Use of single-collector and multi-collector ICP-mass spectrometry for isotopic analysis   - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B903887F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B903887F
(Tutorial Review)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24, 863-886Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUse of single-collector and multi-collector ICP-mass spectrometry for isotopic analysis†

        
          
            Frank 
            Vanhaecke
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Lieve 
            Balcaen
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dmitry 
            Malinovsky
          
          
        
      
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281–S12, BE9000, Ghent, Belgium. E-mail: Frank.Vanhaecke@UGent.be
Received 
      24th February 2009
    , Accepted 31st March 2009First published on 24th April 2009AbstractThis article is intended as a tutorial review on the use of single-collector and multi-collector ICPMS for isotope ratio determination. The monitoring and quantification of both induced and natural differences in the isotopic composition of target elements is covered. The capabilities of various types of ICPMS instruments for isotope ratio measurements are addressed and issues, such as the occurrence of mass discrimination and detector dead time effects and appropriate ways of correcting for the biases they give rise to are discussed. Applications relying on induced changes include elemental assay via isotope dilution, tracer experiments with stable isotopes, aiming at a more profound insight into physical processes or (bio)chemical reactions, and nuclear applications. Attention is also paid to the origin of natural variations in the isotopic composition, with focus onto the mechanisms behind the isotopic variation for those elements for which isotopic analysis can be realized using ICP-mass spectrometry, i.e. the occurrence of radiogenic nuclides formed as a result of the decay of naturally occurring and long-lived radionuclides and mass fractionation as a result of thermodynamic and kinetic isotope fractionation effects. Geochronological dating via the Rb–Sr, U, Th–Pb, and Pb–Pb methods is briefly explained and also the use of Sr and Pb isotopic analysis for provenance determination studies is covered. Subsequently, applications based on isotopic analysis of elements showing a much narrower range of variation as a result of isotope fractionation are described. Next to provenance studies, such applications include the use of isotope ratios in geochemical, environmental and biomedical studies. Although it is not the intention to comprehensively review the literature, several examples of published applications are used to illustrate the capabilities of both single-collector and multi-collector ICPMS in this context. Thereby, attention is devoted both to widely accepted applications and to more ‘exotic’ applications, aiming at an extension of the application range.Frank VanhaeckeFrank Vanhaecke was born in Oostende, Belgium, in 1966. He obtained his PhD from Ghent University, Belgium in 1992. After a period of post-doctoral research at Ghent University and the Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz (Germany), he became Professor of Analytical Chemistry at Ghent University. Since his PhD period, he has explored various facets of ICP-mass spectrometry. He currently leads the ‘Atomic and Mass Spectrometry (A&MS)’ research group and focuses his research on solid sampling via ICPMS using electrothermal vaporization (ETV) and laser ablation (LA) for sample introduction, the development of HPLC-ICPMS methods for metabolite profiling in cooperation with the pharmaceutical industry and isotopic analysis via both single-collector and multi-collector ICPMS instrumentation.Lieve BalcaenLieve Balcaen was born in 1978. She obtained her MSc degree in Chemistry at Ghent University (Belgium) in 2000 and her PhD in 2005. During her PhD – under the supervision of Prof. Frank Vanhaecke – the capabilities of ICPMS for the analysis of complex materials from the imaging industry were evaluated. Therefore pneumatic nebulization (PN) as well as ETV and LA were used as sample introduction techniques. Since 2005, Lieve has worked as a postdoctoral researcher (FWO – Flanders) in the ‘Atomic and Mass Spectrometry’ Research Group at Ghent University. Her current research interests are elemental analysis of biological samples, isotopic analysis by means of single- and multicollector ICPMS and speciation analysis by HPLC-ICPMS.Dmitry MalinovskyDmitry Malinovskiy obtained his degree of Candidate of Sciences, a Russian equivalent of the PhD degree, from the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow in the field of environmental science in 1999. He also obtained a PhD from Luleå University of Technology, Sweden, in the field of isotope geochemistry in 2004. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Analytical Chemistry, Ghent University, Belgium. His research interests include isotope ratio analysis of heavy stable elements by MC-ICPMS and the implications of the natural isotope fractionation effects observed.
1. The isotopic composition of the elements
Before discussing isotope ratio applications, some general information on the isotopic composition of the elements is provided. First of all, it is important to be aware of the fact that, as a first approximation, it can be stated that isotopic abundances are constant in nature1 – this statement will, however, need to be refined later on. The reason for this invariability of the isotopic composition of most elements is explained by the fact that all nuclides were thoroughly mixed in the solar nebula prior to the formation of the earth.2,3 As a result, a variety of problems can be studied by using compounds in which a particular element shows an isotopic composition that is artificially made sufficiently different from the corresponding natural one. Elemental assay by means of isotope dilution (ID) and tracer experiments using (stable) isotopic tracers (vide infra) fall in this category.
Although isotopic abundances are assumed to be fairly constant in nature, variations do occur. These variations may result from (i) the decay of naturally occurring and long-lived radionuclides.2,387Rb is such a radionuclide that decays with a half-life of ∼49 × 109 yrs into 87Sr (β− decay). As a result, the isotopic composition of Sr shows relatively pronounced natural variations and the enrichment of 87Sr in a geological material is basically governed by the relative contents of the two elements involved and the time during which they were together in this material (assuming that it has always behaved as a “closed” system with respect to Rb and Sr). Also Pb is an element that shows quite large variations in its isotopic composition as 206Pb, 207Pb and 208Pb are the final decay products of 238U, 235U and 232Th, respectively (Fig. 14); only 204Pb is not radiogenic. Further down, geochronological dating based on these mother/daughter pairs will be briefly explained and examples of real-life applications (both dating and other types) relying on the isotopic composition of elements with (a) radiogenic isotope(s) will be described. Other examples of such mother–daughter pairs include 147Sm–143Nd, 176Lu–176Hf and 187Re–187Os.3
 Fig. 1  Decay chains of the naturally occurring radionuclides 238U (left), 235U (center) and 232Th (right), with as respective final products the stable isotopes 206Pb, 207Pb and 208Pb. Figure reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from the Mineralogic Society of America MSA. 
Also (ii) natural mass fractionation effects may affect the isotopic composition of an element.5 Different isotopes of one and the same element display the same number of electrons and thus show to a very large extent the same chemical behavior. Nevertheless, small differences in their physicochemical behavior exist as a result of the difference in the number of neutrons in their nucleus, or in other words, their mass. Due to this relative difference in mass, different isotopes of the same element may take part to a different extent in physical processes or in (bio)chemical reactions. Both differences in reaction rate (kinetics) and in equilibrium state (thermodynamics) have been described.
Basically, thermodynamic (or equilibrium) isotope fractionation is a quantum-mechanical phenomenon resulting from the fact that the vibrational energy within a molecule differs according to the mass of the isotope present in the molecule. A diatomic molecule containing the heavier isotope will, e.g., vibrate slower (or with a lower frequency ν), that containing the lighter isotope will vibrate faster (with a higher frequency ν), thus also their vibrational energies (E = 1/2hν) will be different. As a result, the energy required to break the bond (or to separate the two atoms from one another) will be lower in the case of the molecule with the lighter isotope (compare the dissociation energies D0(L) and D0(H) in Fig. 2, modified from ref. 6).
 Fig. 2  Potential energy E as a function of interatomic distance r (Morse curve) for a diatomic molecule. As a result of the difference in the lowest vibration energy level in the presence of a light (L) and heavy (H) isotope in the molecule, respectively, the dissociation energies D0 show a difference, leading to an isotope fractionation effect. Figure modified from ref. 6 with permission from the author and from Springer. 
If we consider a chemical reaction different from the dissociation of a diatomic molecule, an activated complex needs to be formed before the reaction can proceed. Now from Fig. 3, modified from ref. 7, it is clear that the energy required for formation of such an activated complex will again be different, dependent on whether the lighter or the heavier isotope is present (compare the activation energies E(L)* and E(H)*). As a result, the isotopic composition of the element of interest will be different in the reactant and the reagent molecules, respectively. In general, light molecules will react more readily (cf. Arrhenius's equation, providing the relation between the reaction rate constant k and the activation energy E*) and will thus be present at a higher relative abundance in the reaction product than in the reagent, resulting in kinetic isotope fractionation. Both kinetic and equilibrium isotope fractionation effects will be more pronounced at lower temperature.
 Fig. 3  Potential energy curves for the reactant and activated complex playing a role in a chemical reaction. As a result of the difference in the lowest vibration energy levels in the presence of a light (L) and heavy (H) isotope, respectively, the energy required to form the activated complex differs, leading to an isotope fractionation effect. Figure modified from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier. 
In the description of fractionation effects given above, the terminology ‘chemical reaction’ was used, but also physical processes, such as evaporation, condensation and diffusion are prone to isotopic effects.
Whatever the character – thermodynamic or kinetic – the isotope fractionation described so far is mass-dependent, meaning that differences in isotope ratios are proportional to the difference in mass between the isotopes involved (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Mass-dependent fractionation occurring upon methylation of Sn. 
The extent of isotope fractionation can be expressed by a fractionation factor (α) that can be defined as:  wherein Ni represents the number of isotopes with mass mi, with m3 > m2 > m1.
The mass-dependent character is expressed in the mass fractionation law as follows:8α2 = αβ3
If the isotope fractionation is purely of thermodynamic character, then the mass fractionation exponent β is given by:  with m, the atomic mass of the nuclides involved.
If on the other hand, the isotope fractionation is of kinetic origin, then the mass fractionation exponent β is given by:  
In the latter formula, m depicts either the molecular mass of the compound in which the isotope is present (transport proccesses) or the reduced mass (breaking of chemical bonds). The fractionation exponent can be derived from experimental data and provides insight into the nature of the fractionation observed.8,9
For β, Maréchal et al.10 alternatively defined the generalized power law:  
If the isotope fractionation is purely of thermodynamic character, then n = −1, while for kinetic fractionation, n approaches 0.
Self-evidently, the variations in isotopic composition these fractionation effects result in, are more pronounced for the light elements as a result of the high relative difference between the masses of their isotopes. Owing to the high precision offered by multi-collector sector field ICPMS however, (extremely small) natural variations in the isotopic composition are currently being revealed for an increasing number of elements.11
Next to mass-dependent fractionation, also mass-independent or anomalous isotope fractionation is reported for an increasing number of elements. For elements accessible with MC-ICPMS for which this behavior has been revealed (S, Mo, Ru, Sn and Hg), this more exotic behavior has been explained in terms of, among other, nuclear spin effects12–14 or nuclear field shift.13,15 For more information, the reader is referred to the specialized literature.16,17
(iii) The interaction of cosmic rays with terrestrial matter may affect the isotopic composition of an element as well. In the atmosphere, 14C is formed from the widely abundant 14N as a result of the continuous bombardment of the earth with cosmic radiation. The 14C thus formed is subsequently converted into CO2 that can be taken up by plants and further find its way through the food chain. This forms the basis for the radiocarbon dating method.18 At the earth's surface, other cosmogenic nuclides (such as 10Be, 22Na, 26Al or 41Ca) are produced in very minute amounts, but their determination is only feasible using dedicated techniques, such as accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) and ICPMS has, at present, no role to play in this application field.19
Of course, also (iv) human intervention can lead to changes in the isotopic composition of an element. Well-known is, e.g., the enrichment of naturally mined U in 235U to make it suitable as fuel for a fission reactor.
Finally, in some (v) extra-terrestrial material, variations in the isotopic composition that are unknown of in terrestrial material have been reported. This is linked with the earlier existence of radionuclides with such a short half-life that they are completely extinct by now. In some extraterrestrial material, the ratio of mother nuclide to daughter nuclide must have been considerably higher than that in the earth's crust, resulting in a deviating isotopic composition of the element ‘containing’ the daughter nuclide.2,3
In the next sections, the various application ranges wherein ICPMS can play a role will be discussed. While the “natural” domain of ICPMS comprises the metals and metalloids, it will become clear from the sections below that also applications aiming at isotopic analysis of pure non-metals (P, S, halogens and even C) have already been reported on. First, attention will be devoted to those applications whereby the isotopic composition of an element is deliberately changed by adding an isotopic tracer or spike, i.e. elemental assay by means of ID and (stable) tracer experiments for studying (bio)chemical reactions and physical processes. Next, also the determination of natural isotope ratios and the contexts in which this is useful will be addressed. Before tackling these applications however, first some general information on the use of ICPMS for isotope ratio determination will be provided.
2. Isotope ratio measurements with ICPMS – fundamental issues
2.1. Isotope ratio precision
For many isotope ratio applications, high measurement precision is of the utmost importance, e.g., when very subtle variations in the isotopic composition of a target element need to be revealed and quantified. Usually, the isotope ratio precision attainable is reported as the within-run precision – RSD% for N replicate measurements – obtained under favorable experimental conditions. This means that (a) the target element is present at a sufficiently high concentration and (b) a sufficiently long acquisition time per replicate is used for (c) an isotope ratio close to unity. Under these conditions, counting statistics – that dictate that the internal precision cannot be better than:  (with N: total number of counts collected during one replicate measurement for nuclide 1 or 2) – are not the limiting factor and the influence of the dead time of the detection system (vide infra) is negligible.
The isotope ratio precision of both quadrupole-based ICPMS instruments and (single-collector) sector field units is rather modest as a result of the combination of the ICP being a rather ‘noisy’ ion source and the presence of a single detector only, allowing monitoring of only one single signal at any given time. In order to counteract this limitation, the scanning or peak hopping rate is usually chosen as high as possible (residence time as low as possible) in order to compensate for signal drift and/or instability to the largest possible extent.20,21
With ‘traditional’ quadrupole-based instrumentation, the isotope ratio precision is limited to ≥0.1% RSD.22 That attainable using a sector field ICPMS instrument operated at low mass resolution is slightly better with an optimum internal precision ≤0.05% RSD.21 Such values can only be obtained when using pure E-scanning (variation of acceleration voltage without changing the magnetic field strength). This improvement in isotope ratio precision is attributed to the flat-topped signal shape observed with a sector field instrument operated at low mass resolution, in contrast to the rather triangular shape observed with quadrupole-based units. As in sector field ICPMS, increasing the mass resolution from the low (R = 300) to the medium (R = 3000 to 4000) setting brings about a change from flat-topped signals in the mass spectrum to peaks that show a rather triangular form, the internal isotope ratio precision at medium mass resolution is deteriorated to values also typical for ‘traditional’ quadrupole-based instrumentation (RSD ≥ 0.1%).23
When using a collision/reaction cell, pressurized with a non-reactive collision gas to obtain temporal homogenization of the ions extracted from the ICP (mixing of ions sampled at slightly different moments in time), the optimum isotope ratio precision achievable with quadrupole-based instrumentation is slightly improved and matches that attainable with a sector field instrument, operated at low mass resolution (≤0.05% RSD).24
Also with time-of-flight (TOF) ICPMS instrumentation, the optimum isotope ratio precision is of the order of ≤0.05%.25 The improvement in precision compared to quadrupole-based ICPMS is in this context to be attributed to the simultaneous handling of ions formed at the same time in the ICP by the TOF device. Some authors however have pointed out that as a result of shortcomings of the detection system, the isotope ratio results may vary as a function of the analyte concentration, making TOF-ICPMS less appropriate for isotope ratio measurements than originally assumed.26
Multi-collector ICPMS instrumentation finally bridges the gap in isotope ratio precision between ICPMS and thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) – the technique traditionally used for accurate and precise isotopic analysis of metallic elements.27 As the signal intensities of the isotopes of interest are monitored simultaneously, signal drift and instrument instability should (in principle) no longer affect the isotope ratio result, nor the isotope ratio precision,28–30 thus resulting in internal precision values down to 0.002% under favorable conditions and at low mass resolution.31 If all nuclides of interest fit within the maximum mass range offered by the multi-collector set-up (the relative mass range of the MC-ICPMS instrument in operation at Ghent University is, e.g., 17%) and every beam can be properly directed into a Faraday cup, the isotope ratio data are best collected under static conditions. If however isotopes outside this range need to be monitored as well – please note that besides the isotopes of the target element, often also nuclides of other elements need to be monitored, e.g., for enabling adequate correction for potential isobaric overlap (for instance, monitoring of 202Hg enables a proper estimation of the contribution of 204Hg to the total signal intensity at a mass-to-charge ratio of 204 in the case of isotopic analysis of Pb) or for mass discrimination correction using an internal standard (vide infra) – a dynamic approach needs to be deployed.32 Such a dynamic approach is also required when not all the ion beams of interest can be properly directed into the corresponding detectors, a situation that occurs more often with a fixed collector array (i.e. wherein the position of the Faraday cups cannot be changed) or when one or more ion counters (instead of Faraday cups) need to be used for monitoring the less abundant isotope(s). Finally, also for cross-calibrating detectors, dynamic scanning can be used.33 Continuous scanning is still avoided, but the total data set needs to be collected at two or more different magnetic field strengths. For maximizing the reliability of the data, the monitoring of at least one isotope ratio under both conditions is advisable as then the two sets of data obtained can be treated as a single one. This approach is however not always realizable.
Although slightly deteriorated (internal precision of ∼0.005% RSD), also at higher mass resolution, very respectable isotope ratio precisions are obtained owing to the use of what is sometimes called “pseudo” high resolution.34,35 In this approach, the width of the entrance slit, but not that of the exit slit, is reduced. Hence, the peaks from the interferent and the analyte are not entirely resolved, but at least, there is a significantly wide window, wherein only the analyte ion contributes to the signal intensity and where the signal is still flat (Fig. 535).
 Fig. 5  Appearance of mass spectral peak subject to overlap at (a) low mass resolution (b) (full) high mass resolution and (c) pseudo high resolution with multi-collector ICPMS. In pseudo-high resolution mode, the signals of the target ion and the interfering ion are not completely resolved from one another, but there is a mass window in which only the analyte ion contributes to the total signal intensity. Moreover in a sufficiently wide section of this mass window, a flat signal is observed. Figure reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Springer. 
Not all MC-ICPMS instruments are equipped with a double-focusing sector field mass spectrometer; one manufacturer supplies instrumentation that uses a hexapole collision cell pressurized with a non-reactive gas for slowing down the ions extracted from the ICP and reducing their energy spread prior to introduction into the magnetic sector. By adding a reactive gas, spectral interferences can be overcome by selective ion-molecule chemistry, as is abundantly done in quadrupole-based ICPMS.36 Arnold et al., e.g., studied the capabilities and limitations of H2 for setting the signals from 56Fe and 57Fe free from spectral overlap from ArO+ and ArOH+, respectively.37
2.2. Mass discrimination
As a result of differences in the efficiency of ion extraction, transmission and detection as a function of analyte mass, an isotope ratio measured with ICPMS may show significant bias with respect to the corresponding true value. This phenomenon is referred to as mass discrimination and it may amount to several % per mass unit. It is important to indicate the difference between this mass discrimination and the mass fractionation occurring in TIMS. While in TIMS, mass fractionation causes the measured ratio to vary as a function of time (as a result of slight time-dependent changes in the composition of the ion beam), mass discrimination remains constant (Fig. 6, modified from ref. 38). Self-evidently, mass discrimination has to be corrected for. As a result of the extremely high isotope ratio precision offered by multi-collector instruments, it has become clear that there, adequate correction for mass discrimination is still a challenge, especially as it is affected by both the matrix and the analyte concentration. Even after isolation of the target element – a common approach when pneumatic nebulization is used for sample introduction into MC-ICPMS – correction for mass discrimination is not self-evident. Various approaches have been developed and there is still considerable debate among the specialists as to which approach provides the best results. For single-collector ICPMS, characterized by its modest isotope ratio precision, this is not of great concern, however with the excellent isotope ratio precision offered by MC-ICPMS, this issue is crucial.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of the time-dependent isotopic fractionation effect observed in TIMS, leading to an ion beam, the composition of which varies as a function of time (left), with the mass discrimination effect observed in ICPMS that leads to a (more or less) constant, but somewhat larger bias of the measurement data with respect to the true value indicated by the dashed line. Figure modified from ref. 38 with permission from the Mineralogic Society of America MSA. 

Correction using an external standard. 
In this approach, a solution containing an isotopic standard of the target element (known isotopic composition, or at least known isotope ratio) is measured and a correction factor is calculated on the basis of the observed bias between the measured value and the true value of the isotope ratio of interest. Bracketing – whereby the measurement of each sample solution is preceded and followed by a measurement of the isotopic standard – provides the best results. As it has been shown that the matrix exerts a quite pronounced influence on the extent of mass discrimination, the target element needs to be isolated from the matrix for obtaining data of the highest quality and it is even necessary to match the concentration of the target element in the samples and the standards within ±30%.38 Even when these prerequisites are met, several pitfalls can still jeopardize the quality of the results when the goal is quantifying very subtle variations. Maréchal and Albarède39 have, e.g., demonstrated the occurrence of isotope fractionation of Cu during its extraction on a chromatographic column and hence, the need for quantitative Cu recovery. Pietruszka and Reznik, on the other hand, established that a Mo standard showed a significantly different isotope ratio after passage through a column loaded with an anion exchange resin for isolation of Mo from the concomitant matrix.40 The change observed was as high as 60% of the total variation in the isotopic composition of Mo observed in nature and was attributed to a matrix effect caused by some organic material stripped from the column resin. Even when the target element is isolated, there may still be impurities in the solution that interfere with a highly accurate measurement. When Pb is isolated from the concomitant silicate matrix viaanion exchange chromatography, Al, Ca, Fe and Mg are the elements remaining in the purified solution to the largest extent and their presence was identified to induce biases in the final Pb isotope ratios of - 0.15 to 0.12 ‰ per mass unit.41 The different response of Tl and Pb isotope ratios to the presence of the elements mentioned above was identified as the reason for the bias observed. Instead of aiming at a higher purity of the final solution, the authors suggest the addition of a common matrix to all samples and standards as a more straightforward approach. As a result, all results obtained using MC-ICPMS need to be critically evaluated.


Correction using an internal standard. 
Instead of using an external standard, also an internal standard can be used. In this approach, an element of similar mass – e.g., Tl in Pb isotopic analysis42 or Zr in Mo isotopic analysis43 – is added to the sample solution and the bias between the measured 203Tl/205Tl or 90Zr/91Zr isotope ratio and the corresponding true value is used to determine the mass discrimination per mass unit ε, which is subsequently used to correct the Pb or Mo isotope ratio data for mass discrimination.
Several approaches can however be used, depending on whether it is assumed that mass discrimination varies according to a linear, a power-law or an exponential function with the difference in mass between the two isotopes Δm:44,45  
In Russell's equation44,45 on the other hand, the mass of the isotopes rather than the mass difference between them is considered as the factor determining the extent of mass discrimination:  
A further refinement in this approach consists of establishing a linear relationship between the mass discrimination values per mass unit for the internal standard and the target element, respectively, on the basis of standard solutions. For the actual samples, the experimentally measured β or ε value for the internal standard can then be converted into that for the target element, as exemplified for Pb and Tl in Fig. 7.46
 Fig. 7  Relationship (red line) between the mass discrimination factors for Tl (internal standard) and Pb (target element) as established using measurements on standard solutions (red circles). This experimentally determined relationship can then be used to ‘translate’ the mass discrimination factor for Tl into that for Pb for the samples, as exemplified for two data points displayed as blue diamonds. Figure reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the author. 


Internal correction. 
Some elements, show pronounced natural variation in their isotopic composition as one (or more) of their isotopes is (are) radiogenic. For Sr, e.g., natural variations in the isotopic composition exist as 87Sr is the decay product of the naturally occurring and long-lived radio-isotope 87Rb. The 86Sr/88Sr ratio however, is constant1 and the measured value for it can be compared with the corresponding true value to calculate ε or β for further use in the correction approaches mentioned above.


Other approaches. 
There is still ongoing debate as to which correction method provides the most accurate description of mass discrimination effects. This is an issue of increasing importance as a result of the continuously improving isotope ratio precision attainable. Finally, some authors report other approaches – such as the generalized power law47 or a double spike approach48 – to provide even more accurate results. For more information on these approaches, the reader is referred to the specialized literature.


Isotopic reference materials. 
Whatever the approach used, for obtaining reliable isotope ratio results, access to isotopic reference materials is indispensable. While in isotopic analysis of H, C, N, O and S using gas source MS, the results are most often expressed as a deviation with respect to an isotopic reference material (vide infra for the definition of the δ-value), most papers in which, e.g., Sr and Pb isotope ratio results are reported, aim at expressing the results as absolute isotope ratios. As there is often some discussion as to the actual isotope ratio values for the isotopic reference materials themselves and “alternative” values (slightly different from the corresponding certified values) are reported in journal papers49 or on websites gathering information on isotopic reference materials,50 some scientists are in favor of also expressing the results for these elements as δ-values, since a change in the values accepted as “true” for the reference materials then exerts no or only a limited influence on the results reported in a variety of contexts. The isotopic reference materials currently available are pure materials (pure metals, such as Pb or Fe, salts, such as SrCO3, or molecular compounds, such as H3BO3, etc). Since recently only, efforts have been made to certify the isotopic composition of an element present in a concomitant matrix. The latter type of reference material – provided that it is properly characterized – would also allow validation of the sample pretreatment procedure. Until now, researchers have to rely on isotope ratio results reported in the literature by other groups for reference materials only characterized for element concentrations.

2.3. 
          Detector issues

2.3.1. 
            Detector type and characteristics. 
Single-collector instruments are intended for (ultra)trace element analysis and are therefore traditionally equipped with an electron multiplier only. This type of detector displays its highest sensitivity when it is operated in pulse counting mode, wherein every individual incoming ion is detected. At higher beam intensities, the analog mode is used for extending the detector lifetime. In this mode, the electron multiplier is used as an analog amplifier. Present-day instruments provide the option of an automatic (depending on the signal intensity) switch-over between the two modes. For extending the linear dynamic range towards higher concentrations, the ThermoScientific Element XR sector field instrument is equipped with an additional Faraday collector.51 When the incoming ion beam intensity is extremely high, the ion beam is no longer attracted to the electron multiplier (by switching off the high negative voltage applied to the conversion electrode at the front-end of the multiplier) and is entering a less sensitive, but more robust Faraday collector. In the authors' opinion, this feature has to be applied with care in view of the memory effects occurring upon introduction of solutions with high element concentrations, but it can be very useful for monitoring the signal intensity of a matrix element during laser ablation analysis for internal normalization purposes or for determination of “extreme” isotope ratios, for which a decent measurement of the signal intensity of the minor isotope requires such a high concentration that measuring the signal isotope of the major isotope could otherwise be problematic. With the extended range detection system, the signal intensity of the minor isotope can now be monitored using the electron multiplier, that of the major isotope using the Faraday collector.
A multi-collector ICPMS instrument on the other hand is equipped with an array of Faraday collectors. Faraday collectors are less sensitive than electron multipliers, but they display a longer life-time than do electron multipliers and as a result of their analog-only operating mode, they do not suffer from detector dead time effects. As isotope ratio measurement using a multi-collector ICPMS instrument is normally proceeded by analyte isolation, the target element concentration in the measured solution can be optimized with respect to the sensitivity (∼20–25 V/ppm at mid-mass range under wet plasma conditions) and linear dynamic range of the Faraday collector. Moreover, the sensitivity can be enhanced by an order of magnitude by using a 1012 instead of the standard 1011 Ω resistor.52 For low analyte signal intensities (e.g., originating from isotopes with a very low isotopic abundance) however, a still higher sensitivity may be required. Therefore, present-day multi-collector instruments can also be equipped with one or more (up to the same number as there are Faraday collectors) ion-counting devices. These devices can be of the same type as those in single-collector instruments, but in case a larger number of ion-counting devices is required, a miniaturized ion counter is required. Such an ion counter is, unfortunately, characterized by a lower dynamic range than that offered by a “full size” electron multiplier. Finally, it may be worth mentioning that for improving the capability for measuring an ‘extreme’ isotope ratio, the electron multiplier deployed for measuring the intensity for the low-abundant nuclide can be equipped with a retardation filter.53,54 This energy filter removes scattered ions that lead to an increased background in the spectral vicinity of the intense peak of the high-abundant nuclide, thus leading to an improved abundance sensitivity.55–57


2.3.2. 
            Detector dead time. 
When using an electron multiplier in pulse counting mode for measuring the signal intensity, a certain dead time of the detector and its associated electronics has to be taken into account. The detection and electronic handling of every pulse typically takes 5–100 ns (depending on the type of multiplier used) and another ion arriving at the detector within a shorter time frame after a first one will not be detected. Self-evidently, this leads to signal losses that become more pronounced as the rate of ions arriving at the detector increases. As a result, measurement data for isotope ratios differing from unity will show a bias with respect to the corresponding true value. For a non-paralyzable detector – i.e. a detector where the arrival of a second ion within the time required for handling the first one does not lead to an extension of the time during which the detector is dead or in other words not capable of detecting another incoming ion – the actual count rate can be calculated from the observed count rate, provided that the dead time τ is known.58  
Hence, the dead time of the detector system has to be experimentally determined and the signals appropriately corrected for dead time losses in order to obtain accurate isotope ratio results.
Although there are various approaches for experimental determination of the dead time,59 they are all based on the fact that appropriate correction of the measured signal intensities for dead time losses should result in a sensitivity (signal intensity/concentration unit) independent of the signal intensity and hence, independent of analyte concentration.
The software of all ICPMS instruments provides the possibility of automatic correction for detector dead time. Some instruments however, use a predefined value that is not accessible by the user. Although this may be sufficient for element determination, it is not the best situation for accurate isotope ratio determination. Some instruments provide an automated means for the determination of the detector dead time, e.g., based on the measurement of a single signal, the intensity of which is changed by adapting the voltage applied to the extraction lens, and comparison of pulse-counting and analog intensities.60 The most reliable methods for dead time determination however rely on the measurement of a given isotope ratio in standard solutions showing a sufficiently wide range of analyte concentrations. In Russ' method,61 a series of standard solutions of a given element, spanning a sufficiently wide concentration range, is measured. The value that the instrument's software is using for automatic correction for detector dead time has to be set to zero for these measurements. Next, for each standard solution, the signal intensities of the two isotopes selected are corrected for dead time losses assuming a number of detector dead time values in an appropriate range and the isotope ratios thus obtained are plotted as a function of the value applied for correction for each of the standard solutions measured (Fig. 8 from ref. 61). For each concentration level, the values thus obtained lay on a line and the lines for the various concentration levels (should) intersect in one point (x,y), The x-value provides the analyst with the detector dead time, the bias between the y-value and the corresponding ‘true’ value on the other hand, reflects the extent of mass discrimination. Nelms described a method wherein the results of such a measurement are handled differently.59 In this approach, the isotope ratio is plotted as a function of the analyte concentration for various assumed values of detector dead time (Fig. 9.a). The correct dead time should result in a horizontal line, i.e. the slope equals zero. Finding the corresponding dead time is facilitated by plotting the slope thus obtained as a function of the dead time used in the calculation (Fig. 9.b). The intersection of this line with the x-axis provides the analyst with the detector dead time τ. Alternative, but more complicated methods have been described by Held and Taylor62 and Appelblad et al.63
 Fig. 8  Normalized 208Pb/207Pb isotope ratio (= (208Pb/207Pb)measured/true value) plotted as a function of the value applied for dead time correction of the ‘raw’ results obtained for solutions with a Pb concentration ranging from 20 to 45 µg/L. In this particular case, the dead time of the detection system was observed to be ≈ 20 ns.61 
 Fig. 9  (a) Variation of the 204Pb/208Pb isotope ratio as a function of the Pb concentration for various assumed values of detector dead time. (b) Slope of the curve obtained on plotting the 204Pb/208Pb isotope ratio vs. the Pb concentration as a function of the assumed value for the detector dead time. The intersection of the line thus obtained with the x-axis provides the actual dead time. Figure reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry RSC. 
As Vanhaecke et al.61 have shown that for some types of electron multipliers, the experimentally determined dead time varies with the analyte mass, it is advisable to use the target element itself for experimental dead time determination or at least to verify whether for the detector type used, the result of experimental dead time determination is independent of the analyte mass. In addition, the dead time has to be redetermined regularly, as it has been reported on various occasions that it alters with detector age.64
Finally, Nygren et al.65 came up with an interesting approach to circumvent problems with the determination of and correction for detector dead time. By changing the hardware configuration of the pulse detection system, they introduced an artificial and fixed dead time that is substantially longer than the actual dead time to mask temporal variations in the latter. In this way, the corresponding uncertainty is an order of magnitude lower (better) than that usually obtained, such that this contribution to the total measurement uncertainty becomes negligible.


2.3.3. Sag. 
When using an electron multiplier in the pulse counting mode, the magnitude of every individual pulse is compared with a threshold value by a ‘discriminator’. In this way, it is possible to avoid ‘false’ signals (e.g., resulting from ionization of residual gas molecules in the detector as a result of the electron multiplication effect) from contributing to the measured intensity. However, at very high count rates, the gain of an electron multiplier is reduced to such an extent that a substantial fraction of the incoming ions give rise to an output pulse that is actually below the threshold. As a result, much more pronounced signal losses than expected on the basis of the detector dead time occur and cannot be adequately corrected for. This phenomenon is referred to as sag66–68 and of course, it should be avoided in isotope analysis.


2.3.4. 
            Detector calibration in multi-collector arrays. 
Neither for electron multipliers operated in analog mode, nor for Faraday cups, detector dead time effects occur. However, if Faraday cups are used in a multi-collector array whereby each cup has its own amplifier, these individual detectors have to be cross-calibrated in order to provide the same sensitivity. One manufacturer has circumvented the need for detector cross-calibration by an electronic set-up whereby it is possible to use each amplifier for a (1/N)th fraction of the measurement time for each detector out of a set of N.31

3. Isotope ratio applications based on induced changes in the isotopic composition of metallic and metalloid elements
3.1. Elemental assay via isotope dilution – theory
Although often feared for its presumed complexity, isotope dilution (ID) is in fact a fairly easy calibration approach69–71 that can improve the reliability of analysis results obtained using ICPMS. Basically, a known amount of the target element, but with an isotopic composition substantially different from that displayed by the element in the sample, is added to a known amount (mass or volume) of sample. When this isotopic tracer or spike is added to the sample, a blend or mixture is obtained. An isotope ratio R of the enriched isotope to a reference isotope is measured in the spike (RY), the sample (RX) and the blend (RB). On the basis of the isotope ratio results obtained, the amount of tracer added and the amount of sample, the analyte content in the sample can be calculated, provided that the isotopic composition of the target element in the sample is known or can be determined. When the subscripts X, Y and B represent the sample, the spike and the blend, respectively, then the number of atoms in the sample NX is calculated on the basis of the number of atoms in the added spike NY and the isotope ratios measured:  wherein Σ denotes the summation of the ratios of reference isotope to enriched isotope for all of the element's isotopes as reference isotope. When the analyte content rather has to be expressed in number of moles n or molar concentration C, the equation above has to be slightly adapted to:  with m the atomic mass of the target element (which is different for the sample on one hand and the spike on the other, as a result of the difference in isotopic composition). The equations mentioned above suggest that all isotope ratios have to be experimentally determined. In ICPMS, spectral interferences are quite common, especially in the lower mass range (≤80 u) and therefore, not all isotope ratios are always experimentally accessible. Based on IUPAC-tabulated values for the natural isotopic composition of elements showing no pronounced natural variations in their isotopic composition1 and the information provided on the certificates accompanying the isotopic spikes and/or isotopic reference materials, the equation can be further simplified to:  wherein f represents the isotopic abundance of the isotope the spike is enriched in, in the spike and the sample, respectively. Whether or not experimental determination of the isotopic composition of the target element in the spike or sample solution is mandatory can be seen from Fig. 10.72 Of course, also when IUPAC values or certified values are used, the corresponding uncertainties on the isotopic abundances need to be taken into account when calculating the total combined uncertainty. Finally, the ratios as obtained using ICPMS need to be corrected for mass discrimination before they are entered into the ID formula, unless all ratios (RX, RY and RB) are actually measured and it is assumed that the mass discrimination is sufficiently independent from the matrix composition and analyte concentration.
 Fig. 10  Flow chart, indicating the experimental work required prior to elemental assay by isotope dilution, depending on whether or not: (a) the spike concentration is certified and (b) the target element shows natural variations in its isotopic composition. Figure reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry RSC. 
What are the advantages of ID over more traditional calibration approaches, such as external standardization or the method of standard additions? First of all, an isotope ratio is more ‘robust’71 than is a signal intensity and hence, is much less affected by instrument instability, signal drift or matrix effects. When using external calibration, the effect of instrument instability, signal drift and/or matrix effect on the accuracy and precision of the result is counteracted to the largest possible extent by using an external standard with a mass number close to that of the analyte element.73 One could say that in ID, the ‘ideal’ internal standard is used as isotopes of the same element react to a large extent identical to changing conditions. ID is particularly useful when the sample preparation includes an analyte/matrix separation step, for which quantitative analyte recovery is not guaranteed. In fact, as soon as isotopic equilibration has been achieved, analyte losses will no longer affect the final analysis result as every aliquot of sample solution displays the same isotope ratio. As a result, the spike should be added as soon as possible to the sample and isotopic equilibration should be achieved as early as possible in the sample preparation process. The advantages of the combination of matrix removal with isotope dilution for the determination of trace elements in geological samples were reviewed by Pin and Le Fèvre.74
Finally, ID has the potential to provide very accurate and precise results. It should however be stressed that the use of ID does not guarantee analysis results to be very accurate and precise. If ultimate accuracy and precision are aimed at, then all steps have to be executed with great care and a complete elimination of all sources of systematic error and minimization of all sources of uncertainty have to be aimed at. Whatever approach is used, a careful evaluation of all uncertainty contributions should provide the analyst with a good estimate of the total combined uncertainty.
3.2. Elemental assay by means of isotope dilution – applications
Owing to its potential to provide highly accurate and precise results, IDMS is often used by manufacturers of certified reference materials.75 Its use is also advisable when the sample pretreatment includes a trace/matrix separation step, for which quantitative recovery is not guaranteed.
Evans and Fairman76 used ID-ICPMS for characterizing an estuary water, intended to be commercialized as a certified reference material. The results of inter-laboratory trials were assessed inadequate as a result of large discrepancies between the results reported by the 14 participating labs. By using ID-ICPMS, the content for each element of interest could be determined with a total combined uncertainty of only 2–3%, which constituted an improvement with an order of magnitude compared to the variation on the consensus value obtained via the inter-laboratory trial. Tresl and Quétel77 used isotope dilution for the certification of the content of 111Cd in an isotopically enriched candidate spike calibration material, intended for commercialization as a certified isotopic spike. The utmost attention was paid to all possible sources of bias and/or uncertainty (spectral overlap, mass discrimination, instrumental background and detector dead time effects). The final result was obtained with a combined uncertainty of only 0.17%, with the uncertainty on the IUPAC-tabulated isotopic abundances of 111Cd and 112Cd as major contribution (responsible for nearly 60% of the total uncertainty). The contribution of the uncertainty on the isotope ratio measurements itself however, was reported to be below 10%. Although multi-element determination using ID-ICPMS is less self-evident, Willbold and Jochum78 developed an approach for the determination of 12 important elements in geological materials. The combined uncertainty of the method amounted to typically 2–3% and the results obtained for a large group of reference materials agreed within 1–3% with certified and/or literature values.
Also many applications wherein isotope dilution is deployed to avoid non-quantitative recovery of the target element(s) during chemical or physical isolation from affecting the final result can be found in the literature. Evans et al.72 developed a method relying on ID for the accurate determination of the S content in diesel fuel. The maximum S content allowable in this matrix was recently reduced from 2000 to only 50 µg/g. After 34S spike addition, the sample was subjected to closed vessel microwave digestion and subsequently, the 32S/34S isotope ratio was measured using a sector field ICPMS instrument, operated at medium mass resolution (R = 3000) to free the isotopes of interest from the isobaric overlap from O2+ ions. Although the closed vessel approach is intended to avoid losses of volatile S compounds, these would not affect the final result provided they occur after isotopic equilibration has been achieved. Accuracy of the method developed was demonstrated by successful analysis of the NIST SRM 2724b reference material, while the total uncertainty at 50 µg/g level only amounts to 1–2%. Makishima and Nakamura used ID for the determination of S, present at µg/g levels in geological materials, using an approach based on SO2 generation using Br2 for oxidation.79 After isotopic equilibration is achieved in the oxidation step, eventual analyte losses do not deteriorate the final result. For silicate materials, the LOD obtained was below 0.1 µg/g. Application of a higher mass resolution provided interference-free conditions for this challenging target element. Balcaen et al. used isotope dilution for quantification of trace amounts of Fe in highly concentrated AgNO3 solutions, used as starting material in the photographic industry.80 In order to avoid a high dilution factor and the corresponding deterioration of the LOD, selective precipitation of the matrix element as AgBr was opted for. The effect of co-precipitation of Fe on the final result was counteracted by the use of isotope dilution, whereby the 54Fe spike was added prior to addition of highly pure HBr. Interference-free conditions at mass-to-charge ratios of 54 and 56 were provided by pressurizing the dynamic reaction cell (DRC) of the quadrupole-based ICPMS instrument used with NH3, resulting in electron transfer to the Ar-containing molecular ions originally hindering accurate isotope ratio determination. Determination of the radionuclide 241Am – the global abundance of which is constantly increasing – is not only useful from an environmental point of view, but also aids in understanding biogeochemical processes in the marine environment. Zheng and Yamada developed a very sensitive method for determination of this target analyte based on IDMS.81 After addition of the isotopic spike, trace/matrix separation was accomplished using a combination of (i) CaF2co-precipitation and (ii) chromatographic isolation and pre-concentration on a column loaded with TRU-SPEC resin, which selectively retains the actinides. A sub-fg/g LOD – superior to that attainable using α spectrometry – was reported. Finally, the method was used to study the distribution of 241Am as a function of depth in the Sagami Bay in Japan. As a result of the high content of dissolved solids, the low concentration of the target element (sub-µg/L) and the occurrence of various polyatomic ions hindering its determination using ICPMS, Yang et al.82 developed a peculiar method for the determination of Cr in seawater. All Cr present was reduced to Cr(III) by addition of SO2-saturated water and subsequently derivatized using trifluoroacetylacetone (TFA) into the volatile compound Cr(TFA)3. Subsequently, the seawater was sampled using solid phase microextraction (SPME) with a fused silica fiber coated with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). Finally, thermal desorption GC – sector field ICPMS was used for Cr determination. This sample pretreatment effectively eliminated spectral overlap, permitting the use of low mass resolution, resulting in a 5-fold improvement in LOD. ID using a 53Cr tracer adequately corrected for non-quantitative analyte extraction and transfer, as demonstrated by successful analysis of the CASS-4 seawater reference material. Yang et al.83 used SnCl2 in a cold vapor generation unit to reduce Hg2+ into elemental Hg that was subsequently introduced into a sector field instrument for the determination of ppt levels of Hg in water samples. Both direct introduction of the vapors thus generated and batch-wise introduction after collecting the vapors on a gold trap were used. The use of ID for calibration guaranteed accurate correction for incomplete conversion and/or transport, as was demonstrated by successful analysis of a river water certified reference material.
Also in elemental speciation work, ID is used to an increasing extent. In species-specific ID the target species themselves, containing the target element in an isotopic composition markedly different from the corresponding natural one, are admixed with the sample prior to separation.84 In species-unspecific ID, the column effluent is mixed on-line with a constant, calibrated flow of isotopic spike.84 While in the latter approach, on-column losses are not corrected for, signal drift as a result of, e.g., a continuous variation in the plasma loading, resulting from the use of gradient elution, on the other hand, is. For this specific kind of application, introduced by Heumann and co-workers in 1994,85 only two examples will be provided. For more information, the reader is referred to85 and.71 Cuyckens et al. used such an approach in metabolite profiling of a Br-containing candidate drug by using an HPLC system equipped with a C-18 column to an ICPMS instrument.86 Not for all metabolites, reliable standards were available, in fact some of the metabolites had not even been identified yet, such that external calibration or standard addition could not be used. Therefore, the varying sensitivity of the ICPMS instrument caused by the introduction of a varying amount of organic solvent into the ICP as a result of the gradient elution used was corrected for by using species-unspecific isotope dilution. Zinn et al. developed an elegant method for the quantification of proteins based on the determination of S via isotope dilution using a sector field instrument operated at medium mass resolution.87Liquid chromatography was used to separate the proteins from one another, while the column effluent was mixed on-line with a calibrated flow of isotopic spike of S. Provided that the sequence, or more specifically, the number of S-containing amino acids (cysteine and methionine building blocks) are known, the protein concentration can be simply deduced from the S concentration.
The combination of ID with ICPMS is not restricted to solution work. Boulyga et al.,88e.g., applied laser ablation (LA) – sector field ICPMS for the direct determination of Pu in soil and sediment samples. Spike solution was added to the samples, which were subsequently dried, homogenized. and pelletized under high pressure (after addition of graphite in the case of soil). The combination of a LINA spark LA system, characterized by high ablation rates, combined with the high sensitivity provided by a sector field ICPMS instrument led to LODs as low as 3. 10−13 g/g. Although U was present at far higher concentrations than Pu, no interference from 238UH+ on the 239Pu+ was observed owing to the dry plasma conditions, while overlap with the signal from PbO2+ ions was avoided by using a mass resolution of 4000. Accurate results – matching those obtained using the much more time-consuming α spectrometry – were obtained. Care has to be taken however in case of a heterogeneous distribution of the target element due to contamination with ‘hot’ particles, as this affects the precision obtained using LA-ICPMS in a negative way. Fernandez et al. describe a very straightforward procedure for isotope dilution mass spectrometric determination of metals present in soils while using femtosecond LA operated at a very high repetition frequency for sample introduction.89 The solid sample and the solid spike are simply placed next to one another in the ablation cell and the laser beam is moved at high speed, such that sample and spike are ablated intermittently. Although there is no true isotopic equilibration and sample-spike mixing is only accomplished after ablation, very reasonable results were obtained for the concentrations of Cu, Zn, Sn, and Pb in soil reference materials (within 10% of the corresponding certified values). Of course, in this way, the sample throughput is enhanced to a very large extent.
A very limited number of papers report on the use of multi-collector ICPMS for elemental assay by means of ID. Of course, the superior isotope ratio precision offered by these instruments is only taken advantage from if all other aspects of the analysis – among other, weighing of sample and spike solutions, sample preparation, contamination control, correction for mass discrimination, selection of reference materials – are executed very carefully with the aim of avoiding systematic error and minimizing all related contributions to the total uncertainty. Fortunato and Wunderli used ID-MC-ICPMS for the determination of Pb in wine and presented a detailed uncertainty budget. The final result was obtained with an expanded (k = 2) uncertainty of less than 1%.90 Kent et al. used this approach for determination of the REE in a large collection of geochemical reference materials, including both rock powders and synthetic silicate glasses.91 Replicate analyses typically gave rise to results that deviated less than 1% from one another. Moreover, most of the results agreed within ≪1% with the corresponding reference values, obtained by means of ID-TIMS. Waight used MC-ICPMS for determination of Rb in whole rock samples viaID with the aim of improving Rb–Sr geochronology.92 Chartier et al., finally, deployed MC-ICPMS for the reliable and highly precise determination of the long-lived radionuclide 93Zr in zircaloy (zirconium alloy) material, previously used as cladding material for the nuclear fuel elements of a fission reactor.93 A reliable result needed to be guaranteed as it would form the basis for a decision concerning disposal of the nuclear waste. 96Zr was deployed as the spike and the Zr fraction was isolated before Zr isotope ratio measurement.
3.3. 
          Tracer experiments with stable isotopes
Of course, radionuclides are well suited for use as ‘tracers’ in in vivo diagnostic investigation and for obtaining a better insight into biochemical processes occurring on intake of either essential or toxic elements. In cases where no radionuclide of appropriate half-life exists or for safety reasons, stable isotopic tracers with an isotopic composition that is sufficiently different from the corresponding natural one offer a better alternative. In this case, the change(s) in (a) selected isotope ratio(s) has (have) to be monitored upon administration of a tracer or spike, e.g., by means of ICPMS. The tracers involved may be administered to the subject via the alimentary canal, the respiratory system, the integument or by injection.71,94
Karpas et al.95 used a very simple approach to evaluate the fractional absorption of U and its behavior after gastrointestinal absorption by measuring both the concentration and the isotopic composition of U in urine after oral administration of a small dose of isotopically depleted uranium (with a 235U isotopic abundance of 0.245%) to five individuals. The high sensitivity of the (single-collector) sector field ICPMS instrumentation used, allowed analysis of each individual voiding, hence, detailed biokinetic studies could be carried out. In another tracer study, aiming at assessing the absorption of Zn from nutrition by determination of the non-absorbed dose in fecal material, Ingle et al. used a higher mass resolution to resolve the 70Zn+ signal from that of 40Ar14N16O+ and enabled the use of this Zn isotope (showing the lowest natural abundance) as an isotopic tracer.96 For the other Zn isotopes, the signal intensity was measured at low mass resolution. The preparation and analysis of samples by the method developed allowed a single analyst to digest, dilute and analyze 120 samples in duplicate in a period of 10 working days. A very similar approach was also used to study the absorption of Fe.97 In a nutritional study aiming at assessing the uptake of Ca from nutrition, Field et al.98 preferred a more extensive sample pre-treatment and measurement using single-collector sector field ICPMS at low mass resolution over measurement at medium mass resolution, as the first approach offers better isotope ratio precision. By using a combination of precipitation of the Ca as the oxalate for target element isolation and desolvation of the aerosol from the purified sample solution, spectral interferences at mass-to-charge ratios of 42, 43, 44, 46 and 48 were reduced sufficiently to allow Ca isotopic analysis with the precision typical for low mass resolution (flat-topped peaks). For optimization of the entire procedure, observation of the mass spectra at high mass resolution proved to be extremely useful. The Cd stable isotopic tracer study carried out by Rodriguez-Cea et al.99 was not only aiming at obtaining information on the total absorption of this toxic element, but also on its redistribution over various body compartments. In their experiment, seven European eels (Anguilla anguilla) were exposed to 100 µg/L of 111Cd during a period of 3 weeks. After exposure, liver and kidney tissue of these animals was excised, dissolved and analyzed by means of single-collector ICPMS for both the total Cd content and the isotopic composition of this target element. Use of the 111Cd isotopic spike permitted discrimination between Cd previously present in liver and kidney tissue and ‘new’ cadmium (de novocadmium) incorporated during the 3 weeks of exposure. The results obtained demonstrated that upon exposure to Cd, part of the original Cd present in the liver was relocated to the kidney for ‘storage’. As it was presumed that metallothioneins (MT) – small metal-binding proteins, rich in sulfur-containing amino acids and synthesized in the liver and kidney – play an important role in such metal ion transport and detoxification processes, the cytosolic fraction of liver and kidney tissues was therefore subjected to Cd speciation analysis.
From an environmental point of view, not the total metal content of a soil, but the content of labile metal – i.e. metal that is capable of rapid exchange (<7 days) with the soil solution – is relevant. Measurement of the labile metal content can be accomplished by using a tracer experiment with a radioactive spike, but for Cu, the short half-life of the 64Cu radiotracer (12.4 h) prevented this approach from being useful. Therefore, Nolan et al. preferred the use of a stable 65Cu spike and ICPMS for isotope ratio measurements.100
A more reliable approach for nutritional studies is the ‘double’ or ‘dual’ tracer method. In this approach, one tracer is administered orally and another intravenously, and therefore, redistribution of the target element over various body compartments is taken into account and more accurate results can be obtained. For studying the Mg absorption in human subjects, Bohn et al.101 used such a double spike approach, whereby 25Mg was administered orally and 26Mg injected intravenously. The resulting change in the isotopic composition of Mg in the red blood cells after 14 days provides the information required. As a result of the limited change in the Mg isotope ratios, multi-collector sector field ICPMS was used. This approach was evaluated as superior over the more traditional fecal monitoring. Balcaen et al. designed a dual tracer experiment with the purpose of assessing the relative importance of the two exposure routes according to which Daphnia magna (a small aquatic crustacean) can absorb Zn – via the respiratory system (gills) or via the alimentary channel.102 For that purpose, daphnids were cultured in water containing Zn isotopically enriched in 67Zn and fed algae containing Zn isotopically enriched in 68Zn. All three compartments (animals, water and algae) needed to be monitored for their Zn isotopic composition during the course of the experiment, in order to correct for unwanted processes occurring to some extent, i.e. exchange of Zn between the algae and the water and re-excretion of Zn into the water phase by the daphnids. Stable isotopic tracer studies are not limited to in vivo studies, but can also be deployed in in vitro studies and experimental set-ups intended to observe (bio)physical processes or (bio)chemical reactions. De Wannemacker et al.103 used a dual tracer approach for studying the bidirectional Mg transport across the intestinal epithelium of the Tilapia fish (used as a model species). Two solutions (representing the lumen content and blood, respectively) were separated by a sheet of intestinal tissue, freshly excised from Tilapia. The potential difference across the membrane was continuously monitored and nullified to avoid ‘passive’ Mg transport. Both solutions contained the same concentration of Mg, but were isotopically enriched in 24Mg and 26Mg, respectively. By measuring the 26Mg/24Mg isotope ratio as a function of time for both solutions, the Mg2+ fluxes could be determined. In spite of the numerous possibilities for spectral overlap, originating from the occurrence of carbon-based polyatomic ions, such as 12C2+ and 12C14N+, NaH+, Na+ (tailing) and 48Ca2+, accurate determination of Mg isotope ratios was accomplished by using a sector field ICP-mass spectrometer operated at a higher mass resolution (R = 3000).
Although not only single-collector, but also multi-collector sector field ICPMS has proved to be very useful in stable isotopic tracer studies in clinical and nutritional studies, the introduction of multi-collector sector field ICPMS seems to become even more important for determination of natural variations in the elements of interest (e.g., transition metals) in body tissues and fluids. Although it is not clear yet to what extent the data accessible in this way provide insight into the (human) metabolism, it has already been demonstrated that very useful information can be extracted (vide infra).
3.4. Applications related to the nuclear industry
Depleted U is a waste product from the enrichment process, aiming at increasing the isotopic abundance of 235U in mined uranium to such an extent that it can be used as reactor fuel. In depleted U, 235U hence shows an isotopic abundance (approx. 0.2%) that is substantially lower than the corresponding natural value (0.72%). DU is characterized by an extremely high density (almost twice the density of lead) and is therefore used for the manufacturing of ammunition and projectiles, giving these the capability to even penetrate the armored steel of military vehicles. DU is also used in the manufacturing of counterweights that are present in the wings and the tail of airplanes and serve for maintaining the aircraft's centre of gravity. The high density of DU allows these counterweights to be fairly small. However, DU is radiologically (but to a lesser extent than natural U!) and chemically toxic and therefore, there has been concern about the health of veterans that were exposed to DU ammunition in recent wars and the residents of areas where DU-containing planes have crashed. After the crash of an El Al cargo aircraft in apartment buildings in Amsterdam in 1992, exposed professional workers (e.g., firemen and police officers) started to express health complaints. The aircraft and its fuel and cargo burned for more than one hour and as DU readily burns and is converted into small inhalable particles, it was identified as a possible culprit. It was therefore decided to assess possible exposure to DU by investigation of the U content and isotopic composition in the urine of both exposed professional workers and – for comparison purposes – with non-exposed individuals from the same occupational group.104 Determination of the U content in urine was carried out according to the method developed by Vanhaecke et al.105 Those samples that showed an elevated U concentration (exceeding 50 ng/L, compared to the average level of 2–3 ng/L) were submitted to isotopic analysis using a single-collector sector field instrument.106 After microwave-assisted acid digestion of the sample, U was isolated and pre-concentrated using column chromatography with a commercially available U-TEVA resin (Eichrom Technologies), intended for extraction of the Actinide elements. In none of the urine samples investigated, a significant deviation of the 235U/238U ratio from the corresponding natural value could be demonstrated, while no relationship between U content and isotopic composition could be established.
Of course, ICPMS is also suited to study environmental pollution with radionuclides. On the basis of 240Pu/239Pu and 241Pu/239Pu determination with sector field ICPMS, Ketterer et al.107 have estimated the contributions from (a) global fallout and from (b) the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster (fallout characterized by higher 240Pu/239Pu and 241Pu/239Pu isotope ratios) to the Pu activity in Polish soils. The contribution of Chernobyl fallout to the total 239Pu and 240Pu activity, calculated on the basis of a two-component mixing model, ranged from <10% to >90%. Especially for the Northeastern part of Poland, the contribution from the Chernobyl accident was assessed to be very high, with values approaching 100%.
4. Applications based on natural variations in the isotopic composition of metallic, metalloid and non-metallic elements
Except for a few elements, for which the natural variations in the isotopic composition are quite pronounced (e.g., B, Sr or Pb), a very high precision is usually required in these applications and that provided by single-collector ICPMS is insufficient for the majority of applications. For a long time, such applications could only be tackled using TIMS. For analysis by means of TIMS, the analyte element has to be isolated as purely as possible from the concomitant matrix for assuring sufficient ionization efficiency. Moreover, the application range is limited to elements with an ionization energy below 7.5 eV, unless negative ions can be used.27 The introduction of multi-collector sector field ICPMS (MC-ICPMS) has drastically changed this situation, as it offers a similar isotope ratio precision as TIMS, while the typical advantages of ICPMS have been preserved: an ion source operated at atmospheric pressure and thus, a straightforward sample introduction, a high ionization efficiency (also for elements with an ionization energy > 7.5 eV) and a high sample throughput.108 Originally, it was claimed that it would no longer be necessary to separate the analyte element from the matrix, later however, it was realized that in order to enable accurate correction for mass discrimination, the matrix of samples must be reduced to trace amounts, present at a far smaller total concentration than the element to be analyzed.109 Nevertheless, also laser ablation (LA) – MC-ICPMS has been successfully used on many occasions. In LA, a high energy UV laser beam is directed upon the surface of the sample and upon impact, a small amount of material is ablated and the dry aerosol thus obtained is transported into the ICP by means of a He or Ar carrier gas.
The natural variations in the isotopic composition of these heavier elements are very small and are therefore typically expressed as relative differences versus a standard (that is preferentially internationally agreed upon), termed δ values.  
Moreover, these δ values are more robust than the absolute ratios themselves.
In order to illustrate the capabilities of both single-collector and multi-collector ICPMS for detecting and quantifying natural variations in isotope ratios, a selection of applications from various fields and reported in the literature will be discussed.
4.1. Geochronology
Since the introduction of the technique, the majority of isotope ratio applications with TIMS were carried out in a ‘geological’ context and for (multi-collector) sector field ICPMS, the situation is not different.29,30,110,111 Isotope ratio determination of elements with (a) radiogenic isotope(s) can, e.g., be used for geochronology,112 an approach whereby determination of the age of rock material is aimed at. In this context, only Rb–Sr, U, Th–Pb and Pb–Pb dating will be covered here in more detail.

4.1.1 Rb–Sr dating. 
Magmatic rock dating can, e.g., be attempted via the Rb–Sr method. If several minerals of the same magmatic rock are considered, it is self-evident that they all display the same 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio at the time of petrogenesis (open circles in Fig. 11). Afterwards, as 87Rb decays into 87Sr, the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio in the minerals increases with a rate that is dependent on the Rb/Sr elemental concentration ratio. When plotting the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio as a function of the 87Rb/86Sr ratio however, all data points remain on the same straight line, the isochron, at least in case of closed-system behavior with respect to both Rb and Sr. By calculating the best-fitting straight line through the experimental data points (filled circles in Fig. 11), both the slope and the intersection point with the y-axis – the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio for a(n imaginary) Rb concentration of zero – are obtained. From the slope, the age of the rock is calculated, the intersection point provides the original 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio (at petrogenesis) of all minerals.
 Fig. 11  Systematic representation of how the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratios and 87Rb/86Sr ratios (∼ elemental concentration ratios) of an ideally behaving (closed) system vary as the rock material ages. The current data points lay on a straight line – the isochron – from which both the age (from the slope) and the initial 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio (intersection of isochron with y-axis) can be deduced. Modified from ref. 3 with permission from Wiley. 
Although for the majority of applications, an isotope ratio precision beyond the capabilities of single-collector sector field ICPMS is required, Vanhaecke et al.113,114 demonstrated that in less demanding applications, also single-collector ICPMS can provide useful information. For two rock formations with a considerable difference in age – ca. 2500 million yrs (Nilgiri Enderbites, India) vs. ca. 360 million yrs (Regensburg Forest granites, Germany) – the Rb–Sr dating results obtained (age and initial 87Sr/86Sr ratio) were in good agreement with the results provided by TIMS analysis.


4.1.2 
            U, Th–Pb and Pb–Pb dating. 
Pb has three radiogenic isotopes (Fig. 1) that are the final product of fairly long decay series. However, as the first step is very slow when compared to the subsequent steps, the condition for secular equilibrium is fulfilled. As a result, in the context of geochronological dating we can consider the production of these radiogenic Pb isotopes as a single-step process. Hence, dating techniques very similar to Rb–Sr dating can be used, based on the radioactive decay of 238U into 206Pb, 235U into 207Pb and 232Th into 208Pb. These approaches are referred to as U–Pb and U–Th dating and are, e.g., used to date zircon minerals, which occur in different types of rocks.2,3 As a result, if the geological material to be dated contains sufficiently high (adequately measurable) amounts of the isotopes involved, three separate dates can be obtained. If these dates do not differ significantly from one another, the dates are called concordant and the material is assumed to be dated accurately. Often however, significant differences are established, because the material to be dated has not always acted as a closed system with respect to Pb, U and Th. As a result of the physical damage sometimes caused by the occurring α-decay (Fig. 1), losses are facilitated. Pb–Pb dating is a method that is more robust as it does not rely on determination of elemental concentrations, but on Pb isotope ratio results only (and the 235U/238U ratio that can be considered as constant and known). This method is based on the following variation of the ratio of the newly produced 207Pb* to newly produced 206Pb*:  When the system behaves ideally, the 206Pb*/238U ratio varies as a function of the 207Pb*/235U ratio according to the solid red line in Fig. 12. This correlated behavior is universal, as can be understood from the abovementioned equation. When, e.g., a sudden loss of Pb occurs (situation depicted in Fig. 12), the experimental data points are not on the theoretical curve, called the concordia, but they lay below the curve on a straight line, called the discordia. The higher intersection point of the extrapolated straight line with the concordia provides the age of the material to be dated (in this example, ∼3500 million yrs ago), the lower intersection point reveals when the Pb loss has occurred (in this example, ∼800 million yrs ago). If a sudden U loss occurs, the data points are situated above the concordia, but the intersection points of the best-fitting straight line through these data points with the concordia still provide the same information. This type of geochronological dating is, e.g., often used to date carbonates, such as corals, because these materials show relatively high U levels and relatively low Pb levels, which leads to pronounced changes in the Pb isotope ratios, while most often a near-to-ideal behavior (closed system) can be assumed.
 Fig. 12  Concordia diagram (in red) – systematic representation of how the 206Pb*/238U and 207Pb*/235U of an ideally behaving (closed) system vary as the rock material ages. In this specific example, a sudden Pb loss is indicated 2.5 billion yrs after formation. The various data points for the system investigated (yellow circles) remain on a straight line – the discordia – as the 206Pb*/207Pb* is not affected by this loss. As the system ages, the slope of the discordia changes. At present, the upper intersection point of discordia and concordia provides the age of the system (in this example, 3.5 billion yrs), the lower intersection point provides information on when the Pb loss actually occurred (∼1 billion yrs ago). Modified from ref. 3 with permission from Wiley. 
In these geochronological applications, sample introduction by means of LA is gaining ground, as it permits micro-sampling with high spatial resolution, while the combination with MC-ICPMS guarantees an isotope ratio precision that is fit-for-purpose. In the context of Rb–Sr dating of biotites from the Oslo rift (Norway), Willigers et al.115 even reported an improvement in the spread of the isotope ratio results by a factor of 3 when using LA-MC-ICPMS instead of TIMS (after analyte isolation) and also for U–Th studies, MC-ICPMS has shown to be superior to TIMS.116 In both cases, geologically relevant information that could be obscured when using TIMS can be revealed when using MC-ICPMS instead.

4.2. Variations in isotope ratios for studying geochemical phenomena
Numerous articles devoted to the use of variations in the isotopic composition of metallic and metolloid stable elements in geochemical research have been published. Excellent reviews on the subject for selected elements are given by, among others, Tang et al. for Li,117 Young and Galy for Mg,118 Basile-Doelsch for Si,119 DePaolo for Ca,120 Dauphas and Rouxel for Fe,121 Albarède for Cu and Zn,122 Cloquet et al. for Zn,123 Johnson for Se,124 Anbar for Mo,125 Ripperger et al. for Cd126 and Ridley and Stetson for Hg.127 Variations in the isotopic composition of these stable elements have been successfully used in deciphering mechanisms of both low and high temperature geochemical processes. In the former field, a significant emphasis was put towards developing reliable isotopic tools for reconstruction of environmental parameters that existed in the past.
As some materials – e.g., Antarctic ice, corals, speleothems and oceanic Fe–Mn concretions – are formed over thousands to millions of years, they ‘archive’ information on the isotopic composition of the elements they contain in a chronological way. If one of these elements shows measurable natural variation in its isotopic composition and the factors (redox potential, temperature, relative importance of contributing sources, etc) governing the isotopic composition of that particular element can be deciphered, isotope ratios can be used as paleoproxies to reveal information on the prevailing conditions over long periods of time.
Hall et al.128 evaluated the use of the isotopic composition of Li in planktic foraminifera as a proxy for paleo-seawater. After sample dissolution, Li was separated from the concomitant matrix by cation exchange chromatography. Mass discrimination was corrected for by using the L-SVEC isotopic reference material as an external standard in a bracketing approach. For seawater, the 6Li/7Li isotope ratio could be measured with a precision of approximately 0.05% (s). The results obtained showed that Li is incorporated in the planktic foraminifer Orbulina universa without measurable fractionation. Hence, this material acts as an archive for the isotopic composition of Li in ocean water over geological times. Li isotopic analysis of foraminifers thus shows the capability of revealing differences in the relative importance of the two major contributions to the presence of Li in sea water: continental weathering (influx of Li into the sea watervia rivers) and hydrothermal interaction with the ocean crust. In this way, the authors demonstrate, e.g., that the relative contribution from both sources to the North Atlantic seawater was unaltered over the past 44,000 yrs. Also speleothems (e.g., stalactites in caves) may act as an archive. Galy et al.129,130 demonstrated that the isotopic composition of the Mg (measured by means of multi-collector ICPMS and, e.g., expressed as δ26Mg and δ25Mg versus the isotopic reference material NIST SRM 980) present in calcite is however rather determined by the actual type of CaCO3mineral than by the temperature at which the material was deposited. The temperature-dependent fractionation was established to be <20 ppm (or <0.002%) per mass unit and per °C, limiting the capabilities of the Mg isotopic composition as a proxy for the paleo-temperature. On the other hand, Mg isotope ratio measurements in 45 rivers from a wide range of lithotectonic and climate settings were proven useful in assessing the influx and outflux of Mg in sea water and for improving models for oceanic Mg. To a first order, the marine mass balance of Mg isotopic ratios was shown to be approximated by taking into account a riverine input and output via (a) hydrothermal circulation at mid-ocean ridges and (b) Mg carbonate formation.131 Norman et al. measured the isotopic composition of Mg in olivines by MC-ICPMS using both pneumatic nebulization and LA for sample introduction.132 Despite the fact that pneumatic nebulization provided results that were a factor of 2–3 more precise, LA-MC-ICPMS was assessed fit-for-purpose, offering a precision better than that attained with TIMS or SHRIMP (Sensitive High Resolution Ion MicroProbe). It was shown that analysis of olivines with a lower Mg concentration artificially resulted in a heavier measrured isotopic composition, but this discrepancy, caused by mass-dependent isotope fractionation during ablation, could be corrected for. On the basis of the method developed, it was shown that the Mg present in terrestrial (mantle) and lunar olivines show the same Mg isotopic composition giving further evidence for the formation of the moon as a result of a giant impact between a Mars-sized body, often called Theia, and the proto-earth.
As a result of the high isotope ratio precision of MC-ICPMS, also for heavier elements, natural variations in their isotopic composition as a result of fractionation effects are observed. Hence, also for these elements, isotope ratios show potential to be used as paleoproxies. In 1998, Gale et al.,133e.g., reported to have detected natural variations in the isotopic composition of Cu, measured by both TIMS and multi-collector ICPMS in copper minerals. Zhu et al.134 describe the consequences of the natural variations in the isotopic composition of Cu as a result of fractionation effects for its use as a geochemical tracer, providing information concerning a wide variety of topics, ranging from cosmochemistry and planetary geochemistry to biochemistry and nutrition. Quantifying such subtle variations however, has to be carried out with the utmost care. Maréchal and Albarède39 have, e.g., demonstrated the occurrence of isotope fractionation of Cu during its extraction on a chromatographic column and hence, the need for quantitative Cu recovery. Archer and Vance135 highlight some other pitfalls in the isotopic analysis of Cu using multi-collector ICPMS, having serious consequences on the sample clean-up required and the way in which mass discrimination needs to be corrected for. After a very thorough examination of all possible pitfalls, Petit et al. showed that Cu and Zn isotopic analysis could provide valuable information on processes going on in estuarine environments.136 On the basis of the Zn and Cu isotope ratio results obtained for particular matter and sediments from the estuarine of the river Scheldt (Belgium), e.g., they identified the physical mixing of continental and marine water masses as the controlling factor. Also Ikehata et al. aimed at Cu isotope ratio determination, but in pure Cu metal and Cu-rich minerals.137 A femtosecond NIR-LA system was used for sample introduction. Owing to the short laser pulse width, heating of the sample and the isotope fractionation this may give rise to is avoided. LA-MC-ICPMS was demonstrated to provide both statistically indistinguishable results and the same long-term precision – approximately 0.002% RSD – as conventional solution MC-ICPMS. Fietzke and Eisenhauer showed that in addition to natural variation owing to the presence of 87Sr as a radiogenic nuclide, the isotopic composition of Sr also shows an additional (much smaller) variation as a result of isotope fractionation.138 In a lab experiment, they showed that the isotopic composition of Sr is a function of the temperature (5 ppm/°C) at which aragonite is precipitated. This observation was supported by investigation of natural coral samples, although a stronger temperature dependency was seen (33 ppm/°C). Kinetic effects were identified as being at the origin of the temperature-dependency, but the difference in temperature dependency observed between natural coral and laboratory-made aragonite need to be studied in more detail before the possibility of using the Sr isotope ratio as a paleo-temperature proxy can be adequately assessed.

MC-ICPMS has also been deployed for the isotopic analysis of elements that were considered as not or hardly accessible in the early days of ICPMS. Van den Boorn et al., e.g., focused on the determination of Si isotope ratios in silicate materials, as these have been identified as a diagnostic tracer for depositional settings of silica-rich lithologies and for the origin of silica.139 In order to avoid losses of volatile Si compounds as a result of the use of HF, they developed an alternative digestion method, based on the use of heating of a mixture of sample and an excess of solid NaOH·H2O for several days in a heated (200 °C) Parr bomb and subsequent additional treatment of solid residues, whenever observed (with 7 M HNO3 and if required, an additional NaOH·H2O treatment). The target element was then separated from Na+ and other cations present via the use of an AG50-X8 cation exchange column that does not retain the Si, which is present in neutral or anionic form. The MC-ICPMS measurements, carried out at higher mass resolution to avoid spectral overlap resulted in 0.01 to 0.05% measurement precision. The entire procedure is less contamination-prone and much more comfortable than that based on gas source MS that requires fluorination of Si. An even more straightforward approach was reported on by Chmeleff et al. who deployed a femtosecond UV–LA system coupled to an MC-ICPMS instrument for isotopic analysis of the Si present in elemental Si, SiO2 and silicate matrices and even Si purified from solutions and demonstrated a measurement precision of approximately 0.01% RSD.140 Also sulfur, an element for which isotopic analysis by means of gas source MS (after conversion into SO2 or SF6) has already proven its utility in providing information on the sources and cycling of sulfur species in biological and geochemical processes, is nowadays analyzed for its isotopic composition viaMC-ICPMS. Craddock et al., e.g. used both pneumatic nebulization and LA as means of sample introduction into an MC-ICPMS instrument, operated at higher mass resolution to avoid spectral overlap, to study S isotope ratios in sulfur-bearing minerals.141 For solution-based analysis, the S fraction was isolated. With the LA approach, this is self-evidently not possible, such that matrix-matching of samples and standards was required. Fietzke et al. deployed LA-MC-ICPMS for the isotopic analysis of Cl, the isotope ratio of which provides information on geochemical processes, especially in subduction zone systems.142 In their approach, Cl was first quantitatively extracted from the samples using a pyrohydrolysis approach and collected in a NaOH/Na2SO3 solution. Subsequently, Cl− was precipitated as the chloride salt, collected on a filter and subjected to LA-MC-ICPMS analysis. Possibly the most ‘exotic’ element, at least from the point of view of ICPMS, for which the isotopic composition has been determined viaMC-ICPMS is carbon.143 The 13C/12C isotope ratio was corrected for mass discrimination by relying on the 11B/10B isotope ratio for determination of the mass discrimination factor. Final results for reference materials differed by less than 0.2% from the corresponding reference materials, characterized by gas source MS. The authors assess the method as very promising for C isotope ratio analysis and identify two prominent advantages. The signals monitored with ICPMS stem from C+ ions, whereas those monitored by gas source MS stem from CO2+ molecular ions, such that the occurrence of 17O next to 16O needs to be taken into account and complicates data handling. Also the sample pretreatment is substantially facilitated as no previous conversion of organic compounds into CO2 is required.
4.3. Provenance determination
A substantial amount of applications reported on in the literature aim at provenance determination. The isotopic composition of elements, such as Sr (soil) or Pb (mining area) vary substantially from one location to another as some of their isotopes are radiogenic. As a result, isotopic analysis of these elements in, among other, agricultural products, objects of art, human remains or atmospheric particles, may provide insight into their (geographical) origin. As the variations in isotopic composition for these elements is quite pronounced, single-collector sector field ICPMS can be successfully used for some applications.

4.3.1. Agricultural products. 
Especially Sr isotopic analysis has already proved useful for provenance determination of agricultural products (of course, neglecting isotopic analysis of H, C, N, O and S, which is accomplished via gas source mass spectrometry144). Without measurable isotope fractionation, soil Sr is taken up by plants and can thus further enter the food chain.
The most popular agricultural product for which the capabilities of provenance determination based on isotopic analysis via ICPMS have been exploited is wine.145 Also isotopic analysis of other elements have been deployed for provenance determination of wine. Coetzee and Vanhaecke demonstrated the capabilities of B isotopic analysis, which not only enabled to discriminate between wines of European and of South-African origin, respectively, but also between wines coming from different South-African regions.146 Although Medina et al. showed that the presence of Pb in wine had to a large extent to be attributed to anthropogenic input (environmental pollution), they concluded that Pb isotopic analysis still provides some information on the provenance of wine as the composition of this pollutant differs from one continent to the other.147 These approaches can hence be applied for checking the authenticity of the indicated origin and hence, for tracing down fraud, an approach especially relevant for products with a denominated region of origin.
Fortunato et al.148 demonstrated that Sr isotopic analysis viaMC-ICPMS also enables one to distinguish between Emmenthal-type cheeses from different geographic regions. Vendace (Coregonus albula L.) caviar from a specific location in Sweden (the Bothnian bay) is an expensive delicacy, called Kalix vendace caviar. Rodushkin et al.149 have evaluated several approaches to discern Kalix vendace caviar from vendace and other white fish caviars from brackish and fresh waters from other locations in Sweden, Finland and the USA. Sr isotopic analysis by either single-collector or multi-collector sector field ICPMS was assessed very useful as the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio varied at least 10 times more between Kalix vendace caviar and other caviars (>1% relative difference) than between different harvests of Kalix vendace caviar (≤0.1%). Also the discriminating power of the 187Os/188Os isotope ratio was evaluated. For this approach, a special analyte introduction system wherein the target element was converted into gaseous OsO4 was used. Unfortunately, in this case the authors had to come to the conclusion that this strategy did not allow discrimination between Kalix caviar and fresh water caviar from Finland.


4.3.2. Archeological materials and objects of art. 
De Wannemacker et al.150 used single-collector ICPMS for the isotopic analysis of Pb present in Cu alloy statuettes that were discovered during dredging operations in Flemish rivers. These statuettes represent Roman gods and stylistic investigation, backed up by elemental analysis, resulted in the conclusion that these statuettes were actually from the Roman era. Comparison of the Pb isotope ratios determined with the isotopic fields corresponding to the isotopic composition of Pb from mining areas exploited during that time provided information concerning the origin of the material used for the production of the statuettes – Northern/Gallic vs. Southern/Roman-Greek. Fortunato et al.151 carried out Pb isotopic analysis of lead white 2PbCO3·Pb(OH)2 pigment, sampled from 16th and 17th century paintings from Flemish, Dutch and Italian Masters using MC-ICPMS. A marked difference in Pb isotopic composition was demonstrated between the pigment used by Flemish-Dutch painters (e.g., Rubens and Van Dyck) and that used by contemporary Italian painters, hence demonstrating a different origin. Surprisingly, comparison of the Pb isotopic composition of the pigment used by Flemish-Dutch painters with that of Pb from different mining areas across Europe revealed that no locally mined Pb was used for production of the pigment, but that the ore, the Pb isolated from the ore or the pigment itself was imported from either Germany or England. Self-evidently, art-history profits from findings like these and becomes more accurate, while the information obtained can also be relied on for authentication of a work of art or for its restoration (e.g., the detection of overpaints or retouchings of a later date). Of course, minimum sample consumption is of great importance for many archaeometric applications. Therefore, the use of LA is receiving considerable attention as it enables quasi destruction-free sampling. Schultheis et al.152 have used the combination of LA with single-collector sector field ICPMS for isotopic analysis of the Pb present in glass. Either NIST SRM 981 (Pb isotopic reference material) or NIST 610 SRM (glass reference material) were used for external correction for mass discrimination. For this purpose, the isotopic composition of NIST SRM 610 was first characterized using pneumatic nebulization ICPMS. The results thus obtained, e.g., revealed that the single layers of some iridescent Art Nouveau glass samples were of different provenance. Resano et al. used LA-ICPMS for obtaining information on the isotopic composition of Pb used in the manufacturing of Spanish antique lead-glazed ceramics.153 The use of LA allowed a quasi non-destructive and site-specific sampling of the glaze layer (thickness: ca. 100 µm). The use of Ne as a non-reactive collision gas in the dynamic reaction cell (DRC) the quadrupole-based instrument was equipped with resulted in a significant improvement in the isotope ratio precision (0.15–0.25% internal precision), but gave rise to a more pronounced mass discrimination, as previously also described by Vanhaecke et al.154 Several interesting conclusions could be drawn from the results obtained. It was demonstrated that for ceramics with a different type of decoration, also a Pb ore with a different provenance was used, while the Pb ores used in two close production locations (only 200 km away from one another) were demonstrated to be of a different kind as well. Especially when LA is used, the use of a multi-collector instrument offers a substantial advantage over a single collector one, as this sample introduction system results in rather noisy signals. LA-MC-ICPMS was, e.g., deployed for Pb isotopic fingerprinting of silver coins from Roman times155 and of Bronze age metal artefacts excavated in Germany.156
For provenance determination of human remains, Sr isotopic analysis can provide valuable information. Both throughout history and even nowadays, the majority of the world's population relies (predominantly) on local food sources. As described before, agricultural products reflect the Sr isotopic composition of the soil they are are cultivated on and this Sr is also incorporated without (great) fractionation in skeletal tissue, where it readily replaces Ca. Based on this rationale, Latkoczy et al.157 used single-collector ICPMS for Sr isotopic analysis on 7000 yr-old human skeletal tissue, discovered in Austria at what was identified as a Neolithic settlement. Prohaska et al.158 used LA – single-collector sector field ICPMS for spatially resolved Sr isotopic analysis of teeth. Despite the poorer isotope ratio due to the use of LA for sample introduction, a difference in Sr isotopic composition between dentine and enamel for an individual from the Neolithic settlement mentioned above, was demonstrated. This is indicative of a change in food source and hence, a probable migration during early childhood, as the Sr isotopic composition of enamel is governed during a subject's infancy, while dentine shows a much higher turnover rate and thus reflects the Sr isotopic composition of the diet and hence, the location where the subject has been living during the last years before his death. Of course, when LA is deployed as a means of sample introduction, the risk for biased results is increased, as target element and concomitant matrix are simultaneously introduced into the ICP. This may not only jeopardize an adequate correction for mass discrimination, but can also result in spectral overlap that is not always easily recognized. Simonetti et al. have, e.g., demonstrated a significant difference in the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio for the same samples (tooth enamel), but obtained via pneumatic nebulization MC-ICPMS (after sample digestion and Sr isolation) and LA-MC-ICPMS, respectively, as a result of spectral overlap of the signals of 87Sr+ and CaPO+ in the latter case.159 Not only spectral overlap may jeopardize accurate isotope ratio results, as Kuhn et al. demonstrated the isotopic composition of Cu particles, produced via LA with a quintupled Nd:YAG solid state laser (213 nm), to be dependent on the particle size. Larger (>200 µm) particles were shown to be isotopically heavier by 0.07% than the smaller ones, and as not all particle sizes are as easily “handled” by the ICP, this results in a biased result with respect to the true value, even after adequate correction for mass discrimination.160
De Muynck et al. used Pb isotopic analysis viaMC-ICPMS161 to gain insight into the origin of this toxic metal, present in high concentrations in skeletal tissue of stillborn and children that died before the age of one, originating from a gravefield located near to Valkenburg (the Netherlands) and used during Roman times (1st–3rd century AD). By comparison of the Pb isotope ratios of the bone tissue and the graveyard soil, respectively, they could exclude that diagenesis (post-mortem lead contamination from the soil) is the sole explanation for the high Pb levels observed. Additionally, via Pb isotopic analysis, it was shown that the Pb present in the bone tissue is a mixture of local Pb, Pb originating from lead objects, stemming from the same era and excavated in the same region, and Pb originating from amphorae. In this way, the first unequivocal evidence of prenatal Pb intoxication was provided.


4.3.3. Environmental applications. 
Isotopic analysis can also reveal the origin of environmental pollution. The lead sources for PbMe4 and PbEt4 that were abundantly used as anti-knocking agents in petrol showed an isotopic signature clearly different from that of Europe's geogenic Pb. The reason for this is basically the fact that, as a result of the removal of U and Th at the time of Pb ore formation, the Pb isotopic composition of the ore is fixed, while, e.g., in crustal material, the enrichment in the radiogenic isotopes continues to go on. As a result, Pb isotopic analysis of environmental samples by means of ICPMS has been frequently carried out to obtain insight into the relative importance of various contributions. Owing to the large differences in isotopic composition between Pb of various origin, even single-collector ICPMS has been successfully used in such applications.
If the Pb composition in environmental samples is the result of a mixing of Pb from 2 sources (e.g., geogenic and anthropogenic), the results for the environmental samples will plot on a straight line between the values for the 2 sources in a three-isotope plot (one isotope ratio plotted as a function of another, having a common denominator, Fig. 13.a). Also by plotting the isotope ratio results obtained as a function of the Pb concentration, a continuous curve is obtained (Fig. 13.b). The latter curve can be converted into a straight line by using the reverse of the Pb concentration – 1/[Pb] – rather than the Pb concentration itself (Fig. 13.c). The three aforementioned curves obtained for a real-life application aiming at identifying the sources of Pb present in a polluted Antarctic sediment are shown in Fig. 13.162 In this application, the Pb ratio found for sediments assumed to be pristine is considered as a proxy for natural Pb, while Pb ore from the Australian Broken Hill mine is considered as representative for the anthropogenic input. Of course, also cases in which there are more than two sources contributing occur. In such a case, the results for the environmental samples no longer plot on a mixing line, but in an area defined by the straight curves connecting the values for the sources involved. Fig. 14 gives an example in which three sources play a role.
 Fig. 13  (a) Three-isotope ratio plot (208Pb/204Pb as a function of 206Pb/204Pb) for Antarctic sediments from Brown Bay (filled circles) and for proxies for potential Pb sources – Broken Hill and battery samples for anthropogenic lead, on one hand, and O'Brien Bay and Sparkes Bay sediments for natural Pb, on the other. (b) 208Pb/204Pb as a function of the Pb concentration. (c) 208Pb/204Pb as a function of (1/Pb concentration). Figure reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry RSC. 
 Fig. 14  Three-isotope plot (208Pb/206Pb as a function of 207Pb/206Pb) for a situation in which the isotopic composition in the samples investigated (open circles) is determined by a mixing of Pb coming from three sources. 
Döring et al.163 used sector field ICPMS to measure 207Pb/206Pb and 208Pb/206Pb isotope ratios in 1993–1996 snow samples from high alpine sites. Despite Pb concentrations in the lower pg/g range only, the precision offered by sector field ICPMS sufficed to draw meaningful conclusions. It was shown that despite the substantial reduction in lead emission from traffic during the 10 years preceding the investigated time interval, the contribution from this source was still as important as that from other anthropogenic sources (industrial activity and waste incineration). Townsend and Snape162 carried out isotopic analysis of Antarctic marine sediments, sampled near the Australian station Casey using sector field ICPMS. Capacitive decoupling of the induction coil and the ICP by means of a grounded Pt shield boosted the signal intensity by an order of magnitude and hence, was beneficial for Pb isotope ratio precision at low target element levels. Analysis data provided evidence for anthropogenic contamination, attributed to the runoff from a waste disposal site with abandoned lead batteries. Church et al.164 determined Pb isotope ratios in the blood of California condors (Gymnogyps californianus). As these birds are endangered species, efforts are made to extend the population by releasing birds that were bred in captivity. While before release these animals show normal blood Pb levels, condors living in the wild show toxic levels. Pb isotopic analysis of pre-release birds, condors living in the wild, their typical diet and ammunition indicated that the latter is actually the principal source of the elevated Pb levels. Spatially resolved analysis of a condor feather provided additional evidence of acute exposure, presumed to be the result of accidental ingestion of ammunition present in the carcasses of animals killed by hunters. Pb isotopic analysis to provide insight into the origin of Pb pollution, is not restricted to ‘Modern times’. Le Roux et al.165 sampled a peat core from the Manchester area in slices of 2 cm. The peat bog was used as an archive, providing information on Pb pollution from approximately 2000 BC to 1800 AD (estimated via radiocarbon and 210Pb dating). Apparently, Pb pollution appeared as early as 900 BC, as a result of pre-Roman mining activities. Local mining of the Pb ores continued to be the main source of pollution during the Roman era and the Middle Ages. By analyzing samples from a peat bog from the Black Forest region in Germany in a similar way, Le Roux et al.166 could demonstrate that during the past 25 years, the Pb deposition rate was two orders of magnitude higher than that ‘archived’ for 3300–1300 years BC. By means of Pb isotopic analysis, the contribution from the mining activity in Black Forest to the atmospheric Pb deposition could be estimated. Vallelonga et al. go much further back in time and compare the isotopic composition of Pb in Antarctic ice cores, providing information on the Pb present in the Antarctic atmosphere over the past 220,000 yrs, with that of loess and soil samples of potential source areas in the southern hemisphere.167 The major conclusion was that non-volcanogenic (crustal) Pb transported to Eastern Antarctica during the last two glacial – interglacial cycles was predominantly of South-American origin.
Ghazi and Millette168 used the combination of a 213 nm LA system and a single-collector sector field ICPMS instrument to characterize the isotopic composition of Pb in the individual layers of a layered paint chip and could come to some conclusions as to the mines the Pb present in the layers was coming from. Gwiazda and Smith169 describe case studies, wherein Pb isotopic analysis of blood of children with a higher Pb blood level and of potential Pb sources in the child's household environment can shed light on the main exposure route(s).
Also the isotopic signature of elements that show natural variation in their isotopic composition as a result of fractionation effects was already used in such environmental studies. For B, where the percentual difference in mass between the isotopes is high, single-collector ICPMS was demonstrated to offer sufficient isotope ratio precision to be useful. Gäbler and Bahr170 used such an instrument to determine the 10B/11B isotope ratio in surface and ground waters in order to check potential anthropogenic input. This approach is based on the fact that sodium perborate, present as a bleaching agent in detergents, is characterized by a 10B/11B isotope ratio that differs markedly from that of geogenic B in the area of interest. The results obtained clearly demonstrated the effect of the discharge of a sewage plant on the Innerste river water (Harz region, Germany) and infiltration of the river water into some ground water observation wells. For other elements, the isotope ratio precision offered by single-collector ICPMS is no longer sufficient and the use of multi-collector ICPMS is mandatory. By means of MC-ICPMS, Cloquet et al. demonstrated the existence of measurable variation in the isotopic composition of Cd as a result of mass fractionation effects occurring during Pb–Zn smelting.171,172 Although the range of variation is only 0.04%, the isotope ratio precision as offered by MC-ICPMS was sufficient to discriminate between Cd of different sources based on its isotopic signature and thus, to reveal the origin of anthropogenic Cd pollution in the environment.172


4.3.4 Forensic applications. 
The applications described in the previous sections can all be used in the context of forensic analysis. Self-evidently, objective determination of the provenance of foodstuff only becomes relevant in a situation where fraud can be expected. This situation occurs when a false declaration concerning the geographical origin of the product allows enhancing the profit substantially beyond that what would be attainable with a correct indication of the provenance (e.g., fraud with agricultural products with a protected denomination of origin) or circumventing an existing ban against products coming from a certain region, (e.g., beef from countries with too high an incidence of Creutzfeldt-Jakob (mad cow) disease173). Also for discovering counterfeit drugs, another lucrative, but obviously illegal business, isotopic analysis via ICPMS was proven useful. Clough et al. analysed genuine and counterfeit Viagra tablets for their 34S/32S ratio viaMC-ICPMS.174 Sampling via LA provided isotope ratio data for the entire tablet, while the coupling of HPLC with MC-ICPMS provided specific information on the active component, sildenafil citrate. In both cases, significant differences in the isotopic composition of S could be demonstrated. Also in the assessment of the authenticity of objects of art, isotopic analysis can play an important role, as it can, e.g., reveal the use of Pb ore originating from a mine not yet exploited at the time the object is claimed to date from. The approach described to deploy Sr isotopic analysis of human remains (tooth or bone tissue) for revealing the lithology of the environment the individual was living in and thus for getting information as to his/her geographical provenance is not limited to archaeological case studies, but is also deployed in murder investigations.175 Buttigieg et al. on the other hand, carried out Pb isotopic analysis using MC-ICPMS for separating small arms projectiles from one another according to manufacturer and hence, geographical origin.176 Finally, also tracing down illegal nuclear activities or the origin of environmental pollution on the basis of isotope ratios are examples of forensic work.


4.3.5 Biological applications. 
Also for biological studies, provenance determination on the basis of isotopic analysis of Sr and/or Pb is useful. By determination of the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio in fish earbones (otoliths) via LA-MC-ICPMS, Outridge et al.177 could obtain information on the migration behavior of fish. Otoliths show growth rings – very similar to tree rings – and these rings reflect the isotopic composition of Sr of the fish's environment at the time at which this calcified tissue was formed. Owing to the small laser beam diameter, the migration pattern of fish could be revealed with sub-annual resolution.
Owing to the extremely high precision offered by MC-ICPMS instrumentation however, also natural isotope fractionation in biochemical processes is currently being demonstrated for an increasing number of elements. Although the full potential and the possible pitfalls of this analytical tool are probably not fully understood yet, some results that were reported already illustrate its great potential. Walczyk and von Blanckenburg demonstrated that the isotopic composition of Fe present in human blood differs between male and female subjects178 and among several body compartments.179 On the basis of the improved insight in the Fe human metabolism thus obtained and the observation that the isotopic composition of blood Fe reflects the individual differences in iron metabolism, it was predicted that for patients suffering from hereditary hemochromatosis, blood Fe would show an isotopic composition deviating from that typical for healthy subjects. This hypothesis was confirmed experimentally by using MC-ICPMS:180 in the blood of hemochromatosis patients, the 56Fe/54Fe isotope ratio significantly exceeded that typical for healthy individuals. Moreover, the magnitude of this deviation was assessed to correlate with the clinical severity of the disease. Also for Zn, it was demonstrated that isotope fractionation occurs within the human body as a significantly different isotopic composition was found for Zn in red blood cells and in hair from the same individual, respectively.181 Hirata et al. reported on the possibilities that Ca isotopic analysis viaMC-ICPMS provides in the context of (human) metabolism studies.182 A fractionation whereby isotopically lighter Ca (44Ca/42Ca) is incorporated in mouse bone tissue was demonstrated. The isotopic composition of the Ca present in the blood plasma on the other hand was almost identical (only very slightly higher) than that of Ca in the diet. In contrast to Fe, no difference in the isotopic composition of Ca in male and female species was shown for Ca. For lactating females however, a remarkable increase in the 44Ca/42Ca ratio was established in blood plasma, resulting in the assumption of the supplementation of isotopically lighter Ca to infant mice.

5. Outlook
Although it is clear that for many types of isotope ratio applications, single-collector ICPMS is fit-for-purpose, especially the introduction of MC-ICPMS and the revolutionary improvement in the corresponding instrumentation seen over the past years, has rendered isotope ratio determination a very hot topic in many research areas. The extended application area (when compared to TIMS), and the improvement in isotope ratio precision seen over the past couple of years, together with the possibility to carry out measurements at higher mass resolution, have actually provided new insights. In fact, the detection capability has been improved to such an extent that the statement that ‘most elements show an isotopic composition that is constant in nature’ needs to be reconsidered. The possibility to detect and quantify these small fractionation effects is opening a whole new area of research, capable of providing a wealth of information, not only useful in the geosciences, but also in all the other application areas described above and even more. However, the fundamental processes occurring in the instrumentation and affecting the measurement results (especially mass discrimination) need to be further unraveled and understood, so that our vision is not blurred or even changed as a result of instrument-related factors. Moreover, in order to fully profit from the new capabilities offered by today's state-of-art instrumentation and the further improvements probably to be seen in the near future, there is a strong need for a profound understanding of the factors controlling the extent of isotope fractionation during natural processes. This awareness leads to the realization that this research area may still be in its infancy and great discoveries and fascinating applications are still ahead of us.
References
J. K. Böhlke, J. R. de Laeter, P. De Bièvre, H. Hidaka, H. S. Peiser, K. J. R. Rosman and P. D. P. Taylor, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 2005, 34, 57–67 CrossRef CAS .

          A. P. Dickin, Radiogenic Isotope Geology, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press,  2005 Search PubMed .

          G. Faure, Principles of Isotope Geology, 2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1986 Search PubMed .
B. Bourdon, S. Turner, G. M. Henderson and C. C. Lundstrom, Rev. Miner. Geochem, 2003, 52, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
E. Roth, Pure Appl. Chem., 1997, 69, 1753–1828 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Hoefs, Stable isotope geochemistry, 5th ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2004 Search PubMed .

          R. E. Zeebe and D. Wolf-Glabrow, CO2 in seawater: equilibrium, kinetics, isotopes, Elsevier. ( 2001) Search PubMed .
E. D. Young, A. Galy and H. Nagahara, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2002, 66, 1095–1104 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wombacher, M. Rehkämper and K. Mezger, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68, 2349–2357 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Maréchal, P. Telouk and F. Albarède, Chem. Geol., 1999, 156, 251–273 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Coplen, J. K. Böhlke, P. De Bievre, T. Ding, N. E. Holden, J. A. Hopple, H. R. Krouse, A. Lamberty, H. S. Peiser, K. Revesz, S. E. Rieder, K. J. R. Rosman, E. Roth, P. D. P. Taylor, R. D. Vocke and Y. K. Xiao, Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 74, 1987–2017 CrossRef CAS .
V. Rai, T. L. Jackson and M. H. Thiemens, Science, 2005, 309, 1062–1065 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Jackson, D. M. Whittle, M. S. Evans and D. C. G. Muir, Appl. Geochem., 2008, 23, 547–571 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Malinovsky, L. Moens and F. Vanhaecke, Env. Sci. Technol., submitted for publication Search PubMed.
T. Fujii, F. Moynier, P. Telouk and F. Albarede, Astrophys. J., 2006, 647, 1506–1516 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Buchachenko, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 9995–10011 CrossRef .
E. A. Schauble, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2007, 71, 2170–2189 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Taylor, Am. Sci., 2000, 88, 60–67 .
J. S. Vogel, K. W. Turteltaub, R. Finkel and D. E. Nelson, Anal. Chem., 1995, 67, A353–A359 CrossRef .
N. Furuta, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1991, 6, 199–203 RSC .
F. Vanhaecke, L. Moens, R. Dams and P. Taylor, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 567–569 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Heumann, S. M. Gallus, G. Radlinger and J. Vogl, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1998, 13, 1001–1008 RSC .
F. Vanhaecke, L. Moens, R. Dams, I. Papadakis and P. Taylor, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 268–273 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Bandura, V. I. Baranov and S. D. Tanner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 921–928 RSC .
F. Vanhaecke, L. Moens, R. Dams, L. Allen and S. Georgitis, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rowland and J. A. Holcombe, Spectrochim. Acta B, 2009, 64, 35–41 CrossRef .

          D. H. Smith, in Inorganic Mass Spectrometry – Fundamentals and Applications, ed. C. M. Barshick, D. Duckworth and D. H. Smith,  2000, Marcel Dekker, New York, ch. 1, pp. 1–30 Search PubMed .
A. J. Walder, I. Platzner and P. A. Freedman, J. Anal. At. Spectrom, 1993, 8, 19–23 RSC .

          A. N. Halliday, J. N. Christensen, D. C. Lee, C. M. Hall, X. Luo and M. Rehkämper in Inorganic Mass Spectrometry – Fundamentals and Applications, ed. C. M. Barshick, D. Duckworth and D. H. Smith,  2000, Marcel Dekker, New York, ch. 8, pp. 291–371 Search PubMed .
M. Rehkämper, M. Schönbächler and C. Stirling, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2001, 25, 23–40 Search PubMed .
M. E. Wieser and J. B. Schwieters, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 242, 97–115 Search PubMed .
R. A. Mortlock, R. G. Fairbanks, T. C. Chiu and J. Rubenstone, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69, 649–657 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cardinal, L. Y. Alleman, J. de Jong, K. Ziegler and L. André, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 213–218 RSC .
S. Weyer and J. Schwieters, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 226, 355–368 Search PubMed .
F. Vanhaecke and L. Moens, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tanner, V. I. Baranov and D. R. Bandura, Spectrochim. Acta B, 2002, 57, 1361–1452 CrossRef .
T. Arnold, J. N. Harvey and D. J. Weiss, Spectrochim. Acta B, 2008, 63, 666–672 CrossRef .
F. Albarède and B. Beard, Rev. Miner. Geochem., 2004, 55, 113–150 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maréchal and F. Albarede, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2002, 66, 1499–1509 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Pietruszka and A. D. Reznik, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2008, 270, 23–30 Search PubMed .
J. Barling and D. Weis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23, 1017–1025 RSC .
M. E. Ketterer, M. J. Peters and P. J. Tisdale, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1991, 6, 439–443 RSC .
A. J. Pietruszka, R. J. Walker and P. A. Candela, Chem. Geol., 2006, 225, 121–136 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Ingle, B. L. Sharp, M. S. A. Horstwood, R. R. Parrish and D. J. Lewis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 219–229 RSC .
L. Yang and R. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 1452–1457 RSC .

          C. Cloquet, Ph.D. Thesis, CRPG-CNRS, France,  2005 .
F. Wombacher and M. Rehkämper, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 1371–1375 RSC .
J. Woodhead, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17, 1381–1385 RSC .
S. J. G. Galer and W. Abouchami, Miner. Mag., 1998, 62A, 491–492 CrossRef CAS .

          http://georem.mpch-mainz.gwdg.de/, last accessed 31.03.2009.

ThermoScientific Appl. note 30064,  2005 Search PubMed.
J. B. Schwieters, D. Tuttas, C. Bouman and N. Quaas, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70, A567 CrossRef .
R. N. Taylor, T. Warneke, J. A. Milton, I. W. Croudace, P. E. Warwick and R. W. Nesbitt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 480–484 RSC .
A. Cocherie and M. Robert, Chem. Geol., 2007, 243, 90–104 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Luo, M. Rehkamper, D. C. Lee and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 1997, 171, 105–117 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Andersen, C. H. Stirling, E. K. Potter and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 237, 107–118 Search PubMed .
S. F. Boulyga, U. Klötzli and T. Prohaska, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 1427–1430 RSC .

          G. P. Russ III, in Applications of Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry, ed. A. R. Date and A. L. Gray, Blackie, Glasgow,  1989, ch. 4, pp. 90–114 Search PubMed .
S. M. Nelms, C. R. Quetel, T. Prohaska, J. Vogl and P. D. P. Taylor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2001, 16, 333–338 RSC .

Perkin Elmer Elan 6100 DRC Software guide for software version 2.3.2 (May 2000) Search PubMed.
F. Vanhaecke, G. de Wannemacker, L. Moens, R. Dams, C. Latkoczy, T. Prohaska and G. Stingeder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1998, 13, 567–571 RSC .
A. Held and P. D. P. Taylor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1075–1079 RSC .
P. K. Appelblad and D. C. Baxter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 557–560 RSC .
M. P. Seah, Surf. Interf. Anal., 1995, 23, 729–732 CAS .
U. Nygren, H. Ramebäck, M. Berglund and D. C. Baxter, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 257, 12–15 Search PubMed .
E. A. Kurz, Am. Lab., 1979, 67–82 CAS .
L. A. Dietz, Rev. Sci. Instrum, 1995, 36, 1763–1770 .
G. P. Russ and J. M. Bazan, Spectrochim. Acta B, 1987, 42, 49–62 CrossRef .

          K. G. Heumann in Inorganic mass spectrometry, ed. F. Adams, R. Gijbels, R. van Grieken, Wiley, New York,  1988, ch. 7, pp. 301–376 Search PubMed .

          D. H. Smith, in Inorganic Mass Spectrometry – Fundamentals and Applications, ed. C. M. Barshick, D. Duckworth and D. H. Smith, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2000, ch. 5, pp. 223–240 Search PubMed .

          F. Vanhaecke, L. Balcaen and P. Taylor, in Inductively Coupled Plasma Spectrometry and its Applications, ed. S. Hill, Blackwell Publishing, Ames, Iowa,  2006, ch. 6, pp. 160–225 Search PubMed .
P. Evans, C. Wolff-Briche and B. Fairman, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2001, 16, 964–969 RSC .
F. Vanhaecke, H. Vanhoe, R. Dams and C. Vandecasteele, Talanta, 1992, 39, 737–742 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pin and B. Le Fèvre, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2002, 26, 135–148 Search PubMed .
J. Vogl, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 25, 475–492 Search PubMed .
P. Evans and B. Fairman, J. Environ. Monit., 2001, 3, 469–474 RSC .
I. Tresl and C. R. Quetel, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 16, 708–716 CrossRef CAS .
M. Willbold and K. P. Jochum, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29, 63–82 Search PubMed .
A. Makishima and E. Nakamura, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 2547–2553 CrossRef CAS .
L. Balcaen, I. Geuens, L. Moens and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377, 1020–1025 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng and M. Yamada, J. Oceanography, 2008, 64, 541–550 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Z. Mester, L. Abranko and R. E. Sturgeon, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 3510–3516 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Willie and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20, 1226–1231 RSC .
K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378, 318–329 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rottmann and K. G. Heumann, Fresenius J. Anal. Chem., 1994, 350, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cuyckens, L. I. Balcaen, K. De Wolf, B. De Samber, C. Van Looveren, R. Hurkmans and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390, 1717–1729 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zinn, R. Kruger, P. Leonhard and J. Bettmer, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Boulyga, M. Tibi and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378, 342–347 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fernandez, F. Claverie, C. Peycheran, J. Alexis and O. F. X. Donard, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 6981–6994 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fortunato and S. Wunderli, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. R. Kent, B. Jacobsen, D. W. Peate, T. E. Waight and J. A. Baker, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28, 417–429 Search PubMed .
T. Waight, J. Baker and B. Willigers, Chem. Geol., 2002, 186, 99–116 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chartier, H. Isnard, J. P. Degros, A. L. Faure and C. Frechou, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2008, 270, 127–133 Search PubMed .
S. Stürup, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378, 273–282 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Karpas, A. Lorber, E. Elish, R. Kol, Y. Roiz, R. Marko, E. Katorza, L. Halicz, J. Riondato, F. Vanhaecke and L. Moens, Health Phys., 1998, 74, 337–345 CAS .
C. Ingle, N. Langford, L. Harvey, J. R. Dainty, C. Armah, S. Fairweather-Tait, B. Sharp, M. Rose, H. Crews and J. Lewis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17, 1502–1505 RSC .
C. Ingle, N. Langford, L. Harvey, J. R. Dainty, C. Armah, S. Fairweather-Tait, B. Sharp, H. Crews, M. Rose and J. Lewis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17, 1498–1501 RSC .
M. P. Field, S. Shapses, M. Cifuentes and R. M. Sherrell, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 727–733 RSC .
A. Rodriguez-Cea, M. D. F. de la Campa, J. I. G. Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 270–278 RSC .
A. L. Nolan, Y. B. Ma, E. Lombi and M. J. McLaughlin, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380, 789–797 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bohn, T. Walczyk, L. Davidsson, W. Pritzkow, P. Klingbeil, J. Vogl and R. F. Hurrell, Brit. J. Nutrit., 2004, 91, 113–120 Search PubMed .
L. I. Balcaen, K. A. De Schamphelaere, C. R. Janssen, L. Moens and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390, 555–569 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Wannemacker, A. Ronderos, L. Moens, F. Vanhaecke, M. J. C. Bijvelds and Z. I. Kolar, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2001, 16, 581–586 RSC .
J. A. Bijlsma, P. Slottje, A. C. Huizink, J. W. R. Twisk, G. B. van der Voet, F. A. de Wolff, L. Moens, F. Vanhaecke and T. Smid, Nephrol., Dial. Transplant., 2008, 23, 249–255 CAS .
F. Vanhaecke, G. Stevens, G. De Wannemacker and L. Moens, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2003, 48, 251–257 CAS .
I. Tresl, G. De Wannemacker, C. R. Quetel, I. Petrov, F. Vanhaecke, L. Moens and P. D. P. Taylor, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 581–586 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Ketterer, K. M. Hafer and J. W. Mietelski, J. Environ. Radioactiv., 2004, 73, 183–201 CrossRef CAS .
T. Walczyk, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378, 229–231 CrossRef CAS .
F. Albarède, Ph. Telouk, J. Blichert-Toft, M. Boyet, A. Agranier and B. Nelson, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68, 2725–2744 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Halliday, D. C. Lee, J. N. Christensen, M. Rehkämper, W. Yi, X. Z. Luo, C. M. Hall, C. J. Ballentine, T. Pettke and C. Stirling, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1998, 62, 919–940 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Gabler, J. Geochem. Explor., 2002, 75, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. de Laeter, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 1998, 17, 97–125 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vanhaecke, G. De Wannemacker, L. Moens and J. Hertogen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1691–1696 RSC .
F. Vanhaecke, G. De Wannemacker, L. Moens and P. Van den Haute, Fresenius J. Anal. Chem., 2001, 371, 915–920 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. A. Willigers, K. Mezger and J. A. Baker, Chem. Geol., 2004, 213, 339–358 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Robinson, G. M. Henderson and N. C. Slowey, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2002, 196, 175–187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Tang, H. F. Zhang and J. F. Ying, Inter. Geol. Rev., 2007, 49, 374–388 Search PubMed .
E. D. Young and A. Galy, Rev. Miner. Geochem, 2004, 55, 197–230 CrossRef CAS .
I. Basile-Doelsch, J. Geochem. Explor., 2006, 88, 252–256 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. DePaolo, Rev. Miner. Geochem., 2004, 55, 255–285 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dauphas and O. Rouxel, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2006, 25, 515–550 CrossRef CAS .
F. Albarède, Rev. Miner. Geochem., 2004, 55, 409–428 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cloquet, J. Carignan, M. F. Lehmann and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390, 451–463 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Johnson, Chem. Geol., 2004, 204, 201–214 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anbar, Rev. Miner. Geochem, 2004, 55, 429–454 Search PubMed .
S. Ripperger, M. Rehkämper, D. Porcelli and A. N. Halliday, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2007, 261, 670–684 CrossRef CAS .
W. I. Ridley and S. J. Stetson, Appl. Geochem, 2006, 21, 1889–1899 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hall, L. H. Chan, W. F. McDonough and K. K. Turekian, Mar. Geol., 2005, 217, 255–265 CrossRef CAS .
A. Galy, N. S. Belshaw, L. Halicz and R. K. O'Nions, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2001, 208, 89–98 Search PubMed .
A. Galy, M. Bar-Matthews, L. Halicz and R. K. O'Nions, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2002, 201, 105–115 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Tipper, A. Galy, J. Gaillardet, M. J. Bickle, H. Elderfield and E. A. Carder, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2006, 250, 241–253 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Norman, M. T. McCulloch, H. S. O'Neill and G. M. Yaxley, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 50–54 RSC .
N. H. Gale, A. P. Woodhead, Z. A. Stos-Gale, A. Walder and I. Bowen, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 1999, 184, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. K. Zhu, R. K. O'Nions, Y. Guo, N. S. Belshaw and D. Rickard, Chem. Geol., 2000, 163, 139–149 CrossRef CAS .
C. Archer and D. Vance, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19, 656–665 RSC .
J. C. J. Petit, J. de Jong, L. Chou and N. Matielli, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2008, 32, 149–166 Search PubMed .
K. Ikehata, K. Notsu and T. Hirata, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23, 1003–1008 RSC .
J. Fietzke and A. Eisenhauer, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2006, 7, Q08009,  DOI:10.1029/2006GC001243 .
S. H. J. M. van den Boorn, P. Z. Vroon, C. C. van Belle, B. van der Wagt, J. Schwieters and M. J. van Bergen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 734–732 RSC .
J. Chmeleff, I. Horn, G. Steinhoefel and F. von Blanckenburg, Chem. Geol., 2008, 249, 155–166 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Craddock, O. J. Rouxel, L. A. Ball and W. Bach, Chem. Geol., 2008, 253, 102–113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fietzke, M. Frische, T. H. Hansteen and A. Eisenhauer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23, 769 RSC .

          R. Santamaria Fernandez, D. Carter and R. Hearn, Anal. Chem., 80, pp. 5963–5969 Search PubMed.
S. Kelly, K. Heaton and J. Hoogewerff, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2005, 16, 555–567 CAS .
M. Barbaste, K. Robinson, S. Guilfoyle, B. Medina and R. Lobinski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17, 135–137 RSC .
P. P. Coetzee and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383, 2005 .
B. Medina, S. Augagneur, M. Barbaste, F. E. Grouset and R. Buat-Meard, Food. Addit. Contam., 2000, 17, 435–445 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fortunato, K. Mumic, S. Wunderli, L. Pillonel, J. O. Bosset and G. Gremaud, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19, 227–234 RSC .
I. Rodushkin, T. Bergman, G. Douglas, E. Engström, D. Sörlin and D. C. Baxter, Authentication of Kalix (N.E. Sweden) vendace caviar using ICP-based analytical techniques: evaluation of different approaches, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 583, 310–318 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Wannemacker, F. Vanhaecke, L. Moens, A. Van Mele and H. Thoen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 323–327 RSC .
G. Fortunato, A. Ritter and D. Fabian, Analyst, 2005, 130, 898–906 RSC .
G. Schultheis, T. Prohaska, G. Stingeder, K. Dietrich, D. Jembrih-Simburger and M. Schreiner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19, 838–843 RSC .
M. Resano, P. Marzo, J. Pérez-Arantegui, M. Aramendía, C. Cloquet and F. Vanhaecke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23, 1182–1191 RSC .
F. Vanhaecke, L. Balcaen, I. Deconinck, I. De Schrijver, C. M. Almeida and L. Moens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 1060–1065 RSC .
S. Klein, Y. Lahaye, G. P. Brey and H. M. Von Kaenel, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 469–480 CrossRef CAS .
E. Niederschlag, E. Pernicka, T. Seifert and M. Bartelheim, Archaeometry, 2003, 45, 61–100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Latkoczy, T. Prohaska, G. Stingeder and M. Teschler-Nicola, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1998, 13, 561–566 RSC .
T. Prohaska, C. Latkoczy, G. Schultheis, M. Teschler-Nicola and G. Stingeder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17, 887–891 RSC .
A. Simonetti, M. R. Buzon and R. A. Creaser, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 371–385 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Kuhn, N. J. Pearson and S. E. Jackson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22, 547–552 RSC .
D. De Muynck, C. Cloquet, E. Smits, F. A. de Wolff, G. Quitté, L. Moens and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390, 477–486 CrossRef .
A. T. Townsend and I. Snape, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17, 922–928 RSC .
T. Döring, M. Schwikowski and H. W. Gäggeler, Fresenius J. Anal. Chem., 1997, 359, 382–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Church, R. Gwiazda, R. W. Risebrough, K. Sorenson, C. P. Chamberlain, S. Farry, W. Heinrich, B. A. Rideout and D. R. Smith, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 6143–6150 CrossRef CAS .
G. Le Roux, D. Weiss, J. Grattan, N. Givelet, M. Krachler, A. Cheburkin, N. Rausch, B. Kober and W. Shotyk, J. Environ. Monit., 2004, 6, 502–510 RSC .
G. Le Roux, D. Aubert, P. Stille, M. Krachler, B. Kober, A. Cheburkin, G. Bonani and W. Shotyk, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39, 6790–6801 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Vallelonga, P. Gabrielli, E. Balliana, A. Wegner, B. Delmonte, C. Turetta, F. Vanhaecke, K. J. R. Rosman, S. Hong, C. F. Boutron, P. Cescon and C. Barbante, Quaternary Sci. Rev., submitted Search PubMed.
A. M. Ghazi and J. R. Millette, Environm. Forensics, 2004, 5, 97–108 Search PubMed .
R. H. Gwiazda and D. R. Smith, Health Perspect., 2000, 108, 1091–1097 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Gabler and A. Bahr, Chem. Geol., 1999, 156, 323–330 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cloquet, O. Rouxel, J. Carignan and G. Libourel, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29, 95–106 Search PubMed .
C. Cloquet, J. Carignan, G. Libourel, T. Sterckeman and E. Perdrix, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 2525–2530 CrossRef CAS .
K. Heaton, S. D. Kelly, J. Hoogewerff and M. Woolfe, Food Chem., 2008, 107, 506–515 CrossRef CAS .
R. Clough, P. Evans, T. Catterick and E. H. Evans, Anal. Chem, 2006, 78, 6126–6132 CrossRef CAS .
D. De Muynck, S. Boyen, S. Delporte, J. De Winne, F. Vanhaecke and P. Degryse, Geophys. Res. Abstr., 2009, 11, 8928 Search PubMed .
G. A. Buttigieg, M. E. Baker, J. Ruiz and M. B. Denton, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 5022–5029 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Outridge, S. R. Chenery, J. A. Babaluk and J. D. Reist, Environ. Geol., 2002, 42, 891–899 CrossRef CAS .
T. Walczyk and F. von Blanckenburg, Science, 2002, 295, 2065–2066 CrossRef CAS .
T. Walczyk and F. von Blanckenburg, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 242, 117–134 Search PubMed .
P. A. Krayenbuehl, T. Walczyk, R. Schoenberg, F. von Blanckenburg and G. Schulthess, Blood, 2005, 105, 3812–3816 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, A. Shinohara, M. Chiba and T. Hirata, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21, 425–428 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirata, M. Tanoshima, A. Suga, Y. K. Tanaka, Y. Nagata, A. Shinohara and M. Chiba, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24, 1501–1507 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Presented at the 2009 European Winter Conference on Plasma Spectrochemistry, Graz, Austria, February 15–20, 2009.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
Frank Vanhaecke	Frank Vanhaecke was born in Oostende, Belgium, in 1966. He obtained his PhD from Ghent University, Belgium in 1992. After a period of post-doctoral research at Ghent University and the Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz (Germany), he became Professor of Analytical Chemistry at Ghent University. Since his PhD period, he has explored various facets of ICP-mass spectrometry. He currently leads the ‘Atomic and Mass Spectrometry (A&MS)’ research group and focuses his research on solid sampling via ICPMS using electrothermal vaporization (ETV) and laser ablation (LA) for sample introduction, the development of HPLC-ICPMS methods for metabolite profiling in cooperation with the pharmaceutical industry and isotopic analysis via both single-collector and multi-collector ICPMS instrumentation.
Lieve Balcaen	Lieve Balcaen was born in 1978. She obtained her MSc degree in Chemistry at Ghent University (Belgium) in 2000 and her PhD in 2005. During her PhD – under the supervision of Prof. Frank Vanhaecke – the capabilities of ICPMS for the analysis of complex materials from the imaging industry were evaluated. Therefore pneumatic nebulization (PN) as well as ETV and LA were used as sample introduction techniques. Since 2005, Lieve has worked as a postdoctoral researcher (FWO – Flanders) in the ‘Atomic and Mass Spectrometry’ Research Group at Ghent University. Her current research interests are elemental analysis of biological samples, isotopic analysis by means of single- and multicollector ICPMS and speciation analysis by HPLC-ICPMS.
Dmitry Malinovsky	Dmitry Malinovskiy obtained his degree of Candidate of Sciences, a Russian equivalent of the PhD degree, from the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow in the field of environmental science in 1999. He also obtained a PhD from Luleå University of Technology, Sweden, in the field of isotope geochemistry in 2004. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Analytical Chemistry, Ghent University, Belgium. His research interests include isotope ratio analysis of heavy stable elements by MC-ICPMS and the implications of the natural isotope fractionation effects observed.

 	Fig. 1  Decay chains of the naturally occurring radionuclides 238U (left), 235U (center) and 232Th (right), with as respective final products the stable isotopes 206Pb, 207Pb and 208Pb. Figure reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from the Mineralogic Society of America MSA.	 

 	Fig. 2  Potential energy E as a function of interatomic distance r (Morse curve) for a diatomic molecule. As a result of the difference in the lowest vibration energy level in the presence of a light (L) and heavy (H) isotope in the molecule, respectively, the dissociation energies D0 show a difference, leading to an isotope fractionation effect. Figure modified from ref. 6 with permission from the author and from Springer.	 

 	Fig. 3  Potential energy curves for the reactant and activated complex playing a role in a chemical reaction. As a result of the difference in the lowest vibration energy levels in the presence of a light (L) and heavy (H) isotope, respectively, the energy required to form the activated complex differs, leading to an isotope fractionation effect. Figure modified from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Mass-dependent fractionation occurring upon methylation of Sn.	 

 		 
α2 = αβ3

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Appearance of mass spectral peak subject to overlap at (a) low mass resolution (b) (full) high mass resolution and (c) pseudo high resolution with multi-collector ICPMS. In pseudo-high resolution mode, the signals of the target ion and the interfering ion are not completely resolved from one another, but there is a mass window in which only the analyte ion contributes to the total signal intensity. Moreover in a sufficiently wide section of this mass window, a flat signal is observed. Figure reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Springer.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of the time-dependent isotopic fractionation effect observed in TIMS, leading to an ion beam, the composition of which varies as a function of time (left), with the mass discrimination effect observed in ICPMS that leads to a (more or less) constant, but somewhat larger bias of the measurement data with respect to the true value indicated by the dashed line. Figure modified from ref. 38 with permission from the Mineralogic Society of America MSA.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Relationship (red line) between the mass discrimination factors for Tl (internal standard) and Pb (target element) as established using measurements on standard solutions (red circles). This experimentally determined relationship can then be used to ‘translate’ the mass discrimination factor for Tl into that for Pb for the samples, as exemplified for two data points displayed as blue diamonds. Figure reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the author.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Normalized 208Pb/207Pb isotope ratio (= (208Pb/207Pb)measured/true value) plotted as a function of the value applied for dead time correction of the ‘raw’ results obtained for solutions with a Pb concentration ranging from 20 to 45 µg/L. In this particular case, the dead time of the detection system was observed to be ≈ 20 ns.61	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Variation of the 204Pb/208Pb isotope ratio as a function of the Pb concentration for various assumed values of detector dead time. (b) Slope of the curve obtained on plotting the 204Pb/208Pb isotope ratio vs. the Pb concentration as a function of the assumed value for the detector dead time. The intersection of the line thus obtained with the x-axis provides the actual dead time. Figure reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry RSC.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 10  Flow chart, indicating the experimental work required prior to elemental assay by isotope dilution, depending on whether or not: (a) the spike concentration is certified and (b) the target element shows natural variations in its isotopic composition. Figure reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry RSC.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 11  Systematic representation of how the 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratios and 87Rb/86Sr ratios (∼ elemental concentration ratios) of an ideally behaving (closed) system vary as the rock material ages. The current data points lay on a straight line – the isochron – from which both the age (from the slope) and the initial 87Sr/86Sr isotope ratio (intersection of isochron with y-axis) can be deduced. Modified from ref. 3 with permission from Wiley.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 12  Concordia diagram (in red) – systematic representation of how the 206Pb*/238U and 207Pb*/235U of an ideally behaving (closed) system vary as the rock material ages. In this specific example, a sudden Pb loss is indicated 2.5 billion yrs after formation. The various data points for the system investigated (yellow circles) remain on a straight line – the discordia – as the 206Pb*/207Pb* is not affected by this loss. As the system ages, the slope of the discordia changes. At present, the upper intersection point of discordia and concordia provides the age of the system (in this example, 3.5 billion yrs), the lower intersection point provides information on when the Pb loss actually occurred (∼1 billion yrs ago). Modified from ref. 3 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Three-isotope ratio plot (208Pb/204Pb as a function of 206Pb/204Pb) for Antarctic sediments from Brown Bay (filled circles) and for proxies for potential Pb sources – Broken Hill and battery samples for anthropogenic lead, on one hand, and O'Brien Bay and Sparkes Bay sediments for natural Pb, on the other. (b) 208Pb/204Pb as a function of the Pb concentration. (c) 208Pb/204Pb as a function of (1/Pb concentration). Figure reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry RSC.	 

 	Fig. 14  Three-isotope plot (208Pb/206Pb as a function of 207Pb/206Pb) for a situation in which the isotopic composition in the samples investigated (open circles) is determined by a mixing of Pb coming from three sources.	 
Footnote
† Presented at the 2009 European Winter Conference on Plasma Spectrochemistry, Graz, Austria, February 15–20, 2009.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
