SnSe: a remarkable new thermoelectric material  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE01755J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01755J
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3044-3060SnSe: a remarkable new thermoelectric material

        
          
            Li-Dong 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng 
            Chang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gangjian 
            Tan
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Mercouri G. 
            Kanatzidis
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: zhaolidong@buaa.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. E-mail: m-kanatzidis@northwestern.edu
Received 
      17th June 2016
    , Accepted 5th September 2016First published on 5th September 2016AbstractThe deceptively simple material SnSe has surprised the scientific community by showing an unexpectedly low thermal conductivity and high power factor and it has become a very promising thermoelectric material. Both the electrical and thermal transport properties of SnSe are outstanding. It is remarkable that a binary compound exhibits strong anharmonic and anisotropic bonding, and after hole doping it shows an exceptionally high power factor because of a high electrical conductivity and a strongly enhanced Seebeck coefficient. The latter is enabled by the contribution of multiple electronic valence bands. In this perspective, we discuss the natural features of SnSe, including crystal structures, electronic band structures, and physical and chemical properties. We also compare the electrical transport properties of single crystals and polycrystalline SnSe. The thermal conductivities of polycrystalline samples show wide variation from laboratory to laboratory, with some values being higher than those of single crystals and some lower, which has caused confusion and controversy. To address the issues regarding the thermal transport properties of SnSe, we systematically summarize the reports for SnSe variants, discuss them along with some of our own new results, and offer possible explanations. Finally, some possible strategies are proposed toward future enhancements of the thermoelectric figure of merit of SnSe.
Li-Dong Zhao
Li-Dong Zhao was born in Harbin, China in 1979. He is a Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Beihang University, China. He received his BE and ME degrees in Materials Science from Liaoning Technical University, and his PhD degree in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China in 2009. He was a postdoctoral research fellow in the LEMHE-ICMMO (CNRS-UMR 8182) at the University of Paris-Sud from 2009 to 2011, and continued as a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University from 2011 to 2014. He is a recipient of “the Thousand Talents Plan” 2015. His research interests include thermoelectric materials, superconductors and thermal barrier coatings.
Cheng Chang
Cheng Chang is a PhD candidate in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Beihang University. He received his BE degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Beihang University in 2014. He started his doctoral research as a member of Li-Dong Zhao's group in 2014. His main research interests focus on the fabrication and properties of thermoelectric materials with layered structures.
Gangjian Tan
Gangjian Tan received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Wuhan University of Technology, China, under the supervision of Professor Xinfeng Tang, with a focus on nanostructured skutterudite compounds as advanced thermoelectric materials by melt spinning in 2013. In June of 2013, he joined Professor Mercouri Kanatzidis's group at Northwestern University as a postdoctoral research fellow, where his research extended to the development of novel metal chalcogenides for possible applications in energy conversion, particularly in the field of thermoelectrics. He is interested in the understanding of charge and phonon transport behavior in solids associated with the thermoelectric effect.
Mercouri G. Kanatzidis
Mercouri Kanatzidis was born in Thessaloniki, Greece in 1957. After obtaining a BSc degree from Aristotle University in Greece, he received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Iowa in 1984. He was a post-doctoral research associate at the University of Michigan and Northwestern University from 1985 to 1987 and is currently Charles E. and Emma H. Morrison Professor of Chemistry at Northwestern University. He also holds an appointment at Argonne National Laboratory. His research areas include: inorganic chemistry, solid state and coordination chemistry of chalcogenide compounds, design of new materials, exploratory synthesis, thermoelectric materials, nanostructured materials, intermetallics, mesoporous semiconductors, phase-change materials, conducting and porous polymers. He is the recipient of the Royal Chemical Society DeGennes Prize 2015; Elected Fellow of the Royal Chemical Society 2015; the ENI Award for the “Renewable Energy Prize” category; the ACS Award in Inorganic Chemistry 2016; and the American Physical Society 2016 James C. McGroddy Prize for New Materials. He has over 950 papers and 22 patents to his merit.

Broader context
To date, several approaches to enhance thermoelectric performance have emerged including enhancing the power factor through modifying the electronic structure, reducing the thermal conductivity through all-scale phonon scattering, or both simultaneously. It is highly exceptional to find a new system that exhibits a high power factor as well as extremely low thermal conductivity. This extraordinary combination of electrical and thermal transport properties is precisely what we have found in SnSe; the physics of thermal and charge transport in SnSe is unusual and fascinating. It is remarkable that an ultralow thermal conductivity can be realized in a simple compound such as SnSe, which does not have a high molecular weight, nanostructuring, a complex crystal structure or a large unit cell. It is also remarkable that an ultra-high power factor can be achieved in a not-so-narrow bandgap semiconductor with only orthorhombic crystal symmetry. In this perspective, we discuss the natural features of SnSe, including the peculiar crystal structure that results in an impressively low thermal conductivity, in combination with a unique electronic structure that gives it a high power factor and outstanding thermoelectric properties.

1. Introduction
In the past two decades, we have witnessed a surge of interest in the development of alternative renewable energy technologies.1 In particular, thermoelectric materials have drawn strong attention because thermoelectric effects enable direct conversion between thermal and electrical energy, and provide an alternative for power generation from heat as well as being used for refrigeration.2 The efficiency of thermoelectric materials is determined by the dimensionless figure of merit (ZT), defined as ZT = (S2σ/κ)T, where S, σ, κ and T are the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, total thermal conductivity (sum of electron κele and lattice κlat thermal conductivity), and absolute temperature, respectively.1,3 Therefore, high thermoelectric performance requires both a high power factor (S2σ) and a low thermal conductivity (κ). Although it is quite difficult to control the above parameters independently due to their complex interrelationships, thermoelectric performance records have been broken continuously in the past decade, thanks to the development of new concepts and/or mechanisms.4–7
To date, several approaches to enhance ZT have emerged including enhancing the power factor, reducing the thermal conductivity or both simultaneously. The strategies to enhance the power factor include band structure engineering (resonant levels and band convergence)8–10 and microstructure manipulations (modulation doping and texturing).11–14 The most effective approaches to reduce thermal conductivity include nanostructuring (matrix and second phase nano-precipitates)15–17 and all-scale hierarchical architecturing.18 In addition, new concepts such as band alignment and compositionally alloyed nanostructures provide clever means to maintain a high power factor and reduce the lattice thermal conductivity at the same time.19,20 In addition to the above nanocomposite-based strategies, one can seek high performance in single phase compounds with low thermal conductivity. Low thermal conductivity means that the most complex procedures to reduce the thermal conductivity can be avoided and allow one to focus mainly on increasing the power factor. Low thermal conductivity may arise from an anharmonic and anisotropic bonding,21–25 very large unit cells,26 atomic disorders induced by mobile ions such as copper and silver ions and their liquid-like behaviors,27–29 large molecular weight,30 complex crystal structure,31 lone-pair electrons,32–34etc. Examples of previously studied materials of this type include SnSe,35–40 BiCuSeO,41,42 MgAgSb,28 Cu2Se,27,43 Yb14MnSb11,30 Ag9TlTe5,31 K2Bi8Se13,44,45 CsBi4Te6,26 I–V–VI2 compounds,33,46 and tetrahedrites.47–49
SnSe is a long known semiconductor with an energy gap of 0.86 eV and a large optical absorption coefficient.50 It typically behaves as a p-type material with a hole concentration in the range 1017–1018 cm−3 and a room temperature electrical resistivity between 101–105 Ω cm.51 Given this huge electrical resistivity, it has been regarded as of no apparent relevance to thermoelectrics but more useful for applications in solar cells, optoelectronics and other electronic devices.51–54 Recently, SnSe surprised the scientific community as a new promising thermoelectric material, exhibiting one of the lowest lattice thermal conductivities known for crystalline materials (<0.4 W m−1 K−1 at 923 K) and even without doping, achieving high ZTs > 2.3 at 723–973 K along the b- and c-crystallographic directions.35,36
Since the initial report of single crystal SnSe as a high performance thermoelectric material in 2014,35 there have been many reports on this compound focusing mostly, however, on polycrystalline SnSe samples.24,29,55–71 Compared to single crystals of SnSe, lower power factors are observed in polycrystalline compactions of SnSe.24,29,55,57,58,63–67 In contrast, there is a range of thermal conductivity values (even though all deal with polycrystalline SnSe samples), with some groups55,59,72–75 reporting extremely low thermal conductivity similar to or lower than those of single crystals SnSe while others have reported higher values.58,64 Therefore, there seems to be an unsettled issue regarding the low thermal transport properties of SnSe, and this motivates us to systematically summarize the existing reports for the SnSe system and discuss them critically along with our own new results. In this perspective, we discuss the natural features of SnSe, including the special crystal structure that results in an impressively low thermal conductivity, as well as a special electronic structure that gives it a high power factor and outstanding thermoelectric properties. We also attempt to summarize and put into perspective our current understanding of this compositionally simple but evidently innately complex material and discuss possible sources and reasons for the differences in the reported thermal conductivity properties. Possible strategies are proposed aimed at further enhancing the thermoelectric figure of merit of SnSe.
2. Crystal structure
SnSe adopts a simple layered orthorhombic crystal structure at room temperature, which can be derived from a three-dimensional distortion of the NaCl structure.35 Alternatively, the SnSe layers in the structure can be described as that of black phosphorus.76 Perspective views of the room temperature SnSe crystal structure along the crystallographic a, b, and c axes are shown in Fig. 1(a), (c) and (d). There are two-atom-thick SnSe slabs (along the b–c plane) with strong Sn–Se bonding within the plane of the slabs, which are then linked with weaker Sn–Se bonding along the a-direction. The structure contains highly distorted SnSe7 coordination polyhedra with three short and four very long Sn–Se bonds and a lone pair (5s2) from the Sn2+ atoms sterically accommodated in between the four long Sn–Se bonds, see Fig. 1(b). The two-atom-thick SnSe slabs are strongly corrugated creating a zig-zag folded accordion-like projection along the b-axis. The easy cleavage in this system is along the bc-plane because of the weak cross-plane Sn⋯Se bonding interactions. While cooling from its high temperature higher symmetry phase (space group Cmcm, #63) SnSe undergoes a displacive (shear) phase transition at ∼800 K, resulting in a lower symmetry Pnma (#62) space group that necessitates a transformation of its crystallographic axes. The Pnma structure has an expanded volume compared to the Cmcm high temperature form by 2.5% and this can cause the silica tube breakage and sample damage during crystal growth.
 Fig. 1  (a) SnSe crystal structure Pnma at room temperature (Sn atoms are shown in gray and Se atoms in red) along the a axis and (b) highly distorted SnSe7 coordination polyhedron with three short and four long Sn–Se bonds; (c and d) SnSe crystal structures along the b axis (showing the accordion like character) and c axis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
3. Electronic band structure and DOS effective mass
Despite its stoichiometric simplicity, SnSe happens to possess a surprisingly complex electronic structure as indicated by first-principles theoretical electronic structure calculations. This complexity lies at the heart of the enhanced thermoelectric performance of this material. The electronic structures of the low-temperature Pnma SnSe phase are calculated using density functional theory (DFT).39 As shown in Fig. 2(a), the DFT valence band maximum (VBM) lies in the Γ–Z direction (band 1), but another valence band is located just below the VBM (band 2). A third band also exists with its band maximum along the U–X direction (band 3). The calculation shows a very small energy difference of ∼0.06 eV between the first two valence band edges in the Γ–Z direction. Such a small energy gap is easily crossed by the Fermi level as the hole doping approaches ∼4 × 1019 cm−3. In addition, the energy difference between the first and the third band edges (i.e. the maximum of U–X to the maximum Γ–Z) is only 0.13 eV. This value is similar to the 0.15 eV spacing between the first and the second valence band edges of PbTe, in which the heavy hole band contribution is significant as the carrier density exceeds ∼5 × 1019 cm−3.77 Interestingly, the electronic valence bands of SnSe are much more complex than those of PbTe, and the Fermi level of SnSe even approaches the 4th, 5th and 6th valence bands when the doping levels in the material are as high as 5 × 1020 cm−3. Another illustration of the complex band structure is shown in the Fermi surface, which has multiple types of pockets (or valleys) coming from the numerous valence bands all within a small energy window, Fig. 2(b)–(d).
 Fig. 2  (a) Electronic band structure of SnSe indicates non-parabolic, complex multi-band valence states. The red dotted lines from top to bottom represent the Fermi levels with carrier concentrations of 5 × 1017 cm−3, 5 × 1019 cm−3, 2 × 1020 cm−3, and 5 × 1020 cm−3, respectively, indicating that heavy doping pushes the Fermi level deep into the multi-band structure. (b–d) The Fermi surfaces of SnSe (Pnma) at 5 × 1019 cm−3, 2 × 1020 cm−3 and 5 × 1020 cm−3, respectively. The Fermi surface also illustrates the multiple types of pockets (or valleys) coming from the numerous valence bands all within a small energy window.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
From the DFT band structure of the Pnma phase, the first valence band maximum (VBM) is at (0.0, 0.0, 0.35) along the Γ–Z direction of the first Brillouin zone. There is also a local valence-band maximum at (0.0, 0.0, 0.44) that lies 0.06 eV lower in energy than the first VBM. For these two maxima, the effective masses are calculated by fitting the E–k bands around the VBM for the different directions. The SnSe effective masses at each valence band extremum are also anisotropic. Due to the 2D nature of the material, the effective mass has a larger value along the kx direction (a axis) than along either of the in-plane directions ky and kz (b and c axes). For the first valence maximum along Γ–Z, the effective masses are mkx* = 0.76 m0, mky* = 0.33 m0, and mkz* = 0.14 m0. For the second maximum along Γ–Z, mkx* = 2.49 m0, mky* = 0.18 m0, and mkz* = 0.19 m0.
A crystalline material exhibiting multiple extrema in its valence or conduction bands has a correspondingly enhanced Seebeck coefficient. This is a highly sought after electronic structure feature in the search for exceptional thermoelectric materials. The enhancement in the power factor comes from the additional contributions of the conductivity-weighted Seebeck coefficient (see below). If there are multiple Fermi surface pocket electron/hole states accessible through doping, these can collectively contribute to the overall Seebeck coefficient and the power factor. The multiple pockets can be due to symmetry (i.e., if the pocket is not at a high symmetry point (e.g. Γ) in the Brillouin zone of the band structure), or can come from multiple bands that are close enough in energy to contribute to the transport at a given temperature. This is the case, for example, in PbTe's valence band and in SnSe. Although the Seebeck coefficient enhancement in multi-band systems is well known as a general concept,78 what is highly exceptional is to find a system that exhibits this enhancement while also exhibiting an extremely low thermal conductivity and a high electrical conductivity. This extraordinary combination of properties is precisely what we have in hole-doped SnSe.39 As we will see below, these electronic structure features are at the origin of the high power factors that can be achieved in this material.
4. Electrical transport properties
For undoped SnSe crystals the electrical conductivities along different crystallographic directions show a similar temperature-dependence,35Fig. 3(a). When undoped the carrier concentration does not exceed ∼1017 cm−3, and in the electrical conductivity plot the upturn above 525 K is attributed to the thermal excitation of carriers. Hole doping increases the electrical conductivity from ∼12 S cm−1 to ∼1500 S cm−1 as the carrier concentration increases from ∼1017 cm−3 to ∼1019 cm−3 at 300 K, Fig. 3(b). After heavy hole doping, the temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity changes from a semiconductor-like transport behavior to a metal-like behavior.39 It can be readily seen from the figure that the electrical conductivities along the b and c directions are higher than that along the a direction. This anisotropy reflects the much higher carrier mobility within the bc-plane of SnSe compared to that perpendicular to it. For the undoped SnSe, the Seebeck coefficients show an almost isotropic behavior and are independent of the crystallographic direction, Fig. 3(c). The gradual decrease of the Seebeck coefficients above 525 K is consistent with the trend in the electrical conductivity and indicative of bipolar conduction. This behavior reflects the band gap (Eg) narrowing from 0.61 eV (Pnma) to 0.39 eV (Cmcm), and thus bipolar conduction is expected with rising temperature. For hole-doped SnSe, the Seebeck coefficient is ∼+160 μV K−1 at 300 K, and increases to ∼+300 μV K−1 at 773 K.
 Fig. 3  Electrical transport properties of undoped SnSe35 and hole-doped SnSe39 as a function of temperature along different crystallographic directions: (a) electrical conductivity; (b) carrier concentration; (c) Seebeck coefficient and (d) power factors, with those of the optimized Bi2−xSbxTe3 and PbTe–4SrTe–2Na plotted for comparison.16,18 In the figures, SnSe represents undoped SnSe.35 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Compared to other state-of-the-art thermoelectrics, the power factors obtained in undoped SnSe crystals are very low at room temperature and only moderate at high temperature. After hole doping, however, the combination of vastly increased electrical conductivity and still high Seebeck coefficient results in a large power factor of ∼40 μW cm−1 K−2 for hole-doped SnSe (b axis) at 300 K, Fig. 3(d). The power factors remain high, i.e., ∼14 μW cm−1 K−2 around 773 K for hole-doped SnSe (b axis), which is two times higher than the value of ∼6.4 μW cm−1 K−2 at 773 K for undoped SnSe (b axis). The high power factors obtained in hole-doped SnSe rival those of the optimized Bi2−xSbxTe3 materials near room temperature,16,79 and are much higher than those of the high performance hierarchical architectured p-type PbTe–SrTe system in the range of 300–500 K.18
5. Origin of the ultra-high power factor
The power factors achieved in hole-doped SnSe are much higher than those in rock-salt PbTe8,18,20 and SnTe,5,42,80,81 especially in the 300–500 K range. These high power factors derive from the much larger Seebeck coefficient since the electrical conductivity of hole-doped SnSe (b axis) is comparable to those of rock-salt chalcogenides. As shown in Fig. 4(a), similar to a Pisarenko plot, the room temperature Seebeck coefficients of rock-salt chalcogenides plotted with a similar carrier concentration of ∼4 × 1019 cm−3 offer further insight into the enhanced Seebeck coefficients. The Seebeck coefficient for hole-doped SnSe ∼+160 μV K−1 is clearly much higher than ∼+70 μV K−1 for PbTe,8,18 ∼+60 μV K−1 for PbSe,19 ∼+50 μV K−1 for PbS,82 and ∼+25 μV K−1 for SnTe.5
 Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of room temperature Seebeck coefficients of the lead and tin chalcogenides with a similar carrier concentration of ∼4 × 1019 cm−3; (b) calculated Seebeck coefficients as a function of the carrier density at 300 K. The black square line is calculated using the full multi-valley DFT band structure. Single band calculations yield lower Seebeck coefficients, and even for larger effective masses cannot fit the measured values; (c) a schematic diagram showing the multiple valence bands of SnSe; (d) ln[RH(T) − RH(0)]/RH(0) as a function of 1/T with the solid line being the best linear fit to the data; the slope (−ΔE/kB) of −214 K−1 yields an energy gap of ∼0.02 eV between the first two valence bands; the inset shows the Hall coefficient for hole-doped SnSe as a function of temperature.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Generally, Seebeck coefficients can be calculated based on the single parabolic band (SPB) model with different effective masses.39 As shown in Fig. 4(b), the Seebeck coefficient calculated using the full multi-valley DFT band structure is +168 μV K−1 at 4 × 1019 cm−3, which is very close to the experimentally observed value for this carrier concentration, +160 μV K−1. In contrast, a single band model gives a much lower Seebeck coefficient and cannot reproduce the experimental values. A SPB model with a DOS effective mass (0.47 m0) from the first valence band maximum yields a Seebeck coefficient of only +84 μV K−1 at 4 × 1019 cm−3; an estimated SPB effective mass of 0.75 m0, gives a Seebeck coefficient of ∼+110 μV K−1 at 4 × 1019 cm−3. Even the single-band Seebeck coefficients based on a larger effective mass md* = 1.20 m0 (Fig. 4(b), red circle line) are still lower than the experimental Seebeck coefficients. Therefore, the observed experimental Seebeck coefficient enhancements of hole-doped SnSe can be attributed to the multi band character of the electronic structure, as shown by the schematic diagram of Fig. 4(c).
The DFT calculations suggest a very small energy gap of ∼0.06 eV between the first two valence bands, the energy gap between the first and the third band is only 0.13 eV, and the Fermi level of SnSe approaches very close to the 4th, 5th and 6th valence bands for doping levels of ∼5 × 1020 cm−3. By comparison, in heavily hole-doped PbTe and PbSe, the Fermi level is pushed downward towards the heavy valence band, enhancing the Seebeck coefficient because of the contribution of this second valence band to transport especially as the temperature rises. In fact, this enhancement only appears at high temperatures as the extra contribution of the heavy valence band requires a carrier density of ∼5 × 1019 cm−3 and 2 × 1020 cm−3 at 300 K, because the energy difference between the two valence bands in PbTe (0.15 eV) and PbSe (0.25 eV) is higher than that in SnSe, but decreases at high temperatures.5,6 The energy difference between the two bands in PbS and SnTe is even larger (>0.3 eV), resulting in decreased Seebeck coefficients (these systems are essentially SPB systems), Fig. 4(a).
Based on the above results, the large Seebeck coefficients for the hole-doped SnSe arise from the contribution of more than one valence band.77 This is strongly supported by the Hall effect measurements. The Hall coefficient (RH) is consistent with multi-valley transport as it shows a continuous increase with temperature in the range 10–300 K (inset of Fig. 4(d)). Single band transport would have produced a temperature-constant Hall coefficient. The values of RH in hole-doped SnSe are temperature dependent, thus ruling out the single band model of transport. The Hall data imply that the convergence of multiple band maxima of hole-doped SnSe has already happened below room temperature, consistent with the notion that the energy difference between the relevant valence bands in SnSe is much lower than that in PbTe.
The energy gap (ΔE) between the first two bands is estimated using the slope (−ΔE/kB) of the ln[RH(T) − RH(0)]/RH(0) vs. 1/T plot, which yields a ΔE ∼ 0.02 eV at 0 K, assuming that ΔE varies linearly with temperature,77Fig. 4(d). This energy gap between the first two valence bands of SnSe is much smaller than that in PbTe (0.15 eV), PbSe (0.25 eV), PbS (0.45 eV) and SnTe (0.35 eV).5,6,77 The ΔE ∼ 0.02 eV estimate is consistent with the DFT calculated value of ∼0.06 eV, and comparable to kBT at room temperature, suggesting that the valence bands are nearly equivalent in energy. This near degeneracy of the bands accounts for the much higher Seebeck coefficients and power factors observed at room temperature. As the temperature increases, the carriers are thermally distributed over several bands of similar energy, resulting in multi band transport and enhanced Seebeck coefficients.
6. Ultralow thermal conductivity: single crystals versus polycrystalline samples
The temperature dependence of the total thermal conductivity (κtot) for undoped and hole doped SnSe is shown in Fig. 5(a). At room temperature, the values of κtot for undoped SnSe are ∼0.46, 0.70 and 0.68 W m−1 K−1 along the a, b and c axis directions, respectively. Compared to state-of-the-art thermoelectrics,83,84 these thermal conductivity values are exceedingly low, and surprisingly, they decrease even further with rising temperature. At 773 K, they all fall in the range 0.25–0.28 W m−1 K−1.3 It should be noted that the thermal conductivity of SnSe is lower than that of the hierarchical architectured p-type PbTe–SrTe system,18 as shown in Fig. 5(b). The low thermal conductivity in single phase SnSe is therefore believed to derive from the very high anharmonicity of its chemical bonds, but other factors may also play a role such as non-stoichiometry, defects, etc.59,72 These factors will have to be investigated in detail in future studies.
 Fig. 5  (a) Total thermal conductivities of undoped SnSe35 and hole-doped SnSe39 as a function of temperature along different crystallographic directions; (b) comparison of the lattice thermal conductivity of SnSe along the b axis and hierarchical architectured PbTe–4SrTe–2Na;18 (c) the calculated Lorenz number derived from a multi-band model; (d) comparison of the lattice thermal conductivity of undoped SnSe35 and hole-doped SnSe.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
After hole doping, the total thermal conductivities are higher because of the contribution from electronic carriers.39 To derive the lattice thermal conductivity, the precise Lorenz number should be used, which is approximately equal to 1.5 × 10−8 V2 K−2 since undoped SnSe is a nondegenerate semiconductor. However, after hole doping, because of the complex electronic band structure of SnSe, the standard SPB model used to derive the Lorenz number is not appropriate.77 To more accurately obtain an estimate of the lattice thermal conductivity of hole-doped SnSe, the Lorenz number L has to be calculated based on a multi-band model, as shown in Fig. 5(c). Using more correct Lorenz numbers, one can see that the lattice thermal conductivity of hole-doped SnSe is comparable to or even lower than that of undoped SnSe, Fig. 5(d).
The reports on the SnSe single crystals were quickly followed by many reports on polycrystalline SnSe samples.29,55,58,59,63–66,68,72 Generally, polycrystalline samples are expected to exhibit equal or lower thermal conductivity than single crystals because of the extra grain boundary phonon scattering. Even though grain boundary scattering is an effective way to lower the thermal conductivity in some materials with intrinsically high thermal conductivity, such as Si,5,42,85–90 the effect is diminished in materials with low thermal conductivity.32,71,91,92 In the case of SnSe, with its low thermal conductivity (<1% than that of Si), most of its heat carrying phonons have very small mean free paths, below tens of nanometers. Therefore, the grain boundaries of SnSe are too big to affect thermal conductivity.93,94 In strongly anisotropic samples, moreover, such as SnSe, it is difficult to compare the directional thermal conductivity values of the single crystals to the average values of the polycrystalline samples, which are likely to be subject to significant preferential orientation effects which will be difficult to control from sample to sample.
To clearly indicate the thermal conductivities of SnSe reported so far, we have collected and listed them in Table 1. Clearly, while some groups have reported higher thermal conductivities,58,62,64,66 others55,59,72–75,95 have reported very low thermal conductivities comparable to (or even lower than) that of SnSe single crystals.35,39 At room temperature, 61% have reported higher thermal conductivities than single crystals, 19% reported similar thermal conductivities and 20% reported lower thermal conductivities. At 800 K, 14% have reported higher thermal conductivity than single crystals, 78% reported similar thermal conductivities and 8% reported lower higher thermal conductivities. Apparently, there is a range of thermal conductivity values reported by some research groups. Therefore, it seems to be an unsettled issue regarding the low thermal transport properties of SnSe. Below we introduce and summarize these results including some of our own.
Table 1 Comparisons of the total thermal conductivities for SnSe samples reported in the literaturea




References
Single/ingot/polycrystalline

κ (W m−1 K−1) at ∼300 K

κ (W m−1 K−1) at ∼800 K





a It is reasonable to compare the lattice thermal conductivity of SnSe due to the varied carrier contributions to the electronic thermal conductivity. However, some lattice thermal conductivities are unavailable in the above listed papers. Moreover, the Lorenz number could not be precisely calculated due to the complex electronic band structure of SnSe.
b The thermal conductivity measured using an absolute steady state method in the 1960s, which turned out to be severely overestimated.103,104





Zhao et al., Nature (2014)35
Single
0.46–0.70
0.23–0.34


Zhao et al., (this work)
Polycrystalline
0.52–0.62
0.29–0.40


Chen et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. (2016)95
Polycrystalline
0.6–0.7
0.2–0.3


Serrano-Sanchez et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. (2015)59
Ingot
0.1
0.1–0.2 (at ∼400 K)


Bera et al., arXiv:1601.00753v1 (2016)72
Polycrystalline
0.2
0.24 (at ∼400 K)


Ju et al., Ceram. Int. (2016)74
Polycrystalline
0.65




Kim et al., J. Alloys Compd. (2016)75
Polycrystalline
0.61–0.76
0.3–0.4


Gharsallah et al., Sci. Rep. (2016)73
Ingot Ge–SnSe
0.2–0.5
0.2–0.5 (at ∼400 K)


Zhang et al., Adv. Energy Mater. (2015)55
Polycrystalline
0.49–1.1
0.25–0.51


Wei et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. (2015)29
Polycrystalline
0.7–1.3
0.4–0.6


Leng et al., J. Electron. Mater. (2016)62
Polycrystalline
0.7–1.1
0.4–0.5


Sassi et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. (2014)58
Polycrystalline
0.75–1.25
0.4–0.6


Han et al., J. Mater. Chem. A (2015)66
Polycrystalline
0.5–1.26
0.3–0.65


Li et al., New J. Phys. (2015)24
Polycrystalline
0.9–1.2
0.3–0.4


Chen et al., J. Mater. Chem. A (2014)64
Polycrystalline
0.9–1.35
0.5–0.8


Leng et al., RSC Adv. (2016)96
Polycrystalline
0.7–1.0
0.3–0.4


Chere et al., J. Mater. Chem. A (2016)65
Polycrystalline
0.85–1.0
0.4–0.5


Peng et al., Energy Environ. Sci. (2016)97
Single Na–SnSe
1.2–2.0
0.4–0.45


Zhao et al., Science (2016)39
Single Na–SnSe
0.45–0.7
0.2–0.3


Li et al., J. Mater. Chem. C (2016)98
Polycrystalline
1.0
0.35


Popuri et al., J. Mater. Chem. C (2016)99
Polycrystalline
0.6–1.5
0.38–0.71


Wasscher et al., Solid-State Electron. (1963)100b
Single (c-axis)
1.9




Wei et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (2016)101
Polycrystalline
1.2–1.4
0.4–0.5


Gao et al., J. Alloys Compd. (2016)102
Polycrystalline
1.2–1.4
0.3–0.4




6.1 Stoichiometry sensitive thermal conductivity
A recent neutron powder diffraction study demonstrated an exceptionally high anharmonicity of the chemical bonds of SnSe, and reported an ultralow thermal conductivity value <0.2 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature for polycrystalline SnSe0.98.59 This is much lower than that of the SnSe single crystals, which we presume may have had a slightly different stoichiometry.105 Bera et al. also reported a very low thermal conductivity of ∼0.21 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature for SnSe0.95 by introducing Se deficiency.72 Experimentally, for undoped SnSe and hole-doped SnSe, EDS analysis indicates that the composition of SnSe is SnSe0.97, while that of Sn0.98Na0.02Se is Sn0.98Na0.015Se0.96. We surmise that the low thermal conductivity may be related to the exact stoichiometry of SnSe. To address such an issue, we will need to measure the thermal conductivity of a series of samples with stoichiometries of Sn1+xSe1−x and Sn1−xSe1+x where we can look for trends in the thermal conductivity as a function of x.
6.2 Adventitious cracks in the single crystals and effects on thermal conductivity
As mentioned above, SnSe undergoes a strong phase transition from Pnma to Cmcm at ∼800 K. As a consequence, cooling melts of SnSe almost always causes a breakage of the silica tube and loss of the sample. A double tube (tube inside tube) seems to solve the problem. The outer silica tube is used to prevent the crystal from oxidation by air when the inner tube breaks owing to the considerable thermal expansion caused by the phase transition. The high stress associated with this transition, however, can cleave the sample along the bc-plane, especially when the forces exerted on the inner tube are strong enough to break it or damage it. After a SnSe crystal ingot is obtained by such a procedure, the samples must be carefully handled for polishing and cutting. The most challenging measurement specimens are the ones that are cut to measure the thermal diffusivity along the two directions of the bc-plane. The reason is that the thin dimension of the sample is the bc-easily cleaving direction. This can result in complete breakage of the sample during handling or microcracks. These can also form from the phase transition and tube cracking and can cause visible and invisible microgaps in the specimen. These microgaps are parallel to the direction of thermal diffusivity, and thus it is possible that these microgaps can “shorten” the measurement time leading to artificially high values as we have observed. Supporting this notion is the fact that repeating the measurements from 300–900 K several times causes the samples to undergo the phase transition repeatedly, and this gives higher thermal diffusivities with each subsequent measurement cycle. This is presumably due to the widening of the existing gaps and the creation of new gaps.
The scanning electron micrographs shown in Fig. 6(a)–(c) display examples of such cracks in different magnification sections. During measurements, energy can travel non-diffusively through these cracks and cause the thermal diffusivity of the samples to appear higher than it actually is, Fig. 6(d). The effects of these cracks on the thermal diffusivities of SnSe samples are shown in Fig. 6(e) where one can see that the thermal diffusivity can be doubled for samples with these artificial cracks.
 Fig. 6  (a–c) Microcracks in SnSe crystals propagating along the bc-plane; (d) schematic diagram shows how the laser flash goes through cracks; (e) thermal diffusivities are higher when samples contain an increasing number of cracks, especially after phase transition around 800 K. To exclude the effects of heat capacity and sample density on the total thermal conductivity, we directly observed thermal diffusivities. 
6.3 Polycrystalline samples: exposure to air and thermal conductivity
Although the explanations of strong anharmonic chemical bonding can qualitatively account for the low thermal conductivity of SnSe, in practice, as we mentioned above, measuring the thermal conductivity accurately along the two directions of the bc-plane is complicated. It has been found that polycrystalline samples prepared in air are even more difficult to work with because of surface oxidation. The single crystals do not seem to have a severe oxidation problem because of their very low surface area. For selenides, extended exposure to air can result in some oxidation.106,107 Surface oxidation in polycrystalline SnSe samples yields SnO2 which itself has about 140 times higher thermal conductivity of ∼98 W m−1 K−1.107,108 Moreover, SnO2 is humidity sensitive, and thus results in some extra high thermal conductivity products.109,110 Therefore, if samples are ground or handled in air, the measurements will result in higher thermal conductivity values. When protected from oxidation, polycrystalline samples have thermal conductivities comparable to single crystals.59,73–75
Recently, Chen et al. offered this oxidation explanation for the discrepancies in thermal conductivity.95 They found that the thermal conductivity of polycrystalline SnSe will decrease when the powders are processed in an inert atmosphere glove box and will closely approach the 0.25 W m−1 K−1 value at 773 K, which is comparable to or even lower than the values of 0.30 W m−1 K−1 (c axis) and 0.35 W m−1 K−1 (b axis) of SnSe single crystals.35 This phenomenon could be explained by the formation of a thin coating of tin oxides on the surface of the micron sized powders. Indeed, a similar low thermal conductivity of 0.30 W m−1 K−1 at 773 K was also observed in polycrystalline SnSe strictly handled in an inert atmosphere glove box. To test the SnO2 explanation, we carried out a series of control experiments. As shown in Fig. 7, we found that the thermal diffusivity of polycrystalline SnSe is very low when the powders are processed in a glove box (compared to processing in air) and closely approaches the 0.26 mm2 s−1 value at 773 K, which is comparable to the value of 0.25 mm2 s−1 of SnSe single crystals.
 Fig. 7  Thermal diffusivities of polycrystalline SnSe with and without SnO2 as a function of temperature. Single crystals SnSe samples are also plotted for comparison. To exclude the effects of heat capacity and sample density on the total thermal conductivity estimation, we directly compared thermal diffusivities. 
Interestingly, when a very small amount of SnO2 (e.g., the SnO2 addition ranges from 0.005–0.03 g SnO2 per 5 g SnSe, 0.1–0.6% by weight) is added to the SnSe powders, the thermal diffusivities of these polycrystalline SnSe samples showed a significant increase even though they were processed in a glove box.
Heat capacity data for SnSe from different reports are all consistent, Fig. 8(a). If the heat capacity is measured every 50 K, the phase transition (within 50 K width) is jumped over, Fig. 8(b). Because the phase transition at high temperature causes an anomalous jump in the heat capacity, an interpolation was used during this narrow range of 773–823 K to remove the effect of the transition.35 This is appropriate and a standard practice in the thermoelectric community when such phase transitions are encountered.91,92 More detailed studies of the heat capacity and thermal behavior of SnSe near the high temperature transition, of course, should obtain closely spaced measurements during the phase change event.
 Fig. 8  (a) Temperature-dependent heat capacity for SnSe obtained from different reports;111 (b) temperature-dependent heat capacity for SnSe (black line), SnSe0.9S0.1 (red line) and SnSe0.7S0.3 (blue line) measured using a differential scanning calorimetry thermal analyzer (Netzsch DSC 404 C)55 and the heat capacity (thick green line with red dot) of SnSe derived using a standard sample (Pyroceram 9606, Netzsch LFA457) with every 50 K steps, the phase transition (within 50 K width) observed on a Netzsch DSC 404 C was jumped over when using a Netzsch LFA457. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Wiley. 
7. Anharmonic bonding and low thermal conductivity
The intriguing question is what gives rise to the ultralow thermal conductivity of SnSe? Although the two-dimensional (2D) character of the structure can be one factor, clearly this is not a sufficient reason since 2D Bi2Se3 and the related 2D material SnSe2 have a much higher thermal conductivity. As we will discuss below, the 5s2 lone electron pair of Sn2+ and its tendency to stereochemically express itself by occupying its own space in the structure encouraging a wide range of Sn–Se bond lengths is behind a case of strong bond anharmonicity that causes ultra strong phonon scattering.
Although all bonding in real materials is anharmonic, the degree of anharmonicity varies strongly from material to material. In general, materials with substantial anharmonic bonding have low thermal conductivities.35–38 Ideal perfectly harmonic bonds in one-dimension are schematically illustrated in Fig. 9. The potential energy to which an atom is subjected is proportional to its displacement from the equilibrium position, and the proportionality constant is called the spring constant or stiffness. In the anharmonic case, the spring stiffness varies with increasing atom displacement, which has pronounced consequences when two phonons run into each other, as shown in Fig. 9. The presence of the first phonon then changes the spring constant values for the second phonon, which thus runs into a medium with modified elastic properties.36,38,112 High anharmonicity therefore results in enhanced phonon–phonon scattering, which reduces the lattice thermal conductivity.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representations of harmonicity and anharmonicity (Φ(r), a0 and r are the potential energy, lattice parameter and distance between two adjacent atoms, respectively); anharmonicity is the deviation from a linear relationship between displacement and restoring force.36,38 
The Grüneisen parameter is used to measure the strength of anharmonicity. The larger the Grüneisen parameter, the stronger the anharmonicity, and thus phonon scattering. The PbTe system has extraordinary physical and chemical properties favorable for high thermoelectric performance, one of which is a large Grüneisen parameter of ∼1.45.113 The large Grüneisen parameter in PbTe can be ascribed to the recent discovery that the Pb atoms are in fact somewhat displaced off the octahedron center in the rock-salt structure and the displacement increases with rising temperature (a phenomenon dubbed emphanisis).113,114
What is the atomic level basis for anharmonic bonding in SnSe? In our view, the broad range of bond lengths between Sn and Se atoms in the layered accordion-like structure, which is a consequence of the tendency of the 5s2 lone pair of electrons in Sn2+ to stereochemically express itself, is at the root of this property. This situation creates expanded coordination polyhedra around the Sn2+ centers with a mix of weak, medium and strong Sn–Se interactions which can in principle participate in resonance bonding states that can be dynamic, especially at high temperatures. The resonant type bonding is schematically shown in Fig. 10. This can give rise to a soft malleable coordination environment and crystal structure and high anharmonicity.
 Fig. 10  Schematic indicating resonant bonding in SnSe. 
The strength of the lattice anharmonicity can be estimated from the Grüneisen parameters, which characterize the relationship between phonon frequency and crystal volume change.36,38 Therefore, to clarify the origin of the low thermal conductivity of SnSe, the phonon and Grüneisen dispersions were calculated using first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) phonon calculations within the quasi-harmonic approximation. Fig. 11(a) shows that the acoustic modes along the Γ–X Brillouin zone direction (a axis) are significantly softer (lower Debye temperatures and smaller phonon velocities) than those along both Γ–Y (b axis) and Γ–Z Brillouin zone directions (c axis). These soft modes along the a axis suggest weak interatomic bonding and possible strong anharmonicity.
 Fig. 11  Theoretically calculated (a) phonon dispersions and (b) Grüneisen dispersion;35 (c) inelastic neutron scattering (INS) measurements reveal the strong dispersion anisotropy and softening of the low-energy optic phonons with temperature.37 The top two panels show the first-principles calculation at 100 K, which shows a good agreement with INS data obtained at 100 K (intermediate two panels) and the bottom two panels also reveals drastic softening of phonon dispersions and strong anisotropy at 648 K.37 (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
To quantitatively assess the anharmonicity along the three directions, the Grüneisen parameter dispersions of SnSe were plotted (Fig. 11(b)), which shows that the Grüneisen parameters are all very large, with that along the a axis being larger than those along both b and c axes. The average Grüneisen parameters along a, b, and c axes are 4.1, 2.1 and 2.3, respectively. Along the a axis, the maximum longitudinal acoustic (LA) Grüneisen parameter around the Γ point is extraordinarily high, i.e. ∼7.2.35 In contrast, the Grüneisen parameter is 2.05 for AgSbTe2, 3.5 for AgSbSe2, and 1.45 for PbTe corresponding to a lattice thermal conductivity of 0.68 W m−1 K−1, 0.48 W m−1 K−1 and 2.3 W m−1 K−1, respectively, measured at room temperature.34,46
The anomalously high Grüneisen parameter of SnSe is a reflection of its crystal structure which contains very distorted SnSe7 polyhedra and the zig-zag accordion-like geometry of slabs in the b–c plane. This implies a soft lattice that would not directly change the Sn–Se bond length if mechanically stressed along the b and c directions, but instead the zig-zag geometry would allow it to be deformed like a retractable spring. In addition, along the a direction the weaker bonding between SnSe slabs makes them a good stress buffer or a “cushion”,115 thus dissipating phonon transport laterally.36,38 The anomalously high Grüneisen parameter is therefore a consequence of “soft” bonding (i.e., a broad distribution of Sn–Se bond lengths) in SnSe, which leads to a very low lattice thermal conductivity.
Recently, the strong anharmonicity in single crystal SnSe was experimentally confirmed by inelastic neutron scattering studies.37 As shown in Fig. 11(c), both transverse acoustic (TA) and transverse optic (TO) phonons propagate along the Γ–X and Γ–Y (T = 100 K) directions, respectively. Both TA and TO phonons polarize along the c-axis, the TA modes not surprisingly are considerably softer along the Γ–X direction than along Γ–Y. This is consistent with lattice thermal conductivity being much lower along the a-axis, perpendicular to the layers, than within the plane of the layers (b–c plane). Both TA and TO branches along Γ–Y are much stiffer than those along Γ–X, accounting for anisotropic thermal transport. More importantly, Fig. 11(c) reveals a drastic softening of phonon dispersions along Γ–X at higher temperature (T = 648 K) compared to a much more modest softening of TA modes along Γ–Y. Thus, the anharmonicity of phonons exhibits not just strong dispersion but also strong anisotropy.36,38
8. Thermoelectric performance of single crystal and polycrystalline SnSe samples
To date, most reports on SnSe have been focused on polycrystalline samples because of their ease of preparation compared to the slow process of growing and cutting single crystals. It has so far proved difficult to translate high ZTs in single-crystal SnSe to polycrystalline samples because it is a challenge to obtain comparable electrical transport properties. The polycrystalline sample preparation can lead to inhomogeneous specimens where the segregation of Sn is frequently observed, and the defects introduced by the lack of homogeneity have a strong impact on the number of carriers, and hence the Seebeck coefficient and electronic conductivity. It can also lead to oxidation as we discussed above. Given the strong 2D character of the SnSe structure, specimen preparation can also lead to varying degrees of spatially averaged plate orientations and preferential orientation. The extent of preferential orientation in samples can vary not only from laboratory to laboratory, but also from preparation to preparation in the same laboratory. This can lead to a distribution of results, as is evident in the reported data. For these reasons, future work on this system will require a careful characterization of the preferential orientation in such samples using X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy and other techniques.
Single crystals of SnSe show a ZT value of approximately 2.6 ± 0.52 (if the 20% uncertainty criterion is considered) at 923 K along a particular crystallographic direction, the b axis.35 A very high ZT value of about 2.3 ± 0.46 was also observed along the c axis, whereas a moderate ZT value of approximately 0.8 was measured along the a axis, the axes directions are shown in Fig. 12(a). Polycrystalline SnSe shows ZT peaks of 1.2 and of 0.7 at 973 K along the radial and axial directions, respectively. As shown in Fig. 12(a), in a polycrystalline pellet, the radial direction is perpendicular to the applied pressure direction, and the axial direction is parallel to the pressure direction.
 Fig. 12  Comparison of thermoelectric transport properties of undoped SnSe single crystal35 and polycrystalline pellet samples: (a) schematic diagrams show how samples were cut for measurements; (b) carrier mobilities, (c) power factor, and (d) ZT. 
If we describe ZT = α2/L(1 + κlat/κele), where L is the Lorenz number, κlat is the lattice thermal conductivity, and κele is the electronic thermal conductivity, we can see that ZT values will be enhanced by reducing the ratio of κlat/κele.116 Generally, grain boundary scattering in polycrystalline samples is an effective way to lower the thermal conductivity in materials such as half-Heusler,85,86,117 bismuth tellurides,84 skutterudite,87–90etc. The grain boundary scattering approach, however, does not work well for thermoelectrics with low thermal conductivity,26,31,32,45,46 such as SnSe, since there is little room left for further reduction through this scattering mechanism.118 The absence of defects associated with grain boundaries can give single crystals a high carrier mobility, which can also be anisotropic,39,84 depending on the type of crystallographic structure.
To enhance the electrical transport properties (power factor), single crystals are preferred especially for strongly anisotropic compounds. As shown in Fig. 12(b), the carrier mobility of SnSe single crystals along the b axis is 10 times higher than the carrier mobility along the a axis.35 This strong anisotropy character causes the average carrier mobility in polycrystalline compactions of SnSe to diminish. For example, at room temperature, the hole mobility of polycrystalline SnSe is ∼50 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a carrier density of 3 × 1017 cm−3,64 while, the hole mobility of the single crystals is ∼250 cm2 V−1 s−1 along the b axis (at a similar carrier density of 3 × 1017 cm−3).35 At 750 K, at a carrier density of 4 × 1018 cm−3, the hole mobility of polycrystalline SnSe is about 10 cm2 V−1 s−1,64 which is only one fifth of the hole mobility of ∼50 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the single crystals. The low carrier mobility of polycrystalline SnSe results in an electrical conductivity that is five times lower than that of SnSe single crystals. This results in much lower power factors (Fig. 12(c)) and lower ZT values (Fig. 12(d)).
Zhang et al. reported an ultra low thermal conductivity of 0.25 W m−1 K−1 in polycrystalline SnSe, similar to that of the SnSe single crystals. However, because the maximum power factor in polycrystalline SnSe is only about 4 μW cm−1 K−2 at 773 K, a ZT of 1.0 was obtained.55 Correspondingly, the maximum power factor in undoped SnSe single crystals is about 6 μW cm−1 K−2 at 773 K, resulting in a ZT of 1.5 at 773 K.35 It should be noted that both reports are on samples with a similar carrier concentration (∼1017 cm−3) and Seebeck coefficient, and therefore, the difference in the power factor indeed comes from the carrier mobility difference, which comes from the strongly anisotropic character of the SnSe single crystals and also possibly from the oxidation of polycrystalline SnSe samples.
9. The maximum and device ZT
Because of the exceptional thermoelectric properties of single crystal SnSe, it is important to discuss the issues of repeatability and the degree to which the properties vary across a large number of samples. The available measurements are limited so far, given the challenges in growing samples and preparing good orientation specimens, but they can be used to obtain some statistics for each thermoelectric parameter. The range of the thermal conductivities is about 20%, Fig. 13(a). As we discussed above, the range of the reported thermal conductivity values may result from many factors, such as artificial cracks, variations in carrier concentration, errors in mass density determination, possible oxidation (unlikely in single crystals) and variations in stoichiometry. Fig. 13(b) shows that the room temperature ZTmax for hole doped samples ranges from 0.6 to 0.9, while the ZTmax at 773 K ranges from 1.6 to 2.4 and the average ZTmax ranges from 0.7 to 2.0, consistent with the ±20% uncertainty of ZTs.39
 Fig. 13  (a) A series of total thermal conductivity measurements for hole-doped SnSe crystals along the b axis. BU represents the results measured at Beihang University of China. Caltech represents the results measured at California Institute of Technology. The solid line represents the average value; the measurement uncertainty is about 20%;39 (b) the range of ZT values obtained from a series of samples of hole-doped SnSe crystals along the b axis. The solid line represents the average value, the ZT measurement uncertainty is about 20%;39 (c) ZT values of hole-doped SnSe and undoped SnSe crystals along different axial directions; the ZT measurement uncertainty is about ±20%; (d) the calculated efficiency (based on ZTave values) as a function of the hot side temperature (cold side temperature is 300 K) of hole-doped SnSe (b axis),39 undoped SnSe (b axis),35 PbTe–4SrTe–2Na,18 and PbTe–30PbS–2.5K.120 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Doping SnSe with donor and acceptor atoms is not as straightforward as it is in the case of PbTe, PbSe or PbS. It seems that many conventional dopants are rejected from the structure or are accommodated to a very limited degree. We believe this is because of the layered anisotropic structure where each SnSe layer is only two-atom thin and the locally distorted highly covalent bonding around the Sn and Se atoms may destabilize guest atoms with large differences in chemical character. We found that sodium is one of the effective acceptor dopants in SnSe, which causes a two order of magnitude increase in the hole concentration,39 and a vast increase in ZT from 0.1 to 0.7 along the b axis at 300 K while obtaining a ZTmax of 2.0 at 773 K, Fig. 13(c). The ZTmax is large over the entire working temperature range of 300–773 K and likely also below 300 K. The material also projects a large so-called average or device ZTdev, which actually determines the overall thermoelectric conversion efficiency (η) of a device.119 In fact, SnSe has the highest device ZT of ∼1.34 (ZTdev) from 300–773 K known among thermoelectric materials. The projected theoretical conversion efficiency of hole-doped SnSe at Tc = 300 K and Th = 773 K is ∼16.7%, higher than that of other high performance thermoelectrics,18,120Fig. 13(d).
10. Summary and outlook
The physics of thermal and charge transport in SnSe is unusual and fascinating. The high thermoelectric performance of SnSe crystals suggests that single phase materials with strongly anharmonic bonding and ultralow thermal conductivity are promising candidates for achieving high thermoelectric performance. It is remarkable that such an ultralow thermal conductivity can be realized in a simple compound such as SnSe as it does not have a high molecular weight, a complex crystal structure or a large unit cell. It is also remarkable that such an ultra-high power factor can be achieved in a not-so-narrow bandgap semiconductor with only orthorhombic crystal symmetry. The multiple valence band extrema lying close in energy are the key to this performance, which persists over a wide temperature plateau from 300–773 K and perhaps even wider. Hole doping quickly pushes the Fermi level deep into the valence band structure, activating several Fermi pockets to produce enhanced Seebeck coefficients and high power factors. The resulting high figure of merit improves the prospects for realizing very efficient thermoelectric devices using hole-doped SnSe crystals as a p-type leg.
The discovery of exceptional physical properties in SnSe clearly points to new directions in thermoelectric science in terms of what materials systems we might pursue as superior thermoelectrics. In this context, many more materials are yet to be investigated, especially those that share electronic and structural features with SnSe. Although the issue with the exact thermal conductivity of polycrystalline samples vis-á-vis single crystal SnSe samples will take a bit longer to be settled, what is not controversial is the outstanding thermoelectric performance of single crystal SnSe and, according to recent reports, even of polycrystalline samples.55,99,121
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by a grant DOE-EERE/NSF (CBET-1048728), the Revolutionary Materials for Solid State Energy Conversion, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, and Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001054 (G. J. T. and M. G. K.). This work was also supported by the “Zhuoyue” program of Beihang University, the Recruitment Program for Young Professionals, and the NSFC under Grant No. 51571007, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (C. C. and L. D. Z.). We thank Professors H. B. Xu, S. K. Gong, Y. L. Pei, G. J. Snyder, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, J. P. Heremans, S. Q. Hao and Y. S. Zhang for plentiful discussions and fruitful collaborations. Of course most of all, we are grateful to the numerous dedicated graduate students and postdoctoral fellows who have contributed to our thermoelectric research efforts. Their names appear in the various publications cited in this article.
References
G. J. Tan, L.-D. Zhao and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Rev., 2016 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00255 .
L. E. Bell, Science, 2008, 321, 1457–1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 251–268 CAS .
J. R. Sootsman, D. Y. Chung and M. G. Kanatzidis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8616–8639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Tan, L. D. Zhao, F. Y. Shi, J. W. Doak, S. H. Lo, H. Sun, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, C. Uher and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7006–7017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Pei, H. Wang and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6125–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, M. S. Dresselhaus, L. E. Bell and D. T. Morelli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 471–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Pei, X. Y. Shi, A. LaLonde, H. Wang, L. D. Chen and G. J. Snyder, Nature, 2011, 473, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, V. Jovovic, E. S. Toberer, A. Saramat, K. Kurosaki, A. Charoenphakdee, S. Yamanaka and G. J. Snyder, Science, 2008, 321, 554–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, X. J. Tan, K. Yin, H. J. Liu, X. F. Tang, J. Shi, Q. J. Zhang and C. Uher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 166601 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yu, M. Zebarjadi, H. Wang, K. Lukas, H. Z. Wang, D. Z. Wang, C. Opeil, M. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2077–2082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Pei, H. J. Wu, D. Wu, F. S. Zheng and J. Q. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13902–13908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zebarjadi, G. Joshi, G. H. Zhu, B. Yu, A. Minnich, Y. C. Lan, X. W. Wang, M. Dresselhaus, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2225–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Dehkordi, M. Zebarjadi, J. He and T. M. Tritt, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2015, 97, 1–22 CrossRef .
K. F. Hsu, S. Loo, F. Guo, W. Chen, J. S. Dyck, C. Uher, T. Hogan, E. K. Polychroniadis and M. G. Kanatzidis, Science, 2004, 303, 818–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. C. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. A. Yan, D. Z. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Y. Chen, J. M. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, B. Wiendlocha and A. M. Chamoire, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5510–5530 CAS .
K. Biswas, J. Q. He, I. D. Blum, C. I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, D. N. Seidman, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 489, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, S. Q. Hao, S. H. Lo, C. I. Wu, X. Y. Zhou, Y. Lee, H. Li, K. Biswas, T. P. Hogan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7364–7370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Biswas, J. Q. He, Q. C. Zhang, G. Y. Wang, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 160–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, W. Nielson, Y. Xia and V. Ozolins, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 185501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Seko, A. Togo, H. Hayashi, K. Tsuda, L. Chaput and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 205901 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Saha, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 041202 CrossRef .
J. X. Ding, B. Xu, Y. H. Lin, C. W. Nan and W. Liu, New J. Phys., 2015, 17, 083012 CrossRef .
J. Al-Otaibi and G. P. Srivastava, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 043702 CrossRef .
D. Y. Chung, T. Hogan, P. Brazis, M. Rocci-Lane, C. Kannewurf, M. Bastea, C. Uher and M. G. Kanatzidis, Science, 2000, 287, 1024–1027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Liu, X. Shi, F. F. Xu, L. L. Zhang, W. Q. Zhang, L. D. Chen, Q. Li, C. Uher, T. Day and G. J. Snyder, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 422–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Zhao, J. E. Sui, Z. J. Tang, Y. C. Lan, Q. G. Jie, D. Kraemer, K. N. McEnaney, A. Guloy, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Wei, C. F. Wu, X. Z. Zhang, Q. Tan, L. Sun, Y. Pan and J. F. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30102–30109 RSC .
S. R. Brown, S. M. Kauzlarich, F. Gascoin and G. J. Snyder, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1873–1877 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kurosaki, A. Kosuga, H. Muta, M. Uno and S. Yamanaka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 061919 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, A. R. Khabibullin, K. Wei, J. R. Salvador, G. S. Nolas and L. M. Woods, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Skoug and D. T. Morelli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 235901 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Nielsen, V. Ozolins and J. P. Heremans, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 570–578 CAS .
L. D. Zhao, S. H. Lo, Y. S. Zhang, H. Sun, G. J. Tan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2014, 508, 373–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, Nature, 2014, 508, 327–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li, J. Hong, A. F. May, D. Bansal, S. Chi, T. Hong, G. Ehlers and O. Delaire, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 1063–1069 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Heremans, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 990–991 CAS .
L. D. Zhao, G. J. Tan, S. Q. Hao, J. Q. He, Y. L. Pei, H. Chi, H. Wang, S. K. Gong, H. B. Xu, V. P. Dravid, C. Uher, G. J. Snyder, C. Wolverton and M. G. Kanatzidis, Science, 2016, 351, 141–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Behnia, Science, 2016, 351, 124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, D. Berardan, Y. L. Pei, C. Byl, L. Pinsard-Gaudart and N. Dragoe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 092118 CrossRef .
G. J. Tan, F. Y. Shi, H. Sun, L. D. Zhao, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20849–20854 CAS .
B. Yu, W. S. Liu, S. Chen, H. Wang, H. Z. Wang, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 472–478 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kyratsi, D. Y. Chung, J. R. Ireland, C. R. Kannewurf and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3035–3040 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Meng, N. V. C. Shekar, D. Y. Chung, M. Kanatzidis and J. V. Badding, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 4485–4488 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Morelli, V. Jovovic and J. P. Heremans, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 035901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, D. T. Morelli, Y. Xia, F. Zhou, V. Ozolins, H. Chi, X. Zhou and C. Uher, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. T. Morelli, Y. Xia and V. Ozolins, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 408–413 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu and D. T. Morelli, MRS Commun., 2013, 3, 129–133 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nabi, A. Kellou, S. Mecabih, A. Khalfi and N. Benosman, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2003, 98, 104–115 CrossRef .
A. Agarwal, M. N. Vashi, D. Lakshminarayana and N. M. Batra, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2000, 11, 67–71 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Padiyan, A. Marikani and K. R. Murali, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2000, 35, 949–957 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, H. L. Su, B. Li and Y. T. Qian, Mater. Res. Bull., 2000, 35, 459–464 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, K. F. Cai and W. Y. Zhao, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 4154–4159 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, E. K. Chere, J. Y. Sun, F. Cao, K. Dahal, S. Chen, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500360 CrossRef .
D. D. Cuong, S. H. Rhim, J. H. Lee and S. C. Hong, AIP Adv., 2015, 5, 117147 CrossRef .
J. Carrete, N. Mingo and S. Curtarolo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 101907 CrossRef .
S. Sassi, C. Candolfi, J. B. Vaney, V. Ohorodniichuk, P. Masschelein, A. Dauscher and B. Lenoir, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 212105 CrossRef .
F. Serrano-Sanchez, M. Gharsallah, N. M. Nemes, F. J. Mompean, J. L. Martinez and J. A. Alonso, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 083902 CrossRef .
X. H. Guan, P. F. Lu, L. Y. Wu, L. H. Han, G. Liu, Y. X. Song and S. M. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 643, 116–120 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Shi and E. Kioupakis, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 065103 CrossRef .
H. Q. Leng, M. Zhou, J. Zhao, Y. M. Han and L. F. Li, J. Electron. Mater., 2016, 45, 527–534 CrossRef CAS .
A. Banik and K. Biswas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9620–9625 CAS .
C. L. Chen, H. Wang, Y. Y. Chen, T. Day and G. J. Snyder, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11171–11176 CAS .
E. K. Chere, Q. Zhang, K. Dahal, F. Cao, J. Mao and Z. F. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1848–1854 CAS .
Y. M. Han, J. Zhao, M. Zhou, X. X. Jiang, H. Q. Leng and L. F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4555–4559 CAS .
Z. H. Ge, K. Y. Wei, H. Lewis, J. Martin and G. S. Nolas, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 225, 354–358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sassi, C. Candolfi, J. B. Vaney, V. Ohorodniichuk, P. Masschelein, A. Dauscher and B. Lenoir, Mater. Today, 2015, 2, 690–698 CrossRef .
F. Q. Wang, S. H. Zhang, J. B. Yu and Q. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15962–15970 RSC .
K. Kutorasinski, B. Wiendlocha, S. Kaprzyk and J. Tobola, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 205201 CrossRef .
G. Q. Ding, G. Y. Gao and K. L. Yao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Bera, A. V. Sanchela, C. V. Tomy and A. D. Thakur, arXiv:1601.00753 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci], 2016.
M. Gharsallah, F. Serrano-Sánchez, N. M. Nemes, F. J. Mompeán, J. L. Martínez, M. T. Fernández-Díaz, F. Elhalouani and J. A. Alonso, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ju and J. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 9550–9556 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. Oh, Y. M. Kim, H. S. So, H. Lee, J.-S. Rhyee, S.-D. Park and S.-J. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 682, 785–790 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Xia, H. Wang and Y. C. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CAS .

          Y. I. Ravich, B. A. Efimova and I. A. Smirnov, Semiconducting Lead Chalcogenides, Plenum press,  1970 Search PubMed .
L. M. Sysoeva, M. N. Vinograd, N. V. Kolomoet and Y. I. Ravich, Semiconductors, 1970, 3, 975–977 Search PubMed .
X. B. Zhao, X. H. Ji, Y. H. Zhang, T. J. Zhu, J. P. Tu and X. B. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 062111 CrossRef .
G. J. Tan, F. Y. Shi, S. Q. Hao, H. Chi, L. D. Zhao, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5100–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Tan, F. Y. Shi, S. Q. Hao, H. Chi, T. P. Bailey, L. D. Zhao, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11507–11516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, J. Q. He, C. I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, X. Y. Zhou, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7902–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. M. Rowe, CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics, CRC Press, London,  1995 Search PubMed .
T. J. Zhu, K. Xiao, C. Yu, J. J. Shen, S. H. Yang, A. J. Zhou, X. B. Zhao and J. He, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 044903 CrossRef .
T. J. Zhu, C. G. Fu, H. H. Xie, Y. T. Liu and X. B. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500588 CrossRef .
X. Shi, J. Yang, J. R. Salvador, M. F. Chi, J. Y. Cho, H. Wang, S. Q. Bai, J. H. Yang, W. Q. Zhang and L. D. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7837–7846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Liu, B. P. Zhang, L. D. Zhao and J. F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7526–7531 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Liu, B. P. Zhang, J. F. Li and L. D. Zhao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 566–572 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Liu, B. P. Zhang, J. F. Li, H. L. Zhang and L. D. Zhao, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 103717 CrossRef .
Y. He, T. Day, T. S. Zhang, H. L. Liu, X. Shi, L. D. Chen and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3974–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Guin, V. Srihari and K. Biswas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 648–655 CAS .
B. Qiu, H. Bao, G. Q. Zhang, Y. Wu and X. L. Ruan, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 53, 278–285 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Henry and G. Chen, J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci., 2008, 5, 141–152 CAS .
Y.-X. Chen, Z.-H. Ge, M. Yin, D. Feng, X.-Q. Huang, W. Zhao and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201602652 .
H.-Q. Leng, M. Zhou, J. Zhao, Y.-M. Han and L.-F. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9112–9116 RSC .
K. Peng, X. Lu, H. Zhan, S. Hui, X. Tang, G. Wang, J. Dai, C. Uher, G. Wang and X. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 454–460 CAS .
Y. Li, F. Li, J. Dong, Z. Ge, F. Kang, J. He, H. Du, B. Li and J.-F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2047–2055 RSC .
S. R. Popuri, M. Pollet, R. Decourt, F. D. Morrison, N. S. Bennett and J. W. G. Bos, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1685–1691 RSC .
J. D. Wasscher, W. Albers and C. Haas, Solid-State Electron., 1963, 6, 261–264 CrossRef CAS .
T.-R. Wei, G. Tan, X. Zhang, C.-F. Wu, J.-F. Li, V. P. Dravid, G. J. Snyder and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8875–8882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, H. Xin, X. Qin, J. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Li, C. Song and C. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 689, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. LaLonde, Y. Z. Pei and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2090–2096 CAS .
Y. Z. Pei, A. LaLonde, S. Iwanaga and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2085–2089 CAS .
M. Sist, J. Zhang and B. Brummerstedt Iversen, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2016, 72, 310–316 CAS .
A. de Kergommeaux, J. Faure-Vincent, A. Pron, R. de Bettignies, B. Malaman and P. Reiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11659–11666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, B. He, J. P. Heremans and J.-C. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 669, 224–231 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tiirkes, Ch. Pluntket and R. Helbig, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1980, 13, 4941–4951 CrossRef .
I. Stambolova, K. Konstantinov, S. Vassilev, P. Peshev and T. Tsacheva, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2000, 63, 104–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Parthibavarman, V. Hariharan and C. Sekar, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2011, 31, 840–844 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Pashinkin, A. S. Malkova, V. A. Fedorov and M. S. Mikhailova, Inorg. Mater. (Transl. of Neorg. Mater.), 2006, 42, 593–595 CrossRef CAS .
T.-R. Wei, C.-F. Wu, X. Zhang, Q. Tan, L. Sun, Y. Pan and J.-F. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30102–30109 RSC .
E. S. Bozin, C. D. Malliakas, P. Souvatzis, T. Proffen, N. A. Spaldin, M. G. Kanatzidis and S. J. L. Billinge, Science, 2010, 330, 1660–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Knox, E. S. Bozin, C. D. Malliakas, M. G. Kanatzidis and S. J. L. Billinge, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 014102 CrossRef .
D. R. Clarke, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 163, 67–74 CrossRef .
J. F. Li, W. S. Liu, L. D. Zhao and M. Zhou, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 152–158 CrossRef .
C. Yu, T. J. Zhu, R. Z. Shi, Y. Zhang, X. B. Zhao and J. He, Acta Mater., 2009, 57, 2757–2764 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, C. Chang, Y. L. Pei, D. Wu, K. L. Peng, X. Y. Zhou, S. K. Gong, J. Q. He, Y. S. Zhang, Z. Zeng and L.-D. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 25203 CrossRef .

          G. J. Snyder, in Thermoelectrics Handbook: Macro to Nano, ed. D. M. Rowe, CRC Press,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. J. Wu, L. D. Zhao, F. S. Zheng, D. Wu, Y. L. Pei, X. Tong, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Q. He, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4515 CAS .
Y. Fu, J. Xu, G.-Q. Liu, J. Yang, X. Tan, Z. Liu, H. Qin, H. Shao, H. Jiang, B. Liang and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1201–1207 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Li-Dong Zhao
	Li-Dong Zhao was born in Harbin, China in 1979. He is a Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Beihang University, China. He received his BE and ME degrees in Materials Science from Liaoning Technical University, and his PhD degree in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China in 2009. He was a postdoctoral research fellow in the LEMHE-ICMMO (CNRS-UMR 8182) at the University of Paris-Sud from 2009 to 2011, and continued as a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University from 2011 to 2014. He is a recipient of “the Thousand Talents Plan” 2015. His research interests include thermoelectric materials, superconductors and thermal barrier coatings.

Cheng Chang
	Cheng Chang is a PhD candidate in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Beihang University. He received his BE degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Beihang University in 2014. He started his doctoral research as a member of Li-Dong Zhao's group in 2014. His main research interests focus on the fabrication and properties of thermoelectric materials with layered structures.

Gangjian Tan
	Gangjian Tan received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Wuhan University of Technology, China, under the supervision of Professor Xinfeng Tang, with a focus on nanostructured skutterudite compounds as advanced thermoelectric materials by melt spinning in 2013. In June of 2013, he joined Professor Mercouri Kanatzidis's group at Northwestern University as a postdoctoral research fellow, where his research extended to the development of novel metal chalcogenides for possible applications in energy conversion, particularly in the field of thermoelectrics. He is interested in the understanding of charge and phonon transport behavior in solids associated with the thermoelectric effect.

Mercouri G. Kanatzidis
	Mercouri Kanatzidis was born in Thessaloniki, Greece in 1957. After obtaining a BSc degree from Aristotle University in Greece, he received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Iowa in 1984. He was a post-doctoral research associate at the University of Michigan and Northwestern University from 1985 to 1987 and is currently Charles E. and Emma H. Morrison Professor of Chemistry at Northwestern University. He also holds an appointment at Argonne National Laboratory. His research areas include: inorganic chemistry, solid state and coordination chemistry of chalcogenide compounds, design of new materials, exploratory synthesis, thermoelectric materials, nanostructured materials, intermetallics, mesoporous semiconductors, phase-change materials, conducting and porous polymers. He is the recipient of the Royal Chemical Society DeGennes Prize 2015; Elected Fellow of the Royal Chemical Society 2015; the ENI Award for the “Renewable Energy Prize” category; the ACS Award in Inorganic Chemistry 2016; and the American Physical Society 2016 James C. McGroddy Prize for New Materials. He has over 950 papers and 22 patents to his merit.

Broader context
To date, several approaches to enhance thermoelectric performance have emerged including enhancing the power factor through modifying the electronic structure, reducing the thermal conductivity through all-scale phonon scattering, or both simultaneously. It is highly exceptional to find a new system that exhibits a high power factor as well as extremely low thermal conductivity. This extraordinary combination of electrical and thermal transport properties is precisely what we have found in SnSe; the physics of thermal and charge transport in SnSe is unusual and fascinating. It is remarkable that an ultralow thermal conductivity can be realized in a simple compound such as SnSe, which does not have a high molecular weight, nanostructuring, a complex crystal structure or a large unit cell. It is also remarkable that an ultra-high power factor can be achieved in a not-so-narrow bandgap semiconductor with only orthorhombic crystal symmetry. In this perspective, we discuss the natural features of SnSe, including the peculiar crystal structure that results in an impressively low thermal conductivity, in combination with a unique electronic structure that gives it a high power factor and outstanding thermoelectric properties.


 	Fig. 1  (a) SnSe crystal structure Pnma at room temperature (Sn atoms are shown in gray and Se atoms in red) along the a axis and (b) highly distorted SnSe7 coordination polyhedron with three short and four long Sn–Se bonds; (c and d) SnSe crystal structures along the b axis (showing the accordion like character) and c axis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Electronic band structure of SnSe indicates non-parabolic, complex multi-band valence states. The red dotted lines from top to bottom represent the Fermi levels with carrier concentrations of 5 × 1017 cm−3, 5 × 1019 cm−3, 2 × 1020 cm−3, and 5 × 1020 cm−3, respectively, indicating that heavy doping pushes the Fermi level deep into the multi-band structure. (b–d) The Fermi surfaces of SnSe (Pnma) at 5 × 1019 cm−3, 2 × 1020 cm−3 and 5 × 1020 cm−3, respectively. The Fermi surface also illustrates the multiple types of pockets (or valleys) coming from the numerous valence bands all within a small energy window.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrical transport properties of undoped SnSe35 and hole-doped SnSe39 as a function of temperature along different crystallographic directions: (a) electrical conductivity; (b) carrier concentration; (c) Seebeck coefficient and (d) power factors, with those of the optimized Bi2−xSbxTe3 and PbTe–4SrTe–2Na plotted for comparison.16,18 In the figures, SnSe represents undoped SnSe.35 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of room temperature Seebeck coefficients of the lead and tin chalcogenides with a similar carrier concentration of ∼4 × 1019 cm−3; (b) calculated Seebeck coefficients as a function of the carrier density at 300 K. The black square line is calculated using the full multi-valley DFT band structure. Single band calculations yield lower Seebeck coefficients, and even for larger effective masses cannot fit the measured values; (c) a schematic diagram showing the multiple valence bands of SnSe; (d) ln[RH(T) − RH(0)]/RH(0) as a function of 1/T with the solid line being the best linear fit to the data; the slope (−ΔE/kB) of −214 K−1 yields an energy gap of ∼0.02 eV between the first two valence bands; the inset shows the Hall coefficient for hole-doped SnSe as a function of temperature.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Total thermal conductivities of undoped SnSe35 and hole-doped SnSe39 as a function of temperature along different crystallographic directions; (b) comparison of the lattice thermal conductivity of SnSe along the b axis and hierarchical architectured PbTe–4SrTe–2Na;18 (c) the calculated Lorenz number derived from a multi-band model; (d) comparison of the lattice thermal conductivity of undoped SnSe35 and hole-doped SnSe.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 


Zhao et al., Nature (2014)35	Single	0.46–0.70	0.23–0.34
Zhao et al., (this work)	Polycrystalline	0.52–0.62	0.29–0.40
Chen et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. (2016)95	Polycrystalline	0.6–0.7	0.2–0.3
Serrano-Sanchez et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. (2015)59	Ingot	0.1	0.1–0.2 (at ∼400 K)
Bera et al., arXiv:1601.00753v1 (2016)72	Polycrystalline	0.2	0.24 (at ∼400 K)
Ju et al., Ceram. Int. (2016)74	Polycrystalline	0.65	

Kim et al., J. Alloys Compd. (2016)75	Polycrystalline	0.61–0.76	0.3–0.4
Gharsallah et al., Sci. Rep. (2016)73	Ingot Ge–SnSe	0.2–0.5	0.2–0.5 (at ∼400 K)
Zhang et al., Adv. Energy Mater. (2015)55	Polycrystalline	0.49–1.1	0.25–0.51
Wei et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. (2015)29	Polycrystalline	0.7–1.3	0.4–0.6
Leng et al., J. Electron. Mater. (2016)62	Polycrystalline	0.7–1.1	0.4–0.5
Sassi et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. (2014)58	Polycrystalline	0.75–1.25	0.4–0.6
Han et al., J. Mater. Chem. A (2015)66	Polycrystalline	0.5–1.26	0.3–0.65
Li et al., New J. Phys. (2015)24	Polycrystalline	0.9–1.2	0.3–0.4
Chen et al., J. Mater. Chem. A (2014)64	Polycrystalline	0.9–1.35	0.5–0.8
Leng et al., RSC Adv. (2016)96	Polycrystalline	0.7–1.0	0.3–0.4
Chere et al., J. Mater. Chem. A (2016)65	Polycrystalline	0.85–1.0	0.4–0.5
Peng et al., Energy Environ. Sci. (2016)97	Single Na–SnSe	1.2–2.0	0.4–0.45
Zhao et al., Science (2016)39	Single Na–SnSe	0.45–0.7	0.2–0.3
Li et al., J. Mater. Chem. C (2016)98	Polycrystalline	1.0	0.35
Popuri et al., J. Mater. Chem. C (2016)99	Polycrystalline	0.6–1.5	0.38–0.71
Wasscher et al., Solid-State Electron. (1963)100b	Single (c-axis)	1.9	

Wei et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. (2016)101	Polycrystalline	1.2–1.4	0.4–0.5
Gao et al., J. Alloys Compd. (2016)102	Polycrystalline	1.2–1.4	0.3–0.4

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) Microcracks in SnSe crystals propagating along the bc-plane; (d) schematic diagram shows how the laser flash goes through cracks; (e) thermal diffusivities are higher when samples contain an increasing number of cracks, especially after phase transition around 800 K. To exclude the effects of heat capacity and sample density on the total thermal conductivity, we directly observed thermal diffusivities.	 

 	Fig. 7  Thermal diffusivities of polycrystalline SnSe with and without SnO2 as a function of temperature. Single crystals SnSe samples are also plotted for comparison. To exclude the effects of heat capacity and sample density on the total thermal conductivity estimation, we directly compared thermal diffusivities.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Temperature-dependent heat capacity for SnSe obtained from different reports;111 (b) temperature-dependent heat capacity for SnSe (black line), SnSe0.9S0.1 (red line) and SnSe0.7S0.3 (blue line) measured using a differential scanning calorimetry thermal analyzer (Netzsch DSC 404 C)55 and the heat capacity (thick green line with red dot) of SnSe derived using a standard sample (Pyroceram 9606, Netzsch LFA457) with every 50 K steps, the phase transition (within 50 K width) observed on a Netzsch DSC 404 C was jumped over when using a Netzsch LFA457. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representations of harmonicity and anharmonicity (Φ(r), a0 and r are the potential energy, lattice parameter and distance between two adjacent atoms, respectively); anharmonicity is the deviation from a linear relationship between displacement and restoring force.36,38	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic indicating resonant bonding in SnSe.	 

 	Fig. 11  Theoretically calculated (a) phonon dispersions and (b) Grüneisen dispersion;35 (c) inelastic neutron scattering (INS) measurements reveal the strong dispersion anisotropy and softening of the low-energy optic phonons with temperature.37 The top two panels show the first-principles calculation at 100 K, which shows a good agreement with INS data obtained at 100 K (intermediate two panels) and the bottom two panels also reveals drastic softening of phonon dispersions and strong anisotropy at 648 K.37 (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison of thermoelectric transport properties of undoped SnSe single crystal35 and polycrystalline pellet samples: (a) schematic diagrams show how samples were cut for measurements; (b) carrier mobilities, (c) power factor, and (d) ZT.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A series of total thermal conductivity measurements for hole-doped SnSe crystals along the b axis. BU represents the results measured at Beihang University of China. Caltech represents the results measured at California Institute of Technology. The solid line represents the average value; the measurement uncertainty is about 20%;39 (b) the range of ZT values obtained from a series of samples of hole-doped SnSe crystals along the b axis. The solid line represents the average value, the ZT measurement uncertainty is about 20%;39 (c) ZT values of hole-doped SnSe and undoped SnSe crystals along different axial directions; the ZT measurement uncertainty is about ±20%; (d) the calculated efficiency (based on ZTave values) as a function of the hot side temperature (cold side temperature is 300 K) of hole-doped SnSe (b axis),39 undoped SnSe (b axis),35 PbTe–4SrTe–2Na,18 and PbTe–30PbS–2.5K.120 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
