Genetics first or metabolism first? The formamide clue   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35066A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35066A
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5526-5565Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsGenetics first or metabolism first? The formamide clue†

        
          
            Raffaele 
            Saladino
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Giorgia 
            Botta
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Samanta 
            Pino
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Giovanna 
            Costanzo
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Ernesto 
            Di Mauro
          
          
        
      *d
aDipartimento di Agrobiologia ed Agrochimica, Università della Tuscia, Via San Camillo De Lellis, 01100 Viterbo, Italy. E-mail: saladino@unitus.it
bDipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie “Charles Darwin”, “Sapienza” Università di Roma, P.leAldo Moro, 5, Rome 00185, Italy. E-mail: samantapino78@libero.it
cIstituto di Biologia e e Patologia Molecolari, CNR, P.le Aldo Moro, 5, Rome 00185, Italy. E-mail: giovanna.costanzo@uniroma1.it
dIstituto Pasteur “Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti” c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie “Charles Darwin”, “Sapienza” Università di Roma, P.leAldo Moro, 5, Rome 00185, Italy. E-mail: ernesto.dimauro@uniroma1.it;  Fax: +39 064440812;   Tel: +39 0649912880
Received 
      6th March 2012
    First published on 8th June 2012AbstractLife is made of the intimate interaction of metabolism and genetics, both built around the chemistry of the most common elements of the Universe (hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon). The transmissible interaction of metabolic and genetic cycles results in the hypercycles of organization and de-organization of chemical information, of living and non-living. The origin-of-life quest has long been split into several attitudes exemplified by the aphorisms “genetics-first” or “metabolism-first”. Recently, the opposition between these approaches has been solved by more unitary theoretical and experimental frames taking into account energetic, evolutionary, proto-metabolic and environmental aspects. Nevertheless, a unitary and simple chemical frame is still needed that could afford both the precursors of the synthetic pathways eventually leading to RNA and to the key components of the central metabolic cycles, possibly connected with the synthesis of fatty acids. In order to approach the problem of the origin of life it is therefore reasonable to start from the assumption that both metabolism and genetics had a common origin, shared a common chemical frame, and were embedded under physical–chemical conditions favourable for the onset of both. The singleness of such a prebiotically productive chemical process would partake of Darwinian advantages over more complex fragmentary chemical systems. The prebiotic chemistry of formamide affords in a single and simple physical–chemical frame nucleic bases, acyclonucleosides, nucleotides, biogenic carboxylic acids, sugars, amino sugars, amino acids and condensing agents. Thus, we suggest the possibility that formamide could have jointly provided the main components for the onset of both (pre)genetic and (pre)metabolic processes. As a note of caution, we discuss the fact that these observations only indicate possible solutions at the level of organic substrates, not at the systemic chemical level.
Raffaele Saladino
Raffaele Saladino was born in Rome in 1964. He obtained a Masters degree in Chemistry at University “Sapienza”, Rome, in 1989 and a PhD in Chemical Sciences at the same University in 1993. After post-doctoral training at the University of Montreal (Canada) and teaching and research positions at the University of Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy he is now an Associate Professor of Organic & Bioorganic Chemistry at the same University. He is involved in studies on prebiotic chemistry, green catalysis and oxidative transformations of natural substances mainly focused on bioactive compounds.
Giorgia Botta
Giorgia Botta was born in Fredericton, Canada in 1979. She received a Masters degree in Medicinal Chemistry at the University of Siena (Italy) in 2005 and a PhD in Medicinal Chemistry from the same University in 2008. Since October 2010 she has been working as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Viterbo (Italy) in collaboration with Prof. Raffaele Saladino. Her research interests are in the field of Organic, Analytical and Medicinal Chemistry with particular interest in the Synthesis of novel Antiviral and Anticancer agents and in the field of Astrobiology with particular interest in the Origin of Life.
Samanta Pino
Samanta Pino was born in Priverno, Italy in 1978. She studied Biology at the Roma Tre, University of Rome. She received her PhD in Pasteurian Sciences at the Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Rome “Sapienza” in 2009, working in the field of prebiotic chemistry. Her primary research interests are currently focused on the study of the molecular mechanisms and of the physical–chemical environment allowing the formation of the first informational polymers on prebiotic Earth.
Giovanna Costanzo
Giovanna Maria Costanzo was born in Rome, Italy, in 1962. She obtained her Degree in Biological Sciences from “Sapienza” University of Rome, Italy, in 1987. In 1991 she joined the Dept. of Biochemistry and Cell Biology at the University of New York at Stony Brook (USA) as a postdoctoral fellow. Since 2001 she has worked as a researcher at CNR in Rome, Italy. In the past years her research interests were essentially on yeast transcription regulation and DNA chromatin structure. At present she is working on the origin of the life.
Ernesto Di Mauro
Ernesto Di Mauro was born in Valmontone, Italy, in 1945. In 1967 he obtained his Degree in Biological Sciences from “Sapienza” University of Rome, Italy. In 1969 he joined the Department of Genetics (Seattle), as a postdoctoral fellow. Appointed in 1978 as an associate professor of Enzymology at the University of Rome, he has been a professor of Molecular Biology since 1987. His research interests were centered on gene regulation, DNA and chromatin structure and topology and, at present, on the various aspects of the origin of life.
1. Introduction
It is a shared opinion that we will never know exactly how life started on this planet but that at one point it will be possible to reconstruct the likely chemical frames into which the different prebiotic processes organized themselves. Understanding the key passages leading to their reciprocal interactions will follow. Or was it rather a multifaceted single frame? The complexity of the task is paramount. This endeavour necessarily passes through the untangling of the riddles specific to each type of biomolecules (nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, precursors of energy metabolisms) and to their initial, possibly cooperative interactions. Before even considering the kick-starting events leading to the onset of cycles, the relevant prebiotically fertile chemical frame(s) must be identified.
Building on the rationale illuminatingly defined by Victor Oparin,1 the last six decades have witnessed solid and continuous progress, starting from the seminal Stanley Miller's discoveries,2 reviewed in ref. 3. We will here examine ground-breaking and recent observations related to the formation of the precursors of biomolecules, keeping in mind that an exhaustive analysis of this topic is impossible in a single article and that restrictive choices need to be a priori made. Thus, we reasoned following a Bayesian inference approach,4,5 consisting of changing our subjective degree of belief rationally in order to account for evidence. When no decision is possible, we appealed to Occam's lex parsimoniae, usually phrased: simpler explanations are, other things being equal, generally better than more complex ones. As restated by Bertrand Russel: “whenever possible, substitute constructions out of known entities for inferences to unknown entities”.6
The available evidence bayesianally leads to hydrogen cyanide (HCN) chemistry and, inside its frame of reference, to formamide (NH2CHO) chemistry. The two frames are not in conflict (as will be discussed) but, rather, the second is a chapter of the first. However, the specific attributes of stability, reactivity and the chemical properties of formamide make it a preferential starting point for prebiotic synthetic processes. We will present evidence pointing to the possible role of formamide-plus-minerals in the syntheses of a large part of the relevant starting components in prebiotic scenarios, namely nucleic acid components, amino acids, sugars, amino sugars and carboxylic acids. The connection of formamide with all these compounds is presented in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Syntheses from formamide. 
In Occamian terms, if polymerization of ribopolymers had to occur, all the necessary components had to be present in the same environment at the same time. A similar reasoning applies to the possible initial cooperation between vesicles and RNA,7 and to the relationships among the key components of metabolic cycles. As suggested by Vijayasarathy and Harold J. Morowitz,8 the first set of prebiotic processes reasonably consisted of a small group of organic reactions, including the 11 key chemical transformations in the core of autotrophic anabolism: hydrolysis/dehydration, carboxylation/decarboxylation, oxidation/reduction, phosphorylation/dephosphorylation, isomerization, transamination and transfer of functional groups.
Were these compounds present in the same “warm little pond”?9 A brief review of the principal models dealing with the onset of metabolisms will allow us to point to evidence related to a possible formamide-based unitary chemical frame for metabolism and genetics. Thus, possible passages from the compounds afforded by formamide to higher complexity organization levels will be indicated, particular attention being devoted to the spontaneous generation of RNA, to the problem of the onset of metabolic cycles and to their possible coexistence in the same chemical scenario.
2. Chemical precursors and prebiotic processes: the formamide and hydrogen cyanide system. General considerations
Nucleic acids are made out of three components, the purine and pyrimidine nucleic bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine and uracil in DNA and RNA, respectively) and the corresponding nucleosides and nucleotides. The level of structural complexity increases gradually proceeding from nucleic bases to nucleotides, with the initial formation of the glycosidic bond between the nucleic base and the sugar (2′-deoxy ribose or ribose), and the subsequent formation of phosphate derivatives.
The chemical processes that yield these compounds in extant organisms are under the complete control of sophisticated enzymatic systems and follow paths characterized by high chemio-, regio- and stereoselectivity, leading to the formation of the glycosidic bond only in the β-configuration and, in the case of natural oligonucleotides, exclusively to the diphosphate bond at the 3′- and 5′-position of the sugar.
A plausibly prebiotic synthesis of nucleic acids should not only occur under experimental conditions coherent with those that prevailed in primitive terrestrial or non-terrestrial environments, it should also allow the synthesis of nucleic bases, nucleosides and nucleotides in significant yields, possibly under regioselectivity and stereochemical control.
In the definition of the specific experimental conditions under which the origin of nucleic acids might have occurred, the first step is the identification of chemical precursors that could have served as starting materials. In principle, the ideal chemical precursor should be a compound that is widely distributed in the Universe, with a molecular weight lower than 300 Da and an elemental composition containing all the universal atomic components: H, C, N, and O. For the definition of universal atomic components see ref. 10. An estimation of the possible number of covalently bonded compounds with this elemental composition and molecular weight yields millions of possible candidates.11 Among these, hydrogen cyanide (HCN)12 and formamide (NH2CHO)13,14 have received increasing attention as possible precursors of nucleic acid components.
HCN and HCN polymers (for a recent review on HCN polymers see ref. 15) have been detected in different parts of the Universe including planets,16 satellites,17 dense stars,18 molecular clouds19 and in the gas phase of the interstellar medium as well as in the comae of several comets.20 NH2CHO has been detected in interstellar dust associated with the icy phase in dense molecular clouds21 and in protostellar infrared sources,22 in comets such as C/1995 O1 (Hale–Bopp)23,24 and C/1996 B2 (Hyakutake),25 in the interstellar medium,26 in the young stellar object W33A27 and in the galactic sources Sagittarius SgrA and SgrB2.28,29 Recent data suggest the presence of NH2CHO also on Titan and Europa, where a stratosphere of liquid formamide (pure or partially mixed with water) below the frozen surface of the mantle has been hypothesized.30–32

Scheme 1 describes the basic chemistry of NH2CHO and HCN considering selected examples of three main types of transformations: the preparative reactions, the degradation reactions and the reactions of conversion between the two compounds. From the preparative point of view, HCN can be prepared from gaseous mixtures of methane (CH4) and ammonia (NH3) in the presence of platinum33 or corona discharge,34 by ion-irradiation and/or UV-photolysis of N2-rich ice containing CH4,35 from CH4 and NH3 at high temperature in the presence of Al2O3 with a suspension of Pt group metal and nitrides of Al, B, Ti, and Si36 or by yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) cells with Pt electrodes.37
 Scheme 1 
NH2CHO may be formed from the same mixture of reagents leading to the production of HCN. As an example, it can be prepared in appreciable yield from CH4 and NH3 through proton irradiation.38 Other synthetic pathways include the ultraviolet irradiation of icy mixtures of HCN, NH3 and H2O,39 the photolysis of ices,40 or the pyrolysis of mixtures of carbon monoxide (CO), NH3 and H2O.41 NH2CHO can also be synthesized from organic compounds with higher structural complexity, as in the case of the reaction between formic acid (HCOOH) and its esters HCOOR with NH3 over a wide range of experimental conditions.42,43 In the latter case various catalytic conditions have been identified for the optimization of the process, involving the use of alkoxides, ammonium methoxide44 and sodium methoxide,45 heterocyclic derivatives such as thiamine hydrochloride,46 or polyols such as glycerine.47
The synthesis of NH2CHO that probably has the major significance in prebiotic scenarios is by the hydrolysis of HCN. HCN is a gas at ambient pressure and temperature. Once absorbed in water it undergoes two possible processes depending on pH and concentration: (a) direct condensation to biomolecules, like adenine, or polymerization to poly(hydrogen cyanide) derivatives that may be transformed further into biomolecules (see next section), or (b) the hydrolysis by addition of H2O on the CN triple bond to give NH2CHO. These two competitive processes show a similar kinetics at relatively high HCN concentration, in the range between 0.01 and 0.1 M, and at alkaline pH (the optimal value being between pH 8 and 9). The hydrolysis of NH2CHO prevails in more dilute solutions.48
A theoretical study on the possible concentration of HCN on early Earth suggested that the steady state concentration of HCN in the primitive ocean was 4 × 10−12 M at pH 7 and 100 °C, with a slight increase of concentration at lower temperature (2 × 10−5 M at pH 7 and 0 °C).49 Similar results were obtained for NH2CHO. These concentration values appear to be too low for the formation of the appropriate amounts of biomolecules suitable for the first living entities. On the other hand, alternative mechanisms exist for the solution of this problem, as for instance the processes based on the colligative properties of the two compounds. HCN and NH2CHO might have accumulated through formation of eutectic phase with water at low temperature, as reported for HCN,49 or by evaporation processes, a phenomenon that affects mainly NH2CHO, which is characterized by a high boiling point (>200 °C) without azeotropic effects with water. For a comprehensive review on NH2CHO properties see ref. 50. Further concentration processes might have been favored by the presence of minerals, considering as an example the high efficiency of absorption of NH2CHO in clays of the montmorillonites family.51,52 In the latter case, NH2CHO is included in the empty space between the layers of the mineral, mainly due to electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds with the oxygen or metal atoms present in the crystal.53 These interactions may increase the reactivity of NH2CHO by increasing the electrophilic and nucleophilic properties of its functional groups (the amide and amino moieties).
In formamide chemistry, in addition to the direct synthesis of precursors, degradation phenomena also have a significant role in the generation of other reactive species required for different synthetic processes.
As an example, in the presence of metal oxides at high temperature NH2CHO can be dehydrated to HCN, thus closing a cyclic transformation based on the hydrolysis–dehydration system.42 Other degradation reactions of NH2CHO potentially relevant in the prebiotic context are the efficient generation of CO and NH3 and other low molecular weight compounds via a microwave-assisted thermal decomposition process,54 shock waves,55 mercury-(3P1)-photosensitized decomposition56 applied as a tool for the synthesis of nitrogen-containing heterocycles.57,58 The generation of HNCO species by thermal decomposition on Al2O359 or SiO260 and the pyrolysis to HCN polymers61,62 were also reported. Moreover, NH2CHO is hydrolysed under both acidic and basic conditions to ammonium formate HCOO−NH4+. For recent studies on the hydrolysis of NH2CHO see ref. 63 and 64. This compound has been used as a chemical precursor for the nucleic base adenine by reaction at 100 °C with the HCN tetramer.65
Irrespective of the processing route followed, NH2CHO and HCN were used as starting materials for the synthesis of the components of the genetic machinery under experimental conditions compatible with those of the primitive Earth. In the following sections these prebiotic syntheses are reported in detail and the specificity and selectivity of the reactions are analyzed.
3. Prebiotic synthesis of purine and pyrimidine nucleic acid bases
Since the fundamental Miller experiment2 on the prebiotic synthesis of amino acids, attention has been focused on HCN as a potential chemical precursor for nucleic acids.
3.1. The syntheses from HCN
The first synthesis described in this context is the bona fide formation of adenine from a concentrated solution of ammonia and HCN (1.0–11 M solutions of HCN) at reflux for several days.66 In addition to adenine, purine precursors such as 4-aminoimidazole-5-carboxamide (AICA), 4-aminoimidazole-5-carboxamidine (AICAI), formamide, and formamidine were also detected (Scheme 2, pathway A).
 Scheme 2 
On the basis of these data, the authors suggested a reaction pathway involving the condensation of the HCN tetramer, aminomalonodinitrile (DAMN), with formamidine to 4-aminoimidazole-5-carboxamidine. This imidazole derivative can further react with formamidine to yield adenine.67 Guanine was also produced in the range of temperatures encompassed between −20 and 80 °C in a reaction lasting for long periods of time (months to years) and in yields ranging from 10 to 40 times lower than those of adenine. This reaction requires high concentrations of NH4CN that can be obtained in environments characterized by freezing, such as the frozen regions of the primitive Earth, icy satellites or meteorites68 (Scheme 2, pathway B). A three-step synthesis of guanine was also reported from frozen basic HCN solutions reacting to form DAMN,69 followed by a two-photon photochemical rearrangement to AICN.70 The process is completed by the reaction with the presumedly prebiotic reagent cyanogen or cyanogen bromide48 or by reaction of AICA with guanidine or urea.71Scheme 3 reports the proposed route of adenine and guanine formation from HCN. For specific references on the proposed mechanism, see ref. 72–75.
 Scheme 3 
Briefly, the HCN trimer, aminomalononitrile (AMN), is obtained by sequential polymerization/addition of cyanide (CN−). The value of the rate constant for this addition at alkaline pH (pH 9.2) was 0.096 liter mole−1 at 40 °C. Further addition of CN− yields DAMN. DAMN can react with formamidine to provide the imidazole intermediate that by elimination of CN− affords 4-aminoimidazole-5-carbonitrile (AICN). AICN was obtained from DAMN also by an alternative photochemical pathway requiring the isomerization of the CC double bond in the molecule and a ring closure reaction. For a detailed mass spectrometry study on the structure of imidazole intermediates see ref. 76. In principle, under hydrolytic conditions AICN is in equilibrium with AICA. Both AICN and AICA can afford adenine and guanine. As an example, the reactions of AICN with formamidine or cyanogen afford adenine and guanine, respectively. Similarly, adenine can be obtained from AICA by reaction with HCN. An alternative reaction pathway was also proposed that suggests adenine 8-carbonitrile and adenine 8-carboxamide as key intermediates.77 Interestingly, adenine can also be synthesized by the reaction between DAMN and ammonium formate at 110 °C.78 In addition, the HCN dimer N-(methylimino)acetonitrile after treatment with AMN yields the HCN pentamer, a potential precursor of adenine.79

3.1.1. The syntheses from HCN oligomers. 
In the prebiotic chemistry of HCN a key role is played by polymeric products, usually referred to as HCN oligomers. HCN oligomers, also known as azulmic acids or azulmins, are heterogeneous compounds differently colored (from yellow/orange to brown/black) depending on the degree of polymerization and/or cross-linking. Azulmins are widely diffused in the Universe and are associated with dark matter in objects such as asteroids, moons, planets, comets (see, as examples, ref. 80 and 81) and with the reddish haze (tholins) present in the atmosphere of Titan, the largest moon of Saturn.82
Under terrestrial conditions HCN can spontaneously polymerize from relatively dilute solutions (>0.001 M HCN) at alkaline pH in the presence of bases such as NH3 and of free radicals from ionizing radiations in a wide range of temperatures and pressures.15 Other selected simulation experiments for the synthesis of HCN oligomers include spark discharge activation of aqueous aerosols and liquid water in a CH4/N2/H2 atmosphere,83 controlled decomposition of Prussian blue,84 γ-irradiation85 and low temperature processes,86 the first stages of the polymerization process having been studied from a theoretical point of view by computational approaches (see, for example, ref. 87 and 88). HCN oligomers can be also prepared by prolonged heating of NH2CHO at 185–220 °C,89 and their stability studied under Earth orbit conditions.90 Several models trying to explain the structure of HCN oligomers have been proposed including Völker's model (double-ladder rod-like structure), Matthew's model (heteropolypeptide pattern), Umemoto's model (mono ladder pattern) and Mamajanov and Herzfeld's model (polyimidazole pattern) (Scheme 4).91–94
 Scheme 4 
The initial steps in the polymerization of HCN are well understood95 and require the formation of AMN and DAMN. The mechanism of formation of higher order HCN oligomers is much less clear. Radical species can be also detected in HCN oligomers under spatial conditions.96 HCN oligomers are precursors of nucleic acid bases and important biomolecules. As an example, boiling HCN oligomers in 6.0 N HCl yield adenine, hypoxanthine, AICN, 3,4-dihydroxypyrimidine 1 (an uracil isomer) and 5-hydroxyuracil 2 (Scheme 5, pathway A), while under basic conditions adenine, AICN and orotic acid 3 were recovered in appreciable yields.97
 Scheme 5 
Different purine derivatives [adenine, hypoxanthine, 2,4-diamino purine 2,4-(DAMP), xanthine and guanine] were also obtained by acidic or alkaline hydrolysis at high temperature of HCN oligomers produced in a frozen ammonium cyanide solution at −78 °C for 27 years (Scheme 5, pathway B).98,99
Adenine, hypoxanthine, guanine, uracil, 2 and some carboxylic acid derivatives were detected as adsorbed compounds on HCN oligomers prepared from a solution of sodium cyanide and ammonium chloride at 38 °C (Scheme 5, pathway C),100 while glycine, alanine, aspartic acid, non-protein amino acids and β-amino butyric acid were obtained by spark discharge experiments (Scheme 5, pathway D).101


3.1.2. Other synthetic pathways. 
Among pyrimidine nucleic bases, cytosine and thymine were never obtained in appreciable yields.
On the other hand, the presence of relatively high amounts of unusual pyrimidine derivatives (such as compounds 1–3) suggested the possibility that pre-genetic materials could have existed allowing non-standard base-pairing with catalytic properties which were successively lost during molecular evolution.102 Cytosine may also be prepared from chemical precursors characterized by a structure more complex than HCN, as exemplified by the reaction between the cyanoacetylene 4 with cyanate (NCO–) at 30 °C,103 and of 4 with urea at 100 °C,104 or by reaction between cyanoacetaldehyde 5 and urea105 or guanidine, also at 100 °C106 (Scheme 6). Irrespective of the procedure applied, cytosine easily lost ammonia to yield uracil.
 Scheme 6 

3.2. The syntheses from H2NCHO
We have observed that all purine and pyrimidine nucleic acid bases can be simultaneously synthesized from NH2CHO (ref. 13, 14 and references therein). The main difference between the prebiotic chemistry of HCN (and HCN derivatives) and that of NH2CHO is in the role played by minerals. The reactivity and selectivity of NH2CHO in the formation of nucleic acid bases can be finely tuned by the chemical and physical properties of the minerals present in the reaction medium, thus mimicking a genuinely primitive environment.
In these reactions the minerals act mainly as heterogeneous catalysts through the reactivity of the metal atoms present in their structure. Simply, heating neat NH2CHO at 160 °C yields low amounts of purine, while adenine can be synthesized in traces when the reaction is performed in the presence of added HCN.107 The mechanism of formation of purine (and adenine) from NH2CHO is not completely understood and, in principle, both pyrimidine and imidazole derivatives are plausible intermediates for the condensation process.
Nuclear magnetic resonance experiments performed on reaction mixtures from labeled reagents showed the possibility that three equivalents of HCN and two of NH2CHO are embedded in the heterocyclic ring through a C–N bond fission process.108

3.2.1. Catalysts: clays. 
The possibility of a prebiotic role of NH2CHO may be hypothesized based on thermal condensation analyses performed in the presence of clays, minerals known to have been largely diffused on the primitive Earth and present on other celestial bodies. It has long been proposed that clays were involved at different levels in prebiotic chemistry.109 Among clays, the minerals of the smectite family, such as montmorillonites and kaolinite, have a layered structure composed of silica tetrahedral sheets and alumina octahedral sheets in a ratio depending on the specific nature of the sample.110 Due to isomorphic substitutions, a charge deficiency results that is counterbalanced by the exchangeable metal ions (mainly Na+ and Ca+2 in extant clays) held between the layers. Hydration of these metal ions causes expansion of the layers and the intercalation of organic molecules with appropriate charge and dimension.111 On the basis of these properties, it was suggested that clays could have concentrated prebiotic chemical precursors from the surrounding environment influencing the synthesis of biomolecules, as well as have protected them against chemical and photochemical degradation.112
The formation of complexes between NH2CHO and clays is usually a rapid and quantitative process, irrespective of the elemental composition, morphology and crystallinity of the mineral.113 The guest NH2CHO is arranged in the interlayer space in an ordered supramolecular structure based on a hydrogen bond network between the oxygen and nitrogen atoms of the amide moiety and the adjacent silica and alumina sheets. For selected examples of interactions between clays and formamide see ref. 114 and 115.
The noncovalent interactions and the ordered layout of the guest molecules can activate condensation processes. Thus, when NH2CHO is heated in the presence of montmorillonites with different physical and chemical properties, a large panel of products, including purine, adenine, hypoxanthine, N9-formylpurine 6, AICA, 5-formamidoimidazole-4-carboxamide 7 (fAICA), cytosine and uracil, were isolated in varying amounts depending on the experimental conditions (Scheme 7).116
 Scheme 7 
Chemiomimesis. 
In accordance with what is known from HCN chemistry, the imidazoles AICA and fAICA 7 are expected to be intermediates for the synthesis of both adenine and hypoxanthine. AICA ribonucleotide-5′-monophosphate and fAICA ribonucleotide-5′-monophosphate are intermediates in the biosynthesis of inosine-5′-monophosphate (IMP), the main route to purine nucleotides in extant cells. The large similarity between the intermediates of this metabolic process and the products observed during the condensation of NH2CHO suggests the possibility of “chemiomimesis”, referring to defined biosynthetic pathways considered as chemiomimetic of prebiotic chemistry. For a definition of chemiomimesis see ref. 117.
Moving towards the evolution of molecular complexity, clays act as catalysts for the synthesis of the sugar moiety required in nucleoside derivatives. The aldol-like condensation of formaldehyde (the formose reaction) is the main reaction invoked for the prebiotic synthesis of sugars (for critical reviews see ref. 118 and 119). Noteworthily, the rate of the reaction is increased by the presence of montmorillonites under alkaline conditions,120,121 the sugars being mainly formed in the interlamellar region of the clay affording stable intercalates.122 Adenine, cytosine and various sugars and amino sugar derivatives 8–10 were synthesized from a mixture of formaldehyde and formamide in the presence of montmorillonite and dihydroxy acetone (DHA) (Scheme 8).123 In these reactions formamide provides the nitrogen atom of the amino sugars on which nucleic acid bases can be assembled in successive steps, while DHA acts as an electrophilic agent and an organocatalyst. For examples of conventional procedures for the preparation of sugars see ref. 124 and 125. Clays were also shown to be involved in the montmorillonite-catalyzed domino one-pot [3+1+2] π coupling reactions between unprotected hexoses, amidines and natural amino acids to yield pyrimidine nucleoside analogues.126
 Scheme 8 
Clays as protective and organizing agents. 
In addition to the reported catalytic properties, clays probably played a crucial role in other prebiotic processes relevant for the origin of life. These minerals might have provided, in the formation of biopolymers, a protective environment against degradation, allowing their persistence and the possibility to self-replicate and evolve. In this scenario, clays can perform as an aggregation nucleus to gather and organize key components of the primitive cell. Inorganic cations and pH modulate the adsorption/binding process of nucleotides and nucleic acids on clays by reducing the electrostatic repulsion between negatively charged phosphates and the surface of the mineral. For examples of the role of cations and pH in the interaction between nucleic acids and clays, see ref. 127–130.
Purines are adsorbed better than pyrimidines in the presence of cations,128,131,132 and oligonucleotides are adsorbed on the mineral surface with different selectivity depending on the nucleobase sequence and tertiary structure.133,134 Irrespective of the mechanism of interaction between clays and nucleic acids (for a mechanism based on hydrogen bonding see ref. 135, for coulombic attraction and van der Waals interactions see ref. 136), after the absorption nucleic acids were shown to retain their biological activity. Chromosomal DNA adsorbed on clay minerals could be amplified by Taq polymerase,137 and both chromosomal and plasmid DNAs were able to transform competent bacterial cells in the presence of montmorillonite and kaolinite.138 Clay–nucleic acid complexes enhance the stability of DNA and RNA towards agents of biological origin (DNases, RNases and aspecific nucleases activities) and physical and chemical degrading factors (high temperature, hydrolysis, UV and X-ray radiation).139,140
Clays also play a role in the supramolecular organization of a membrane-like boundary structure necessary for the onset of cellular life. For a comprehensive review on chemistry and physics of primitive membranes see ref. 141. In particular, the surface of montmorillonite may bring together and organize RNA molecules and fatty acids to afford complex systems that at the same time contain a catalytic site for prebiotic processes (e.g. the polymerization of activated nucleotides) and informational biopolymers within a membrane. In this process, the formation of vesicles occurs in the proximity of the surface, finely tuned by the surface area and by the radius of curvature of the particles.142 Since the adhesion interactions of growing oligonucleotides with the surface increase by increasing the value of their molecular weight, the presence of vesicles can promote the release of newly synthesized biopolymers in the space between the mineral and the surface, thus enhancing their biological activity.143 This self-assembled abiotic system may represent an amazing self-replicating cell-like entity.


3.2.2. Catalysts: metal oxides. 
Similarly to clays, simple metal oxides, such as silica (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3) and titanium dioxide (TiO2), are able to absorb biomolecules from aqueous solutions promoting their polymerization. In this process, the formation of hydrogen bond networks between absorbed monomers causes the condensation to proceed faster.144
As for nucleic acid bases, both SiO2 and Al2O3 catalyze the thermal condensation of NH2CHO to yield purine, adenine, cytosine and 4(3H)-pyrimidinone 11 (Scheme 10).145 Compound 11 (Scheme 9) was observed as a minor pyrimidine derivative in the Murchison meteorite.146 Adenine was isolated in high yield in syntheses in the presence of SiO2, while Al2O3 afforded mainly 11. The isomeric compound 2(1H)-pyrimidinone 12 was synthesized in high yield from NH2CHO in the presence of ZrO2 (Scheme 10).147 Compound 12 was used as starting material for the first successful instance of formation of the β-glycosidic bond between a pyrimidine derivative and a sugar under plausible prebiotic conditions.148
 Scheme 9 
 Scheme 10 
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) accounts for an appreciable part of Earth's crustal rocks and is largely present in the Universe. Examples of detection of TiO2 in terrestrial and extraterrestrial bodies are in ref. 149 and 150. NH2CHO treated at 160 °C in the presence of TiO2 (in anatase phase) yields purine, adenine, cytosine, thymine, 5-hydroxymethyl uracil (5-HMU), N9-formylpurine 6, N9,N6-diformyladenine 13, and purine acyclonucleosides 14–16 (Scheme 10).151 Compounds 14–16 have a sugar-like side chain bonded to the N(9)-atom in the purine scaffold, and are currently referred to by the term acyclonucleosides. Acyclonucleosides can in principle pair by Watson–Crick interactions similarly to natural derivatives, and are possible components of pre-RNA and pre-DNA molecules.152,153
Since formaldehyde (HCOH) can be generated in situ from NH2CHO and TiO2,154 it probably played a key role in the formation of 14–16. HCOH was shown to be able to add as a nucleophilic reagent on the formyl moiety of 6 and 13 in a formose-like condensation, growing the side chain through the subsequent addition of a carbon and oxygen atom unit.
These data are of particular prebiotic relevance because of the known difficulty of building the β-glycosidic bond between nucleic acid bases and sugars.155 The nucleophilic addition of HCOH to the reactive C(5)-position of uracil is also a key step for the previously unreported one-pot synthesis of thymine and 5-hydroxymethyl uracil.156
Photocatalysis. 
Rutile and anatase TiO2 are photocatalysts with a value of transition gap-bands energy of 3.0 and 3.2 eV, respectively. Once the energy of UV photons is adsorbed by the surface of the mineral, interfacial electron transfer is promoted between the excited semiconductor surface and adsorbed molecules. For a recent review see ref. 157. A possible photocatalytic role of TiO2 in the prebiotic synthesis of nucleic acid bases was supposed for the synthesis of hypoxanthine by UV irradiation of a mixture containing KCN, NH3 and H2O.158 Better results were obtained by UV irradiation of NH2CHO in the presence of a TiO2 (001) single crystal surface under high vacuum and dry conditions.159 Under these experimental conditions adenine, cytosine, uracil, thymine, guanine and HCN oligomers were obtained in very low yield (Scheme 11). Due to the complexity of the mixture recovered after thermal desorption of the sample during the analytical procedures, the unambiguous identification of the products was admittedly impossible.159
 Scheme 11 
More recently, similar results were obtained by UV irradiation of NH2CHO in the presence of mineral phosphates during heating. Relatively to the simple thermal condensation, a 15-fold increase of the yield of adenine was obtained by photons irradiation. The observation that purine nucleobases are formed in UV-irradiated/heated NH2CHO solutions in the absence of inorganic catalysts (i.e. with “100% less salt”) further relaxes the requirements for obtaining nucleic acid bases under prebiotic Earth conditions.160


3.2.3. Catalysts: silicates and phosphates. 
Silicates and phosphates also catalyze the synthesis of nucleic acid bases from NH2CHO. As an example, the thermal condensation of NH2CHO in the presence of silicates with different magnesium and iron content, such as fayalite (FeSiO4), olivine (MgFeSiO4) and forsterite (MgSiO4), afforded cytosine, uracil, 4(3H)-pyrimidinone 11 and 5,6-dihydrouracil 17, in addition to the simple purine and urea. The reaction showed the highest efficiency when performed in the presence of cosmic-dust analogues (CDAs) of olivines (Scheme 12).161 CDAs are “fluffy” grains of amorphous silicates with variable proportions of silicium and carbonaceous matrices, prepared by laser ablation techniques162 and reproducing the chemical composition and morphology of the silicate dusts present in large amounts in space environments.163
 Scheme 12 
As a general trend, the yield of nucleic acid bases increased by increasing the amount of iron in the elemental composition of the mineral in the following order of reactivity: fayalite > olivine > forsterite, suggesting the possibility of a redox step as a crucial process for the formation of the pyrimidine scaffold. These data show that CDAs are favorable microenvironments mainly for the synthesis of pyrimidine nucleic acid components, which are not easily obtained under terrestrial conditions.164,165
CDAs analogues of silicates are also efficient catalysts for the synthesis of simple organic compounds, such as hydrocarbons, amine and nitrile derivatives, through Fisher–Tropsch- and Haber–Bosch-like condensations at high temperature.166 In addition, silicates such as alkali feldspar [(Na, K)AlSi3O8] and clinopyroxene [(Ca, Mg, Fe)SiO3], present in rocks of the Earth's crust as well as on other planets of the Solar system, are characterized by chiral crystal surfaces.167
Such natural chiral environments may provide stereoselective functions and resolution of racemic mixtures in prebiotic processes. For a general recent review see ref. 168.
Mineral components of the Murchison meteorite were investigated in terms of potential catalytic effects on NH2CHO chemistry.169 Under thermal conditions the mineral surfaces catalyzed condensation reactions of NH2CHO to form nucleic acid bases in addition to carboxylic acids, amino acids and sugar precursors. These results suggest that NH2CHO condensation reactions in the parent bodies of carbonaceous meteorites could give rise to organic compounds engaged in both genetic and metabolic apparatuses, introducing on the scene two key components of primitive life. The meteorite minerals had little or no effect in promoting hydrolysis of RNA (see Section 8.2.1) at 80 °C over a pH range from 4.2 to 9.3, the highest stability being observed in the neutral pH range, with a half-life of 5 h.169
Minerals can in principle perform at the same time as catalysts and reactants. This is the case of mineral phosphates. Most of the phosphorus in the early Earth would have been in the form of insoluble minerals. On the other hand, chemical and physical conditions exist generating reactive phosphorus from these insoluble materials. As an example, lightning discharges in model prebiotic atmospheres reduce orthophosphates to reactive phosphites.170
Soluble inorganic phosphates171 and phosphonic acids172 were used for the phosphorylation of nucleosides in water to yield mixtures of nucleotide derivatives. The efficiency of this reaction increased in the presence of condensing agents containing activated multiple bonds (cyanamide and urea). A selection of relevant reference is in ref. 173. Further discussion on this topic is in Section 5. Reviews on phosphorylation, condensation or polymerization of biomolecules with (poly)phosphates potentially produced by volcanic activity have been reported.174–176 Simple inorganic phosphates (Na3PO4, Na4P2O7 and Na5P3O9) and mineral phosphates like hureaulite [Mn2+(PO3OH)2(PO4)2(H2O)4], libethenite [Cu2+2(PO4)(OH)], turquoise [Cu2+Al6(PO4)4(OH)8(H2O)4], childrenite [Mn2+(AlPO4(OH)2H2O], vivianite [Fe2+3(PO4)2(H2O)8] and vauxite [Fe2+Al2(PO4)2(OH)2(H2O)6] catalyze the thermal condensation of NH2CHO to yield a large panel of nucleic acid precursors, including purine, adenine, hypoxanthine, cytosine, uracil, 5,6-dihydrouracil 17, the amino acid derivative N-formyl glycine 18 and low molecular weight compounds such as urea, parabanic acid 19 and carbodiimide 20 (Scheme 13).177
 Scheme 13 
Condensing agents. 
Even though the glycine derivative 18 was previously synthesized from mixtures of ammonia, carbon dioxide and water by electric discharges,178 its formation from formamide was unprecedented. Carbodiimide 20 is one of the most powerful condensing agents in organic chemistry for the formation of amide or ester bonds.179 In the formation of peptide bonds this compound acts by initial addition of an amino acid on its carbon atom with high electrophile character. This process generates a good leaving group that can be eliminated as an urea molecule during the formation of the new bond between the two amino acid residues.180 Dehydration of urea yields back carbodiimide.181
The presence of both urea and carbodiimide among the products of condensation of formamide suggests the existence of a carbodiimide–urea organocatalytic cycle, explaining the presence of N-formylglycine 18 in the reaction mixture. In fact glycine, once formed in the presence of carbodiimide and of an excess of formamide, can be easily formylated by a reaction mimicking the formation of a dipeptide. In principle, the carbodiimide generated by degradation of formamide can catalyze the formation of both peptides and oligonucleotides, the mechanism of formation of the ester bond being similar to that of the amide bond. The possible role of the carbodiimide–urea cycle in the formation of N-formyl glycine is shown in the lower part of Scheme 13.
In conclusion, NH2COH affords all the nucleic bases present in extant nucleic acids. It does so in nonfastidious reactions consisting in heating in the presence of one of a large class of simple and abundant catalysts. The instances of catalysts as metal oxides, clays, silicates and phosphates have been here presented in some detail. Other catalysts (iron–sulfur minerals, borates, zirconium minerals and materials from Murchison meteorite) afford, in addition to nucleic acid bases, also carboxylic acids and will be discussed in Section 10.

4. Prebiotic synthesis of nucleosides
The formation of purine and pyrimidine nucleosides is one of the least understood aspects of the prebiotic chemistry of nucleic acids. The fundamental chemical step in this synthesis is the formation of the β-glycosidic bond, which in extant molecules allows the linkage between the nitrogen atom located on the nucleic acid bases and the anomeric carbon of the sugar, the ribose or the 2′-deoxyribose in RNA or DNA, respectively. In Nature, important limitations exist for the formation of this bond. As for regiochemistry, the purine heterocyclic bases may only use the nitrogen atom at the N(9)-position, while the pyrimidines only the nitrogen atom at the N(1)-position. As for stereochemistry, the glycosidic bond must be in the β-configuration, i.e. the nucleic acid base must be facing upwards relative to the molecular plane of the sugar. In principle, three possible routes can be followed for the synthesis of nucleosides that meet these requirements. Assuming the contemporaneous prebiotic synthesis of the two reagents, the nucleic acid base and the sugar, these molecules must directly react with each other via a reaction that may be substantially considered a dehydration process. Multisteps construction of the nucleic acid base on a sugar or the building of the sugar on a nucleic acid base is possible alternatives. Examples of these three possibilities are briefly described below.
4.1. Dehydration procedures
The easiest procedure to carry out a dehydration process consists in reacting the nucleic acid base and the sugar in anhydrous phase to favor the elimination of water during the reaction. However, this procedure does not allow for an adequate regioselectivity, since the exocyclic nitrogen atoms (primary amino groups in both purines and pyrimidines) are more reactive as nucleophiles than the endocyclic N(9)- or N(1)-atoms. As an example, when adenine and guanine were treated with D-ribose by heating in dry phase, 6-ribosylamino adenine 21 and 2-ribosylamino guanine 22 were obtained as the only recovered products. A slightly better regioselectivity was observed when performing the reaction in the presence of magnesium salts and inorganic phosphates, in which case the nucleosides riboadenosine and riboguanosine were detected in low yield (4% and 9%, respectively) as a mixture of α and β-isomers (Scheme 14, pathway A).182
 Scheme 14 
The increased regioselectivity of the reaction was probably due to the occurrence of coordination processes involving the nitrogen atoms of the nucleic acid bases. A detailed study on the stereoselectivity of the reaction was performed using hypoxanthine, a purine nucleic acid base free of exocyclic amino groups. The heating of hypoxanthine under solid-state conditions in the presence of apatite, CaHPO4, MnSO4, (NH4)2SO4 and of a mixture of salts with a composition similar to the inorganic residue obtained after sea water evaporation yielded 9-D-ribopyranosylhypoxanthine, α-inosine and β-inosine, the β-inosine being the main reaction product (Scheme 14, pathway B).
The maximum yield of β-inosine calculated on the basis of the initial amount of hypoxanthine was 20%. Similar results were obtained in the case of adenine, guanine and xanthine. Natural pyrimidines failed to produce the corresponding nucleosides under similar experimental conditions.183 Other prebiotic syntheses of purine nucleosides under drying conditions include the preparation of adenosine and deoxyadenosine from dry mixtures of adenine and sugars in the presence of feldspar, schist, TiO2, and ZnO,184 and the synthesis of deoxyadenosine in the presence of phosphates.185 More recently it was discovered that the drying and heating of 2-pyrimidinone 12 with ribose produces a β-furanosyl ribonucleoside (named zebularine) 23 approximately with a 12% yield, in addition to other chemical isomers (Scheme 15). This work is the first synthesis of a pyrimidine nucleoside derivative from a free base and a non-activated sugar under drying conditions. A comparison of 2-pyrimidinone with the purine bases that have also been shown to form nucleosides in plausible prebiotic reactions provides insights into which chemical features of the bases facilitate glycoside formation in drying–heating reactions.148
 Scheme 15 
Detailed computational studies on the formation of zebularine at the density functional theory (DFT) level were performed to explain the catalytic role of Mg2+ ions in the reaction mechanism. The data showed that Mg2+ ions act as a Lewis acid, affording the necessary stabilization at the pyrimidinone derivative and promoting the elimination of a water molecule during the glycoside bond formation. In addition, predictions concerning the formation of nucleosides from other pyrimidine bases were formulated, providing valuable insights into the chemical features that might facilitate glycoside formation in drying–heating reactions.186
Organic Brönsted acids,187 activated silyl reagents,188 the Vorbruggen glycosylation reaction and the silyl-Hilbert–Johnson reaction,189 glycosyl trifluoroacetimidates,190 Lewis acids in water191 have all been tested in the synthesis of nucleosides with varying degrees of efficiency. Their prebiotic valence has yet to be determined.
4.2. Multi-steps construction of the nucleic acid base on a sugar
An alternative route for the synthesis of nucleosides passes through the preparation of suitable heterocyclic sugar precursors with one or more activated positions able to act as starting material for the construction of the nucleic acid base. Among all the heterocyclic precursors studied, aminooxazoline derivatives have certainly led to the most interesting results in relation to prebiotic chemistry. For a general review on the topic see ref. 192 and 193. The carbamimidic moiety in the aminooxazoline ring supports various condensation processes with formation of pyrimidine nucleic bases.194 As an example, D-ribose 5-phosphate 24, D-ribose 25, and D-arabinose 26 react with cyanamide in aqueous solutions to yield the corresponding aminooxazolines 27–29, which further react with cyanoacetylene to yield α-cytidylic acid 30, α-cytidine 31, and β-arabinosylcytosine 32, respectively (Scheme 16). Anomerization and epimerization of these and of related nucleosides and nucleotides occurred upon irradiation in aqueous solutions (unfiltered 253 nm light source).195
 Scheme 16 
Similarly, pyrimidine nucleoside derivative analogues of natural products have been synthesized, as in the case of 6-methyluracil nucleoside 32 obtained by cyclocondensation between diketene and furanooxazoline 29 (Scheme 17).196
 Scheme 17 
A significant improvement in the use of aminooxazolines in prebiotic chemistry has recently been described for the synthesis of β-ribocytidine-2′,3′-cyclic phosphate. In this latter case, the furanooxazoline 29 was treated with cyanoacetylene to give the anhydroarabinonucleoside 33, which subsequently undergoes phosphorylation with rearrangement to afford β-ribocytidine-2′,3′-cyclic phosphate 34 (Scheme 18).197
 Scheme 18 
4.3. Multi-steps construction of the sugar on the nucleic acid base
Nucleoside derivatives can also be produced by the construction of the sugar on suitably modified nucleic acid bases. A simple example to illustrate this aspect is represented by formyl purine derivatives. Formyl purines are bioactive compounds,198 sometimes used as reactive intermediates for the synthesis of more complex nucleosides.199 These compounds may be of particular interest in prebiotic chemistry if involved in processes of synthesis of sugars via condensation reactions of the “formose” type. For recent examples of formose-like synthesis of sugars see ref. 200–203. Formyl purines are in fact characterized by the presence in their structure of a masked glycosidic bond corresponding to the electrophilic side-chain carbon atom. As mentioned above, during thermal condensation of NH2CHO in the presence of TiO2 some purine acyclonucleosides formed (compounds 14–16, see Scheme 10) in which ribose or deoxyribose is replaced by a non-cyclic chain. Acyclonucleosides are bioactive compounds able to pair with nucleic acid bases by Watson–Crick interactions.204,205 Their possible prebiotic role has been discussed from a theoretical point of view,206 and experimentally evaluated in the case of glycerol-derived acyclonucleosides able to polymerize after activation as phosphate derivatives.206 In the case of 14 and 16, the HCOH produced in situ by TiO2-catalyzed degradation of NH2CHO can add to the electrophile side-chain carbon atom, increasing step by step the complexity of the alicyclic sugar side-chain (Scheme 19). In principle, the side chain can grow up to 5 or 6 carbon atoms making intramolecular cyclization reactions possible.
 Scheme 19 
5. Nucleoside phosphorylation
The source of phosphate and the prebiotic routes for the transformation of nucleosides into nucleotides has been matter of early discoveries and debate,171,207–210 reviewed and formalized by Frank H. Westheimer.211 Additional discussion is by Yamagata et al.,174 highlighting both the problems and the possible solutions. The problems essentially derive from the scarce solubility of the majority of phosphorus-containing minerals (notably, of the most diffuse: hydroxylapatite). As possible solution, it was reported that volcanic activity produces water soluble phosphates through partial hydrolysis of P4O10. However, as pointed out,174 phosphates would precipitate to the sea bed as insoluble salts. The plausibility of polyphosphates or phosphate esters as a prebiotic reagent has been examined.175
In a series of ground-breaking studies appeared during a decade,212–215 from 1976 to 1988, Allen M. Schoffstall reported the phosphorylation of nucleosides in reactions occurring in water and in formamide, the source of phosphate being provided by inorganic phosphates. Formamide proved its worth in this reaction, and appreciable yields of nucleotides obtained in a simple, prebiotically plausible reaction were for the first time reported. As far as we know, these studies were not extended. Building on them, we tested a series of phosphate minerals, chosen as a representative of different classes, in a simple reaction consisting in the heat treatment (130 °C, 72 h) of each phosphate mineral in formamide, followed by the addition of a nucleoside, and reacted under various conditions at temperatures encompassed between 60 and 90 °C.216,217 Two noticeable results were obtained: (i) upon treatment with formamide, numerous phosphate minerals acted as phosphate donors and phosphorylated nucleosides with an efficiency comparable to that of the reference soluble KH2PO4. Phosphorylation occurred at any of the possible positions of the sugar moiety: 2′,3′,5′ and 2′,3′ or 3′,5′ cyclic. For differential reactivity of the various positions, see ref. 216 and 217.
Hydroxylapatite proved to be the most efficient phosphorylation source, followed by several copper-containing minerals, in the order: libethenite Cu2+2(PO4)(OH), cornetite (Cu2+3PO4(OH)3), ludjibaite (Cu2+5(PO4)2(OH)4), reichenbachite (Cu2+5(PO4)2(OH)4).
The role of copper in phosphorylation is not unprecedented. It was shown that copper ions can act as catalysts in phosphorylation reactions: the phosphorylation of a variety of sugars and of structurally related compounds is catalysed by copper salts,218 copper ions interacting with the phosphate moiety activating it towards nucleophilic additions.219 In addition, copper ions are involved in the nucleoside phosphorylation activity of enzymes such as purine nucleoside phosphorylase, a key enzyme in the purine-salvage pathway.220
Indications were obtained that on certain minerals the phosphorylation reaction occurred onto the mineral surface (prominently, in the case of libethenite and hydroxylapatite).216 Surface reaction studies were not extended. Nevertheless, the data reported allowed us to conclude that in these minerals surface interactions are a requirement of the reaction, as shown by the fact that phosphate solutes pre-released from the minerals and separated from them were essentially inert, and that the presence of the mineral was necessary for the phosphorylation process to occur at high rate. Given that the phosphate component of the mineral was transferred to the recipient nucleoside (adenosine), these minerals cannot be classified as catalysts. The catalyst function is exerted by formamide.
Under the reaction conditions analyzed, the life span of the phosphorylated forms lasted several hundred hours (i.e. t½ of AMP at 90 °C in water is 4.5 × 102 h).216,221 Under these conditions the cyclic forms proved to be more stable, thus becoming the predominantly remaining compounds and a potential source of abiotically activated nucleotides.
6. Polymerization
The origin of genetic materials is not known. None of the fundamental questions has been definitively answered. The origin of the usage of the extant 4 bases has been a matter of long standing interest. Did the earliest nucleic acid start only with purines, or only with a single purine–pyrimidine couple (possibly G:C),222 or with a variety of different purine–pyrimidine combinations derived from a complex pool that was progressively simplified? An access to the specific literature is in ref. 223–225.
Somewhat simplifying, and assuming that the genetic materials originated using the same purine and pyrimidine bases present in extant nucleic acids, the general questions pertain to three different topics: the structure of the polymeric chains, the abiotic mechanism leading to their formation, their relative stability properties.
6.1. Precursors
Was RNA preceded by other forms of polymeric organization of nucleic bases? Numerous nucleic bases-based polymers with totally different structures have been proposed, analyzed in detail and reviewed.226–234 The particularly interesting prebiotic properties of Peptide Nucleic Acid (PNA) have been reported.153,235–239 The properties and the advantages of the phosphodiester chain as-we-know-it have been established since long, and reviewed.211,230 The reason why natural DNA is based on 2′-deoxyribose with 3′–5′-phosphodiester links was determined240,241 through the synthesis and the analysis of the iso-DNA, based on 3-deoxyribose that makes 2′–5′ links instead of the normal 2-deoxyribose that makes 3′–5′ links. Iso-DNA makes a much weaker double helix with its conjugate or with the conjugate bases on normal DNA.
Did RNA polymerization in prebiotic scenarios become possible only after peptide-based (proto)enzymatic activities had reached sufficient complexity and diffuse availability? Or, in contrast, did RNA formation rely on the intrinsic chemical properties of its precursors, its subsequent evolution being made possible by its ribozymic242 abilities?
Applying Occamian logics one might reformulate the question: which were the RNA precursors that met the criteria: nonfastidious abiotic formation, moderate reactivity (sufficient to allow polymerization when the right conditions are met, but not too strong to prevent their accumulation because of instability). It did not escape the attention of pioneering attempts to abiotic polymerization that cyclic nucleotides were a promising possibility.
3′–5′-linked hexa-adenylic acid with a 2′,3′-cyclic phosphate terminus couples on a polyuridylic acid template in the presence of ethylene diamine to form the dodecamer and octadecamer.243 The bond produced was largely that of the 2′–5′ isomer, but about 5% of 3′–5′ bonds also formed. The same authors observed244 that upon annealing with a 3′–5′-linked complementary polyU strand the stability of the 2–5′ bond becomes about 900-fold lower than that of the 3–5′ bond. This helical conformation-induced selective instability rapidly led to a majority of the “natural” 3′–5′ phosphoester bonds. A theoretical model on the early chemical evolution of nucleic acids based on these findings was presented.244 These studies support the prebiotic relevance of the formation of 2′,3′-cyclic AMP driven by soluble phosphate donors in formamide,216 and of the orders-of-magnitude larger stability of this monophosphate.244
Michael S. Verlander et al.245 reported in 1973 the self-polymerization of 2′,3′-cyclic adenosine monophosphate. By evaporating cyclic 2′,3′-phosphate from solution in the presence of simple catalysts such as aliphatic diamines at alkaline pH, maintaining the dry state at moderate temperatures (25–85 °C), self-polymerization to give oligonucleotides of chain-lengths up to at least 6 nucleosides was observed. The products contained an excess of 3′–5′-linkages over 2′–5′-linkages. After the analysis of the high molecular weight material from the polymerization of 2′,3′-cyclic adenosine phosphate,245 the use of cyclic nucleotides as a source of naturally activated precursors was not further explored.
In the polymerization process of nucleic acids, organisms activate the monomers by converting them to phosphorylated derivatives and then utilize the free energy of phosphate hydrolysis to drive the reaction. Do extant polymerization processes mimic spontaneously occurring prebiotic reactions, thus representing a sort of biochemiomimesis117,246 descending from ancient pathways, or should it be considered a fully novel cellular invention?
The need for activated precursors depends on the fact that none of the key polymers (polysaccharides, peptides, and polynucleotides) may spontaneously form in an aqueous solution from their monomers because of the Gibbs free-energy change, as critically reviewed.247,248 Thermodynamic considerations impose that amino acid polymerization or the formation of phosphodiester or glycosidic linkages will be spontaneous only under highly dehydrating conditions. Thus, either (i) life did not arise in aqueous environments, or (ii) pre-genetic polymerizations required activated monomers. The observation that cyclic nucleotides may form from nucleosides and a phosphate source by heating in formamide216,217 indicates that the two alternatives mentioned above are not necessarily in contradiction: activated monomers can form under prebiotic conditions in a liquid, non-aqueous environment in the presence of phosphate minerals under conditions that are compatible (see Section 6.2) with the thermodynamics of polymerization.
A different approach to the activation of precursors for RNA self-polymerization has met large success and has proven invaluable for studies of numerous aspects of polymerization in different systems. The ground-breaking finding goes back to 1968, when Bernd J. Weimann et al.249 reported template-directed synthesis with adenosine-5′-phosphorimidazolides. This type of compounds is possibly difficult to reconcile with prebiotic scenarios because of the complexity of their preparation, decreasing the likelihood of their abundant presence in acellular environments. A critical evaluation of the requirements for a reaction to be considered as “prebiotic” was formulated by Lesley E. Orgel.250,251
Nevertheless, the possibility of prompt nonenzymatic polymerization of nucleic acids has largely benefited the field, from nonenzymatic template-directed synthesis of RNA copolymers,252 to the studies of the catalytic effects of minerals (notably clays10,253–257), to molecular evolution studies.258,259 An interesting alternative was presented by Kanaya and Yanagawa using cyanogen bromide for the template-directed polymerization of oligoadenylates on polyU.260
A detailed analysis of polymerization studies from highly activated precursors is not within the aims of the present review. Appropriate introduction to the related literature can be found in ref. 7, 143 and 261.
6.2. The (inefficient) polymerization of cyclic purine nucleotides in solution
The low efficiency of a polymerization reaction releasing water to occur in water caused by the Gibbs free-energy change was mentioned, and the biological solutions can be manifold. In addition to the production of biotically synthesized high-energy compounds (i.e. polyphosphorylated nucleotide derivatives) extant reactions usually take place in hydrophobic pockets inside enzymes, and concentration is programmed and often exploited as a regulatory mechanism.
The concentration of reactants for polymerization is a problem difficult to deal within prebiotic terms. Did reactions occur inside (potentially concentrating) vesicles,7,262,263 onto potentially concentrating mineral surfaces,253–257 in brines concentrating by dehydration,254,264 in lipid environments by hydrating–dehydrating cycles,265,266 or even free in solution? Each of these conditions entails an independent answer.
A recent set of experiments showed that concentration can be easily obtained in solution by thermophoresis (or Soret effect), a phenomenon consisting in the movement of molecules along a thermal gradient. If thermophoresis is perpendicular to the convection flow and inside a long chamber, accumulation becomes very efficient. Thermophoresis was exploited to obtain extreme accumulation of nucleotides in a simulated hydrothermal pore system,267 of DNA molecules, and to mimic an abiotic replication system.268 Even considering prebiotic environments different from hydrothermal pores, thermophoresis is a physical phenomenon that is general enough to be applied to other scenarios. It provides the proof-of-principle for the possibility to obtain elevated concentrations of reactants from dilute solutions in the absence of cellular structures.
Cyclic nucleotides provide an answer to the need for high-energy precursors. The free energy for phosphodiester bond formation was calculated to be −5.5 kcal mol−1.269 The enthalpy of hydrolysis of cyclic nucleotides was calculated to be encompassed between −7.7 and −14.1 kcal mol−1, depending on the type of bond (3′,5′ or 2′,5′) and the type of nucleoside.270 The reaction is a transesterification, does not involve hydrolysis and therefore is almost isoenergetic. This reaction requires no enzyme and relies on the possible correct positioning of the reacting species.
The solubilization of 3′,5′-cyclic GMP (3′,5′-cGMP) and of 3′,5′-cyclic AMP (3′,5′-cAMP) in water,271 in formamide or in N,N-dimethylformamide,272 followed by heating at moderate temperatures resulted in the formation of oligomers up to a length of 30 units for 3′,5′-cGMP and to shorter oligomers for 3′,5′-cAMP. Conditions for the polymerization of cyclic pyrimidines have not been found. The polymerization reaction is not efficient, and the highest yield obtained was 1.3% of the input monomer. This yield was obtained under the optimal conditions of time (1 h), temperature (80 °C), pH (9.0), presence of enhancers (like dimethylformamide or 1,8-diazabicycloundec-7-ene) of the base-dependent catalysis on which the reaction relies, concentration (6 mM). A model of this reaction is shown in Fig. 2; for detailed description of this click-like polymerization process, see ref. 272.
 Fig. 2  The mechanism of 3′,5′-cGMP polymerization generating RNA oligomers. For details see the text and ref. 272. 
In spite of the low efficiency of this reaction, the nonenzymatic polymerization of 3′,5′-cyclic purine nucleotides provides the proof-of-principle that RNA formation could have occurred in the absence of enzymes and of pre-existing templates.
Cyclic purine nucleotides undergo polymerization after pillaring by stacking. Stacking of nucleic bases and of their derived forms in solution is a well characterized phenomenon.273–280 In particular, the thermodynamic parameters for stacking of nucleic bases in aqueous solution were determined.274,278 The comparative analysis of the stacking free energy profiles for all 16 natural ribodinucleoside monophosphates in aqueous solution275,277 has established that the stacked states have a 2–6 kcal mol−1 lower free energy than the unstacked states for purine–purine dimers and that A–A and G–G have the most favourable stacking. Stacking of purines in the high dielectric aqueous solution is a very rapid phenomenon.
In summary, the observed polymerization of cyclic nucleotides245,271,272 relies on favourable thermodynamics, on well established interaction and structural phenomena, on environment-determined nonfastidious concentration possibilities. It has been so far limited to purines, possibly because of the lower stacking capacity of pyrimidines,275,276 for whom however no a priori reason exists precluding the possible identification of the appropriate physical–chemical conditions allowing nonenzymatic polymerization.
The interesting property of cyclic purines polymerization is that it occurs among monomers free-floating in solution, held together by stacking. Is this reaction extendable to templated systems? And: how do stacking-driven and templated polymerization compare?
7. Abiotic RNA chain growth
The oligomerization of 3′,5′-cGMP in solution shows that abiotic polymerization of abiotically plausible monomers may actually occur and that the size and the base composition of the products obtained are intrinsically limited. Thus, it also sets a limit: the formation of a population of molecules complex enough to kick-start a (pre)genetic system requires additional mechanisms to foster the formation of longer polymers. Two such mechanisms were identified: RNA-templated polymerization and ligation.
7.1. The templated polymerization of 3′,5′-cyclic guanosine
Exposure of preformed RNA oligonucleotides to 3′,5′-cyclic nucleotides resulted in the growth of RNA oligomers on the 3′-end of the oligonucleotides. The system analyzed consisted of oligoCs reacted with 3′,5′-cGMP, yielding molecules composed of the starting C-stretches on whose 3′-end sequence-complementary oligonucleotides of various lengths polymerized.271,281,282
More in detail, in the system analyzed (oligoC24 + 3′,5′-cGMP)271 the cyclic nucleotide actively reacted with the preformed oligonucleotide, affording longer fragments. In particular, a group of molecules with number average (Navg) 42 formed in the presence of 3′,5′-cGMP, which grew up to an observed length of >50 nucleotides in the presence of the highest concentrations of cyclic nucleotides tested.271
The observed 3′-tail polymerization of 3′,5′-cGMP on complementary polyC sequences is an efficient reaction271,281 and provides the proof-of-principle of the possibility for a prebiotic sequence complementarity-based replication system. The system allows for imprecise sequence matching, suggesting a mechanism for error-based sequence evolution.282
7.2. Ligation
Ligation of fragments of genetic materials in extant organisms, be it DNA or RNA, is a biologically exquisitely controlled process. Its analysis in biological systems is beyond the purport of this discussion. For an entry to the relevant literature the reader is referred to ref. 283.

7.2.1. Ligation of preactivated oligonucleotides. 
Nonenzymatic abiotic joining of oligoadenylates on a polyuridylic acid template was reported as early as 1976,243 ligation being performed via a 2′,3′-cyclic phosphate terminus. Imidazole-activated ligation reactions were reported,284,285 which were also template-directed and highly regioselective for the formation of 3′–5′-phosphodiester bonds. These two latter studies led to the conclusion that RNA may correctly self-assemble as an intrinsic consequence of its chemical structure, and that this ability need not to be imposed by an external catalyst. The synthesis of oligoadenylates from the 5′-phosphorimidazolide of 2′–5′-diadenylate was carried out on a template made of decauridylate containing exclusively a 2′–5′-phosphodiester bond.286 This synthesis was followed by joining of the products to yield long-chain oligoribonucleotides in a template-directed reaction.286 This approach was extended287 to nonenzymatic ligation of short-chained 2′–5′- or 3′–5′-linked oligoribonucleotides on complementary templates, showing that a homo-linkage system is preferable for the template-directed synthesis of RNA.
With a chemically different approach, it was shown that oligonucleotide 5′-polyphosphates are formed from oligonucleotide 5′-phosphates and sodium trimetaphosphate.288 The oligonucleotides activated as polyphosphates underwent template-directed ligation. The possibility that these reactions could have produced longer oligonucleotide products from shorter substrates under prebiotic conditions was pointed out.288


7.2.2. Ligation of nonpreactivated oligonucleotides. 
The fact that RNA ligation may occur by phosphoester transfer was shown.289 The reaction required no external energy source, the energy for ligation being provided by the cleavage of the phosphodiester bond of a coupled reaction. The correct structure of the reacting groups was shown to play a pivotal role.
These studies were extended in numerous directions. The field that largely profited from this approach is that of the nonenzymatic spontaneous290 and template directed291 recombination of RNAs, indicated as a possible mechanism for the formation of novel RNA sequences.292 The reactions were shown to be secondary structure-driven transesterifications.293
An additional simple approach to nonenzymatic ligation of RNA oligomers was more recently reported. Nontemplated nonenzymatic ligation of preformed oligomers was observed,281,294,295 which occurred according to two different mechanisms: (i) ligation among oligomers held together in the reactive-prone conformation by stacking, and (ii) sequence complementarity-based ligation.
Stacking-driven ligation. 
Homogeneous polyA oligomers were observed to undergo terminal ligation affording dimers, tetramers and more complex molecules.294 The reaction is driven by terminal transphosphorylation, similarly to what occurs in extant biological systems, with the difference that no enzymatic system or high-energy cyclic phosphate bonds are required. This type of terminal ligation is favoured by low pH to allow stacking among polyA oligomers. The net result is multimerization of pre-existing oligomers.281,294,295
The nonenzymatic ligation in water of polyA sequences294 is a time-, pH- and temperature-dependent reaction. Ligation efficiency depends on the oligonucleotide length and sequence, and is strongly enhanced by adenine-based nucleotide cofactors.
It was shown that the ligation is preceded by a first step of pH-dependent interaction of polyA oligonucleotides based on stacking, followed by transphosphorylation at one extremity. Analysis of the orientation of the resulting ligation products (which always formed as even-numbered multimers, dimers and tetramers) provided a coherent mechanism explaining the mechanics of the observed ligation, as described in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Nonenzymatic terminal ligation of polyA oligonucleotides held by stacking. Panel A: gel electrophoretic analysis of untreated 5′-32P-A24-3′ (lane 1) and of the reaction products of the 5′-32P-A24-3′ oligomer reacted in water for 18 h at 60 °C in the presence of 10 mM 3′,5′-cAMP (lane 2). The upper part of the panel is an overexposure (10×) of the upper section of the image containing the dimers (48 nt) and the tetramers (96 nt), as indicated. Oligomers are idealized as rods whose 5′ (red) and 3′ (black) extremities are indicated throughout by this colour-code. During the permanence in water, the oligomers undergo hydrolysis, producing the ladder of decreasing length fragments, as indicated on the left side of lane 2. The identification of the fragments is shown on the right. Panel B: a model explaining for the observed directionality of the ligation events of polyA in water. Arrow A, 5′ to 5′ ligation brings to the impossibility (×) of continuing the reaction to form the tetramer. Arrow B, 3′ to 3′ ligation, the same. Arrow C, the antiparallel interaction of two parallel polyA double helices brings the reactive 5′-phosphate and 3′-hydroxyl group in the correct positioning. Data and models from ref. 294, with modifications. 
The products of ligation reaction of a 24 nucleotide-long polyA RNA adsorbed on mica were also analyzed by atomic force microscopy.295 In that study the occurrence of oligonucleotides at different degrees of polymerization was quantitatively studied before and after the ligation reaction. The microscopy images at the nanoscale showed that nonenzymatic ligation of RNA monomers resulted in the formation of supramolecular aggregates, with large prevalence of dimers and tetramers. Analytical conditions were defined allowing the identification, the quantitative evaluation, and their distribution after ligation, also providing an estimate of the degree of hydration of the objects. Such investigation (Fig. 4) provides the simplest yet model system for direct investigation of RNA reactions by advanced microscopy, potentially extendable to mineral surface studies.
 Fig. 4  The products of nonenzymatic stacking-driven terminal ligation observed by AFM. Panel A: AFM image on mica of polyA24 reacted with 3′,5′-cAMP (18 h, 60 °C). The bar marked in the lower-left part of the image corresponds to 100 nm. RNA concentration: 1 ng mL−1 in a solution of 50% bidistilled water and 50% formamide. Height scale Δz = 1 nm. Panels B and C: linear profiles of differently sized RNA molecules, marked as 1, 2, and 3 in panel A. The objects 1, 2, and 3 correspond to a presumptive monomer, dimer, and tetramer, respectively. Panel D: 2D contour plots and 3D image renderings of the sample described in Panel A; three typical objects assigned to the monomer (1), dimer (2), and tetramer (3) class. Right: linear profiles along the main orthogonal axes of the objects shown on the left; width (red lines), length (black lines). Inset: model interpretation of the oligomers: red, 5′ extremity; black, 3′ extremity. Data and models from ref. 295 with modifications. 
Sequence complementarity-driven ligation. 
Analysis of a mechanistically similar terminal ligation reaction in sequence-complementary oligonucleotides confirmed the simplicity of ligation occurring by terminal transphosphorylation.281 The experimental system analyzed consisted in reacting oligoC with oligoG, one of the two reacting oligos bearing a phosphate group at 5′. The oligos ligated promptly, the relative position and orientation being determined by which of the two oligos bore the 5′-ligating phosphate.
Ligation of short RNA fragments could have liberated prebiotic polymerization systems from the thermodynamically demanding task of reaching a (pre)genetically meaningful size by stepwise additions of one precursor monomer at the time, and is a system fit for evolution.
The requirement for the transmission of genetic information is that the two strands replicate through a pairing mechanism. Strand pairing in extant biological systems is a sequence complementarity-based phenomenon. Nevertheless, strand matching by stacking can be obtained with a number of sequence combinations and allows for internal sequence defects. As long as the two reactive extremities are matched in the correct reacting position (be it by stacking or by complementarity) the strands have the possibility to evolve to higher complexity sequence combinations.

8. Stability
Once formed, polymers can evolve only if the physical–chemical conditions of their environment and their intrinsic chemical properties allow them to survive in polymeric form. It was reported that the weak point of RNA (its 3′-phosphoester bond) is more stable when embedded in a ribopolymer than when present in the monomer.221 This observation accounts on one hand for the otherwise not easily understandable subsistence of polymeric information in an abiotic environment, on the other provides the background for the identification of pro-life environments. The same analysis was performed in the DNA system, where the weak bond is the 5′-phosphoester.296 Given that the synthesis of nucleic bases, of acyclonucleosides and the phosphorylation of nucleosides by formamide require the presence of mineral catalysts, the effect of the same catalysts on the stability of RNA and DNA was determined.
8.1. Stability of RNA and DNA phosphoester bonds in monomers and in polymers under different physical–chemical conditions
The rapidity of the degradation of nucleic bases is well characterized86,98,99,297–299 and depolymerization studies of nucleic acids in H2O date back to early studies by Robert Shapiro and Erwin Chargaff,300 continued for decades.300–309
The rate of hydrolysis of ribonucleotides was determined as early as 1929.310 Direct comparison of the degradation rates of the various bonds when present in the nucleotides versus those present in the polymers was to our knowledge not reported, although from indirect comparison of the rate of cleavage of β-glycosidic bonds of free deoxynucleosides302,303 relative to that in single-stranded DNA304 one could infer the higher lability of the bond in the monomers. We have performed such comparative analysis for the deoxyribose296 and the ribose221 systems. The results revealed extensive differences depending on the molecular context and on the physical–chemical environment. For detailed information on these differences the reader is referred to ref. 221 and 296.
The general indication obtained is that phosphoester bonds in monomers are not necessarily more stable than in polymers. Comparative measurements revealed that well defined conditions exist in which the opposite is actually true.
Let us focus here on RNA, also taking into consideration parallel studies (when available) on DNA. The fact that DNA is probably not a prebiotic actor (presumably being a product of cellular processes) does not decrease the interest of mechanistic studies on the effects of physical–chemical conditions and of mineral interaction analyses on nucleic acids stability in general.
The stabilities of the bonds critical for the half-life of ribonucleotides (the β-glycosidic and the 3′- and 5′-phosphoester bonds) were measured under a wide range of H2O/NH2CHO ratios and temperatures.221 The stability of the 3′-phosphoester bond in RNA was also measured under the same conditions. The results obtained were coherent with previous reported mechanistic studies on the stability of RNA308 and with the kinetics of RNA degradation by specific base catalysis.309
The comparison revealed that the polymeric state of phosphorylated nucleosides is thermodynamically favoured over the monomeric one at high temperature both in pure water and in pure formamide and two defined thermodynamic niches (Fig. 5) inside which polymers are favoured were identified.
 Fig. 5  Differential stability of phosphoester bonds in a ribo-monomer (AMP) and in the polymer (RNA) in aqueous formamide solutions. Panel A: the differential stability of P bonds in RNA. The half-life of the 3′-phosphoester bond in RNA is compared with that of the same bond in 3′-AMP and with that of the 5′-phosphoester bond in 5′-AMP as a function of formamide concentration in water and temperature. Data are taken from ref. 221. Grey shades indicate the areas highlighting the conditions in which bond stability is higher in the polymer than in the monomer. Panel B: thermodynamic niches for RNA. Cartoon of the higher stability of the 3′ bond in the polymer, derived summarizing 42 measurements of differential t½ values (see Section 8.1. and ref. 221 and 296). The 5′ bond in the deoxy system is more stable in DNA than in the monomer only at the highest temperatures and formamide concentrations, as indicated (data from ref. 296). The background is made of scanning profiles of electrophoretic analyses of degradation of DNA oligonucleotides, observed at the indicated combination of temperature/formamide:water (%) (from ref. 296). 

Fig. 5 shows (panel A) the half-life of the indicated bonds in RNA and in monomers at three selected temperatures in solutions varying in their H2O/NH2CHO relative composition. The shaded areas indicate higher stability of the 3′-bond in the polymer (redrawn from ref. 14) . Panel B presents the two areas in the temperature (vertical) versus H2O/NH2CHO ratios (horizontal) plot in which such higher stability behaviour was observed. This plot summarizes a series of measurements consisting of the analysis of 42 temperatures vs. H2O/NH2CHO combinations (redrawn from Fig. 5 of ref. 296). Similar analyses were performed for DNA,296 keeping in mind its lower prebiotic relevance. The weakest bond in DNA is the 5′-phosphoester (see below). Comparative analyses showed that the DNA favourable thermodynamic niche, in the purport given above, is only present at low H2O/NH2CHO ratios and at high temperature.
The fact that these conditions exist and that they are well within plausible prebiotic scenarios (as for instance mild hydrothermal vents,267,311–313 or geothermal fields314) points to a possible mechanism leading to accumulation and survival of macromolecular information. The stability of RNA is highly reduced in the presence of divalent cations, e.g. Zn2+, Fe2+/3+, Mg2+, etc. This fact has to be taken into account when considering the plausibility of prebiotic scenarios, and is discussed in the paragraphs that follow. Given that the core Darwinian property of a polymer is to maintain and transmit its sequence information, these “relative stability” assays were extended to different RNA sequences. The results315 revealed that a narrow pH range exists in which complex sequences resist degradation markedly more than monotonous ones, thus potentially favoring the evolution of sequence-based genetic information.
The following section summarizes stability studies of DNA and RNA in the presence of the minerals that were analyzed for their synthetic ability in formamide/heat condensations.
8.2. Stability of RNA and DNA in the presence of minerals

8.2.1. RNA and minerals. 
The protection of RNA catalytic activity by clays (namely, montmorillonites) was analyzed in detail.129,130,133,140,316,317 The mechanistic aspects of RNA protection rely on the large body of analyses centered on RNA degradation mechanisms301–309 that established that RNA degradation follows the pathways summarized in Fig. 6, panel A. The cleavage of the phosphoester chain normally requires participation of the 2′-OH group as an internal nucleophile318 by two “nucleophilic cleavage” events: the transesterification and hydrolysis reactions. During transesterification (pathway a), the 2′-OH nucleophile attacks the tetrahedral phosphorus to afford a 2′,3′-cyclic monophosphate. This species is then hydrolyzed to a mixture of 3′- and 2′-phosphate monoesters (pathway b). Both steps are catalyzed by protons, hydroxide, nitrogen derivatives and metal ions.
 Fig. 6  RNA stability in the presence of minerals. Panel A: mechanism of RNA degradation. For a description, see Section 8.2. Panel B: RNA protection in water by ludwigite (Mg2Fe3+BO5), performed as described.322 Briefly, a 5′-32P-labelled polyA24 oligomer was treated for the period of time indicated on top of each lane (h = hours) in water at 80 °C and analyzed in 16% acrylamide gel electrophoresis. The decrease of autoradiographic signal is proportional to the first-hit kinetics degradation of the 5′-terminally labelled RNA molecules. For a detailed description of the method see Saladino et al.177 and Ciciriello et al.315 The % of the remaining full-length molecules in the presence (●) or in the absence (○) of ludwigite was determined and plotted. U = untreated. Panel C: soluble phosphates protect the phosphodiester bonds of RNA.177 Mixed sequence P1 RNA was treated at 90 °C in water for the time periods indicated on top, in the presence of 1.3 mM NaH2PO4, Na4P2O7, Na5P3O9 or in the absence of added salt, as indicated. The autoradiograms show the increasingly (top to bottom) protective effects exerted by the phosphate salts. Panel D: iron–sulfur minerals modify the degradative reaction of RNA in formamide. (top) Degradation profiles of the 5′-labeled 5′-AAAAAAAAAAAAAAU-3′ ribooligomer in the absence (leftmost panel) or in the presence of a mineral (as indicated above each profile). The reactions were performed as described in panel B and as detailed.320 The size of the resulting fragments is indicated (in nucleotides) to the right of the first profile. (bottom) Kinetics of degradation of the oligomer in the absence or presence of the indicated minerals, reported as the percentage of the full-sized molecules (ordinate) as a function of the reaction time (abscissa). 
Extending the studies that determined the protection by clays, the stability of RNA in the presence of minerals was analyzed in numerous mineral classes: borates,319 iron–sulfur–copper minerals,320 phosphates,177,321 zirconium minerals147 and Murchison meteorite components.169 As reasonably expected, the results largely varied and strictly depended on the type of mineral analyzed. No stringent unifying conclusion could be drawn and each class of minerals had its own behaviour. More so, within each class different minerals exerted opposite behaviour, so that the determination of the half-lives of RNA in the presence of the various minerals should be taken at its face value of preliminary rough-out screening to be used to orient mechanistically focused further studies. Nevertheless, some conclusions are worth mentioning.
Borates319,322. 
A typical assay is shown in Fig. 6, panel B. The assay consisted of the treatment of a 5′ terminally labelled RNA for the indicated time in water in the absence or in the presence of the borate mineral ludwigite (Mg2Fe3+BO5). The protective effect of the mineral towards hydrolytic degradation at longer times is evident.322 Interestingly, out of 20 different borates analyzed (representative of the most common classes of this type of minerals), only ludwigite, hambergite (Be2(BO3)OH) and jeremejevite (Al6B5O15F2.5(OH)0.5) had a protective effect, and only at low concentration.322 In water all the other borates had a marked degradative effect, which was somewhat unexpected due to the well established protection exerted by borates on ribose.200
Phosphates177,321. 
Phosphate minerals are, as a general trend, essentially inert relative to the RNA stability, both in water and in formamide. The representative phosphates tested: pyromorphite (Pb5(PO4)3Cl), wardite (NaAl3(OH)4(PO4)2(H2O)2), vivianite (Fe2+3(PO4)2(H2O)8), herderite (Ca[BePO4F]), turquoise (Cu2+Al6(PO4)4(OH)8(H2O)4) and hydroxylapatite Ca5(PO4)3OH exhibited no effect (data not published). The only protection observed versus the degradation in formamide was exerted by libethenite (Cu2+2(PO4)(OH)), cornetite (Cu2+3(PO4)(OH)3), and malachite (Cu2+5(PO4)2(OH)4) (all copper containing minerals) presumably because free phosphate is released into solution by these minerals by formamide.216 Coherently, soluble phosphates do protect RNA versus hydrolytic degradation.
We describe here as an example (Fig. 6, panel C) the effect of three forms of soluble phosphates (NaH2PO4, Na4P2O7 and Na5P3O9) on the stability of a 5′ labelled short RNA (RNA P1, containing in 21 nucleotides 14 of the 16 possible different base steps), as compared with the half-life of the same RNA in their absence. The protective effect exerted by di- and triphosphates is clear. The detailed quantitative analysis is in ref. 177 and 323.
This type of assays provides the basis for the analysis of the effect of the various minerals on the half-life of RNA and on which aspect of the degradative reaction is affected. RNA stability was analyzed in the presence of Fe–S–Cu minerals,320 of zirconium minerals147 and of minerals from the Murchison meteorite.169 All the tested Fe–S–Cu and zirconium minerals and, to lower extent, Murchison materials increased RNA degradation (as exemplified in Fig. 6, panel D, for Fe–S–Cu minerals).
One of the relevant aspects of these analyses in a prebiotic perspective relates to the fact that in order to avoid an otherwise futile cycle of polymerizations/depolymerizations, the survival of informational polymers required a thermodynamic set of conditions which could provide them with sufficient stability. These pro-polymer thermodynamic niches were identified, as described in the previous section. However, the role of minerals in the possible extension of these niches was not previously analyzed. In this perspective it is interesting that several among the minerals tested (i.e. borates, zirconium minerals and Murchison) do no protect RNA but favour its degradation, both in water and in formamide. Soluble di- and triphosphates177,323 and basalt320 are the only actively protective agents.
Phosphates act as catalysts for the synthesis of nucleic precursors (Section 3), as substrates for the phosphorylation of nucleosides (Section 5) and as stabilizing agents for the eventually formed polymers (this section). Thus, the formamide–phosphate system appears particularly worth considering in a prebiotic perspective.


8.2.2. DNA and minerals. 
Degradation of DNA oligonucleotides occurs through two different mechanisms in aqueous formamide solutions. The first mechanism – dubbed hydrolysis following nucleobases degradation (HND) – occurs more efficiently in the absence of water at temperatures of ∼100 °C or more. It is initiated by the nucleophilic addition of formamide at position C-8 of purines, and positions C-4 and C-6 of pyrimidines.324,325 This results in the elimination of both the 3′- and the 5′-phosphoester bonds followed by chain cleavage. The second mechanism – dubbed hydrolysis following nucleobase substitution (HNS) – involves the hydrolytic degradation of oligonucleotides in water, which occurs after the cleavage of the β-glycosidic bond. The two mechanisms296 have different reaction rates; HNS is faster than HND, both preferentially cleaving the 3′-phosphoester bond (Fig. 7, panel A).
 Fig. 7  DNA stability in the presence of minerals. Panel A: mechanisms of DNA degradation. Pathway A: hydrolysis by Nucleophilic Degradation (HND), consisting of formamide or hydroxyl nucleophilic addition at the C-8 position of a purine (adenine) ring followed by nucleobase degradation/elimination and two β-elimination reactions with C(3′)–O and C(5′)–O bond cleavages. Pathway B: hydrolysis by Nucleophilic Substitution (HNS) consisting of direct hydroxide nucleophilic substitution of adenine followed by two β-elimination reactions with C(3′)–O and C(5′)–O bond cleavages (modified from Saladino et al.296). See Section 8.2. Panel B: the effects of phosphate minerals on the instability of DNA molecules in water. General assay conditions as for RNA (Fig. 6). Reproduced from ref. 322 with modifications. Treatment in H2O in the absence or in the presence of the indicated amounts (mg mL−1) of the phosphate mineral indicated on top of each panel. Similar assays were performed with the other 22 minerals whose results are summarized in Fig. 8. 
The protection of DNA oligonucleotides was analyzed for metal oxides,145 cosmic dust analogues of olivines,161 montmorillonite clays, 116 TiO2151 and phosphates.177,321 The type of assay was similar to that for RNA and, as for RNA, different types of results were obtained with different minerals. For these, the reader is addressed to the specific articles indicated. As a general trend, the results obtained for DNA differ from those obtained for RNA, mostly because of a more diffuse protection for pyrimidines (i.e. in the TiO2151 and montmorillonite116 systems). In the olivine-like class of minerals,161 fayalite (Fe2SiO4) showed a particularly strong protective behaviour, while the oxides analyzed SiO, SiO2, FeO, Al2O3, CuO, CaO, MgO showed differing results, as detailed in ref. 145.
The behaviour of phosphate minerals is noteworthy. In contrast to what observed for RNA, numerous phosphates exerted protection. Fig. 7, panel B shows examples of
(i) no interference by the considered mineral in the half-life of an oligo DNA in water. The instance of laueite (Mn2+[Fe3+2(PO4)2(OH)2(H2O)2](H2O)4(H2O)2) is reported;
(ii) protection, the instance of lazulite (Mg[Al(PO4)(OH)]2) is reported;
(iii) enhanced degradation, as exemplified by variscite (Al(PO4)(H2O)2).
The effect of the whole set of 25 phosphate minerals analyzed, both in water and in formamide, is reported in Fig. 8. In addition, soluble phosphates exerted a strong protective effect against the DNA-cleavage reactions, and changed the 5′ versus 3′ cleavage specificities, as shown by the modification of the cleavage patterns.321 As observed for RNA, the active and variegate behaviour of phosphate minerals appears particularly interesting in a prebiotic perspective.
 Fig. 8  The effect of phosphate minerals on DNA in water and in formamide. 
In summary, different classes of minerals exert different actions on RNA and DNA stability, RNA degradation being in general enhanced by all the minerals tested except those releasing soluble phosphates. Discussion of chemical rationals and of more specific and mechanistic aspects of this topic is in the specific reference and in ref. 14 and 156.

9. Continuity
The data described allow us to hypothesize a continuous thread from formamide to complex (pre)genetic polymers. Fig. 9 presents this possibility. Formamide is derived from a pool of a few alternative simple reactions which may essentially be boiled down to the central H2O + HCN = H2NCHO. Formamide condenses into pools of more stable chemical structures, whose composition mostly depends on the catalyst present, the physical–chemical conditions essentially and ideally consisting of temperatures moderately higher than 100 °C, nothing else being required. In the case of temperatures <100 °C, the synthetic reactions allow the presence of water. The fact that purine is synthesized in the absence of catalysts (and that it is always present as a product, whatever catalyst is used) tells that formamide acts as a substrate and a catalyst at the same time, quite similarly to the role of formaldehyde in the autocatalytic process established for the formose reaction leading to sugars326 and to the role hypothesized for HCN by Albert Eschenmoser.327
 Fig. 9  The possible continuous line from universal elements to complex (pre)genetic chemical information. The prebiotic plausibility of each step is discussed in the text in the indicated sections. The difficulties presented by ribonucleosides are discussed in Section 4. Formamide chemistry is effective up to the RNA polymerization step included. 
We see formamide chemistry in its whole as an autocatalytic process that may be differently oriented and fine-tuned by specific additional catalysts. The relevant point in a biological perspective is the long way that the series of successive reactions may cover. The scheme in Fig. 9 summarizes the possible continuity from the simplest compounds to (pre)genetic polymers, referring to the specific sections in which the data were presented. The complexities and alternatives concerning the major gap, the synthesis of nucleosides, are described in Section 4.
The data gathered so far mostly refer to the nucleic acids domain, the search for other compounds, such as amino acids, sugars, amino sugars, components of condensation processes such as carbodiimide and urea, still being at its initial stage. Nevertheless, as described, instances of all these compounds have been encountered. Formamide chemistry is in force up to the RNA polymerization step. Polymerization of 3′,5′-cyclic purine nucleotides (3′,5′-cGMP271,272,281,282 and 3′,5′-cAMP)271 occurs in water,271,281,282 and both in formamide and in dimethylformamide.272 In dimethylformamide polymerization is actually more efficient than in water both in terms of yield and of polymer length, due to the base catalysis mechanism onto which it relies. The ligation reaction has not been tested in solvents different than water.
10. Synthesis of precursors of metabolic cycles
10.1. About primitive metabolisms
Cellular genetic apparatuses require for their functions the presence of externally provided molecules and the use of chemical energy made available by metabolism. The metabolic machinery is today a complex network of highly controlled chemical transformations whose specificity and selectivity depend on the catalytic activity of enzymes. Reasonably, the initial metabolic machineries were much simpler, and the network of proto-metabolic reactions was less orderly and selective than extant metabolisms. In these elementary systems the molecules that collectively were the best catalysts of the synthesis of their own constituents may have been selected with higher probability than less organized communities, the self-replication process becoming a property of the metabolic networks rather than a property of individual molecules.328
In the absence of enzymes, minerals might have been critical for the control of the selectivity and specificity of chemical transformations in otherwise very complex networks, as well as for accelerating the reaction rates. Possibly because of this initial and important function, metal clusters329 and cofactors330 are still ubiquitous in the majority of extant enzymes. Multimeric systems, in which primitive amino acids, nucleotides and cofactors were linked in random assemblages, may have also played an important role in the selection processes of key molecular pathways (for a discussion on multimeric systems see ref. 331).
Among all the chemical transformations characterizing extant metabolism, the transformations which are able to produce biomolecules from carbon dioxide (CO2) under reducing conditions appear to be the most consistent with the environmental conditions presumably existing on the primitive Earth.332 These transformations include autotrophic pathways333 such as the reductive pentose phosphate pathway,334 the reductive acetyl-CoA pathway,335 the 3-hydroxypropionate cycle,336 the 4-hydroxy butyrate cycle,337 and the reductive tricarboxylic acids (rTCA) cycle.338
10.2. The reductive tricarboxylic acids cycle
The rTCA pathway has recently received particular attention as a possible prebiotic “core of the core” of primitive pre-metabolism. This reductive cycle runs in the opposite direction relative to the Krebs cycle, the oxidative citric acid cycle,339 based on the intervention of 11 carboxylic acid derivatives which are transformed into each other through a series of hydrolysis/dehydration, oxidation/reduction, group transfer and isomerization reactions (Scheme 20).
 Scheme 20 
In modern photoautotrophs and oxidizing heterotrophs the sequence of reactions in the cycle runs oxidatively, while in several chemolithoautotrophs it runs reductively, appearing as a topological network of autocatalytic transformations and a platform for more advanced self-replicating biotic systems.340 Intermediates in the cycle are key starting compounds for the biosynthesis of amino acids, nucleic acid bases, sugars and lipids, suggesting the concept of the “universality in intermediary metabolism”.341
Citric acid, pyruvic acid, and other possible rTCA intermediates have been detected in carbonaceous meteorites.342

10.2.1. Syntheses of rTCA components. 
Several experiments have been performed to test the possibility of the synthesis of rTCA intermediates under plausible prebiotic conditions, analyzing predominantly photochemical and thermal reactions.
Photo- and radiation chemistry. 
Some redox steps of the cycle can be photochemically run starting from preformed acids in the presence of sphalerite ZnS particles, prepared by mixing ZnSO4 with Na2S.343 Under these experimental conditions, oxaloacetate was converted to malate and fumarate to succinate, while the transformation of ketoglutarate to oxalosuccinate occurred only in low yield, and that of succinate to ketoglutarate and oxalosuccinate to isocitrate did not occur at all (Scheme 21). As a class of compounds, α-ketocarboxylic acids have high free energies of formation, which disfavors their production under simple experimental conditions. On the other hand, in the ZnS photochemistry framework pyruvate is synthesized from lactate and ketoglutarate from pyruvate. In particular, pyruvate is produced in 70% yield and a quantum efficiency of 0.009 at 15 °C across the wavelength range of 200–400 nm. Pyruvate further proceeds by photooxidation to ketoglutarate with a 50% yield and a quantum efficiency of 0.0036. Noteworthily, isocitrate, glutarate, succinate, and acetate are also produced in low amounts as side-products (Scheme 21).344
 Scheme 21 
In addition, the reaction of glyoxylate with carbon dioxide to produce lactate is promoted when ZnS is irradiated by ultraviolet light.345 Furthermore, the enzyme-like reversible amination of ketoglutarate to glutamate, and of other three intermediates pertinent to rTCA, can be also performed by photoirradiation of NH3 on ZnS346 (Scheme 21).
Intermediates of the rTCA cycle are also produced by irradiation of an aqueous solution of acetic acid AcOH with γ-rays.347 The latter procedure was extended to test the effect of clays of the family of montmorillonites. The results showed a decrease in the yield of carboxylic acids due to the increase of degradative processes with predominant formation of CO2 and CH4.348 The X-rays irradiation of frozen and liquid HCN solutions at the dose range from 0 to 419 kGy produced carboxylic acids as well as some amino acids and urea. Organic compounds were synthesized even at low temperature and low radiation doses.349 Complex mixtures of carboxylic acids can be also formed from CH4 and H2O gaseous mixtures,350 and by arc-discharge experiments starting from elemental carbon351 or from HCN oligomers (tholins) in saline aqueous aerosols.352
Temperature. 
Other intermediates of the cycle can be synthesized in the presence of metal sulfides under thermal conditions. In the context of the “iron–sulfur-world theory”,353,354 thioacetic acid (an activated form of acetate and possible precursor of acetyl-CoA) was prepared from CH3SH and CO at 100 °C in the presence of (Fe,Ni)S, NiS, Ni(OH)2 and CoS,355 pyruvate was obtained by CO fixation at 2000 bar and 250 °C with the FeS–RSH system,356 and α-amino acids were synthesized from ketoacids through an amination/reduction procedure catalyzed by FeS and/or Fe(OH)2 at 100 °C357,358 (Scheme 22).
 Scheme 22 
CO is considered as a possible alternative to CO2 as a carbon source359 and is omnipresent in volcanic gases.360 Interestingly, thioacetic acid can act as an acylating agent for different amino acids under oxidative conditions catalyzing the formation of amide linkages.361 It has been proposed that hydrothermal systems may have provided an appropriate environment for the abiotic formation and accumulation of organic matter on the primitive Earth, thus supplying biomolecules necessary for the evolution of life.362–364 Theoretical calculations suggested that synthetic processes in hydrothermal vents are energetically possible in metastable equilibrium states in the presence of mineral clusters at relatively high temperatures. These computational studies point out that carboxylic acids may be the dominant organic compounds produced in these systems, in addition to lower concentrations of alcohols, aldehydes, and ketones.365–367
The abiotic formation of organic compounds under hydrothermal conditions proceeds by reduction/polymerization of the CO–CO2 system with H2 in the presence of H2O and mineral clusters as heterogeneous catalysts. Noteworthily, the organic compounds synthesized by thermocatalytic reactions are usually characterized by homologous series with no carbon number preferences.368,369
The conversion and synthesis of rTCA components is also operative under submarine hydrothermal vent conditions. When ketoglutarate, succinate and fumarate were treated in a flow-reactor system simulating the hydrothermal environment, malate was detected as a reaction product. Similarly, citrate was prepared from pyruvate and from all the other rTCA components. The synthesis of citrate decreased significantly in the absence of pyruvate in the initial reaction mixture (Scheme 23).370
 Scheme 23 
Under these experimental conditions the presence of metals can increase the efficiency and selectivity of the reactions. Thus, when a mixture of reagents known to be present in the vicinity of submarine hydrothermal vents (e.g. CO, H2S) was treated in the presence of NiS, carboxylic acids and related thioesters containing up to four carbon atoms were obtained, in addition to thiols and alkyl mono- and disulfides. In these reactions the Ni(0) species appear to be the key catalysts probably by hydroformylation-like processes. Since this process can lead to organic compounds of any chain length, such as n-alkanols, n-alkanoic acids, alkyl formates, n-alkanals, n-alkan-2-ones, n-alkanes, n-alkenes, methyl alkanoates, methylalkanes and phenylalkanes, it could have played a significant role in the prebiotic formation of lipidic amphiphilic derivatives, potential precursors of membrane constituents. The formation of these lipid constituents is inferred to proceed by insertion of a CO group at the terminal end of a carboxylic acid functionality to form α-oxoalkanoic acids, followed by reduction to n-alkanoic acids, to n-alkanals, then to n-alkanols.371,372
The synthesis of amino acids (Strecker-type) under hydrothermal conditions has been also reported for reactions performed in the presence of a nitrogen source to yield glycine, alanine, aspartic acid, serines, glutamic acid, sarcosine and 2-aminobutyric acid.373 The experiments performed in the presence of pyrite, pyrrhotite and magnetite in buffer pH yielded glycine, racemic alanine, aspartic acid and glutamic acid.374 Oligomerization of amino acids and nucleotide monomers was also reported under various hydrothermal constraints.375,376

10.3. Formamide and carboxylic acids
Numerous intermediates of the rTCA cycle can be prepared starting from NH2CHO in both thermal and photochemical processes.

The first evidence of the possibility of synthesizing carboxylic acids from NH2CHO was obtained in a study of its reactivity in the presence of different iron–sulfur minerals,320 previously suggested as key redox components for the energetics of the Wächtershäuser model. In particular, pyrite (FeS2) interacts efficiently with different organic species, including NH2CHO. The reactivity of the mineral surface during this process is tuned by the defect density value,377 the concentration of Fe+2 ions and the pH of the solution. In fact, an increase in the iron activity increases the abundance of iron groups on the surface providing more sites suitable for the interaction with negatively charged species that are thus activated for further transformations.378 Purine, adenosine, adenosine monophosphate and sugars interact with pyrite.379 Iron–sulfur minerals, such as FeS2 and pyrrothine [Fe(1 − x)S], and iron–sulfur–copper minerals chalcopyrite (FeCuS2), bornite (FeCu5S4), tetrahedrite [(Fe, Cu, Sb)S], and covellite (CuS) catalyze320 the thermal condensation of NH2CHO to yield purine, adenine, 2(1H)-pyrimidinone12, urea, carbodiimide 20, isocytosine 35 and oxalic acid 36 (Scheme 24). The condensation was operative also in mixed formamide–water solutions (up to 30 wt% water).
 Scheme 24 
Isocytosine [2-aminopyrimidin-4(3H)one] is a structural isomer of cytosine. Nucleoside derivatives of isocytosine are useful probes for the study of the formation of a DNA triplex380 and for mechanistic studies of RNA catalysis.381 In addition, isocytosine could perform as bioisostere of guanine in the hydrogen bonding interactions with natural nucleobases. Oxalic acid 36 has been detected in various organisms, including animals, plants and fungi, and its biosynthesis is mainly related to photosynthesis and carbohydrate metabolism.382


Better results, in relation to the synthesis of intermediates of the cycle rTCA, were obtained by thermal condensation of NH2CHO in the presence of mineral borates. Boric acid (H3BO3) and mineral borates such as ulexite, kernite and colemanite catalyze the formation and stabilization of ribose under formose-like conditions by formation of complexes with the vicinal 1,2-diol moiety in key intermediates.200,383,384
The chemical relationship between formamide and borate minerals is in the “water paradox” stating that polymerization of biomolecules requiring release of water is, in water, thermodynamically disfavoured. In fact, during the dry–wet cycles expected on the early Earth, two processes can occur: (i) the formation of borate evaporites, mineral deposits that emerge from evaporating water (as discussed in ref. 385), and (ii) the concentration of NH2CHO, which is characterized by a boiling point of 210 °C in the absence of eutectics with water.
The heating of NH2CHO at 160 °C in the presence of mineral borates (hydrates of borates containing hydroxyl or halogen moieties, anhydrous borates containing hydroxyl or halogen moieties, borosilicates, borocarbonates and multiple oxides) afforded319 purine, adenine, cytosine, isocytosine, uracil, 2(1H)-pyrimidinone 12 and carbodiimide 20, different carboxylic acids: oxalic acid 36, lactic acid, pyruvic acid, glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid, and two N-formylated amino acids, glycine and alanine. Pyruvate is directly involved in the rTCA cycle, while glyoxylate is involved in the glyoxylate cycle, a variation of the TCA cycle, an anabolic metabolic pathway occurring in plants, bacteria, protists, fungi and several microorganisms, such as E. coli and yeast (Scheme 25). In addition, glycolate is involved in the photosynthetic oxidation of glycolate to glyoxylate.386 Carboxylic acids can be produced through a common reaction pathway involving a reactive HCN-dimer and/or DAMN.327 The hydrolysis of the nitrile moiety in DAMN affords hydroxyoxaloacetic acid tautomers (2,3-dihydroxymaleic, 2,3-dihydroxyfumaric, and 2-hydroxyoxaloacetic acid, respectively) that are easily converted to oxaloacetic acid (not detected) and its decarboxylation product pyruvic acid via a stepwise addition of over two electrons and two protons.117,387 Further reduction of pyruvic acid yields lactic acid. Similarly, glyoxylic acid can be formed by hydrolysis of the HCN-dimer, and glycolic acid by a second two electron–two proton reductive step of the formyl moiety in glyoxylic acid.
 Scheme 25 
It is noteworthy that under these experimental conditions NH2CHO behaves as a chemical precursor for the contemporaneous synthesis of intermediates of the genetic apparatus and of metabolism. This property does not appear to be limited to the catalysis by mineral borates.


Similar results were obtained with minerals of zirconium. Zirconium compounds occur almost wherever ancient sediments are present.388 They rise through the crust in igneous rocks and are eroded into the stream system, washed out to sea, and laid down in the sediment beds where they become part of the next cycle of sandstone, remaining totally unaffected.389 Zirconium minerals that exceed 4 billion years in age have been found in a quartz conglomerate.390
Geological processes of the Earth's surface over billions of years have probably modified the properties of the minerals that catalyzed prebiotic syntheses of biomolecules. In this scenario, zirconium minerals can provide a mineral probe that simulates ancient Earth. The role of zirconium minerals in the synthesis of biomolecules as well as in the stability of RNA has been recently reported.147 Zircon (zirconium silicate, ZrSiO4), baddeleyite (zirconium dioxide, ZrO2) and different metal zirconates catalyzed the condensation of formamide to yield purine, adenine, isocytosine 35, 2(1H)-pyrimidinone 12, urea, carbodiimide 20, and carboxylic acid derivatives oxalic acid, succinic acid, fumaric acid and maleic acid (Scheme 26).
 Scheme 26 
Fumaric acid and succinic acid are intermediates of the rTCA cycle, while lactic acid is a precursor of pyruvic acid.


Also non-terrestrial minerals catalyze the synthesis of nucleic acid bases and carboxylic acids from NH2CHO, as observed in the case of material sampled from the Murchison meteorite.169
Murchison minerals are a complex mixture of microscopic silicate particles ranging from sub-micron single crystals to aggregates tens of microns in size. Very little metallic iron is present (0.03% by weight). The mineral components are primarily classified as pyroxene and olivine. Trace amounts of iron and nickel oxides and sulfides have been also detected.391
The heating of NH2CHO at 160 °C in the presence of dust from the Murchison meteorite afforded purine, uracil, isocytosine, 4(3H)-pyrimidinone 11, 3-hydroxypyrimidine 37, isocyanate 38, parabanic acid 19, dihydroxyacetone (DHA) 39, N-formylglycine and some carboxylic acid derivatives, including oxalic acid, oxaloacetic acid, malic acid and lactic acid. Again, oxaloacetic acid and malic acid are directly involved in the rTCA cycle (Scheme 27). DHA is a chemical precursor for sugar.
 Scheme 27 


10.3.5. TiO2. 
Finally, the UV irradiation of NH2CHO in the presence of TiO2 anatase with synchrotron light (3.2 eV; ca. 387.5 nm corresponding to the band gap energy of anatase) at 25 °C afforded392 6 of the 11 carboxylic acid intermediates of rTCA, including pyruvic acid, succinic acid, malic acid, oxaloacetic acid, α-ketoglutaric acid and fumaric acid (Scheme 28). Other carboxylic acid derivatives, glycolic acid, lactic acid, ethanimidic acid, propanoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxypropanoic acid, 2,4-dihydroxybutanoic acid, 3,4-dihydroxybutanoic acid, oxalic acid and malonic acid (not shown) were also detected in the reaction mixture. Under these experimental conditions, nucleic acid bases were not detected. The UV irradiation of neat formamide in the absence of TiO2 only afforded traces of oxalic acid diamide, triazine and urea, in accordance with data previously reported.393
 Scheme 28 
About the mechanism of formation of carboxylic acids, pyruvic acid and lactic acid may be formed with a process similar to that previously described for mineral borates by conversion of a DAMN intermediate. Succinic acid, malic acid and fumaric acid can be derived from oxaloacetic acid by a two electron–two proton reduction step (to yield malic acid) concomitant with, or followed by, a β-elimination of H2O (to yield fumaric acid), and reductive dehydroxylation step (to yield succinic acid), while α-ketoglutaric acid is a product of photochemical transformation of succinic acid in which TiO2 acts as a catalyst instead of zinc sulfide. Finally, long chain carboxylic acids can be obtained394 by successive addition of a one-carbon unit through a known process of induced carbon–carbon bond formation via TiO2 photocatalysis.

10.4. Towards a unified scheme for the origin of primitive metabolism
On the basis of the data described above, two main processes appear to be involved in the origin of primitive metabolism: the chemical reactions necessary for the synthesis of metabolism intermediates, and the chemical (or photochemical) transformations needed for the interconversion of the intermediates of the catalytic cycles.
Some reagents and minerals may contribute to both these processes, as observed in NH2CHO–minerals systems where the thermal pathway predominantly leans towards syntheses, while photochemistry favors interconversions.
In other systems, as observed for ZnS photochemically-based transformations, the interconversions pathway prevails. Reasonably, the primitive environment in which these transformations occurred was quite complex as for mineral composition, ensuring the contemporaneous presence of compounds able to catalyze syntheses and to provide the energy necessary to run the cycles. The formamide chemistry–mixed minerals systems look promising for an experimental approach to these hypotheses.
11. Concluding remarks
We have started from the consideration that formamide is the simplest possible amide and that it contains within its diverse chemistry the functional groups and chemical bonds of the central biomolecules. We have considered the sources of formamide (meteorites, comets, interstellar dusts) and we have discussed how formamide can be at the same time solvent and reactant. Having observed the products obtained simply by warming formamide in the presence of one out a large number of different catalysts, we adhere to the conclusion that formamide chemistry is quite versatile and nonfastidiously yields in rich and complex combinations nucleobases, carboxylic acids, amino acids, sugars, amino sugars and condensing agents. These reactions occur in the presence of necessary catalysts, as discussed in the specific sections. If the cradle of life contained formamide, the walls of the cradle were made of one out of many different possible minerals, presumably of combinations thereof. As noted, phosphate minerals were a likely ingredient.
We have considered the first steps towards (pre)genetic materials, from nucleosides to their phosphorylation to nucleotides, and have discussed the available evidence leading towards the formation of complex RNA molecules, passing through polymerization and ligation. Attention has been devoted to the problem of the stability of nucleic polymers. In the origin-of-life perspective, the system would be blocked if nucleic syntheses could not somehow couple with proto-metabolic processes. Far from suggesting any detailed solution, we note that precursors of genetics and metabolism form under the same conditions and with the same catalysts. If origin of life has been a matter of interacting systems, its key requisite is that the necessary components had to be present in the same place at the same time. Its origin is expected to have met conditions of contemporaneity and availability.
This natural consideration is often overlooked. Given for granted with respect to thermodynamics and the control of channelled energy flows, the kinetic optimization of all the reactions, and a programmed and orderly avoidance of clogging these reactions by accumulation of secondary or underused products, the basic need remains, in the origins, for an actual source of nucleic bases, amino acids, carboxylic acids.
In order to have a set of metabolic reactions in place and to evolve the specific molecules of inheritance, spatial compartmentalization was at some point needed. However, that was probably not before that “simple chemistry in diverse environments on the early Earth led to the emergence of ever more complex chemistry”.395
We have not been dealing here with the emergence of complex chemistry. Nevertheless, the non-fastidious single-chemistry scenario set by formamide points to the possibility that the diverse environments imagined for the various components did not need, all considered, to be that diverse. A simple and unitary chemistry might support the possibility that on this planet life might have emerged more than once396 and at different geological sites.397,398
11.1. The limits of the formamide scenario
The contribution that HCN/formamide chemistry provides to the general picture of the origins is limited to the proof-of-principle that a unifying chemistry is at least conceivable. The scenario is far from being fully and satisfactorily sketched. Riddles remain.
The first riddle is the concentration problem. We have mentioned in Section 2 that the steady state concentration of HCN in the primitive ocean was evaluated to be 4 × 10−12 M at 100 °C, that similar values were reported for NH2CHO and that even at lower temperatures concentrations were too low to foster biomolecular syntheses in solution. Concentration processes of formamide by eutectics, by absorption onto or into appropriate minerals such as clays, and by evaporation (the boiling point of NH2CHO being 204 °C), have been studied (see Sections 2 and 3.2.1). Noteworthily, the stability of NH2CHO towards hydrolysis increases proportionally to its concentration,399 and efficient prebiotic syntheses from NH2CHO are operative also in 30% water (v/v).320 Another possible concentration means as thermophoresis have not yet been sufficiently explored experimentally to indicate novel possible solutions. The fact that hydrolysis of HCN to formamide is optimal under alkaline conditions and that many of the reported reactions are favoured by alkaline conditions point to alkaline hydrothermal vents311,312,400–404 as a favourable setting. In vents, thermophoresis and mineral nanopore and/or chemical absorption would be the preferred concentrating means providing an interesting prebiotic scenario. This scenario needs to consider formamide stability.
Thus, the second riddle is the stability problem. The activation free energy value of 31.0 kcal mol−1 suggests that the neutral hydrolysis of formamide does not take place at all.405 The mechanism of the base-catalyzed hydrolysis of formamide has been extensively studied both experimentally and theoretically as a key model for peptides stability.406–409 The reaction is first order in hydroxide concentration, with a free energy of activation of 21.5 kcal mol−1 and rate constants of 3.2 s−1 (398 K) and 0.032 s−1 (329 K).399 These values are of the same order of magnitude as those measured for the corresponding amino acid derivatives, as in the case of glycine amide,410 confirming the similar stability of the amide bond in formamide and in peptides.
This identifies a third riddle. Which was the optimal temperature? The synthetic reactions affording the various combinations of biomolecules from NH2CHO + minerals were typically optimal at 140 °C, efficient syntheses occurring at temperature as low as 100 °C. The effect of UV irradiation160 as a source of energy may be a marginal observation in terrestrial scenarios and does not detract from the central fact that on planet Earth heat and one out of a large ensemble of common mineral catalysts are sufficient conditions.
The fourth riddle is systemic. The data gathered so far indicate that NH2CHO provides a single and fertile chemical frame only at the level of organic products. At systems level the kinetics and the conditions necessary for the optimization of a series of connected reactions have not been explored. The data gathered so far only provide the proof-of-principle that the reactions involved do actually occur starting from a single substrate and that nucleic bases and carboxylic acids may form together. The limit of this type of observations was lucidly defined by Lesley Orgel,411 stating the implausibility of metabolic cycles on the early Earth. The reasons indicated were the difficult optimization of the various catalyses, the clogging of the reactions by plethoras of secondary products, the difficulty in obtaining the right assembly of catalytic minerals, coherent chemical plausibilities and the right combination of efficiencies and specificities. The cycle allowing the conversion of formaldehyde into a mixture of monosaccharides by an aldol-like reaction412 remains a prebiotically interesting exception.
The same problems can be invoked in the formulation of a precise scenario envisaging the onset of metabolic cycles, their cooperation, their eventual interaction with (pre)biotic systems. The fact that NH2CHO yields rich panels of biomolecules in a large set of conditions and increases the likelihood of combinatory events shows the versatility and elasticity of its chemistry. In this respect we deem as particularly promising the concurrence of alkaline hydrothermal vent chemistry311,312,400–404 based on CO2, for whose production robust and abundant mechanisms have been identified.
Deep submarine hydrothermal vents (“black smokers”) of volcanic origin, characterized by high temperature (350 °C), low pH (1–2), and devoid of compartmentalization are not particularly suited for the prebiotic synthesis of biomolecules.413,414 On the other hand, the alkaline hydrothermal vents produced by serpentinisation (the hydroxylation of olivine to serpentine) show environmental conditions more compatible with synthetic processes, the vent being warm, alkaline and loaded with dissolved hydrogen.312 Under these experimental conditions, some organic compounds such as hydrocarbons, formic acid and acetate can be synthesized in appreciable yields,414,415 the process energy for these transformations being the reduction of CO2 by H2 catalyzed by minerals, able to produce primitive analogues of the “acetyl CoA pathway”400 and ATP.416 The reducing power of hydrothermal vents is sufficient to fix N2 as ammonia,417 a reagent useful for the synthesis of nitrogen containing biomolecules such as amino acids418 and formamide.419 In this environment formamide can be also directly produced from CO2 and H2 in the presence of a nitrogen source.419–422
The experimental exploration of formamide chemistry in the alkaline hydrothermal vents environment looks particularly promising.
We have mentioned in the Introduction that complex problems are best confronted by a Bayesian approach, by successive runs of experience-driven approximations, each time possibly selecting the simplest alternative following Occam's approach, best if in its updated Russel's version. It seems to us that formamide chemistry matches these criteria of simplicity and that in the quest for a common general frame it might meet successive runs of validation.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Silvia Lopizzo for helpful contributions.
References

          A. I. Oparin, in Vozniknovenie Zhisni na Zemle (The Origin of Life on Earth), Izdatelstvo Akademii Nauk SSSR, Moscow, 3rd edn,  1957, [Translated in English (New York Academic Press Inc), 1957] Search PubMed .
S. L. Miller, Science, 1953, 117, 528–529 CAS .
L. Delaye and A. Lazcano, Phys. Life Rev., 2005, 2, 47–64 CrossRef .
T. Rev. Bayes, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1736, 53, 370–418 Search PubMed .
G. P. Tocchini Valentini and M. A. Tocchini Valentini, FASEB J., 2012, 36, 5–8 CrossRef .

          B. Russel, in The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, ed. D. F. Pears, La Salle, Open Court edn.,  1918, pp. 35–155 Search PubMed .
S. S. Mansy, J. P. Schrum, M. Krishnamurthy, S. Tobé, D. A. Treco and J. W. Szostak, Nature, 2008, 454, 122–125 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vijayasarathy and H. J. Morowitz, Biol. Bull., 2009, 217, 222–232 Search PubMed .

          C. Darwin, The life and letters of Charles Darwin,  1888, vol. 3, p. 18, Letter to Joseph Hooker. John Murray, London Search PubMed .

          G. Wald, in Horizons in Biochemistry, (Life in the Second and Third Periods; or, Why Phosphorus and Sulfur for High-Energy Bonds?), ed. M. Kasha and B. Pullman, Marcel Academic Press, New York,  1962, pp. 127–142 Search PubMed .
T. Fink, H. Bruggesser and J. L. Reymond, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1504–1508 CrossRef CAS .

Cellular Origin and Life in Extreme Habitats and Astrobiology, (The HCN world: Establishing protein-nucleic acid life via hydrogen cyanide polymers), ed. C. N. Mattews, Origins, Genesis, Evoluation and Diversity of Life, vol. 6,  2004, pp. 121–135 Search PubMed .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, G. Costanzo and E. Di Mauro, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 259, 29–68 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo and E. Di Mauro, Chem. Biodiversity, 2007, 4, 694–720 CAS .
C. N. Matthews and R. D. Minard, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 133, 393–401 RSC .
A. Segura and N. G. R. Antigona, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2005, 32, L05203 CrossRef .
R. L. Hudson and M. H. Moore, Icarus, 2004, 172, 466–478 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, C. Yu, C. L. Carilli, P. M. Solomon and P. A. Vanden Bout, Astrophys. J., 2007, 660, L93–L96 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. M. Smith, D. Talbi and E. Herbst, Astron. Astrophys., 2001, 369, 611–615 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Gerakines, M. H. Moore and R. L. Hudson, Icarus, 2004, 170, 202–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Brucato, G. Baratta and G. Strazzulla, Astron. Astrophys., 2006, 455, 395–399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Raunier, T. Chiavassa, F. Duvernay, F. Borget, J. P. Aycard, E. Dartois and L. d’Hendecourt, Astron. Astrophys., 2004, 416, 165–169 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bockelee-Morvan, D. C. Lis, J. E. Wink, D. Despois, J. Crovisier, R. Bachiller, D. J. Benford, N. Biver, P. Colom and J. K. Davies, Astron. Astrophys., 2000, 353, 1101–1114 CAS .

          D. Despois, J. Crovisier, D. Bockelee-Morvan and N. Biver, Proceedings of the Second European Workshop on Exo-Astrobiology, ESA SP [Special Publication], SP-518,  2002, 123–127 Search PubMed .
D. C. Lis, D. M. Mehringer, D. Benford, M. Gardner, T. G. Phillips, D. Bockelee-Morvan, N. Biver, P. Colom, J. Crovisier and D. Despois, Earth, Moon, Planets, 1997, 78, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Solomon, Phys. Today, 1973, 26, 32–40 CAS .
W. A. Schutte, A. C. A. Boogert, A. G. G. M. Tielens, D. C. B. Whittet, P. A. Gerakines, J. E. Chiar, P. Ehrenfreund, J. M. Greenberg, E. F. van Dishoeck and Th. de Graauw, Astron. Weak Ice Absorbtion Features at 7.24 and 7.41 Microns in the Spectrum of the Obscured Young Stellar Object W33A Th, Astron. Astrophys., 1999, 343, 966–976 CAS .

          W. H. Flygare, R. C. Benson, H. L. Tigelaar, R. H. Rubin and G. W. Jr. Swenson, in Molecules in the Galactic Environment, Proceeding of a symposium at University of Virginia November 4–7, 1971, ed. M. A. Gordon and L. E. Snyder, Wiley and Sons, New York,  1973, pp. 173–179 Search PubMed .
C. A. Gottlieb, P. Palmer, L. J. Rickard, B. Zuckerman, C. A. Gottlieb, P. Palmer, L. J. Rickard and B. Zuckerman, Astrophys. J., 1973, 182, 699–710 CrossRef CAS .
M. Levy, S. L. Miller, K. Brinton and J. L. Bada, Icarus, 2000, 145, 609–613 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Borucki, B. Khare and D. P. Cruikshank, J. Geophys. Res., 2002, 107(E11), 24 CrossRef .
J. Parnell, M. Baron and P. Lindgren, J. Geochem. Explor., 2006, 89, 322–325 CrossRef CAS .
E. Herceg and M. Trenary, Ciencia, 2006, 14, 104–113 CAS .
R. Stribling and S. L. Miller, Icarus, 1987, 72, 48–52 CrossRef CAS .
M. H Moore, R. L. Hudson and R. F. Ferrante, NASA Conf. Publ., 2002, 208–212 Search PubMed .

          L. von Hippel, C. Bussek, J. Sauer, M. Sauer and D. Arntz, Dietrich, German Pat., DE, 19617040 C1 19971030,  1997 Search PubMed .
E. A. McKenna, A. Othoneos, N. Kiratzis and M. Stoukides, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1993, 32, 1904–1913 CrossRef CAS .
T. Koike, T. Kaneko, K. Kobayashi, S. Miyakawa and Y. Takano, Biol. Sci. Space, 2003, 17, 188–189 Search PubMed .
P. A. Gerakines, M. H. Moore and R. L. Hudson, Icarus, 2004, 170, 202–213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takano, T. Tsuboi, T. Kaneko, K. Kobayashi and K. Marumo, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 77, 779–783 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Bernstein, L. J. Allamandola and S. A. Sandford, Adv. Space Res., 1997, 19, 991–998 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Deschamps, Chim. Ind. (Paris),  1931, 589–597 Search PubMed .
S. Sato, K. Mori and A. Tanaka, Jpn. Kokai Tokkyo Koho, 1994 Search PubMed  , JP 06340601 A 19941213.
M. Lei, L. Ma and L. Hu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 4186–4188 CrossRef CAS .

          Kirk-Othmer, Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Wiley-Interscience, New York, NY, 3rd edn,  1978, vol. 11, pp. 259–264 Search PubMed .
S. Kodama, S. Nose, N. Tomihisa, A. Tochitani and T. Yamahara, Kogyo Kagaku Zasshi, 1955, 58, 157–158 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Kodama, S. Nose and N. Tomihisa, Synthesis of formamide from ammonia and carbon monoxide, JP, 31005519 B4 19560710,  1956 Search PubMed .
R. A. Sanchez, J. P. Ferris and L. E. Orgel, J. Mol. Biol., 1967, 30, 223–253 CAS .
S. Miyakawa, H. J. Cleaves and S. L. Miller, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 195–208 CrossRef CAS .

          R. E. Kirk and D. F. Othmer, Formic acid and derivatives, in ECT Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Wiley Interscience, vol. 11,  1980, pp. 251–262 Search PubMed .
T. T. Nugyen, Clays Clay Miner., 1986, 34, 521–528 Search PubMed .
P. M. Amarasinghe, S. K. Katti and R. Dinesh, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 337, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Churchman and B. K. G. Theng, Clays Clay Miner., 1984, 19, 161–175 CAS .
Y. Loidreau and T. Besson, Tetrahedron, 2011, 67, 4852–4857 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kakumoto, K. Saito and A. Imamura, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 2286–2291 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Boden and R. A. Back, Can. J. Chem., 1970, 48, 2965–2968 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Kostakis, A. Elomri, E. Seguin, M. Iannelli and T. Besson, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 6609–6613 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nouira, I. K. Kostakis, C. Dubouilh, E. Chosson, M. Iannelli and T. Besson, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 7033–7036 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Paul and S. D. Worley, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8956–8959 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Paul, S. D. Worley, N. W. Hoffman, D. H. Ash and J. Gautney, J. Catal., 1989, 120, 272–277 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cataldo, G. Patane and G. Compagnini, J. Macromol. Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 46, 1039–1048 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cataldo, E. Lilla, O. Urini and G. Angelini, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2010, 87, 34–44 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang and Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 12918–12927 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Gupta and S. Mittal, J. Ind. Chem. Soc., 2011, 88, 277–280 CAS .
A. Hill and L. E. Orgel, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 99–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oró and A. P. Kimball, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1961, 94, 217–227 CrossRef .
J. Oró and A. P. Kimball, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1962, 96, 293–313 CrossRef .
L. Matthew, S. L. Miller and J. Oró, J. Mol. Evol., 1999, 49, 165–168 CrossRef .
R. A. Sanchez, J. P. Ferris and L. E. Orgel, Science, 1966, 153, 72–73 CAS .
J. P. Ferris and L. E. Orgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1966, 88, 1074 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Oró, in Problems of evolutionary and industrial biochemistry, (Prebiological synthesis of nucleic acid constituents), ed. V. L. Kretovich and A. N. Bach, Institute of Biochemistry Academy of Sciences USSR, Moscow,  2000, pp. 63–69 Search PubMed .
J. Oró, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1960, 2, 407–412 CrossRef .
J. Oró, Nature, 1961, 191, 1193–1194 CrossRef .
J. P. Ferris and L. E. Orgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1966, 88, 3829–3831 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sanchez, J. P. Ferris and L. E. Orgel, J. Mol. Biol., 1968, 38, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Voet and A. W. Schwartz, Bioorg.
Chem., 1983, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .

          A. B. Voet and A. W. Schwartz, in Origin of Life, ed. Y. Wolman, Reidel, Dordrecht,  1981, pp. 217–223 Search PubMed .
A. Hill and L. Orgel, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 99–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Xiang, S. Drenkard, K. Baumann, D. Hickey and A. Eschenmoser, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1994, 77, 2209–2250 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Ehrenfreund, S. Charnley and D. Wooden, in COMETS II, (From ISM Material to Comet Particles and Molecules), ed. M. Festou, H. U. Keller and H. Weaver, University of Arizona Press, Tucson,  2004, p. 115 Search PubMed .
C. N. Matthews and R. D. Minard, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 133, 393–401 RSC .
E. Quirico, G. Montagnac, V. Lees, P. F. McMillan, C. Szopa, G. Cernogora, J.-N. Rouzaud, P. Simon, J.-M. Bernard, P. Coll, N. Fray, R. D. Minard, F. Raulin, B. Reynard and B. Schmitt, Icarus, 2008, 198, 218–231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruiz-Bermejo, C. Menor-Salvan, J. L. de la Fuente, E. Mateo-Marti, S. Osuna-Esteban, J. A. Martin-Gago and S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, Icarus, 2009, 204, 672–680 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruiz-Bermejo, C. Rogero, C. Menor-Salvan, S. Osuna-Esteban, J. A. Martin-Gago and S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, Chem. Biodiversity, 2009, 6, 1309–1322 CAS .
R. Navarro-Gonzalez, A. Negron-Mendoza, M. E. Aguirre-Calderon and C. Ponnamperuma, Adv. Space Res., 1989, 9, 57–61 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bada and and A. Lazcano, Science, 2002, 1982–1983 CrossRef .
R. Rivelino, P. Chaudhuri and S. Canuto, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 10593–10601 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Gupta, P. Tandon, P. Rawat, R. N. Singh and A. Singh, Astron. Astrophys., 2011, 528(Pt. 2), A129 CrossRef .
F. Cataldo, G. Patane and G. Compagnini, J. Macromol. Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 46, 1039–1048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Guan, N. Fray, P. Coll, F. Macari, D. Chaput, F. Raulin and H. Cottin, Planet. Space Sci., 2010, 58, 1327–1346 CrossRef CAS .
T. Völker, Angew. Chem., 1960, 72, 379–384 CrossRef .
C. N. Matthews and R. E. Moser, Nature, 1967, 215, 1230 CrossRef CAS .
K. Umemoto, M. Takahashi and K. Yokota, Origins Life, 1987, 17, 283–293 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mamajanov and J. Herzfeld, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 134504 CrossRef .
J. P. Ferris and W. J. Hagan Jr., Tetrahedron, 1984, 40, 1093–1120 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Budil, J. L. Roebber, S. A. Liebman and C. N. Matthews, Astrobiology, 2003, 3, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ferris, P. C. Joshi, E. H. Edelson and J. G. Lawless, J. Mol. Evol., 1978, 11, 293–311 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miyakawa, H. J. Cleaves and S. L. Miller, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 195–208 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miyakawa, H. J. Cleaves and S. L. Miller, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 209–218 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Bermejo, J. L. de la Fuente, C. Rogero, C. M. Salvana, S. O. Estebana and J. A. Martin-Gago, Chem. Biodiversity, 2012, 9, 25–40 Search PubMed .
G. D. McDonald, B. N. Khare, W. R. Thompson and C. Sagan, Icarus, 1991, 94, 354–367 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Robertson and S. L. Miller, Science, 1995, 268, 702–705 CAS .
R. Shapiro and R. S. Klein, Biochemistry, 1966, 5, 2358–2361 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sanchez, J. P. Ferris and L. E. Orgel, Science, 1966, 154, 784–785 CAS .
M. P. Robertson and S. L. Miller, Nature, 1995, 375, 772–774 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ferris, O. S. Zamek, A. M. Altbuch and H. J. Freiman, J. Mol. Evol., 1974, 3, 301 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamada, M. Hirobe, K. Higashiyama, H. Takahashi and K. T. Suzuki, Tetrahedron Lett., 1978, 42, 4039–4042 CrossRef .
H. Yamada, M. Hirobe, K. Higashiyama, H. Takahashi and H. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4617–4618 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Schwartz, Chem. Biol., 1996, 3, 515–518 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Pinnavaia, Science, 1983, 220, 365–371 CAS .

          W. I. Mitchell, Pillared Layered Structures, Elsevier, London,  1990 Search PubMed .
W. A. Bonner, H. Hall and Y. Liang, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1984, 15, 103–114 CrossRef .
A. Michalkova, D. Tunega and L. T. Nagy, THEOCHEM, 2002, 581, 37–49 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie and S. Hayashi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 5956–5962 CrossRef CAS .
E. Joussein, S. Petit and B. Delvaux, Appl. Clay Sci., 2007, 35, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, U. Ciambecchini, F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo and E. Di Mauro, ChemBioChem, 2004, 5, 1558–1566 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eschenmoser and E. Loewenthal, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1992, 21, 1–16 RSC .
R. Shapiro, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1988, 18, 71–85 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Schwartz and R. M. de Graaf, J. Mol. Evol., 1993, 36, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Gabel and C. Ponnamperuma, Nature, 1967, 216, 453–455 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zubay, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1998, 28, 13–26 CrossRef CAS .
N. Evole Martil and F. Aragon de la Cruz, An. Quim., Ser. B, 1985, 81, 22–25 CAS .
R. Saladino, V. Neri and C. Crestini, Phys. Mag., 2010, 90, 2329–2337 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bobek and J. Farkas, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 1969, 34, 1684–1689 CAS .
M. W. Winkley, Carbohydr. Res., 1973, 31, 245–254 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. S. Yadav and R. Ankta, Synthesis, 2009, 2802–2808 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. G. Theng, Clays Clay Miner., 1982, 30, 1–10 CAS .
J. P. Ferris, G. Ertem and V. K. Agarwal, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1989, 19, 153–164 CrossRef CAS .
C. El Amri, M. H. Baron and M. C. Maurel, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2003, 59, 2645–2654 CrossRef .
M. Franchi, J. P. Ferris and E. Gallori, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2003, 33, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
D. Winter and G. Zubay, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1995, 25, 61–81 CrossRef CAS .
L. Perezgasga, A. Serrato-Diaz, A. Negron-Mendoza, L. Galan de Pablo and F. G. Mosqueira, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2005, 35, 91–110 CrossRef CAS .
M. Franchi, E. Bramanti, L. Morassi Bonzi, P. L. Orioli, C. Vettori and E. Gallori, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1999, 29, 297–303 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pietramellara, M. Franchi, E. Gallori and P. Nannipieri, Biol. Fertil. Soils, 2001, 33, 402–409 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, L. N. Daniel, N. Whittaker and U. Saffiotti, Environ. Health Perspect., 1994, 102, 165–171 CAS .

          M. B. MacBride, in Minerals in soil environment, ed. J. B. Dixon and S. B. Weed, Soil Science Society of America, Madison SSSA, Book series, 2nd edn, No. 1,  1989, pp. 35–87 Search PubMed .
C. Vettori, D. Paffetti, G. Pietramellara, G. Stotzky and E. Gallori, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 1996, 20, 251–260 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gallori, E. Biondi and S. Branciamore, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2006, 36, 493–499 Search PubMed .
F. Scappini, F. Casadei, R. Zamboni, M. Franchi, E. Gallori and S. Monti, Int. J. Astrobiol., 2004, 3, 17–19 CrossRef CAS .
M. Franchi and E. Gallori, Gene, 2005, 346, 205–314 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Deamer and J. P. Dworkin, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 259, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hanczyc, S. S. Mansy and J. W. Szostak, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2007, 37, 67–82 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hanczyc, S. M. Fujikawa and J. W. Szostak, Science, 2003, 302, 618–622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Meng, L. Stievano and J. F. Lambert, Cuihua Xuebao, 2005, 26, 393–398 CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, G. Costanzo, R. Negri and E. Di Mauro, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2001, 9, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Folsome, J. G. Lawless, M. Romiez and C. Ponnamperuma, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1973, 37, 455–465 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, V. Neri, C. Crestini, G. Costanzo, M. Graciotti and E. Di Mauro, J. Mol. Evol., 2010, 71, 100–110 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Bean, Y. Sheng, J. P. Collins, F. A. L. Anet, J. Leszczynski and N. V. Hud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9556–9557 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Berezhnoy and A. B. Klumov, Icarus, 2008, 195, 511–522 CrossRef CAS .
G. Meinhold, Earth-Sci. Rev., 2010, 102, 1–28 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, U. Ciambecchini, C. Crestini, G. Costanzo, R. Negri and E. Di Mauro, ChemBioChem, 2003, 4, 514–521 CrossRef CAS .
G. Spach, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1984, 14, 433–437 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Nelson, M. Levy and S. L. Miller, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 3868–3871 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Friesen, J. V. Haedely and C. H. Langford, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 3193–3198 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Fuller, R. A. Sanchez and L. E. Orgel, J. Mol. Biol., 1972, 67, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
G. Costanzo, R. Saladino, C. Crestini, F. Ciciriello and E. Di Mauro, BMC Evol. Biol., 2007, 7, 1–18 CrossRef .
U. I. Gaya and A. H. Abdullah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. Onoe and T. Kawai, Chem. Commun., 1988, 681–683 RSC .
S. D. Senanayake and H. Idriss, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 1194–1198 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Barks, R. Buckley, G. A. Grieves, E. Di Mauro, N. V. Hud and T. M. Orlando, ChemBioChem, 2010, 11, 1153–1207 CrossRef .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, V. Neri, J. R. Brucato, L. Colangeli, F. Ciciriello, E. Di Mauro and G. Costanzo, ChemBioChem, 2005, 6, 1368–1374 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rotundi, J. R. Brucato, L. Colangeli, G. Ferrini, V. Mennella and E. Palomba, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2002, 37, 1623–1635 CrossRef CAS .
L. Colangeli, T. Henning, J. R. Brucato, D. Clèment, D. Fabian, O. Guillois, F. Huisken, C. Jäger, E. K. Jessberger, A. Jones, G. Ledoux, G. Manicò, V. Mennella, F. J. Molster, H. Mutschke, V. Pirronello, C. Reynaud, J. Roser, G. Vidali and L. B. F. M. Waters, Astron. Astrophys. Rev., 2003, 11, 97–152 CrossRef .
M. A. Septhon, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2002, 19, 292–311 RSC .
S. Pizzarello, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 231–237 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. M. Hill and J. A. Nuth, Astrobiology, 2003, 3, 291–304 CrossRef CAS .

          R. M. Hazen, Chiral crystal faces of common rock-forming minerals, in Progress in Biological Chirality, ed. G. Palyi, Elsevier, New York,  2004, pp. 137–151 Search PubMed .
R. M. Hazen and D. A. Sverjensky, Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol., 2010, 2, a002162 CrossRef .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, C. Cossetti, E. Di Mauro and D. Deamer, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2011, 41, 437–451 CrossRef CAS .
D. Glindemann, R. M. De Graaf and A. W. Schwartz, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1999, 29, 555–561 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beck, R. Lohrmann and L. E. Orgel, Science, 1967, 157, 952 CAS .
R. M. De Graaf, J. Visscher and A. W. Schwartz, J. Mol. Evol., 1997, 44, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .

          S. L. Miller and L. E. Orgel, The Origin of Life on the Earth, Prentice-Hall, New York, NY,  1974 Search PubMed .
Y. Yamagata, H. Watanabe, M. Saitoh and T. Namba, Nature, 1991, 352, 516–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Keefe and S. L. Miller, J. Mol. Evol., 1995, 41, 693–702 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schwartz, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1997, 27, 505–512 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, V. Neri, F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo and E. Di Mauro, ChemBioChem, 2006, 7, 1707–1714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamagata, Y. Kusano and K. Inomata, Origins Life, 1981, 11, 317–320 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hulshof and C. Ponnamperuma, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1976, 7, 197–224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takeishi, M. Tadano and S. Hayama, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1982, 3, 871–874 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Gagnoni, J. L. Boivin and J. H. Dickson, Can. J. Chem., 1959, 37, 520–524 CrossRef .
W. D. Fuller, R. A. Sanchez and L. E. Orgel, J. Mol. Biol., 1972, 67, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Fuller, R. A. Sanchez and L. E. Orgel, J. Mol. Evol., 1972, 1, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Nikolaeva and M. A. Khenokh, Zh. Evol. Biokhim. Fiziol., 1972, 8, 18–23 CAS .
E. A. Kuzicheva and N. V. Tsupkina, Zh. Evol. Biokhim. Fiziol., 1978, 1, 213–218 Search PubMed .
Y. Sheng, H. D. Bean, I. Mamajanov, N. V. Hud and J. Leszczynski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16088–16095 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sniady, M. W. Bedore and T. F. Jamison, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2155–2158 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Baddi, M. Smietana, S. Sebti, J. J. Vasseur and H. B. Lazrek, Lett. Org. Chem., 2010, 7, 196–199 CrossRef .

          H. Vorbrueggen and C. Ruh-Pohlenz, in Organic Reactions, Wiley and Sons, New York,  2000, vol. 55, pp. 1–630 Search PubMed .
J. Liao, J. Sun and B. Yu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 5036–5038 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zerrouki, L. Billard, R. Granet and P. Krausz, Nucleosides, Nucleotides Nucleic Acids, 2004, 23, 749–754 CAS .
E. I. Stankevich, I. Drizina, E. Liepins and D. N. Snikeris, Khimii Nukleozidov i Nukleotidov, 1978, 63–64 CAS .
M. Wojtowicz, Acta Pol. Pharm., 1994, 51, 81–87 CAS .
D. Cech, J. Koenig, H. Koeppel, S. Moeller and G. Herrmann, J. Prakt. Chem. (Leipzig), 1981, 323, 747–754 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sanchez and L. E. Orgel, J. Mol. Biol., 1970, 47, 531–543 CrossRef CAS .
I. Drizina, D. Snikeris, E. Liepins and E. I. Stankevich, Khim. Geterotsikl. Soedin., 1978, 8, 1115–1119 Search PubMed .
W. M. Powner, B. Gerland and J. D. Sutherland, Nature, 2009, 459, 239–242 CrossRef .
A. Giner-Sorolla, M. McCravey, J. Longley-Cook and J. H. Burchenal, J. Med. Chem., 1973, 16, 984–988 CrossRef CAS .
P. Silhar, R. Pohl, I. Votruba and M. Hocek, Synthesis, 2006, 1848–1852 CAS .
A. Ricardo, M. A. Carrigan, A. N. Olcott and S. N. Benner, Science, 2004, 303, 196 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Lambert, S. A. Gurusamy-Thangavelu and K. Ma, Science, 2010, 327, 984–986 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Weber, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2010, 40, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
G. Maheen, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, G. Tian and S. Feng, Heteroat. Chem., 2011, 22, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Merle, E. Bonneil, L. Merle, J. Sagi and A. Szemö, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1995, 17, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Rekoske and M. A. Barteau, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2061–2070 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Joyce, A. W. Schwartz, S. L. Miller and L. E. Orgel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1987, 84, 4398–4402 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lohrmann and L. Orgel, Science, 1968, 161, 64–66 CAS .
A. W. Schwartz, J. Chem. Soc. D, 1969, 23, 1393a RSC .
R. Lohrmann and L. Orgel, Science, 1971, 171, 490–494 CAS .
R. Osterberg and L. Orgel, J. Mol. Evol., 1972, 1, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Westheimer, Science, 1987, 235, 1173–1178 CAS .
A. M. Schoffstall, Origins Life, 1976, 7, 399–412 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Schoffstall, R. J. Barto and D. L. Ramos, Origins Life, 1982, 12, 143–151 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Schoffstall and E. M. Laing, Origins Life, 1985, 15, 141–150 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Schoffstall and S. M. Mahone, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1988, 18, 389–396 CrossRef CAS .
G. Costanzo, R. Saladino, C. Crestini, F. Ciciriello and E. Di Mauro, J. Biol. Chem., 2007, 282, 16729–16735 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, F. Ciciriello, S. Pino, G. Costanzo and E. Di Mauro, Res. Microbiol., 2009, 160, 441–448 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jones and J. R. Burt, Analyst, 1960, 85, 810–814 RSC .
V. Scheller-Krattiger and H. Sigel, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25, 2628–2634 CrossRef CAS .
R. Grenha, V. M. Levdikov, M. J. Fogg, E. V. Blagova, J. A. Brannigan, A. J. Wilkinson and K. S. Wilson, Acta Crystallogr., 2005, F61, 459–462 CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, F. Ciciriello, E. Di Mauro and G. Costanzo, J. Biol. Chem., 2006, 281, 5790–5796 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Trifonov, I. Gabdank, D. Barash and Y. Sobolevsky, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2006, 36, 559–565 CAS .
M. Di Giulio, BioSystems, 2005, 80, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
N. Trifonov, Res. Microbiol., 2009, 160, 481–486 CrossRef .

          E. Di Mauro, A. K. Dunker and E. N. Trifonov, Disorder to order, non-life to life. In the beginning there was …a mistake, in GENESIS - In The Beginning Precursors of Life, Chemical Models and Early Biological Evolution Series: Cellular Origin, Life in Extreme Habitats and Astrobiology (COLE), ed. J. Seckbach and R. Gordon, Springer,  2012, vol. 22, part 3, pp. 415–435 Search PubMed .
J. Pitha, P. M. Pitha and P. O. Ts'o, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1970, 204, 39–48 CAS .
A. Schwartz and L. Orgel, Science, 1985, 228, 585–587 CAS .
K. Scheneider and S. Brenner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 453–455 CrossRef .
D. Hutter, M. O. Blaettler and S. A. Benner, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2002, 85, 2777–2806 CrossRef CAS .
S. A Benner, E. A. Ricardo and M. A. Carrigan, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2004, 8, 672–689 CrossRef .
A. Eschenmoser, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2004, 34, 277–306 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Benner and A. M. Sismour, Nat. Rev. Genet., 2005, 6, 533–543 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Bean, F. A. Anet, I. R. Gould and N. V. Hud, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2006, 36, 39–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Renders, M. Abramov, M. Froeyen and P. Herdewijn, Chemistry, 2009, 15, 5463–5470 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Nielsen, M. Berg, R. H. Egholm and O. Buchardt, Science, 1991, 254, 1497–1500 CAS .
P. E. Nielsen, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2007, 37, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Nielsen, Chem. Biodiversity, 2007, 4, 1996–2002 CAS .
P. E. Nielsen, Sci. Am., 2008, 299, 64–71 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Nielsen, Chem. Biol., 2009, 16, 689–690 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Sheppard and R. C. Breslow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 9810–9811 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Breslow and T. L. Sheppard, Pure Appl. Chem., 1998, 68, 2037–2041 CrossRef .
T. R. Cech, Science, 1987, 236, 1532–1539 CAS .
D. A. Usher and A. H. McHale, Science, 1976, 192, 53–54 CAS .
D. A. Usher and A. H. McHale, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1976, 73, 1149–1153 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Verlander, R. Lohrmann and L. E. Orgel, J. Mol. Evol., 1973, 2, 303–316 CrossRef CAS .
R. Breslow, J. Biol. Chem., 2009, 284, 1337–1342 CrossRef CAS .

          K. van Holde, in The Origins of Life and Evolution, ed. H. O. Halvorson and K. E. van Holde, Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York,  1980, p. 31 Search PubMed .
C. Anastasi, F. F. Buchet, M. A. Crowe, A. L. Parkes, M. W. Powner, J. M. Smith and J. D. Sutherland, Chem. Biodiversity, 2007, 4, 721–739 CAS .
B. J. Weimann, R. Lohrmann, L. E. Orgel, H. Schneider-Bernloehr and J. E. Sulston, Science, 1968, 161, 387–388 CAS .
L. E. Orgel, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol., 2004, 39, 99–123 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Orgel, Trends Biochem. Sci., 1998, 23, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Joyce, Origins Life, 1984, 14, 613–620 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Prabahar, T. D. Cole and J. P. Ferris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 10914–10920 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ertem and J. P. Ferris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7197–7201 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ferris, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 311–332 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang and J. P. Ferris, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1458–1459 RSC .
W. Huang and J. P. Ferris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8914–8919 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Joyce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6420–6436 CrossRef CAS .
O. Taran, O. Thoennessen, K. Achilles and G. von Kiedrowski, J. Syst. Chem., 2010, 1, 9 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kanaya and H. Yanagawa, Biochemistry, 1986, 25, 7423–7430 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deck, M. Jauker and C. Richert, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 603–608 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Szostak, D. P. Bartel and P. L. Luisi, Nature, 2001, 409, 387–390 CrossRef CAS .
U. J. Meierhenrich, J. J. Filippi, C. Meinert, P. Vierling and J. P. Dworkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3738–3750 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reimann and G. Zubay, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1999, 29, 229–247 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rajamani, A. Vlassov, S. Benner, A. Coombs, F. Olasagasti and D. Deamer, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2008, 38, 57–74 CrossRef CAS .
F. Olasagasti, H. J. Kim, N. Pourmand and D. W. Deamer, Biochimie, 2011, 93, 556–561 CrossRef CAS .
P. Baaske, F. Weinert, S. Duhr, K. Lemke, M. J. Russell and D. Braun, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 9346–9351 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Mast and D. Braun, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 188102 CrossRef .
K. S. Dickson, C. M. Burns and J. P. Richardson, J. Biol. Chem., 2000, 275, 15828–15831 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Rudolph, E. M. Johnson and P. Greengard, J. Biol. Chem., 1971, 246, 1271–1273 CAS .
G. Costanzo, S. Pino, F. Ciciriello and E. Di Mauro, J. Biol. Chem., 2009, 284, 33206–33216 CrossRef CAS .
G. Costanzo, R. Saladino, G. Botta, A. Giorgi, A. Scipioni, S. Pino and E. Di Mauro, ChemBioChem, 2012, 13, 999–1008 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Vologodskii, B. R. Amirikyan, Y. L. Lyubchenko and M. D. Frank-Kamenetskii, J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 1984, 2, 131–148 CAS .
R. A. Friedman and B. Honig, Biophys. J., 1995, 69, 1528–1535 CrossRef CAS .
J. Norberg and L. Nilsson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10832–10840 CrossRef CAS .
J. Norberg and L. Nilsson, Biophys. J., 1995, 69, 2277–2285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Norberg and L. Nilsson, Biopolymers, 1996, 39, 765–768 CrossRef CAS .
J. Florián, J. Šponer and A. Warshe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 884–892 CrossRef .
R. Luo, H. S. Gilson, M. J. Potter and M. K. Gilson, Biophys. J., 2001, 80, 140–148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Šponer, K. E. Riley and P. Hobza, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 2595–2610 RSC .
S. Pino, G. Costanzo, A. Giorgi and E. Di Mauro, Biochemistry, 2011, 50, 2994–3003 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pino, E. Trifonov and E. Di Mauro, Genomics, Proteomics Bioinf., 2011, 9, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Joyce, Science, 2007, 315, 1507–1508 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rohatgi, D. P. Bartel and J. W. Szostak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 3332–3339 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rohatgi, D. P. Barthel and J. W. Szostak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 3340–3344 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sawai, S. Totsuka, K. Yamamoto and H. Ozaki, Nucleic Acids Res., 1998, 26, 2995–3000 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sawai, M. Wada, T. Kouda and A. N. Ozaki, ChemBioChem, 2006, 7, 605–611 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gao and L. E. Orgel, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2000, 30, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Zaug, P. J. Grabowski and T. R. Cech, Nature, 1983, 301, 578–583 CrossRef CAS .
H. V. Chetverina, A. A. Demidenko, V. I. Ugarov and A. B. Chetverin, FEBS Lett., 1999, 450, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Nechaev, A. V. Lutay, V. V. Vlassov and M. A. Zenkova, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2009, 10, 1788–1807 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Lutay, M. A. Zenkova and V. V. Vlassov, Chem. Biodiversity, 2007, 4, 762–767 CAS .
A. B. Chetverin, H. V. Chetverina, A. A. Demidenko and V. I. Ugarov, Cell, 1997, 88, 503–513 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pino, F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo and E. Di Mauro, J. Biol. Chem., 2008, 283, 36494–36503 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pino, M. Biasiucci, M. Scardamaglia, G. Gigli, M. G. Betti, C. Mariani and E. Di Mauro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 6296–6303 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, V. Busiello, F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo and E. Di Mauro, J. Biol. Chem., 2005, 280, 35658–35669 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Miller and A. Lazcano, J. Mol. Evol., 1995, 41, 689–692 CrossRef CAS .
M. Levy and S. C. Miller, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1998, 95, 7933–7938 CrossRef CAS .
M. Levy, S. L. Miller, K. Brinton and J. L. Bada, Icarus, 2000, 145, 609–613 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Shapiro and E. Chargaff, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1957, 26, 596–608 CrossRef CAS .
H. Venner and Hoppe-Seyler's, Z. Physiol. Chem., 1966, 344, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chargaff and H. S. Shapiro, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1968, 59, 161–163 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shapiro and S. Kang, Biochemistry, 1969, 8, 1806–1810 CrossRef CAS .

          N. K. Kochetkov, E. I. Budovskii, E. D. Sverdlov, N. A. Simukova, M. F. Turchinskii and V. N. Shibaev, in Organic chemistry of nucleic acids, ed. N. K. Kochetkov and E. I. Budovskii, Plenum Press, London and New York,  1972, Part B, ch. 8, p. 425, and ch. 10, p. 472 Search PubMed .
E. R. Garrett and P. J. Mehta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 8542–8547 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lindahl and O. Karlstrom, Biochemistry, 1973, 12, 5151–5154 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shapiro and M. Danzig, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1973, 319, 5–10 CAS .
G. A. Soukup and R. R. Breaker, RNA, 1999, 5, 1308–1325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and R. R. Breaker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 5364–5372 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Levene and E. Jorpes, J. Biol. Chem., 1929, 81, 575–580 CAS .
W. Martin, J. Baross, D. Kelley and M. J. Russell, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2008, 6, 806–814 Search PubMed .
N. Lane, J. F. Allen and W. Martin, Bioessays, 2010, 32, 271–280 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nitschke and M. J. Russell, J. Cosmol., 2010, 10, 3200–3216 Search PubMed .
A. Y. Mulkidjanian, A. Y. Bychkov, D. V. Dibrova, M. Y. Galperin and E. V. Koonin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, E821–E830 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo, S. Pino, C. Crestini, R. Saladino and E. Di Mauro, Biochemistry, 2008, 47, 2732–2742 CrossRef CAS .
E. Biondi, S. Branciamore, M. C. Maurel and E. Gallori, BMC Evol. Biol., 2007, 7(Suppl 2:), S2 CrossRef .
S. Branciamore, E. Gallori, E. Szathmàry and T. Czárán, J. Mol. Evol., 2009, 69, 458–469 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Morrow, K. Aures and D. Epstein, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 2431–2432 RSC .
R. Saladino, M. Barontini, C. Cossetti, E. Di Mauro and C. Crestini, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2011, 41, 317–330 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, V. Neri, C. Crestini, G. Costanzo, M. Graciotti and E. Di Mauro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15512–15518 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo, C. Crestini, R. Saladino and E. Di Mauro, Astrobiology, 2007, 7, 616–630 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cossetti, C. Crestini, R. Saladino and E. Di Mauro, Polymers, 2010, 2, 211–228 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Ciciriello, G. Costanzo, S. Pino and E. Di Mauro, in Evolutionary Biology, Concept, Modeling and Application, ed. P. Pontarotti, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2009, pp. 3–22 Search PubMed .
R. Saladino, E. Mincione, C. Crestini, R. Negri, E. Di Mauro and G. Costanzo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5615–5619 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saladino, C. Crestini, E. Mincione, G. Costanzo, E. Di Mauro and R. Negri, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 1997, 5, 2041–2048 CrossRef CAS .
R. Breslow, Tetrahedron Lett., 1959, 21, 22–26 CrossRef .
A. Eschenmoser, Chem. Biodiversity, 2007, 4, 554–573 CAS .
S. D. Copley, E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, Bioorg. Chem., 2007, 35, 430–433 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Rees, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2002, 71, 221–246 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. White, J. Mol. Evol., 1976, 7, 101–104 CrossRef CAS .

          C. De Duve, in Blueprint for a Cell, ed. N. Patterson, Burlington, NC,  1991 Search PubMed .
V. Srinivasan and H. J. Morowitz, Biol. Bull., 2009, 217, 222–232 CAS .
S. Nakagawa and K. Takai, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 2008, 65, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Calvin and J. A. Bassham, in The Photosynthesis of Carbon Compounds, ed. Benjamin, New York,  1962 Search PubMed .
L. G. Ljungdahl, Annu. Rev. Microbiol., 1986, 40, 415–450 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishii, S. Cuakrut, H. Arai and Y. Igarashi, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2004, 64, 605–610 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Berg, D. Kockelkorn, W. Buckel and G. Fuchs, Science, 2007, 318, 1782–1786 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Buchanan and D. Arnon, Photosynth. Res., 1990, 24, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .

          D. L. Nelson and M. M. Cox, in Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, Worth Publishers, New York, 3rd edn,  2000, ch. 16, pp. 567–597 Search PubMed .
L. E. Orgel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 12503–12507 CrossRef CAS .
E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 13168–13173 CrossRef CAS .
G. Coopera, C. Reeda, D. Nguyena, M. Cartera and Y. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 14015–14020 CrossRef .
X. V. Zhang and S. T. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16032–16033 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Guzman and S. T. Martin, Astrobiology, 2009, 9, 833–842 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Guzman and S. T. Martin, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2265–2267 RSC .
W. Wang, Q. Li, B. Yang, X. Liu, Y. Yang and W. Su, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2146–2148 RSC .
A. Negron-Mendoza and C. Ponnamperuma, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1976, 7, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Negron-Mendoza and C. Ponnamperuma, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1990, 20, 377–387 CrossRef CAS .
M. Colin-Garcia, A. Negron-Mendoza and S. Ramos-Bernal, Astrobiology, 2009, 9, 279–288 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Simionescu, I. Cristofor, B. C. Simionescu, M. Leanca, R. Mora and D. Mancas, C. R. Seances. Acad. Sci., 1979, 288, 453–455 CAS .
A. Shimoyama, H. Ikeda, S. Nomoto and K. Harada, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1994, 67, 257–259 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruiz-Bermejo, L. A. Rivas, A. Palacin, C. Menor-Salvan and S. Osuna-Esteban, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2011, 41, 331–345 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wächtershäuser, Syst. Appl. Microbiol., 1998, 21, 473–477 CrossRef .
G. Wächtershäuser, Science, 2000, 289, 1307–1308 CrossRef .
C. Huber and G. Wächtershäuser, Science, 1997, 276, 245–247 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Cody, N. Z. Boctor, T. R. Filley, R. M. Hazen, J. H. Scott, A. H. S. Sharma and H. S. Yoder, Science, 2000, 289, 1337–1340 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hafenbradl, M. Keller, G. Wächtershäuser and K. O. Stetter, Tetrahedron Lett., 1995, 36, 5179–5182 CAS .
C. Huber, W. Eienreich, S. Hecht and G. Wächtershäuser, Science, 2003, 301, 938–940 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rother and W. W. Metcalf, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 16929–16934 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wächtershäuser, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2006, 361, 1787–1808 CrossRef .
R. H. Liu and L. E. Orgel, Nature, 1997, 389, 52–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ferris, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1992, 22, 109–134 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Holm, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1992, 22, 5–14 CrossRef .
N. G. Holm, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1992, 22, 1–242 CrossRef .
E. L. Shock, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1990, 20, 331–367 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Shock, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1990, 54, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Shock, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1992, 22, 67–107 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. McCollom, G. Ritter and B. R. T. Simoneit, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1999, 29, 153–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Rushdi and B. R. T. Simoneit, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2001, 31, 103–118 CrossRef CAS .
N. Atsushi, I. Ryosuke, I. Ei-ichi, H. Hajime and M. Koichiro, Viva Origino, 2006, 34, 90–95 Search PubMed .
B. R. T. Simoneit, Adv. Space Res., 2004, 33, 88–94 CrossRef CAS .
B. Loison, S. Dubant, P. Adam and P. Albrecht, Astrobiology, 2010, 10, 973–988 CrossRef .
H. Yanagawa and K. Kobayashi, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1992, 22, 147–159 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hennet, N. G. Holm and M. H. Engel, Naturwissenschaften, 1992, 79, 361–365 CrossRef .
H. Ogasawara, A. Yoshida, E. I. Imai, H. Honda, K. Hatori and K. Matsuno, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2000, 30, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsukahara, E. I. Imai, H. Honda, K. Hatori and K. Matsuno, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Guevremont, D. R. Strongin and M. A. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral., 1998, 83, 1246–1255 CAS .
J. Bebiè and M. A. A. Schoonen, Geochem. Trans., 2000, 8, 635–641 Search PubMed .
J. Bebiè and M. A. A. Schoonen, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 1999, 171, 1–5 CrossRef .
A. Ono, P. O. P. Ts'O and L. Kan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 4032–4033 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Oyelere, J. R. Kardon and S. A. Strabel, Biochemistry, 2002, 41, 3667–3675 CrossRef CAS .
M. Caliskan, Turk. J. Zool., 2000, 24, 103–106 CAS .
B. F. Prieur, C. R. Acad. Sci. Chim./Chem., 2001, 4, 667–670 CAS .
R. Scorei and V. M. Cimpoiaşu, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2006, 36, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .

          L. M. Anovitz and E. S. Grew, in Boron mineralogy, petrology and geochemistry, Rev Mineral 33, 2nd printing., ed. E. S. Grew and L. M. Anovitz, Mineralogical Society of America, Washington,  2002, pp. 1–40 and 115–116 Search PubMed .
E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 13168–13171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koerber, P. Risch and R. Bruckner, Synlett, 2005, 2905–2910 CAS .

          H. Rauchfuss, Chemical Evolution and Origin of Life, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. A. Wilde, J. W. Valley, W. H. Peck and C. M. Graham, Nature, 2001, 409, 175–178 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Mojzsis, T. M. Harrison and R. T. Pidgeon, Nature, 2001, 409, 178–181 CrossRef CAS .

Mineralogy, mineral-chemistry, and composition of the Murchison (C2) meteorite, Smithsonian contributions to the earth sciences, ed. L. H. Fuchs, E. Olsen and K. J. Jensen, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,  1973, vol. 10, pp. 1–37 Search PubMed .
R. Saladino, J. R. Brucato, A. De Sio, G. Botta, E. Pace and L. Gambicorti, Astrobiology, 2011, 11, 815–824 CrossRef CAS .
G. Heinrich, Z. Naturforsch., 1965, 20b(3), 209–211 Search PubMed .
L. Cermenati, C. Richter and A. Albini, Chem. Commun., 1998, 805–806 RSC .
J. W. Szostak, J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 2012, 29, 599–620 CAS .
P. C. Davies and C. H. Lineweaver, Astrobiology, 2005, 5, 164–173 CrossRef .
B. L. Tang, J. Br. Interplanet. Soc., 2005, 58, 218–222 Search PubMed .
B. L. Tang, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2007, 17, 500–510 CrossRef CAS .
H. Slebocka-Tilk, F. Sauriol, M. Monette and R. S. Brown, Can. J. Chem., 2002, 80, 1343–1350 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Russell and A. J. Hall, J. Geol. Soc. (London, U. K.), 1997, 154, 377–402 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Russell and W. Martin, Trends Biochem. Sci., 2004, 29, 358–363 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lane and W. Martin, Nature, 2010, 467, 929–934 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lane, J. Cosmol., 2010, 8, 16 Search PubMed .
N. Lane, J. Cosmol., 2010, 10, 7 Search PubMed .
G. I. Almerindo and J. R. Pliego Jr., J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2007, 18, 696–702 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bakowies and P. A. Kollman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 5712–5726 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Brown, A. J. Bennet and H. Slebocka-Tilk, Acc. Chem. Res., 1992, 25, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cascella, S. Raugei and P. Carloni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 369–375 CrossRef CAS .
H. Slebocka-Tilk, A. J. Bennet, J. W. Keillor and R. S. Brown, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 8507–8514 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Basiuk and H. M. Montiel, Adv. Space Res., 2005, 36(2), 209–213 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Orgel, PLoS Biol., 2008, 6, 5–13 CrossRef CAS .
A. Butlerow, Ann. Phys., 1861, 120, 296 Search PubMed .
J. L. Bada, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2004, 226, 1–15 CAS .
G. Proskurowski, M. D. Lilley and J. S. Seewald, Science, 2008, 319, 604–607 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bradley, J. M. Hayes and R. E. Summons, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2009, 73, 102–118 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. de Zwart, S. J. Meade and A. J. Pratt, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68, 4093–4098 CrossRef CAS .
A. Smirnov, D. Hausner and R. Laffers, Geochem. Trans., 2008, 9, 5,  DOI:10.1186/1476-48669-5 .
C. Huber and G. Wacthtershauser, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 1695–1697 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Pazicky, T. Schaub, A. G. Altenhoff, D. M. Fries and R. Paciello, U.S. Pat. Appl.Publ., US, 20120071690 A1 20120322 2012 Search PubMed .
K. Kudo, H. Phala, N. Sugita and Y. Takezaki, Chem. Lett., 1977, 1495–1496 CrossRef CAS .
C. Federsel, A. Boddien, R. Jackstell, R. Jennerjahn, P. Dyson, J. R. Scopelliti, G. Laurenczy and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9777–9780 CrossRef CAS .

          P. G. Jessop, in Handbook of Homogeneous Hydrogenation, ed. A. De Vries, G. Johannes and J. Cornelis, Elsevier,  2007, vol. 1, pp. 489–511 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Part of the prebiotic chemistry themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Raffaele Saladino
	Raffaele Saladino was born in Rome in 1964. He obtained a Masters degree in Chemistry at University “Sapienza”, Rome, in 1989 and a PhD in Chemical Sciences at the same University in 1993. After post-doctoral training at the University of Montreal (Canada) and teaching and research positions at the University of Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy he is now an Associate Professor of Organic & Bioorganic Chemistry at the same University. He is involved in studies on prebiotic chemistry, green catalysis and oxidative transformations of natural substances mainly focused on bioactive compounds.

Giorgia Botta
	Giorgia Botta was born in Fredericton, Canada in 1979. She received a Masters degree in Medicinal Chemistry at the University of Siena (Italy) in 2005 and a PhD in Medicinal Chemistry from the same University in 2008. Since October 2010 she has been working as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Viterbo (Italy) in collaboration with Prof. Raffaele Saladino. Her research interests are in the field of Organic, Analytical and Medicinal Chemistry with particular interest in the Synthesis of novel Antiviral and Anticancer agents and in the field of Astrobiology with particular interest in the Origin of Life.

Samanta Pino
	Samanta Pino was born in Priverno, Italy in 1978. She studied Biology at the Roma Tre, University of Rome. She received her PhD in Pasteurian Sciences at the Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Rome “Sapienza” in 2009, working in the field of prebiotic chemistry. Her primary research interests are currently focused on the study of the molecular mechanisms and of the physical–chemical environment allowing the formation of the first informational polymers on prebiotic Earth.

Giovanna Costanzo
	Giovanna Maria Costanzo was born in Rome, Italy, in 1962. She obtained her Degree in Biological Sciences from “Sapienza” University of Rome, Italy, in 1987. In 1991 she joined the Dept. of Biochemistry and Cell Biology at the University of New York at Stony Brook (USA) as a postdoctoral fellow. Since 2001 she has worked as a researcher at CNR in Rome, Italy. In the past years her research interests were essentially on yeast transcription regulation and DNA chromatin structure. At present she is working on the origin of the life.

Ernesto Di Mauro
	Ernesto Di Mauro was born in Valmontone, Italy, in 1945. In 1967 he obtained his Degree in Biological Sciences from “Sapienza” University of Rome, Italy. In 1969 he joined the Department of Genetics (Seattle), as a postdoctoral fellow. Appointed in 1978 as an associate professor of Enzymology at the University of Rome, he has been a professor of Molecular Biology since 1987. His research interests were centered on gene regulation, DNA and chromatin structure and topology and, at present, on the various aspects of the origin of life.

 	Fig. 1  Syntheses from formamide.	 

 	Scheme 1	 

 	Scheme 2	 

 	Scheme 3	 

 	Scheme 4	 

 	Scheme 5	 

 	Scheme 6	 

 	Scheme 7	 

 	Scheme 8	 

 	Scheme 9	 

 	Scheme 10	 

 	Scheme 11	 

 	Scheme 12	 

 	Scheme 13	 

 	Scheme 14	 

 	Scheme 15	 

 	Scheme 16	 

 	Scheme 17	 

 	Scheme 18	 

 	Scheme 19	 

 	Fig. 2  The mechanism of 3′,5′-cGMP polymerization generating RNA oligomers. For details see the text and ref. 272.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nonenzymatic terminal ligation of polyA oligonucleotides held by stacking. Panel A: gel electrophoretic analysis of untreated 5′-32P-A24-3′ (lane 1) and of the reaction products of the 5′-32P-A24-3′ oligomer reacted in water for 18 h at 60 °C in the presence of 10 mM 3′,5′-cAMP (lane 2). The upper part of the panel is an overexposure (10×) of the upper section of the image containing the dimers (48 nt) and the tetramers (96 nt), as indicated. Oligomers are idealized as rods whose 5′ (red) and 3′ (black) extremities are indicated throughout by this colour-code. During the permanence in water, the oligomers undergo hydrolysis, producing the ladder of decreasing length fragments, as indicated on the left side of lane 2. The identification of the fragments is shown on the right. Panel B: a model explaining for the observed directionality of the ligation events of polyA in water. Arrow A, 5′ to 5′ ligation brings to the impossibility (×) of continuing the reaction to form the tetramer. Arrow B, 3′ to 3′ ligation, the same. Arrow C, the antiparallel interaction of two parallel polyA double helices brings the reactive 5′-phosphate and 3′-hydroxyl group in the correct positioning. Data and models from ref. 294, with modifications.	 

 	Fig. 4  The products of nonenzymatic stacking-driven terminal ligation observed by AFM. Panel A: AFM image on mica of polyA24 reacted with 3′,5′-cAMP (18 h, 60 °C). The bar marked in the lower-left part of the image corresponds to 100 nm. RNA concentration: 1 ng mL−1 in a solution of 50% bidistilled water and 50% formamide. Height scale Δz = 1 nm. Panels B and C: linear profiles of differently sized RNA molecules, marked as 1, 2, and 3 in panel A. The objects 1, 2, and 3 correspond to a presumptive monomer, dimer, and tetramer, respectively. Panel D: 2D contour plots and 3D image renderings of the sample described in Panel A; three typical objects assigned to the monomer (1), dimer (2), and tetramer (3) class. Right: linear profiles along the main orthogonal axes of the objects shown on the left; width (red lines), length (black lines). Inset: model interpretation of the oligomers: red, 5′ extremity; black, 3′ extremity. Data and models from ref. 295 with modifications.	 

 	Fig. 5  Differential stability of phosphoester bonds in a ribo-monomer (AMP) and in the polymer (RNA) in aqueous formamide solutions. Panel A: the differential stability of P bonds in RNA. The half-life of the 3′-phosphoester bond in RNA is compared with that of the same bond in 3′-AMP and with that of the 5′-phosphoester bond in 5′-AMP as a function of formamide concentration in water and temperature. Data are taken from ref. 221. Grey shades indicate the areas highlighting the conditions in which bond stability is higher in the polymer than in the monomer. Panel B: thermodynamic niches for RNA. Cartoon of the higher stability of the 3′ bond in the polymer, derived summarizing 42 measurements of differential t½ values (see Section 8.1. and ref. 221 and 296). The 5′ bond in the deoxy system is more stable in DNA than in the monomer only at the highest temperatures and formamide concentrations, as indicated (data from ref. 296). The background is made of scanning profiles of electrophoretic analyses of degradation of DNA oligonucleotides, observed at the indicated combination of temperature/formamide:water (%) (from ref. 296).	 

 	Fig. 6  RNA stability in the presence of minerals. Panel A: mechanism of RNA degradation. For a description, see Section 8.2. Panel B: RNA protection in water by ludwigite (Mg2Fe3+BO5), performed as described.322 Briefly, a 5′-32P-labelled polyA24 oligomer was treated for the period of time indicated on top of each lane (h = hours) in water at 80 °C and analyzed in 16% acrylamide gel electrophoresis. The decrease of autoradiographic signal is proportional to the first-hit kinetics degradation of the 5′-terminally labelled RNA molecules. For a detailed description of the method see Saladino et al.177 and Ciciriello et al.315 The % of the remaining full-length molecules in the presence (●) or in the absence (○) of ludwigite was determined and plotted. U = untreated. Panel C: soluble phosphates protect the phosphodiester bonds of RNA.177 Mixed sequence P1 RNA was treated at 90 °C in water for the time periods indicated on top, in the presence of 1.3 mM NaH2PO4, Na4P2O7, Na5P3O9 or in the absence of added salt, as indicated. The autoradiograms show the increasingly (top to bottom) protective effects exerted by the phosphate salts. Panel D: iron–sulfur minerals modify the degradative reaction of RNA in formamide. (top) Degradation profiles of the 5′-labeled 5′-AAAAAAAAAAAAAAU-3′ ribooligomer in the absence (leftmost panel) or in the presence of a mineral (as indicated above each profile). The reactions were performed as described in panel B and as detailed.320 The size of the resulting fragments is indicated (in nucleotides) to the right of the first profile. (bottom) Kinetics of degradation of the oligomer in the absence or presence of the indicated minerals, reported as the percentage of the full-sized molecules (ordinate) as a function of the reaction time (abscissa).	 

 	Fig. 7  DNA stability in the presence of minerals. Panel A: mechanisms of DNA degradation. Pathway A: hydrolysis by Nucleophilic Degradation (HND), consisting of formamide or hydroxyl nucleophilic addition at the C-8 position of a purine (adenine) ring followed by nucleobase degradation/elimination and two β-elimination reactions with C(3′)–O and C(5′)–O bond cleavages. Pathway B: hydrolysis by Nucleophilic Substitution (HNS) consisting of direct hydroxide nucleophilic substitution of adenine followed by two β-elimination reactions with C(3′)–O and C(5′)–O bond cleavages (modified from Saladino et al.296). See Section 8.2. Panel B: the effects of phosphate minerals on the instability of DNA molecules in water. General assay conditions as for RNA (Fig. 6). Reproduced from ref. 322 with modifications. Treatment in H2O in the absence or in the presence of the indicated amounts (mg mL−1) of the phosphate mineral indicated on top of each panel. Similar assays were performed with the other 22 minerals whose results are summarized in Fig. 8.	 

 	Fig. 8  The effect of phosphate minerals on DNA in water and in formamide.	 

 	Fig. 9  The possible continuous line from universal elements to complex (pre)genetic chemical information. The prebiotic plausibility of each step is discussed in the text in the indicated sections. The difficulties presented by ribonucleosides are discussed in Section 4. Formamide chemistry is effective up to the RNA polymerization step included.	 

 	Scheme 20	 

 	Scheme 21	 

 	Scheme 22	 

 	Scheme 23	 

 	Scheme 24	 

 	Scheme 25	 

 	Scheme 26	 

 	Scheme 27	 

 	Scheme 28	 
Footnote
† Part of the prebiotic chemistry themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
