Amphiphilic conjugated block copolymers as NIR-bioimaging probes   - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2PY00258B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2PY00258B
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2022, 13, 2057-2064Amphiphilic conjugated block copolymers as NIR-bioimaging probes†

        
          
            Axel-Laurenz 
            Buckinx
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ashley M. 
            Rozario
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Toby D. M. 
            Bell
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jasper J. 
            Michels
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Tanja 
            Junkers
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemistry, Monash University, 19 Rain-forest Walk, Building 23, Clayton, Vic 3800, Australia. E-mail: tanja.junkers@monash.edu
bMax Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany. E-mail: michels@mpip-mainz.mpg.de
Received 
      25th February 2022
    , Accepted 4th March 2022First published on 15th March 2022AbstractAlthough semiconducting polymer nanoparticles (SPN) are emerging as versatile theragnostic platforms for drug delivery and near infrared (NIR)-imaging, their synthesis remains restricted to nanoprecipatation or graft polymers. Here we present a novel method for creating an SPN of the donor–acceptor conjugated polymer p(IDT-NDI) containing indacenodithienothiophene (IDT) and naphthalene diimide (NDI) units. The conjugated polymer is functionalised with a styryl endgroup which is used to introduce a RAFT-agent via a 1,2-radical insertion reaction. This results in a conjugated macroinitiator which can be chain extended using classical RAFT polymerization with methyl acrylate resulting in an amphiphillic triblock copolymer. The amphiphile showed excellent self-assembly with stable particles of 80–110 nm diameter and absorption and emission in the NIR-region. The micelles are taken up efficiently by cells and can deliver a payload proving this method to be a new and powerful tool for the future of SPN in bioimaging.
Introduction
Nanotechnology for theragnostics has received increasing interest over the past decades due to its capability of combining diagnostics and therapeutic functions through a single entity.1–3 Such nanoplatforms are crucial for detecting diseases at an early stage resulting in an increased survival rate. Great effort has been placed towards the development of imaging tools such as quantum dots (QD), fluorescent dyes and conjugated polymers. Of all these imaging tools, conjugated polymers are one of the most promising developments due to their excellent optical properties, minimal photobleaching, low toxicity, surface modifiability and ability to carry therapeutic payloads. Their optical properties are especially interesting from the viewpoint of tuning the wavelengths at which they are excited and emit light.4,5
Traditionally, most imaging probes are excited using UV or short-wavelength visible light. While commonplace, short-wavelength light tends to scatter and absorb with increasing observation depth which limits its use in real 3D samples where the depth can vary from a few micrometres to a few centimetres. It is here that near infrared (NIR) fluorescence shows superiority when compared to the visible spectrum, owing to the way photons interact with the tissue.6,7 Biological tissue shows strong interaction with light in the visible region (400–650 nm). Light in the NIR (>750 nm) region however displays much less absorption and scattering hence significantly increasing the depth photons can penetrate biological tissue.8–10 In this way, payload delivery and detection can occur in vivo at significant locations in a body.
Conjugated polymers are a prime candidate for the development of NIR bioimaging owing to their aforementioned modifiability and optical stability. One of the most popular methods to create low band gap polymers with suitable absorption and emission spectra is incorporation of donor–acceptor units in the polymer backbone. These conjugated donor–acceptor polymers have been used in a new class of nanomaterials, semiconducting polymer nanoparticles (SPNs).8,11–13 NIR absorbing SPNs have been used for fluorescence imaging of tumours and cell tracking.14,15 Despite the promise of SPNs for bioimaging their synthesis remains relatively limited, the most prominent method being encapsulation of SPNs into amphiphilic block copolymers through nanoprecipitation, producing binary micelles that are prone to dissociation.9
Another widely used method is the synthesis of polyethylene glycol (PEG)-functionalized semiconducting polymer amphiphiles. These graft polymers can spontaneously self-assemble into nanoparticles. These particles have been shown to be more effective than their nanoprecipitate counterparts with higher quantum yields and smaller particle sizes.8 However, this system relies on an amphiphilic graft polymer, where multiple PEG-side chains are covalently bonded to the conjugated polymer. While effective for self-assembly into particles, an amphiphilic block copolymer would generally be more desirable since block copolymers are more widely studied. Furthermore, such systems could allow for a larger variation in self-assembled structures while also offering more control on the molecular weight, targeting mechanisms, cell uptake and type of polar monomer used.10
Conjugated block copolymers are currently already being used for example in organic solar cells.16 However, block copolymers containing a conjugated block combined with different functionalities such as NIR emission and hydrophilicity are not easily formed and only few methods are known to date.17 This stems mostly from the fact that conjugated polymers are typically formed in step-growth polymerizations with very limited functional group tolerance. This makes it difficult to introduce functionalities that can be used for chain extension of a non-conjugated polymer. One notable method which uses a true block copolymer was presented by Junkers and coworkers.18 Here they presented the synthesis of poly(p-phenylene vinylene (PPV) via a dual initiator route allowing for chain extension of the conjugated polymer with single electron transfer living radical polymerization (SET-LRP) to create a true amphiphilic conjugated block copolymer. This method allows for a variety of hydrophilic monomers to be used as well as to effectively tune the ratio of polar to apolar chain lengths, which is a straightforward and well-developed method to create different nano-aggregate morphologies. These polymers were also found to be non-toxic, which is in line with results found for most conjugated polymers, underpinning their promising use in biomedical application. While showing remarkable stability and the possibility to encapsulate drugs efficiently, these PPVs were not able to absorb or emit light in the NIR region, reducing their effectiveness for in vivo bioimaging. While it is possible to modify these PPVs to create a narrower band-gap, the previously mentioned donor–acceptor systems offer a much more versatile method to create NIR polymers.
Another synthesis method towards conjugated block copolymers was presented by Ribeiro and coworkers.19 Here a reversible addition fragmentation transfer (RAFT)-functionality was incorporated at either end of the conjugated polymer after end capping in the step growth polymerization process followed by post-polymer modification. With this strategy, chain extension into a triblock copolymer was achieved. This approach opens up a new pathway for the synthesis of conjugated polymer amphiphiles for self-assembly into SPN's.
In this work, we adapted this strategy as shown in Fig. 1. An NIR emitting polymer was first synthesised under classical Stille coupling conditions. The polymer was then functionalised in order to transform it into a macro-RAFT agent which could then be used for linear chain extension with virtually any radically polymerizable monomer. From the so-constructed block copolymers, nanoparticles containing a hydrophobic conjugated donor–acceptor block consisting of indacenodithienothiophene (IDT) and naphthalene diimide (NDI) could then be obtained via self-assembly. This donor–acceptor has, to the best of our knowledge, not yet been used for self-assembly and bioimaging applications. Next, these particles are tested for cell-uptake, loading and capability of delivering a dye to the cell.
 Fig. 1  Schematic overview of the synthesis of the conjugated polymer and subsequent chain extension via RAFT polymerisation into the amphiphilic triblock copolymer pMA-b-p(IDT-NDI)-b-pMA. Next, the polymers are self-assembled into micelles via a continuous flow setup. Finally, micelles are used in cell experiments to verify bioimaging and payload delivery capabilities. 
Experimental section
Analytical methods

GPC. 
Analysis of the polymers was performed on a PSS SECcurity2GPC system operated by PSS WinGPC software, equipped with a SDV 5.0 μm guard column (50 × 8 mm), followed by three SDV analytical 5.0 μm columns with varying porosity (1000 Å, 100000 Å and 1000000 Å) (50 × 8 mm) and a differential refractive index detector using tetrahydrofuran (THF, RCI Labscan, 99.9%) as the eluent at 40 °C with a flow rate of 1 mL min−1. The SEC system was calibrated using linear narrow polystyrene standards PS (K = 14.1 × 10−5 dL g−1 and α = 0.70).


NMR. 
Proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) was undertaken using a Bruker Avance III 400 which operated at 400 MHz, using deuterated solvents in the form of chloroform (CDCl3).


Scanning transmission electron microscopy. 
All scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images were taken on the Magellan 400 FEGSEM. The Magellan 400 FEGSEM is an extreme high resolution (XHR) instrument equipped with a monochromator allowing improved resolution at low accelerating voltages. This system is fitted with a multi-sample holding station allowing for analysis of multiple samples at once without compromising the vacuum. For STEM, a special STEM detector is used with the system. The system consists of a FEG; 5-axis piezo stage, IR chamber camera, oil-free pumping system, retractable DBS annular BSE detector, retractable STEM-3 detector, quick loader; beam deceleration, in-lens detectors, NavCam, plasma cleaner, cryo-trap, Bruker Quantax 400 X-ray analysis system and 30 mm2 SDD with super light element window (slew).


UV-Vis and emission. 
UV-visible absorption measurements were taken with a Varian Cary 100 Bio UV-visible spectrophotometer (Agilent) using solvent for baseline subtraction. Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra were recorded using a Varian Cary Eclipse fluorimeter (Agilent). All samples for steady state spectra were prepared in 1.0 cm path length quartz cuvettes.


Fluorescence microscopy and live cell fluorescence. 
COS-7 cells (African green monkey kidney fibroblast-like, ATCC CRL1651) were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagles medium (DMEM – high glucose) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin–streptomycin, and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2. For imaging, cells were seeded onto high precision cover glass slides (Marienfeld 18 mm diameter #1.5H) and grown to ∼50% confluency. Dye-loaded polymer micelles were added to the cell growth media to a final concentration of 80–100 nM. Cells were incubated with micelles for 4 hours then washed with warm phosphate buffered solution (PBS), then mounted into a custom-built imaging chamber filled with warm PBS. Live cell imaging was performed using an Olympus IX81 wide field fluorescence microscope fitted with a TIRF 100× 1.49 NA oil objective, Oxxius 638 nm, Dragon 532 nm and Toptica 488 nm laser diodes, and Andor iXon EM-CCD detector. Cells were excited with relatively low laser powers (∼2–6 mW laser output) and images were acquired using Micromanager with 100 ms exposure time. Distinct emission signatures of the polymer and each dye were captured sequentially using suitable emission filters 3,3′-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate (DiO): 525/50 bandpass, Rhodamine 6G: 570/50 bandpass and polymer: 700/75 bandpass. All dyes were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Images were coloured using ImageJ (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of P(IDT-NDI) macro chain transfer agent: first IDT and NDI are polymerised via Stille polycondensation for 12 h at 115 °C, followed by end-capping with a styrene moiety and subsequent use in RAFT polymerizations at 70 °C. 


Small angle neutron scattering. 
Small-angle neutron scattering (SANS): small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) measurements were undertaken on the Bilby instrument20,21 at the Australian Centre for Neutron Scattering, Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO), Lucas Heights, NSW, Australia. Samples were prepared using D2O as the aqueous phase and measured at a concentration of 1 mg mL−1 for 2 hours at room temperature in 1 mm path length quartz window cells. Raw scattering data were further processed via the reduction of the empty cell scattering as well as the D2O THF background. SANS data were modelled using the SasView software (https://www.sasview.org) and analysed using the sphere, cylinder and ellipse models presented by Guinier and Fournet.22

Synthesis

Stille polycondensation and styrene end-capping. 
p(IDT-NDI) was synthesized via Stille coupling with palladium as a catalyst as described in literature.23 In a Schlenk flask, 4,4,9,9-tetrakis((4-hexylphenyl)-4,9-dihydro-sindaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (168.92 mg, 0.137 mmol) and 2,6-dibromo-N,N′-bis((2-decyltetradecyl)naphthalene-1,4,5,8-tetracarboxylic acid diimide) (80.00 mg, 0.092 mmol) were dissolved in dry toluene (5 mL). After degassing under nitrogen for 30 min, Pd2(dba)3 (4.12 mg, 0.0045 mmol) and P(o-Tol)3 (7 mg, 0.0232 mmol) were added to the mixture, which was then stirred for 12 h at 115 °C. p(IDT-NDI) was subsequently end-capped using with a styryl functionality. Bromostyrene (21892 mg, 0.1196 mmol) was added to the mixture via a syringe, which was then stirred again for 12 h at 115 °C. The polymer was precipitated in methanol and the crude polymer collected by filtration and purified by soxhlet extraction with, successively, methanol, hexane and chloroform. The polymer was then obtained via precipitation in cold methanol.


Synthesis of PFO-macro-RAFT agent. 
RAFT functionalisation was performed as shown in literature.19 20 mg (0.0031 mmol, 1 eq.) of p(IDT-NDI) (approx. 6500 g mol−1) was added to a flask equipped with a stirring bar and dissolved in 2 mL toluene. Subsequently, 0.61 mg (0.0031 mmol, 1 eq.) of azobis(isobutyronitrile) AIBN and 21 mg (0.062 mmol, 20 eq.) of the RAFT agent 2-(dodecylthiocarbonothioylthio)propionic acid (DOPAT) was added to the solution. The mixture was degassed by purging with nitrogen for 20 minutes. The solution was then heated up to 70 °C and kept stirring overnight under a nitrogen atmosphere and an aliquot was collected for 1H NMR analysis. The end group functionalized polymer obtained was then precipitated twice in excess methanol, and dried overnight under vacuum.


Block copolymerization. 
20 mg (0.001 mmol, 1 eq.) of di-DOPAT-p(IDT-NDI) (approx. 6500 g mol−1) initiator was dissolved in 0.5 mL toluene. 0.03 mg AIBN (0.002 mmol, 0.1 eq.) and 0.020 mL methyl acrylate (MA) (0.05 mmol, 50 eq.) were added to the solution. The solution was purged with nitrogen for 30 minutes and the vial covered in aluminium foil to block all sunlight. Subsequently the solution was heated up to 70 °C and kept stirring for 15 hours under a nitrogen atmosphere.


Self-assembly of amphiphilic block copolymers. 
For the self-assembly of the amphiphilic block copolymers a novel flow system was used. In a typical experiment, two pumps were used in combination with a U-466 mixing tee from UpChurch scientific. One pump was loaded with a 10 mL syringe containing the aqueous phase and the other was loaded with a 1 mL syringe contain a 2 mg mL−1 solution of the block copolymer in THF. The flowrates were kept at a 1/9 ratio THF to water at a total flow rate of 2 mL min−1. The resulting solution was collected and covered with paper to allow evaporation of THF from the micellar dispersion.

Results and discussion
For the synthesis of the donor–acceptor (D–A) conjugated polymer, a Stille coupling was used. IDT was chosen due the presence of the extended fused-ring of the monomer unit. This aids in π-electron delocalization, which will enhance the charge carrier mobility, reducing the bandgap and broadening the absorption of the conjugated polymer. In addition, the steric effect of tetrahexylphenyl substituents present on the polymer backbone can limit intermolecular interactions.23 A degree of polymerization (DP) of 5–6 units was targeted via the Carothers equation. Chain length was kept short in order to keep the size of the final particle as small as possible while maintaining good fluorescent properties. The monomer IDT was used in excess to ensure a trimethylstannane group is present on either end of the polymer. This stannane moiety can then be used for further end-group functionalisation with bromostyrene as mentioned above.
Bromostyrene was added to reaction mixture after 12 hours to start the end-capping process. The bromine functionality reacts with the trimethylstannane group on the polymer to endcap each side of the polymer with a styryl group with vinyl functionality, meaning no further reaction can take place since there is no halide present anymore. This modification turns the p(IDT-NDI) (P1) into a macro monomer (P2) which can be used in a RDRP. As shown by the elugram in Fig. 2 the Stille polycondensation reaction was successful. The SEC trace nicely shows the expected DP of 5–6, achieved with an apparent average molecular weight of 6500 g mol−1 resolving the individual single oligomers on the separation column due to the large molecular weight of the building blocks used. This resolution should not be confused with a multimodality, and results from the good separation of oligomers on the SEC columns. Fig. S1† demonstrates that successful end-capping of p(IDT-NDI) conjugated polymer occurred. The 1H NMR spectrum of the bistyrene-p(IDT-NDI) (P2) reveals signals at 5.31 ppm, 5.84 ppm and 6.80 ppm, corresponding to the vinyl end groups of the functionality.
 Fig. 2  SEC trace of the p(IDT-NDI) homopolymer (red) and the pMA-b-p(IDT-NDI)-b-pMA triblock copolymer (blue). 
The styryl group is ideal for introducing another functionality via a 1,2-radical insertion reaction. The reactivity of the styryl double bond is similar to that of the styrene monomer which has been studied extensively for RDRP.19 In a typical RAFT process, polymerization starts with a 1,2 insertion (change from pre- to main equilibrium in the RAFT process). With styrene, this 1,2 insertion stage is often completely separated from the polymerisation and further chain growth, thus allowing use of this reaction for introduction only of the RAFT group itself. This absence of polymerization is further supported by the sterical demand of the p(IDT-NDI) macromonomer. Nonetheless, after re/functionalization of the styryl end group into a RAFT moiety, RAFT polymerization with any vinyl monomer can be performed. The styryl-capped polymer was reacted with the RAFT agent DOPAT in the presence of AIBN resulting in the synthesis of di-DOPAT-p(IDT-NDI) macro initiator (P3). As described in the procedure by Ribeiro and co-workers,19 an excess of RAFT agent must be employed, combined with a low concentration of AIBN, to drive the reaction to completion and to avoid termination of chains with AIBN-derived cyano-isopropyl radicals. Nonetheless, the synthesis of di-DOPAT-p(IDT-NDI) was successful as evidenced by the complete disappearance of the vinyl signals (5.31, 5.84 and 6.80 ppm) in the 1H NMR spectrum depicted in Fig. S2.†
After the successful incorporation of the RAFT-group, block copolymer extension was performed. Due to the very hydrophobic nature of the p(IDT-NDI) polymer methyl acrylate (MA) was chosen as a second block instead of a more polar, water soluble monomer. MA allows the use of toluene as a reaction medium, giving good solubility for both blocks. Even though the polarity of pMA is moderate, the difference in polarity between the conjugated block and the polyacrylate should be large enough to induce self-assembly and create stable micelles in an aqueous environment.24 To further promote solubility in water, the pMA block was kept at low molecular weight to maximize water solubility. RAFT polymerization was carried out in the presence of AIBN at 70 °C, and as shown in Fig. 2 the chain extension was successful as evidenced by a complete shift of the SEC trace towards a lower elution volume (higher molecular weight). On the high molecular weight shoulder, the SEC trace does not show a perfect shift. This is typically observed when chain extending conjugated polymers and does not indicate unsuccessful chain extension. It is most likely routed in the difference of solubility of both blocks and the residual complex change (or absence of change) in hydrodynamic volume.25 Overall, the broadness of the MWD remains unchanged in the chain extension, which indicates a low dispersity of the RAFT block, and hence good success of the reaction. Notably, a full shift of the MWD on the low molecular weight side is observed, which indicates that no dead or unfunctionalized material was left behind. Ideally, mass spectrometric data would confirm the endgroup conversion and chain extension, yet molecular weights proved to be too high for standard ESI-MS analysis. Conversion of MA in the RAFT polymerization was determined gravimetrically to be 40%, thus on either side of the conjugated polymer block about 10 units of MA were incorporated (20 total). It should be noted that full conversion was not targeted in the polymerization in order to avoid side reactions typically occurring at high conversion during acrylate polymerization.
We proceed studying the optical properties of the block copolymer (BP1). First, UV-vis absorption was determined on both the homopolymer and the BCP (see Fig. 3a). The homopolymer shows a peak absorption around 380 nm which most likely originates from backbone absorption.23 In the NIR band, the maximum absorption at 730 nm corresponds to strong intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between the NDI and IDT units. The block copolymers show a slight blue shift compared to the homopolymer with a maximum absorption at around 650 nm. Fluorescence spectroscopy was employed to measure the emission spectrum of the block copolymer, shown in Fig. 3b. The polymer was excited at 650 nm upon which it showed emission with a maximum at 820 nm which is in the NIR-region (>750 nm) nicely confirming that the synthesised BCP is suitable for NIR-imaging applications.
 Fig. 3  (a) UV absorbance spectrum of the homopolymer in red and the block copolymer in blue. (b) Fluorescence emission spectrum of the block copolymer at 650 nm excitation. 
In the next step, the block copolymers were self-assembled into micelles to allow them to act as a nanocarrier and bioimaging probe. Self-assembly itself serves as a further proof of the success of the synthesis procedure as only block copolymers would form the desired nanoaggregates. For self-assembly, a recently introduced continuous flow mixing method was used allowing for quick and reproducible self-assembly. The flow method has shown to be effective for self-assembly of BCPS into nano-particles, which do not aggregate using classical batch procedures.19 Micelles were made at a relatively low flowrate of 2 mL min−1 to balance the kinetic and thermodynamic stability of the particles during the self-assembly process. Making these micelles in flow ensures that despite using a weakly polar monomer as the building blocks for the corona of the micelle, stable particles were obtained. Fig. 4a shows an STEM micrograph of the micelles. The radius was measured to be around 40 nm. We used small angle neutron scattering (SANS) as an additional analysis method. Besides being a much more powerful technique for particle characterisation than electron microscopy, SANS allows measurement of particles in their hydrated state. This removes the need for drying or freezing of particles which could lead to changes in particle morphology or size. The SANS data are depicted in Fig. 4b. Assuming an ellipsoidal shape with an equatorial radius of 55 nm and a polar radius of 30 nm resulted in the best fit of the data. This is comparable to other micelles prepared via flow self-assembly where likewise ellipsoidal particles were observed.26 The mismatch at low q in the SANS data compared to the fit can be attributed to the presence of micelle aggregation in the solution and is likely the cause of the slightly larger than expected equatorial radius as compared to the STEM image, where the radius is around 40 nm. Moreover, STEM is known to give smaller sizes when compared to SANS since the hydrophilic corona is collapsed and not visible. While the particles created are seemingly large for the low DP of the building blocks, they are still within a suitable range for cell uptake experiments. The larger size could be a result of the structure of the BCP, and the fact that a tri- rather than a diblock copolymer was used. Additionally, the extremely rigid NDI-IDT block will lead to decreased coiling and adopt an extended shape in the core of the particles.27 Finally, it should be added that the formed particles exhibited good stability with unchanged dispersions being observed over extended periods of time up to several months.
 Fig. 4  a, shows a STEM image of the SPN made via flow self-assembly. b, SANS-plot with ellipsoidal fit, an image of the approximate shape and size is added to give a better idea of particle size. 
To prove the value of these particles as nanocarriers, a payload experiment was performed. The particles were loaded with Rhodamine 6G, a dye for which successful loading can be easily identified by UV-vis absorbance. The protocol for loading the micelles was the same as for their self-assembly with the only difference that the dye was added to the organic phase. After assembly, the micelles were dialysed against water for 72 hours replacing the water every 12 hours to remove any dye outside of the micelle cores. UV-vis absorbance of the loaded particles is shown in Fig. S3† and the successful encapsulation of Rhodamine 6G is evidenced by the newly appearing characteristic absorbance peak at 530 nm. To further verify the imaging capabilities of the particles, the micelles were investigated with fluorescence microscopy. A drop of the loaded micelles solution was placed on a glass slide and left to dry with the images obtained shown in Fig. 5. The red channel (5a) shows the signal from the SNPs themselves while the green channel (5b) shows the signal from the loaded dye rhodamine 6G. Clearly, the signal from the rhodamine 6G is less bright than the signal from the SNP. This could be due to two reasons. One is that the loading efficiency of the micelles is fairly low and not all micelles are loaded. However, a more plausible explanation is that the conjugated polymer quenches the signal from dye while it is encapsulated inside the micelle core. This is similar to previous literature studies where the signal of the conjugated block itself was quenched while in micellar form, and where only upon dissociation of the micelles the signal from the conjugated polymer was clearly seen.18 It is hypothesized that due to small internal volume of the micelle, the dye is confined and is likely to collide or undergo energy and/or electron transfer quenching which would result in the rhodamine 6G emission quenching. Regardless, the data confirmed the capability of the particles to encapsulate the dye, providing ample ground for further study, for instance involving live cells.
 Fig. 5  Confocal microscopy images of SPNs loaded with dyes. Figure a and b shows the SPNs on a glass slide with the signal of the conjugated polymer and dye respectively. Figure c shows the signal of the conjugated polymer in the cell while d shows the signal of Rhodamine 6G. Figure e shows the signal of the conjugated polymer in the cell while f shows the signal of DiO. 
Initial cell uptake studies were performed with loaded particles to investigate the delivery of the payload. For cell uptake, both Rhodamine 6G was used as well as another dye, 3,3′-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate (DiO). Rhodamine 6G is known to target mitochondria in the cell while DiO is used to image lipids.28 Hence both dyes should image different structures upon cell-uptake and successful release of the dye. Micelles were loaded with the dyes via the previously described procedure. Loaded micelles were placed inside a cell culture and incubated for 4 hours. Next, the cells were washed and placed under a fluorescence microscope. As can be seen from the images in Fig. 5c and d, rhodamine loaded micelles efficiently entered the cell. The red signal inside the cell structure given in Fig. 5c indicates the presence of the SNPs. Additionally, the characteristic green signal of rhodamine 6G was also observed within the cell, demonstrating the successful release of rhodamine inside of the cytoplasm (Fig. 5d). As mentioned, rhodamine has an affinity for the mitochondria. This is clearly visible in the images as these organelles are clearly lit up due to the presence of the dye.29 Interestingly, in these pictures the brightness of the rhodamine signal is much higher than the signal from the SNPs themselves, consistent with the hypothesis that the signal from rhodamine 6G is quenched when encapsulated inside the SNPs.
The DiO loaded micelles also showed efficient cell-uptake with the red signal present in the cell (Fig. 5e) and the signal from DiO showing in lipid droplets inside the cell (Fig. 5f). One would expect DiO to stain the cell membrane (the first lipids it should encounter when entering the cell). However, since the dye resides inside the micelle, DiO is found in lipid droplets inside the cell, demonstrating that release of the payload only occurs within the cell, and not during cell uptake. The exact mechanics of dye release by the particles inside the cell and their fate after dissociation is still to be fully understood and is currently under investigation. Nevertheless, successful delivery of rhodamine 6G and DiO inside the cell shows the capability of this SPN system to not only be used as an imaging tool but also to deliver a payload. Moreover, the self-triggered dissociation of SPNs inside the cells could also be of added benefit since it removes the need of modifying the particles with complex functional groups that can be extrinsically activated.
Conclusions
An amphiphilic block copolymer was successfully synthesised via RAFT chain extension of the alternating copolymer p(IDT-NDI) with p(MA). The block copolymer showed imaging capabilities in the NIR-region with emission beyond 750 nm, with a maximum at 820 nm. The amphiphilic BCPs were successfully self-assembled into stable nanoaggregates of around 80 nm which could be used as an imaging tool. Additionally, the particles could be loaded with a payload which was successfully delivered inside the cytoplasm of cells proving this system's capabilities as a potential theragnostic nanoplatform. Our data proves that the direct synthesis of amphiphiles, combined with the wide variety of conjugated polymers being investigated at present will be of indispensable value for further studies.
Author contributions
Axel-Laurenz Buckinx: experimental work, data curation, writing – original draft; Ashley Rozario: experimental work, Toby Bell: conceptualization, writing–review & editing; Jasper Michels: conceptualization, project administration, writing–review & editing; Tanja Junkers: conceptualization, project administration, writing–review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Funding from Monash University is kindly acknowledged. We acknowledge the support of ANSTO, in providing access to their neutron scattering facilities. The authors also acknowledge the assistance of Xi-Ya Fang and Zhou Xu at the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy. TJ is also grateful for funding from the Australian Research Council via project DP190103309. TJ and JJM acknowledge the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) and Universities Australia for financial support in the framework of the project 57446038 “high-precision synthesis and self-assembly of semiconducting block copolymers”.
Notes and references
M. de Jong, W. A. Breeman, D. J. Kwekkeboom, R. Valkema and E. P. Krenning, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 873–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Koo, M. S. Huh, I. C. Sun, S. H. Yuk, K. Choi, K. Kim and I. C. Kwon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1018–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, H. Zhang, F. Fontana, J. T. Hirvonen and H. A. Santos, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2018, 128, 54–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Braeken, S. Cheruku, A. Ethirajan and W. Maes, Materials, 2017, 10, 1420 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Resch-Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, X. Shi, S. Bai, J. Zhang, M. Hou, T. Zhang, B. S. Li, P. Xue, Y. Kang and Z. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6252–6255 RSC .
P. Liu, X. Mu, X.-D. Zhang and D. Ming, Bioconjugate Chem., 2020, 31, 260–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yin, X. Li, G. Wen, B. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Zhao, S. Li, R. Li, L. Wang, C. S. Lee and L. Bian, Biomaterials, 2020, 232, 119684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, X. Mu, X. D. Zhang and D. Ming, Bioconjugate Chem., 2020, 31, 260–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, D. Hu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, Z. Sheng and H. Zheng, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 4241–4257 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhen, K. Pu and X. Jiang, Small, 2021, 17, e2004723 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wei, F. Xin, J. Zhang, M. Wu, T. Qiu, Y. Lan, S. Qiao, X. Liu and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1093–1096 RSC .
Y. Jiang, D. Cui, Y. Fang, X. Zhen, P. K. Upputuri, M. Pramanik, D. Ding and K. Pu, Biomaterials, 2017, 145, 168–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chan and P. J. Wu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 11–28 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Creamer, C. S. Wood, P. D. Howes, A. Casey, S. Cong, A. V. Marsh, R. Godin, J. Panidi, T. D. Anthopoulos, C. H. Burgess, T. Wu, Z. Fei, I. Hamilton, M. A. McLachlan, M. M. Stevens and M. Heeney, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3237 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Yang, X. Fan, L. Li, Y. Yang, A. Nuernisha, D. Xue, C. He, J. Qian, Q. Hu, H. Chen, J. Liu and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2020, 2, 2509–2521 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) K. Shou, Y. Tang, H. Chen, S. Chen, L. Zhang, A. Zhang, Q. Fan, A. Yu and Z. Cheng, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3105–3110 RSC .
Y. Lee and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7385–7395 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cosemans, J. Vandenbergh, V. Voet, K. Loos, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and T. Junkers, Polymer, 2013, 54, 1298–1304 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zaquen, H. Lu, T. Chang, R. Mamdooh, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, M. Stenzel and T. Junkers, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 4086–4094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ribeiro, J. Haven, A.-L. Buckinx, M. Beuchel, K. Philipps, T. Junkers and J. J. Michels, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 216–225 RSC .
A. Sokolova, J. Christoforidis, A. Eltobaji, J. Barnes, F. Darmann, A. E. Whitten and L. de Campo, Neutron News, 2016, 27, 9–13 CrossRef .
A. Sokolova, A. E. Whitten, L. de Campo, J. Christoforidis, A. Eltobaji, J. Barnes, F. Darmann and A. Berry, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2019, 52, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Guinier, G. Fournet and C. Walker, Small-Angle Scattering of X-rays, J. Wiley & Sons, New York,  1955 Search PubMed .
L. Xue, Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang, X. Dong, L. Gao, H. Bin, J. Zhang, Y. Yang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5810–5816 RSC .
Y. Mai and A. Eisenberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5969–5985 RSC .
K. Philipps, T. Junkers and J. J. Michels, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 2522–2531 RSC .
A.-L. Buckinx, K. Verstraete, E. Baeten, R. F. Tabor, A. Sokolova, N. Zaquen and T. Junkers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13799–13802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and A. Eisenberg, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 2239–2249 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Lehmann, W. Juzwa, K. Filipiak, P. Sujka-Kordowska, M. Zabel, J. Głowacki, M. Głowacki and P. P. Jagodziński, Mol. Med. Rep., 2016, 14, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Audi, A. Cammarata, A. V. Clough, R. K. Dash and E. R. Jacobs, J. Appl. Physiol., 2020, 128, 892–906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2py00258bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic overview of the synthesis of the conjugated polymer and subsequent chain extension via RAFT polymerisation into the amphiphilic triblock copolymer pMA-b-p(IDT-NDI)-b-pMA. Next, the polymers are self-assembled into micelles via a continuous flow setup. Finally, micelles are used in cell experiments to verify bioimaging and payload delivery capabilities.	 

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of P(IDT-NDI) macro chain transfer agent: first IDT and NDI are polymerised via Stille polycondensation for 12 h at 115 °C, followed by end-capping with a styrene moiety and subsequent use in RAFT polymerizations at 70 °C.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEC trace of the p(IDT-NDI) homopolymer (red) and the pMA-b-p(IDT-NDI)-b-pMA triblock copolymer (blue).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV absorbance spectrum of the homopolymer in red and the block copolymer in blue. (b) Fluorescence emission spectrum of the block copolymer at 650 nm excitation.	 

 	Fig. 4  a, shows a STEM image of the SPN made via flow self-assembly. b, SANS-plot with ellipsoidal fit, an image of the approximate shape and size is added to give a better idea of particle size.	 

 	Fig. 5  Confocal microscopy images of SPNs loaded with dyes. Figure a and b shows the SPNs on a glass slide with the signal of the conjugated polymer and dye respectively. Figure c shows the signal of the conjugated polymer in the cell while d shows the signal of Rhodamine 6G. Figure e shows the signal of the conjugated polymer in the cell while f shows the signal of DiO.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2py00258b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
