Light management in photoelectrochemical water splitting – from materials to device engineering  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC06071B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC06071B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3726-3748Light management in photoelectrochemical water splitting – from materials to device engineering

        
          
            Yubin 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenyu 
            Zheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sebastián 
            Murcia-López
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Lv
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joan Ramón 
            Morante
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Lionel 
            Vayssieres
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Clemens 
            Burda
          
        
      *b
aInternational Research Center for Renewable Energy (IRCRE), State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi 710049, China
bDepartment of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. E-mail: burda@case.edu
cCatalonia Institute for Energy Research (IREC), Jardins de les Dones de Negre 1, Sant Adrià de Besós, 08930, Spain
dUniversity of Barcelona (UB), Martí i Franquès 1, Barcelona, 08020, Spain
Received 
      28th December 2020
    , Accepted 15th February 2021First published on 1st March 2021AbstractPhotoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a very attractive approach to produce clean hydrogen using abundant natural resources such as solar energy and (sea)water. As its primary step, light absorption controls the available amount of photons for the subsequent processes. Light management in PEC water splitting is essential to obtain high performance and efficiency. Herein, light management strategies via selective material choices and device engineering are comprehensively reviewed from two aspects: (1) improving light trapping ability; and (2) extending light absorption range. From a material design standpoint, morphology control of the photoelectrode components and application of surface-plasmon resonance are priorities. Besides these design priorities, approaches and strategies such as doping, solid–solution formation, and photon up-conversion will be briefly discussed. From a device engineering standpoint, tandem PEC devices are proposed to extend light absorption. The concentration of light is involved as an effective route to regulate the photon flux. In addition to experimental work, simulations of light distribution and absorption in PEC water splitting are examined to provide new device-oriented recommendations. This work features realistic and practical light management approaches for efficient and stable PEC water splitting materials, systems and devices by considering the synergistic effects of light absorption, charge transfer, and surface reactivity.
1. Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting has gained increasing attention in the past decades as an attractive approach to convert solar energy into clean hydrogen.1–5 Similar to photosynthesis in nature, the basic idea of PEC water splitting is to utilize photoexcited electrons and holes in the light-absorber to trigger the water reduction and oxidation reactions. Three typical processes are included during PEC water splitting: light absorption; charge generation, separation, and transfer; interfacial chemical reaction.6,7 The overall solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency depends on the efficiency of each process. The implementation of PEC water splitting relies on the development of efficient, stable, and cost-effective photoelectrodes. Diverse semiconductor materials, e.g. metal oxides, metal sulfides, organic semiconductors, III–V group materials, have been examined as light-absorbers for PEC water splitting.8 To improve the stability, a protective layer is generally coated on the surface of the light-absorber to prevent the direct contact with the electrolyte.9 Electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) are loaded to promote charge transfer and accelerate the interfacial reaction. Although the III–V group materials-based PEC cells have achieved STH efficiencies higher than 19% under one-sun irradiation, their high price and the low reserve of III–V group materials restrict large-scale applications.10 On the other hand, the STH efficiencies of low-cost and robust metal oxide-based PEC devices still do not meet the performance criteria for wide-spread applications.11
To improve the PEC efficiency for water splitting, different modification approaches have been implemented for the photoelectrodes, such as morphology control,12–14 element doping,15–17 and forming heterojunction.18,19 The device optimization and electrolyte engineering can also play a positive role in improving the STH efficiencies.20,21 A major goal of these approaches is to simultaneously improve light absorption, promote charge separation and transfer, and accelerate the redox reactions. As the first step of the PEC reaction, the light absorption determines the number of available photons for the subsequent processes. Therefore, the light management in PEC water splitting is essential to achieve high efficiency.22–24 As shown in Fig. 1, light management can be implemented from two directions: improving light trapping and extending light absorption range. Improving light trapping means to enhance light absorption by reducing the photon loss from reflection or transmission without the compromise of charge transfer properties. It should be noted that improving light absorption by simply increasing the film thickness is not a light trapping strategy, because it can lead to severe charge recombination. Extending light absorption range means to broaden the utilization of solar spectrum and make use of relatively low-energy photons (visible or infrared light) for PEC water splitting. In the aspect of material design, the morphology control of the photoelectrodes should be a feasible approach to trap light by increasing the optical path length through multiple scattering. Applying plasmonic materials has recently emerged as an attractive means to increase light trapping and utilize the wide-spectrum light for PEC water splitting. Other modification routes such as element doping, solid solution, and photon up-conversion, can also be used to extend light absorption range, which has been extensively studied by previous researches.8
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of light management for PEC water splitting. 
In terms of device engineering, extending light absorption range can be achieved by constructing tandem PEC devices, in which the short-wavelength light can be absorbed by the front photoelectrode and the rear unit absorbs the transmitted long-wavelength light. In such a way, the light utilization can be maximized.25 Up to date, one-sun irradiation is generally applied to test the PEC properties for water splitting, giving rise to the photocurrent density at the scale of mA cm−2. The low photocurrent density indicates that large land space is indispensable to the practical PEC water splitting, which would inevitably increase the overall cost. In fact, none of the current approaches for solar water splitting (photoelectrochemical or PV-electrolysis) are currently economically viable for large-scale applications, with the STH efficiency being a determining parameter to reduce the H2 generation cost.26 Applying concentrated light should be a viable approach to increase the photocurrent intensity. The high flux of photogenerated charge carriers under concentrated light irradiation could potentially increase the photovoltage, prolong the charge lifetime, and overcome the reaction barrier. Meanwhile, the thermal effects induced by the concentrated light could provide the “hot spots” to accelerate the surface chemical reactions and strength the mass transfer.27–29 Despite these aspects highlighting the implicit potential of using concentrated light, some materials such as perovskite solar cells can see their stability dramatically compromised by those illumination conditions, making it necessary a further validation of this approach. In addition to the experimental approaches for light management in PEC water splitting, theoretical simulation is one effective tool to investigate light absorption in the PEC materials and cells, which can provide some forward-looking suggestions on the design of PEC devices with optimized light harvesting.22
Considering the important role of light management in PEC water splitting, an adequate review of recent progress in this field is required. In the following sections, the basic principles of PEC water splitting and light management are first introduced. The strategies for material design and device engineering to promote light utilization are respectively summarized. Particularly, the morphology control of the photoelectrodes and adopting plasmonic materials are focused on the aspect of material design. Constructing tandem PEC devices and regulating the light trapping by concentrating are involved in the aspect of device engineering. The simulation methods of light absorption in PEC water splitting are then discussed. A brief summary and outlook of efficient strategies for light management in PEC water splitting is finally presented.
2. Basic principles of PEC water splitting and light management
To develop efficient PEC systems for overall water splitting, it is important to comprehensively understand the basic principles. Forming a semiconductor–liquid junction (SCLJ) is crucial to actuate PEC water splitting, and a clear description of the semiconductor–electrolyte interface will help to understand the mechanism. When the photoelectrode immerses into the electrolyte, electrons will migrate through the semiconductor–liquid interface due to the difference between the redox potential of the electrolyte and the Fermi level of the semiconductor, until that the equilibration is reached.30 As shown in Fig. 2a, a “band bending” appears in the semiconductor owing to the electron flow. A typical region in the semiconductor, where the majority carriers are depleted, is called as the depletion layer.31 The band bending takes place in the depletion layer. The n-type semiconductors generally work as photoanodes since the upward band bending makes photoexcited holes inject into the solution. As for p-type semiconductors, a similar manner also happens. They work as photocathodes, in which photoexcited electrons migrate toward the semiconductor–solution interface to drive water reduction due to the downward band bending. The semiconductors will yield non-equilibrium electrons and holes after photoexcitation. The electrochemical potential of photoexcited electrons or holes under light illumination could be determined as the quasi-Fermi level. An electric field close to the photoelectrode surface would be produced due to the difference between the electron quasi-Fermi level (EF,n) and hole quasi-Fermi level (EF,p). The generated voltage is defined as the “photovoltage”.32
 Fig. 2  Illustration of (a) PEC water splitting over a photoanode and a counter electrode, (b) photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem device, and (c) PEC/PV tandem device. Theoretical STH efficiencies of (d) single light-absorber photoelectrode corresponding to the bandgap, (e) dual light-absorber PEC device with a parallel illumination mode, and (f) dual light-absorber PEC device with a tandem illumination mode. Adapted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
PEC water splitting needs to overcome considerable thermodynamic and kinetic barriers to perform the desired chemical reactions. A minimum Gibbs free energy to drive the uphill reaction is 237 kJ mol−1 under the standard conditions, as shown in eqn (1). H2O → H2 + 1/2 O2 ΔG0 = 237 kJ mol−1(1)
For the overall water-splitting reaction, the redox potential difference is determined as 1.23 V from the free energy change. Therefore, the photon energy for driving water splitting should be larger than 1.23 eV. As shown in Fig. 2a, the photoexcited charge carriers in the semiconductor first undergo separation. The minority carriers migrate toward the surface of the photoelectrode, and the majority carriers transport to the counter electrode. Water redox reactions take place at the electrode–solution interface, leading to the generation of hydrogen and oxygen at the separate electrodes. The valence band and conduction band positions of a semiconductor should straddle the potentials for OER and HER to drive water redox reaction. Considering the energy loss from the overpotentials for OER and HER, the photon energy required for PEC water splitting is generally larger than ∼1.7 eV for a single light-absorber photoelectrode, corresponding to the light wavelength of ∼730 nm.33
To effectively utilize the absorbed photons, the light absorption and charge transfer should be balanced in PEC water splitting. For a semiconductor photoelectrode, the light penetration length is determined to be α−1, where α is the optical absorption coefficient of the photoelectrode material at the wavelength λ. For instance, the value of α−1 is ∼118 nm at 550 nm for Fe2O3.34 In the light of the Lambert–Beer law, the light intensity is exponentially reduced when it transmits through a material. The film thickness of a planar photoelectrode is generally more than 2-fold of the penetration length to assure that the incident light is efficiently harvested.30 For the minority carriers, the effective charge collection length is the sum of the depletion layer width (W) and the carrier diffusion length (Ld). Compared to the light penetration length α−1, the values of W and Ld (∼2 nm for Fe2O3) are much smaller. This mismatching gives rise to low charge separation and transfer efficiencies in the planar photoelectrodes.35 So, it is not a bright idea to improve the light absorption of the photoelectrodes by simply increasing the film thickness. Alternatively, constructing nanostructured morphology should be an effective route to increase light absorption and charge migration at the same time. For instance, one-dimensional and two-dimensional nanostructures can improve the light trapping by increasing light scattering among different units. The charge transfer distance from the semiconductor to the electrolyte can be considerably decreased by introducing the nanostructures, and the reactive surface area can be greatly enlarged. In addition, integrating the anti-transmittance and anti-reflection structures is also a feasible way to improve the light trapping.36
Besides the material choices, the absorption and utilization of the incident light can be regulated using PEC device engineering. To decrease the cost and system complexity, developing PEC devices without the assistance of external electric energy is required for the practical application. However, a single photoelectrode usually could not fulfill the critical demands for overall water splitting. Instead, developing the photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem devices and PEC/photovoltaic (PV) tandem devices is an applicable way to maximize the utilization of solar energy and achieve enough photovoltage for water redox reaction.37
In the photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem devices, the photocathode and the photoanode would drive HER and OER, respectively (Fig. 2b). Usually, the two photoelectrodes are arranged in a tandem illumination mode (mode T), where the front photoelectrode harvests the short-wavelength light, and the back photoelectrode absorbs the transmitted long-wavelength light. In such a scenario, the utilization of solar spectrum can be maximized. Another configuration of PEC tandem device is a parallel irradiation mode (mode P), in which both photoelectrodes are illuminated by the full-spectrum light. There are two ways to make ohmic contact between the two photoelectrodes in the PEC tandem cell. One is the wired configuration in which a conductive metal wire is used to connect the photoanode and the photocathode. The other is the wireless configuration where the photoanode and photocathode stand back to back with a transparent conductive oxide as a middle layer. The wired configuration is simple to assemble, while the wireless one owns the highest integration level.31
In the PEC/PV tandem device, the photoelectrode can drive one of water splitting half-reactions, and the PV cell provides the photovoltage regarded as a bias to promote the other half-reaction over the counter electrode (Fig. 2c). Generally, the short-wavelength light can be absorbed by the photoelectrodes. Meanwhile, the long-wavelength light transmitted from the photoelectrode is harvested by the PV cell (mode T). In addition, similar to PEC tandem devices, the mode P can be employed in PEC/PV tandem devices. According to different assembly methods, the tandem devices are classified into three categories, including wired, wireless, as well as separated configurations. Applying a wire to couple dark electrode and integrated photoelectrode/PV cell is called as the wired configuration, which is the most broadly applied. In the wireless configuration, the electrodes and PV cell are in contact through ohmic layers. The separated configuration corresponds to the modular system in which the PV component and PEC cell are separate units. The potential corrosion of the PV cell can be avoided in the separated device, because it is placed outside the eletrolyte.38
As discussed above, the wide-spectrum light response of photoelectrodes is generally needed to achieve high PEC property. However, for the single light-absorber system, the theoretical STH efficiency is first increased and decreased with the decreased bandgap owing to the tradeoff of light absorption and photovoltage. As shown in Fig. 2d, the maximum practical STH efficiency can be predicated to be 11.2% for a bandgap of 2.26 eV. The combination of dual light-absorbers to construct the tandem devices enhances the available free energy for PEC water splitting. For the tandem devices with mode P, the maximum practical STH efficiency can be improved to 15.5% with the same bandgap of 1.59 eV for two light-absorbers (Fig. 2e). Because the dual light-absorbers in tandem devices with mode T can use the incident light with different wavelength range, the STH efficiency can reach a maximum of 22.8% with the front and rear light-absorbers respectively having the bandgaps of 1.84 and 1.23 eV (Fig. 2f).39
3. Material design for improved light harvesting
Modifying the morphology of the photoelectrodes is an effective way to improve the light trapping. Various nanostructures have been constructed for PEC water splitting, e.g. nanowires, nanosheets, and nanotrees.35 To broaden the light absorption range of the PEC materials, several approaches, including doping, forming solid solution, and utilizing surface-plasmon resonance effects, are widely employed. Typically, surface-plasmon resonance effects have emerged as a research focus. In the following sections, various approaches to increase the light harvesting of photoelectrode materials will be discussed.
3.1 Morphology control
The morphology of the photoelectrode materials plays an important role in determining the PEC performance.33,40 It can not only affect the specific surface area and the charge separation efficiency, but also has a direct influence on the light absorption capacity.41–44 The morphology of utilized semiconductor materials to construct the photoelectrode can be classified to 0-dimensional (0D), 1-dimensional (1D), 2-dimensional (2D), and 3-dimensional (3D) nanostructures.45Fig. 3 presented the schematic and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D nanomaterials. 0D nanostructures generally represent nanoparticles, and 1D nanostructures include nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, and nanofibers. For the 2D materials, the nanosheets and nanowalls are widely applied, which can be vertically or horizontally aligned on the substrate. The 3D structures allow the materials to grow outside the nanoscale from arbitrary directions, which include nanotrees, 3D ordered porous structures, etc.46
 Fig. 3  Schematics and SEM images of (a) 0D, (b) 1D, (c) 2D, and (d) 3D nanostructures at the photoelectrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For 0D nanomaterials, the photogenerated charges have to pass through the grain boundaries of the stacked nanoparticles to reach the interface, which usually leads to severe charge recombination and low PEC performance.45 Therefore, the assembled 0D nanomaterials as single photoelectrode are not the research priority for PEC water splitting. However, varied examples of systems incorporating 0D nanomaterials on bulk semiconductors can be found in literature, in which these materials act as quantum dots and have an overall effect on the light absorption. A typical example is the incorporation of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) on metal oxide photoanodes such as BiVO4. For instance, Ye et al. deposited 5–7 nm CQDs on BiVO4 photoelectrodes, thus extending the light harvesting in the wavelength range of 500–800 nm and giving rise to applied bias to photon-to-current efficiency of 2.29% at 0.6 VRHE, while a value lower than 1.5% was obtained with the material with only electrocatalyst.47 Similarly, Fe2O3 and WO3 photoanodes decorated with CQDs have been reported, having not only optical effects reflected on the incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) values in the range of 450–600 nm, but also playing a role on the enhanced charge transfer processes.48
Next, we firstly take the nanowire as a model to study the effect of 1D morphology. Due to the short diffusion distance, the nanowires own excellent charge transfer property.49 Meanwhile, the nanowire array can efficiently trap the incident light. As shown in Fig. 4a, the multiple light scattering among the nanowire array can occur, which prolongs the light travel time and length inside the photoelectrode. Compared with the planar and bulk materials, the nanowire structure is a better light-absorber for PEC water splitting.50,51 For instance, the longer Ti and Sn doped α-Fe2O3 nanowires could absorb more incident light. The photocurrent density of the nanowire photoanode with the length of 2.5 μm could reach 1.3 mA cm−2 at 0.7 VAg/AgCl.52 Considering the advantages of the nanowire structure, the ITO (In:SnO2) nanoarrays were introduced to prepare the α-Fe2O3 core–shell nanowires. Due to the increased light absorption, the photocurrent density of the α-Fe2O3 core–shell nanowires could reach 1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE.53 Zhang et al. proposed that the controllable diameter of the nanowires was a critical factor to influence the PEC efficiency. The activities of single silicon nanowires with different diameters from 200 to 2000 nm were compared. It was shown that the small diameter was in favor of generating the resonance effect, and the larger diameter could make more efficient utilization of long-wavelength light. The optimal performance was achieved at a diameter of 1415 nm.54 Pihosh et al. prepared the WO3/BiVO4 core–shell nanostructured photoanode for water oxidation. The combination of BiVO4 and conductive WO3 nanorods could enhance light trapping and decrease charge recombination. After loading the CoPi cocatalyst, a high photocurrent density of 6.72 mA cm−2 was obtained at 1.23 VRHE.55
 Fig. 4  (a) Light trapping among 1D nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Light–matter interaction among vertically aligned 2D nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Illustration of 3D hierarchically branched TiO2 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Guan et al. prepared p-GaN-based nanowire arrays for seawater splitting in the absence of any external bias or sacrificial agent. Compared to hydrogen production from pure water splitting, the improved hydrogen production performance was achieved in simulated seawater due to the chlorine oxidation reaction as a favorable intermediate process and the increased solution conductivity. Under concentrated light irradiation, the nanowire arrays showed a STH efficiency of 1.9%.56 They further loaded water oxidation and reduction cocatalysts on the GaN-based nanowire arrays to improve hydrogen production. A remarkable STH efficiency of ∼2.7% and an excellent stability beyond 580 h were achieved for pure water splitting without the external bias.57 In addition to nanowires, nanorods and nanotubes are also widely examined in PEC water splitting due to their favorable light absorption properties. Jeon et al. used a series of strategies to modify the hematite nanorod arrays, consisting of hydrogen treatment, depositing TiO2 passivation layer, and loading CoPi cocatalyst, and a high photocurrent density of 6 mA cm−2 was achieved at 1.23 VRHE.58 Graphynes have received increasing attention as newly emerging 2D carbon materials for PEC applications owing to their large surface area, high stability, and higher carrier mobility than graphene. It was revealed that the graphyne could be decorated on the TiO2 nanotube arrays. The produced C–O–Ti linkage could result in enhanced PEC performance of oxygen evolution, and a photocurrent density of 3.95 mA cm−2 was obtained at 0.86 VRHE.59
The regulated light–matter interaction could contribute to high PEC properties of 2D materials.60,61 As shown in Fig. 4b, the different refractive indexes of the semiconductor and water could lead to the light reflection and scattering. Meanwhile, the multi-wall film had a high specific surface area and an open edge geometry, which was helpful to enlarge the contact area between the photoelectrode and electrolyte and further realized more surface reactive sites. When the number of layers increased, there was obvious absorption enhancement. The multi-wall film had the best light absorption and PEC performance.62,63 The arrangement mode of 2D materials on the substrate is an important factor to adjust the optical properties. Hu and coworkers compared the vertically aligned SnS2 nanosheets with the parallelly aligned ones. It was shown that the vertical alignment had a significantly higher light absorption capacity, because of the increased light scattering among the nanosheets.64 The thickness of 2D materials determines the charge diffusion length, which would affect the PEC performance. Zhang et al. fabricated hierarchical SnS2/CuInS2 nanosheet heterostructure films for PEC water splitting. Large CuInS2 nanosheet films first grew on the substrate, and then small SnS2 nanosheets were epitaxially deposited on both sides of the CuInS2. The large surface area of the 2D nanosheets could facilitate the generation of high-quality heterostructures, resulting in enhanced PEC activity.65 For the narrow bandgap SnSe2, the light absorption of 20 nm-thick nanosheets and 200 nm-thick nanoplates both showed good light absorption in the visible-light region. However, compared with the thick nanoplates, the nanosheet exhibited a higher photocurrent.66 Wang et al. proposed the controlled synthesis of ultrathin 2D β-In2S3 nanoflakes by a facile solvothermal method. The Zr doping could successfully improve the photocurrent density and low the onset potential.67 Constructing 2D morphology is also an efficient way to improve the activities of metal oxide films.16 2D anatase TiO2 porous single crystalline nanostructure was generated on the FTO glass substrate. The porous 2D structure owned excellent charge mobility and had no detriment to the crystal structure, which yielded a photocurrent density of 1.02 mA cm−2 at 0.4 VRHE.68
The photoelectrode with 3D nanostructure has a complex geometric morphology, which can exhibit special optical features, such as the optical waveguiding. Additionally, compared to the 1D and 2D structures, the 3D nanostructure has a larger surface area and better charge transfer property.69 Cho et al. compared the PEC performance of TiO2 nanoparticles, TiO2 nanorods, and hierarchically branched TiO2 nanorods (Fig. 4c). It was revealed that the branched TiO2 nanorods presented the maximum photoelectric conversion efficiency, which could be ascribed to efficient light absorption, increased charge separation and transport, and enhanced active surface area.70 A NiCoSex modified 3D Si nanopillar array photocathode was fabricated, which showed a high photocurrent density of 37.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. The Si nanopillar arrays had strong antireflection properties for enhanced light harvesting. The transparent NiCoSex cocatalyst deposited on the Si nanopillar array backbones could accelerate the surface reaction without affecting the light absorption by Si arrays.71 One example of the effective morphology control for improvement of both light absorption and charge transfer, is the work of Fàbrega et al.72 They prepared highly oriented WO3 photoanodes, displaying a columnar porous morphology that allowed to increase the film thickness beyond several microns, while preserving the carrier charge transfer to the electrolyte, and ultimately fabricated a stack of two electrodes of controlled thickness for maximizing the light absorption, reaching more than 3.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE. Constructing a 3D hierarchical heterostructure is an effective approach to further increase the light absorption, surface area, and multiple interfaces. Han and coworkers fabricated the α-Fe2O3/TiO2 3D hierarchical nanostructure to promote the PEC performance. The 3D hierarchical nanostructures consisted of α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes and TiO2 nanotubes, which could expand the absorption region from the UV to Vis light. The carrier transfer was also dramatically accelerated owing to the formation of heterojunction structure. Through the nanostructured design, the photocurrent of the 3D Fe2O3/TiO2 increased twice as that of bare TiO2 nanotubes.73 A hierarchical WO3@ZnWO4@ZnO–ZnO nanocactus array was fabricated to increase both light absorption and charge separation. The branch structure led to the multiple scattering and enhanced light absorption, and the heterojunction gave rise to efficient charge transfer.74 Nanopyramids can be utilized for improving light absorption due to the anti-reflection property, and strong electrical fields can be created at the very tip. Wei et al. fabricated a hierarchical vertically oriented arrayed structure for water oxidation, in which CoPi cocatalyst nanoparticles grew exclusively on the apex of BiVO4 nanopyramid arrays.75 The highly selective deposition of CoPi nanoparticles was attributed to the (112) facet formation at the apex of BiVO4 nanopyramids, which showed electron enriched states thus generating the electric field for hole diffusion. The close interaction between CoPi and the BiVO4 nanopyramid facilitated charge separation and thus improved the PEC activity.76 Substrate structuration could be considered a different example of 3D design, as alternative to planar devices. In such systems, textured substrates are used for growing the semiconductor, thus displaying significantly improved light management. Inverse opals (IO) are a clear example of such systems: BiVO4 grown on IO-AZO (Al doped ZnO) and BiVO4/TiO2 heterojunctions on IO-FTO (F-doped SnO2) have displayed between 60% and two-fold improvement in the photocurrent density.77,78 Double-deck WO3/BiVO4 IO fabricated by Ma et al. demonstrated enhanced in-plane light scattering, thus significantly improving the light absorbance (around 90% between 350–475 nm), leading to high IPCE values (above 60% at λ ≤ 450 nm).79 A similar strategy has also been applied to CuFeO2 photocathodes, boosting its intrinsic low near-bandgap quantum efficiency and reaching a photocurrent density of 5.2 mA cm−2 at −0.1 VRHE.80 Following a different strategy to the IO preparation, Zhao et al. reported the fabrication of photoanodes consisting in textured polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrates with different nanostructures covered by ultrathin BiVO4/SnO2/Au layers, able to induce resonant light trapping and light retrapping processes, causing a 10% photocurrent increase in the textured substrate compared to a planar one, only related to light absorption improvement.81
Briefly, the morphology control is an effective way to improve light trapping in the photoelectrodes. 0D nanoparticles have been widely used as photocatalysts in the suspension solution. However, when they are assembled into a photoelectrode, the severe charge recombination at the interparticle boundaries would restrict the PEC performance. Meanwhile, the photoelectrode with 0D nanoparticles barely showed advanced light absorption properties. As a comparison, the delicately designed 1D, 2D, and 3D nanostructures are beneficial to light trapping, charge transfer, and surface reaction, which give rise to apparent improved PEC activities. The enhancement of light trapping in the 1D architecture can be simply tuning the geometry. For instance, leaky mode resonances can take place with appropriate nanowire interspacing or diameter, which leads to increased light absorption. The light absorption improvement at a specific wavelength can be controlled by adjusting the nanowire diameter.45 Compared with 1D nanostructures, 2D nanostructures possess two exposed surfaces, which can be engineered as active sites for catalytic reactions and provide a platform to design heterojunction structures through the efficient face-to-face contact. The 3D nanostructure can be considered as the assembly of 0D, 1D, and 2D nanostructures, which have more possibility to design the morphology, heterojunction structure, and textured substrate. 3D ordered structures also own some unique properties. For instance, the slow-light effect in the 3D photonic crystal can increase the light absorption orders of magnitude via strong multiple scattering (Table 1).45
Table 1 Summary of photoelectrodes with different morphology for PEC water splitting




Dimensionality
Photoelectrode (morphology)
Light management properties
Electrolyte
Photocurrent density
Ref.





a KPi: potassium phosphate buffer solution.





1D
Ti,Sn:Fe2O3 (nanowire)
Enhance light trapping
1 M NaOH
1.3 mA cm−2 at 0.7 VAg/AgCl

52



1D
Fe2O3 (nanorod)/TiO2/CoPi
Enhance light trapping
1 M KOH
6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHEc

58



1D
WO3 (nanorod)/BiVO4/CoPi
Enhance light trapping
0.1 M KPia
6.72 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE

55



1D
TiO2 (nanotube)/γ-graphyne
Increase the optical path
0.5 M Na2SO4
3.95 mA cm−2 at 0.86 VRHE

59



2D
SnS2 (nanosheet)
Increase light reflection and scattering
0.5 M Na2SO4
1.73 mA cm−2 at 1.4 VRHE

64



2D
SnS2/CuInS2 (nanosheet)/C60
Enhance visible-light utilization
0.5 M Na2SO4
4.51 mA cm−2 at −0.45 VRHE

65



2D
Zr:In2S3 (nanoflake)
Enhance light trapping
0.5 M NaOH
1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.3 VRHE

67



2D
TiO2 (nanoplate)/Au/MnOx
Enhance light absorption
1 M KOH
1.02 mA cm−2 at 0.4 VRHE

68



2D
WO3 (nanoflake)/NCDs
Increase light harvesting
1 M H2SO4
1.42 mA cm−2 at 1.0 VSCE

16



3D
WO3 (columnar-shape)/IrOx
Enhance the light collection capability
0.1 M H2SO4
3.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE

72



3D
BiVO4 (nanopyramid)/CoPi
Improve anti-reflection property
0.5 M Na2SO4
1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE

75



3D
CuFeO2 (inverse opal structure)/CoFe LDH
Enhance visible-light absorption due to multiple scattering
1 M NaOH
5.2 mA cm−2 at −0.1 VRHE

80



3D
BiVO4 (textured structure)/SnO2/Au/FeOOH
Induce resonant light trapping and light retrapping
0.5 M phosphate buffer solution
1.99 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE

81



3D
Si (nanopillar)/NiCoSex
Strong anti-reflection property
0.5 M H2SO4
37.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE

71





3.2 Surface-plasmon resonance effects
Combining plasmonic materials can improve the optical properties of the photoelectrodes, because plasmonic materials have tunable absorption in wide spectrum and large absorption cross section.82 The attachment of plasmonic materials to the semiconductor photoelectrode can widen the light absorption range, enhance the electromagnetic field, and promote the catalytic and photoinduced processes.83,84 The surface-plasmon resonance (SPR) effect is the interaction between electrons and photons that vibrate freely on the metal surface, generating electron density waves that propagate along the metal surface.85 The main favorable effects of plasmonic metals on solar conversion efficiency can be divided as (i) light scattering/trapping, (ii) plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer (PIRET), and (iii) hot electron injection.86
When the size of plasmonic materials is larger than 100 nm, the light trapping is induced by multiple scattering and reflection. With the particle size smaller than 20 nm, the light scattering is weak, but a strong local electromagnetic field with intensity 100 times higher than that of incident light can be created.87 Plasmonic core–shell Au@TiO2 nanoparticles were used to modify the photoelectrodes for water splitting. Compared with the photoelectrode without the Au@TiO2 nanoparticle layer, the photoelectrode with the Au@TiO2 nanoparticle layer could dramatically enhance the IPCE from the UV to the IR region (Fig. 5a). The enhancement in the UV region was induced via the light scattering of plasmonic Au nanoparticles (Fig. 5b). The increase in the IR region was attributed to the plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer.88 In addition, the periodic structure of plasmonic materials can introduce the incident light along the lateral direction and trap it. With the careful nanostructured design of the plasmonic materials, the SPR could concentrate light around the surface.89
 Fig. 5  (a) Plot of IPCE against wavelength over different photoelectrodes: (a) FTO/TiO2–Au@TiO2, (b) FTO/Cu2O, (c) FTO/TiO2-P25/Cu2O, and (d) FTO/TiO2–Au@TiO2/Al2O3/Cu2O at −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The inset image is the enlarged view in the Vis-IR region; (b) schematic diagram of light utilization in the FTO/TiO2–Au@TiO2/Al2O3/Cu2O photoelectrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For the PIRET, the energy transfers from the plasmonic metal to the semiconductor by dipole–dipole coupling. It allows the photons with energy smaller than the bandgap of the semiconductor to participate in the PEC water splitting, thus extending the absorption spectral range. Notably, the PIRET process does not need an intimate contact between plasmonic materials and the semiconductor.87 Even if the thickness of the insulating layer between the plasmonic materials and the semiconductor is larger than 25 nm, the PIRET still could occur. However, it was pointed out that the efficiency of the PIRET depended on the distance and spectral overlap between the metals and semiconductors.90 The hematite nanorod–Au nanohole array was prepared to enhance the light harvesting. Above the band edge of hematite, the light enhancement was ascribed to the surface plasmon polariton of Au nanohole array, which could launch a guided wave mode inside the hematite nanorods with these nanorods as miniature optic fibers (Fig. 6a and b). The PIRET helped to enhance light absorption below the band edge of hematite, and the local plasmonic field could decrease charge recombination (Fig. 6c). Therefore, the greatly increased PEC water splitting performance (i.e. IPCE) was achieved by incorporating hematite nanorods into the plasmonic Au nanohole array (Fig. 6d).91 Li et al. proposed a new plasmon-driven photoanode based on plasmonic metal–insulator–semiconductor (PMIS) heterostructure (Au@SiO2NP-decorated α-Fe2O3 nanorod array) for water splitting. The PEC performance of PMIS structure was greatly improved due to the enhancement of localized SPR electromagnetic field via the PIRET mechanism. Meanwhile, the thin SiO2 insulating layer could eliminate the negative influence of interfacial states and increase the metal–semiconductor barrier height, which could suppress charge recombination.92
 Fig. 6  (a and b) Simulation of the electromagnetic field distribution at the surface plasmon polariton mode with (a) single hematite nanorod in the Au nanohole and (b) multiple hematite nanorods in the Au nanohole (450 nm light). (c) Simulation of the electromagnetic field distribution at the localized SPR mode (650 nm light). (d) Plot of the waveguiding efficiency, local field enhancement, and IPCE values against the wavelength over the Au nanohole array with hematite nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
Hot electron injection is a direct electron transfer from the plasmonic materials to the semiconductors, which is also called as direct electron transfer (DET).90 Compared to the PIRET, the DET requires close contact between the plasmonic metal and the semiconductor, and the hot electrons need to overcome the Schottky barrier.93 Among various plasmonic metal/semiconductor composite materials, plasmonic metal-photonic crystal (PC) semiconductor heterostructures emerged as an efficient combination to extend the light absorption, because both plasmonic metals and PC semiconductors are sensitive and tunable light-absorbers. The spectral overlap of electronic bandgap, localized SPR, and incident light source could also lead to superior PEC performance.94 Au nanoparticles with a size of 10 nm were coupled with a TiO2 PC layer, and the PEC water splitting performance was apparently enhanced owing to the energetic hot electrons and holes generated in Au nanoparticles. By tuning the pore size of the TiO2 PC structure, the slow photon region at the red edge of the photonic bandgap could overlap with the localized SPR region of Au NPs, which would intensify the SPR response. Considerable hot electrons were thus generated under visible-light irradiation, which were then injected to the TiO2 PC structure for efficient PEC water splitting.95
3.3 Other approaches
Besides the morphology control and surface-plasmon resonance effect, other approaches such as doping, forming solid solution, and photon up-conversion could also improve the absorption spectral range of the photoelectrode materials, which has been extensively studied by previous researches.8 For instance, doping Ge ions into α-Fe2O3 could induce the non-isovalent impurities, which led to better absorption from 250 to 800 nm and a shift of absorption onset to longer wavelength. The improved light absorption after Ge doping was an important factor for the enhanced photocurrent.96 With the aid of forming the solid solution, the bandgap and band positions of semiconductors can be adjusted. Li et al. prepared (GaN)1−x(ZnO)x nanowires for water splitting. The increased content of ZnO from 10.3% to 47.6% in the (GaN)1−x(ZnO)x solid solution would lead to the bandgap tailoring from 3.08 to 2.77 eV. Owing to the narrower bandgap and the favorable morphology of nanowires, the PEC property of (GaN)1−x(ZnO)x photoanode was greatly enhanced.97 Because the up-conversion can utilize two low-energy photons to generate a high-energy photon, the Vis or IR light can be converted into UV light to excite large bandgap metal oxides for PEC water splitting. As shown in Fig. 7a, Barawi et al. respectively applied the 2,3-butanedione (BA) and 2,5-diphenyloxazole (PPO) as the emitter and sensitizer in the triplet–triplet annihilation systems. The upconverted energy of BA/PPO overlapped with the TiO2 absorption bandgap (Fig. 7b). Therefore, the photocurrent of the TiO2 photoelectrode cell with up-conversion materials could be increased 40 folds compared to that without up-conversion materials.98 For the single light-absorber photoelectrode, most of current PEC systems can only utilize the light with the wavelength shorted than 600 nm. If the light response is extended to ∼730 nm (corresponding to the bandgap of ∼1.7 eV), the photogenerated charge carries in the single light-absorber still have enough redox ability for water splitting. When the plasmonic and up-conversion materials are applied, the incident light with even longer wavelength can be utilized. In terms of the tandem device with dual or multiple light-absorbers, the band position of each light-absorber only needs to meet the criterion for HER or OER, so semiconductors with narrow bandgaps can be used. As discussed in Fig. 2f, the STH efficiency can reach a maximum of 22.8% with the front and rear light-absorbers respectively having the bandgaps of 1.84 and 1.23 eV. Broadening the light absorption range may lead to the accumulation of photoexcited charges and cause increased charge recombination. Nevertheless, the charge separation and transfer can be accelerated through many strategies such as morphology control and loading cocatalysts. Eventually, the PEC activity can be improved by extending the light absorption range through appropriate optimization.
 Fig. 7  (a) Sketch of the triplet–triplet annihilation based photon up-conversion system for PEC reaction. (b) Absorbance and emission spectra of BA and PPO in dimethylformamide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Sketch of light propagation in a quarter-wave film. (d) Effect of the film thickness and depth on the photon absorption of the α-Fe2O3 film using the Pt reflective layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright © 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
Adding the metal reflective layer is another method to enhance light absorption. As displayed in Fig. 7c, the reflective layer on the bottom of the α-Fe2O3 film could reduce the light transmission, and the different refractive indexes between the medium and the semiconductor could lead to multiple reflections inside the semiconductor. The interference between forward- and backward-propagating waves could improve the light absorption in quarter-wave films. High photon fluxes could be concentrated close to the film surface, which was important to collect photogenerated minority charge carriers in α-Fe2O3 film (Fig. 7d). By coupling this light management strategy with V-shape light re-trapping scheme, an impressive photocurrent density of 4 mA cm−2 was obtained over the Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 film with a thickness of ∼26 nm.99 Besides using metal reflective layers, noncontact photonic crystals have been used in combination with hematite photoanodes, adhered to the nonconductive side of the FTO/glass.100 This PC film showed a high reflection peak at 373 nm and light scattering signals (5–45°), thus increasing the absorption of the Fe2O3 electrode in the 350–550 nm range. Moreover, even when compared to a highly reflective metal mirror (HMR), the photocurrent gain with the PC was higher than the one with the HMR at short wavelengths, associated to the light reflection and scattering. An analogous approach followed by Choi et al., by combining a luminescent back reflector (LBR) with photon up-conversion properties has been proposed, in combination with Mo:BiVO4 photoanodes.101 Besides the emission capability of the LBR, the authors introduced TiO2 nanoparticles for maximizing the scattering effect, thus reducing the internal reflection and increasing the surface emission (excitation and emission at wavelengths of 600–650 and 470 nm, respectively), which in turn, increased the efficiency of the Mo:BiVO4 in around 46%.
4. Device engineering for optimized light utilization
A single light-absorber PEC device is hard to achieve efficient unbiased water splitting. Alternatively, the tandem configuration is generally applied to construct viable PEC devices, containing photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem devices and PEC/PV tandem devices. Importantly, the absorption of incident light can be optimized through dual or multiple absorbers, leading to higher theoretical STH efficiency.102 To obtain efficient PEC water splitting, the management of light absorption between dual light-absorbers should be optimized. Typically for the tandem devices with mode T configuration, the light absorption and transmission of the front photoelectrode should be balanced to guarantee the sufficient light absorption by the rear unit. Therefore, selecting appropriate photoelectrode and PV materials, as well as constructing effective device configurations is crucial.25,103 In addition, the current PEC water splitting is generally studied under one-sun irradiation. Inspired by concentrated photovoltaic (CPV) cells, PEC water splitting under concentrated light have received increasing attention as an efficient light trapping strategy. It is expected that the high photon flux from the dramatically increased light intensity can give rise to favorable properties of charge generation, separation, transfer, and injection.
4.1 Photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem devices
The utilization of a photoanode and a photocathode to construct the tandem device is an attractive approach for unbiased PEC water splitting without complex power supply. The efficiency is determined by the operating current density (Jop) from the intersection of current–potential curves of the photoanode and the photocathode. Both the onset potentials and photocurrents of the two photoelectrodes will affect the performance of the PEC tandem devices.103 The ideal Jop is required to approach the plateau photocurrent densities of both photoelectrodes.104 Besides the current matching, the optimization of the tandem device not only depends on the selection of the two photo-absorbers, but also on other parameters affecting the individual performance for each half-reaction. Several models and predictions have been proposed in literature,31 suggesting ideal combinations based on the materials bandgap which is one of the main aspects determining the overall STH. However, as demonstrated by Hu et al., the STH depends on the interplay of all the components, including individual fill factor, electrocatalysts, electrolyte, etc.105 A web-based approach for modeling tandem systems developed by Seger et al. (initially focused on water electrolysis but extendable to other PEC reactions), has shown for instance that besides the top- and bottom-layer bandgap, decreasing the optical thickness of the top absorber (i.e. photon matching) is theoretically a good strategy to gain in the STH for some tandems with specific combinations.106
Currently, different semiconductors such as metal oxides, metal sulfides, III–V group materials, have been used to construct PEC tandem devices. Among them, III–V materials-based devices have exhibited the best activities due to their remarkable photoelectric properties. Kainthla et al. reported an STH efficiency of 8.2% for the tandem device composed of InP photocathode and GaAs photoanode. The efficiency and stability were greatly improved with the assistance of the manganese oxide protective layer and Pt HER cocatalyst.107 Kang et al. fabricated a series-connected layered tandem cell including GaAs photoelectrodes with an STH efficiency of 13.1%.108 In these printed bifacial GaAs photoelectrodes, sunlight irradiated from a glass substrate to reach the photoelectrode, while the water redox reactions occurred on the opposite side of the incident light (Fig. 8a). The decoupled light absorption and electrocatalysis could avoid the parasitic absorption from electrocatalytic nanoparticles and the protection layer, leading to efficient utilization of incident photons by the light-absorbers. Compared with conventional wafer-based systems, the resulting bifacial GaAs photoelectrodes with well-matched energy band performed improved light absorption and charge transfer property, as well as good stability (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram (top), photographic image (bottom left), and optical micrographs (bottom right) of the tandem system consisting of the GaAs photocathode and photoanode on a glass substrate. (b) Energy band diagram of the GaAs-based photoanode and photocathode in the PEC tandem device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
In terms of practical application, developing cost-effective PEC devices is crucial, and metal oxide-based PEC tandem devices stand out to be potential choices. In the early research, an all-oxide PEC tandem device was constructed, where the n-type TiO2 nanotube photoanode absorbed UV light, and the Cu–Ti–O nanotube photocathode absorbed visible light. Under AM 1.5 irradiation, this device produced a photocurrent of 0.25 mA cm−2, corresponding to the photoconversion efficiency of 0.30%.109 Under the integrated configuration, the combination of TiO2 photoanode and Si photocathode could realize the efficient utilization of sunlight to obtain overall water splitting with an STH efficiency of 0.12%.110 BiVO4 photoanode is the most widely investigated metal oxide photoelectrode in the PEC tandem devices due to its good PEC property, relatively large photovoltage of ∼1.0 V, and visible-light response.111 Connecting BiVO4 photoanode with Si nanoarray photocathode was feasible to achieve unbiased water splitting with an STH efficiency of 0.57%.112 With the help of ultrasmall cobalt borate cocatalysts and conformal TiO2 layer, the BiVO4 photoanode was connected with a-Si photocathode to form a self-driven tandem cell, achieving an STH efficiency up to 3%.113 When BiVO4 was used as the photoanode and Cu2O was applied as the photocathode, a tandem device can be fabricated to achieve unbiased water decomposition.114,115 Grätzel and coworkers built a tandem device consisting of the BiVO4 photoanode and the RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O photocathode, in which the back Cu2O photocathode could absorb the light transmitted from the BiVO4 photoanode (Fig. 9a). After optimization, an operating current density of 2.45 mA cm−2 was achieved, corresponding to the STH efficiency of ∼3% (Fig. 9b).116 As a stable and narrow-bandgap photoanode, α-Fe2O3 is widely utilized to construct tandem devices. However, the efficiencies are generally smaller than those of BiVO4 based tandem devices owing to the low PEC activity of the pristine α-Fe2O3.117 When assembled into a monolithic tandem device, the light management by modifying the device architecture also matters. An integrated PEC tandem cell consisting of the WO3/FTO/p+n Si photoanode and Pt/TiO2/Ti/n+p Si photocathode was fabricated in a layered configuration. Two PEC modules were separated by Nafion membrane. The PEC module was tilted relative to the horizontal direction, and the Nafion membrane was parallel to illumination direction to optimize the light trapping in the PEC modules. The as-prepared device exhibited a hydrogen evolution rate of 0.17 mL h−1 and a corresponding STH efficiency of 0.24%.118
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of a self-biased system connected by Mo:BiVO4 photoanode and Cu2O photocathode. (b) Current density–potential curves (left y-axis) and STH efficiencies (right y-axis) of Cu2O photocathode, BiVO4 photoanode, and Cu2O behind BiVO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Energy band diagram of CdS/CIGS at the solid–liquid interface under 0 VRHE. (d) Current density–potential curves of CIGS photocathode and BiVO4 photoanode in a tandem system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Some monolithic tandem photoanodes for unbiased water splitting can also be found in literature. Black-Si/W-doped BiVO4 tandem photoanode was fabricated and demonstrated an average STH efficiency 0.45% during 1 h operation.119 More recently, Ahmet et al. developed nanostructured monolithic tandem devices consisting on n-Si/metal–oxide/WO3/BiVO4 architectures by using a simple preparation approach and reaching STH efficiency ∼0.37% during 10 h operation.120 In that work, the effect of SnO2 and TiO2 as passivating layers was demonstrated, to suppress Fermi level pinning by directly contacting native SiOx layer with a WO3 or BiVO4 layer.
Copper-based chalcogenides are widely studied in PEC tandem devices due to the narrow bandgaps, high absorption coefficients, and good charge transfer properties.19 A PEC tandem cell comprising of p-CuInS2/n-CuIn5S8 was fabricated, which provided a feasible way to develop tunable metal sulfides for PEC water splitting. The cation exchange route was applied to synthesize p-type CuInS2 and n-type CuIn5S8 microcrystals. It is found that the structure, composition, and semiconducting behaviors can be tuned by maneuvering the cation exchange rate.121 Gong's group proposed a two-step platinization strategy to monitor the particle size and dispersion of Pt cocatalysts on the Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) based photocathode, leading to significantly improved surface reaction. The robust CIGS/CdS/Al2O3/TiO2/Pt photocathode was combined with a BiVO4 photoanode to generate a tandem cell for unassisted water splitting, and an STH efficiency of 1.01% was achieved.122 Domen's group optimized the performance of CIGS by changing the ratio of In and Ga elements. The CuIn0.5Ga0.5Se2 film had the smaller conduction band offset with the CdS buffer layer to decrease the energy loss (Fig. 9c). A tandem PEC device using the BiVO4 photoanode and the CuIn0.5Ga0.5Se2 photocathode was constructed to harvest light with different spectrum range, which exhibited an STH efficiency of 3.7% (Fig. 9d).123 Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) is an attractive candidate for PEC water splitting because of its earth-abundant elements, suitable band gap (1.5 eV), and low toxicity. Huang et al. used a HfO2 layer to passivate the CdS/Cu2ZnSnS4 photocathode. It was revealed that the thickness of the HfO2 layer could apparently affect the PEC activity and stability, with an optimized thickness of 6 nm. By coupling the Pt/HfO2/CdS/Cu2ZnSnS4 photocathode with the BiVO4 photoanode, a tandem device with an STH conversion efficiency of 1.046% was achieved.124
4.2 PEC/PV tandem devices
Although the photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem devices are good options for unassisted water splitting, they need proper matching. To mitigate the requirements of photoelectrodes, PV units can be introduced to provide additional photovoltages, and the generated PEC/PV tandem devices lead to self-biased water splitting. Diverse semiconductor photoelectrodes and PV units can be integrated, which provides versatile combinations. Similar to PEC tandem devices, the efficiency of the PEC/PV devices is determined by the properties of each component, and generally limited by the low photocurrent of the photoelectrodes.102,125 The solar spectrum also needs to be reasonably distributed between the photoelectrode and the PV device to achieve a balance.126
The III–V semiconductor photo-absorbers have shown remarkable performance in PEC/PV tandem devices. A monolithic PEC/PV device based on III–V group semiconductors with an STH efficiency of 12.4% was reported by Turner's group, which comprised of a top layer of epitaxially grown p-GaInP2 and a GaAs p/n bottom cell. The top GaInP2 with a bandgap of 1.83 eV absorbed the visible light, while the bottom unit with a smaller bandgap would increase the use of near-infrared region.127 The GaInP2 photocathode and Pt anode could drive the water redox reactions under additional voltage provided by the GaAs bottom cell. Afterwards, it is pointed out that the inflated efficiency for this device should be corrected according to the advanced benchmarking protocols, and an STH efficiency of 10% is more reasonable.128 Deutsch and coworkers improved the GaInP/GaInAs tandem devices by employing an inverted metamorphic multi-junction (IMM) architecture. The efficiency modeling was carried out to guide the bandgap matching of two light-absorbers. Incorporating a gradient buffer layer could mitigate the incompatibility of the lattice constants between different layers, and a high STH efficiency of over 16% was finally obtained.128 Significantly, a PEC/PV tandem device with a remarkable STH efficiency of 19.3% was presented, which included a GaInP photocathode, a GaInAs PV module on a GaAs substrate, and a RuO2 counter electrode (Fig. 10a). A crystalline and uniform TiO2 film was deposited by the atomic layer deposition, which could act as a protective and antireflective layer. Rh cocatalysts were loaded to accelerate the charge transfer. Benefited from multiple surface modifications on GaInP photocathode, the tandem cell yielded a photocurrent density of 15.7 mA cm−2 (Fig. 10b).10
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the tandem system with a GaInP photocathode modified by interfacial films (AlInP, AlInPOx, TiO2) and Rh electrocatalysts, a GaInAs PV module, and a RuOx cathode. (b) Current density–potential curves of tandem device in different electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Although the tandem cells including metal oxide photoanodes exhibit lower photocurrents, the improved stability and decreased cost are beneficial to the practical application. To solve the contradiction of light penetration depth and short hole diffusion length of BiVO4 photoanode, the inverse nanocone array (ICA) substrate was employed to support nanoporous Mo-doped BiVO4 films. This unique nanostructure not only showed a remarkable light trapping effect but also apparently improved charge separation. The ICA-photoanode/perovskite solar cell (PSC) tandem device yielded an STH efficiency of 6.3%.129 Additionally, Wang et al. fabricated the FeOOH/NiOOH modified thin BiVO4 films with oxygen vacancies. Then, the dual BiVO4 photoanodes were coupled with a sealed PSC to build an unbiased water splitting device. The tandem device exhibited an excellent operating current density of 5.27 mA cm−2 and an optimized STH efficiency of 6.5%.130 Kim et al. developed unique dual photoanodes with modified BiVO4 and α-Fe2O3 to extend light utilization to 610 nm, and two pieces of Si solar cells in parallel as the bottom absorber to offer a photovoltage of 1.2 V. The dual photoanodes showed an current density of 6.3 mA cm−2, and the tandem cell presented an STH efficiency of 7.7%.131 The WO3/BiVO4 core–shell nanorods can form heterojunctions to simultaneously facilitate charge separation and extend the light absorption. By coupling the composite photoanode with a PSC, a highly efficient PEC/PV device was fabricated with an STH efficiency of 7.7%.132 Recently, a BaSnO3 photoanode with controlled oxygen vacancies was prepared, which showed excellent light absorption and charge transfer properties. At a bias of 1.23 V, the optimized BaSnO3 photoanode exhibited a good photocurrent density of 7.32 mA cm−2. By coupling with a PSC, a tandem device with an STH efficiency of 7.92% and impressive stability for 100 h was constructed.133 Hematite has also been evaluated in tandem configuration with multijunction thin-film silicon photovoltaics.134 This tandem device demonstrated a bias-free operation reaching STH of around 1.5%, slightly lower than the ones reported for other material combination. In such work, the calculations of quantum efficiencies (QE) revealed that the Fe2O3 photoanode had a significant impact on the QE of the thin-film Si sub-cells in the 350–1100 nm range. Therefore, further re-design of the PV component and the individual sub-cell thicknesses would be necessary for pairing with hematite, which demonstrates the intrinsic complexity of tandem designing.
Other examples with more advanced light management arrangements have been proposed. As exhibited in Fig. 11a, the double junction GaAs/InGaAsP PV cell could harvest the light reflected from the BiVO4/WO3 nanorod photoanode, leading to an improved utilization of the light spectrum. Under the illumination of 1 sun and 3 suns, the corresponding operating points of the tandem device were respectively 6.6 mA cm−1 at 1.01 V and 18.3 mA cm−1 at 1.02 V (Fig. 11b). A high STH efficiency of 8.1% was achieved under 1 sun irradiation.55 The distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) is an optical filter consisting of multiple alternating high- and low-refractive layers, such as TiO2 and SiO2 layers, which can reflect the short-wavelength light and transmit the long-wavelength light. A hybrid conductive DBR structure was introduced in a tandem device assembled with the BiVO4/WO3 photoanode and the dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC). By optimizing the thickness of TiO2/SiO2 and ITO stack, this DBR structure could reflect light from 300 to 500 nm and transmit light with a wavelength range of 500–800 nm (Fig. 11c). This tandem device showed better PEC performance than that without the hybrid DBR.135 A distinctive V-shaped device provided a new configuration, which consisted of two α-Fe2O3 photoanodes with an angle of 90°, the DBR structures, and the PV cells. The α-Fe2O3 film with a thickness of 10 nm was difficult to fully absorb the incident light. When the light reached the DBR structure, the short-wavelength light was reflected and hit the other photoelectrode in the horizontal direction, and the long-wavelength light passed through the DBR structure to the rear PV cell. The remaining short-wavelength light will be repeatedly absorbed multiple times, which could minimize the light loss (Fig. 11d). This device cleverly utilized the reflection of light, although the photoelectrode requires a relatively good transparency.136
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the tandem device composed of CoPi/BiVO4/WO3 photoanode and GaAs/InGaAsP PV cell. (b) Current density–potential curves of the GaAs/InGaAsP PV cell and the CoPi/BiVO4/WO3 photoanode measured at standard (1 sun, 25 °C) and concentrated light (3 suns, 50 °C) conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic diagram of the tandem device consisting of the DSSC and the BiVO4/WO3 photoanode with a hybrid conductive DBR structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of the V-shaped PEC/PV tandem device consisting of α-Fe2O3 photoanodes and the DBR structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
4.3 PEC water splitting under concentrated light
The concentrated photovoltaic (CPV) cells have been maturely used to improve the energy conversion efficiency and decrease the consumption of the raw material to lower the operational costs and to reduce the large area requirements.137 Inspired by the advantages of CPV cells, the utilization of concentrated light in PEC water splitting has recently drawn increasing attention for efficient light trapping.138,139 It is expected that the high flux of photogenerated charge carriers under concentrated light irradiation could improve photocurrent and photovoltage, extend the charge carrier lifetime, and overcome the potential barrier for PEC water splitting.27,28 Additionally, the thermal effects can be induced by the concentrated light. The increased temperature is favorable to the surface reaction and mass transfer. For typical metal oxide photoanode materials such as BiVO4 and α-Fe2O3, the electron transfer property is limited by the small-polaron hopping. Enhancing the temperature can significantly improve the transportation of small polarons, which is thus beneficial to the PEC reaction.29
The incident light intensity is closely related to the PEC performance. Bell et al. increased the light intensity to 52 suns for PEC water oxidation over the TiO2 photoanode. It was found that the photocurrent and the light intensity had a sub-linear relationship, and the photocurrent was proportional to the light intensity with an exponential value of 0.627.140 Generally, the generation rate of photoexcited charge carriers is faster than the charge transfer and surface reaction rate.141 Therefore, the relationship of the PEC performance with the light intensity should be affected by the charge transfer and surface reaction properties of the photoelectrodes. Hernández et al. found that after increasing the incident light intensity, the photocurrent enhancement of TiO2 nanotubes was more obvious compared to that of ZnO@TiO2 core–shell structures. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis revealed that these material-dependent behaviors were determined by their different charge transport and interface reaction properties.142 Segev et al. changed the light intensity from 0.5 to 25 suns for PEC water splitting. It was shown that the photocurrent density of α-Fe2O3 photoanode increased linearly with the light intensity (Fig. 12a), and the photovoltage scaled logarithmically with the light intensity, displaying a steeper rate than in photovoltaics. Therefore, the energy conversion efficiency could be improved under high light intensity. The improvement of the charge injection efficiency at the interface and the decreased charge recombination rate were considered as the main reasons for the dramatically increased efficiency of α-Fe2O3 at high intensity.28 The charge carrier dynamic study by ultrafast spectroscopy revealed that the increased light intensity could extend the lifetime of minority carriers in the α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode.143,144 Chen's group also demonstrated that the high light intensity could accelerate the electron transfer from the semiconductor nanostructure to cocatalysts for HER through thermionic emission.27
 Fig. 12  (a) Photocurrent density at the maximum power point corresponding to the varied flux concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (b) Current density–potential curves of the CoPi/Mo:BiVO4/SnO2/Si photoanode under different temperature (from 10 to 42 °C). The inset is the Arrhenius plot, and the calculated activation energy is ∼0.18 eV. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The concentrated light can also generate a significant thermal effect in the PEC system. The increased temperature can promote the charge transfer of metal oxide photoelectrodes with the small-polaron carrier conduction. Chueh's group discovered the thermally-enhanced minority carrier collection in α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode for PEC water oxidation. By increasing the temperature from 7 to 72 °C, the Tafel slope could be significantly decreased from 480 to 240 mV dec−1 under 9 suns irradiation for achieving the photocurrent of 3 mA cm−2. Although the photovoltage decrease was expected by increasing the temperature, it could be mitigated by enhancing the light intensity. The detailed mechanism study revealed that the dramatic increase of the photocurrent with the temperature was mainly attributed to the enhancement of charge collection efficiency in the diffusion region of α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode.145 The effect of reaction temperature on the PEC performance of the BiVO4 photoanode was further examined. It was found that the saturation current density increased more than twice as the temperature rose from 10 to 42 °C (Fig. 12b). The strong temperature enhancement was 3.8% K−1, which was 5 times higher than that in α-Fe2O3. The improved collection efficiency of minority carriers in the quasi-neutral region should account for the improved performance.146 In addition to the charge transfer property, the thermal effect induced by the concentrated light can also decrease the water redox potentials, accelerate the surface chemical reaction, and strength mass transfer. All these factors are beneficial to PEC water splitting.147–149
Briefly, the one-sun irradiation and the room temperature are not always the best reaction conditions for PEC water splitting. The improved light trapping and increased temperature brought by concentrated light can alleviate the problems of unfavorable charge transfer, slow interfacial reaction, and large mass transfer resistance in the PEC water splitting. Therefore, the concentrated light can dramatically improve the photocurrent density. Meanwhile, the PEC system under concentrated light has a great significance to promote the practical application by reducing the materials requested. The current experimental study on PEC water splitting using concentrated light are mainly focused on metal oxide photoelectrodes. The effect on other semiconductor photoelectrodes is still an open question and deserves more investigation in the future.
5. Simulation of light distribution and absorption in PEC water splitting
Theoretical simulation is one effective tool to investigate light distribution and absorption in PEC water splitting, which can provide forward-looking suggestions on the design of efficient materials and devices to promote the light harvesting.22 Maxwell's equations are classic equations to describe the optical field distribution,150 which can be solved by many numerical methods, e.g. the finite element method (FEM),151 the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method,152 and the rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA).153 The FEM is a basic numerical method to solve partial differential equations (PDEs). The space domain is first discretized into several small elements, and then the PDEs are solved in each small element. The solution in each element is finally connected to form the solution for the studied domain. Usually, the FEM can be applied to solve the electromagnetic phenomenon in complex geometry.154 The FDTD method is based on the direct solution of Maxwell's equations,155 which can calculate electromagnetic scattering and absorption from the time and space scale.152 The RCWA can study the spatio-temporal change of the electromagnetic field. It is a semi-analytical numerical method of solving Maxwell's equations in the Fourier domain.156 In the following sections, the application of these methods for simulating the light distribution and absorption in PEC water splitting will be introduced.
5.1 Finite element method (FEM)
The FEM has been widely applied to simulate the electromagnetic field, because it can employ the flexible mesh in the complex geometries and structures. Haussener and coworkers investigated the effects of a wedge shape on the light absorption of the α-Fe2O3 photoanode. As displayed in Fig. 13, the light distribution in the unit wedge structure was simulated and the floquet periodicity was applied as the boundary condition. By solving Maxwell's equations, the electromagnetic field distribution was simulated to determine the optimal wedge shaped photoanode with different reflective layers, wedge angles, and aspect ratios. The FEM simulation results suggested that the wedge shaped α-Fe2O3 photoanode would generate both the resonant and geometric light trapping.157 Jäger and Strehle employed the FEM to evaluate the light absorption of the silicon arrays. In the model, the analytic wavelength of the incident light ranged from 300 to 800 nm. The mesh was finer to 14–30 nm, which was far smaller than the minimum studied wavelength. Through the simulation, it was found that the light absorption was affected by the diameter, pitch, length, and shape of the nanoarray. The silicon nanoarray exhibited an excellent optical performance than the silicon film.158 Chen et al. introduced the localized plasmon-induced effects by loading the Au nanoparticles on the ZnO nanorod array to improve the PEC property. To explain the mechanism of plasmon-induced effects, the FEM was applied to simulate the electromagnetic field distribution. It was shown that the plasmonic nanoparticles with the smaller size were the proper and optimum condition for both plasmon-induced effects and PEC activity.159
 Fig. 13  Simulated geometry and applied conditions for the light distribution in a wedge-shaped α-Fe2O3 photoanode. λ represents the wavelength of simulated light, PML represents the perfectly matched layer, E0 is the initial electric intensity, αi is the incident angle, dfilm represents the thickness of the film, dcoating represents the thickness of the coating, Lp represents the width of the wedge, Lg is the width of the gap, dsc is the width of the domain section, γ is the wedge angle, and P(λ) is the incident power. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. 
5.2 Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method
Although the FEM can be applied to an arbitrary geometry, it is quite awkward in the simulation of electrically large structures and broadband solar irradiation. These limitations of the FEM can be compensated by the FDTD method.160 Qiu et al. prepared nanoporous Mo doped BiVO4 layer on the cone-shaped nanophotonic structure for water splitting, and investigated the effects of the nanostructure on the light absorption using the FDTD method. The ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra indicated that the light absorption on the nanocone substrate was much higher compared to that on the FTO-coated glass substrate (Fig. 14a). The simulation results revealed that the nanocone structure could enhance the electromagnetic field around them due to the light diffraction and redistribution in the nanocone area (Fig. 14b). Namely, the Mo doped BiVO4 layer could absorb more light on the nanocone substrate than that on the flat substrate, which led to significantly improved PEC performance. By combining the modified nanocone/Mo:BiVO4 photoanode with a PSC, the tandem cell exhibited a high STH of 6.2% for unassisted water splitting.161 Yalamanchili et al. used the arrays of TiO2 nanocones to transmit more than 85% of incident light to the underlying Si light-absorber. The 3D FDTD simulation over the spectral range from 400 to 1100 nm revealed that the TiO2 nanocones could act as the waveguide to transmit the broadband light to the semiconductor, and reduce the light interaction with the metal catalyst layer.162
 Fig. 14  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra and (b) simulated cross-sectional electromagnetic distribution of Mo doped BiVO4 on the nanocone substrate and the FTO glass substrate. The red region indicates effective light trapping area. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2016 AAAS. 
Braun and coworkers prepared Si/WO3 hierarchically structured core–shell microwire arrays as the photoelectrode for water splitting. The outer shell was made of WO3 with a porous structure, and the core consisted of Si microwires. By the FDTD simulation, it was shown that the porous WO3 shell could effectively reduce the light reflection. The Si/WO3 hierarchically structured core–shell photoanode exhibited improved photocurrent, because of the increased light trapping and decreased charge collection distance.163 The FDTD method is also a powerful approach to examine the electric field distribution of the plasmonic materials modified photoelectrodes.91,164 Xu et al. employed the FDTD method to simulate the surface plasmon effects in the 3D CdS/Au pillar/truncated-pyramid (PTP) array. It was revealed that the CdS/Au PTP photoanode could achieve high light absorption in wide incident angle and broadband. The surface plasmon effects at the CdS–Au interface contributed to the optical absorption enhancement above 450 nm, while the optical absorption enhancement below 450 nm resulted from the photonic modes.165
5.3 Rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA)
Compared to the FEM and FDTD methods requiring large amount of computational resources, the RCWA is a simplified method and could be applied to some specific cases, such as periodically structured films.166 Song and coworkers employed both the FDTD method and the RCWA to simulate the electromagnetic field distribution in planar, cylindrical, truncate cone, and cone GaN nanostructures. The RCWA was used to simulate diffraction efficiency under the periodic situation, and the FDTD method was used to calculate the electromagnetic field in the broad computational region. From the RCWA simulation, it was indicated that the nanostructured truncated cone could increase light absorption by reducing the reflection of the semiconductor (Fig. 15a). The FDTD results revealed that the light absorption was mainly concentrated on the bulk, except the truncated cone (Fig. 15b). The carrier separation and transfer in the bulk was unfavorable, but the truncated nanocone could increase the carrier utility by reducing the carrier migration length.167 The additional reflective layer and the surface roughness of the photoelectrode also affect the light absorption. The RCWA was used to model the light absorption in the BiVO4/SnO2 flat structure, BiVO4/SnO2/Au flat structure, and BiVO4/SnO2/Au textured structure. The PDMS is applied as the textured substrate. It was revealed that the Au reflective layer would increase the light trapping, and the textured film could produce the diffraction pattern and trap more light, which was coincident with the experimental results.81
 Fig. 15  (a) The absorptance and reflectance of the planar and truncated cone from the RWCA simulation. (b) The light distribution in the planar, nanorod, truncated cone, and nanocone under 350 nm from the FDTD simulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the above three methods, some groups also use analytic solutions or other numerical methods to calculate the light absorption in the PEC cell. Lee et al. studied the effect of the thickness of TiO2 hollow microspheres on their light absorption and scattering using the exact solution for the Mie theory. When the thickness ratio of inner core to whole particle radii was less than 0.4, the hollow microspheres could achieve the same light absorption capacity as the solid spheres. This finding not only helped to save the materials used for PEC reaction, but also provided a guide in the design of efficient hollow spheres.168 Zhao et al. used the ray optics to investigate the effect of the geometry on the light absorption in the microstructured photoelectrode. The simulation results indicated that the shadow produced by the micropillar geometry could lower the PEC efficiency when reducing the pillar pitch, and the microcone could avoid the negative effect of the shadow.169
In short, the FEM can be applied to the arbitrary geometry and structure with high accuracy, whereas it is not suitable to the electrically large structures and broadband irradiation. In contrast, the FDTD method is effective to calculate the electromagnetic wave propagation in electrically large structures and broadband irradiation. However, its accuracy is lower than the FEM, and it is restricted in the uncomplicated geometry and structure. The RCWA performs the worst accuracy for the electromagnetic field simulation among these methods, but it has the highest computational efficiency.
6. Conclusions and prospects
To conclude, several feasible light management approaches for PEC water splitting from the aspects of materials and devices were summarized. In terms of the material design, the morphology control is widely used to improve the light trapping, and the delicately developed 1D, 2D, and 3D nanostructures can attain a good balance of light absorption, charge transfer, and surface reaction. Under these conditions, improved PEC performances for water splitting are achieved. The surface-plasmon resonance effect is a promising approach to increase light harvesting, because plasmonic materials have tunable absorption in wide spectrum and large absorption cross section. The surface-plasmon resonance effects can improve the PEC through light scatting and trapping, plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer, and hot electron injection. Several other approaches, e.g., doping, forming solid solution, and photon up-conversion are also frequently employed to enhance light trapping or to extend the light absorption range. In addition to the material choices, device engineering is necessary to achieve efficient water splitting. To adequately utilize the solar energy, photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem devices and PEC/PV tandem devices are good choices because they can extend light absorption range by the frequency division absorption. The utilization of concentrated light in PEC water splitting can lead to high flux of photogenerated charge carriers and increased temperature of the reaction system. Accordingly, the increased photocurrent and photovoltage, improved charge transfer property, and accelerated surface reaction are achieved, making it as another efficient light management strategy for enhanced PEC property.
It should be noted that our ultimate goal is to design feasible PEC devices for the practical application. High-performance materials with good light absorption property are the foundation for a good PEC device. After applying the light management strategies from the material aspect, the single photoelectrode can achieve enhanced PEC property. However, when the optimized photoelectrode is assembled into a device, the overall PEC activity can be unsatisfactory due to the mismatching of different components in the device. Taking the photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem device in mode T as an example, the light absorption and transmission over the front photoelectrode should be balanced to ensure the sufficient light absorption by the rear photoelectrode. In this case, the property of the front photoelectrode in the device can be different from the optimal property when separately tested. Therefore, the light management strategies from materials and device engineering should be carefully coordinated to obtain high-performance devices, by considering the used material and device architecture.
Theoretical simulation is one effective tool to investigate light distribution and absorption in PEC water splitting, which can provide constructive suggestions on the design of efficient materials and devices. The FEM, FDTD method, and RCWA are the most studied methods for simulating the electromagnetic field in the PEC cell. The FEM can be applied to solve Maxwell's equations in complex geometry. The FDTD method is suitable to describe the electromagnetic field in broad ranges. The RCWA is a simplified method with low accuracy, yet, requiring less computational resources. To accurately determine the light absorption and optical properties of the photoelectrode, theoretical methods should be combined with experimental approaches, such as optical absorption spectroscopy and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. For transparent materials, the light absorption spectrum can be acquired in transmission. When the material is non-transparent or suffers severe light scattering, the absorption property can be evaluated by the diffusion reflectance spectroscopy. The bandgap of the semiconductor can be determined from the absorption spectrum. Meanwhile, the complementary information about the bandgap can be offered by the PL spectroscopy. The light absorption property can be affected by the defect states. To determine the defect states, the absorption spectroscopy, PL spectroscopy, and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy can be utilized. Furthermore, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy are useful methods to estimate the valence band positions. Typically, the light scattering of plasmonic nanoparticles can be measured by dark-field microscopic imaging and spectroscopy, which affords a feasible approach to uncover the working principle of plasmonic nanoparticles in the photoelectrode at the single-particle level.
To date, various strategies have been applied to promote the efficiency of PEC cells. However, practical applications of PEC water splitting still face many challenges, and the STH efficiency of low-cost and robust PEC devices have not yet achieved 10%, which would start to make them competitive. As the primary step of the PEC reaction, the light absorption plays a significant role in determining the overall efficiency. Based on the above discussion, some issues of light management in PEC water splitting can be addressed to further promote their performance in the future:
(i) The morphology control of the PEC materials can effectively promote light harvesting. Learning from nature to design tunable hierarchical structures for enhanced light trapping should be a feasible approach and deserves continuous studies. Combining optics theory into PEC water splitting is important to improve light harvesting. For instance, adding appropriate metal reflective layer could reduce the light transmission, and the different refractive indexes between the medium and the semiconductor could lead to multiple reflections inside the semiconductor light-absorber. By delicately tuning the configuration of tandem devices, the incident light can be repeatedly absorbed multiples times to minimize energy loss in the system. To optimize the light distribution inside the photoreactor, optical fiber can be used to guide the light propagation. However, the application of the optical fibers inside the PEC device still needs to be explored. The efficiency of PEC water splitting is based on the combined effect of light absorption, charge separation and transfer, and surface reactivity. Therefore, when developing effective strategies for improved light harvesting, the efficiencies of charge separation and transfer, as well as the surface reaction should be considered. Meanwhile, the modification on the photoelectrode materials and PEC devices should be simultaneously carried out to improve the overall efficiency.
(ii) Because the applicable photoelectrodes generally have multi-layer structures, including the light-absorber layer, buffer layer, protection layer, and catalyst layer, the light absorption and transmission of each layer should be well balanced to insure the sufficient absorption by the light-absorber. In some scenarios, the front and back illumination will lead to dramatically different PEC performances. A promising idea is to decouple light absorption and electrocatalysis, which would avoid the parasitic absorption from electrocatalytic nanoparticles and the protection layer, giving rise to efficient utilization of incident photons by the light-absorbers. When constructing tandem devices, special attention should be paid on the light absorption by the aqueous solution. The light transmission loss in the aqueous electrolyte will lead to the poor absorption of the component with narrow bandgap, thus decreasing the overall performance of the PEC device.
(iii) Although some progress in PEC water splitting under concentrated light irradiation has been achieved, the underlying mechanism is still unclear, especially for the properties of high-flux charge carriers. The relationship of the PEC performance with the light intensity and reaction temperature deserves deep investigation. Typically, the poor charge transfer property of metal oxide light-absorbers is mainly attributed to the slow-moving small polarons. The increased temperature and photon flux can potentially increase the conductivity of the charge carriers. To disclose the underlying mechanism, advanced in situ characterization methods such as in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy, in situ Raman spectroscopy, and in situ electron paramagnetic spectroscopy would be conducive.
(iv) More theoretical studies in both material design and device engineering need to be carried out to assist the investigation of light-related properties in PEC water splitting. The theoretical analysis can help to visualize the advantages of different modification approaches, and ultimately offer guidelines for developing efficient PEC materials and devices. Because the PEC system involves different spatial scales, from microscale materials to macroscale devices, the simulation of light distribution and absorption should be varied depending on the spatial scale. For nanoscale materials in the photoelectrode, the wave optics theories can be utilized to simulate the electromagnetic field distribution. In the design of macroscale PEC devices, the geometric optics theories can be used to optimize the light absorption. In addition, the PEC reaction takes place in the multi-physical field. The light distribution and absorption can be affected by other physical fields such as the flow field and the electric field. Therefore, the multi-physical field information should be considered when carrying out the optical simulation.
By addressing the synergistic effects of light absorption, charge transfer, and surface reactivity, this review covers the most effective light management approaches, which act as comprehensive knowledge and guidance to develop and fabricate more efficient and stable PEC materials, systems, and devices for solar water splitting.
Author contributions
C. B. conceived the idea and initiated the research for this review. C. B. and Y. C. have designed the outline. Y. C. prepared and wrote this invited review under the supervision of C. B. with help from W. Z., S. M.-L., F. L. as well as advice, guidance and input from J. R. M. and L. V. All authors reviewed and contributed to the discussion as well as to the selection of its featured content and references.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
Y. C. would like to thank the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52076177) and Shaanxi Technical Innovation Guidance Project (Grant No. 2018HJCG-14). L. V. thanks the Outstanding Talent Program of Shaanxi Province, China. S. M.-L and J. R. M. would like to thank the Generalitat de Catalunya for financial support, and also acknowledge support by the European Regional Development Funds (ERDF, FEDER) and by MINECO project ENE2017-85087-C3-2-R. C. B. would like to thank CWRU for funding the Center for Chemical Dynamics and Nanomaterials Research.
References
J. Tournet, Y. Lee, S. K. Karuturi, H. H. Tan and C. Jagadish, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Tan, S. D. Tilley and J. Moon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4979–5015 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photon., 2012, 6, 511 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Dong and L. Vayssieres, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18356–18373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Gopinath and N. Nalajala, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1353–1371 RSC .
M. D. Bhatt and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10632–10659 RSC .
J. Su and L. Vayssieres, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 121–135 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
C. Ros, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10625–10669 RSC .
W. H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H. J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee, D. Lee, M. A. Lumley and K. S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2126–2157 RSC .
K. K. Dey, S. Gahlawat and P. P. Ingole, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21207–21221 RSC .
E. Samuel, B. Joshi, M. W. Kim, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, Nano Energy, 2020, 104648 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ennaceri, K. Fischer, K. Hanus, A. Chemseddine, A. Prager, J. Griebel, M. Kühnert, A. Schulze and B. Abel, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 279 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mazzaro, S. B. Bibi, M. Natali, G. Bergamini, V. Morandi, P. Ceroni and A. Vomiero, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 36–46 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kong, X. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Zhou, B. Chang, S. Zhang, H. Fan and B. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801653 CrossRef .
X. Feng, L. Hou, Z. Huang, R. Li, J. Shi and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12396–12399 RSC .
J. H. Baek, B. J. Kim, G. S. Han, S. W. Hwang, D. R. Kim, I. S. Cho and H. S. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1479–1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Feng, M. Liu, J. Su and S. Shen, Nanophotonics, 2016, 5, 524–547 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 61–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shinagawa and K. Takanabe, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1318–1336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, M. L. Brongersma, T. F. Jaramillo and S. Fan, ACS Photon., 2014, 1, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, S. F. Leung, Q. Zhang, B. Hua, Q. Lin, Z. Wei, K.-H. Tsui, Y. Zhang, S. Yang and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2123–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qiu, S. Xiao, Y. Tong and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 18753–18770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Feng, Y. Liu, X. Guan, C. Burda and L. Guo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 844–866 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Qiao, M. Yuan, N. Li and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2369–2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Segev, H. Dotan, K. D. Malviya, A. Kay, M. T. Mayer, M. Grätzel and A. Rothschild, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1500817 CrossRef .
A. J. Rettie, W. D. Chemelewski, J. Lindemuth, J. S. McCloy, L. G. Marshall, J. Zhou, D. Emin and C. B. Mullins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 022106 CrossRef .
S. Chu, W. Li, Y. Yan, T. Hamann, I. Shih, D. Wang and Z. Mi, Nano Futures, 2017, 1, 022001 CrossRef .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 CrossRef .
M. R. Nellist, F. A. Laskowski, F. Lin, T. J. Mills and S. W. Boettcher, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 733–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, X. W. D. Lou and Y. Xie, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 598–618 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, W. Qiu, S. Xiao, Y. Tong and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 660–684 RSC .
K. Zhang, M. Ma, P. Li, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600602 CrossRef .
J. Brillet, M. Cornuz, F. Le Formal, J. H. Yum, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forrnan, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
Y. Wei, J. Su, L. Guo and L. Vayssieres, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 201, 110083 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kment, F. Riboni, S. Pausova, L. Wang, L. Wang, H. Han, Z. Hubicka, J. Krysa, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716–3769 RSC .
L. Vayssieres, C. Sathe, S. M. Butorin, D. K. Shuh, J. Nordgren and J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2320–2323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Xia, X. Feng, Y. Liu, W. Zheng, L. Ma and R. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 52, 343–350 CrossRef .
A. Tofanello, S. Shen, F. L. de Souza and L. Vayssieres, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 040905 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and N. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1360–1384 RSC .
J. N. Tiwari, R. N. Tiwari and K. S. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 724–803 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Ye, Z. Wang, J. Gu, S. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, W. Mai and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 772–779 RSC .
X. Xie, Y. Yang, Y. H. Xiao, X. Huang, Q. Shi and W. D. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6954–6962 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, R. Qiao, W. Yang, I. Boukahil, X. Kong, F. A. Chowdhury, M. L. Trudeau, W. Ji, H. Guo, F. J. Himpsel, L. Vayssieres and Z. Mi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8388–8397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, Y. Su, D. Liu, P. Yang, B. Liu and C. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9221–9259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Qin, C. L. Tao, S. I. In, Z. Y. Yang, T. E. Mallouk, N. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 5257–5263 CrossRef .
J. Yang, C. Bao, T. Yu, Y. Hu, W. Luo, W. Zhu, G. Fu, Z. Li, H. Gao, F. Li and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26482–26490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Zhang, H. Wang, L. He, C. Y. Duan, F. Li, X. M. Ou, B. Q. Sun and X. H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1369–1372 RSC .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui and D. Fujita, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11141 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guan, F. A. Chowdhury, N. Pant, L. Guo, L. Vayssieres and Z. Mi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13797–13802 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guan, F. A. Chowdhury, Y. Wang, N. Pant, S. Vanka, M. L. Trudeau, L. Guo, L. Vayssieres and Z. Mi, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2230–2231 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Jeon, G. H. Moon, H. Park and W. Choi, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, M. Sun, W. Ding, Z. Ding and W. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119492 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Arpin, A. Mihi, H. T. Johnson, A. J. Baca, J. A. Rogers, J. A. Lewis and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1084–1101 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, H. Lu, Z. Shi, F. Wu, J. Guo, K. Deng and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17200–17207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, M. Tao, R. Zhu, Y. Zeng, Z. Wei and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3439–3441 RSC .
X. Feng, Y. Chen, Z. Qin, M. Wang and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18089–18096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Z. Li, T. Hasan, X. Chen, W. Zheng, W. Feng, D. Jia, Y. Zhou and P. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1989–1995 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Ren, H. Gao and G. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9093–9101 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, S. Hao, L. Long, H. Fang, T. Qiang and Y. Song, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 2404–2410 RSC .
L. Wang, L. Xia, Y. Wu and Y. Tian, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2606–2614 CrossRef CAS .
T. Butburee, Y. Bai, H. Wang, H. Chen, Z. Wang, G. Liu, J. Zou, P. Khemthong, G. Q. M. Lu and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705666 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gu, J. Khan, Z. Chai, Y. Yuan, X. Yu, P. Liu, M. Wu and W. Mai, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Ding, D. He, H. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, B. Yang, X. Zhang, L. Lei and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3113–3119 RSC .
C. Fàbrega, S. Murcia-López, D. Monllor-Satoca, J. D. Prades, M. D. Hernández-Alonso, G. Penelas, J. R. Morante and T. Andreu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 133–140 CrossRef .
H. Han, F. Riboni, F. Karlicky, S. Kment, A. Goswami, P. Sudhagar, J. Yoo, L. Wang, O. Tomanec and M. Petr, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 134–142 RSC .
K. Yuan, Q. Cao, X. Li, H. Y. Chen, Y. Deng, Y. Y. Wang, W. Luo, H. L. Lu and D. W. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 543–551 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, J. Su, X. Wan, L. Guo and L. Vayssieres, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1561–1569 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nie, S. Kashtanov, Y. Wei, Y. S. Liu, H. Zhang, M. Kapilashrami, Y. Ye, P. A. Glans, J. Zhong, L. Vayssieres, X. Sun and J. Guo, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 483–491 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and C. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 813–821 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, E. Reisner and J. J. Baumberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1402–1408 RSC .
M. Ma, J. K. Kim, K. Zhang, X. Shi, S. J. Kim, J. H. Moon and J. H. Park, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5592–5597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oh, W. Yang, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park and J. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900194 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Guo, L. Cai, H. Li, K. X. Wang, I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, S. Fan and X. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tofanello, Z. Diao, E. Djatoubai, J. Z. Su, S. H. Shen, F. L. Souza and L. Vayssieres, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 063103 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing and N. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 666–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat and G. V. Hartland, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1467–1469 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 RSC .
S. K. Cushing, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30013–30022 RSC .

          P. Nbelayim, G. Kawamura, W. K. Tan and A. Matsuda, Photoelectrochemical Cells: Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2018, pp. 385–423 Search PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, J. H. Yun, H. Chen, R. M. Richards and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20127–20133 RSC .
R. A. Pala, J. White, E. Barnard, J. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3504–3509 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2679–2696 RSC .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 CAS .
C. Li, P. Wang, H. Li, M. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Qi and Y. Jin, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14290–14297 RSC .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Collins, A. Lonergan, D. McNulty, C. Glynn, D. Buckley, C. Hu and C. O'Dwyer, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901805 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. T. Lee, S. Yang and Z. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1409–1419 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Y. Cai, Z. F. Tian, G. S. Ruan, Y. X. Ye, C. H. Liang and G. S. Shao, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 282–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, B. Liu, A. Wu, B. Yang, W. Yang, F. Liu, X. Zhang, V. An and X. Jiang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 5240–5248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barawi, F. Fresno, R. L. Pérez-Ruiz and V. C. A. de la Peña O’Shea, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dotan, O. Kfir, E. Sharlin, O. Blank, M. Gross, I. Dumchin, G. Ankonina and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Yu, D. K. Ma, D. P. Yang, X. G. Yang, Q. L. Xu, W. Chen and S. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 20202–20211 RSC .
D. Choi, S. K. Nam, K. Kim and J. H. Moon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6891–6895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Alexander, P. J. Kulesza, I. Rutkowska, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2298–2303 RSC .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
H. Döscher, J. F. Geisz, T. G. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2951–2956 RSC .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984 RSC .
B. Seger, O. Hansen and P. C. K. Vesborg, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, e201600013 CrossRef .
R. Kainthla, B. Zelenay and J. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 841–845 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, J. L. Young, H. Lim, W. E. Klein, H. Chen, Y. Xi, B. Gai, T. G. Deutsch and J. Yoon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17043 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, R. H. Wilke, S. Sharma, K. Shankar, T. J. Latempa, K.-S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1906–1911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Han, S. Shin, D. H. Kim, I. J. Park, J. S. Kim, P.-S. Huang, J. K. Lee, I. S. Cho and X. Zheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1299–1306 RSC .
P. Xu, J. Feng, T. Fang, X. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Zou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9905–9910 RSC .
D. Xue, M. Kan, X. Qian and Y. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16228–16234 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bornoz, F. F. Abdi, S. D. Tilley, B. Dam, V. D. K. Roel, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16959–16966 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bai, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Huang, Y. Gao, X. Li and Y. Du, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 321–328 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M.-K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jang, C. Du, Y. Ye, Y. Lin, X. Yao, J. Thorne, E. Liu, G. McMahon, J. Zhu and A. Javey, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–5 Search PubMed .
K. Walczak, Y. Chen, C. Karp, J. W. Beeman, M. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, I. D. Sharp, X. Amashukeli, W. West and J. Jin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 544–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chakthranont, T. R. Hellstern, J. M. McEnaney and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701515 CrossRef .
I. Y. Ahmet, S. Berglund, A. Chemseddine, P. Bogdanoff, R. F. Präg, F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, Adv. Energy Sustainable Res., 2020, 2000037 CrossRef .
X. Feng, R. Li, M. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11180–11188 RSC .
M. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Li, A. Li, X. Chang, W. Liu, Y. Sun, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2025–2034 RSC .
H. Kobayashi, N. Sato, M. Orita, Y. Kuang, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3003–3009 RSC .
D. Huang, K. Wang, L. Yu, T. H. Nguyen, S. Ikeda and F. Jiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1875–1881 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, I. A. Digdaya, T. W. Buijs, F. F. Abdi, Z. Huang, R. Liu, B. Dam, M. Zeman, W. A. Smith and A. H. Smets, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4155–4162 RSC .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. DöScher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiao, C. Hu, H. Lin, X. Meng, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Qu, K. Yan and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19091–19097 RSC .
S. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Bai, J. H. Yun, G. Liu and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800486 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, Y. H. Jo, F. F. Abdi, Y. H. Lee, R. van de Krol and J. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kosar, Y. Pihosh, R. Bekarevich, K. Mitsuishi, K. Mawatari, Y. Kazoe, T. Kitamori, M. Tosa, A. B. Tarasov and E. A. Goodilin, Appl. Nanosci., 2019, 9, 1017–1024 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, B. Lee, H. Ju, J. Y. Kim, J. Kim and S. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903316 CrossRef .
F. Urbain, P. Tang, V. Smirnov, K. Welter, T. Andreu, F. Finger, J. Arbiol and J. R. Morante, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1428–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, H. Jeong, S. J. Oh, M. Ma, K. Zhang, J. Kwon, I. T. Choi, I. Y. Choi, H. K. Kim, J. K. Kim and J. H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Piekner, H. Dotan, A. Tsyganok, K. D. Malviya, D. A. Grave, O. Kfir and A. Rothschild, ACS Photon., 2018, 5, 5068–5078 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burhan, K. J. E. Chua and K. C. Ng, Energy, 2016, 99, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bicer, A. F. V. Sprotte and I. Dincer, Appl. Energy, 2017, 197, 169–182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bicer and I. Dincer, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8035–8043 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bell, G. Will and J. Bell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 6938–6947 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Y. Chen, J. Su, M. Liu and Y. Liu, Energy, 2019, 172, 1079–1086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hernández, D. Hidalgo, A. Sacco, A. Chiodoni, A. Lamberti, V. Cauda, E. Tresso and G. Saracco, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 7775–7786 RSC .
K. U. Wijayantha, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi and L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5264–5270 RSC .
F. Le Formal, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Cornuz, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2564–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, J. Yang, M. Boloor, N. A. Melosh and W. C. Chueh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10801–10810 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. Ye, M. Boloor, A. Poletayev, N. A. Melosh and W. C. Chueh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2044–2052 RSC .
B. Zhang, Q. Daniel, M. Cheng, L. Fan and L. Sun, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 169–179 RSC .
W. Hao, R. Wu, H. Yang and Y. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12440–12445 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Zhu, G. Dharan and G. W. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16580–16584 RSC .

          J. Piprek, in Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices, ed. J. Piprek, Academic Press, Boston,  2003, pp. 83–120 Search PubMed .

          L. Demkowicz, Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics Second Edition, John Wiley & Sons,  2017, pp. 1–20 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, D. Ding and R. Chen, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2016, 64, 2410–2417 Search PubMed .
K. Q. Le, A. Abass, B. Maes, P. Bienstman and A. Alù, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A39–A50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Okamoto, Fundamentals of optical waveguides, Academic Press,  2006, pp. 261–328 Search PubMed .

          B. E. Rapp, in Microfluidics: Modelling, Mechanics and Mathematics, ed. B. E. Rapp, Elsevier, Oxford,  2017, pp. 623–631 Search PubMed .
I. Semenikhin, M. Zanuccoli, M. Benzi, V. Vyurkov, E. Sangiorgi and C. Fiegna, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2012, 44, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suter, R. Graf, D. Moreno García and S. Haussener, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5739–5749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Jäger and S. Strehle, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 511 CrossRef .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C.-J. Chen, L. C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y. Y. Hsu, T. S. Chan, J. F. Lee, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362–7372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Pandey, Practical Microstrip and Printed Antenna Design, Artech House,  2019, pp. 1–26 Search PubMed .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P.-C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501764 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yalamanchili, E. Verlage, W. H. Cheng, K. T. Fountaine, P. R. Jahelka, P. A. Kempler, R. Saive, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2019, 20, 502–508 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Coridan, K. A. Arpin, B. S. Brunschwig, P. V. Braun and N. S. Lewis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2310–2317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong and J. Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xu, L. Wen, Z. Wang, H. Zhao, S. Xu, Y. Mi, Y. Xu, M. Sommerfeld, Y. Fang and Y. Lei, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7382–7389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. M. McMahon, in Topics in theoretical and computational nanoscience: from controlling light at the nanoscale to calculating quantum effects with classical electrodynamics, ed. J. M. McMahon, Springer Science & Business Media,  2011, pp. 21–55 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, G. J. Lee, S. Kim, J. W. Min, S. Y. Jeong, Y. J. Yoo, S. Lee and Y. M. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28672–28678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, M. C. Tsai, P. C. Chen, T. T. Chen, K. L. Chan, C. Y. Lee and R. K. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25754–25760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, P. Westerik, R. Santbergen, E. Zoethout, H. Gardeniers and A. Bieberle-Hütter, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909157 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of light management for PEC water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of (a) PEC water splitting over a photoanode and a counter electrode, (b) photoanode–photocathode PEC tandem device, and (c) PEC/PV tandem device. Theoretical STH efficiencies of (d) single light-absorber photoelectrode corresponding to the bandgap, (e) dual light-absorber PEC device with a parallel illumination mode, and (f) dual light-absorber PEC device with a tandem illumination mode. Adapted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
H2O → H2 + 1/2 O2 ΔG0 = 237 kJ mol−1	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Schematics and SEM images of (a) 0D, (b) 1D, (c) 2D, and (d) 3D nanostructures at the photoelectrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Light trapping among 1D nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Light–matter interaction among vertically aligned 2D nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Illustration of 3D hierarchically branched TiO2 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 


1D	Ti,Sn:Fe2O3 (nanowire)	Enhance light trapping	1 M NaOH	1.3 mA cm−2 at 0.7 VAg/AgCl	
52

1D	Fe2O3 (nanorod)/TiO2/CoPi	Enhance light trapping	1 M KOH	6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHEc	
58

1D	WO3 (nanorod)/BiVO4/CoPi	Enhance light trapping	0.1 M KPia	6.72 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE	
55

1D	TiO2 (nanotube)/γ-graphyne	Increase the optical path	0.5 M Na2SO4	3.95 mA cm−2 at 0.86 VRHE	
59

2D	SnS2 (nanosheet)	Increase light reflection and scattering	0.5 M Na2SO4	1.73 mA cm−2 at 1.4 VRHE	
64

2D	SnS2/CuInS2 (nanosheet)/C60	Enhance visible-light utilization	0.5 M Na2SO4	4.51 mA cm−2 at −0.45 VRHE	
65

2D	Zr:In2S3 (nanoflake)	Enhance light trapping	0.5 M NaOH	1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.3 VRHE	
67

2D	TiO2 (nanoplate)/Au/MnOx	Enhance light absorption	1 M KOH	1.02 mA cm−2 at 0.4 VRHE	
68

2D	WO3 (nanoflake)/NCDs	Increase light harvesting	1 M H2SO4	1.42 mA cm−2 at 1.0 VSCE	
16

3D	WO3 (columnar-shape)/IrOx	Enhance the light collection capability	0.1 M H2SO4	3.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE	
72

3D	BiVO4 (nanopyramid)/CoPi	Improve anti-reflection property	0.5 M Na2SO4	1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE	
75

3D	CuFeO2 (inverse opal structure)/CoFe LDH	Enhance visible-light absorption due to multiple scattering	1 M NaOH	5.2 mA cm−2 at −0.1 VRHE	
80

3D	BiVO4 (textured structure)/SnO2/Au/FeOOH	Induce resonant light trapping and light retrapping	0.5 M phosphate buffer solution	1.99 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE	
81

3D	Si (nanopillar)/NiCoSex	Strong anti-reflection property	0.5 M H2SO4	37.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE	
71


 	Fig. 5  (a) Plot of IPCE against wavelength over different photoelectrodes: (a) FTO/TiO2–Au@TiO2, (b) FTO/Cu2O, (c) FTO/TiO2-P25/Cu2O, and (d) FTO/TiO2–Au@TiO2/Al2O3/Cu2O at −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The inset image is the enlarged view in the Vis-IR region; (b) schematic diagram of light utilization in the FTO/TiO2–Au@TiO2/Al2O3/Cu2O photoelectrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) Simulation of the electromagnetic field distribution at the surface plasmon polariton mode with (a) single hematite nanorod in the Au nanohole and (b) multiple hematite nanorods in the Au nanohole (450 nm light). (c) Simulation of the electromagnetic field distribution at the localized SPR mode (650 nm light). (d) Plot of the waveguiding efficiency, local field enhancement, and IPCE values against the wavelength over the Au nanohole array with hematite nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Sketch of the triplet–triplet annihilation based photon up-conversion system for PEC reaction. (b) Absorbance and emission spectra of BA and PPO in dimethylformamide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Sketch of light propagation in a quarter-wave film. (d) Effect of the film thickness and depth on the photon absorption of the α-Fe2O3 film using the Pt reflective layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright © 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram (top), photographic image (bottom left), and optical micrographs (bottom right) of the tandem system consisting of the GaAs photocathode and photoanode on a glass substrate. (b) Energy band diagram of the GaAs-based photoanode and photocathode in the PEC tandem device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of a self-biased system connected by Mo:BiVO4 photoanode and Cu2O photocathode. (b) Current density–potential curves (left y-axis) and STH efficiencies (right y-axis) of Cu2O photocathode, BiVO4 photoanode, and Cu2O behind BiVO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Energy band diagram of CdS/CIGS at the solid–liquid interface under 0 VRHE. (d) Current density–potential curves of CIGS photocathode and BiVO4 photoanode in a tandem system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the tandem system with a GaInP photocathode modified by interfacial films (AlInP, AlInPOx, TiO2) and Rh electrocatalysts, a GaInAs PV module, and a RuOx cathode. (b) Current density–potential curves of tandem device in different electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the tandem device composed of CoPi/BiVO4/WO3 photoanode and GaAs/InGaAsP PV cell. (b) Current density–potential curves of the GaAs/InGaAsP PV cell and the CoPi/BiVO4/WO3 photoanode measured at standard (1 sun, 25 °C) and concentrated light (3 suns, 50 °C) conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic diagram of the tandem device consisting of the DSSC and the BiVO4/WO3 photoanode with a hybrid conductive DBR structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of the V-shaped PEC/PV tandem device consisting of α-Fe2O3 photoanodes and the DBR structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photocurrent density at the maximum power point corresponding to the varied flux concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (b) Current density–potential curves of the CoPi/Mo:BiVO4/SnO2/Si photoanode under different temperature (from 10 to 42 °C). The inset is the Arrhenius plot, and the calculated activation energy is ∼0.18 eV. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Simulated geometry and applied conditions for the light distribution in a wedge-shaped α-Fe2O3 photoanode. λ represents the wavelength of simulated light, PML represents the perfectly matched layer, E0 is the initial electric intensity, αi is the incident angle, dfilm represents the thickness of the film, dcoating represents the thickness of the coating, Lp represents the width of the wedge, Lg is the width of the gap, dsc is the width of the domain section, γ is the wedge angle, and P(λ) is the incident power. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra and (b) simulated cross-sectional electromagnetic distribution of Mo doped BiVO4 on the nanocone substrate and the FTO glass substrate. The red region indicates effective light trapping area. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2016 AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The absorptance and reflectance of the planar and truncated cone from the RWCA simulation. (b) The light distribution in the planar, nanorod, truncated cone, and nanocone under 350 nm from the FDTD simulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
