Visualizing physical, electronic, and optical properties of organic photovoltaic cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE41773E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE41773E
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2871-2891Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsVisualizing physical, electronic, and optical properties of organic photovoltaic cells
Martin Pfannmöller*a, 
Wolfgang Kowalskybc and 
Rasmus R. Schröder*acd
aUniversitätsklinikum Heidelberg, BioQuant, Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. E-mail: martin.pfannmoeller@bioquant.uni-heidelberg.de; rasmus.schroeder@bioquant.uni-heidelberg.de;  Fax: +49 6221 5451 486;   Tel: +49 6221 5451 349
bTechnische Universität Braunschweig, Schleinitzstr. 22, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.  Fax: +49 531 391 2045;   Tel: +49 531 391 2001
cInnovationLab GmbH, Speyerer Str. 4, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany.  Fax: +49 6221 54 19 110;   Tel: +49 6221 54 19 100
dCAM – Centre for Advanced Materials Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.   Tel: +49 6221 54 51 351
Received 
23rd May 2013
, Accepted 9th August 2013First published on 5th September 2013AbstractThe most interesting active layer system for organic photovoltaic cells is the bulk heterojunction (BHJ). The general structure of a BHJ is a network of domains, which contain blended donor and acceptor molecules, often in pure and mixed phases. Directly visualizing this nanoscale phase separation of BHJs and corresponding morphological parameters has attracted much interest and has led to novel insights into their physical properties. Imaging methods that have been proven to be of great importance are scanning probe, scanning X-ray, and electron microscopy. Early works successfully employed conventional contrast mechanisms at high resolution for correlation of structure and function. Many imaging techniques also offer analytical capabilities using specific interactions of the probes with different material domains. Resulting material contrasts can be converted into morphological maps by correlation with the intrinsically different physical, electronic, and optical sample properties. Spatially resolved visualization of these properties is crucial to provide answers to questions about fundamental processes that determine the solar cell performance. A major paradigm shift was initiated by the discovery that instead of a completely separated network of donor and acceptor domains, a multiphase system is beneficial for enhanced photo-physical properties. Thereby phases differ in ordering, orientation and composition. In this review, we provide an overview of techniques and recent approaches for imaging BHJ structures at the nanoscale. Advantages and disadvantages of the underlying contrast mechanisms are summarized. In addition, we introduce best practices for the application of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) by comparing enhanced conventional and analytical modes.

Broader context
The morphological structure of organic photovoltaic blends plays a crucial role in cell performances. Photoactive layers show a hierarchical organization. It follows that optoelectronic processes are governed by physical, electronic, and optical properties of materials domains at scales ranging from sub-nm to at least several tens of nm. The most direct way to decipher how such morphology develops, what the optimal morphology is, and how it explains the actual processes for charge generation is to directly resolve these structures in real space. Typical blends, however, consist of carbonaceous donor and acceptor compounds. State-of-the-art microscopes offer analytical modes to combine high spatial resolution and identification of spectroscopic features. Such methods mainly use surface probes, electrons or X-ray beams. Specific interactions of these probes with the specimen provide functional maps on the basis of spatially variant properties. Indeed, such maps can be linked to morphology information at nm resolution. These results encourage future developments where three-dimensional visualization of organic blends at nm to sub-nm resolution will be possible.

Introduction
For the last ten to fifteen years organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices have attracted widespread attention. Rapid advances push this technology to fulfill certified criteria—which are large-scale fabrication availability, use in semi-transparent thin-film technology, and cost-effective material consumption.1 It is expected that OPV devices qualify to provide a superior alternative to inorganic solar cells that still require complex manufacturing procedures and consume toxic or rare elements.2–4 A recent probabilistic life cycle analysis predicts that OPVs show great potential towards superior sustainability.5 Assuming an external quantum efficiency and fill factor of 65%, Scharber et al. predicted in 2006 that power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of more than 10% can be obtained with an optimal donor–acceptor material design.4 With novel polymers, modification of fullerene acceptors by adding side moieties, and enhanced device architectures, PCEs exceeding 9.2%6 for a single layer cell and more than 10%7 for a tandem cell were reported. So, material and device engineering plays a crucial role in increasing performance levels. The success of OPVs, however, depends on how systems with small energy payback time can be adapted or formulated at the industrial scale using, for example, printing or coating technologies.8,9 These considerations are based on BHJs as thin active layers.10 Polymer based BHJs are generally deposited from solution whereas BHJs with small molecules as donors and acceptors are typically fabricated by vacuum/vapour deposition. Such compounds are regarded as beneficial due to the potential application in roll-to-roll fabrication.11 Therefore, there is increasing attention to solution-processible small-molecules, which offer advantages due to a more defined handling and production.12,13 Although many results from lab-based experiments cannot directly be correlated with potential large-scale processes, one fundamental aspect of BHJs is that an interpenetrating network of donor and acceptor domains forms and that optional post-deposition treatments can improve intrinsic morphology for device performance.14 Hence, performance values do not only depend on the compounds and device design but also critically follow the structure of the interpenetrating network. Various parameters regarding morphology, such as the ordering of compounds, domain sizes, domain connectivity, or domain composition have to be considered.15
With respect to the phase composition of the domain network, at first a two-phase scenario was assumed as an optimal structure. Within the scope of such a model the theoretical objective was to achieve the well-known interlaced comb structure.16 According to such a construct, alternating pure domains of the two compounds build up a narrow but connected system of charge transport paths. At the anode and cathode small layers of donor and acceptor, respectively, are found. Not only does this design differ from reality in the majority of cases—as-prepared BHJs typically present frozen-in structures and thus do not consist of pure domains of the two compounds and show varying levels of ordering in a hierarchical organization17—but also there is increasing evidence that a combination of different phases as well as a possible mix of amorphous and crystalline phases is necessary to enable optimal electronic properties.18–20 Consequently, this paradigm shift has recently started to influence interpretations of high-performing donor–acceptor systems.21 In contrast to the rigid two-phase model a novel scenario emerged where at least one type of amorphous, intermixing phase exists, depending on the processing conditions and on the intrinsic affinity of the polymer to form crystals.22 However, we would like to emphasize that studies on directed self-assembly23,24 or nano-patterning25–28 offer controlled morphologies that assist in identifying relationships between specific structures and electronic properties. In Fig. 1 potential phases within a BHJ network are shown that are vertically and laterally separated. These generally vary in terms of compositional ratios of the compounds, in ordering and orientation of crystallites. Different behaviours of donor–acceptor systems can thereby be attributed to the finite intermixing of the donor and acceptor.29–31 Hence, it is crucial to consider that more than two phases develop upon blending and can still exist after post-processing the cast photoactive layer.
 Fig. 1  The electronic properties of a BHJ are strongly influenced by various morphological characteristics. Correlating structure and function thereby requires vertical as well as lateral visualization of the blend at multiple length scales. For a typical sample an imaging modality must provide coarse views down to several hundred nanometers for assessing aspects of vertical phase separation, percolation paths and domain properties. However, the most important processes for charge generation critically depend on the exact domain compositions, interfaces, as well as molecular ordering and orientation at the nanometer to sub-nanometer scale. Hence, it is essential to span at least four orders of magnitude for imaging physical properties of pure donor (green) and acceptor (red) domains, but also mixed and interfacial phases (yellow). 
To understand the physical processes upon light absorption, charge generation, transport, and collection, a deep insight into the correlation between such morphological parameters, material composition, fabrication details, and performance measures is required. Theoretical predictions from computational models could accelerate optimization, but only on the basis of a profound structural knowledge. Finally, degradation or effects of scaling up to large-area fabrication can solely be determined if the underlying structure–function relationships are known. These strongly depend on lateral and vertical morphological variations at the nanometer scale. Thus, for a visual characterization the ideal imaging technique would provide the possibility to see the three-dimensional (3D) structure with sufficient chemical contrast at nanometer resolution. Since this is extremely challenging, various techniques have been applied, where each approach meets at least one of these specifications, i.e. either provides high spatial resolution or chemical contrast. Approaches range from surface sensitive methods, two-dimensional (2D) bulk or projection imaging, to 3D visualization. However, the numerous results from different laboratories are, in part, contradictory. Some of the applied methods either still suffer from lack of resolution or an incomplete understanding of the underlying contrast mechanisms. Nevertheless, over the last few years many crucial aspects of the multi-phase networks could be visualized. A large number of reviews offer general summaries of efforts to determine morphological parameters, which include aspects of imaging as characterization. A very detailed description as well as advantages and disadvantages of various methods is given by Chen et al.32 However, there is no specific survey of imaging modalities that directly offer spatial information in 2D or 3D. In this article we therefore give a timely overview of imaging studies, developments, and conclusions relating to the morphology of BHJs with emphasis on the underlying contrast mechanisms. We particularly elaborate on surface probe microscopies, scanning X-ray microscopy and electron microscopy (EM). All of these offer spectroscopic modes of operation, i.e. spatially resolved analytical datasets. Thereby differences in physical, electronic, or optical properties are directly visualized. This creates reliable compositional or structural maps of the domain network. One example is analytical transmission electron microscopy (ATEM), an emerging technique to study OPVs that combines the 3D resolving power of TEM with material contrast. With ATEM a reliable visualization of different phases using four-dimensional (4D) data is possible. It offers large potential to assist in creating spectroscopic 3D representations of the BHJ's multi-phase nanostructure. Since conventional TEM is more accessible and commonly used in standard characterization experiments, we provide a first comparison of spectroscopic ATEM measurements with conventional TEM images, which are corrected for contrast artefacts. Non-corrected conventional TEM data frequently led to misinterpretations. The comparison shows that corrected TEM data already allow reliable estimates of the size distribution of enriched material domains. However, discrimination into different phases, especially a separation of enriched and molecularly mixed domains is only possible with spectroscopic contrast.
The article is organized as follows: in the second section we briefly summarize general aspects of BHJs and requirements for an optimized imaging. Following the scope of a perspective article, we do not extensively elaborate on general OPV developments. The reader is referred to overviews in the literature.2,33–36 In the third section we provide explanations for various imaging techniques that have been demonstrated to reveal nanostructural information on layer morphologies, primarily based on functional contrast. How contrast arises to identify material domains and how pitfalls might lead to misinterpretation will be discussed in the following. Finally, in the fourth section we highlight relationships between techniques for a better understanding on how to apply a set of complementary imaging methods. This is essential to answer some of the most significant questions regarding the relationship between morphology and function.
Bulk heterojunctions: characterizing a multi-phase system
Active layers for organic solar cells typically consist of a semiconducting electron donor compound and an electron acceptor. At first, bilayer cells were fabricated, but with poor PCEs.37 After that BHJs were introduced consisting of an interpenetrating network of the two compounds.10 They have been proven to show beneficial device performances in comparison to bilayer cells.38 Numerous studies use polymers as donors and fullerene derivatives as acceptors that are cast onto the substrate after dissolving in solvent mixtures. After drying, the heterojunction network forms. Typically, morphology optimization aims at obtaining the best trade-off between the existence of donor and acceptor percolation paths and sufficiently small or crystalline domains to enable efficient exciton diffusion. These efforts aim at using the full inherent potential of the applied materials towards maximal performances, which have thus led to a completely new field of research.39 A major part of past studies has used the polythiophene P3HT40–42 as the donor and PCBM as an efficient fullerene acceptor,43,44 which has allowed deciphering general rules for structure–property relationships of BHJs.
Creating an optimal structure from solution or vacuum processing is challenging since it might not lead to an equilibrium structure.45 Therefore numerous studies work on this objective, but typically focus on only one specific aspect. Successful attempts to influence morphology rely, e.g., on adjusting side-groups of polymers for improved interchain packing,46 varying solvents for polymers and/or for fullerenes,47,48 using solvent additives for “pre-packing” of the molecules in solution,31,49 or applying a post-processing treatment with vapour,50 hot-plate51 or microwave annealing.52 All of these processing variants affect the nanoscopic structure of a BHJ. This in turn influences the possible intrinsic processes for power conversion. In addition, it should be mentioned that device performance parameters—i.e. short current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE—critically depend on factors other than the active layer morphology. Additional major factors include: the intrinsic material properties,53 interfaces and interlayers used to improve contact behaviour,53,54 layer thicknesses,55–57 and light trapping mechanisms or plasmonic nanostructures.1 Furthermore, the material degradation state, which is related to the lifetime, must be taken into account.58–61 This significantly extends the complexity of possible property–structure–function relationships.
Requirements for visualizing specific material properties
One goal of high-quality visualization of multiple phases in BHJs is to provide high resolution, from 1 nm to at least some tens of nanometers. This resolving power allows assessing domain size distributions for direct interpretation of the observed electronic behaviour. Furthermore, phases of varying compositions must be separated by material contrast using analytical modes. Even when assuming that a BHJ consists of only two pure phases, its visualization would already require sophisticated approaches, since typically the phases show comparable elemental compositions (carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen) and thus a very similar image contrast. Identifying more than two unique phases is, hence, even more challenging.
Additionally, we like to stress in particular that the morphological analysis of BHJs should also account for additional aspects that arise in such a soft-matter, multicomponent system. Most importantly, these include high sensitivity of organic compounds to the probe (mostly high-energetic photons or electrons). Approaching high spatial resolution in 3D, specimen damage will become increasingly important and will have to be studied systematically.
Measuring bulk parameters
A large quantity of spectroscopic methods is applied to assess general properties of photoactive layers and their components. This serves to understand ensemble-average behaviour.
All of these methods reveal bulk information on one-dimensional profiles relating to the morphology of BHJs, which is particularly valuable when vertical profiles are obtained since this offers resolution in one spatial coordinate.22,62–65 In this review we extend the scope to techniques that ultimately provide 2D or 3D image information. More comprehensive reviews of general morphological studies such as those mentioned above are found elsewhere.66–78
One powerful and widely used technique uses grazing incidence X-ray scattering (GIXS).78–88 With GIXS it is possible, for example, to measure crystallinity and ordering of components or large-scale phase separation. The contribution from X-ray scattering experiments to most studies lies in the structure analysis of the samples including crystal orientation and relative crystallinity. In principle, two-dimensional images are analysed, which consist of scattering vector components parallel and perpendicular to the substrate. This allows determining the orientation of crystals. However, it does not directly visualize local morphology. A very recent and detailed overview of X-ray scattering applications is provided, e.g. by Rivnay et al.89
Imaging organic photovoltaic materials
Scanning probes
An important tool for general evaluation of photoactive layers has been atomic force microscopy (AFM), being the most prominent representative of scanning probe microscopies (SPMs). By scanning across surfaces with tips of diameters of several nanometers, nanoscale topography information can be obtained. It has been used extensively to study effects of solvent evaporation rates,90 annealing,91 solvent additives,92 or surface patterning93 on morphology. Topographic AFM serves as a relatively simple method for rapid collection of morphological information, typically in conjunction with other spectroscopic or imaging techniques.94 More details are provided by phase information from nanoscale energy dissipation between the AFM tip and surface material.95 It depends on inelastic interactions relating to processes such as energy hysteresis or viscoelasticity. Domains of different materials, where for the P3HT:PCBM system higher energy dissipation is usually assigned to P3HT crystallites,96 can be visualized. Amplitude-modulated AFM phase images were used to image P3HT nanofibers,97 fibres from P3HT-b-PFTBTT diblock copolymers98 or ferroelectric polymer islands on P3HT:PC70BM.99 However, quantitative analysis of domain composition or differentiation of materials into more than two domains (e.g., P3HT-rich and PCBM-rich) has not been realized. For this, detailed knowledge of material properties with regard to dissipation behaviour would be required.95
For imaging of electronic structures, advanced, functional force microscopy techniques exploit the fact that the probe tip can serve as top contact for application of bias voltages. In the simplest case the spatial distribution of dark currents can be measured in conductive AFM (cAFM).100,101 Although the cAFM resolution is much lower than that in topography or phase images, this offers a correlation of functional with standard AFM data. Pingree et al. combined cAFM with photocurrent AFM (pcAFM) using diffraction-limited laser-illumination of the contact region. They found that cAFM and pcAFM images of identical sample regions cannot be spatially correlated. Large dark currents measured with cAFM indicate donor or acceptor-rich domains that penetrate through the whole photoactive layer. In contrast, high photo-current signal from pcAFM denotes regions where preferentially vertical as well as lateral phase separation coincides. This was also demonstrated by Hamadani et al.102 As shown in Fig. 2, they performed pcAFM measurements at the surface of a P3HT:PCBM layer with large areas of low photocurrent. In addition, they used ultralow angle microtomy to create wedges on the layer revealing the subsurface. With a pcAFM scan across this region, approximately 10 nm below the original surface, a more homogeneous distribution of large photocurrents was found. They concluded that the top area consisted mainly of P3HT inhibiting the photocurrent through the OPV layer. Importantly, these studies indicate that results from functional measurements with AFM have to be interpreted very carefully. Information regarding the 3D morphology can only be deduced under certain conditions or with sufficient prior-knowledge. Recently, near-field pcAFM was applied to determine photocurrents some lateral distance away from the top electrode.103 Since the negative photocurrent was measured at the top cathode layer, the authors investigated maps of continuous acceptor networks (Fig. 3). It was further found that less crystalline donor phases induce more diffuse interfaces of intermediate photocurrent generation.
 Fig. 2  PcAFM data of the surface of a P3HT:PCBM layer (left) and of the bulk (right). Bulk pcAFM measurements were possible by creating wedges using ultralow angle microtomy. They show that much finer features appear when pcAFM is not applied to the surface, which potentially contains wetting layers. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  Near-field pcAFM measurements of PCDTBT:PC71BM (a) and Si–PCDTBT:PC71BM (b). Higher photocurrents correspond to areas that are well connected to the measuring electrode. The line scans in (c) reveal that the blend with the less crystalline polymer, i.e. without the bridging Si, has an extended mixed phase. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
To measure currents, conductive AFMs operate in contact mode so that attention must be paid to uncontrolled tip–sample interactions and the spatial resolution, which is restricted by the tip–sample contact area.104 By accurately controlling the force, sample damage can be limited.105 By adaptation of this method it was possible to produce maps of Young's modulus and resistivity of P3HT:PCBM at sub-100 nm resolution.106
There are non-contact modes that allow the determination of laterally resolved surface potentials, i.e. to probe properties at open circuit conditions. With time-resolved electrostatic force microscopy (EFM) Coffey et al.107 investigated local, photoinduced charging rates on F8BT:PFB blends. For this the frequency shift of the oscillating and biased AFM tip due to local charging was determined. They observed slower charging rates at domain interfaces than at domain centres. It indicates that the photocurrent depends strongly on domain compositions. Charges could be generated within domains because they are not pure. The influence of small domains of one compound within large enriched areas of the other was also investigated with surface potential measurements.108 The authors detected a relationship between a drop of open-circuit voltage and charge trapping in such islands.
To determine the spatially resolved work function of a material, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) can be applied.109 Several studies used KPFM to create material contrast by determining the surface photovoltage of OPV layers.96,110,111 Saive and co-workers measured the vertical surface potential profile on cross-sections prepared by focused ion beam milling.112 With a spatial resolution of 20 nm they could show different voltage drop behaviours of conventional and inverted cells due to changes in interface properties. Spadafora et al.96 showed that a resolution up to 2 nm is possible with KPFM. Furthermore, they observed interface regions between P3HT and PCBM domains (Fig. 4) as space charge areas with aligned work function.
 Fig. 4  Overlay of high-resolution surface topography and surface photovoltage of a P3HT:PCBM blend. The photovoltage was determined by measuring work functions under illumination and in the dark. The neutral potential is attributed to the interfacial area with a mean value of 2 nm. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
Optical properties at sub-wavelength resolution can be determined by near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM). This is realised using the near-field of a light source focused through a fibre probe.113 In 2004 McNeill and co-workers applied NSOM in contact mode for photocurrent mapping to find that electronic information helps to explain the influence of morphological segregation as observed in topographic image data on the device performance of a heterojunction.114 Another work shows that it is possible to map the time-resolved photoluminescence, i.e. exciton quenching at nm spatial resolution.115 Using local absorption spectroscopy, data on crystallinity and orientation maps of a neat thiophene PQT-12 were presented.116 Another approach combines tunnelling luminescence spectroscopy with the intrinsic features of an AFM setup.117 Here, luminescence is spatially resolved using the enhanced excitation by surface plasmons at the AFM tip. With this method exciton transport and dissociation across donor–acceptor interfaces can be measured.
There are many other SPM techniques that provide valuable information about physical, electronic, or optical properties at multiple length scales. For more information the reader is referred to a very detailed overview on SPM modes by Bonnell et al.118
X-rays
Focused X-rays can serve as a probe to create two-dimensional morphological images of the bulk of a layer. Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) has been introduced as a promising technique to visualize organic semiconductor thin film morphology by chemical contrast at resolutions of several tens of nanometers.119 Here, the specimen is raster-scanned at the focus of the X-ray beam. In case the sample is thin enough, the transmitted beam can be analysed. Analysis is based on X-ray spectroscopy (NEXAFS), where materials can be investigated for their structure and orientation.120 STXM allows us to spatially resolve NEXAFS signals. For this, typically energies around the carbon 1s ionization energy are used. Such soft X-rays induce transitions to unoccupied π* or σ* orbitals. Spectral fingerprints thereby depend on the electronic structure of the material. By quantitative analysis of transmitted spectra, compositional maps can be inferred. Spectra for 23 semiconducting polymers and some other popular materials, such as PCBM, are provided by Watts et al.121 as reference data for various possible blends.
As an additional technique to GIXS and AFM, STXM was recently applied to P3HT:PCBM blends.122 In one specific STXM study, Watts and co-workers analysed the composition of the vicinity of large PCBM crystals.123 They observed a PCBM equilibrium concentration of 19% at the interface of PCBM crystals. For MDMO-PPV:PCBM, McNeill et al. could show that larger PCBM-rich domains are actually 100% pure in films of 1:4 concentration ratio.124 Quantitative chemical mapping with STXM was also applied for other blends, such as PFB:F8BT,125 or TFB:F8BT,119,126 although these compounds are rather used for organic light-emitting diodes. A novel system for OPV is PTB7:PCBM offering relatively high efficiencies. Using STXM it was recently shown that a significant enhancement of performance can be obtained using solvent additives.29 This is depicted in Fig. 5. Based on spectral differences between the donor and acceptor (Fig. 5a) the morphological maps reveal a much finer phase separation when the additive diiodooctane (DIO) is used in chlorobenzene than when the pure solvent is used (Fig. 5b). Intensity histograms and line profiles (Fig. 5c and d), however, revealed domain sizes and composition in the non-additive sample. Enriched areas within the additive sample were not observed. This indicates that either the high performance is a consequence of an extremely fine phase intercalation or the microscope resolution of ca. 30 nm is insufficient to visualize the morphology at the required scale.
 Fig. 5  Spectral NEXAFS and 2D STXM contrast of high-performing PTB7:PC71BM blends dissolved in chlorobenzene with and without the additive DIO. X-ray absorption profiles around carbon K-edge energies reveal significant differences (a), which can be used to create compositional maps by STXM (b and c). The histograms (c) and line profiles (d) of the images of both samples indicate that without the additive a very coarse phase separation occurs. With the additive a much finer intermixing is observed although it is not certain whether there are enriched domains with sizes which are below the resolution limit of 31 nm of this experiment. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH. 
By introducing an electron detector on the side of the transmitted beam Hub and co-workers could demonstrate that additionally a surface image can be recorded with an STXM.127 This setup allows the detection of secondary electrons produced by the X-ray beam interacting inelastically with the sample. Because the mean-free path length of secondary electrons is very small, the recorded signal originates only from the first few nanometers of the backside of the mounted sample. The technique was used to simultaneously derive chemical mapping of the bulk on the basis of NEXAFS signal differences and the surface of a 150 nm thick PFB:F8BT blend.128 In addition to the domain structure of the film, capping layers could be visualized.
By using polarized X-rays and varying the electric field vector, quantitative maps of ordering and backbone orientations can be inferred.129 In particular, this helps in understanding characteristics of pristine polymers, such as F8BT130 or pBTTT.94 For the latter it was shown that in comparison to AFM topography images, STXM provides a much more realistic view of quasi-domain sizes and transitions in orientation between grain boundaries (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Basic study of polymer pBTTT using polarized STXM. A nanoribbon morphology was shown by AFM measurements (a). Applying various incident linear polarizations of the X-ray beam a backbone orientation map at STXM resolution can be obtained (b). The derivative of the orientations reveals an ordered structure with only few spots of large rates of orientation change. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
Electrons
Conventional electron microscopy. In numerous fields from materials science to biological science, where visualizing nanostructures is an essential objective, EM has been a crucial tool for unravelling structural details with nanometer resolution or better. It is used in all kinds of variants, e.g. as: (i) scanning electron microscopy (SEM), (ii) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), or (iii) bright field transmission electron microscopy (BF-TEM). Nanometer, atomic or even sub-atomic resolutions are possible.131 However, separation of different materials and the obtainable resolution strongly depend on the imaging method and instrument of choice as well as on the investigated material itself. Very high resolution is only achievable using a very large dose of high-energetic electrons. This is normally not a problem for inorganic compounds but can induce severe sample damage and degradation on organic samples.132 These are often purely carbon based. Thus, imaging polymers as they are used in thin-film organic electronics has to deal with beam damage. This problem is well known from imaging biological objects,133 which also consist of carbon-based, polymeric materials.Consequently, polymers and also small-molecules blended in BHJs are easily damaged when analysed with EM. In addition, material contrast is typically very low between compounds. They consist of the same or similar atomic elements and hence, densities do not differ very much. In STXM, chemical contrast is obtained using the visualization of small variations in antibonding energies. Although it allows sophisticated chemical analysis; at present its resolution only reaches about 30 nm.134 Therefore many efforts have been invested into studies to create contrast with EM, which offers imaging of the bulk at higher resolution.

Scanning electron microscopy. In SEM a focused electron beam is scanned across the sample surface offering topographic and some material contrast at a resolution, which is typically of the order of 2–5 nm for carbon-based materials.135 Valuable information particularly at the meso-scale of layer thickness morphology and interfaces, can be extracted relatively quickly. Since SEM is a surface-sensitive technique, mostly cross-sections are examined for vertical phase separation. Treat et al. investigated the miscibility of PCBM within P3HT using cross-sections of thermally annealed layers of P3HT:PCBM and neat PCBM.136 Apart from that, the evaluation of vertical profiles by SEM has been particularly valuable in early studies on OPV structures.90,137
Scanning transmission electron microscopy. In STEM imaging the convergent electron beam is also raster-scanned using a sample that is thin enough for the beam to pass through. With a detector at the side opposite to the side of incident electrons the transmitted beam can be recorded. The image is obtained in a point-by-point fashion by scattering contrast. Osasa and co-workers analysed cross-sections of TPD:C60 blends by bright field STEM and could generally show that neat TPD and C60 films form a heterostructure after heat treatment.138 However, contrast in bright field STEM is too low to reliably identify different domains with sufficient resolution. For enhancement of contrast, annular dark-field (ADF) or high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) detectors can be applied. Here, only electrons scattered to higher angles are recorded. In this case contrast depends on the average atomic number (Z-contrast) at the scanned sample area.139 Lu et al. could show that STEM tomography using ADF allows reliable detection of carbon black particles in a polymer volume.140 Roehling et al. applied HAADF STEM for tomography on blends of P3HT and endohedral fullerenes, which contain Lu3N clusters to enhance contrast between materials.141 In addition they used a discrete algebraic reconstruction technique to improve signal-to-noise. By incorporating prior knowledge that three phases can be expected, a detailed 3D quantitative analysis was possible that showed the compositional and size evolution of mixed and enriched phases depending on the fullerene and post-processing treatment. Contrast can be further increased when reducing the electron energy from conventionally 100–300 keV to very low energies of ≤30 keV.142 Klein and co-workers performed low-energy HAADF imaging and investigated P3HS:PCBM blends.143 Using the selenium equivalent to P3HT, domains of P3HS-rich regions after annealing could be identified. This method was recently extended to P3HT:PCBM.144
Transmission electron microscopy. The requirement to go to very low electron energies or to make substitutions of native atoms with heavier ones for STEM illustrates that imaging thin film BHJs requires other types of contrast mechanisms. Although STEM offers the possibility to employ dark-field imaging, the main focus has therefore been on BF-TEM. With today's instruments BF-TEM is in principle a very versatile technique. Microscopes in BF-TEM mode allow parallel illumination of a small area of a thin film offering larger image sizes than is typically possible with STEM for comparable acquisition times.145 Multiple projection modes are available for characterization of the sample, ranging from conventional bright-field imaging, low-dose high-resolution imaging, diffraction imaging, and energy-filtered imaging.146,147 However, as in STEM, material contrast in BHJs is difficult to obtain, which has led to the application of various approaches to generate contrast in the TEM. This variety necessitates considerable caution regarding comparison of images and, consequently, conclusions on BHJ morphology. Many studies directly focus on the methodology, which is why we believe in the importance of a critical review.Indeed, most of these studies have used P3HT:PCBM. High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) is one possibility to determine orientation and abundances of P3HT and PCBM crystallites. In this case imaging does not depend on density differences or material composition. Instead, structure evaluation mainly focuses on lamellar spacing and other crystal parameters used to correlate the amount, size and orientation of crystal domains of P3HT or PCBM with processing parameters such as annealing148 or molecular weight of P3HT.149,150 As Brinkmann et al. showed (Fig. 7), the molecular weight of the polymer strongly influences the length of crystallites and the occurrence of inter-lamellar zones. As with GIXS, ensemble-averaged information about a photoactive layer can be collected by operating the TEM in diffractive mode.151 Diffraction patterns from larger areas often show well-defined Debye–Scherrer rings at spacings around 0.4 nm that are attributed to π–π stacking in randomly oriented P3HT crystals, and diffuse rings that are attributed to 0.46 nm d-spacing of PCBM-rich domains. Yang et al.152 compared selected area diffraction patterns from several larger PCBM crystals with patterns from a more homogeneous region. From the similarity of diffraction rings they concluded that the latter region consists of nanocrystalline PCBM clusters. However, it is important to note that PCBM diffraction rings in commonly manufactured BHJs are much more diffuse than P3HT diffraction rings. In contrast, by summarizing results from GIXS measurements30 Collins and co-workers demonstrate that the occurrence of PCBM crystals can depend on the layer thickness, where at preferential thicknesses around 100 nm no PCBM crystallization is observed. So it is still unclear whether in a typical BHJ, PCBM-rich domains rather consist of PCBM nanocrystals in many different orientations and slightly different spacings or whether these domains must be treated as amorphous. The majority of observed PCBM patterns could be regarded as amorphous when comparing diffraction rings in the literature with diffraction information from amorphous carbon.147,153 An interesting application of selected area electron diffraction was provided by Li et al.154 They induced epitaxy-assisted growth of PCBM nanocrystals using the crystallographic (001) surface of mica. PCBM crystal orientation could be mapped by analysing the diffraction patterns of small selected areas. This is done by introducing a small field-limiting aperture to select only an area of interest that contributes to the diffraction pattern.
 Fig. 7  HRTEM study of P3HT crystals showing the dependence of the crystalline substructure on molecular weight. HRTEM can be used to visualize crystallites (a) as well as their orientation and extension (b and c). At a molecular weight of approximately 70 kDa, junctions of lamellar crystals appear with defect points at the junction (d). The lower panel shows models of low and high molecular weight lamellae. Ordered regions of low-weight P3HT are thinner but defects and larger amorphous interlamellar zones occur at high molecular weight. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
In conclusion, from electron diffraction or spatial Fourier analysis of high-resolution BF-TEM images, some morphological parameters can be deduced. These include a qualitative assessment of the sample's crystallinity and preferred orientation of crystals. Particularly, the orientation of P3HT crystals is important since charge transport towards the anode critically depends on orientation and packing of P3HT molecules.155 In spite of the information one can gain from such studies, larger scale properties regarding morphology are not visualized by these methods. Such properties mainly include domain sizes in lateral and vertical directions as well as the compositional evaluation of materials domains, irrespective of the domain character, i.e. amorphous or crystalline. To assess such morphology parameters using BF-TEM, image contrast and its interpretation is based on the density differences between P3HT crystals (1.1 g cm−3)156 and PCBM (1.5 g cm−3).157 Hence, it is very tempting to assign bright areas in BF-TEM images to P3HT-crystals and darker areas to PCBM-rich domains. On the larger scale and for a coarse assessment of morphological changes in correlation with various processing conditions, applying this relationship for image interpretation is valid. Here, BF-TEM can be regarded as providing supporting information to roughly understand processing effects on P3HT:PCBM blends158,159 or other blends such as P3HT:NDI-3TH160 or PCPDTBT:PCBM.31 Frequently, crystalline polymers are observed to form fibres, visible as whisker-shaped, bright structures in BF-TEM images of donor–acceptor blends.151 This can be exploited to perform bright-field electron tomography (BF-ET) on BHJs.
A tomographic analysis is crucial for detailed characterization of the morphology to gain direct access to a three-dimensional (3D) representation. In two-dimensional (2D) imaging, interpretation is based on projections of the vertical distribution of materials. Thereby it is not possible to discern the number of overlapping domains at a certain position. Additionally, in 2D imaging, contrast is affected by mass–thickness variations. These two impairments can be avoided by BF-ET. In BF-ET, the sample is tilted offering successive recording of 2D projections from different views. The final image series allows the reconstruction of the sample volume.161 Here, we do not discuss the various reconstruction techniques, which—apart from the tomogram setup—have an additional impact on the resulting reconstruction. The reader is referred to the general literature regarding electron tomographic reconstructions for further information.162 Van Bavel and co-workers163 used BF-ET to investigate the 3D distribution of P3HT fibres of as-cast and annealed blends with PCBM. They provide estimates on the gradual P3HT contents along the vertical direction of the film. This was done by selecting bright areas in all slices of the reconstructed volumes. They show that in their preparation more P3HT filaments are found at the bottom of the annealed layers, i.e. near the interface to the bottom contact anode. It was also demonstrated that the vertical distribution of P3HT filaments depends on the layer thickness with a gradient only found at thicknesses below 200 nm.164 In a more recent work the correlation of solar cell performance and PCBM mass ratio was studied in the same fashion, with the result that an inverse P3HT concentration gradient was found in comparison to their first tomography study.165 All these studies rely on the assumption that bright areas in the analysed BF-TEM images can be assigned to P3HT crystallites. However, there is essentially no detailed knowledge about the contrast mechanism of the numerous different phases that can be formed by the blended donor and acceptor compounds. It is widely accepted that processing steps such as thermal annealing drive phase separation into more pure domains. Since only recently a quantitative understanding of the miscibility was achieved,30 reliability of image interpretation was not always given.
Several approaches were suggested to enhance the contrast between domains. Andersson et al.166 performed BF-ET on blends of APFO-3 and PCBM. Using the assumption that PCBM produces three-times higher scattering contrast than the polymer, the 3D volume of PCBM-rich and APFO-3-rich domains was estimated by adjusted thresholding, but without consideration of different effects of crystalline and amorphous phases or different mixing ratios within domains. In another BF-ET study hybrid solar cell active layers were investigated.167 Here, ZnO is used as the acceptor compound. ZnO domains in a 3D P3HT matrix could be clearly visualized and analysed for their connectivity depending on the film thickness. However, with Zn as the heavier element within a matrix of carbonic material, contrast is again enhanced due to higher scattering or amplitude contrast. In comparison, pure organic thin films show very weak amplitude contrast.168 Here, contrast is mainly defined by phase contrast, which is determined by the phase contrast transfer function (CTF). According to contrast transfer theory the object is convolved with the microscope's CTF,169 which itself mainly depends on the aberrations of the objective lens and on the defocus. In frequency space this means that spatial frequencies of the object are multiplied with the CTF, which is reflected in the Fourier transform of the bright-field image. The CTF is an oscillatory function. This implies that there are zero crossings where there is no contrast transfer from the object to the image. The first zero crossing also determines the resolution limit. This first crossing lies at high spatial frequencies when working in-focus, which is why for visualization of crystallites, in-focus imaging of BHJs is preferential. However absolute CTF values for low spatial frequencies, i.e. for large-scale object features, are small. Hence, for assessing other morphological parameters such as domain sizes working in-focus is inappropriate. Contrast may be enhanced by changing the defocus because the first zero crossing is shifted to lower spatial frequencies with large contrast transfer up to this point. However, judging one image on the basis of a certain defocus leads to misinterpretations regarding the object's properties. Because the CTF is highly oscillatory at large defocus and shows high peak values, some spatial frequencies are strongly enhanced, whereas others are repressed. This creates large image features in defocused BF-TEM images corresponding to the enhanced frequency ranges, irrespective of the original object features.170 To compensate for these effects a series of images with varying defocus values can be combined. The defocus values should be selected in such a way that the CTF zeros do not coincide. Numerically combining such a series provides more features with large contrast transfer, both at low and high resolution. For such a combination, images must be corrected, i.e. the CTF for each image is fitted and subsequently used for deconvolution. The reader is referred to the relevant literature for details on the applied methods about correcting for CTF effects.169–171

Analytical transmission electron microscopy. Another possibility for imaging BHJs is the use of ATEM. For this imaging modality, the fact that high-energy, incident electrons lose small amounts of their energy by inelastic scattering events is exploited. With today's electron-optical dispersive elements, which split electrons according to their energy loss, energy resolutions down to 100 meV or even better can be achieved.172 Generally, ATEM provides two modes for spectroscopic analysis of the sample: (i) electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS), and (ii) electron spectroscopic imaging (ESI). The latter is also referred to as energy-filtered TEM (EFTEM). With EELS it is possible to record energy-loss spectra of a specified irradiated sample area, which for STEM can be as low as the typical probe size, even smaller than 1 nm in diameter. By scanning across a defined area and recording spectra for each scan position into a 3D dataset, this offers localized analysis of spectral features, hence, local assignment of specific excitations of the material within the probe diameter.172 General investigation using EELS was conducted to study the electronic structure of C60 fullerite173 and polyamide/poly(phenylene ether)-blends.174 For ESI, small energy windows are used for selective imaging with electrons of defined energy losses. Here, a 3D dataset is built by sequentially varying the energy loss and adding monochromatic images so that spectroscopic information can be obtained for each pixel. This definition implies that the TEM is operated in imaging mode. Thus, large sample areas can be probed at once. The advantage compared to BF-TEM is that contrast is determined by differences between excitation probabilities at specific energies. Three different excitation regimes are used for imaging: ionization of inner-shell core electrons of the materials, volume plasmons, and characteristic transitions between bands or band-like states. This technique was already applied to image polymer interfaces some years ago.175 However, for imaging of organic semiconductor blends, it was only recently introduced by visualization of the BHJ morphologies. Kozub et al. interpreted core-loss elemental maps of sulphur and carbon for assessing the influence of annealing temperature on the morphology of P3HT:PCBM BHJs.176 The problem of pure elemental imaging is the very low signal-to-noise ratio. Ionizations occur at energies which are mostly much larger than 100 eV. However, the inelastic cross-section is proportional to 1/ΔE.172 As a consequence, to attain sufficient signal a very large electron dose is required. Alternatively, imaging can be conducted at volume plasmon energies. For carbonaceous materials typical plasmon energy losses are around 20 eV and differ for polymers and fullerenes. Plasmon peaks for P3HT and PCBM, for example, can be found at approximately 21.5 and 25 eV, respectively.177 Different plasmon modes of PCBM that are comparable to C60 excitations can be detected as well.178 This leads to contrast inversions for P3HT-rich and PCBM-rich domains when imaging at energy-losses around these peaks. Drummy et al. used single images at 19 and 30 eV for visualization of P3HT and PCBM enriched areas.179 The blends for the recent 10.6% polymer tandem cell were also examined by ESI images around plasmon losses to obtain a rough assessment of the phase separation depending on the applied solvents and additives7 (see Fig. 8). Extension to 3D using ESI-tomography was demonstrated by Herzing et al.180,181 and by Hammond et al.21 as shown in Fig. 9. Compositional information can further be enhanced by a series of energy-filtered images at energies preceding and succeeding volume plasmon energy losses. Such a data stack was analysed by principal component analysis as a linear decomposition to search for statistically relevant features or basis spectra.181 With the additional information obtained from the statistical analysis P3HT and PCBM enriched domains can be identified with more confidence. Recently, we could show that by applying a nonlinear decomposition of the spectral dataset three classes of spectra can be distinguished.177 Such an analysis not only assigns P3HT-rich and PCBM-rich domains, but also offers the possibility to localize mixed areas of polymer and fullerene molecules. It was demonstrated that both the changes in the domain size of enriched areas and the extent of this mixed phase can be identified with the applied spectral classification approach. Fig. 10 shows the changes from an unannealed to an annealed blend. It was additionally demonstrated that the assignments using ESI stacks and nonlinear decomposition are indeed due to material composition and do not correlate with assignments from single BF-TEM micrographs.182
 Fig. 8  Coarse screening of three different polymer:PC71BM blends by electron spectroscopic imaging. Zero-loss images and energy-loss images at 20 and 30 eV are shown from left to right. Although difficult to see in this case, polymers PCPDT–BT (a–c) and PCPDT–DFBT (d–f) show a much coarser phase separation than PDTP–DFBT (g–i). The latter was used in this study for a solution processed polymer tandem solar cell, which was the first to achieve a PCE of more than 10%. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 7. Scale bars represent 200 nm. Copyright (2013) Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 9  The system PTB7:PC71BM was analysed by ESI-tomography. As already found by STXM,29 using a solvent additive induces a phase separation with smaller enriched domains (a) compared to processing without the additive (b). Since TEM offers higher resolution than STXM, even the finer phase separation can be visualized albeit not quantitatively. For these reconstructions, a tilt series with ESI images at 19 and 29 eV was acquired producing inverted contrasts due to different plasmon excitations of the polymer and fullerene. This complementary information was combined by dividing images before reconstruction. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 21. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 10  Detection of enriched and mixed phases by non-linear multivariate statistical analysis (MSA) of hyperspectral ESI datasets from P3HT:PCBM blends. Instead of single or two ESI images, stacks of energy-loss micrographs along the optical excitation window of an as-cast (a–c) and an annealed (d–f) blend were used to fully exploit spectral information at ATEM resolution. For each pixel a spectrum from 3 to 30 eV was extracted. With nonlinear feature detection using locally linear embedding230 the spectral dataset could be separated into three classes (a and d), i.e. into polymer (green) and fullerene (red) enriched areas as well as a homogeneously mixed phase (yellow). The resulting maps (b and e) and ESI spectra (c and f) reveal that factors can be linked to morphological properties explaining the increased performance upon annealing (g). These factors include stronger demixing, larger enriched domains and less extent of the mixed phase at interfaces. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 177. Scale bar in (b) represents 100 nm for both maps. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
As mentioned above, reliability of contrast at high resolution in BF-TEM could be enhanced by combining a defocus series with CTF correction. To test this hypothesis, a correlation of ESI classification from ATEM and CTF corrected BF-TEM images is shown in the following. We performed all measurements at an identical area of a P3HT:PCBM blend. The layer was hot-plate annealed at 120 °C for 5 min and subsequently transferred to a TEM grid. First, we recorded a defocus series starting near the focus so that crystallites are visible before damaging them with the accumulated dose, which was approximately 2 × 106 electrons per nm2. It is known that such a dose damages crystal and electronic structures,132,183 but the nanoscale morphology and specific differences of plasmonic excitations remain.177 Defocus values ranged from 300 nm to 34 μm, spread among 28 images. Afterwards we acquired an ESI series of inelastic images, from 2 to 30 eV, in steps of 1 eV. For each image of the first dataset the defocus, i.e. the CTF, and astigmatism were determined. In a Wiener filter approach for a defocus series171 the images were corrected for CTF effects and the restored object information from all images was combined. The result can be seen in Fig. 11. Fig. 11a and b show single defocus images for defocuses of 300 nm and 34 μm, which are the extremes of this series. The former contains high-resolution information with lattice fringes originating from P3HT crystallites, but no clear larger-scale structural information regarding enriched domains. The image at 34 μm defocus reveals large structures, but due to the nature of the CTF it is not clear whether it contains real or artificial information. At least boundary information is not reliable in such an image because of the intrinsically low spatial resolution. Only the combined information, corrected for CTF effects, can show larger structures with sharp interfaces in the BHJ layer. A corrected image using information from 8 images and defocuses from 300 nm to 1.3 μm is depicted in Fig. 11c. High-resolution as well as low-resolution structures can be seen. For Fig. 11d the whole dataset up to 34 μm is combined into a corrected image. No principle differences are observed except that low resolution structures become even more pronounced. The ESI dataset was used for classification into P3HT-rich, PCBM-rich, and mixed phase domains as previously introduced.177 An overlay of the resulting map with the CTF corrected image is provided in Fig. 11e. It shows that similar assignments can be made using both methods. P3HT-rich (green for ESI, high intensity in bright-field) and PCBM-rich (red for ESI, low intensity in bright-field) appear to coincide. However, domain borders and sizes are not always identical. Reasons for this can be manifold. Spectroscopic imaging relies on the material composition. All of the images are projections through the layer so that an incident electron may pass through several domains of different compositions. The classification of ESI data assigns three classes according to the spectral profiles so that a specific range of compositions are assigned P3HT-rich and PCBM-rich resulting in the presented map. However, it is not understood how contrast can be interpreted in detail in bright-field images of BHJs. As shown in Fig. 1, multiple phases can exist with complicated lateral and vertical profiles. It is not clear how such a large variety of domains appear in phase-contrast images. Another observation is that pixels at coordinates of the mixed phase, which were assigned by ESI data classification, cannot be distinguished from other areas of similar intensities in the bright-field CTF corrected image. However, the overlay with the mixed phase in Fig. 11f shows that it largely coincides with areas between very bright and dark areas. The images were also quantitatively analysed using computation of the power spectral densities (PSDs). It is a measure of the occurrence of certain spatial features.184 The PSDs of single defocus images in Fig. 11g demonstrate the effect of the CTF for defocuses of 0.3 μm, 1.3 μm, and 34 μm. Near the focus, information about the contribution of certain spatial frequencies is reliable but with low intensity, i.e. contrast transfer for lower frequencies. For higher defocus some frequencies show high intensity but there is a large uncertainty as to which extent it follows from the CTF or from the object. In contrast, the PSDs in Fig. 11h, which were computed from the CTF corrected images, contain reliable information. There are no more oscillations up to high frequencies and increased intensity is observed for feature sizes of around 1.6 nm and between 7 and 55 nm. The high-frequency peak marks the crystal spacing of P3HT crystallites, the latter the larger structures of enriched domains. The PSD of the ESI map also contains increased signal in the range of several ten nanometers, which emphasizes the similarity to CTF corrected images. However, due to explicit classification assignments the main peak lies between 15 and 40 nm. In that case both size ranges allow valuable insights. Whereas the bright field CTF corrected images contain information from the projection through overlapping domains, the domains in the ESI map indicate enriched areas with a large vertical prolongation. In addition, there is a peak around 3 nm, which can be attributed to the mixed phase areas, which is not visible in CTF corrected bright-field data.
 Fig. 11  Comparison of BF-TEM and analysis of spectral ESI datasets. A BF-TEM image of a typical P3HT:PCBM blend in the focus does not show sufficient contrast to reliably identify domains of varying compositions (a). The four gold fiducials were added for improved alignment between all successive images of the identical sample area. A strong defocus increases contrast but only enhances certain spatial frequencies (b). Only if the defocused images are corrected for artefacts induced by the microscope's CTF and by combination of several images of a defocus series (c and d) high resolution information can be obtained in combination with increased contrast between domains originating from phase separation. The identical area was also analysed using an ESI hyperspectral dataset and nonlinear statistical analysis according to.177 The overlay of the CTF corrected image from (d) with the resulting map of three different phases is shown in (e). It shows that enriched P3HT and PCBM domains can both be detected by ATEM and the correct application of BF-TEM. However, the extension of the interfacial mixed phase can only be identified using enhanced material contrast by ESI and subsequent data analysis. The effect of CTF correction and application of the defocus series is further measured by PSD calculations of the images. In (g) PSDs are shown for BF-TEM images of three different defocuses: 0.3 μm, 1.3 μm, and 34 μm. Whereas the micrograph near the focus reveals a strong peak at 1.6 nm resulting from the P3HT crystallite spacing no morphological information can be extracted for feature sizes from 10 to 100 nm. Strong defocus induces a large peak within the corresponding frequency range but a strong oscillation becomes apparent, which produces image artefacts. PSD plots for the CTF corrected images in (h) contain reliable information for both the high (1.6 nm) and low (ca. 7–55 nm) resolution regime. The PSD for the ESI map provides details about domain sizes of enriched and mixed phases. Scale bars in (a–f) represent 50 nm. 
To gain even more insight into the compositional distribution of a BHJ, a more quantitative analysis is desirable. As the comparison between CTF corrected and ESI data showed, a quantitative statement requires a spectroscopic type of measurement. Schindler et al. presented an approach to determine the composition of domains of ZnPc:C60 blends.185 They computed a calibration curve on the basis of the plasmon peak position depending on a control set of blends with varying C60 fraction. They also showed that the spectral response depends on the structure of the sample. Plasmon peak positions of bilayers of ZnPc and C60 differ from peak positions of blends. Hence, a nanoscale assignment of domain compositions—not only for small molecules but also for polymer blends—depends on the understanding of a complicated interplay between bilayer and blend electronic structures. According to Howe and Oleshko such characteristic features should be systematized for a reliable quantitative determination of materials.186
All of the above applications of ESI were conducted in 2D using projections through the sample layers. For establishing structure–property relationships—whether qualitatively or quantitatively—analyses should be done in 3D, since vertical phase separation plays a crucial role. This requires 4D data stacks when using ATEM. Tilt series at several energy-losses must be combined so that spectra can be analysed for all voxels of the reconstructed volume. It was shown by combining information from two energy-losses near the volume plasmon peaks that energy-filtered tomography of a BHJ is applicable (see Fig. 9). One crucial constraint on TEM tomography is that the projection requirement must be fulfilled, i.e. the recorded signal must be proportional to the increasing thickness upon tilting the sample. It was recently stated that as long as the thickness remains thin enough so that plural scattering can be neglected, the projection criterion is indeed fulfilled for low-energy-loss tomography.187 So the way to spectral analysis in 3D appears to be open. However, for reliable analyses difficulties with handling such 4D datasets and effects of irradiation damage must be solved.

Emerging technologies
Recently, novel techniques, particularly tools for probing surface chemistry, have appeared that may also be useful for morphological studies of BHJs. We like to mention two developments that have already been used to study polymers or fullerenes by chemical contrast with nanoscale resolution. The first is helium ion microscopy, applied to P3HT:PCBM blends.188 It uses a scanning probe like in SEM, but with accelerated helium ions instead of electrons. The authors of this study argue that polymers and fullerenes can be separated by secondary electron detection due to a negative correlation between the proportion of π-electrons of the material and the amount of emitted secondary electrons. However, the number of emitted secondary electrons is substantially larger when probing with helium ions than with electrons.189 This also leads to less beam induced damage because the probe current can be decreased. Maps with PCBM-rich and P3HT-rich domains were analysed for unannealed and annealed blends. Moreover, they performed plasma etching within the microscope to remove material from the surface of the active layer to reveal subsurface structures for comparison with surface information.
Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) is another promising technique for nanoscale chemical analysis of surfaces. TERS exploits the effect that Raman signals of probed molecules can be enhanced by many orders of magnitude by a near-field.190 However, in this case a scanning probe tip is used, where the enhancement of the Raman signal is confined to the vicinity of the tip apex. Very high resolution can be obtained since it only depends on the apex size and shape. It was first shown for C60 spectra on gold in the year 2000 that a 50 nm tip diameter is sufficient for a resolution of 55 nm.191 By reduction of the diameter, chemical information with resolution in the range of 10 nm is achievable. This creates possibilities for various potential applications in biology and materials sciences, which are summarized in a recent review article.192 Applicability of TERS to polymer blends and BHJs was demonstrated. Yeo et al. reported a 20 nm resolution for compositional profiling of a polyisoprene and polystyrene blend.193 For a P3HT:PCBM blend chemical contrast at 10 nm resolution was achieved by Wang et al.194 Here, P3HT-rich, PCBM-rich and mixed regions as identified by Raman signals were compared with photoluminescence and topographic mapping of the layer surface.
Consequences of obtaining material contrast and 3D nanoscale resolution
How can an image of a BHJ display domains of varying composition, purity and size scale together with their interfacial areas at angstrom or nanometer resolution, both in lateral and vertical directions? How can the composition of these domains be quantified, maintaining the resolution? The challenge of answering these questions has conquered numerous analytical disciplines since a mechanistic understanding of the evolution of optoelectronic BHJ properties appears to be a particularly valuable objective. What makes this task still so difficult is the fact that—in contrast to inorganic species from the materials sciences—the underlying organic compounds for OPVs are very fragile and are used to build a highly versatile material system. All methods that are currently employed for the visualization of BHJs have also been successfully applied for inorganic materials. Electron microscopy, e.g., easily allows angstrom resolution with sufficient electron dose and stability of the sample, provided that reliable contrast between the objects exists. However, the electronic structure of a BHJ comprising organic semiconducting compounds can change drastically upon irradiation, and contrast for sufficient analysis is very low and not fully understood. Transferring patterns from biological imaging may offer some solutions due to the carbonaceous nature of bio-organic compounds. We have shown that this transfer is possible for understanding contrast in TEM by applying CTF correction to BF-TEM images of a BHJ. CTF corrected images from defocus series provide more reliable information than single unprocessed images and can be obtained more readily than high-resolution spectroscopic data. The common procedure to overcome the problem of limiting dose for biological samples is to combine and average thousands of images from undamaged molecules acquired at low-dose conditions.195 Such single particle averaging led to the discovery of numerous 3D structures with sub-nanometer resolution. Unfortunately, this solution is not applicable to BHJs since here one needs to visualize the 3D structure of an individual layer. One possibility to obtain a comprehensive insight is to combine information from multiple views of a single layer used within different modalities. However, to deal with single targets is particularly challenging. Whilst the identical position can hardly be found in another device, at least the same specimen can be transferred for surface and bulk or 3D imaging in SPM, STXM or EM.
Using cross-sections it is possible to obtain valuable, spatially resolved information about vertically separated phases, especially by combining more than one method. Example applications are TEM in conjunction with X-ray scattering,196 ATEM in combination with time-of-flight secondary-ion mass spectroscopy,197 or scanning tunnelling microscopy and AFM topography information.198 Complex handling procedures and uncertain correlations of multi-modality information could, of course, be avoided with a technique that alone is capable of fulfilling the two major requirements for OPV visualization, i.e. providing nanometer resolution in 3D and chemical contrast. In principle, 3D nanometer resolution of a blend layer within a single instrument can be obtained by (i) a tomographic approach, or (ii) a surface sensitive technique in combination with sequential removal of small amounts of the layer. The latter could be realized with a dual-beam approach using a combination of focused-ion-beam milling with sequential SEM imaging. However, typical thicknesses of milled surfaces are on the order of several tens of nanometer, down to 15 nm.199,200 This value could be smaller, but then sample damage by ion implantation and amorphization prior to imaging plays a significant role.201,202 For tomography, electron microscopy has been proven to be applicable. It still remains to be evaluated whether TEM with parallel illumination or STEM using a scanned convergent beam is superior for imaging BHJs. STEM has the advantage of fulfilling the projection requirement and contrast is determined by scattering contrast. On the downside it uses very high beam currents focused to one spot, thus damaging not only the spot area but also the material in its vicinity.203 Moreover purely carbon-based acceptor and donor materials might not be sufficiently distinguishable with high-energy STEM. In contrast, tomography with BF-TEM was already applied to P3HT:PCBM blends. As is obvious from the CTF analysis, however, BF-TEM micrographs must be analysed with caution due to the phase contrast effects, which are not yet fully understood for this object class. Because of phase contrast and the occurrence of crystalline areas, projections from different directions when tilting the sample for tomography induce even more artefacts.180
Analytical electron microscopy can be used to overcome these problems, both in STEM and TEM mode. It provides chemical contrast at nanometer resolution204 and, even in TEM mode, follows the projection requirement187 if the sample is thinner than 100 nm, which is the approximate inelastic mean free path for 100 keV electrons.172 Mendis et al. proposed a method for the correction of effects resulting from thicker samples.205 Analytical EM tomography therefore offers a promising way for full 3D visualization of OPV blends. In principle it can also be used for band-gap imaging, i.e. for chemical contrast between phases due to band-gap signals in the range of energies equivalent to energies of visible to ultraviolet light. Obtaining contrast between multiple phases of P3HT:PCBM at nanometer resolution is possible by analysing this spectroscopic window.177 It must be noted that here details are rapidly destroyed upon irradiation with high-energy electrons since the molecular structures responsible for such a specific signal are damaged. Changing the molecular structure implies that the energetics of the system are influenced at the most basic level.206 Hence, it is highly desirable to enhance research efforts for locally visualizing chemical differences prior to excessive radiation damage. One approach could be cooling the specimen down to liquid helium temperatures. It may allow for single exposures at a higher electron dose, although breakage of bonds and eventually establishing new chemical connections cannot be prevented completely.132,183 For a 3D visualization of the domain structure, the discrete tomography approach will be of value to lower the necessary dose.141 If the number of expected phases is known, much less projections are required to obtain a high-resolution reconstruction due to the integration of prior knowledge.
Assuming that an in-depth analytical and spatially resolved analysis of band-gaps in OPV blends is feasible, one gains the ability to localize even subtle spectroscopic variations relating to optical phenomena such as band bending. In general, for analyses of organic samples and such specific spectroscopic features it is recommended to use lower acceleration voltages, since the carbon knock-on damage, i.e. the displacement of carbon atoms, is below 80 keV.207 Since lower energetic electrons also interact more strongly with the sample, attention must be paid to effects from other damaging mechanisms. However, it has been shown that typically contrast increases faster than damage.208 To obtain high resolution in HRTEM, energy filtering should be used in any case to filter out inelastically scattered electrons.209,210 Otherwise the chromatic aberration would diminish the minimum spacing that can be resolved to visualize crystal properties. Another solution would be aberration correction, which has been shown to drastically improve resolution for inorganic samples.211 It is not yet clear whether this would also enhance visualization of organic blends. For energy-loss imaging it could be sufficient to apply small filtering widths and sampling intervals.212 Chromatic aberration correction allows for very high instrumental resolution, but imaging at such a level of detail would still require a large dose and would therefore induce non-negligible irradiation damage.
X-ray methods are generally not used to probe optical excitations, but especially STXM provides an unmatched ability to locally assign minimal chemical shifts of core excitations between blend constituents.89 Nowadays, resolutions far below 100 nm are achieved provided that systematic errors regarding detector calibration, beam point spread function and higher harmonic effects are minimized.213 Yet the resolution is still too low to visualize nanometer sized areas so that compositional comparisons of domains are often restricted. This occurs in particular for optimized layers with a nanoscale, intermixed morphology.29 Therefore, a tenfold increase in resolution for X-ray microscopy would be desirable. Novel zone-plate designs already promise a resolution down to 15 nm214,215 and even 10 nm.216 For pixelated detectors for acquiring angularly resolved diffraction patterns at each scan position and more sophisticated data analysis, a resolution well below 10 nm is predicted.217 An enhancement of resolution in general requires an increase of the applied dose and, hence, involves more functional damage. Although soft X-rays are about three orders of magnitude less damaging than high-energetic electrons,218 this may also become a serious restriction for STXM. Degradation of functional groups that are important for separating spectral features cannot be suppressed by cooling to liquid nitrogen temperatures during imaging.219 To the best of our knowledge there is no consideration yet, whether the required dose for nanometer resolution STXM imaging would compromise the functional contrast for compositional analysis. This would be of high interest, in particular, for 3D chemical mapping. In principle, a tomographic approach for STXM is applicable. It could be shown, for example, that acrylate polyelectrolyte is separable from polystyrene and water in 3D at a resolution of 80 nm.220 In this case, however, the underlying spectral NEXAFS features are very pronounced. It will be a question of whether much finer spectral variations are stable enough for a 3D visualization at a tenfold increase in resolution.
Conclusions and future perspectives
The morphology of OPV blends is strongly dependent on all kinds of parametric variations during fabrication. Apart from intrinsic material parameters the exact conditions and tools applied for fabrication determine the structure that later determines performance of photoelectric energy conversion. With this complex situation only an incremental progress in understanding the mechanisms of photocurrent generation could be realized. Nevertheless, the multitude of applied characterization methods delivered important aspects about structure–property relationships. The last few years of studying BHJs have shown that considering a biphasic hair comb structure as the optimal morphology was challenged by much more complex structural models. Multiple phases of materials with different ordering, orientations, and donor–acceptor compositions are increasingly correlated with the specific photo-physical processes from exciton generation to charge collection. There have been attempts to create such ordered structures, for example, by using epitaxial growth.154 Novel results can explain why these systems do not offer enhanced performance. Yet, a specific amount of ordering for charge separation, i.e. exciton diffusion, and mobility as well as of connectivity for charge transport to the electrodes are still required. However, for efficient charge transfer one needs finite miscibility between donor and acceptor molecules. It was shown that side-chain design of the polymer to obtain a certain degree of miscibility without disturbing its crystallinity is beneficial for the solar cell performance.221 Hence, too little acceptor–donor interaction is detrimental, even though in case the tendency for demixing is too low, solvent additives are required to drive phase separation.222 These findings also explain why PCBM shows high performance with various polymers. While its miscibility as a small-molecule acceptor is relatively large, temperature-independent charge separation is facilitated even in the presence of structural disorder.223 Due to the distribution of the charge on one C60 cage and the spherical nature, charge density delocalization is strongly enhanced in any direction of neighbouring PCBMs. This induces a red-shift of the PCBM band gap. Jamieson et al. argue that together with a mixed transition phase between enriched domains such behaviour offers step-wise charge transfer along a step-wise excited state energy route.224 Such considerations have revealed the material properties that can provide an improved functional morphology. To this end the numerous techniques applied for characterization of blend layers have enabled a considerable increase in knowledge. In fact, first generation approaches applied brute-force methods, i.e. structure–function relationships were often tried to be established on the basis of only one or two main observations. In more recent studies, which can be regarded as second generation approaches, BHJs are characterized using multiple results from many different modalities. As an example, Shoaee et al. applied high-resolution TEM, transient absorption spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry, and GIXS to compare the behaviour of PCBM and a fullerene indene–C60 bisadduct, with emphasis on the optoelectronic processes at interfaces between different phases.225 It demonstrates that combining zero-dimensional spectroscopic characterization with imaging holds tremendous promise in unravelling the optoelectronic processes. The examples discussed here showed that direct visualization is particularly useful to image certain properties at the limits that are provided by today's microscopes. In this respect we think that advancements in surface probe, X-ray, and electron microscopies will further produce important insights. At the same time it would be desirable to use multiple characterizations not only for identical samples but rather for identical sample positions. Thus, a third generation approach can be envisaged, which ideally implements improvements in resolution and multi-dimensional, functional imaging as a correlative approach in conjunction with more versatile spectroscopic methods. Although transition phases are now believed to be essential for optimized electronic processes, a deep understanding at the molecular scale is still missing.226 Typically, theoretical calculations use relatively crude models, but conclusions could already be confirmed by experiments.227 Increasing model complexity and simultaneously enhancing experimental imaging resolution can finally pave the way for an effective design of optimal compounds and fabrication of OPV cells.
Experimental details
Materials
The BHJ for BF-TEM and ATEM investigation was fabricated on ITO-coated Borofloat glass with a 50 nm thick poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) sacrificial layer. For the BHJ, P3HT (Honeywell) and PCBM (American Dye Source Inc.) were dissolved in chlorobenzene in a weight ratio of 1:1 and a total concentration of 10 mg ml−1 each. Afterwards the sample was hot-plate annealed for 5 min at 120 °C. The layer with an approximate thickness of 60 nm was floated on water by dissolving the PEDOT:PSS layer. Floating pieces were collected with Quantifoil (Quantifoil Micro Tools GmbH) holey carbon grids for EM investigation. For supporting alignment of image data of different acquisition modes, 6 nm gold markers (AURION) were added as fiducials.
Electron microscopy
All TEM measurements for comparison of BF-TEM, CTF corrected and ESI data were conducted with a Libra 200 MC (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH), equipped with a monochromator and a corrected in-column spectrometer. The primary electron energy was set to 200 keV. Images were recorded with a TemCam F416 camera (TVIPS GmbH) using the corresponding acquisition software (EM-MENU, EM-SPECTRO, TVIPS GmbH) and customized scripts. At first, an image near the focus (280 nm defocus) was recorded in BF-TEM mode to obtain high-resolution information of non-damaged P3HT crystallites, followed by a defocus series with 27 images with defocuses up to 34 μm. Determination of the exact defocus by CTF fitting for each image, CTF correction and combination of the series into one corrected image171 was done with spider (System for Processing Image Data from Electron microscopy and Related fields, Wadsworth Center). In case of large defocus and failure of the fitting procedure, a customized version of FitCTF228 was applied for CTF fitting. ESI image series recording from the identical sample position and its analysis, including nonlinear analysis and spectral classification with ilastik,229 was done as described elsewhere.177 The width of the energy-selecting slit was set to 4 eV. PSD calculations were also done using spider.
AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge financial support by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (no. 13N10794), managed by the VDI, Düsseldorf, Germany. M. P. would like to thank Sarah Wulf for supplying help and updates on FitCTF, which were necessary to determine CTFs in very high-defocus micrographs.
Notes and referencesQ. Gan, F. J. Bartoli and Z. H. Kafafi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2385–2396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096401 CrossRef .G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber, T. Ameri, P. Denk, K. Forberich, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .D. Yue, P. Khatav, F. You and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9163–9172 CAS .Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 Search PubMed .J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel and F. C. Krebs, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 16–34 CrossRef .G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef .Y. Liu, X. Wan, F. Wang, J. Zhou, G. Long, J. Tian, J. You, Y. Yang and Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 771–775 CrossRef CAS .J. Min, Y. N. Luponosov, T. Ameri, A. Elschner, S. M. Peregudova, D. Baran, T. Heumüller, N. Li, F. Machui, S. Ponomarenko and C. J. Brabec, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 219–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. Pearson, T. Wang and D. G. Lidzey, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 022501 CrossRef PubMed .C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185–1199 RSC .D. M. Bassani, L. Jonusauskaite, A. Lavie-Cambot, N. D. McClenaghan, J.-L. Pozzo, D. Ray and G. Vives, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2429–2445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Chen, T. Xu, F. He, W. Wang, C. Wang, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. Chen, K. Hong, L. Yu and S. B. Darling, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. C. Jamieson, E. B. Domingo, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, N. Stingelin and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 485–492 RSC .O. G. Reid, J. A. N. Malik, G. Latini, S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, C. Silva, N. Stingelin and G. Rumbles, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 27–37 CrossRef CAS .M. Sanyal, B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, C. Munuera, A. Vorobiev, A. Colsmann, P. Scharfer, U. Lemmer, W. Schabel, H. Dosch and E. Barrena, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3795–3800 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Hammond, R. J. Kline, A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter, D. S. Germack, H.-W. Ro, C. L. Soles, D. A. Fischer, T. Xu, L. Yu, M. F. Toney and D. M. DeLongchamp, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8248–8257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. W. Ro, B. Akgun, B. T. O'Connor, M. Hammond, R. J. Kline, C. R. Snyder, S. K. Satija, A. L. Ayzner, M. F. Toney, C. L. Soles and D. M. DeLongchamp, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6587–6599 CrossRef CAS .P. Goldberg-Oppenheimer, D. Kabra, S. Vignolini, S. Hüttner, M. Sommer, K. Neumann, M. Thelakkat and U. Steiner, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1063–1070 CrossRef CAS .O. P. Lee, A. T. Yiu, P. M. Beaujuge, C. H. Woo, T. W. Holcombe, J. E. Millstone, J. D. Douglas, M. S. Chen and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5359–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Chen, W. Zhao and T. P. Russell, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1479–1485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Haberkorn, J. S. Gutmann and P. Theato, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1415–1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. H. Lee, D. W. Kim, H. Jang, J. K. Choi, J. Geng, J. W. Jung, S. C. Yoon and H.-T. Jung, Small, 2009, 5, 2139–2143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Moungthai, N. Mahadevapuram, P. Ruchhoeft and G. E. Stein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4015–4023 CAS .B. A. Collins, Z. Li, J. R. Tumbleston, E. Gann, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 65–74 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 3135–3145 CrossRef CAS .Y. Gu, C. Wang and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 683–690 CrossRef CAS .W. Chen, M. P. Nikiforov and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8045–8074 CAS .C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839–3856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef PubMed .G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .B. Kippelen and J.-L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 CAS .N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510–4515 CrossRef CAS .B. G. Sumpter and V. Meunier, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1071–1089 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Barnes and M. Baghar, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1121–1129 CrossRef CAS .M. Brinkmann, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 1218–1233 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Virkar, S. Mannsfeld, Z. Bao and N. Stingelin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3857–3875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. Hummelen, B. W. Knight, F. LePeq, F. Wudl, J. Yao and C. L. Wilkins, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .T. Liu and A. Troisi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 25, 1038–1041 CrossRef PubMed .C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653–5667 CAS .H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, A. E. Hayden, H. Yang, K. N. Houk and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. K. H. Ho, L. L. Chua, M. Dipankar, X. Y. Gao, D. C. Qi, A. T. S. Wee, J. F. Chang and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 215–221 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H.-Y. Chiang, V. Körstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382–3391 CrossRef CAS .A. Pivrikas, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1226–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. D. Zimmerman, X. Xiao, C. K. Renshaw, S. Wang, V. V. Diev, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4366–4371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. C. Nieuwendaal, H. W. Ro, D. S. Germack, R. J. Kline, M. F. Toney, C. K. Chan, A. Agrawal, D. Gundlach, D. L. VanderHart and D. M. Delongchamp, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1255–1266 CrossRef CAS .H. Flugge, H. Schmidt, T. Riedl, S. Schmale, T. Rabe, J. Fahlbusch, M. Danilov, H. Spieker, J. Schobel and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 123306 CrossRef .G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .S. Chen, J. R. Manders, S.-W. Tsang and F. So, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24202–24212 RSC .S. K. Gupta, A. Sharma, S. Banerjee, R. Gahlot, N. Aggarwal, K. Deepak and A. Garg, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 116, 135–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Hazar Apaydın, D. Esra Yıldız, A. Cirpan and L. Toppare, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 113, 100–105 CrossRef PubMed .G. Namkoong, J. Kong, M. Samson, I.-W. Hwang and K. Lee, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 74–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Carach and M. J. Gordon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 1950–1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. T. Lloyd, D. C. Olson, P. Lu, E. Fang, D. L. Moore, M. S. White, M. O. Reese, D. S. Ginley and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7638–7642 RSC .M. Seeland, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 064513 CrossRef .E. Sengupta, A. L. Domanski, S. A. L. Weber, M. B. Untch, H.-J. Butt, T. Sauermann, H. J. Egelhaaf and R. Berger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19994–20001 CAS .M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Jo, S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, T.-W. Lee, Y. Chung, S.-J. Kang, D. Vak and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2398–2406 CrossRef CAS .J. G. Labram, E. B. Domingo, N. Stingelin, D. D. C. Bradley and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .Y. Vaynzof, D. Kabra, L. Zhao, L. L. Chua, U. Steiner and R. H. Friend, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 329–336 CrossRef PubMed .T. Benanti and D. Venkataraman, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 87, 73–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. Brady, G. M. Su and M. L. Chabinyc, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 11065–11077 RSC .L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434–1449 CrossRef CAS .R. Giridharagopal and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1160–1169 CrossRef CAS .C. Groves, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 612–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC .H. Jinnai, R. J. Spontak and T. Nishi, Macromolecules, 2011, 43, 1675–1688 CrossRef .S. S. Lee and Y.-L. Loo, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2010, 1, 59–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. G. Nicholson and F. A. Castro, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 492001–492026 CrossRef PubMed .M. A. Ruderer and P. Muller-Buschbaum, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482–5493 RSC .S. van Bavel, S. Veenstra and J. Loos, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1835–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. S. van Bavel and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3217–3234 CrossRef CAS .E. Verploegen, C. E. Miller and M. F. Toney, Synchrotron Radiat. News, 2010, 23, 16–21 CrossRef .N. C. Cates, R. Gysel, Z. Beiley, C. E. Miller, M. F. Toney, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4153–4157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M.-Y. Chiu, U. S. Jeng, M.-S. Su and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2009, 43, 428–432 CrossRef .T. Erb, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, S. Raleva, B. Stühn, P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1193–1196 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee and M. F. Toney, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 222–228 CrossRef .G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Miller, R. Gysel, C. E. Miller, E. Verploegen, Z. Beiley, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, Z. Bao, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 499–503 CrossRef CAS .M. Sanyal, B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, A. Colsmann, C. Munuera, A. Vorobiev, U. Lemmer, W. Schabel, H. Dosch and E. Barrena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 363–367 CrossRef CAS .H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Woo, B. C. Thompson, B. J. Kim, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16324–16329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Rivnay, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. E. Miller, A. Salleo and M. F. Toney, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5488–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005–1011 CrossRef CAS .S. Nilsson, A. Bernasik, A. Budkowski and E. Moons, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8291–8301 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Kim, A. L. Ayzner, A. L. Appleton, K. Schmidt, J. Mei, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 25, 431–440 CrossRef .L. Y. Park, A. M. Munro and D. S. Ginger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15916–15926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Schuettfort, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, M. Lee, H. Sirringhaus and C. R. McNeill, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1849–1864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Garcia, C. J. Gómez, N. F. Martinez, S. Patil, C. Dietz and R. Magerle, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 016103 CrossRef CAS .E. J. Spadafora, R. Demadrille, B. Ratier and B. Grévin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3337–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Berson, R. DeBettignies, S. Bailly and S. Guillerez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1377–1384 CrossRef CAS .R. C. Mulherin, S. Jung, S. Huettner, K. Johnson, P. Kohn, M. Sommer, S. Allard, U. Scherf and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4846–4851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Yuan, T. J. Reece, P. Sharma, S. Poddar, S. Ducharme, A. Gruverman, Y. Yang and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 296–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. S. Kim, Y. Park, D. Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, J. K. Kim and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 540–545 CrossRef CAS .L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2946–2952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. H. Hamadani, S. Jung, P. M. Haney, L. J. Richter and N. B. Zhitenev, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1611–1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Mukhopadhyay, A. J. Das and K. S. Narayan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 4, 161–169 CrossRef .L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .K. Sweers, K. van der Werf, M. Bennink and V. Subramaniam, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 270 CrossRef PubMed .M. P. Nikiforov and S. B. Darling, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012 DOI:10.1002/pip.2217 .D. C. Coffey and D. S. Ginger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 735–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. L. Luria, N. Hoepker, R. Bruce, A. R. Jacobs, C. Groves and J. A. Marohn, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9392–9401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Nonnenmacher, M. P. O'Boyle and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 2921–2923 CrossRef .T. Glatzel, S. Sadewasser and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 210, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .K. Maturová, S. S. van Bavel, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 261–269 CrossRef .R. Saive, M. Scherer, C. Mueller, D. Daume, J. Schinke, M. Kroeger and W. Kowalsky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201301315 .J. R. O'Dea, L. M. Brown, N. Hoepker, J. A. Marohn and S. Sadewasser, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 642–650 CrossRef CAS .C. R. McNeill, H. Frohne, J. L. Holdsworth, J. E. Furst, B. V. King and P. C. Dastoor, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .A. Cadby, G. Khalil, A. M. Fox and D. G. Lidzey, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 093715 CrossRef .S. Kuehn, P. Pingel, M. Breusing, T. Fischer, J. Stumpe, D. Neher and T. Elsaesser, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 860–868 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Romero, A. J. Morfa, T. H. Reilly, J. van de Lagemaat and M. Al-Jassim, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3904–3908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. A. Bonnell, D. N. Basov, M. Bode, U. Diebold, S. V. Kalinin, V. Madhavan, L. Novotny, M. Salmeron, U. D. Schwarz and P. S. Weiss, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2012, 84, 1343–1381 CrossRef CAS .C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, W. J. Belcher, N. C. Greenham and P. C. Dastoor, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1202–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Hemraj-Benny, S. Banerjee, S. Sambasivan, M. Balasubramanian, D. A. Fischer, G. Eres, A. A. Puretzky, D. B. Geohegan, D. H. Lowndes, W. Han, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Small, 2006, 2, 26–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Watts, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 024702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Salim, L. H. Wong, B. Brauer, R. Kukreja, Y. L. Foo, Z. Bao and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 242–250 RSC .B. Watts, W. J. Belcher, L. Thomsen, H. Ade and P. C. Dastoor, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8392–8397 CrossRef CAS .C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, W. J. Belcher, A. L. D. Kilcoyne, N. C. Greenham and P. C. Dastoor, Small, 2006, 2, 1432–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Swaraj, C. Wang, H. Yan, B. Watts, J. Lüning, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Nano Lett., 2011, 10, 2863–2869 CrossRef PubMed .C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, W. J. Belcher, N. C. Greenham, P. C. Dastoor and H. Ade, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS .C. Hub, S. Wenzel, J. Raabe, H. Ade and R. H. Fink, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81, 033704–033705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Watts and C. R. McNeill, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1706–1712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 187–201 RSC .B. Watts, T. Schuettfort and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1122–1131 CrossRef CAS .K. W. Urban, Science, 2008, 321, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. H. Michler, in Electron Microscopy of Polymers, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2008, pp. 175–183 Search PubMed .L. A. Baker and J. L. Rubinstein, in Methods Enzymol., ed. J. J. Grant, Academic Press,  2010, vol. 481, pp. 371–388 Search PubMed .C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, S. Swaraj, H. Ade, L. Thomsen, W. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Schatten, Micron, 2011, 42, 175–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Osasa, S. Yamamoto and M. Matsumura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2937–2942 CrossRef CAS .Scanning transmission electron microscopy, ed. S. J. Pennycook and P. D. Nellist, Springer, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .K. Lu, E. Sourty and J. Loos, J. Electron Microsc., 2010, 59, S39–S44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. D. Roehling, K. J. Batenburg, F. B. Swain, A. J. Moulé and I. Arslan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 23, 2115–2122 CrossRef .M. Pfaff, E. Müller, M. F. G. Klein, A. Colsmann, U. Lemmer, V. Krzyzanek, R. Reichelt and D. Gerthsen, J. Microsc., 2011, 243, 31–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. F. G. Klein, M. Pfaff, E. Müller, J. Czolk, M. Reinhard, S. Valouch, U. Lemmer, A. Colsmann and D. Gerthsen, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 198–206 CrossRef CAS .M. Pfaff, M. F. G. Klein, E. Müller, P. Müller, A. Colsmann, U. Lemmer and D. Gerthsen, Microsc. Microanal., 2012, 18, 1380–1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. Aronova and R. D. Leapman, MRS Bull., 2011, 37, 53–62 CrossRef PubMed .D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter, Transmission electron microscopy, Springer, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .L. Reimer and H. Kohl, Transmission electron microscopy, Springer, New York,  2008 Search PubMed .R. M. Beal, A. Stavrinadis, J. H. Warner, J. M. Smith, H. E. Assender and A. A. R. Watt, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2343–2348 CrossRef CAS .M. Brinkmann and P. Rannou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .M. Brinkmann and P. Rannou, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1125–1130 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Yang, J. K. J. vanDuren, M. T. Rispens, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 802–806 CrossRef CAS .J. Kakinoki, Y. Komura and T. Ino, Acta Crystallogr., 1960, 13, 171–179 CrossRef .L. Li, G. Lu, S. Li, H. Tang and X. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 15651–15658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. J. W. Crossland, K. Tremel, F. Fischer, K. Rahimi, G. Reiter, U. Steiner and S. Ludwigs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 839–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. J. Prosa, M. J. Winokur, J. Moulton, P. Smith and A. J. Heeger, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 4364–4372 CrossRef CAS .C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, W. J. H. van Gennip, J. K. J. van Duren, P. Jonkheijm, R. A. J. Janssen and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203–204, 547–550 CrossRef CAS .M. Hallermann, I. Kriegel, E. Da Como, J. M. Berger, E. von Hauff and J. Feldmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3662–3668 CrossRef CAS .J. Jo, S.-S. Kim, S.-I. Na, B.-K. Yu and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .G. Ren, E. Ahmed and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 946–953 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Midgley and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 271–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Electron Tomography: Methods for Three-Dimensional Visualization of Structures in the Cell, ed. J. Frank, Springer, New York,  2006 Search PubMed .S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. d. With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With, K. Frolic and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7396–7403 CrossRef CAS .S. S. van Bavel, M. Bärenklau, G. de With, H. Hoppe and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .B. V. Andersson, A. Herland, S. Masich and I. s. Olle, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 853–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. Jan Anton Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Angert, C. Burmester, C. Dinges, H. Rose and R. R. Schröder, Ultramicroscopy, 1996, 63, 181–192 CrossRef CAS .I. Angert, E. Majorovits and R. R. Schröder, Ultramicroscopy, 2000, 81, 203–222 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhu, P. A. Penczek, R. Schroder and J. Frank, J. Struct. Biol., 1997, 118, 197–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. A. Penczek, J. Zhu, R. Schroder and J. Frank, Scanning Microsc., 1997, 11, 147–154 Search PubMed .R. F. Egerton, Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope, Springer, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .P. L. Hansen, P. J. Fallon and W. Krätschmer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 181, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .W. Heckmann, W. Probst, F. Hofer and W. Grogger, presented in part at the ICEM14, Cancun, Mexico,  04/09/1998.K. Siangchaew and M. Libera, Microsc. Microanal., 1997, 3, 530–539 CAS .D. R. Kozub, K. Vakhshouri, L. M. Orme, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5722–5726 CrossRef CAS .M. Pfannmöller, H. Flügge, G. Benner, I. Wacker, C. Sommer, M. Hanselmann, S. Schmale, H. Schmidt, F. A. Hamprecht, T. Rabe, W. Kowalsky and R. R. Schröder, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3099–3107 CrossRef PubMed .P. Bolognesi, L. Avaldi, A. Ruocco, A. Verkhovtsev, A. V. Korol and A. V. Solovyov, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2012, 66, 1–9 CrossRef .L. F. Drummy, R. J. Davis, D. L. Moore, M. Durstock, R. A. Vaia and J. W. P. Hsu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 907–912 CrossRef .D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline and A. Herzing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5980–5993 CAS .A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter and I. M. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17501–17508 CAS .M. Pfannmöller, H. Flügge, G. Benner, I. Wacker, W. Kowalsky and R. R. Schröder, Synth. Met., 2012, 161, 2526–2533 CrossRef PubMed .R. W. Ditchfield, D. T. Grubb and M. J. Whelan, Philos. Mag., 1973, 27, 1267–1280 CrossRef CAS .W. Ma, C. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1387–1390 CrossRef CAS .W. Schindler, M. Wollgarten and K. Fostiropoulos, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1100–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Howe and V. P. Oleshko, J. Electron Microsc., 2004, 53, 339–351 CrossRef CAS .B. Goris, S. Bals, W. Van den Broek, J. Verbeeck and G. Van Tendeloo, Ultramicroscopy, 2011, 111, 1262–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. Pearson, S. A. Boden, D. M. Bagnall, D. G. Lidzey and C. Rodenburg, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4275–4281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Cohen-Tanugi and N. Yao, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 063504 CrossRef .B. Pettinger, P. Schambach, C. J. Villagómez and N. Scott, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 379–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. M. Stöckle, Y. D. Suh, V. Deckert and R. Zenobi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 318, 131–136 CrossRef .K. F. Domke and B. Pettinger, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1365–1373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B.-S. Yeo, E. Amstad, T. Schmid, J. Stadler and R. Zenobi, Small, 2009, 5, 952–960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, D. Zhang, K. Braun, H.-J. Egelhaaf, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Meixner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 492–499 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Fernandez, C. O. S. Sorzano, R. Marabini and J. M. Carazo, IEEE Signal Process. Mag., 2006, 23, 84–94 CrossRef .C.-M. Liu, M.-S. Su, J.-M. Jiang, Y.-W. Su, C.-J. Su, C.-Y. Chen, C.-S. Tsao and K.-H. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5413–5422 CAS .H. Flügge, M. Pfannmöller, G. Benner, I. Wacker, H. Schmidt, T. Rabe, R. R. Schröder and W. Kowalsky, Energy Procedia, 2012, 31, 46–59 CrossRef PubMed .M.-C. Shih, B.-C. Huang, C.-C. Lin, S.-S. Li, H.-A. Chen, Y.-P. Chiu and C.-W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2387–2392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. S. Lidke and K. A. Lidke, J. Cell Sci., 2012, 125, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .P. Schneider, M. Meier, R. Wepf and R. Müller, Bone, 2011, 49, 304–311 CrossRef PubMed .R. J. Bailey, R. Geurts, D. J. Stokes, F. de Jong and A. H. Barber, Micron, 2013, 50, 51–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. I. Kato, J. Electron Microsc., 2004, 53, 451–458 CrossRef CAS .R. F. Egerton, S. Lazar and M. Libera, Micron, 2012, 43, 2–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. R. Daniels, R. Brydson, A. Brown and B. Rand, Ultramicroscopy, 2003, 96, 547–558 CrossRef CAS .B. G. Mendis, S. J. Bishop, C. Groves, M. Szablewski, A. Berlie and D. P. Halliday, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 253301 Search PubMed .W. C. Tsoi, S. J. Spencer, L. Yang, A. M. Ballantyne, P. G. Nicholson, A. Turnbull, A. G. Shard, C. E. Murphy, D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson and J.-S. Kim, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2944–2952 CrossRef CAS .H. H. Rose, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 3809–3823 CrossRef PubMed .U. Kaiser, J. Biskupek, J. C. Meyer, J. Leschner, L. Lechner, H. Rose, M. Stöger-Pollach, A. N. Khlobystov, P. Hartel, H. Müller, M. Haider, S. Eyhusen and G. Benner, Ultramicroscopy, 2011, 111, 1239–1246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. E. Cosslett, Br. J. Appl. Phys., 1956, 7, 10–13 CrossRef .W. Probst, G. Benner, J. Bihr and E. Weimer, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 297–300 CrossRef CAS .B. Kabius, P. Hartel, M. Haider, H. Müller, S. Uhlemann, U. Loebau, J. Zach and H. Rose, J. Electron Microsc., 2009, 58, 147–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .O. L. Krivanik, M. K. Kundmann and K. Kimoto, J. Microsc., 1995, 180, 277–287 CrossRef .B. A. Collins and H. Ade, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2012, 185, 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Chao, B. D. Harteneck, J. A. Liddle, E. H. Anderson and D. T. Attwood, Nature, 2005, 435, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Jefimovs, J. Vila-Comamala, T. Pilvi, J. Raabe, M. Ritala and C. David, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 264801 CrossRef CAS .W. Chao, P. Fischer, T. Tyliszczak, S. Rekawa, E. Anderson and P. Naulleau, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 9777–9783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. N. Chapman, Science, 2008, 321, 352–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Ade and H. Stoll, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 281–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Beetz and C. Jacobsen, J. Synchroton Radiat., 2003, 10, 280–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. A. Johansson, T. Tyliszczak, G. E. Mitchell, M. H. Keefe and A. P. Hitchcock, J. Synchroton Radiat., 2007, 14, 395–402 CAS .H. J. Son, B. Carsten, I. H. Jung and L. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8158–8170 CAS .J. S. Kim, Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, J. K. Kim and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1355–1360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. D. Pensack, C. Guo, K. Vakhshouri, E. D. Gomez and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4824–4831 CAS .F. C. Jamieson, E. B. Domingo, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, N. Stingelin and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 485–492 RSC .S. Shoaee, S. Subramaniyan, H. Xin, C. Keiderling, P. S. Tuladhar, F. Jamieson, S. A. Jenekhe and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3286–3298 CrossRef CAS .R. A. J. Janssen and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2012, 25, 1847–1858 CrossRef PubMed .F.-C. Wu, Y.-C. Huang, H.-L. Cheng, W.-Y. Chou and F.-C. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15057–15066 CAS .C. Yang, W. Jiang, D. H. Chen, U. Adiga, E. G. Ng and W. Chiu, J. Microsc., 2009, 233, 391–403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Sommer, C. Straehle, U. Kothe and F. A. Hamprecht, Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, 2011 IEEE International Symposium on,  2011, pp. 230–233 Search PubMed .S. T. Roweis and L. K. Saul, Science, 2000, 290, 2323–2326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
The morphological structure of organic photovoltaic blends plays a crucial role in cell performances. Photoactive layers show a hierarchical organization. It follows that optoelectronic processes are governed by physical, electronic, and optical properties of materials domains at scales ranging from sub-nm to at least several tens of nm. The most direct way to decipher how such morphology develops, what the optimal morphology is, and how it explains the actual processes for charge generation is to directly resolve these structures in real space. Typical blends, however, consist of carbonaceous donor and acceptor compounds. State-of-the-art microscopes offer analytical modes to combine high spatial resolution and identification of spectroscopic features. Such methods mainly use surface probes, electrons or X-ray beams. Specific interactions of these probes with the specimen provide functional maps on the basis of spatially variant properties. Indeed, such maps can be linked to morphology information at nm resolution. These results encourage future developments where three-dimensional visualization of organic blends at nm to sub-nm resolution will be possible.


 	Fig. 1  The electronic properties of a BHJ are strongly influenced by various morphological characteristics. Correlating structure and function thereby requires vertical as well as lateral visualization of the blend at multiple length scales. For a typical sample an imaging modality must provide coarse views down to several hundred nanometers for assessing aspects of vertical phase separation, percolation paths and domain properties. However, the most important processes for charge generation critically depend on the exact domain compositions, interfaces, as well as molecular ordering and orientation at the nanometer to sub-nanometer scale. Hence, it is essential to span at least four orders of magnitude for imaging physical properties of pure donor (green) and acceptor (red) domains, but also mixed and interfacial phases (yellow).	 

 	Fig. 2  PcAFM data of the surface of a P3HT:PCBM layer (left) and of the bulk (right). Bulk pcAFM measurements were possible by creating wedges using ultralow angle microtomy. They show that much finer features appear when pcAFM is not applied to the surface, which potentially contains wetting layers. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Near-field pcAFM measurements of PCDTBT:PC71BM (a) and Si–PCDTBT:PC71BM (b). Higher photocurrents correspond to areas that are well connected to the measuring electrode. The line scans in (c) reveal that the blend with the less crystalline polymer, i.e. without the bridging Si, has an extended mixed phase. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Overlay of high-resolution surface topography and surface photovoltage of a P3HT:PCBM blend. The photovoltage was determined by measuring work functions under illumination and in the dark. The neutral potential is attributed to the interfacial area with a mean value of 2 nm. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Spectral NEXAFS and 2D STXM contrast of high-performing PTB7:PC71BM blends dissolved in chlorobenzene with and without the additive DIO. X-ray absorption profiles around carbon K-edge energies reveal significant differences (a), which can be used to create compositional maps by STXM (b and c). The histograms (c) and line profiles (d) of the images of both samples indicate that without the additive a very coarse phase separation occurs. With the additive a much finer intermixing is observed although it is not certain whether there are enriched domains with sizes which are below the resolution limit of 31 nm of this experiment. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Basic study of polymer pBTTT using polarized STXM. A nanoribbon morphology was shown by AFM measurements (a). Applying various incident linear polarizations of the X-ray beam a backbone orientation map at STXM resolution can be obtained (b). The derivative of the orientations reveals an ordered structure with only few spots of large rates of orientation change. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  HRTEM study of P3HT crystals showing the dependence of the crystalline substructure on molecular weight. HRTEM can be used to visualize crystallites (a) as well as their orientation and extension (b and c). At a molecular weight of approximately 70 kDa, junctions of lamellar crystals appear with defect points at the junction (d). The lower panel shows models of low and high molecular weight lamellae. Ordered regions of low-weight P3HT are thinner but defects and larger amorphous interlamellar zones occur at high molecular weight. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Coarse screening of three different polymer:PC71BM blends by electron spectroscopic imaging. Zero-loss images and energy-loss images at 20 and 30 eV are shown from left to right. Although difficult to see in this case, polymers PCPDT–BT (a–c) and PCPDT–DFBT (d–f) show a much coarser phase separation than PDTP–DFBT (g–i). The latter was used in this study for a solution processed polymer tandem solar cell, which was the first to achieve a PCE of more than 10%. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 7. Scale bars represent 200 nm. Copyright (2013) Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  The system PTB7:PC71BM was analysed by ESI-tomography. As already found by STXM,29 using a solvent additive induces a phase separation with smaller enriched domains (a) compared to processing without the additive (b). Since TEM offers higher resolution than STXM, even the finer phase separation can be visualized albeit not quantitatively. For these reconstructions, a tilt series with ESI images at 19 and 29 eV was acquired producing inverted contrasts due to different plasmon excitations of the polymer and fullerene. This complementary information was combined by dividing images before reconstruction. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 21. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Detection of enriched and mixed phases by non-linear multivariate statistical analysis (MSA) of hyperspectral ESI datasets from P3HT:PCBM blends. Instead of single or two ESI images, stacks of energy-loss micrographs along the optical excitation window of an as-cast (a–c) and an annealed (d–f) blend were used to fully exploit spectral information at ATEM resolution. For each pixel a spectrum from 3 to 30 eV was extracted. With nonlinear feature detection using locally linear embedding230 the spectral dataset could be separated into three classes (a and d), i.e. into polymer (green) and fullerene (red) enriched areas as well as a homogeneously mixed phase (yellow). The resulting maps (b and e) and ESI spectra (c and f) reveal that factors can be linked to morphological properties explaining the increased performance upon annealing (g). These factors include stronger demixing, larger enriched domains and less extent of the mixed phase at interfaces. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 177. Scale bar in (b) represents 100 nm for both maps. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Comparison of BF-TEM and analysis of spectral ESI datasets. A BF-TEM image of a typical P3HT:PCBM blend in the focus does not show sufficient contrast to reliably identify domains of varying compositions (a). The four gold fiducials were added for improved alignment between all successive images of the identical sample area. A strong defocus increases contrast but only enhances certain spatial frequencies (b). Only if the defocused images are corrected for artefacts induced by the microscope's CTF and by combination of several images of a defocus series (c and d) high resolution information can be obtained in combination with increased contrast between domains originating from phase separation. The identical area was also analysed using an ESI hyperspectral dataset and nonlinear statistical analysis according to.177 The overlay of the CTF corrected image from (d) with the resulting map of three different phases is shown in (e). It shows that enriched P3HT and PCBM domains can both be detected by ATEM and the correct application of BF-TEM. However, the extension of the interfacial mixed phase can only be identified using enhanced material contrast by ESI and subsequent data analysis. The effect of CTF correction and application of the defocus series is further measured by PSD calculations of the images. In (g) PSDs are shown for BF-TEM images of three different defocuses: 0.3 μm, 1.3 μm, and 34 μm. Whereas the micrograph near the focus reveals a strong peak at 1.6 nm resulting from the P3HT crystallite spacing no morphological information can be extracted for feature sizes from 10 to 100 nm. Strong defocus induces a large peak within the corresponding frequency range but a strong oscillation becomes apparent, which produces image artefacts. PSD plots for the CTF corrected images in (h) contain reliable information for both the high (1.6 nm) and low (ca. 7–55 nm) resolution regime. The PSD for the ESI map provides details about domain sizes of enriched and mixed phases. Scale bars in (a–f) represent 50 nm.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
