Nanofuel as a potential secondary energy carrier  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B906384F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B906384F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 591-600Show Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsNanofuel as a potential secondary energy carrier

        
          
            Dongsheng 
            Wen
          
          
        
      *
      School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary, University of London, London, E1 4NS. E-mail: d.wen@qmul.ac.uk;  Fax: +0044-20-89831007;   Tel: +0044-20-788232
Received 
      31st March 2009
    , Accepted 21st December 2009First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      23rd February 2010
    AbstractThis paper presents a novel concept of nanofuel, pure energetic nanoparticles or suspensions of energetic nanoparticles in a liquid carrier, as a potential secondary energy carrier. Technological issues for the realization of the concept including nanofuel production, controlled ignition and combustion, oxidized particle capture and other related issues are described and key challenges are identified, which calls for a cross disciplinary collaboration from materials, chemistry, physics and engineering researchers.Dongsheng WenDongsheng Wen received his DPhil in Engineering Science from the University of Oxford. After a two-year post-doc experience in the University of Leeds, he moved to Queen Mary, University of London, first as a Lecturer, then Senior Lecturer, and currently holds a Readership position in Future Energy. His research is focused at the interface of nanotechnology and energy engineering, i.e. engineering and utilizing unique properties of nanomaterials to enhance energy conversion and transportation processes. He is a Fellow of the Institute of Nanotechnology (FIoN), a member of the Energy Institute (MEI), a Chartered Engineer (CEng) and a Chartered Scientist (CSci), and has authored over 100 scientific publications and several patents.

Broader context
The increasing use of energies generated from renewable resources will become viable where the geographical and climatic prerequisites are met. Such regions, however, seldom coincide with the areas of high energy consumption, namely industrial and city regions with a high population density. Hydrogen and battery technologies have been conventionally regarded as potential secondary energy carriers, but all with significant barriers to overcome. This work presents a novel concept of nanofuel, pure energetic nanomaterials or suspensions of energetic nanomaterials in a liquid medium, as a potential energy carrier. Technological issues for the realization of the concept including nanofuel production, controlled ignition and combustion, oxidized particle capture and other related issues are described and key challenges are identified. Nanofuel presents both opportunities and risks; however if properly addressed, it could provide a potential energy carrier to compete with current hydrogen and battery technologies, which has significant implications on energy, environment, society and the quality of life.

1. Background
Concerns about global climate change due to the emissions of greenhouse gases, and the projected decline in world oil production have put energy as the single most important problem facing humanity in the next fifty years.1 Securing clean, affordable energy for the long term is becoming one of the biggest challenges in the world. The increasing use of energies generated from renewable resources, including biomass, wind energy, hydroelectric power, and solar energy, will become viable where the geographical and climatic prerequisites are met. Such regions, however, seldom coincide with the areas of high energy consumption, namely industrial and city regions with high population densities. Hydrogen has been conventionally proposed as a potential energy vector. However, current hydrogen production is heavily dependent on crude oil or natural gas as raw materials, or on electricity from fossil fuels. Other significant technological and economical challenges in hydrogen storage, transportation and utilization further restrict the vision of a hydrogen economy becoming a reality in the short term. Electricity is another energy carrier that has been long established, where a battery or capacitor is required for mobile applications. Recently, electric and hybrid vehicles have been proposed as more viable alternatives to hydrogen vehicles for transportation, particularly in the near future.2 However, they have some significant problems such as long charging time, limited charging capacity and limited resources of heavy metals. Research into viable novel energy carriers is still ongoing.
2. The concept
The utilization of thermal energy released from exothermic reactions has been long practiced in a variety of industries. For instance, the thermite reaction, which involves the reduction of metallic oxides with aluminium to form aluminium oxide and metals or alloys, is widely used for metallurgical applications and combustion synthesis of new materials and explosives, and micrometre sized metal particles, including aluminium, boron and iron, have been used as solid fuel additives for enhanced propulsion, airbag igniters/boosters and aerial decoy flares.3 The common features relating to such applications include large particle size typically at bulk or micrometre scale, high ignition/combustion temperature, and an open cycle where oxidized metals are discharged without being recycled.
Like hydrocarbon fuels and hydrogen, metals are potential energy carriers that can release a large amount of heat when being oxidized. In the simplest terms, the exothermic process can be represented by a reaction such as: 4Al + 3O2 = 2Al2O3, and the energy release rate is ∼30 MJ per kilogram of aluminium. The energy densities for boron and beryllium increase to 55 and 64 MJ kg−1, which are even higher than those of gasoline and diesel fuels. A complete comparison of energy density of various fuels is shown in Fig. 1 on a mass and volume basis. The energy available from metals in general is much higher than that of conventional fuels per volume, and a few orders of magnitude higher than a typical lithium acid battery, ∼0.4 MJ kg−1.4
 Fig. 1  Energy density comparison, per kg and per litre of fuel. 
However, realizing a fast chemical energy release in a useful and controllable manner is not possible for bulk materials. For instance, the oxidation process of bulk metals is a very slow process that is nearly unnoticeable. Pure bulk metals such as iron and aluminium are normally covered by layers of oxides that must be removed before the reaction can proceed rapidly. To achieve a rapid thermal energy release, i.e. combustion, in most of the metals, one needs an energy source of a temperature of at least 2000 °C to vaporize the oxide layer and expose the bare, reactive metal beneath.
It is a well known phenomenon in physics that the properties of most materials are size-dependent. Some relevant properties in metal oxidation and combustion may include the activation energy, oxidation and ignition temperature. Small particles burn much more easily because of their large surface area to volume ratio and short oxidizer diffusion length; the oxidation could generate enough energy to spontaneously ignite and combust particles. There is some evidence that shows that metallic aluminium nanoparticles of ∼100 nanometres can be ignited at ∼250 °C, much lower than that in the bulk.5 The reduction in ignition temperature opens a big window for potentially wide applications of energetic particles.
This paper proposes a novel concept of nanofuel, pure energetic nanomaterials (dry fuels) or suspensions of energetic nanomaterials in a liquid medium (wet fuels), as a potential energy carrier. The concept comprises three main elements: production, transportation and utilization of nanofuels. In a simplified version, primary or renewable energy resources are utilized to manufacture nanofuels from raw materials or captured oxidized particles (production), which are then transported and stored in places, requiring energy (transportation); heat or, indirectly, electricity/work is released through an oxidation or combustion process (utilization). The end products, oxidized particles, are recycled and processed back to metal form, thus closing the loop. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 illustrate the concept from both process and energy aspects.
 Fig. 2  Nanofuel as a potential secondary energy carrier: process route. 
 Fig. 3  Nanofuel as a potential secondary energy carrier: energy path. 
One of the key requirements in this concept is to fully utilize the chemical energy stored in energetic particles in a controllable manner, where the energy release rate is dependent on practical application needs. For instance, for a potential application as a fuel for internal combustion engines, the particle burning time should be a couple of milliseconds to match the engine speed. However, there is still no consensus in the research on the mechanisms of the ignition and combustion of small particles.3,5 For convenience, nanofuels in this paper also refer to possible micrometre-sized energetic particles that can be controllably ignited and burned in the form of either a pure particle fuel or a suspension of energetic particles in a liquid medium.
Some initial studies, as will briefly described in section 3, have identified that such an idea is visionary but adventurous with a number of challenges to overcome, which include a) large-scale production of suitable nanofuels; b) controlled nanofuel delivery and injection; c) controlled combustion and efficient use of heat; d) potential wear and lubrication issues and e) potential particle emissions, and associated health and environmental issues, which will be detailed in section 4. Nevertheless, if properly addressed, nanofuel could provide a number of advantages. It could achieve improved ignition and combustion properties over large sized particles at reduced ignition temperature, which make combustion easier and heat release faster with a possibility of complete combustion of particles. Properly engineered, it could provide an alternative energy carrier to battery and hydrogen economics. As compared with the hydrogen economy, nanofuels possess relatively high energy densities especially in terms of volume, and the advantages of easy storage and transportation. The richness of resources is an advantage over battery technologies, as silicon, aluminium and iron represent the 2nd, 3rd and 4th richest elements in earth's crust. Compared with hydrocarbon based energy carriers, nanofuels form economically valuable end products: metal oxides instead of CO2, which enables the possibility of regeneration to metal form for continuous usage. In addition, dilute nanofuels, low concentrations of nanoparticles as additives to conventional hydrocarbon fuels, could improve the ignition and combustion properties of hydrocarbon fuels. However, inevitably, as with other technologies, nanofuels have many constraints. It is a double-edged sword, as the increase in reactivity of nanofuel may bring potential health and safety issues. A preliminary feasibility study is conducted, as described below.
3. Initial feasibility study
3.1 Suitable candidates
As shown in Fig. 1, beryllium has a very high energy density; however, its extreme toxicity and cost prohibit its extensive usage. A single exposure to beryllium is sufficient for a lifelong risk of developing chronic beryllium disease (CBD), which is usually irreversible and may result in fatality.6 The estimated price reaches ∼$215 per kilogram of bulk beryllium, which contrasts significantly to ∼$2/kg for both aluminium and boron.7 Boron, aluminium and iron particles have been used as solid fuel additives for enhanced propulsion and airbag igniters/boosters and aerial decoy flares.3,8 The direct application of boron is also hindered by the presence of a stable liquid oxide layer covering the particle surface, and a very high vaporization temperature.8 From both economic availability and resource abundance considerations, conventional energetic nanoparticles including aluminium (Al) and iron (Fe) can be used as potential fuels. Some novel fuels, including silicon (Si), a mixture of aluminium and boron (Al–B) and iron and boron (Fe–B), as well as some nanostructured fuels (NSF), can be also good candidates. Silicon fuel is proposed due to its abundance, i.e. being the 2nd richest element in the earth's crust, relatively high energy density, Fig. 1, and technological maturity, i.e. the basis of Silicon Valley. The Al–B and Fe–B mixtures are proposed to overcome barriers associated with conventional boron combustion by using Al or Fe as pilot fuels. The early ignition of aluminium or iron particles would increase temperature rapidly, which will make boron combustion much easier. Structured fuels are proposed as a potential way to control the burning rate of some nanofuels, as most nanoparticles may burn too fast and ease the storage and transportation process. Though there is still no consensus on the mechanisms of combustion of nanoparticles, a rough estimation based on the conventional d2 law shows that a 100 nm particle could be burned within tens of nanoseconds in the absence of passivation layers or proper structures. Burning speeds are much faster for some applications, such as in internal combustion engines where a typical burning period is a few milliseconds. Under such a scenario, the thermal energy released by nanofuels can not be fully utilized by the engine. It appears that properly engineered morphology and structure of nanomaterials are important to achieve controlled combustion for different applications.
3.2 Initial life cycle analysis (LCA) of nanofuels
Probably the biggest concerns about using nanofuel as a future energy carrier are the well-to-wheel energy efficiency, cost and potential environmental impact. Very few relevant publications can be found from open literature. There is, however, some strong evidence that supports the nanofuel concept. A recent paper revealed that the overall energy need for silicon production based on mature commercial technology, i.e. quartz sand reduction with carbon using an electric arc process at a megaton scale, is ∼43 MJ kg−1, and the process has an overall energy efficiency of 84%.9 As shown in Fig. 1, a complete combustion of silicon will release ∼33 MJ kg−1 of heat. Taking a reasonable thermal energy utilization efficiency of 40%, the estimated well-to-wheel energy efficiency will be ∼31%, which is much higher than hydrogen as a secondary energy carrier.10 The major weaknesses of this analysis, however, are the uncertainty of the thermal energy utilization and the neglected energy consumption to reduce bulk silicon to silicon nanoparticles. Complete combustion is impossible for bulk silicon. Silicon needs to be ground or processed to smaller particles in order to increase the combustion efficiency and achieve better fuel utilization. The energy required to transform bulk silicon to nanometre and/or micrometre scales, which is presumed to be energy intensive, has not been taken into account in this simple energy analysis.
Metallic nanoparticles such as iron, aluminium or boron have been proposed as alternative fuels for combustion engines,11 and a well-to-wheel efficiency analysis for two of these fuels was conducted.12 In the analysis,12 the energy requirement for iron and aluminium production, based on some mature technologies, was estimated as 10.5 MJ kg−1 and 86 MJ kg−1, respectively, by assuming a 50%:50% production ratio of both primary production (from ores to metals) and secondary production (recycling of used metals). The extra energy for processing metals to nanoparticle form was estimated as ∼10 MJ kg−1 and 3 MJ kg−1 based on a commercial mechanical milling process. So, for a once-through system, i.e. nanoparticles used without being recycled, the total primary energy consumption for a vehicle to drive one kilometre was estimated as 12.1 MJ km−1 and 12.4 MJ km−1 for iron and aluminium nanoparticles by assuming a tank-to-wheel efficiency of 3.2 MJ km−1. The authors of the paper were a bit pessimistic about the future of metallic nanoparticles as the energy consumptions are much higher than those of conventional hydrocarbon fuels, which are around ∼3.1 MJ km−1. However, the concept of nanofuel here is not to compete with primary fuels such as gasoline, but a potential alternative for the secondary energy market, which includes hydrogen and battery power. In their analysis,12 the well-to-wheel energy consumptions were found to be ∼6.7 MJ km−1 and 10.6 MJ km−1, respectively, for hydrogen applications in fuel cells and in internal combustion engines. Even based on these data, the values of well-to-wheel energy consumption for iron and aluminium nanofuels, 12.1 and 12.4 MJ km−1, are only slightly higher than that for hydrogen’s application in internal combustion engines.
Using energetic nanoparticles only once is not feasible. For the proposed concept to be working, it is essential to capture oxidized particles and re-process them to metal nanoparticle form for continuous usages. The analysis of Utgikar et al.12 claimed that the energy consumption for a particle recycling system is much higher than that of a once-through system, which is highly debatable. Their analysis was based on a very bold assumption that for a recycling system, the energy consumption for metal regeneration is the same as that of primary production of metals from ores. This is inappropriate as the primary production involves many processes such as ore mining, extraction, separation and refining that require more energy than a direct reduction from pure metal oxide to metal, which is the case for recycling nanoparticles. More importantly, the data used for aluminium production, 164 MJ kg−1-Al, is outdated that is not representative the current industry-average level. Recent studies show that the energy requirement for metal aluminium production is in the range of 40 ∼ 60 MJ kg−1-Al.13,14 If taking a middle ranged value, i.e. the production energy for aluminium is 50 MJ kg−1-Al, and using other data provided by Utgikar et al.,12 the life cycle energy requirement for aluminium nanoparticles would be (50 + 3)/31 × 3.2 + 3.2 = 8.7 MJ km−1, even based on the assumption that the energy consumption of a recycling system is the same as that of primary production. Such a value is still higher than that of hydrogen fuels cells, but becomes smaller than the energy consumption for hydrogen in ICEs.
The development of nanotechnology also means that alternative ways of metal nanoparticle production, other than the electrolytic reduction, that require less energy are possible. For instance, even based on an energy-intensive plasma technology, one old study15 suggests that the energy consumption for direct reduction to metal nanoparticles from bulk metal oxide is lower than the primary energy consumption used by Utgikar et al.12 Furthermore, the energy consumption of producing nanoparticles will be significantly reduced with the development of the technology. Rather than using energy intensive mechanical milling methods, the energy consumption for nanoparticle synthesis could be much lower if based on some bottom-up approaches or optimized systems. One example is carbon nanotubes: three quarters of the current energy consumption for carbon nanotube production can be reduced if employing an optimized process.16
This initial analysis illustrates the potentials of nanofuel as a future energy carrier, i.e. it could become a strong competitor against hydrogen as an energy vector. The well-to-wheel energy efficiency of nanofuels could become competitive against the hydrogen economy with the rapid development of nanotechnology. Certainly, further detailed energy analysis is needed. Currently, the cost of nanofuel is still very high; however, it could be driven down significantly should large scale nanoparticle production be needed. As revealed by some leading experts in the field, the biggest problem facing the nanotechnology industry is the shortage of market, rather than the technology. It is clear from these limited analyses that nanofuel could become a viable future energy carrier. However, some challenges have to be tackled before its full industrial employment, as described below.
4. Challenges to overcome
The reduction of particle size from millimetre/micrometre to nanometre scales presents both challenges, as little prior research has been carried out and the understanding of the energy conversion and transportation process at nanometre scale is still poor, and opportunities, such as fast heat release and complete combustion. To realize the nanofuel concept, a systematic approach is required with improved technologies and mechanistic understandings, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Each box represents a major challenge, extending from fundamental to application aspects.
 Fig. 4  Overview of the nanofuel technology and their synergies. 
• Controlled production of nanofuels: this refers to the production of nanofuels with controlled nanoparticle size, shape, size distribution, structure and passivation layers.
• Controlled combustion of synthesised nanofuels: this includes the identification of suitable combustion characteristics of nanofuels from oxidation and ignition to controlled combustion, as well as optimizing combustion parameters, such as fuel-to-oxidizer ratio and emission characteristics.
• Pilot application of nanofuels: this refers to applying identified suitable fuels for a pilot study, such as in a reciprocating internal combustion engine, a burner or a gas turbine. Engineering problems including fuel injection, exhaust particle capture, and wear and lubrication issues should be addressed.
• Social economical considerations: this includes the analysis of energy efficiency, cost and environmental impact from a life cycle point of view, and addressing the health and safety concerns.
• Mechanistic understanding of relevant processes: this refers to a multiscale understanding of the process that may extend from atomic and molecular scale, to particle scale and to process scale.
Some of these major challenges will be discussed below.
4.1 Nanofuel production, efficiency and cost
As the oxidization, ignition and combustion characteristics of energetic particles are very sensitive to particle morphology and properties, it is essential to produce energetic nanoparticles with controlled size, size distribution, shape, structure and passivation layers. The ideal nanofuel requires a uniform size distribution with controlled oxidation or passivation layers to achieve controlled ignition and combustion. Large scale controlled synthesis of metallic nanoparticles with uniform particle size distribution still presents a challenge for industries.
Nanoparticles synthesized from different routes will have different morphologies and structures hence different physical and chemical properties. A wide range of vapor, liquid and mechanical routes are available for producing nanoparticles. The mechanical route, such as milling and grinding, is straightforward but energy intensive. The liquid route such as the sol–gel and wet chemical methods typically involves chemical reactions of a few reagents with one designed product, which normally produces other impurities that are difficult to control. The vapor phase route produces a reactive vapor in which nucleation and growth occur through combustion, pyrolysis, plasmas, laser ablation, laser pyrolysis or chemical vapor deposition. From both economic and quality considerations, the vapor phase route is the most favorable method for large-scale production of nanoparticles. The quality of nanoparticles synthesized from the vapor phase route is controlled by the coagulation process, where the size of particles and the growth of agglomeration are determined by the rate of collision and subsequent coalescence. During the condensation process, formed nanoparticles collide with each other and sintering occurs, forming relatively large particles of agglomerates. Qualitatively, if the sintering time is less than the collision time, larger particles are produced; otherwise, agglomerates consisting of smaller particles fused together are formed.
Limited choices are available for large scale metallic nanoparticle production. The mechanical and liquid methods are easily contaminated with the media or vessel used to break the particles or synthesizing particles. The vapor route appears to be promising; however, it is energy intensive due to the high temperature requirements and high separation costs. Possible methods may include electric explosion of wires, detonation and induction plasma. Depending on the burning characteristics of the nanoparticle, different particle sizes should be designed for different applications.
Wet-fuels possess the advantages of spray injectibility and the pumpability of liquid fuels, and high energy release rates of solid fuels. Our previous work has already shown that adding nanoparticles to other liquids significantly improves the heat and mass transfer inside the liquid.17–19 Adding nanoparticles into a liquid fuel would also increase the combustion efficiency, which has already been shown in the use of cerium oxide nanoparticles as fuel additives: the claimed fuel economy can be improved and the emission can be reduced.20 However, unlike fuel additives like cerium oxides, which act as catalysts to enhance combustion, wet-fuels can be formed in an inert liquid carrier such as water, or a liquid hydrocarbon medium, such as gasoline or diesel fuels. For the former formulation, energetic nanoparticles will be the only fuel. For the later formulation, wet-fuels are believed to have two functions: being both catalysts and energy carriers. The injection and subsequent combustion of nanoparticles may produce a similar “micro-explosion” effect that can enhance local turbulence and promote a more complete combustion;21 the extra energy released through nanoparticle combustion may reduce the fossil fuel consumption and increase the cycle energy efficiency.
Due to the nature of the attractive van der Waals forces between particles, wet-fuels will typically experience a stability problem by forming aggregates.22 A controlled formulation of stable wet-fuel is essential for a smooth injection. Ideal wet-fuels should possess enhanced stability and good wettability with an increased diffusion coefficient, which is still a research challenge. The top down approach, bottom up method and a combination of the above two have been investigated to optimize the particle size, structure and morphology effect. Conventional formulation methods, i.e. milling, ultrasonification and high shear mixing and some emerging methods, such as the electro-spray, supercritical fluids and high energy ball milling methods, can be employed for potential production of wet nanofuels.23 Particular attention needs to be paid to nanofuels formulated with the aid of different concentrations of ions and surfactants, which could alone affect the combustion process.
One of the major concerns for nanofuel production is the energy consumption and cost. With the rapid development of nanoscience and nanotechnology, the energy and cost are decreasing rapidly. However, a large number of data gaps exist when considering the life cycle analysis of different nanomaterials. Only minimal data exist that details the material inputs, energy consumption and environmental emissions. While there is no open data that can be found for some proposed fuels, a summary from open literature on the life cycle energy and emission analysis of a few nanomaterials is illustrated in Table 1. Large differences can be found among different materials and different synthesis methods. For instance, a ∼7 times difference in energy consumption can be observed for single-walled carbon nanotube production. Further development of nanoscience and nanotechnology is expected to make nanofuels affordable in the near future. Some pilot studies have shown that nanoparticles produced using cost-effective vapor methods can be marketed in the $20–$200/kg range in tons-per-year volumes, and larger volumes are expected to permit pricing in the $5–$50/kg range.24 All these suggest that the potential application of nanofuel as an energy carrier is indeed possible from both energetic and economic points of view.
Table 1 Life cycle energy and emission analysis of nanomaterials




Nanomaterials
Method
Energy consumption/MJ kg−1
CO2 equivalent, (kgCO2/kg)
Source




TiO2
Sulfate route
32–40
5
Osterwalder et al.43


Chloride route
19
4
Althaus et al.44


ZrO2
ZrCl4 hydrolysis
—
5
Osterwalder et al.43


Zr-Octanoate
—
20


Zr, plasma
—
40


Nano-milling
—
35


Carbon nanofibre
Benzene
654
70
Khanna et al.45


Methane/H2
1807
93


Carbon nanotubes
Multi-walled
210–300
—
Kushnir and Sanden16


Single walled
47–328
—
Meyer et al.46


Semiconductors
—
90880
102
Krishan et al.47


Iron
Milling
20.5
—
Utigikar et al.12


Aluminium
Milling
89
—




4.2 Controlled combustion of nanofuels
Similar to conventional fuels, nanofuels have to be ignited with controlled combustion at the right time in the right place. The achievement of controlled combustion of nanoparticles could significantly increase the controllability of solid propellant and pyrotechnic compounds. Nanometre sized aluminium and boron, as additives to solid fuels, have been investigated since the 1960s for enhanced propulsion applications. Compared to their counterparts at the micrometre or millimetre scales, a significant reduction of ignition temperature has been found. The burning rate has been found to deviate from the classical d2 law and combustion characteristics have been closely related to particle morphology and structure.3,5,25,26 The burning rate increases with decreasing particle size and is strongly dependent on ambient temperature, pressure, and oxidizer concentration.5,26,27 Compared with the conventional diffusion controlled mechanism for large particles, some studies revealed that the kinetic controlled mechanism appears to become important.27 However, many problems still exist, especially regarding the combustion mechanisms, which is believed to be related to the characteristics of nanoparticles, such as surface area, size-dependent thermo-physical and chemical properties, lower bulk density and rapid absorption of gases, as well as the oxygen supply and its interaction with metal and oxide. A proper understanding of the nanofuel combustion process requires knowledge of pre-combustion (oxidation), ignition, combustion and post-combustion (emission). It is essential to understand these processes in order to achieve controlled combustion of nanofuels.

4.2.1 Oxidation. 
A natural oxide film is always present on the surface of metal particles, which prevents further oxidation at low temperatures. At elevated temperatures, the properties of the oxide and its thickness would change before ignition. Since the thickness of the oxidation layer of nanoparticles plays an essential role in the ignition and combustion processes, the understanding of the nanoparticle oxidation and phase transition processes, i.e. the pre-combustion behaviour, becomes important for controlled ignition. For bulk metals and micrometre or millimetre sized particles, the oxidation process is relatively well understood. For example, aluminium particles have been identified to experience four stages with a gradual transition from amorphous oxide to γ phase, θ phase and then to α alumina during the oxidation process.5 However, the investigation of nanoscale oxidation and phase transition behaviour is just at the beginning and few studies have linked the oxidation behaviour to the subsequent ignition and combustion of nanoparticles. A literature study shows that the oxidation kinetics of nanoparticles can be influenced by the properties of pre-formed oxide made during the synthesis process,28 the external heating rate,29 ambient temperature and humidity,30 as well as particle size and morphology, though the quantitative agreement is still lacking. Fig. 5 summarizes the initial oxidation temperature as a function of aluminium particle size. Many scattered data points were observed, especially at the nanoscale range, which are likely to be a combined effect due to differences in initial oxidation layer, structure and morphology of particles investigated. However, it still depicts a general trend that nanoparticles are more prone to be oxidized at reduced particle size.
 Fig. 5  Onset temperature of oxidation of different samples of aluminium powders from ref. 48–51. 
Associated with the increased specific surface area, the activation energy for oxidation of nanoscale metallic nanoparticles has been found to be much smaller than that of bulk materials, and exhibit unique conversion ratio dependent activation energies.31,32
For nanofuel applications, there are other aspects that require further investigation. Particularly relevant are the influence of ambient pressure, aggregation structure and the oxidation kinetics of mixture nanofuels, such as a compound of boron and aluminium nanoparticles. At elevated temperatures, the collision and sintering of nanoparticles would affect particle morphology and the subsequent oxidation process.33 The nanofuels will experience a typical pressure of tens of bars for some burning processes, which will inevitably modify the chemical reaction kinetics by the modification of thermo-physical properties and dynamics of different species. These aspects need to be considered in the subsequent ignition and combustion studies.


4.2.2 Ignition. 
Extensive efforts have been made to understand the ignition behaviour of small particles. An optimum particle size and distribution, oxide film thickness and fuel-to-oxidizer ratio need to be identified, as well as increasing mechanistic understanding of the related processes to achieve a controlled ignition. Reproduced from Trunov et al.,5Fig. 6 summarized the influence of particle size on the ignition temperature of aluminium. For aluminium particles larger than 0.1 mm, the ignition temperature is found to be close to the melting temperature of alumina, ∼2000 °C,5 and the ignition process can be generally described by three models: the fixed ignition temperature model,34 the stress model in the oxide layer35 and the exothermic growth model of the oxide film.36 A rapid decrease of the ignition temperature is observed at the transition zone, as particle size decreases from ∼100 micrometres to ∼10 micrometres. A nearly constant ignition temperature close to the melting temperature of aluminium is found as particle size becomes smaller than ∼10 micrometres. At the nanometre scale, the ignition temperature varies significantly with different materials and the quantitative agreements are still lacking, i.e. ∼600 °C for 120 nm aluminium particles37 and ∼250 °C for 100 nm iron nanoparticles38 have been reported.
 Fig. 6  Ignition temperatures of different samples of aluminium samples (reproduced from Trunov et al. 2005). 
Similar to the oxidation process, it is likely that the ignition temperature is sensitive to the particle size, oxide thickness, ambient temperature and pressure, and the actual fuel-to-oxidizer ratio, as well as the addition of different enhancers for boron related particles. The influence of such factors on the ignition and combustion of nanoparticles needs to be investigated experimentally in order to achieve a controlled combustion. Depending on the ignition temperature, it is possible to design different systems for different applications. For application in internal combustion engines, for example, a variable compression ratio design may be used to make it suitable for different-sized nanofuels.


4.2.3 Combustion. 
Aluminium particles above 30 μm have been well studied and have been most often observed to burn in a diffusion limited regime. In this regime, aluminium vaporizes and burns in the gas phase, generating a gaseous product of Al2O3. Diffusion limited droplet theory predicts that the time it takes for a particle to completely burn is dependent on the initial diameter squared, hence the d2 law. Particle combustion exhibits strong size-dependent characteristics. The burning rate has been found to deviate from the classical d2 law and combustion characteristics have been closely related to particle morphology and structure.5,25,26,36 It increases with the decrease of particle size and was strongly dependent on ambient temperature, pressure, and oxidizer concentration.25,26 The kinetic controlled mechanism appears to become dominant but the mechanism is still unclear.
The combustion mechanisms for aluminium particles can be schematically summarized in Fig. 7.27 The classical vapor-phase diffusion flame is applicable for large particles, where there is a detached flame a few radii from the particle surface. The temperature peaks in the flame region and is decided by the Al2O3 dissociation temperature. For micrometre sized aluminium particles, a near surface-limited combustion process occurs. In this regime, diffusion becomes faster and can reach the particle surface or, in the gas-phase, very close to the particle surface, where a heterogeneous reaction occurs, which results in a combustion flame on or close to the surface, and the peak temperature remains near the boiling temperature of aluminium. As the particle becomes increasingly smaller, i.e. < 10 micrometres, a shrinking core model of aluminium combustion occurs, where oxidizer diffuses to the particle surface and then through the oxide layer. Combustion temperatures in this case will be the highest in the particle, but not necessarily significantly elevated from the ambient. The burn time in this regime is roughly linearly proportional to particle diameter, a strong implication of kinetic controlled combustion.
 Fig. 7  Schematic drawing of size-dependent particle combustion (Bazyn et al. 2007). 
Such processes would have to be included in combustion models in order to accurately predict burning characteristics for nanofuels. The particle size, morphology and distribution become controlling factors for combustion due to these size-dependent characteristics. It is desirable to have uniform size distribution particles so as to control ignition and combustion accurately. In practical applications, however, large particle size distributions exist. Small particles might be auto-ignited first and behave as a pilot fuel to initiate the whole combustion process; however, ignition that occurs too early may result in abnormal combustions. Achieving a controlled combustion requires detailed knowledge about nanoparticle size and morphology, oxide layers and the ambient environment, such as temperature and pressure. An added complexity related to the nanofuel concept is to preserve the end product in a small particle form to facilitate regeneration and form a closed cycle. This may require limiting the maximum flame temperature to below the boiling temperature and the vaporization–dissociation temperatures of the oxidized particles. It appears that achieving a controlled combustion of nanofuels requires a cohesive collaboration across the boundaries of materials, physics and engineering subjects.

4.3 Emission, particle collection and regeneration
One of the advantages of nanofuel is the low emission, i.e. no carbon dioxide and no soot. However, nitric oxides (NOx) and particulate matter (PM) are likely to be formed. The formation of NOx will be strongly dependent upon the combustion process of nanofuels. The morphological properties of exhaust particulate matter (PM) are important parameters for understanding the complex particulate formation and oxidation mechanisms, and assessment of their health impacts. Due to the increasing pressure for the regulation of emissions, PM from nanofuels would have to be collected. This would also coincide with the aim of recycling end products for the regeneration process. The exhaust PM for dry-fuels would include metal oxides and some possible incompletely burned metal nanoparticles, and some extra soot for wet-fuels in a hydrocarbon medium. The morphological and phase transition of nanoparticles during and after combustion is dependent on the maximum flame temperature in comparison with the boiling temperature and the vaporization–dissociation temperatures of the oxidized particles. Gaseous oxides may be formed if the peak combustion temperature is higher than the vaporization–dissociation temperatures of the oxidized particles; a subsequent temperature drop would condense the gaseous oxides to liquid and then to solid, and form different structures depending on the nucleation, sintering and agglomeration processes. It would, however, be expected that aggregation of primary particles will take place, resulting in a fractal structure. With regards to the burning temperature and potential agglomeration time for metal oxides, the exhaust particle size is also expected to be similar to the majority of diesel PMs, falling below PM2.5 (<2.5 micrometres).
Many techniques have been developed to separate and collect particles from a gas flow. The separation mechanisms can be divided mainly into four categories: a) by mechanical forces (such as cyclone, impactor, sedimentator and centrifuge separator), b) by filtration (organic and non-organic membrane filtration and bag filtration), c) by electrostatic forces (electrostatic precipitator) and d) in the case of iron nanoparticles, by magnetic mechanisms. The techniques in category a) are inefficient for nanoparticle separation as nanoparticles are likely to follow the movements of the carrying gas; category c) has been widely used in electrostatic scrubbers to remove charged particles from gases but the low charging probability at small particle sizes may limit their applicability at the nanometre scale.39; category d) will only work for some iron oxides but caution is necessary as the iron oxide is likely to be a mixture of α-Fe2O3, γ-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4, some of which do not have sufficient magnetic properties.40 Category b) appears to be the most efficient way of capturing exhaust particles.
Filters are commonly used to remove aerosol particles from air either as part of a control system or in respirators. The properties of a filter, such as size of the fibers, microstructure, media thickness, and electrostatic charge, determine how effective it is in removing particles. For large particles, the filtration is dominated by inertial collection, and the efficiency decreases with decreasing particle diameter. Nanoparticles are effectively captured through the mechanism of diffusion, where the efficiency increases with the decrease of particle size. Consequently, most air filters have low collection efficiency between approximately 100 nm to 1 micrometre with the minimum at around 300 nm, as shown in Fig. 8.39 For nanofuel applications, a large portion of exhaust particles appears to be within this low efficiency regime. The phenomenon of thermal bounce could occur for small particles, increasing the penetration as the particle thermal energy overcomes the energy of attachment following initial deposition.41 Further research is required to fully understand filtration efficiency for discrete particles only a few nanometres in diameter. Some highly efficient filters, such as high efficiency particulate air filter (HEPA), derived from the nuclear industry with collection efficiency of 99.99% could be used. This would prevent particles going outside the system, but it will be difficult to separate the captured particles from the filter, which represents a big challenge for the effective usage of nanofuels. New methods for highly efficient collection and separation of nanoparticles will be required in order to improve the energy efficiency and reduce particle emissions.
 Fig. 8  Characteristic particle capture efficiency of a typical filtration system (Lee and Liu, 1982).39 
The collected nanoparticles will be regenerated outside the engine through chemical reactions, such as by purging with hydrogen under suitable conditions. Multi-step reactions by adding sulfur and bromine are generally needed for regeneration of boron oxide. Such processes are relatively well established in terms of the technology; however, a detailed energy efficiency and economic study will be needed. New methods, such as those proposed by Auner and Holl,9 will be useful in regenerating silicon fuels. If the regeneration process is efficient, silicon will be a promising future energy vector with feedstock of only sand (SiO2), water, air (oxidizer) and solar energy.
4.4 Fuel injection and others
For dilute wet-fuels, little modification of the injection system is expected for stable dispersions as they can easily pass the injector nozzle, which has a typical orifice diameter of ∼0.1 mm. This is similar to the application of commercially available cerium oxide fuel additives where no injection modification is needed. For dry fuels, nanoparticles will be the only fuel for combustion and the fuel injection system needs to be carefully designed. According to particle classification by Geldart,42 nanoparticles belong to the Geldart C-type, which is very difficult to fluidise. The strong inter particle forces would keep them in an agglomerated form while an idealized combustion of nanofuel requires fuel particles to be uniformly suspended. This is not easy for dried particle injection. A carefully designed powder dispensing system is required by taking into consideration the strong particle interactions and potential risks of early ignition.
The fuel particles and oxides formed during and after combustion may present some lubrication and wear problems to the engine, and affect the performance of the injection system. Due to the high reactivity, special caution is required during the nanofuel transportation, storage and handling processes. Suitable surface modifications of particles or some controlled passivation layers should be designed.
5. Outlook and summary
Nanofuel presents both opportunities and risks. The realization of the concept could result in a potential energy carrier to compete with current hydrogen and battery technologies, which bears significant implications on energy, environment, society and the quality of life. Nanofuel possesses advantages of abundance, high energy density and easy transportation, with potential applications in domestic heating systems, automobiles, and power plants in both conventional and emerging renewable industries. It has potential in reducing the carbon footprint and minimizing the formation of toxic and dangerous emissions. A wide application of nanofuels could also provide a driving force for nanotechnology, especially nanoparticle production, dispersion, separation and collection fields, and advance our understanding of the energy conversion process at the nanoscale.
However, the challenges, ranging from production and combustion to regeneration, are demanding. As outlined in this paper, these challenges include controlled nanofuel production, controlled combustion of nanoparticles, high-efficiency capture and regeneration of oxidized particles and a number of engineering related issues, such as controlled fuel injection. Further development of technologies and an in-depth exploration of mechanisms are required to tackle these challenges, which calls for a close inter-disciplinary collaboration among nanomaterials, chemistry, physics and engineering researchers.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to extend his acknowledgement to Professors R. Crookes, Z. Guo, C. Lawn and T. Korakianitis for constructive discussions.
References
R E. Smalley, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 412–417 .
C. Forsberg, Prog. Nucl. Energy, 2005, 47, 484–495 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Rosenband, Combust. Flame, 2004, 137, 366–375 CrossRef CAS .
E. Meissner and G. Richter, J. Power Sources, 2005, 144, 438–460 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Trunov, M. Schoenitz and E. L. Dreizin, Propellants, Explos., Pyrotech., 2005, 30, 36–43 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Williams, Sarcoidosis, 1993, 10, 41–43 Search PubMed .

Minerals Yearbook, Vol. 1, Metals and Minerals, US Geography Survey, US,  2006, http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/myb Search PubMed .
A. Ulas, K. K. Kuo and C. Gotzmer, Combust. Flame, 2001, 127, 1935–1957 CrossRef CAS .
N. Auner and S. Holl, Energy, 2006, 31, 1395–1402 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granovskii, I. Dincer and M. Rosen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 337–352 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kleiner, NewScientist, 22, October 2005, pp. 35–37 Search PubMed .
V. Utgikar, W. Lattin and R. Jacobsen, Int. J. Energy Res., 2007, 31, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. H Tan and H. H. Khoo, J. Clean. Prod., 2005, 13, 607–618 CrossRef .
E. Nordheim and G. Barrasso, J. Clean. Prod., 2007, 15, 275–279 CrossRef .
V. A. Lyubochko, V. V. Malikov, O. G. Parfenov and N. V. Belousova, J. Eng. Phys. Thermophys., 2000, 73, 568–572 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kushnir and B. Sanden, J. Ind. Ecol., 2008, 12, 360–378 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Wen and Y. L. Ding, J. Enhanced Heat Transfer, 2006, 13, 231–244 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Wen, J. Nanopart. Res., 2008, 10, 1129–1140 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Wen, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2008, 51, 4958–4965 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wakefield, X. P. Wu, M. Gardener, B. Park and S. Anderson, Technol. Anal. Strategic Manage., 2008, 20, 127–136 Search PubMed .
T. Kadota and H. Yamasaki, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2002, 28, 385–404 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Wen, G. Lin, S. Vafaei and K. Zhang, Particuology, 2009, 7, 141–150 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stenger, S. Mende, J. Schwedes and W. Peukert, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 4557–4565 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Rittner, Chem. Eng. Prog., 2003, 99, 39s–42s Search PubMed .
T. Bazyn, H. Krier and N. Glumac, Combust. Flame, 2006, 145, 703–713 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Risha, S. F. Son, R. A. Yetter, V. Yang and B. C. Tappan, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2007, 31, 2029–2036 CrossRef .
T. Bazyn, H. Krier and N. Glumac, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2007, 31, 2021–2028 CrossRef .
S. Giri, S. Ganguli and M. Bhattacharya, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2001, 182, 345–349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kwon, A. Gromov, A. P. Ilyin, E. M. Popenko and G. H. Rim, Combust. Flame, 2003, 133, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Song, C. Xie, D. Zeng, W. Wang and M. Hu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 97, 127–131 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Song, D. S. Wen, Z. X. Guo and T. Korakianitis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 5057–5065 RSC .
P. X. Song and D. S. Wen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13470–13476 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Song and D. S. Wen, J. Nanopart. Res., 2009 DOI:10.1007/s11051-009-9718-7 .
K. P. Brooks and M. W. Beckstead, J. Propul. Power, 1995, 11, 769 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Rozenband and N. I. Vaganova, Combust. Flame, 1992, 88, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Fedorov and Y. V. Kharlamova, Combust., Explos. Shock Waves, 2003, 39, 544–547 CrossRef .

          C. J. Bulian, T. T. Kerr and J. A. Puszynski, 31st International Pyrotechnics Seminar, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA,  2004, pp. 327–332 Search PubMed .
D. Beach, A. Rondinone, B. Sumpter, S. Labinov and R. Richards, J. Energy Resour. Technol., 2007, 129, 29–32 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Lee and B. Y. H. Liu, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 1982, 1, 35–46 CAS .
S. Linderoth, S. Morup and M. D. Bentzon, J. Mater. Sci., 1995, 30, 3142–3148 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Wang and G. Kasper, J. Aerosol Sci., 1991, 22, 31–41 CrossRef CAS .
D. Geldart, Powder Technol., 1973, 7, 285–292 CrossRef CAS .
N. Osterwalder, C. Capello, K. Hungerbuhler and W. Stark, J. Nanopart. Res., 2006, 8, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .

          H. J. Althaus., M. Chudacoff, R. Hischier, N. Jungbluth, M. Osses and A. Primas, Life Cycle Inventories of Chemicals, Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Dübendorf, Switzerland,  2003, http://www.ecoinvent.ch Search PubMed .
V. Khannaa, B. Bhavik and L. Lee, Proc. 2007 IEEE Int. Symp. Electron. Environ., 2007, 128–133 Search PubMed .
D. Meyer, M. Curran and M. Gonzalez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 1256–1263 CrossRef CAS .
N. Krishnan, S. Boyd, A. Somani, S. Raoux, D. Clark and D. Dornfeld, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 3069–3075 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, M. Pantoya and S. Simon, Thermochim. Acta, 2006, 444, 117–127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ilyin, A. Gromov, V. An, F. Faubert, C. Izarra, A. Espagnacq and L. Brunet, Propellants, Explos., Pyrotech., 2002, 27, 361–364 CrossRef CAS .
N. Eisenreich, H. Fietzek, M. M. Juez-Lorenzo, V. Kolarik, A. Koleczko and V. Weiser, Propellants, Explos., Pyrotech., 2004, 29, 137–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rai, K. Park, L. Zhou and M. R. Zacharia, Combust. Theory Modell., 2006, 10, 843–859 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Dongsheng Wen	Dongsheng Wen received his DPhil in Engineering Science from the University of Oxford. After a two-year post-doc experience in the University of Leeds, he moved to Queen Mary, University of London, first as a Lecturer, then Senior Lecturer, and currently holds a Readership position in Future Energy. His research is focused at the interface of nanotechnology and energy engineering, i.e. engineering and utilizing unique properties of nanomaterials to enhance energy conversion and transportation processes. He is a Fellow of the Institute of Nanotechnology (FIoN), a member of the Energy Institute (MEI), a Chartered Engineer (CEng) and a Chartered Scientist (CSci), and has authored over 100 scientific publications and several patents.

Broader context
The increasing use of energies generated from renewable resources will become viable where the geographical and climatic prerequisites are met. Such regions, however, seldom coincide with the areas of high energy consumption, namely industrial and city regions with a high population density. Hydrogen and battery technologies have been conventionally regarded as potential secondary energy carriers, but all with significant barriers to overcome. This work presents a novel concept of nanofuel, pure energetic nanomaterials or suspensions of energetic nanomaterials in a liquid medium, as a potential energy carrier. Technological issues for the realization of the concept including nanofuel production, controlled ignition and combustion, oxidized particle capture and other related issues are described and key challenges are identified. Nanofuel presents both opportunities and risks; however if properly addressed, it could provide a potential energy carrier to compete with current hydrogen and battery technologies, which has significant implications on energy, environment, society and the quality of life.


 	Fig. 1  Energy density comparison, per kg and per litre of fuel.	 

 	Fig. 2  Nanofuel as a potential secondary energy carrier: process route.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nanofuel as a potential secondary energy carrier: energy path.	 

 	Fig. 4  Overview of the nanofuel technology and their synergies.	 

TiO2	Sulfate route	32–40	5	Osterwalder et al.43
Chloride route	19	4	Althaus et al.44
ZrO2	ZrCl4 hydrolysis	—	5	Osterwalder et al.43
Zr-Octanoate	—	20
Zr, plasma	—	40
Nano-milling	—	35
Carbon nanofibre	Benzene	654	70	Khanna et al.45
Methane/H2	1807	93
Carbon nanotubes	Multi-walled	210–300	—	Kushnir and Sanden16
Single walled	47–328	—	Meyer et al.46
Semiconductors	—	90880	102	Krishan et al.47
Iron	Milling	20.5	—	Utigikar et al.12
Aluminium	Milling	89	—

 	Fig. 5  Onset temperature of oxidation of different samples of aluminium powders from ref. 48–51.	 

 	Fig. 6  Ignition temperatures of different samples of aluminium samples (reproduced from Trunov et al. 2005).	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic drawing of size-dependent particle combustion (Bazyn et al. 2007).	 

 	Fig. 8  Characteristic particle capture efficiency of a typical filtration system (Lee and Liu, 1982).39	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
