Interactions between lasers and two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00553A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00553A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2494-2515Interactions between lasers and two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides

        
          
            Junpeng 
            Lu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Eng Soon 
            Tok
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chorng-Haur 
            Sow
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Physics, National University of Singapore, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117542, Singapore. E-mail: physowch@nus.edu.sg
bCenter for Advanced 2D materials and Graphene Research Center, National University of Singapore, 6 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117546, Singapore
cInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, #08-03, Singapore 138634, Singapore. E-mail: liuhw@imre.a-star.edu.sg
Received 
      16th July 2015
    First published on 1st February 2016AbstractThe recent increasing research interest in two-dimensional (2D) layered materials has led to an explosion of in the discovery of novel physical and chemical phenomena in these materials. Among the 2D family, group-VI transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), such as represented by MoS2 and WSe2, are remarkable semiconductors with sizable energy band gaps, which make the TMDs promising building blocks for new generation optoelectronics. On the other hand, the specificity and tunability of the band gaps can generate particularly strong light–matter interactions between TMD crystals and specific photons, which can trigger complex and interesting phenomena such as photo-scattering, photo-excitation, photo-destruction, photo-physical modification, photochemical reaction and photo-oxidation. Herein, we provide an overview of the phenomena explained by various interactions between lasers and the 2D TMDs. Characterizations of the optical fundamentals of the TMDs via laser spectroscopies are reviewed. Subsequently, photoelectric conversion devices enabled by laser excitation and the functionality extension and performance improvement of the TMDs materials via laser modification are comprehensively summarized. Finally, we conclude the review by discussing the prospects for further development in this research area.
Junpeng Lu
Dr Junpeng Lu received his BSc from Shandong University in 2009 and his PhD from the National University of Singapore in 2013. Now he is a research fellow at the Department of Physics, National University of Singapore. His current research interests are focused on the development of laser techniques for the characterization and modification of nanostructured materials, the synthesis and characterization of 1D and 2D semiconductors, and the design and optimization of nanoscale optoelectronic devices.
Hongwei Liu
Dr Hongwei Liu is a Research Scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency of Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Her current research interests include the spectroscopic characterization of nanostructures. She received her BS degree from the School of Information Science and Technology from Shandong University in 2009 and her PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore in 2013. She was previously a Research Fellow at the National University of Singapore before joining IMRE.
Eng Soon Tok
Dr Eng Soon Tok received his BSc (Honours in Chemistry and Physics, 1st Class) at the National University of Singapore and his PhD in Semiconductor Materials at Imperial College London, UK. He returned to join NUS in 1999. He is interested in surface and interface science related to the “Atomic Scale Engineering” of low-dimensional structures formed with Group IV and III–V semiconducting materials. His research emphasis is on elucidating growth processes (adsorption, desorption, nucleation, segregation, self-assembly), reaction kinetics, and energetics. He aims to understand the relationship between surface chemistry and physics with material properties at the atomic scale through his research.
Chorng-Haur Sow
Dr Chorng Haur Sow is a Professor in the Department of Physics at the National University of Singapore. He obtained his BSc (1991) and MSc (1993) in Physics from the National University of Singapore, and his PhD (1998) from The University of Chicago. He was a postdoctoral fellow at Bell Laboratories from 1999 to 2000. His current research is focused on laser–matter interactions for low-dimensional materials, the development of laser pruning method for the micropatterning of nanostructured materials, studies of physical properties of nanostructured materials, and studies of 2D materials with a focus on the laser modification of these 2D materials en route to developing functional materials.
1. Introduction
As a forerunner of the two-dimensional (2D) material family, graphene has opened up an upsurge in research interests with its enticing prospects for future applications, since its reduced dimensionality give it novel properties in electronics, optoelectronics and mechanics.1,2 However, the gapless feature of pristine graphene means it lacks the capacity to provide “on/off” switching control for a transistor in a logic circuit. To overcome this shortcoming of graphene, interest in layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) has been revitalized, with TMDs attracting great attention due to their wide variety of chemical compositions and unique properties, especially due to the presence of a direct band gap in a monolayer.3 2D TMDs, denoted as MX2, usually possess a repeated unit of X–M–X, where M is a transition metal, such as Mo, W, Ta, Zr, and Re, and X is a chalcogen of S, Se, or Te. The different filling of the d orbitals in this wide range of transition metals gives rise to MX2 crystals with versatile properties, such as superconducting, metallic, semiconducting and insulating properties.4 The big library of TMD compounds boosts development opportunities in various research fields such as electronics, photonics, and catalysts.5 Among these TMDs, group-VI candidates, including MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, are currently attracting the most attention due to their beneficial semiconducting behavior and sizable energy band gaps, covering the spectral range from the visible to the near infrared.6 Similar to graphene, TMD monolayers can be fabricated through various different methods, such as mechanical exfoliation,3 chemical exfoliation7–9 or chemical vapor deposition (CVD) approaches,10–13 and they can be viewed as the semiconducting counterpart of graphene at the 2D limit. In the initial focus of interest, a MoS2 monolayer was first created using the scotch-tape method, with a similar equipment as for the fabrication of graphene.3 Subsequently, an interesting indirect to direct band gap transition was experimentally observed using photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy when the MoS2 was thinned down to a monolayer.14,15 This phenomenon renders monolayer TMDs as attractive materials for a host of emerging optical and photoelectrical devices. In addition, the reduced screening in two dimensions and the large carrier effective mass helped in the development of a monolayer field effect transistor (FET) that exhibited a superior electron mobility of ∼200 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a high on/off ratio.16 Furthermore, the 2D nature of the materials facilitates a high specific surface area. This feature makes TMDs extremely sensitive to surface and interface perturbances, i.e. the surface and interface effects can be employed to improve the performance of electronic devices based on 2D TMDs. As a result, the versatile TMD monolayers are spectrally robust and are amenable to ultimately being used in electrical, optical and photoelectrical devices.
Moreover, given the fast increasing demands placed upon the exploration of 2D TMDs, a deep understanding of their fundamental properties, effective implementation of their applications, and further expansion of their potential are all particularly desired. Synchronous to the rapid development of the materials at the micro/nanoscales, various laser-based techniques have been developed as effective tools to meet different kinds of demands in nanomaterial research, such as nanomaterial characterization,17,18 manipulation,19,20 activation,21,22 modification,23,24etc. Interactions between a laser and these materials can trigger complex and interesting phenomena, such as photo-scattering, photo-excitation, photo-destruction, photo-physical modification, photochemical reaction and photo-oxidation. Upon these interactions, laser spectroscopies have been designed to characterize the optical and electrical fundamentals of nanomaterials in an accurate and non-invasive matter;25 whereby, laser light beams are employed to excite and activate optoelectronic devices,26 while laser beams with high powers facilitate structure manipulation and property modification in the nanoscale range.27 Considering the atomic fineness of TMD monolayers, handling techniques for working with them need to be straightforward and nondestructive and accompanied by high spatial and spectral resolution. Laser technologies satisfy all of these requirements.
Arising from the fast growing interest in the 2D TMDs research field, this article provides a retrospective review of the interactions between lasers and 2D TMDs with a trigonal prismatic phase (2H phase). In this review, we highlight recent advances in the fundamental property characterizations, optoelectronic applications, property modification and improvements in the emerging 2D group-VI TMD semiconductors, facilitated by laser-based technologies. We first begin with a review of the characterizations of the optical fundamentals of atomically thin TMDs via laser spectroscopies. Subsequently, we summarize the realized photoelectric conversion devices of TMDs enabled by laser excitation. We place a special emphasis on the functionality extension and performance improvement of the TMD materials via laser modification. Finally, we conclude the review with a discussion of the outlook of the challenges and further developments in the ongoing research into the interactions between lasers and TMDs.
2. Fundamental optical property characterizations via laser spectroscopy
The fundamental properties of a TMD lattice structure depend on the coordination geometry of the atoms and the electrons in the d orbitals. Generally, layered TMDs present different stacking orders and metal coordination geometry, including 1T (trigonal symmetry, one layer per unit cell), 2H (hexagonal symmetry, two layers per unit cell), and 3R (rhombohedral symmetry, three layers per unit cell).6 1H is the single layer format of the 2H phase with a prismatic unit cell. In such a single layer MX2, each metal atom is fixed in the center of a trigonal prismatic cage and bound to six chalcogen atoms via primarily covalent intra-layer bonding (Fig. 1a).28 This structure of the monolayer MX2 facilitates the breaking of the inversion symmetry since there are no matched positions of the chalcogen atoms when the metal atom works as an inversion center29 (Fig. 1b). Different polytypes of TMDs exhibit different basic properties; for example, the 1T phase MoS2 was demonstrated to be metallic, while the 2H phase is semiconducting.7,30 Therefore, the present investigations of the optical fundamentals are focused on the 2H phase of the TMDs. The metallic nature of the 1T phase is caused by the partial filling of the t2g band (dxy, dxz, dyz), while the semiconducting behavior of the 2H phase originates from the complete filling of dz2 with empty dxy and dx2−y2 orbitals (Fig. 1c and d), as explained by the ligand field theory calculation.4 Quantitatively identifying the optical fundamentals of 2D TMDs could be achieved by using laser spectroscopies, such as PL and Raman spectroscopy, while further characterizations could be provided by various means of second harmonic generation spectroscopy, transient absorption/reflection (pump–probe) spectroscopy, and so on. All these laser spectroscopic studies will be addressed later in this review.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the atomic and electronic structures of a TMD monolayer. (a) Unit cell and (b) top view of the lattice structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. Position of the Femi level and the orbital filling of the d orbitals of (c) 1T and (d) 2H phase. The d orbitals split into dxy,xz,yz and dx2−y2,z2 bands in the 1T phase and dxz,yz, dxy,x2−y2 and dz2 in the 2H phase. These bands locate at the bonding σ and antibonding σ* states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
2.1 Fundamental optical properties
The optical fundamentals of semiconductors are determined by the electronic band structure. One of the key features of group-VI TMDs is that the electronic band structures exhibit a strong dependence on the number of layers.14 The multilayer or bulk materials are indirect band gap semiconductors, while the band gap of the monolayer counterparts converts to a direct band gap at the 2D limit.14,15,31 In multilayers, the indirect band gap is determined by the conduction band minimum (CBM) at the Λ point (Λc, midpoint between K and Γ points) and the valence band maximum (VBM), coinciding at the Γ point (Γv). When the thickness of the material is thinned down to a monolayer, the CBM and VBM shift and finally coincide at the K point, producing a direct band gap.33 The electronic states at the Γ point are dominated by the chalcogen Pz.
Orbitals are sensitive to the layer number since their charge density extends to the outer surface and is strongly affected by interlayer coupling, while the electronic states at the K point are mainly determined by the d electrons of the metal atoms. These states are not sensitive to interlayer actions since the metal atoms are confined at the middle of the X–M–X sandwich.15,37 Therefore, the evolution of the band gap transition is due to the combined contributions of the quantum confinement effect and the interlayer orbital interactions. Fig. 2a shows the calculated electronic band structure of MoS2 with a monolayer and multilayers using density functional theory (DFT) calculations.32 The band gap gradually changes from 1.2 eV to 1.9 eV with the thickness thinning down from the bulk to a monolayer. Simultaneously, the type of band gap makes a cross-over from indirect to direct. The evolution of the transition of the electronic structure and the facilitated optical properties of 2D MX2 could be monitored by PL spectroscopy via collecting the near band edge emissions.7,14,15 The respective PL spectra of MoS2 and WS2 with different layer numbers are shown in Fig. 2b and c. The samples are prepared by a mechanical exfoliation method. The emission peak-shift (feature I in Fig. 2b and c) clearly demonstrates the broadness of the band gap with the thinning of the thickness, while, the quantum yield (PL intensity) provides direct evidence of the transition in the type of band gap. The much higher (several orders of magnitude) quantum yield in monolayer MX2 indicates the direct band gap behavior, since the involvement of defect- or phonon-scattering, which restricts radiative recombination, are suppressed in direct band gap materials.29 Similar phenomena were also observed from a sample prepared by the chemical exfoliation method.7 This feature renders MX2 monolayers as promising building blocks for various photonics and optoelectronics applications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated band structure of MoS2 with different layer numbers. Red dashed-lines indicate the position of the Fermi level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2011, American Physical Society. Evolution of PL emissions with layer numbers of (b) MoS2 and (c) WS2. (b) From left to right, PL spectra of MoS2 monolayer and bilayer, inset shows the quantum yield as a function of layer numbers; PL spectra of MoS2 with a thickness of 1–6 layers; band gap energy as a function of layer numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society. (c) From left to right, PL intensity of WS2 as a function of layer numbers, inset shows the PL spectra of the monolayer and bilayer; PL spectra of WS2 with a thickness of 1–4 layers and the bulk form; peak positions of I, A (radiative recombination of A excitons), and B (radiative recombination of B excitons) as a function of layer numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition, the frequency range of the PL emission could be further extended utilizing chemical or physical methods.38 Compared to the quantum confinement effect, alloying has been demonstrated to be a convenient technique to engineer the band gap of semiconductors in nanostructure research.24,39 Ternary or polynary alloys provide tunable band gaps through controlling their compositions/stoichiometry. For example, the band gap of the ternary compound of ABxC1−x/AxB1−xC could be continuously tuned from the band gap of AB/AC to the band gap of AC/BC with a decreasing x. Fig. 3a schematically illustrates the tunability of the band gap of ABxC1−x. Generally, the relationship between the band gaps and the composition x obeys the following quadratic function: Eg(x) = EAC + (EAB − EAC − b)x + bx2(1)where Eg and EAC/EAB are the band gaps of the ternary and binary compounds, respectively, and b is a bowing parameter describing the miscibility of the ternary alloy. In principle, by alloying MX2 to form alloys, the direct band gap of the monolayer alloy could be continuously tuned from 1.55 eV of a MoSe2 monolayer to 2.0 eV of a WS2 monolayer, thus covering the frequency range of visible and near infrared light. The first observation of the tunable direct band gap using PL spectroscopy was realized in ternary Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers.34 The ternary alloys were fabricated by mixing the metallic elements. The band gap of the alloy changed from 1.8 eV to 2.0 eV with x increasing from 0–1, as revealed by the PL spectra (Fig. 3b). The relatively lower value of the b parameter obtained from the theoretical fitting using eqn (1) indicates the high miscibility of MoS2 and WS2. Compared to the mixing of metal elements, more demonstrations of ternary TMD monolayers with chalcogen alloying have been reported using CVD methods. By employing a facile one-step CVD method, ternary MoS2xSe2(1−x) monolayers with tunable compositions have been synthesized.35,40,41 The direct band gap was measured to gradually vary from 1.87 eV to 1.55 eV, as revealed by the PL spectra (Fig. 3c). The relative lower value of b (∼0.05) obtained from the relationship of the band gap energy and the composition factor, x, indicates the high miscibility of the group-VI MX2.
 Fig. 3  (a) Diagram of the band gaps of ternary alloyed semiconductors. (b) From left to right, A exciton peak at the PL spectra of ternary Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers; B exciton peak at the PL spectra of ternary Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers; peak position of A and B as a function of composition x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) From left to right, PL spectra of MoS2xSe2(1−x) monolayers with different compositions; peak position as a function of composition x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the growth process, (e) optical image, (f) TEM images, and (g) atomic model of the WSe2/MoS2 monolayer heterojunction. (h) From left to right, PL intensity and peak spatial modulation maps of WSe2/MoS2 monolayer heterojunctions. (i) PL spectra collected from nine points as labeled in (h). (d–i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In addition to tuning the band gap among distinct samples, band gap engineering within a same monolayer flake is also desired in order to satisfy the rapid development in high integrated electronics/photonics. To this purpose, in-plane altering of the stoichiometry within a MX2 monolayer has been designed and realized. An MX2 monolayer consisting of a lateral heterojunction of WS2/MoS2,44 MoS2/MoSe2,45 WS2/WSe2,45 MoSe2/WSe2,46 and WSe2/MoS236 were synthesized by a modified one-step or two-step CVD method. Due to the high miscibility of the MX2, the growth of the heterojunction was epitaxial, and realized the growth of a lateral heterojunction that presented an atomically sharp and seamless interface (Fig. 3d–i). Take the WSe2/MoS2 monolayer as an example, the PL spectra exhibited two characteristic peaks corresponding to the band gap of WSe2 (1.62 eV) and MoS2 (1.85 eV) (Fig. 3i). PL emission enhancement was found at the heterojunction interface near the WSe2 part due to the type II band alignment of the junction. Besides the heterojunctions with sharp interface, MoS2(1−x)Se2x monolayer with continuously tunable and laterally graded compositions were synthesized via a specially designed CVD approach.47 Within a single monolayer flake, the composition factor, x, could be continuously engineered from 0 to 0.68 from the center to the edge. Correspondingly, the direct band gap gradually varied from 1.82 eV to 1.64 eV within the single monolayer.
As described by ligand field theory calculations, the valence and conduction band edges at the K points of the 2H phase MX2 are determined by the dz2 and dxy/dx2−y2 orbitals of the heavy metal (Fig. 1d). This distinct d-orbits facilitates significant Zeeman-like spin–orbit coupling in 2D MX2. The calculated band structures of MoS2 and WS2 indicate that the spin–orbit coupling could induce an obvious splitting of the valence band at the K points (Fig. 4a).42 The splitting of the valence band facilitates two interband optical transition paths for the carriers. These two transitions could be monitored by the optical spectra of the PL spectra (Fig. 2) and absorption spectra (Fig. 4b), as defined and corresponding to the A and B excitonic transitions. The values of the splitting of group-VI MX2 were measured to be ∼0.15 eV to ∼0.40 eV according to the spectra,14,48,49 which are slightly smaller than the predicted values from the DFT calculations.37,50,51 The tungsten dichalcogenides present enhanced splitting compared to molybdenum dichalcogenides due to the heavy mass of tungsten. Besides the information about the spin–orbit splitting, the absorption spectra also exhibit strong absorption peaks at higher energy ranges in the MX2 monolayer (peak C in Fig. 4b). However, this peak is not observed in the PL spectra. As indicated by the calculated band structures (Fig. 4a), the giant absorption is caused by the resonance with the band nesting in the band structures. The band nesting is the region in the band structure where the valence and conduction bands are parallel.42 The existence of band nesting results in the excitation-dependence of the relaxation paths of the photo-carriers. Since the photoexcited electrons and holes possess the same but opposite velocities at the band nesting region, electron–hole pairs prefer to separate in that space. Therefore, the radiative recombination (PL) is suppressed for absorption in the resonance range with band nesting. The excitation-wavelength-dependent relaxation of the photo-carriers could be evaluated from the PL spectra and by intensity mapping (Fig. 4c).43 These unique optical properties establish substantial science bases for the applications of 2D TMDs in photonics and optoelectronics.
 Fig. 4  (a) Calculated band structures of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers. The blue dashed-lines indicate the splitting of the valence bands. The green arrows indicate the band nesting region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2013, American Physical Society. (b) PL spectra (colorized curves) and absorption spectra (gray color curves) of MX2 monolayers. (c) PL emission intensity maps of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
2.2 Vibrational properties
Infrared and Raman spectroscopies represent effective techniques to evaluate the low-frequency and high-frequency phonons in solid-state physics, respectively. Considering the relatively small size of the TMDs samples, Raman spectroscopy is the most generally used nondestructive and accurate tool to investigate the thickness-dependent lattice vibrations. This is rendered by the high spatial resolution of the lasers employed as the light sources in Raman spectroscopy. The interlayer interactions of the van der Waals structures facilitate the basic lattice vibrations and present distinct features in the layer-number evolution of phonons, the interlayer shear, layer breathing phonons, etc. Due to the versatility of the Raman spectroscopy, all these phonon-related properties could be clearly elucidated by Raman spectra. In bulk MX2, the lattice vibrations obey the D6h point group symmetry, and the corresponding modes at Γ point could be described as: Γ = A1g + 2A2u + E1g + 2E1u + 2E2g + E2u + 2B2g + B1u, where 18 phonon modes are included since the “E” modes are doubly degenerate. Among these modes, A1g, E1g, and E2g are Raman active, while A2u and one of E1u are IR active, B2g, B1u, and E2u are silent, and A2u and the other E1u are acoustic modes. When the MX2 is thinned down to a bilayer, the point group summery is transferred to D3d and the 18 vibrational modes are expressed as Γ = 3A1g + 3A2u + 3Eg + 3Eu due to the inversion symmetry, where A1g and Eg are Raman active, while the others are IR active or acoustic modes. For the MX2 monolayer, the symmetry is reduced and belongs to D3h. There are only nine phonon modes, which can be described as Γ = A1′ + 2A2′′ + 2E′ + E′′, where the Raman-active modes include E′ (both Raman and IR active), A1′, and E′′ (Fig. 5a).52 Evidently, A1g, E1g, and E2g are Raman active in bulk MX2. By employing Raman spectroscopy with a back-scattering configuration to monitor the photons of bulk MoS2, three Raman peaks located at ∼33.5 cm−1, 383.6 cm−1, and 408.7 cm−1 are observed and can be assigned to E22g, E12g, and A1g, respectively.53 E1g is not observed due to its Raman tensor. Intensive research efforts have been done on monitoring the thickness of TMDs via Raman spectroscopy. As discussed in Fig. 5a, the denotations of the photon modes in bulk and monolayer MX2 are different. When the Raman spectra are used to evaluate the thickness of the material from the bulk to monolayer, the high-frequency modes E12g (in-plane vibrational mode) and A1g (out-of-plane mode) are commonly monitored as thickness indicators. The layer number identification is favored by the relative frequency difference between A1g and E12g (Δω = A1g − E12g). As demonstrated in the Raman spectra of MoS2,52,54 E12g presents a blue-shift, while A1g red-shifts when the material is thinned down from the bulk to a monolayer (Fig. 5b). For thinner samples (layer number N < 5), the relationship between Δω and the layer number can be described well by Δω = 2.58–8.4/N (Fig. 5c).52 However, this description is not suitable for evaluating the thickness of the materials. The shift of the E12g mode with thickness may be assigned to the long-range Coulombic interactions or structure changes induced by stacking, while, the shift of A1g is caused by the varying restoring forces at different thicknesses.54,55 Similar shift trends of the phonon modes have also been observed in MoSe2,56 WS2,57 and WSe2,57 although due to the heavier atomic mass of tungsten, the shifts of the frequencies are less significant.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of each optical vibration mode for the MX2 monolayer, bilayer, and bulk. The R, IR, and silent stands for Raman-active, infrared-active, and Raman and infrared inactive, respectively. The dashed lines indicate that the corresponding in-plate and out-of-plate modes of the bilayer and bulk merge into one in monolayer. (b) From left to right, Raman spectra of MoS2 with different thicknesses; frequency of A1g, E22g, and the frequency difference of these two modes as a function of 1/N, where N means the layer numbers. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) From left to right, Raman spectra of MoS2 with different thicknesses at a low frequency collected using (xx)z polarization; frequencies of the breathing modes and interlayer shear modes as a function of layer number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
The determination of the thickness of MX2 by monitoring Δω is restricted to samples with N < 5. A more precise and pertinent approach is to monitor the phonon modes at low frequencies (<50 cm−1). Take MoS2 as an example, two obvious modes: the E22g (interlayer shear mode (C)) and the B22g (layer breathing mode (LB)) are observed.53,58 These phonon modes originate from the interlayer interactions. As illustrated in Fig. 5a, the C modes are the oscillations of the adjacent layers along the plane direction and the LB modes are the oscillations of the layers perpendicular to the slab. The LB and C modes are absent in MX2 monolayers since there is no interlayer interaction for one layer. Starting from the bilayer, the frequencies of the LB modes gradually increase with increasing layer numbers, while the frequencies of the C modes present the opposite trend. Several sets of C (defined as S in Fig. 5c) and LB (defined as B in Fig. 5c) modes are observed in MoS2 (Fig. 5c),59 but the LB mode is absent in bulk MoS2, since the LB mode is not Raman active in the bulk counterpart. The relationship of the phonon modes at low frequency and the layer numbers can be employed to evaluate the thickness of MoS2, and the applicability extends to 18 layers.53 Similar results are also observed in tungsten dichalcogenides.59
Considering the high specific surface area, 2D TMDs are predicted to present high sensitivity to external perturbances, such as changes of environment temperature, external strains, and electrical fields. Given the sensitive vibrational property of the TMDs, Raman spectroscopy is expected to play an important role in probing the external perturbances by carefully analyzing the spectra collected under the perturbances. For example, temperature changes can be monitored by observing the peak shifts of the E′and A1′ modes of WS2 monolayers. The corresponding Raman spectra of WS2 monolayers at a wide temperature range (77–623 K) have been recorded by Thripuranthaka et al.60 The peak positions of both the E′ and A1′ modes shift to lower frequency with increasing temperature. According to the experimental data, the temperature coefficient of the WS2 is extracted to be ∼−0.006 cm−1 K−1. In addition to the temperature change, the external electrical field could also be monitored by the E′ and A1′ modes of TMD monolayers.61 Applying a gate voltage is a common approach employed to engineer carrier doping to TMDs and to tune the output of electronic devices. Simultaneously, the doping of carriers can significantly affect the vibrational property of the TMDs due to the enhanced electron-phonon interactions. Recently, the evolution of E′ and A1′ modes of MoS2 monolayers at different applied top-gate voltages was analyzed and it was found that the position of the A1′ mode significantly softens, while the full-wave half-maximum of the peak increases with increasing applied voltages; whereas, the changes of the E′ mode are inconspicuous. Since the effect of the gate voltage is to facilitate carrier doping, the shift of the A1′ mode can thus act as readout of the carrier concentration in electronic devices based on TMDS.
2.3 Carrier dynamics
Given the prominent optical properties of 2D TMDs, they are expected to present superior performance in optoelectronics, together with high efficiencies and fast response. To realize photoelectrical devices with a rapid response rate, it is a prerequisite to understand the ultrafast optical phenomena of the semiconductors at the ultrafast timescale. Here, the good performance of TMDs in optoelectronics critically depends on the efficient light absorption and excited carrier relaxation dynamics.
Taking full advantage of the highly temporal resolution of the ultrafast (femtosecond) pulse laser techniques, ultrafast spectroscopies have been devised to directly monitor the carrier dynamics, whereby the decay time of the carriers in each path (carrier lifetime) could be evaluated, whereas the fundamental mechanisms of the energy loss from the electron–exciton, exciton–exciton, and electron–phonon interactions could be comprehensively determined. The general ultrafast spectroscopies include time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectroscopy and pump–probe spectroscopies (e.g., transient absorption/reflection spectroscopies). As described above, since the excitons in monolayer MX2 dominate their optical properties, it is critical to investigate the corresponding excitonic dynamics. Among the ultrafast spectroscopy techniques, TRPL is the most frequently used tool for probing this property. As monitored by the TRPL spectra at different temperatures, the PL decay of the MoS2 monolayer is very fast (∼5 ps) at low temperature, while an additional slow recombination process emerges at higher temperature (Fig. 6a).62 The slow decay process may originate from the exciton–phonon scattering. Besides the classic excitonic behavior as a traditional direct band gap semiconductor, the carriers in 2D TMDs present strong Coulomb interactions due to the co-existence of the reduced dielectric screening and quantum confinement effects. The strong Coulomb interactions can facilitate tightly bound excitons and can additionally lead to higher-order excitonic states such as the observation of charged excitons (trions) and many-body states. Biexciton, a representative four-body state, can be observed and identified by low temperature PL and TRPL spectroscopies.63 According to the excitation fluence-dependent analysis, the P0 peak in Fig. 6b presents different trends with other peaks. The intensity of P0 grows superlinearly with increasing excitation densities (Fig. 6c), while the strength of emission from P0 also presents a superlinear relationship with respect to the exciton emission (X in Fig. 6b), as shown in Fig. 6d. Consequently, the P0 peak is identified as the emission from the biexciton (XX) states. As further evidence for this, TRPL spectra were obtained to characterize the dynamics of the biexciton state (Fig. 6e). The lifetime of biexciton is comparable to that of excitons and trions (X−) at around tens of ps. However, the lifetime of the emissions from defect-related features (P1 and P2) is much longer (>100 ps). Therefore, the emission of P0 is excluded from the defect-related states. The binding energy of the biexciton is defined as ΔXX = 2EX − EXX, where EX/EXX is the energy of free excitons/biexcitons. During the decay process, if the radiative decay of the biexciton is assumed to produce an exciton, the energy of the biexciton can be expressed to be EXX = ℏωXX + EX = ℏωXX + ℏωX, where ℏω is the energy of the radiative emission and can be extracted from the spectra. Therefore, the biexciton binding energy (ΔXX = ℏωX − ℏωXX) is calculated to be 52 meV. This value is much higher than that observed in conventional quantum-wells.
 Fig. 6  (a) TRPL spectra of MoS2 monolayers measured at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2011, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) PL spectra of monolayer WSe2 measured at 50 K and excited using fluences of 0.8 and 12 μJ cm−2. (c) PL spectra of monolayer WSe2 at 10 K and excited with different fluences. The identified peaks are the same as (b). Only P0 peak changes with the fluences. (d) P0 emission strength as a function of exciton emission (X peak) strength. (e) TRPL spectra of different peaks labeled in (b). (b–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Differential reflection of WSe2 monolayer as a function of time delay and spatial position. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Differential reflection of MoS2 monolayer pumped using different fluences. The right axis is the density of excitons. The upper and bottom panels show the different time scale ranges. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (h) From left to right, density of excitons as a function of probe delay measured using different fluences (increasing from top to bottom); also, the quantity No/N(t) − 1 as a function of time delay. N is the exciton density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014, American Physical Society. 
Besides the TRPL spectroscopy, transient absorption spectroscopy is another ultrafast technique usually employed to monitor the carrier dynamics in semiconductors. As compared to the TRPL spectroscopy, the characterizations taken by transient absorption spectroscopy would not be effectively affected by the low quantum yield of the materials.69 In addition to the measurement of carrier lifetime, it is quite straightforward to extract other crucial physical parameters such as the mean free path, mobility, diffusion length, exciton diffusion coefficient, etc. from an analysis of the experimental spectra. By employing this technique on the characterization of 2D TMD systems, the lifetime and diffusion coefficient of excitons in a WSe2 monolayer were directly measured.64 Combining the high resolution of pulse lasers in temporal and spatial domains, the transient absorption spectroscopy could be designed to be an effective approach to investigate the transport property of excitons in WSe2 monolayers. Fig. 6f depicts such spatiotemporally resolved spectra. This measurement was carried out following a low-density exciton system, where the exciton–exciton interaction was not a significant contribution factor to the exciton dynamics. In this case, exciton transport in WSe2 monolayer could be described by the classic diffusion equation. Under this description, the exciton diffusion coefficient could be extracted as 15 ± 5 cm2 s−1via theoretically fitting the experimental data. Based on this value, the mean free time, mean free path, and mobility were deduced to be 0.24 ps, 17 nm, and 600 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Associated with the measured lifetime, the diffusion length was calculated to be 160 nm. All these parameters on exciton dynamics could provide theoretical support for the fabrication and optimization of optoelectronics devices based on WSe2 monolayers. In contrast to the low-density exciton system, the high-density exciton process would exhibit more complex dynamics due to the involvement of exciton–exciton interactions. For instance, another four-body interaction, efficient exciton–exciton annihilation, in MoS265 and MoSe266 monolayers, was observed and identified experimentally via pump–probe spectroscopy. Exciton–exciton annihilation can be considered as the excitonic analog of Auger recombination. It is a four-body interaction process. During this process, one of the excitons is annihilated and transfers its energy to the other exciton. The dynamics of the MX2 monolayers are strongly dependent on the initial exciton density. Under excitations with high injected density, a fast decay component is observed, both in the MoS2 (Fig. 6g) and MoSe2 (Fig. 6h) monolayers. The decay dynamics of the excitons involving the exciton–exciton annihilation process can be theoretically modeled as: (2)where N is the exciton density and kA is the rate of exciton–exciton annihilation. Derived from eqn (2), the solution can be expressed as: (3)where N0 is the initially photoexcited exciton density. According to these equations, the exciton–exciton annihilation rate of MoS2 and MoSe2 monolayers can be extracted as (4.3 ± 1.1) × 10−2 cm2 s−1 and (33 ± 6) × 10−2 cm2 s−1, respectively, from the experimental spectra. A more complicated dynamics process could also be identified by ultrafast spectroscopy. As described in Section 2.1, the spin–orbit splitting gives rise to two interband transition paths and facilitates two excitons of A and B. Given the affinity of the A and B excitons, a strong A–B interaction was observed in an ultrathin MoS2 film by analyzing the spatiotemporally resolved measurements. The interaction was evaluated by a similar temporal evolution of the transient blue-shift and the wide broadening of the absorption Gaussians. The identification of these carrier dynamics processes provides fundamental support for the implementation of 2D TMDs in ultrafast optoelectronics.
2.4 Nonlinear optical effects
As discussed in Section 2.2, the structure symmetry is a critical factor to engineer the light–matter interactions. The inversion symmetry of monolayer MX2 is broken and reduced to the D3h space group. The inversion asymmetry is an underlying reason for the interesting optical properties, such as the finite nonlinear optical response in these materials. The optical nonlinearity is important in light–matter interactions and can facilitate new applications in optoelectronics and photonics where lasers with high intensity are employed. Due to the inversion asymmetry in MX2 monolayers and in odd-numbered layers, a second-order nonlinearity, i.e., second harmonic generation (SHG), has been observed in MoS2,70–72 WSe2,31 and WS2.31,73 SHG is a typical nonlinear optical process where photons with the same frequency interact with a nonlinear material to generate new photons with half wavelengths. The observations of SHG in MX2 can be identified via laser spectroscopy and imaging techniques. The efficiency of the SHG is quantified by a second-order nonlinear susceptibility χ(2). When the inversion symmetry is broken, χ(2) ≠ 0. Based on the different efficiencies of SHG from MX2 with different layer numbers, the measurement of SHG can be employed as a sensitive approach to evaluate the thickness of TMDs. Only samples with odd-numbered layers present an SHG signal, while the intensity of the SHG gradually decreases with increasing thickness (Fig. 7a). In addition to the layer number determination, SHG imaging can be employed to figure out the crystal grains and grain boundaries, the crystal orientations, and the electronics states variation at the edges of the MX2 monolayer (Fig. 7b).67,70,71 The crystal grains and grain boundaries could be directly imaged by SHG microscopy. The observation of the grain boundaries is enabled by the suppression of SHG at the boundaries. The suppression arises from the destructive interference and annihilation of the nonlinear waves from neighboring grains with different orientations. The determination of the crystal orientations is facilitated by the polarization resolved feature of the designed SHG microscopy as the polarization resolved SHG signal is highly dependent on the crystal orientation. The electronic structure variation at the 1D edges can be monitored by the enhancement of the SHG intensity at the edges. This SHG technique based on laser spectroscopy demonstrates an easier way to observe the grains and crystalline orientations in crystals, which so far could only be realized via using high-resolution electron microscopes. Besides these characterizations, the SHG technique has also been demonstrated as useful to determine the stacking orientation of heterostructures consisting of artificial stacking noncentrosymmetric MX2.68 The SHG of stacked MX2/MX2 twisted bilayers was shown to be a coherent superposition of the second harmonic fields of each component monolayer. Therefore, it is very sensitive to the stacking angle but is insensitive to the component materials. As a result, the SHG technique is efficient for identifying the stacking orientation in both homo-stacked and hetero-stacked MX2 bilayers, as has been demonstrated on homo-stacked MoS2/MoS2 and hetero-stacked WSe2/MoS2 and WSe2/WS2 bilayers (Fig. 7c and d).
 Fig. 7  (a) From left to right, optical image of a WS2 flake with domains with different thicknesses; PL map of the same flake; SHG image of the same flake; SHG intensity as a function of layer numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) From left to right, optical image of a CVD-grown monolayer MoS2 film; SHG image of the same film, where the grains and grain boundaries are clearly shown; crystal orientation image of the same film, where the crystal orientations are clearly identified; schematics of the crystal orientations of the regions labeled in the images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Optical images (upper panel) and SHG maps of stacked MoS2 bilayers with different stacking angle. (d) Angular dependence of the quantitative SHG effects (κ(θ)) of homo-stacked MoS2/MoS2 and hetero-stacked WSe2/MoS2 and WSe2/WS2 bilayers. κ(θ) is a defined dimensionless parameter as described in ref. 68. The histogram in the bottom right panel shows the SHG intensity of MoS2, WS2, and WSe2 monolayers. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3. Photoelectric conversion via laser excitation
Invariably, the unique optical properties exhibited by 2D TMDs could be employed to enable photoelectric conversion in optoelectronic devices. Optoelectronic devices can be employed to detect, manipulate, and interact with or generate light. Traditional semiconductors have been widely explored as building blocks in optoelectronics devices such as photodetectors, solar cells, lasers, optical modulators, etc. Given the special requirements (such as wearable, lighter, and transparent) of next generation optoelectronic devices, flexible and transparent features are now essential conditions of semiconductors. Compared with traditional 3D semiconductors, 2D TMDs possess absolute predominance in such a context of optoelectronic devices due to their mechanical flexibility, transparency, and their advantages in fabrication processing. Additionally, the quantum confinement effects in the 2D limit support a number of novel advantages. For instance, the tunable band gap with varying layer numbers leads to the response to photons with different wavelengths. Moreover, the high surface-to-volume ratio of the nanoscale material provides a larger working area for light absorption, especially as, the surface of the 2D TMDs naturally have bonds dangling free. This gives them the capacity to easily integrate with other components such as cavities and waveguides in optoelectronic systems.
3.1 Photocurrent
The operation of optoelectronic devices relies on the generation of a photocurrent due to photoelectric conversion. The capability to generate a photocurrent in 2D TMDs strengthens their potential as building blocks in optoelectronics. With the rapid progress in material synthesis and the increasing interest in 2D device fabrication, insights into the photoresponse mechanism and photocurrent origins are important in optimization of the performance of the devices. The origins of the photocurrent in a 2D optoelectronic device arise from several factors, including light absorption efficiency, photocarrier excitation, free carrier generation, free carrier collection, charge trapping, and recombination.77 Remarkably, the junction at the TMDs–metal electrode interface could also contribute to the photocurrent generation due to the existence of a rectifying Schottky barrier. Therefore, in order to apply 2D TMDs in functional optoelectronic devices, clear insights into the underlying mechanism of photocurrent generations are desirable. A deep understanding of the mechanism would efficiently guide device design and optimization. Considering the high spatial resolution of a focused laser beam, a scanning photocurrent microscope (SPCM) can be easily designed to investigate the photocurrent origins.22,77 The SPCM has been demonstrated to be well-suited to probe various parameters related to the photoresponse in nanostructures, such as carrier diffusion length, electrical field distribution, barrier height and local band bending by monitoring the local photocurrent of the nanoscale devices.78–84
The first time observation of the photocurrent from the MX2 monolayer is based on the investigation of MoS2 monolayer phototransistors.85 In this early report, a broad laser beam was employed to globally irradiate the entire device. In doing so, the contributors to the photoresponse could not be clearly identified and a lower photoresponsivity of 7.5 mA W−1 was measured. The lower conductivity and mobility offset the intrinsic advantage of the direct band gap of the MoS2 monolayer and gave rise to the lower photoresponsivity. Subsequently, a photodetection device based on a MoS2 monolayer was optimized and achieved a 105-fold improvement in photoresponsivity (880 A W−1).74 Characterization of the photocurrent was carried out by employing a standard SPCM setup. A microscope objective was used to focus the laser beam. A nanopositioning stage was employed to obtain a photocurrent map. The spatially resolved photocurrent distribution could then be clearly figured out by scanning the focused laser beam over the device (Fig. 8a). The photocurrent map showed that the highest photocurrent was generated at the center of the device. This indicated that the MoS2 monolayer is the dominant contributor to the photocurrent generation rather than the junctions of the material and electrodes. On the other hand, the differences of the work functions of the material and metal electrodes also play an important role in the photocurrent generation. When different metal electrodes are used in a device, the key contribution of the photocurrent would be different. Different from the generation of the photocurrent from the MoS2 monolayer, the highest photocurrent might be generated at the interface of the MoS2 monolayer/metal electrodes junctions (Fig. 8b).75 The formation of the current is dominated by the Schottky contacts. By rastering the focused laser beam across the device, the line profile of the photocurrent could be obtained at a constant bias. After analysis of the profiles at different applied biases, the Schottky barrier height at the MoS2 monolayer/electrode contact was estimated to be ∼210 meV (Fig. 8c). In addition, by combining different 2D materials in vertical stacks, heterostructures based on 2D crystals could be formed. These heterostructures represent a new paradigm in optoelectronics. For instance, the heterostructure consisting of graphene/TMDs/graphene has been demonstrated to present superior performance in photocurrent generation.76 The improvement arises from the van Hove singularities in the density of states of the TMD monolayers. These van Hove singularities facilitate stronger light absorption and more electron–hole pairs due to the enhanced light–matter interactions. Significant photocurrent generation from the graphene/WS2/graphene stacks was observed and was mapped by SPCM measurements (Fig. 8d). Such characterizations carried out by SPCM helped unambiguously identify the mechanism of the photocurrent generation. This can clearly help guide the design and optimization of optoelectronic devices based on 2D TMDs.
 Fig. 8  (a) Photocurrent map of a MoS2 monolayer device. Scale bar = 5 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) PL (upper panel) and photocurrent map of a MoS2 monolayer device. Greed dashed-lines indicate the positions of the electrodes. (c) Photocurrent line-scan profiles along the device channel at different applied biases (upper panel); photocurrent amplitude as a function of applied bias measured at the positions labeled in the upper panel. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Upper panel from left to right: schematic illustration of the stacking device architecture; optical image of the device; optical image of a device placed on the flexible substrate. Bottom panel, photocurrent maps of the stacking device for different applied biases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3.2 Photovoltaic effect
Photoelectrical conversion based on the photovoltaic effect is facilitated by the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs by built-in electric fields. Such electric fields generally locate at the junctions between regions with different potentials. Among these junctions, the p–n junction is one of the most versatile and is considered to be a key foundational component in various optoelectronic devices. The formation of a p–n junction requires tightly jointed negatively doped (n-type) and positively doped (p-type) materials. The different doping status in 2D TMDs could be induced by local electrostatic gating86,89,90 or by chemical doping.88 By using the electrostatic gating method, the doping can be flexibly tuned to be n- or p- via controlling the applied gate voltages. As an ambipolar semiconductor, p–n junctions could be flexibly configured within WSe2 monolayers via electrostatic gating.86,89,90 Upon this electrically controlled p–n junction, a significant photocurrent could be generated without any applied bias due to the built-in potential. Under SPCM characterization, the photocurrent is measured when the laser spot scans over the device. The generation of the photocurrent at zero bias is the result of a photovoltaic effect and obeys the following process. The electron–hole pairs are excited within the WSe2 monolayer by the injected photons. The electron–hole pairs are then separated by the built-in potential at the p–n junction and flow to opposite contacts. The separated carriers are collected by the electrodes to form the photocurrent. The photocurrent spatial map and line profile indicate that the maximum photocurrent occurs when the laser is irradiated onto the junction (Fig. 9a).86 Given the configuration of the p–n junction, the presented photovoltaic effect shows the promising potential of MX2 monolayers in solar cell applications. Under laser illumination, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current (Isc) of a photovoltaic device based on a WSe2 monolayer could be clearly measured (Fig. 9b).87 With increasing laser power illumination, both Voc and Isc increase accordingly and realize higher output electrical power (Pel, P = VdsIds) (Fig. 9c). Under illumination using a laser with a wavelength of 640 nm, the power conversion efficiency of the device was calculated to be ∼0.01% according to η = P/Pin, where Pin is the incident effective power on the work area. Besides electrostatic gating, chemical doping is another effective approach to facilitate the n- and p-type conversation of MX2. The chemical doping of a MoS2 monolayer and multilayers via surface modification using Au nanoparticles has been realized to control the optical,94 electrical,95 and thermoelectrical96 properties of materials. The occurrence of a surface charge transfer between MoS2 and AuCl4− ions facilitates the easy decoration of Au nanoparticles onto the MoS2 surface.94 During this charge transfer process, Au3+ ions attract electrons from MoS2 and enable a significant p-type doping in the MoS2 monolayer or multilayers. Therefore, a lateral p–n junction could be fabricated within a MoS2 multilayer with such a method via converting half of the material from an n-type to a p-type.88 The mechanism of this photovoltaic-effect-induced photoelectrical conversion is schematically illustrated in Fig. 9d. A device based on the p–n junction was demonstrated to present a photoresponse to a multispectral region covering the UV and visible regions (Fig. 9e).
 Fig. 9  (a) Photocurrent map and line-scan profile of an electrically tuned p–n junction WSe2 monolayer device measured without bias. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) I–V curves (with and without laser illumination) of an electrically tuned p–n junction WSe2 monolayer device under a PN configuration. Inset shows the curves under an NP configuration. (c) I–V curves of the device under a PN configuration with illuminations with different powers. Inset shows the generated power Pel, Pel =VdsIds. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the band diagram of the p–n junction within a MoS2 monolayer. (e) I–V curves of the chemically doping induced p–n junction MoS2 monolayer device under laser illuminations of different powers. Inset shows the zoom-in view to visualize the unidirectional characteristic. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Valleytronics
Traditional electronic devices function based on the movement of electric charge. In addition to electric charge, electronic devices could also be realized by exploiting other internal freedoms of electrons, such as via spintronics, which involves manipulating the spin angular momentum of electrons. With particular observations in graphene, the robust spin states of electrons in monolayers has attracted significant investigation and the demonstration of several spintronic devices.97 Compared to graphene, the hexagonal lattice structures and absence of an inversion center in MX2 monolayers give rise to an additional degree of freedom (DOF) of electrons, i.e., the valley, upon spin. As described in Section 2.1, the shift of the VBM from the Γ point to K points facilitates direct band gaps forming at the K and −K points in MX2 monolayers (Fig. 10a).92 The K and −K valleys are separated by a big momentum space and are related to each other by time reversal. This makes them a binary value state system. Manipulation of the DOF of the valleys (K and −K) can be realized by controlling the occupation of them. Since the manipulation operations are similar to those of spintronics, the concept of “valleytronics” has been proposed. The robust excitons in the ±K valleys enable the manipulation of the valley DOF by optical approaches.28,91,98,99 It is predicted that the ±K valleys obey optical selection rules induced by the hexagonal lattice with inversion asymmetry. The interband transitions at the ±K valleys follow the optical excitations with opposite circular helicity, suggesting namely that left/right-hand circularly polarized light (σ−)/(σ+) will only excite electrons at the K/−K (defined as K′ in Fig. 10b) valley.91 This selection rule offer a protocol to realize valley polarization in MX2 monolayers; indeed, exciton valley polarization has been demonstrated in MoS2 monolayers by polarization-resolved PL (Fig. 10c).28 The PL results demonstrate the optical circular dichroism, that is, when the monolayers are excited with circularly polarized light, the resulting exciton PL is found to retain the same circular polarization as the excitation light.
 Fig. 10  (a) The schematic diagram of ±K valleys in MX2 monolayer. (b) Schematic of the selection rules at the ±K valleys. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (c) PL spectra of MoS2 monolayer excited using circularly polarized laser. The red, blue and black curves correspond to the σ+, σ− polarizations and the net degree of polarization, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Diagram illustration of the VHE. (a and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Schematic of the photoinduced VHE working principle and optical image of a MoS2 monolayer device. (f) Hall voltage as a function of applied bias. (g) Angle-dependence of the anomalous Hall resistance. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Valleytronic devices aim to confine electrons to individual momentum valleys as additional DOF in optoelectronic devices. As theoretically predicted, the tight coupling between spin and valley DOF in TMDs could host a combination of valley and Hall effects.37 Owing to the broken inversion symmetry in TMD monolayers, there are magnetic moments with equal magnitudes but opposite signs at ±K valleys. Such presented magnetic fields could generate an anomalous velocity to the charge carriers excited in the valleys, i.e., the electrons excited from different valleys will undergo Lorentz-like forces with opposite directions and would then move toward opposite directions perpendicular to the applied bias in the device (Fig. 10d).92 This phenomenon is called the valley Hall effect (VHE). The so-called VHE has been demonstrated in a MoS2 monolayer device.93 Based on a Hall bar device (Fig. 10e), a photo-generated anomalous Hall effect could be observed under the excitation of circularly polarized light. The magnitude of the VHE is evaluated by the Hall conductivity σH, expressed as: (4)where me is the electron band mass, ℏ = h/2π, where h is Planck's constant, e is the elementary charge, nυ is the difference of the photoexcited carrier density between K and −K valleys, and Eg is the band gap of the monolayer. As illustrated in Fig. 10e, under the illumination of circularly polarized light and an applied bias along horizontal direction, the Hall voltage (VH) could be obtained along the vertical direction. As a demonstration of this, an anomalous VH presented a linear relation with applied bias under the illumination of light with polarization at the critical point changing from right to left (R–L), while, VH with an opposite direction was observed under L–R modulation (Fig. 10f). However, no VH was observed in the MoS2 monolayer under linear (s–p) polarized light modulation. For an MoS2 bilayer, the VHE is not applicable due to inversion symmetry. The polarization dependence of the VHE in the MoS2 monolayer can be revealed by the Hall resistance (RH = VH/Ix) as a function of θ, which is the angle between the incident linearly polarized light and the fast axis of the quarter-wave plate (Fig. 10g). The relationship is exhibited in the monolayer under circularly polarized modulation. In addition, the dichroic spin–valley-coupled photogalvanic current has been demonstrated in devices based on MoS2 and WSe2 monolayers,101,102 thus extending the applications of the valleytronics of TMD monolayers and opening up new avenues for photoelectrical conversion in optoelectronics.
4. Functionality extension/improvement via laser modification
Once the TMD materials are prepared or synthesized, the range of their potential applications is mainly restricted by their discrete intrinsic properties. In light of the increasing interests to widen the range of applications, it would be worthwhile to also develop post-treatment techniques. These techniques should have the capacity to improve the properties of the as-synthesized materials and to extend their application potential. Furthermore, to miniaturize functional devices based on TMDs, it is also desirable to develop techniques with the ability to fabricate micropatterns with controlled functionalities on the as-synthesized TMDs. These techniques are required to directly pattern the TMDs as well as to alter their properties. Considering the features of high resolution, fast speed, and controllable disruption of a scanning focused laser beam, it is rational to develop this technique as a simple, efficient, and flexible tool to post-treat the as-synthesized TMDs with the aim of extending and improving their functionalities.
4.1 Direct laser thinning/patterning of TMDs
Considering the increasing demands and wide range of applications shown by TMD monolayers, the lower productive rate of the exfoliation approaches makes it difficult to meet fast development requirements. To resolve this issue, considerable efforts have been made to synthesize large area and high quality TMD monolayers based on different bottom-up strategies. On the other hand, top-down methods based on post-synthesis procedures have also been developed to further control the thickness of the TMDs. For example, a method based on a plasma technique was employed to achieve a layer-by-layer thinning of a multilayer MoS2 to give a monolayer.104 To achieve better control, techniques based on focused laser beams were designed as a straightforward and effective approach for the “on-demand” fabrication of TMD monolayers. Such a laser thinning method was firstly applied on mechanically exfoliated MoS2 multilayers.100 Herein, after scanning the focused laser beam on the multilayered sample with an optimized power density and scanning speed, a uniform monolayer region was created (Fig. 11a and b). The created monolayer region presented a higher PL intensity than the pristine region (Fig. 11c). By extending this to large area MoS2 films grown by the CVD method, direct thinning and micropatterning could be simultaneously achieved.13 The as-grown sample was subjected to a focused laser beam setup (Fig. 11d). The sample absorbs the photons and converts the energy into thermal energy. The generated heat facilitates the sublimation of the upper layers to realize the direct thinning. The sample was controlled to enable it to move with respect to the laser beam in a programmable manner to achieve the patterning (Fig. 11e). In such a way, versatile functional junctions and components could be fabricated on an MoS2 thin film based on the layer-dependent band gaps. For instance, a monolayer domain surrounded by a multilayer region can be fabricated (Fig. 11f). The formation of the monolayer domain was identified by the Raman and PL spectra (Fig. 11g and h). This “on-demand” method has been demonstrated to be applicable to directly produce thin and to pattern other TMDs (WSe2103) and even other 2D materials such as black phosphorus (phosphorene).105 Moreover, this laser patterning technique could also be employed to fabricate micro-supercapacitors using a paintable MoS2 film.106 In addition to the thinning and patterning capabilities, this method also possesses the capability to modify or alter the property of the samples.
 Fig. 11  Optical images of MoS2 (a) before and (b) after laser thinning. (c) PL map of the same as shown in (b). The monolayer region created using a laser presents a higher PL intensity. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of a focused laser beam pruning setup. (e) Optical bright field and dark field images of a micropattern created on a MoS2 film. Scale bar = 20 μm. (f) Optical bright field and dark field images of a monolayer domain fabricated via laser thinning within a MoS2 four-layer film. Scale bar = 20 μm. (g) Raman and (h) PL spectra of the created monolayer (red curves) and pristine regions (black curves) of the MoS2 film. (d–h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Photochemical reaction of 2D TMDs
Naturally, TMDs are chalcogen-deficient due to the higher volatility of the chalcogens.107 The chalcogen vacancies contribute to the free carrier trapping and scattering. To achieve materials with higher quality, healing the defects with chemical passivation has been proposed. Isoelectronic substitutional oxygen defects in TMDs are theoretically demonstrated to be electrically neutral,103 therefore, passivation of the chalcogen vacancies using oxygen is a feasible approach to improve the quality of TMDs. DFT calculations have been carried out on WSe2 monolayers.103 The significant unoccupied gap state originating from the Se vacancies could be effectively healed by oxygen substitution (Fig. 12a). Experimentally, the oxygen substitution has been realized using the focused laser beam technique. The substitution process is controlled by the photochemical reaction between the WSe2 monolayers and oxygen in the atmosphere. The degree of the substitution is controlled by altering the oxygen concentration of the environment. The XPS scans clearly indicate that more oxygen can be introduced into the WSe2 monolayers in an environment with a higher oxygen concentration (Fig. 12b). In the W 4f scans, the two doublets are ascribed to W4+ in the W–Se environment and W5+/W6+ in the W–O environment, respectively. The oxidization ratio is defined as I(W5+/W6+)/(I(W4+) + I(W5+/W6+)). The ratio gradually increases when the WSe2 monolayers are modified by a focused laser beam in an environment with a higher oxygen concentration. The stoichiometric ratio of W4+ and Se could be tailored from ∼1:1.8 of the pristine sample to ∼1:2.0 after modification with a focused laser beam.
 Fig. 12  (a) Calculated band structures of a WSe2 monolayer with different defects. From left to right, pristine; selenium vacancy; oxygen adsorbed in the Se4 and W1 configurations; oxygen substitution of Se. (b) XPS scans of W and Se for pristine WSe2 monolayer; sample modified in an environment with a lower oxygen concentration; sample modified in an environment with a higher oxygen concentration (from left to right). (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the simple photochemical reactions, more complex chemical reactions could be facilitated based on the modification of TMDs using the focused laser beam technique. The 2D configuration of ultrathin TMDs presents a superior high surface-to-volume ratio. This feature offers robust surface states since all the chemical bonds are exposed on the surfaces. These surface states make the TMDs extremely sensitive to extraneous perturbations. Therefore, altering the properties of 2D TMDs via surface modification would be pronounced and effective. An effective way to enable this surface modification is by decoration of the surfaces with other nano/micro-structures to form functional interfaces. Interfacing with metal nanoparticles (NPs) provides an access route to extend the functionality of TMDs. Under the help of a focused laser beam, the selective self-assembly of Au NPs on MoS2 has been achieved.94 A focused laser beam is used to create micropatterns with active nucleation sites on the MoS2 surface. Reduction reactions can then occur on the activated surface in AuCl3 solution, whereby Au NPs can be selectively assembled onto the modified domains (Fig. 13a). Moreover, the density and size of the Au NPs particles could be easily controlled by tuning the MoS2 thickness (Fig. 13b), reaction time, and laser power. Such a reaction gives rise to the localized functionalization of as-grown MoS2 films and creates functional hybrid materials.
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of the Au NPs–MoS2 hybrids. Au NPs only assembled onto the laser modified regions. Bottom right panel is the AFM image of the Au NPs on a MoS2 film. (b) SEM images of the Au nanoparticles on MoS2 films with different thicknesses. i–v: MoS2 thicknesses are 1.34, 2.2, 3.5, 6.8, and 9.8 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
4.3 Superior photoelectrical/optical devices
2D TMDs have been successfully demonstrated to be useful functional materials in various optoelectronic devices. However, their practical applications are constrained by their comparatively low conductivity and photoconductivity. As described in Section 4.2, the lower conductivity of the TMDs is generally due to the trapping or scattering of free carriers induced by chalcogen vacancies. To heal these vacancies, oxygen substitution controlled by a focused laser beam setup has been demonstrated to be a feasible approach. Consequently, modification via the use of focused laser beam pruning is expected to improve the performance of optoelectronic devices built based on TMDs. Photodetection devices based on WSe2 monolayers have been demonstrated and characterized by different research groups. Their photoresponsivity, one of the most important parameter of a photodetector, was measured to be in the range of 0.7–210 mA W−1.86,87,90,103 Taking the standard two-probe device architecture as an example,103 the photoresponsivity and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of a device based on an as-grown WSe2 monolayer are calculated to be 25 mA W−1 and 5.8%, respectively, at the medium level of the reported devices. Once the working area (WSe2 monolayer) of the device is globally modified by a focused laser beam, the performance of the device is found to be significantly improved (Fig. 14a–c), indeed, the output dark current has been measured to be ∼400-fold higher at the same applied bias than before modification. The corresponding photoresponsivity and EQE are also improved, namely to 3717 mA W−1 and 860%, respectively. Therefore, modification based on focused laser beam pruning could improve the performance of the optoelectronic devices by more than two-orders of magnitude. Similarly, an enhanced device performance has also been achieved on MoS2 transistors after a selective laser annealing process.108
 Fig. 14  (a) I–V curves and (b) photoresponse characteristics of the WSe2 monolayer device before and after laser modification. (c) Photocurrent map of the device after laser modification. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) I–V curves (with and without laser illumination) of the pristine MoS2 multilayer device and the device with a laser-created monolayer–multilayer junction. Inset shows the optical image of the device with a laser-created junction. (e) Photocurrent profile across the junction measured using SPCM. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Raman spectra of rhodamine 6G; methylene blue; rhodamine 101 (from left to right), respectively, on Si, MoS2/Si and Au NPs–MoS2 substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
As described in Section 4.1, a focused laser beam could be employed as an “on-demand” approach to create functional junctions within an MoS2 film. An optoelectronic device built on the monolayer–multilayer junction was demonstrated to present superior performance (Fig. 14d). The difference in the band gaps of the MoS2 monolayer and of the multilayer enabled a significant built-in potential barrier to develop at the junction. This built-in potential promotes the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs and generates a higher photocurrent. The contributions of the different functional domains were identified by means of SPCM (Fig. 14e). The improvement in the output was ascribed to the synergy of the built-in junction and the introduced defects by laser modification.
Besides the improvement of optoelectronic devices, the focused laser beam technique could also facilitate optical devices with superior performance. Such a technique has been demonstrated to enable selective self-assembly of Au NPs onto the surface of a MoS2 film to form functional hybrid materials (Fig. 13). Considering the strong coupling of Au NPs to the Raman signal and the efficient adsorption of aromatic organic molecules onto MoS2, the obtained Au NPs–MoS2 hybrid was demonstrated to give superior surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrates for the detection of aromatic organic molecules. These SERS substrates present a sensitive detection ability to molecules of methylene blue, rhodamine 101, and rhodamine 6G even at the resonance excitation wavelength (Fig. 14f). With the extensive applicability of the laser techniques, focused laser beam pruning is expected to play an important role in extending the functionalities of a wider range of 2D materials than just TMDs.
5. Conclusions and prospects
In this review, we have provided an overview into the use of laser-based technologies as effective tools for the characterization, analysis, modification, and manipulation of group-VI 2D TMD films. Our current understanding of the fundamental optical properties identified via various laser spectroscopies is summarized. In particular, how the emerging PL has been observed by PL spectroscopies, while vibrational phonon modes have been identified by Raman spectroscopes, the dynamics of excitonic carriers have been established by various time-resolved spectroscopies, and the nonlinear optical behaviors of these TMDs have been demonstrated by SHG spectroscopy. Subsequently, the demonstrations of optoelectronic devices operated by laser excitation are reviewed. Laser excitations could facilitate photoelectric energy conversion within TMDs through different pathways and with different mechanisms. Finally, a review on the post-synthesis treatments of TMDs using lasers with subversive energy is presented. Focused laser beams offer a means to achieve direct thinning and the patterning of TMDs for creating monolayer domains. During the fabrication processes, it was also observed that the photoelectrical and optical properties are altered under the effects of induced photochemical reactions. The modified TMDs were demonstrated to present improved functionalities and could be fabricated in photoelectrical/optical devices with superior performances.
Moving beyond this review, it is worthwhile to think that the techniques based on lasers have yet to attain their full potential in the research field of 2D TMDs. Although many optical fundamentals have been studied, the understanding of the fundamental properties related to the complex and unique electronic structures of TMDs remain incomplete. For example, the exciton binding energy, one of the key parameters affecting the optical properties, has not yet been established directly by experiment. Besides the robust exciton-related investigations, more research efforts are also encouraged to focus on the investigation of free carriers rather than just excitons because separated free carriers are the key factor determining the performance of optoelectronic devices. To this end, laser spectroscopy with frequencies in the terahertz (THz) range might be an effective tool to reach this requirement since THz waves have been demonstrated to be sensitive to free carrier dynamics in semiconductors.109,110 On the other hand, higher-order many-body interactions in the TMDs monolayers are expected to be observed. The binding energies of the higher-order many-body interactions are predicted to be present at higher frequencies. This can extend TMDs' roles in optoelectronics with via an extended response range, even to the far infrared. Considering the high degree of integration of next generation optoelectronic devices, miniaturizing the size of the functional domains and creating multifunctional components on a single TMD sample are desirable. To this end, techniques based on lasers are expected to remain very useful. Given the site selectivity, focused laser beam techniques would be flexible to create functional domains as versatile components on TMDs. Simultaneously, laser beams can be employed as the control switches to operate the working of the devices. The high spatial resolution of the focused laser beam facilitates a precise control of every functional component on the device. Since the components could be individually operated, very complex logic circuits could be achieved. In doing so, more functionalities could be enabled by these devices. In addition, the laser technique is an effective tool to construct hybrid nanostructures by combining 2D TMDs with other 0D or 1D nanomaterials. By precisely controlling the architecture of the combination, the hybrids are expected to present superior properties. Based on the designed architecture, laser beams could also be employed to effectively control the optical and thermal interactions between the beams and the materials, in order to engineer specific device performance.
Despite the admirable properties shown by the typical 2D TMDs, the featured band gaps (1.6–2.0 eV) of the group-VI MX2 restrict their light–matter interactions within the visible light range. To pave an avenue for optoelectronic devices working under the control of invisible light (UV or IR), 2D semiconductors with extended band gap ranges are needed. As for solid nonmetal monotypic 2D crystal besides graphene, black phosphorus (phosphorene) has been demonstrated to present encouraging properties. The direct band gap of the material can be flexibly tuned from 0.3 eV to 2.0 eV with the thickness reducing from the bulk to the monolayer.111,112 This facilitates considerable light–matter interactions in the visible and IR light ranges. In addition, the focused-laser-modification technique could realize the in situ oxidization of the phosphorene to form phosphorene oxides. By controlling the oxygen concentration, the band gap of the material can be extended from 2.3 eV to 5.0 eV.105 This enables the photoresponse of the material to cover the spectrum range from the UV to IR. Besides phosphorene, arsenene and antimonene have been theoretically predicted to present indirect band gaps of 2.5 eV and 2.3 eV, respectively. This also extends the photoresponse of the materials to the shorter wavelength range.113
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister Office, Singapore, under its Medium Sized Centre Programme. J. Lu and C. H. Sow thanks the support of MOE Tier 2 grant R-144-000-357-11.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 623–636 RSC .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, C.-S. Lai and L.-J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, J. H. Lu, H. Liu, B. Liu, K. X. Chan, J. Lin, W. Chen, K. P. Loh and C. H. Sow, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6334–6343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gouadec and P. Colomban, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2007, 53, 1–56 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chuang and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1921–1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Y. Tan, C. H. Sow, K. Y. Lim, F. C. Cheong, G. L. Chong, A. T. S. Wee and C. K. Ong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18575–18579 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lim, C. H. Sow, J. Lin, F. C. Cheong, Z. X. Shen, J. T. L. Thong, K. C. Chin and A. T. S. Wee, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 300–303 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Lim and C.-H. Sow, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 847–852 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, H. Liu, S. Deng, M. Zheng, Y. Wang, J. A. van Kan, S. H. Tang, X. Zhang, C. H. Sow and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7619–7627 RSC .
X. Lim, H. W. G. Foo, G. H. Chia and C.-H. Sow, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, X. Lim, M. Zheng, S. G. Mhaisalkar and C.-H. Sow, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8298–8307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cabanillas-Gonzalez, G. Grancini and G. Lanzani, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5468–5485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Marago, P. H. Jones, P. G. Gucciardi, G. Volpe and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 807–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. Han, H. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Niu, P. Tan, E. Wang, B. Liu and J. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 887 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zeng and X. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2629–2642 RSC .
S. N. Shirodkar and U. V. Waghmare, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 157601 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zeng, G.-B. Liu, J. Dai, Y. Yan, B. Zhu, R. He, L. Xie, S. Xu, X. Chen, W. Yao and X. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1608 Search PubMed .
A. Kuc, N. Zibouche and T. Heine, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 245213 CrossRef .
H. Schmidt, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7715–7736 RSC .
Y. Chen, J. Xi, D. O. Dumcenco, Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, D. Wang, Z. Shuai, Y.-S. Huang and L. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4610–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Duan, X. Wu, X. Zhuang, H. Zhou, Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, W. Hu, P. Ren, P. Guo, L. Ma, X. Fan, X. Wang, J. Xu, A. Pan and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3756–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiao, G.-B. Liu, W. Feng, X. Xu and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 196802 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Yuan, S. Sae Hong, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2664–2680 RSC .
L. Junpeng, S. Cheng, Z. Minrui, N. Mathews, L. Hongwei, C. Gin Seng, Z. Xinhai, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Chorng Haur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19538–19545 Search PubMed .
Q. Feng, Y. Zhu, J. Hong, M. Zhang, W. Duan, N. Mao, J. Wu, H. Xu, F. Dong, F. Lin, C. Jin, C. Wang, J. Zhang and L. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2648–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, Z. Liu, A. R. Lupini, G. Shi, J. Lin, S. Najmaei, Z. Lin, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, G. You, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, R. Vajtai, S. T. Pantelides, S. J. Pennycook, J. Lou, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 442–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carvalho, R. M. Ribeiro and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 115205 CrossRef .
D. Kozawa, R. Kumar, A. Carvalho, K. Kumar Amara, W. Zhao, S. Wang, M. Toh, R. M. Ribeiro, A. H. Castro Neto, K. Matsuda and G. Eda, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4543 CAS .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Duan, X. Wu, X. Fan, X. Zhu, X. Zhuang, W. Hu, H. Zhou, A. Pan and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5284–5287 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schuller, S. Karaveli, T. Schiros, K. He, S. Yang, I. Kymissis, J. Shan and R. Zia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 271–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, R. M. Ribeiro, M. Toh, A. Carvalho, C. Kloc, A. H. Castro Neto and G. Eda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5627–5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, S. Wu, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, A. M. Jones, G. Aivazian, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1474 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhu, Y. C. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 153402 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X.-F. Qiao, W. Shi, J.-B. Wu, D.-S. Jiang and P.-H. Tan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2757–2785 RSC .
X. Zhang, W. P. Han, J. B. Wu, S. Milana, Y. Lu, Q. Q. Li, A. C. Ferrari and P. H. Tan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 115413 CrossRef .
C. Lee, H. Yan, L. E. Brus, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and S. Ryu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2695–2700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhang, C. C. R. Yap, B. K. Tay, T. H. T. Edwin, A. Olivier and D. Baillargeat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan, D. R. T. Zahn, S. Michaelis de Vasconcellos and R. Bratschitsch, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, K. K. Amara, J. R. Pang, M. Toh, X. Zhang, C. Kloc, P. H. Tan and G. Eda, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9677–9683 RSC .
H. Zeng, B. Zhu, K. Liu, J. Fan, X. Cui and Q. M. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 241301 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Luo, H. Li, J. Zhang, P. T. Araujo, C. K. Gan, J. Wu, H. Zhang, S. Y. Quek, M. S. Dresselhaus and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1007–1015 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thripuranthaka and D. J. Late, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1158–1163 Search PubMed .
B. Chakraborty, A. Bera, D. V. S. Muthu, S. Bhowmick, U. V. Waghmare and A. K. Sood, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys., 2012, 85, 161403 CrossRef .
T. Korn, S. Heydrich, M. Hirmer, J. Schmutzler and C. Schüller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 102109 CrossRef .
Y. You, X.-X. Zhang, T. C. Berkelbach, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 477–481 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cui, F. Ceballos, N. Kumar and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2970–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, Y. Rao, G. A. Reider, G. Chen, Y. You, L. Brézin, A. R. Harutyunyan and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5625–5629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kumar, Q. Cui, F. Ceballos, D. He, Y. Wang and H. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125427 CrossRef .
X. Yin, Z. Ye, D. A. Chenet, Y. Ye, K. O'Brien, J. C. Hone and X. Zhang, Science, 2014, 344, 488–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-T. Hsu, Z.-A. Zhao, L.-J. Li, C.-H. Chen, M.-H. Chiu, P.-S. Chang, Y.-C. Chou and W.-H. Chang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2951–2958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Titova, T. B. Hoang, H. E. Jackson, L. M. Smith, J. M. Yarrison-Rice, Y. Kim, H. J. Joyce, H. H. Tan and C. Jagadish, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 173126 CrossRef .
N. Kumar, S. Najmaei, Q. Cui, F. Ceballos, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou and H. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 161403 CrossRef .
L. M. Malard, T. V. Alencar, A. P. M. Barboza, K. F. Mak and A. M. de Paula, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 201401 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Rao, K. F. Mak, Y. You, S. Wang, C. R. Dean and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3329–3333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Janisch, Y. Wang, D. Ma, N. Mehta, A. L. Elías, N. Perea-López, M. Terrones, V. Crespi and Z. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5530 CAS .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yamaguchi, J.-C. Blancon, R. Kappera, S. Lei, S. Najmaei, B. D. Mangum, G. Gupta, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, J. J. Crochet and A. D. Mohite, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 840–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, S. X. Lim and C. H. Sow, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2015, 31, 616–629 Search PubMed .
M. C. Putnam, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 163116 CrossRef .
Y. Ahn, J. Dunning and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1367–1370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Graham, C. Miller, E. Oh and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 717–722 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gu, J. P. Romankiewicz, J. K. David, J. L. Lensch and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 948–952 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Allen, E. R. Hemesath and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1903–1908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ahn, A. W. Tsen, B. Kim, Y. W. Park and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3320–3323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Doh, K. N. Maher, L. Ouyang, C. L. Yu, H. Park and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4552–4556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. H. Baugher, H. O. H. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 262–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, S. Michaelis de Vasconcellos, R. Bratschitsch, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5846–5852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Choi, D. Qu, D. Lee, X. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and W. J. Yoo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9332–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, J. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, K. L. McGill, J. Park and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2014, 344, 1489–1492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, J. H. Lu, H. Liu, B. Liu, L. Gong, E. S. Tok, K. P. Loh and C. H. Sow, Small, 2015, 11, 1792–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, J.-K. Huang, L. Jin, Y.-T. Hsu, S. F. Yu, L.-J. Li and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1839 Search PubMed .
T. S. Sreeprasad, P. Nguyen, N. Kim and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4434–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, R. K. Kawakami, M. Gmitra and J. Fabian, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 794–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 494–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Jones, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, B. Zhao, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Barkelid, A. M. Goossens, V. E. Calado, H. S. J. van der Zant and G. A. Steele, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3187–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eginligil, B. Cao, Z. Wang, X. Shen, C. Cong, J. Shang, C. Soci and T. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7636 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuan, X. Wang, B. Lian, H. Zhang, X. Fang, B. Shen, G. Xu, Y. Xu, S.-C. Zhang, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 851–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, A. Carvalho, X. K. Chan, H. Liu, B. Liu, E. S. Tok, K. P. Loh, A. H. Castro Neto and C. H. Sow, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3524–3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Nan, X. Wu, W. Pan, W. Wang, J. Bai, W. Zhao, L. Sun, X. Wang and Z. Ni, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4202–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, J. Wu, A. Carvalho, A. Ziletti, H. Liu, J. Tan, Y. Chen, A. H. Castro Neto, B. Özyilmaz and C. H. Sow, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10411–10421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, S. Yang, W. Gao, Z. Liu, Y. Gong, L. Ma, G. Shi, S. Lei, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2013, 9, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Komsa, J. Kotakoski, S. Kurasch, O. Lehtinen, U. Kaiser and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 035503 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-J. Kwon, S. Kim, J. Jang and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 113111 CrossRef .
R. Ulbricht, E. Hendry, J. Shan, T. F. Heinz and M. Bonn, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2011, 83, 543–586 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Lu, S. H. Tang, C. H. Sow and X. Zhang, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 567–570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3112–3115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Junpeng Lu
	Dr Junpeng Lu received his BSc from Shandong University in 2009 and his PhD from the National University of Singapore in 2013. Now he is a research fellow at the Department of Physics, National University of Singapore. His current research interests are focused on the development of laser techniques for the characterization and modification of nanostructured materials, the synthesis and characterization of 1D and 2D semiconductors, and the design and optimization of nanoscale optoelectronic devices.

Hongwei Liu
	Dr Hongwei Liu is a Research Scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency of Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Her current research interests include the spectroscopic characterization of nanostructures. She received her BS degree from the School of Information Science and Technology from Shandong University in 2009 and her PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore in 2013. She was previously a Research Fellow at the National University of Singapore before joining IMRE.

Eng Soon Tok
	Dr Eng Soon Tok received his BSc (Honours in Chemistry and Physics, 1st Class) at the National University of Singapore and his PhD in Semiconductor Materials at Imperial College London, UK. He returned to join NUS in 1999. He is interested in surface and interface science related to the “Atomic Scale Engineering” of low-dimensional structures formed with Group IV and III–V semiconducting materials. His research emphasis is on elucidating growth processes (adsorption, desorption, nucleation, segregation, self-assembly), reaction kinetics, and energetics. He aims to understand the relationship between surface chemistry and physics with material properties at the atomic scale through his research.

Chorng-Haur Sow
	Dr Chorng Haur Sow is a Professor in the Department of Physics at the National University of Singapore. He obtained his BSc (1991) and MSc (1993) in Physics from the National University of Singapore, and his PhD (1998) from The University of Chicago. He was a postdoctoral fellow at Bell Laboratories from 1999 to 2000. His current research is focused on laser–matter interactions for low-dimensional materials, the development of laser pruning method for the micropatterning of nanostructured materials, studies of physical properties of nanostructured materials, and studies of 2D materials with a focus on the laser modification of these 2D materials en route to developing functional materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the atomic and electronic structures of a TMD monolayer. (a) Unit cell and (b) top view of the lattice structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. Position of the Femi level and the orbital filling of the d orbitals of (c) 1T and (d) 2H phase. The d orbitals split into dxy,xz,yz and dx2−y2,z2 bands in the 1T phase and dxz,yz, dxy,x2−y2 and dz2 in the 2H phase. These bands locate at the bonding σ and antibonding σ* states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated band structure of MoS2 with different layer numbers. Red dashed-lines indicate the position of the Fermi level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2011, American Physical Society. Evolution of PL emissions with layer numbers of (b) MoS2 and (c) WS2. (b) From left to right, PL spectra of MoS2 monolayer and bilayer, inset shows the quantum yield as a function of layer numbers; PL spectra of MoS2 with a thickness of 1–6 layers; band gap energy as a function of layer numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society. (c) From left to right, PL intensity of WS2 as a function of layer numbers, inset shows the PL spectra of the monolayer and bilayer; PL spectra of WS2 with a thickness of 1–4 layers and the bulk form; peak positions of I, A (radiative recombination of A excitons), and B (radiative recombination of B excitons) as a function of layer numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 
Eg(x) = EAC + (EAB − EAC − b)x + bx2	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Diagram of the band gaps of ternary alloyed semiconductors. (b) From left to right, A exciton peak at the PL spectra of ternary Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers; B exciton peak at the PL spectra of ternary Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers; peak position of A and B as a function of composition x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) From left to right, PL spectra of MoS2xSe2(1−x) monolayers with different compositions; peak position as a function of composition x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the growth process, (e) optical image, (f) TEM images, and (g) atomic model of the WSe2/MoS2 monolayer heterojunction. (h) From left to right, PL intensity and peak spatial modulation maps of WSe2/MoS2 monolayer heterojunctions. (i) PL spectra collected from nine points as labeled in (h). (d–i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Calculated band structures of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers. The blue dashed-lines indicate the splitting of the valence bands. The green arrows indicate the band nesting region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2013, American Physical Society. (b) PL spectra (colorized curves) and absorption spectra (gray color curves) of MX2 monolayers. (c) PL emission intensity maps of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of each optical vibration mode for the MX2 monolayer, bilayer, and bulk. The R, IR, and silent stands for Raman-active, infrared-active, and Raman and infrared inactive, respectively. The dashed lines indicate that the corresponding in-plate and out-of-plate modes of the bilayer and bulk merge into one in monolayer. (b) From left to right, Raman spectra of MoS2 with different thicknesses; frequency of A1g, E22g, and the frequency difference of these two modes as a function of 1/N, where N means the layer numbers. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) From left to right, Raman spectra of MoS2 with different thicknesses at a low frequency collected using (xx)z polarization; frequencies of the breathing modes and interlayer shear modes as a function of layer number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TRPL spectra of MoS2 monolayers measured at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2011, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) PL spectra of monolayer WSe2 measured at 50 K and excited using fluences of 0.8 and 12 μJ cm−2. (c) PL spectra of monolayer WSe2 at 10 K and excited with different fluences. The identified peaks are the same as (b). Only P0 peak changes with the fluences. (d) P0 emission strength as a function of exciton emission (X peak) strength. (e) TRPL spectra of different peaks labeled in (b). (b–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Differential reflection of WSe2 monolayer as a function of time delay and spatial position. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Differential reflection of MoS2 monolayer pumped using different fluences. The right axis is the density of excitons. The upper and bottom panels show the different time scale ranges. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (h) From left to right, density of excitons as a function of probe delay measured using different fluences (increasing from top to bottom); also, the quantity No/N(t) − 1 as a function of time delay. N is the exciton density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014, American Physical Society.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  (a) From left to right, optical image of a WS2 flake with domains with different thicknesses; PL map of the same flake; SHG image of the same flake; SHG intensity as a function of layer numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) From left to right, optical image of a CVD-grown monolayer MoS2 film; SHG image of the same film, where the grains and grain boundaries are clearly shown; crystal orientation image of the same film, where the crystal orientations are clearly identified; schematics of the crystal orientations of the regions labeled in the images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Optical images (upper panel) and SHG maps of stacked MoS2 bilayers with different stacking angle. (d) Angular dependence of the quantitative SHG effects (κ(θ)) of homo-stacked MoS2/MoS2 and hetero-stacked WSe2/MoS2 and WSe2/WS2 bilayers. κ(θ) is a defined dimensionless parameter as described in ref. 68. The histogram in the bottom right panel shows the SHG intensity of MoS2, WS2, and WSe2 monolayers. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Photocurrent map of a MoS2 monolayer device. Scale bar = 5 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) PL (upper panel) and photocurrent map of a MoS2 monolayer device. Greed dashed-lines indicate the positions of the electrodes. (c) Photocurrent line-scan profiles along the device channel at different applied biases (upper panel); photocurrent amplitude as a function of applied bias measured at the positions labeled in the upper panel. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Upper panel from left to right: schematic illustration of the stacking device architecture; optical image of the device; optical image of a device placed on the flexible substrate. Bottom panel, photocurrent maps of the stacking device for different applied biases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Photocurrent map and line-scan profile of an electrically tuned p–n junction WSe2 monolayer device measured without bias. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) I–V curves (with and without laser illumination) of an electrically tuned p–n junction WSe2 monolayer device under a PN configuration. Inset shows the curves under an NP configuration. (c) I–V curves of the device under a PN configuration with illuminations with different powers. Inset shows the generated power Pel, Pel =VdsIds. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the band diagram of the p–n junction within a MoS2 monolayer. (e) I–V curves of the chemically doping induced p–n junction MoS2 monolayer device under laser illuminations of different powers. Inset shows the zoom-in view to visualize the unidirectional characteristic. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The schematic diagram of ±K valleys in MX2 monolayer. (b) Schematic of the selection rules at the ±K valleys. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (c) PL spectra of MoS2 monolayer excited using circularly polarized laser. The red, blue and black curves correspond to the σ+, σ− polarizations and the net degree of polarization, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Diagram illustration of the VHE. (a and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Schematic of the photoinduced VHE working principle and optical image of a MoS2 monolayer device. (f) Hall voltage as a function of applied bias. (g) Angle-dependence of the anomalous Hall resistance. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 11  Optical images of MoS2 (a) before and (b) after laser thinning. (c) PL map of the same as shown in (b). The monolayer region created using a laser presents a higher PL intensity. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of a focused laser beam pruning setup. (e) Optical bright field and dark field images of a micropattern created on a MoS2 film. Scale bar = 20 μm. (f) Optical bright field and dark field images of a monolayer domain fabricated via laser thinning within a MoS2 four-layer film. Scale bar = 20 μm. (g) Raman and (h) PL spectra of the created monolayer (red curves) and pristine regions (black curves) of the MoS2 film. (d–h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Calculated band structures of a WSe2 monolayer with different defects. From left to right, pristine; selenium vacancy; oxygen adsorbed in the Se4 and W1 configurations; oxygen substitution of Se. (b) XPS scans of W and Se for pristine WSe2 monolayer; sample modified in an environment with a lower oxygen concentration; sample modified in an environment with a higher oxygen concentration (from left to right). (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of the Au NPs–MoS2 hybrids. Au NPs only assembled onto the laser modified regions. Bottom right panel is the AFM image of the Au NPs on a MoS2 film. (b) SEM images of the Au nanoparticles on MoS2 films with different thicknesses. i–v: MoS2 thicknesses are 1.34, 2.2, 3.5, 6.8, and 9.8 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) I–V curves and (b) photoresponse characteristics of the WSe2 monolayer device before and after laser modification. (c) Photocurrent map of the device after laser modification. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) I–V curves (with and without laser illumination) of the pristine MoS2 multilayer device and the device with a laser-created monolayer–multilayer junction. Inset shows the optical image of the device with a laser-created junction. (e) Photocurrent profile across the junction measured using SPCM. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Raman spectra of rhodamine 6G; methylene blue; rhodamine 101 (from left to right), respectively, on Si, MoS2/Si and Au NPs–MoS2 substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
