A single-site iron catalyst with preoccupied active centers that achieves selective ammonia electrosynthesis from nitrate   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00545F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00545F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3522-3531A single-site iron catalyst with preoccupied active centers that achieves selective ammonia electrosynthesis from nitrate†

        
          
            Panpan 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoyu 
            Jin
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Zhiwei 
            Fang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Guihua 
            Yu
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Science and Engineering Program, Texas Materials Institute, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. E-mail: ghyu@austin.utexas.edu
bCenter for Electrochemistry, Department of Chemistry, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. E-mail: zyjin@utexas.edu
Received 
      21st February 2021
    , Accepted 16th April 2021First published on 16th April 2021AbstractThe necessity to pursue sustainable ammonia (NH3) production with economic and environment-friendly technologies is growing with the global development aim of future fertilizer and renewable energy industries. Electrosynthesis of ammonia from nitrate reduction is encouraging for both environmental nitrogen pollution management and artificial nutrient recycling. However, it is fundamentally difficult to regulate the reaction pathways for efficient and selective ammonia production over competing reactions, e.g., the hydrogen evolution reaction, particularly under aqueous conditions. Enlightened by the unique and tunable local electronic structures, an iron-based single-atom catalyst is reported in this contribution. We demonstrate a polymer-hydrogel strategy for preparing nitrogen-coordinated Fe sites with uniform atomic dispersion on carbon. The catalyst exhibits a maximum NH3 yield rate of 2.75 mgNH3 h−1 cm−2 (ca. 30 molNH3 h−1 gFe−1) with nearly 100% faradaic efficiency. Furthermore, the catalytically active individual Fe site in the isolated atom state displays a twelve times higher turnover frequency than that in metallic Fe nanoparticles. Experimental evidence suggests that the single-site iron would experience a nitrate-preoccupied transition center, which prohibits water adsorption as the competitive reaction that generally exists for bulk catalysts. Theoretical insights into the localized structure further assist in better understanding and support of the high selectivity for NH3 achieved by the Fe single-atom catalyst.

Broader context
Renewable energy powered low-temperature electrification of ammonia production as an alternative to the Haber–Bosch process could eliminate the use of fossil fuels and the discharge of CO2 emissions. Direct electroreduction of dinitrogen has emerged as an attractive technique in recent years, while to date it typically only allows the production of limited quantities of NH3 with poor selectivity. Here an electrochemical strategy is introduced to efficiently produce NH3 from nitrate driven by an earth-abundant iron single-site catalyst. Nitrate, long considered to be a toxic contaminant in industrial and agriculture wastewater, is thus a valuable resource to be recovered and used to produce NH3. However, it is fundamentally difficult to control the reaction pathways to advance the yield and selectivity over competing reactions, such as hydrogen evolution, under aqueous conditions. This work found that Fe single atoms could experience a nitrate-preoccupation mechanism during catalysis, which effectively prohibited the competitive water adsorption.

Introduction
The manufacture of ammonia has seen rapid growth in tonnage globally and has become one of the most central production processes in the chemical industry in the past century.1 The invention of the Haber–Bosch (H–B) process, which converts atmospheric nitrogen gas (N2) and hydrogen (H2) to NH3, allows the booming development of modern agriculture with synthetic nitrogen fertilizers.2,3 In addition, ammonia has been regarded as a renewable energy carrier as a consequence of primary benefits, including its high energy density, carbon-free and safe nature, and cost-effective transportation.4,5 Despite the continued technological advancement of the H–B process, there is an urgent need to address the substantial energy consumption and huge greenhouse emission, which has been beyond any other industrial chemical-making reactions.6 Lately, increasing attention has been paid to an alternative approach, aqueous-based electrosynthesis of ammonia from N2 under ambient conditions.7 However, this process suffers from poor efficiency because of difficulties in breaking the triple bond of N2 and the suppression of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).8–11 Another oxidized form of nitrogen, nitrate (NO3−), ubiquitously exists in the environment as the result of anthropogenic forcing in soil and water pollution through crop fertilization. NO3− has long been of concern as a toxic contaminant, which is strictly controlled under the safe level in emissions.12 There has been a surge in expenditure for the management of nitrogen pollution worldwide over the past several decades.13,14 Though ammonia is considered as the upstream product of nitrate in industry, the electrochemical conversion of nitrate to NH3 has been receiving renewed interest since the past year.15,16 The basic motivation of converting nitrate to ammonia is to develop a sustainable route that permits nitrogen nutrient/fuel recovery from wastewater with clean water production. As such, one would expect the nitrogen in wastewater and soil to be no longer an environmental burden, but a resource for fertilizer recycling. The process is analogous to microbial dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium, which plays an important role in terrestrial and oceanic nitrogen cycle sustainability.17
Nitrate is in principle more reactive than dinitrogen for reduction to ammonia with a favorable thermodynamic potential (0.69 V vs. RHE) under alkaline conditions.18 However, the electrochemical nitrate reduction reaction (NitRR) involves eight-electron and nine-proton transfer, and thus markedly lowers the overall kinetic rate. This is particularly disadvantageous to operation under aqueous conditions on account of the HER competing for active sites. Besides, complicated products of the NitRR, possibly including NO2−, N2, and NH3, also raise major challenges for the goal of highly selective synthesis. To address these issues, single-atom catalysts (SACs) have emerged as a promising type of catalyst with much higher atomic utilization, distinct activity, and selectivity in comparison to bulk structures, showing great potential in effective nitrate-to-ammonia synthesis.19 Interestingly, the isolated site with a unique and tunable localized coordination state permits highly selective adsorption of a specific substance.20,21 While several previous publications have demonstrated this feature in catalyzing some reactions, research has yet to extend the potential capability of SACs to the NitRR.22–24 Besides, the understanding of their selectivity largely relied on theoretical modeling, which was adopted by most studies with a lack of experimental validation.19,25 Indeed, techniques traditionally employed to characterize ensemble materials are only able to provide limited information on SACs because of the less accessible active species. The complexity of the NitRR as stated also leaves a major challenge to obtain empirical evidence of the catalytic behavior of individual sites.
In nature, microbial nitrate and nitrite reductases have been recognized as the most efficient species for the reduction of nitrogen-containing oxyanions during anaerobic respiration.26,27 Ferredoxin-dependent nitrite reductase widely found in biological green algae and cyanobacteria can actively produce ammonia through the photosynthetic nitrate assimilation pathway.28 Inspired by the single-site of iron, here we report a densely populated Fe single-atom catalyst derived from a ferric acetylacetonate/polypyrrole hydrogel precursor, which demonstrated impressive selectivity and activity for the electrocatalytic NitRR under alkaline conditions. Zero-valence iron has been reported as an effective catalyst to remove nitrate in water for managing nitrogen pollution. However, the metallic surface suffers from problematic oxidation, which forms iron oxide with poor conductivity and activity. In the case of isolated Fe sites, the catalyst displays nearly 100% selectivity for producing ammonia and a turnover frequency that is over twelve times as high as that of Fe nanoparticles. Mechanistic insight reveals that preoccupation of nitrate on Fe(II)–Nx may account for the specificity of the nitrate-to-ammonia process, while the classical site-competition between the NitRR and HER was observed for the bulk Fe. The study, as an important example of recently featured SACs, contributes to a deeper understanding of intrinsic catalytic behavior on isolated sites.
Experimental
Preparation of SDS induced PPy (PPy-SDS) hydrogels
PPy-SDS hydrogels were synthesized using surfactants as soft templates.29 Specifically, solution A was prepared by dissolving pyrrole monomers (416 μL, 0.3 M) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, 0.58 g, 0.1 M) into deionized (DI) water (10 mL) with ultrasonic treatment. Then, ammonium peroxydisulfate (APS, 1.5 g, 0.3 M) was dissolved into DI water (10 mL), marked as solution B. After cooling to room temperature, solution A and solution B were quickly mixed and rested for at least 1 h to undergo sufficient polymerization. The as-prepared PPy-SDS hydrogels were purified using DI water to eliminate the unreacted residual chemicals.
Preparation of Fe-PPy single-atom catalysts and PPy-SDS derived carbon materials
The purified PPy-SDS hydrogels were directly added into iron(III) acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) ethanol solution (0.05 M, 40 mL) for 10 h stirring. Then, the Fe-PPy hydrogels were washed with ethanol several times and dried in a vacuum at 30 °C overnight. After being ground into uniform powders, the Fe-PPy hydrogels were heated to 800 °C at 10 °C min−1 and kept for 2 h in an argon flow. Then, the samples were naturally cooled to room temperature and further immersed in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution for 8 h to remove the aggregated clusters and particles. The samples were subsequently washed with DI water until reaching a neutral pH and dried in a vacuum at 80 °C. A second pyrolysis under the same conditions was carried out to reduce inactive Fe sites in the catalysts after the acid treatment30 and finally produce Fe-PPy SACs. PPy-SDS derived carbon materials (denoted as PPy) were obtained by directly calcinating the PPy-SDS hydrogels under the same conditions.
Characterization
A field emission Hitachi S5500 microscope (Japan) was employed to acquire scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) images were acquired with a JEOL NEOARM probe-corrected transmission electron microscope with aberration correction (Japan). X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (XAFS) analysis, including the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), was carried out at the BL14W1 beamline of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, China. All samples were characterized using Fe–K edge XANES and EXAFS in transmission mode under ambient conditions and Fe foil was used as a reference. The analysis of all XAFS data was performed using IFEFFIT. The total Fe contents of the samples were obtained via a THERMO VG PQ ExCell quadrupole based inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS, USA) with diluted samples dissolved in 2% HNO3 (ion concentration below 200 ppm). X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were acquired with a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD photoelectron spectrometer (UK). All binding energies were referenced to the C 1s peak at 284.6 eV to correct the possible shift.

57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy was performed with a Rh/57Co source at room temperature using α-Fe foil for the velocity calibration. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were recorded using a Thermo Evolution 300 spectrophotometer (USA). All 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectra were collected on a Varian VNMRS 600 MHz (USA) with water suppression.
Electrochemical measurements
The nitrate reduction reaction activities were studied on a BioLogic multi-channel potentiostat (VMP-3 model, France) equipped with a sealed H-shape electrochemical cell separated by a Nafion 115 membrane. Prior to all tests, the Nafion membrane was treated with H2O2 (5 wt%) aqueous solution at 80 °C for 1 h and ultrapure water at 80 °C for another 1 h, respectively. The catalyst ink was prepared by adding 4 mg catalyst powder to DI water–isopropyl alcohol (500 μL, 3:1 in v/v) and Nafion solution (20 μL, 5 wt%, Dupont, USA) with ultrasonic treatment. Fe nanoparticles (30–50 nm) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). The uniform catalyst ink was drop-cast on carbon paper (active area: 0.5 × 0.5 cm2) with a mass loading of ca. 240 μg cm−2 unless specified. The carbon paper with the loaded catalysts was directly used as the working electrode, while Ag/AgCl (1 M KCl) and a graphite rod were employed as the reference and counter electrode, respectively. Before the electrochemical measurements, the electrolytes (0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M KNO3) were degassed using an ultrapure argon flow to remove O2 and N2. Linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) were obtained from −1.3 to −1.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Chronoamperometry tests were carried out at given potentials for 30 min to evaluate the yield rate and faradaic efficiency of NH3. The potentials vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) were obtained by transforming the recorded potentials against Ag/AgCl based on the calibration equation expressed as ERHE = 0.059 × pH + EAg/AgCl + 0.23 = EAg/AgCl + 0.997. The Ag/AgCl electrode was verified to be stable before and after the electrolysis experiments via calibrating with a home-made hydrogen electrode. Note that the pH-dependent thermodynamic potential change (less than 1% based on the activity coefficient modification of OH−) caused by KNO3 is not included here.
Surface interrogation scanning electrochemical microscopy (SI-SECM) analysis was conducted on a CHI920C SECM bipotentiostat (CH Instruments, USA). The details are described in the ESI.†
Results and discussion
Preparation and characterization
SDS-induced polypyrrole hydrogels prepared through the soft template strategy were employed as ideal precursors of a carbon support for loading single Fe atoms due to the large surface area, derived conductive networks, and abundant dopants.31–33 Specifically, pyrrole monomers, sodium dodecyl sulfate, and DI water were thoroughly mixed to generate oil-in-water emulsion droplets as shown in Scheme 1. Then, sulfate groups on the droplet electrostatically adsorbed the dissolved pyrrole on its surface and formed crosslinked PPy nanoparticles with adding initiators. After rinsing, hierarchal PPy-SDS hydrogels were obtained by removing the soft templates. SDS micelles acting as crosslinkers greatly contribute to the PPy hydrogel formation (Scheme 1). As indicated in Fig. S2a and b (ESI†), the PPy-SDS hydrogels reveal a sheet-like porous structure from low-magnification SEM images. From the enlarged view in Fig. S2c (ESI†), the porous sheets are composed of interconnected nanoparticles with reduced size (ca. 40 nm). However, PPy nanoparticles synthesized without adding SDS show a much larger size (ca. 300 nm) and no gelation was found in this process. The SDS induced PPy hydrogels were proved to reveal improved porosity and an enlarged surface area.29 Thus, the PPy-SDS hydrogels could offer an increased capability to accommodate Fe(acac)3 molecules via stacking interactions between the acac-type chelate rings and polymer backbones.34 From Fig. S1b (ESI†), the discoloration of the Fe(acac)3 solution indicates the adsorption of Fe species in the PPy-SDS hydrogels. After carbonization, the Fe(III)-adsorbed PPy-SDS hydrogels were transformed to be Fe single-atom catalysts (Fe-PPy SACs) without obvious structural changes (Fig. 1a).
 Scheme 1  The synthetic route of the Fe-PPy SACs. 
 Fig. 1  The morphology and compositions of the Fe-PPy SACs. (a) SEM and (b) HAADF-STEM images of the Fe-PPy SACs. (c) The local EELS of the isolated Fe site. (d) Mössbauer spectrum of the Fe-PPy SACs. (e) XANES and (f) FT-EXAFS of the samples. WT plots of (g) Fe foil, (h) Fe2O3, and (i) the Fe-PPy SACs based on EXAFS. 
The HAADF-STEM image (Fig. 1b) with aberration correction reveals isolated bright spots with a diameter of ca. 0.1 nm, which is strong evidence for observing single metal atoms. To confirm the elemental composition of these spots, the electron energy loss spectrum (EELS) was collected at a local area of one atom marked with the red circle in Fig. 1b. Fig. 1c shows that iron, carbon and nitrogen elements are mainly distributed in the selected region. Moreover, XPS further confirms the presence of C, N, and Fe in the Fe-PPy SACs (Fig. S3a, ESI†). In addition, the oxidation state of Fe is +2 based on the binding energy of ca. 711 eV from Fig. S3b (ESI†).35,36 Binding energy of metal-nitrogen bond at ca. 399 eV (Fig. S3c, ESI†) exhibits the formation of Fe–N species.37 However, XPS analysis is far from satisfactory for confirming the fine structure of single atom materials because of the low content of Fe species (2.38 wt% from ICP-MS). Thus, the Mössbauer spectrum in Fig. 1d was measured to figure out the configuration of the iron species. As a result, the transmission profile of Fe sites in the Fe-PPy SACs is mainly deconvoluted as D1 and D2 doublets, suggesting that the Fe atom is likely to be coordinated by four nitrogen atoms. For the dominant D1 configuration, the Fe atom is slightly out of the planar surface, and two empty d bands are in the low spin state.38,39 The D1 configuration was proved to show better adsorption, such as of O2, as a result of the partially filled dz2 band.40
To detail more precise structural information, XAFS was conducted for determining the interaction between the Fe atom and other elements. Fig. 1e compares the Fe K-edge XANES of Fe foil, Fe2O3, and the Fe-PPy SACs. The Fe-PPy SACs show adsorption intensity at a rising-edge position of ca. 7120 eV, which is located between Fe foil and Fe2O3, suggesting that the oxidation state of iron is close to +2, consistent with the result from XPS. The obvious pre-edge peak at ca. 7113.5 eV for Fe-PPy is in good agreement with the typical Fe–N4 configuration.41 The Fourier transform of EXAFS (FT-EXAFS) in Fig. 1f confirms that the Fe atom is mainly coordinated with N atoms (Fe–N bond at 1.55 Å) rather than other Fe atoms (Fe–Fe bond at ca. 2.20 Å) in line with the atomically dispersed Fe sites of the Fe-PPy SACs.42 Based on Mössbauer and FT-EXAFS, the Fe–N4 model structure (Fig. S4a, ESI†) was proposed here as the single-site feature in the pristine catalyst and was subsequently employed to fit the FT-EXAFS spectrum. As indicated in Fig. S4b and c (ESI†), the EXAFS fitting curves can well fit with the experimental curves in k and R spaces. According to the fitting results in Table S1 (ESI†), the coordination number was obtained to be ca. 3.8 and the bonding length was ca. 1.980 nm. To better visualize the EXAFS spectra of Fe foil, Fe2O3, and the Fe-PPy SACs, wavelet transform (WT) plots (Fig. 1g–i) were processed based on the values of k and R spaces. The contour graph (below) is the projection of a three-dimensional (3D) surface (above). For the case of the Fe-PPy SACs, only one main peak belonging to the Fe–N bond is located at 4–6 Å−1 and 1–2 Å, showing a slight difference compared with the Fe–O bond in Fe2O3. Another strong peak of Fe2O3 is similar to metallic Fe, which is ascribed to the Fe–Fe shell in oxides.27
Electrocatalytic performance for the NitRR
LSV curves for the PPy derived carbon materials (denoted as PPy), Fe nanoparticles (Fe NPs, 30–50 nm), and Fe-PPy SACs were recorded and are shown in Fig. 2a. Before adding NO3−, we can clearly observe the catalytic current onset after ca. −0.3 V for the HER, while the current densities for all samples show a remarkable increase with adding 0.1 M NO3−. Moreover, a positive shift in the potentials is also noticed, particularly for the catalysts with Fe. A small reduction peak at ca. −0.2 V for the Fe-PPy SACs is due to the diffusion control of NO3− reduction. The charge transfer number (n) of this peak was determined to be ca. 8 via the relationship between the peak current and the scan rate under a 10 mM NO3− concentration (a diffusion-control condition) as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). It suggests the high efficiency of ammonia production at −0.2 V. To further confirm the NitRR ability at low overpotentials, current density–time (I–t) curves before and after introducing 0.1 M NO3− were recorded (the inset of Fig. 2b). Only the Fe-PPy SACs deliver an obvious cathodic current response at 0, 0.1, and 0.2 V upon adding nitrate, while no such signals have ever been seen in all trials under the same conditions for other samples.
 Fig. 2  Electrocatalytic activities of different catalysts for NO3− reduction to NH3. (a) LSVs of the Fe-PPy SACs, Fe NPs, and PPy with and without adding NO3− in the electrolytes. The yield rate of the three catalysts at (b) low and (c) high overpotentials. (d) Faradaic efficiency for ammonia. (e) The energy efficiency and yield rate of ammonia synthesis for the Fe-PPy SACs compared with reported catalysts (see details in Table S2, ESI†); the yield rate is normalized by the mass loading of the active species in the catalysts. 
The well-established indophenol blue spectrophotometric method was used to quantify the produced ammonia in the electrolytes, further determining the yield rate (Y.R.) and faradaic efficiency (F.E.) of NH3 (see calculation details in the ESI†). The reliability of this method and the origin of ammonia were confirmed via1H NMR (see more details in Fig. S8, ESI†). The results indicate that the produced ammonia is mainly from electrocatalytic NO3− reduction rather than interference from the environment and the catalysts themselves. To better illustrate the NitRR performance of the studied catalysts, yield rates at low and high overpotentials (Fig. 2b and c) were plotted, separately. For the Fe-PPy SACs, ammonia can be produced from 0.2 V with a Y.R. of ca. 1.3 μgNH3 h−1 cm−2 and an F.E. of ca. 20% (Fig. 2d). As a comparison, for PPy and Fe NPs, NH3 can be only found at potentials lower than 0 V. In all of the experiments, the Fe-PPy SACs outperform other samples and reach ca. 2.75 mgNH3 h−1 cm−2 at −0.7 V and nearly 100% in F.E. after −0.3 V. In contrast, PPy shows relatively inferior NitRR activity with less than 0.62 mgNH3 h−1 cm−2 and 47%, implying that the isolated Fe sites on the Fe-PPy SACs make a prominent contribution to the electrocatalytic nitrate reduction to ammonia. Though Fe NPs achieve a high Y.R. of ca. 3.0 mgNH3 h−1 cm−2, the corresponding F.E. is less than 80%. It is probably due to the intense competition from the HER on iron nanoparticles as we could observe some bubbles during electrolysis. No or very little gas was found, by comparison, on the Fe-PPy SACs at any given potential as demonstrated.
Other products of the NitRR typically involve complicated nitrogen-containing species, such as NO2−, N2, and NOx, accompanied by the HER as the competitive reaction at negative potentials. In this regard, it is necessary to determine the other possible products for better interpreting the superior selectivity of the single-atom catalysts. One impressive finding is that almost no H2 (F.E. < 2%) is detected for the Fe-PPy SACs (Fig. S9f, ESI†). In contrast, Fe NPs (Fig. S9g, ESI†) and PPy (Fig. S9h, ESI†) appear to experience noticeable H2 evolution starting from −0.3 V, reaching a highest F.E.(H2) of ca. 22% and ca. 35%, respectively. NO2− is an essential intermediate of the NitRR and is almost detectable for the three catalysts in all potential ranges, while F.E.(NO2−) is much less than F.E.(NH3). For the Fe-PPy SACs, F.E.(NO2−) is less than <10%, which is much lower than other reported electrocatalysts.15,25 F.E.(others) is defined as the F.E. of remaining products (e.g., N2, N2H4, and NO2) apart from F.E.(NH3), F.E.(NO2−), and F.E.(H2). Since the current densities at potentials above 0 V are too low (microamp level), F.E.(others) retains significant deviations from background signals, the double-layer charging current, and the instrumental offset, which would not contribute to any Faraday reactions. Consequently, the selectivity of ammonia for the NitRR is compared from −0.1 to −0.7 V (vs. RHE) in Fig. S10d (ESI†), where the Fe-PPy SACs reveal impressively selective NH3 production with over 80% at all potentials.
The durability of the Fe-PPy SACs was evaluated by the yield rate and faradaic efficiency of ammonia after cyclic electrolysis (Fig. S11a, ESI†), where only a slight fluctuation is observed within 10 cycles. Additionally, the accumulated charge through the catalyst results in a linear increase of the ammonia yield (Fig. S11b, ESI†), suggesting stable NH3 production with an increment of the duration of electrolysis. The STEM image after cyclic electrolysis (Fig. S12a, ESI†) indicates that isolated Fe atoms still exist in the carbon matrix. EELS (Fig. S12b, ESI†) and EDS (Fig. S12c and d, ESI†) images before and after electrolysis were obtained to confirm the stability of the Fe-PPy SACs. Moreover, the faradaic efficiency can remain at above 80% within a wide range of KNO3 concentration from 1 to 500 mM (Fig. S13, ESI†). For better interpreting the merits of the NitRR, we compared the energy efficiency (E.E.) and the yield rate of ammonia synthesis among five different ammonia synthesis protocols, including the H–B process (☆), enzymatic N2 fixation, the photocatalytic N2RR (□), the electrocatalytic N2RR (△), and the electrocatalytic NitRR (○). Though the H–B process has the highest E.E. of ca. 60%,43 it largely relies on fossil fuels, which leads to massive CO2 emission. The photocatalytic N2RR can produce ammonia directly through solar energy, while it shows a low E.E. of less than 1%.44 Electricity can be generated from green and sustainable energy, e.g. solar energy through photovoltaic cells.
Hence, the electrification of ammonia synthesis is promising and shows a high E.E. of up to 40% (the E.E. was obtained from the half-cell overpotential of the N2RR or NitRR, assuming 1.23 V for anodic water oxidation) even though it currently faces a relatively high energy consumption as the region marked in yellow shows. In particular, most electrocatalysts for the N2RR exhibit a low yield rate of up to 10 mmol h−1 g−1, which appears less competitive than the H–B process. By contrast, the electrocatalytic NitRR presents an impressively higher yield rate and even outperforms the conventional H–B process and enzymatic N2 fixation.45 Notably, the Fe-PPy SACs in this work are recorded with impressive performance for electrified NH3 production among the recent reports summarized in Table S2 (ESI†).
Identification of the preoccupied Fe(II)–Nx site during the NitRR
Several recent publications have demonstrated that SI-SECM, an in situ and quantitative technique, could afford insights into the kinetic behavior of redox species relevant to electrocatalysis.8,37,46,47 In this work, we employed SI-SECM to time-dependently analyze the site density of the single-site Fe moiety with a dynamic oxidation state toward nitrate reduction and water dissociation at given potentials. As shown in Fig. 3a, a catalyst powder ultramicroelectrode (UME) was prepared and served as the substrate electrode while a similar-sized Pt UME as the tip electrode was aligned above it with an inter-electrode distance of about 2 μm. The solution with KOH as the supporting electrolyte contained a redox mediator, ferrocenemethanol (Fc), which was subsequently oxidized into Fc+ at the tip during the titration. The tip-generated Fc+ can react with Fe(II) and Fe(0) in the catalysts, after which the instrument records positive feedback on the tip current. Previous literature reported that ammonia oxidation on a Pt surface would result in the dissolution of the electrode.48 Nonetheless, in the control experiment, we did not see such current feedback on the tip in the presence or absence of ammonia, where a pure Pt substrate with no Fe active sites was used.
 Fig. 3  SI-SECM for studying the NitRR mechanism. (a) Schematic of the SI-SECM setup for the titration of Fe sites. (b) Electrochemically active surface area (EASA)-normalized active site density and corresponding titration charges of the Fe-PPy SACs plotted against different potentials. The decay in the Fe(II) and Fe(0) active site concentrations with different delay time in solution (c) with and (d) without NO3−. (e) The proposed preoccupied NitRR mechanism for the single-site center and classical competitive mechanism for the bulk surface. (f) TOFs of the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs based on the result of SI-SECM for ammonia production. 

In situ spectroscopic techniques, such as XANES, have shown the capability to investigate the dynamic oxidation state and the localized structure of catalytically active sites during catalysis.38 Yet there are no studies that have developed nitrate-adsorbed single-site Fe–N–C models (both the adsorbates and active moiety contain nitrogen) to allow insight into the NitRR mechanism. The very fast reaction rate of the active intermediates would further complicate the detection and analysis. Additionally, these methods are not valid for providing quantitative site information and high time-resolution measurements of reaction kinetics. SI-SECM, a coulometric titration-based approach, permits one to precisely measure the amount of charge passed to a starting catalyst layer. Fig. 3b displays the charges recorded at the tip against different potentials, which were integrated from the current–time titration curves in Fig. S14c (ESI†). There are two obvious leaps, implying an oxidation state transition upon the corresponding potentials. In particular, the increase of the charge at the higher potential of 0.8–0.9 V is ascribed to the reduction of Fe(III)–Nx to Fe(II)–Nx, while the further transformation to Fe(0)–Nx with charges around two times larger than that of the first reduction process can be seen between 0 and −0.1 V. Here we did not specify the exact coordination number of the Fe–Nx structure as it might involve a dynamic environment under the redox conditions for the NitRR, which SI-SECM is unlikely to validate. The Fe(0)–Nx moiety in homogeneous molecules, e.g. iron(0) porphyrin, has been well known for efficiently catalyzing reduction reactions.49 Here, the formed Fe(0) transition state with nitrogen coordination is probably analogous to the molecular unit. However, the very short lifetime of the active intermediate in an aqueous solution challenges the identification of its real structure by conventional spectroscopies, and thus requires future great efforts. Fe site densities with the transition of different oxidation states are further plotted in Fig. 2b as per the number of charges recorded at the plateau assigned to Fe(II), assuming that the total site number is constant. The redox behavior of the Fe–Nx moiety shows more positive and narrower potential ranges for both Fe(III/II) and Fe(II/0) transformation than those of Fe NPs as displayed in Fig. S14d (ESI†). This suggests the feature of high reversibility of the single-site transition-metal catalysts. In contrast, bulk metals may suffer from surface passivation with poorly conductive oxide or hydroxide formation, resulting in lower electron mobility through surface layers. The iron chemistry obtained in this study highlighted that the unique thermodynamic and kinetic properties may allow Fe–Nx SACs to catalyze a variety of reduction reactions with intrinsically improved activity.
In aqueous electrocatalysis, the on-site competition between water and substrate molecules, such as NO3−, substantially challenges the selectivity over the target products. The practical potentials required on metallic heterogeneous electrocatalysts for the NitRR are typically more negative than those needed for the HER, causing low faradaic efficiencies for the ammonia yield. One interesting finding as discussed is that single-site iron can selectively reduce nitrate without observable hydrogen evolution from water dissociation. We then attempted to seek insight into the HER and NitRR on isolated and bulk Fe sites with SI-SECM, which can measure the kinetic behavior of two electrocatalytic reactions separately. Notably, NH3 was detected at a potential above 0 V for the Fe-PPy SACs (Fig. 2b), where the Fe site had yet to be reduced to the metallic state as per the titration result. However, no signals of nitrate reduction like this at such a positive potential were ever observed on Fe NPs. The time-delay titration of Fe(II) and Fe(0) at 0.2 V and −0.2 V was carried out in nitrate solution. Fig. 3c exhibits the relationship between the surface concentration of Fe sites, [Fe], and the delay time for the Fe-PPy SAC and Fe NPs. Specifically, both single-atom Fe(II)–Nx and Fe(0)–Nx were able to react with NO3− as a result of the decay in [Fe] with the delay time, after which the tip generated titrants. After linearly fitting the plots of ln[Fe] vs. delay time as a pseudo-first-order reaction, we obtained the reaction rates of NO3− binding with the Fe(II)–Nx and Fe(0)–Nx moieties as 0.057 and 1.24 s−1. By comparison, the Fe(II) transition state in Fe NPs shows no such catalytic activity, which is independent of the delay time. Instead, nitrate adsorption was only observed with Fe(0) formation on the surface with a much slower reaction rate of 0.01 s−1 than that of Fe–Nx. In the case of the HER, a similar SI-SECM experiment was conducted in nitrate free KOH solution. No signals of Fe(II) reacting with H2O for both the single-atom and nanoparticle catalysts have been ever seen in all independent trials, while Fe(0) can induce water dissociation with a reaction rate of 0.027 and 0.041 s−1 for the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs.
The activity of Fe(II)–Nx toward selective nitrate activation appears to be closely linked to the high faradaic efficiency of ammonia production, which can eliminate the domination of water upon reaching negative potentials. Namely, NO3− is likely to preoccupy most Fe sites in the Fe-PPy SACs at the Fe(II) transition state prior to the formation of Fe(0), the HER active center. In this case, even though nitrate-preoccupied Fe(II)–Nx experiences a further reduction to Fe(0)–Nx, the HER would be completely suppressed as a consequence of no or very few available adsorption sites for water molecules (Fig. 3e). Yet the behavior of the NitRR and HER on a bulk Fe surface, like nanoparticles, is evidently different from the preoccupied site mechanism as demonstrated for the Fe-PPy SACs. Oxidized Fe, such as Fe(II), is unlikely to react with either NO3− or water, which subsequently compete to be adsorbed on Fe(0) sites once the electrode potential can drive the reduction of Fe(II). This competition mechanism as displayed by Fe NPs is known for most aqueous electrocatalytic reactions whose potential overlaps with water splitting. In contrast to water, the much lower concentration and slower mass transport of target substances essentially prohibit their binding with active sites in catalysts. Instead, the isolated Fe center with an atomic distribution allows a preoccupied Fe(II)–Nx intermediate, where no water molecules are able to react with the catalyst. This suggests that the unique coordination environment of SACs may adequately regulate the electronic structure of transition-metal atoms, thus significantly promoting the activity and selectivity, which would be hardly achieved by bulk metals. Additionally, the proposed preoccupation mechanism would provide exciting opportunities to make possible highly selective electrocatalysis and electrosynthesis under full aqueous conditions.
The density of active sites that participate in the NitRR has been precisely quantified with SI-SECM for the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs as shown in Fig. 3b and Fig. S14d (ESI†), respectively. One would expect the turnover frequency (TOF, s−1) to be calculated in order to further reveal the intrinsic activity. Here, the TOF was estimated as per the site number and the yield rate of NH3 at different potentials (see details in the Experimental section). Fig. 3f demonstrates the histograms of TOF vs. potential for the number of ammonia molecules produced per second on one Fe site in the two as-prepared catalysts. Specifically, the Fe-PPy SACs display TOFs of 0.006–0.7 s−1 at potentials from 0 to −0.7 V while the Fe NPs can only deliver TOFs of 0.00015–0.06 s−1. The result indicates that at least a twelve times higher rate on individual active sites is exhibited by the isolated Fe atoms compared with that of the bulk Fe surface. The experimental data we obtained with the assistance of the SI-SECM technique hopefully clarify the extraordinary selectivity and activity of the single-atom transition-metal catalysts for a particularly challenging reaction, converting nitrate ions to ammonia in water solution.
Theoretical understanding of the electronic structures and NitRR mechanism
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were conducted to help the understanding of the fundamental reason for the highly selective nitrate reduction displayed by the Fe single-site catalyst. The charge density differences of Fe–N4 and Fe bulk surface models to simulate the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs after adsorbing NO3− are illustrated in Fig. 4a and b. For the isolated Fe atom, one O atom of NO3− is more likely to be adsorbed on the Fe site in the way of the end-on mode (the most favorable configuration) in accordance with the optimized geometric structure. However, two adjacent Fe atoms of Fe NPs appear to bond with two O atoms simultaneously in the form of the side-on mode. Besides, the sliced isosurface of the charge distribution implies that the iron site can serve as a nitrate-activated center in the Fe-PPy SACs because of the accumulated (red) electron between Fe and O atoms. The partial density of states (PDOS) of the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs after bonding NO3− was further compared in Fig. 4c. Due to the isolated Fe atom, Fe d reveals energy level splitting and the electron density near the Fermi level (Ef) is dramatically decreased. A discrete electronic level is a typical feature of single atom materials,50,51 which greatly affects the activation of the adsorbate. As a comparison, Fe d of Fe NPs is in a continuous state throughout Ef, suggesting a metallic feature. Adsorbed NO3− on the Fe-PPy SACs is more active than that on Fe NPs as a result of the pronounced hybridization between O p and Fe d as well as the obvious overlap of electron density at the antibonding orbitals.
 Fig. 4  DFT calculations. The optimized charge density difference of (a) the Fe-PPy SACs and (b) Fe NPs after adsorbing NO3−. (c) PDOS of Fe d and O p of NO3−-bonded to the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs. (d) Gibbs free-energy diagram of nitrate reduction to ammonia and water dissociation (the top right). 
The Gibbs free-energy diagram further provides more details about the NitRR mechanism. We compared the first step of the NitRR over Fe(II)–N4, Fe(0), and Fe(II)–OH sites as shown in Fig. S16 (ESI†). The calculated free energy implies that only Fe–N4 and metallic Fe can adsorb NO3− spontaneously, while Fe(II)–OH is incapable, which is in agreement with the results of SI-SECM. As such, the following steps of the NitRR were conducted with Fe–N4 and metallic Fe models. The geometric structure of each intermediate (at the bottom of Fig. 4d) along the NitRR steps was optimized prior to thermodynamic calculations.52 The element steps as considered in this work are based on the previously reported mechanism, where the deoxygenation of nitrate takes place before the protonation process.53,54 Specifically, NO3− is first adsorbed to give *NO3 with a dramatic energy decrease up to 5 eV for the Fe-PPy SACs, implying favorable NO3− adsorption. Then the N–O cleavage of *NO3 produces *NO2 and *NO step by step. Next, three continued protonation steps of *NO generate *NHO, *NH2O, and *NH2OH, respectively. The first protonation of *NO to *NHO requires overcoming a large energy barrier of 1.33 eV for Fe NPs, which suggests that the Fe single site can facilitate the formation of *NHO. Subsequently, *NH2OH goes through another N–O cleavage and hydrogenation to form *NH3. Finally, *NH3 desorbs from the catalyst surface to produce free NH3via consuming energy of 0.43 and 0.73 eV for the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs. Overall, the NitRR involves around nine elementary steps and various intermediates, which is much more complicated than the competing HER with only three steps under alkaline conditions (as indicated in the top right of Fig. 4d). However, the free energy difference (ΔG) of NO3− adsorption on the catalysts is much more negative than that of H2O adsorption by about one order of magnitude, suggesting that the Fe active site should be basically occupied by NO3− as we discussed in the previous section. For the Gibbs free-energy diagram of water dissociation, the desorption of *H is considered as the rate-determining step, where the larger ΔG (1.42 eV) observed on the Fe-PPy SACs indicates the inadequate HER activity compared with the iron bulk surface (ΔG = 0.81 eV). Namely, the isolated Fe sites are likely to outperform Fe nanoparticles with the more active adsorption of NO3−, the favorable formation of *NHO, and suppression of the competition from the HER.
Conclusions
Endowed with a unique coordination state and electronic structure, atomically dispersed iron sites on a carbon matrix demonstrated considerably improved activity and selectivity for nitrate electro-reduction to ammonia. In comparison to Fe NPs, the reported Fe-PPy SACs deliver a 12 times higher TOF with nearly 100% faradaic efficiency for NH3 production. The analysis of by-products in the presence of NO3− reveals that no obvious H2 gas was ever detected for the single-site Fe catalysts, while significant water dissociation was observed on both the bulk Fe surface (Fe NPs) and carbon support at negative potentials. An in situ mechanistic study found the exclusive existence of nitrate-preoccupied Fe(II)–Nx sites prior to Fe(0) formation, which can effectively eliminate the competing water adsorption under aqueous conditions. Given the fact that localized states of isolated transition-metal atoms are closely relevant to the redox and kinetic behaviors, one would expect regulating the coordination environment to allow single-atom catalysts with distinguished performance. The present findings also show promise of nitrogen pollution management through the electrocatalytic approach of using single-site iron catalysts, thus contributing in several ways to the future sustainability of fertilizer and renewable fuel recycling.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
G. Y. acknowledges funding support from the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award DE-SC0019019, and the Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award. We especially thank Prof. Allen J. Bard's group for the support with scanning electrochemical microscopy and constructive discussion.
References
U.S. Geological Survey, 2020, 116.
J. N. Galloway, A. R. Townsend, J. W. Erisman, M. Bekunda, Z. Cai, J. R. Freney, L. A. Martinelli, S. P. Seitzinger and M. A. Sutton, Science, 2008, 320, 889–892 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
A. Valera-Medina, H. Xiao, M. Owen-Jones, W. I. F. David and P. J. Bowen, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2018, 69, 63–102 CrossRef .
C. H. Christensen, T. Johannessen, R. Z. Sørensen and J. K. Nørskov, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 140–144 CrossRef CAS .

Institute for Industrial Productivity, http://www.iipinetwork.org/wp-content/Ietd/content/ammonia.html.
G. Zheng, J.-M. Yan and G. Yu, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900070 CrossRef .
P. Li, Z. Jin, Z. Fang and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22610–22616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, Y. Qian, C. Yan, Y. Ding, Y. Liu, G. Chen and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10246–10250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, L. Zhong, Y. Yao, D. Liu, Y. Kong, X. Jin, Z. Fang, W. Xu, C. Yan, K. N. Dinh, M. Shao, L. Song, G. Chen, S. Li, Q. Yan and G. Yu, Chem, 2020, 6, 2690–2702 CAS .
Z. Fang, D. Fernandez, N. Wang, Z. Bai and G. Yu, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 1570–1577 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kanter, O. Chodos, O. Nordland, M. Rutigliano and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Sustainability, 2020, 3, 956–963 CrossRef .
G. P. Robertson and P. M. Vitousek, Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour., 2009, 34, 97–125 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, E. A. Davidson, D. L. Mauzerall, T. D. Searchinger, P. Dumas and Y. Shen, Nature, 2015, 528, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
G.-F. Chen, Y. Yuan, H. Jiang, S.-Y. Ren, L.-X. Ding, L. Ma, T. Wu, J. Lu and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Van Langevelde, I. Katsounaros and M. T. M. Koper, Joule, 2021, 5, 290–294 CrossRef .
P. Lam and M. M. M. Kuypers, Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci., 2011, 3, 317–345 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. Xu, Z. Wang, L. Huang, J. Li, F. Li, J. Wicks, M. Luo, D.-H. Nam, C.-S. Tan, Y. Ding, J. Wu, Y. Lum, C.-T. Dinh, D. Sinton, G. Zheng and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5702–5708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Niu, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Wan, C. Shao and Y. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2008533 Search PubMed .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11900–11955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kaiser, Z. Chen, D. Faust Akl, S. Mitchell and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11703–11809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Gao, Z. Luo, X. Wang, R. Zeng, A. Li, H. Li, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, C. Ma, R. Si and J. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 14036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin and A. J. Bard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 12651–12656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, Q. Chen, P. Liao, W. Duan, S. Liang, Z. Yan and C. Feng, Small, 2020, 16, 2004526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, G. Wisedchaisri and T. Gonen, Nature, 2013, 497, 647–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Vega and H. Kamin, J. Biol. Chem., 1977, 252, 896–909 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirasawa, J. N. Tripathy, F. Sommer, R. Somasundaram, J.-S. Chung, M. Nestander, M. Kruthiventi, M. Zabet-Moghaddam, M. K. Johnson, S. S. Merchant, J. P. Allen and D. B. Knaff, Photosynth. Res., 2010, 103, 67–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bo, X. Luo, H. Huang, L. Li, W. Lai and X. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 407, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, P. Li and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Bae, Z. Fang, P. Li, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642–7707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Chen, Z. Jin, P. Li and D. Xiao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1140–1163 RSC .
D. P. Malenov and S. D. Zarić, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 419, 213338 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Z. Jin and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3274–3283 RSC .
Z. Jin, P. Li, Y. Jin and D. Xiao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 160–167 CrossRef .
P. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Qian, Z. Fang, D. Xiao and G. Yu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1793–1802 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jia, N. Ramaswamy, H. Hafiz, U. Tylus, K. Strickland, G. Wu, B. Barbiellini, A. Bansil, E. F. Holby, P. Zelenay and S. Mukerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12496–12505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Sa, J. H. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Electrochem. Sci. Technol., 2017, 8, 169–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen, B. Halevi, S. McKinney, G. McCool, C. Ma, X. Yuan, Z.-F. Ma, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2418–2432 RSC .
N. Zhang, T. Zhou, M. Chen, H. Feng, R. Yuan, C. A. Zhong, W. Yan, Y. Tian, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 111–118 RSC .
N. Zhang, T. Zhou, J. Ge, Y. Lin, Z. Du, C. A. Zhong, W. Wang, Q. Jiao, R. Yuan, Y. Tian, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Matter, 2020, 3, 509–521 CrossRef .
M. Kitano, Y. Inoue, M. Sasase, K. Kishida, Y. Kobayashi, K. Nishiyama, T. Tada, S. Kawamura, T. Yokoyama, M. Hara and H. Hosono, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2648–2652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-W. Guo, S.-M. Chen, H.-J. Wang, Z.-M. Zhang, H. Lin, L. Song and T.-B. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19831–19837 RSC .
F. Simpson and R. Burris, Science, 1984, 224, 1095–1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Qian, Z. Fang, D. Xiao and G. Yu, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 78–86 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin and A. J. Bard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 794–799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, W. Yang, W. H. Lee, M. H. Han, J. Moon, C. Jeon, D. Kim, S. G. Ji, K. H. Chae, K.-S. Lee, J. Seo, H.-S. Oh, H. Kim and C. H. Choi, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11674–11684 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bhugun, D. Lexa and J.-M. Savéant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 3982–3983 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boronat, A. Leyva-Pérez and A. Corma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 834–844 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Liu, M. Xia, Y. Tang, F. Gao, Y. Hou, J. Tse and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27175–27185 RSC .
S. Garcia-Segura, M. Lanzarini-Lopes, K. Hristovski and P. Westerhoff, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 546–568 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Zhou, R. Jia, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5350–5354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jia, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3533–3540 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SI-SECM tests details; calculation and computational details; SEM images; XPS spectra; fitting results of EXAFS; calibration curves and quantification of products; 1H NMR and 15N labelling tests; electrochemical measurements; SI-SECM analysis. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee00545fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Renewable energy powered low-temperature electrification of ammonia production as an alternative to the Haber–Bosch process could eliminate the use of fossil fuels and the discharge of CO2 emissions. Direct electroreduction of dinitrogen has emerged as an attractive technique in recent years, while to date it typically only allows the production of limited quantities of NH3 with poor selectivity. Here an electrochemical strategy is introduced to efficiently produce NH3 from nitrate driven by an earth-abundant iron single-site catalyst. Nitrate, long considered to be a toxic contaminant in industrial and agriculture wastewater, is thus a valuable resource to be recovered and used to produce NH3. However, it is fundamentally difficult to control the reaction pathways to advance the yield and selectivity over competing reactions, such as hydrogen evolution, under aqueous conditions. This work found that Fe single atoms could experience a nitrate-preoccupation mechanism during catalysis, which effectively prohibited the competitive water adsorption.


 	Scheme 1  The synthetic route of the Fe-PPy SACs.	 

 	Fig. 1  The morphology and compositions of the Fe-PPy SACs. (a) SEM and (b) HAADF-STEM images of the Fe-PPy SACs. (c) The local EELS of the isolated Fe site. (d) Mössbauer spectrum of the Fe-PPy SACs. (e) XANES and (f) FT-EXAFS of the samples. WT plots of (g) Fe foil, (h) Fe2O3, and (i) the Fe-PPy SACs based on EXAFS.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrocatalytic activities of different catalysts for NO3− reduction to NH3. (a) LSVs of the Fe-PPy SACs, Fe NPs, and PPy with and without adding NO3− in the electrolytes. The yield rate of the three catalysts at (b) low and (c) high overpotentials. (d) Faradaic efficiency for ammonia. (e) The energy efficiency and yield rate of ammonia synthesis for the Fe-PPy SACs compared with reported catalysts (see details in Table S2, ESI†); the yield rate is normalized by the mass loading of the active species in the catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 3  SI-SECM for studying the NitRR mechanism. (a) Schematic of the SI-SECM setup for the titration of Fe sites. (b) Electrochemically active surface area (EASA)-normalized active site density and corresponding titration charges of the Fe-PPy SACs plotted against different potentials. The decay in the Fe(II) and Fe(0) active site concentrations with different delay time in solution (c) with and (d) without NO3−. (e) The proposed preoccupied NitRR mechanism for the single-site center and classical competitive mechanism for the bulk surface. (f) TOFs of the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs based on the result of SI-SECM for ammonia production.	 

 	Fig. 4  DFT calculations. The optimized charge density difference of (a) the Fe-PPy SACs and (b) Fe NPs after adsorbing NO3−. (c) PDOS of Fe d and O p of NO3−-bonded to the Fe-PPy SACs and Fe NPs. (d) Gibbs free-energy diagram of nitrate reduction to ammonia and water dissociation (the top right).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SI-SECM tests details; calculation and computational details; SEM images; XPS spectra; fitting results of EXAFS; calibration curves and quantification of products; 1H NMR and 15N labelling tests; electrochemical measurements; SI-SECM analysis. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee00545f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
