First-row transition metal-based materials derived from bimetallic metal–organic frameworks as highly efficient electrocatalysts for electrochemical w ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03614A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03614A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3119-3151First-row transition metal-based materials derived from bimetallic metal–organic frameworks as highly efficient electrocatalysts for electrochemical water splitting

        
          
            Soheila 
            Sanati
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ali 
            Morsali
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Hermenegildo 
            García
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, 14115 175, Iran. E-mail: morsali_a@modares.ac.ir
bInstituto Universitario de Tecnología Química, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones CientíficaS, Universitat Politècnica de València, València, 46022, Spain. E-mail: hgarcia@qim.upv.es
Received 
      19th November 2021
    , Accepted 31st May 2022First published on 2nd June 2022AbstractElectrochemical water splitting is a mature technology for hydrogen generation. Numerous studies have focused on the development of highly efficient electrocatalysts to produce hydrogen and oxygen from water electrolysis through the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), respectively. Up to now, the most effective electrocatalysts for electrochemical water splitting are still materials based on Pt, Ru and Ir. Although these materials exhibit very good performance, their massive utilization is limited due to the scarce resources. Therefore, the search for suitable, efficient, inexpensive, stable and abundant materials for electrochemical water splitting is imperative for the large-scale, worldwide, commercial implementation of electrolytic hydrogen generation. Abundant first-row transition metal-based electrocatalysts for water splitting are considered as promising alternatives to those based on noble metals. It has been found that materials combining two metals exhibit enhanced electrocatalytic activity. It is the focus of this review to show that efficient first-row bimetallic materials can be obtained from the corresponding metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) as precursors. The present review describes recent advances in bimetallic electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic MOFs containing first row transition metals, including bimetallic oxides, bimetallic chalcogenides, bimetallic nitrides and their composites. Challenges in this area and future research directions are highlighted.

Broader context
There is an ongoing shift from fossil fuels to alternative, renewable sources with zero CO2 footprints. In this context, green electricity from hydraulics, wind turbines, solar panels, tides, etc. appears to be a viable possibility that can be deployed at the massive scale needed to provide the enormous required energy in the range of TW. However, implementation of green electricity technology, in contrast to electricity from CO2 emitting power plants, requires vast energy storage systems to accumulate energy at moments of production surplus to be consumed during high-demand peaks. One appealing possibility is to store renewable electricity in chemical fuels (power-to-fuels), hydrogen obtained through water electrolysis being among the best options. To be efficient, water electrolysis requires special electrodes containing catalysts to decrease the overpotential for fast hydrogen evolution and increase electrocatalytic efficiency. The present review summarizes the state of the art on one of the most efficient electrocatalyst classes prepared using bimetallic MOFs as precursors. While electrolysis has been traditionally performed using noble metal electrodes, large scale water electrolysis is not possible based on precious metals and efficient alternative electrocatalysts are urgently needed. In this context, bimetallic materials derived from MOFs have considerable advantages in terms of availability, affordability, efficiency and stability.

1. Introduction
Global warming and climatic crisis have to be solved by the development of clean and sustainable energy alternatives to fossil fuels.1–6 Thanks to its huge energy density, abundance, and lack of negative environmental impact, hydrogen is considered as a clean fuel. Despite this promising perspective, a green, sustainable, and efficient method for hydrogen large-scale production is still highly requested. Currently, industrial methods of hydrogen production (e.g. steam reforming) are based on the use of hydrocarbons and emit greenhouse CO2 gas. As an alternative, electrochemical water splitting is a viable technology that can produce high purity hydrogen under mild conditions on a large scale. Hydrogen generation from water could be achieved using green electricity from renewable resources (like hydraulics, wind, tidal, and solar). In a certain way, hydrogen production can be considered as a system for renewable electrical energy storage in a chemical compound.
Electrochemical water splitting involves two half-reactions: the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). From the theoretical point of view, the minimum decomposition voltage for water splitting is 1.23 V; however, an overpotential (η) is required to overcome the kinetic barrier to generate hydrogen at a sufficiently high rate in real electrolytic experiments. Overpotentials increase the energy consumption and, as a result, diminish the efficiency and economic competitiveness of electrochemical water splitting. By catalyzing electrochemical reactions, electrocatalysts are able to minimize the overpotential, increasing the current density at a given voltage. For this reason, an efficient electrocatalyst with high catalytic performance and stability is highly demanded, especially considering the real opportunity of immediate massive water electrolysis implementation. Today, noble metal-based electrocatalysts are used for this purpose (Pt-based catalysts for the HER and catalysts based on Ir or Ru for the OER).7–9 Obviously, the commercial use of these materials is restricted because of their high cost and scarcity. Thus, the design of inexpensive metal catalysts for water splitting is a topic of considerable importance, and in the last few years, there has been much progress in the development of such electrocatalysts from earth-abundant metals for water splitting.10–12
In general, electrocatalysts behave differently for the HER and OER and their efficiency strongly depends on the electrolyte. The integration of two types of electrocatalysts in a single medium for the HER and OER often results in lower performance due to the mismatch of the optimal pH domains at which these electrocatalysts maintain their stability and activity. Currently, existing electrocatalysts show a high OER, but a low HER performance in alkaline solution. The activity is reversed in an acidic environment that is more favorable to the HER due to the lower potential under these conditions. As a consequence, high-performance bifunctional electrocatalysts capable of simultaneous catalysis of both the HER and OER under the same conditions are of particular significance and it still remains an unsatisfactorily solved issue. These bifunctional electrocatalysts can greatly facilitate the production, while causing a significant decline in costs.13–15
Bimetallic materials play a crucial role in many areas related to electrical energy storage and conversion, such as in fuel cells, supercapacitors, metal–air batteries and water splitting.16–20 In comparison to their monometallic counterparts, bimetallic materials usually perform better as a consequence of synergistic effects between the two metals, meaning that the electrochemical performance is better than any of the two components independently.21–23 Bimetallic catalysts offer much more possibilities for improving the catalytic performance than single metals, since there are many more combinations and the performance generally varies depending on the atomic ratio of the two metals. Among the essential factors, one of the most important parameters is the tuning of surface electron density in the bimetallic catalyst.24–26 Another key factor regarding the electrochemical activity is the control of the catalyst morphology, increasing the surface area exposed to the catalysts or inducing a preferential facet exposure.27,28 The latter is mainly attributable to the newly formed bimetallic structure of catalysts, which can lead to strain and surface tension effects that alter the electronic and catalytic properties of the material.29,30
2. Metal–organic frameworks
As a novel class of porous substances, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are the self-assembled network of metal ions and organic ligands through coordination and coulombic bonds.31–34 MOFs have attracted the attention of researchers because the wide range of compositions and structures makes them appropriate choices for applications such as sensing, luminescence, catalysis, photocatalysis, energy storage, drug delivery and imaging, adsorption and separation, gas storage, and so on.35–41 These materials provide an ideal structural support for preparing advanced electrocatalysts with unique properties, such as large surface area, high porosity and flexible chemical structures.42–45 However, the poor electrical conductivity, large crystal size and low structural stability of MOFs have severely limited so far their direct application as electrocatalysts. Nonetheless, MOFs can be transformed into derived materials with high electrocatalytic activity, particularly in the case of bimetallic MOFs.
It has recently been proved that the partial substitution of metal ions in MOFs with a second metal with a similar ionic radius and properties not only preserves the original crystal structure, but also may enhance the performance of the resulting bimetallic material derived therefrom.46–48 Thus, materials derived from bimetallic MOFs with a desired structure and chemical composition could be a viable type of low-cost noble metal-free electrocatalyst with comparable or even superior performance respect to noble metal-containing benchmark electrocatalysts.49,50
Some tunable MOF properties of importance in the field of electrocatalysis that are inherited by the resulting derived materials include porosity and high surface area, and processability. In addition, these materials can be obtained in large quantities. Fig. 1 illustrates these properties. One of the most salient properties of MOFs is their high surface area and porous structure. It is confirmed that the high surface area is an important parameter to enhance the performance of electrocatalysts as macropores or mesopores enhance the density of open active centers on the electrocatalyst surface and favor their accessibility. After the thermal treatment process, the MOF-derived materials can inherit special properties, particularly unique particle morphology, higher surface area and porosity, combined with higher stability that altogether can be responsible for the better electrochemical performance of MOF derived materials. For example, after pyrolysis of a layered Co-naphthalene dicarboxylate MOF grown on Cu-foil, Co3O4 nanoparticles with a strong interaction with a carbon nanowire matrix are obtained. The large surface area, improved charge transfer, mass transport and structural stability, together with easy release of oxygen bubbles of this Co3O4/carbon nanowire electrocatalyst, lead to a remarkable OER and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) performance in alkaline electrolytes.51
 Fig. 1  Tunable MOF properties for electrochemical applications. 
The ratio and the type of metals in bimetallic-MOFs are crucial to tuning the electrochemical performance of the MOF derived materials to meet the requirements of the electrochemical process. Materials having two or more metals offer much more flexibility to adapt the potential of the active site to the optimal value for a process than analogous electrocatalysts having a single metal. By tuning the Zn/Co ratio in a ZnCo imidazolate MOF, the structural properties such as graphitization degree and the surface area of the resulting carbon can be rationally adjusted.52 In this ZnCo imidazolate, the role of volatile Zn is to create porosity, while metallic Co nanoparticles remain on the N-doped graphitic carbon formed in the pyrolysis from imidazolate. The graphitic carbon residue can inherit the polyhedral shape of the ZIF-8 precursor.53 The resulting Co/N-doped carbon exhibited great ORR behavior because of the high surface area, uniform doping of Co/N and high degree of graphitization.
The framework topology and pore size can be modulated by selecting the metal nodes having adequate coordination directions and linkers with appropriate geometry. MOFs that have the same structural topology are known as isoreticular metal–organic frameworks (IRMOFs). MOFs in this class differ from each other in the length and substituents of the linker or/and the metal composition. Although the increase in the length of organic linkers increases the corresponding pore volume, if the pore size is too large it could result in the interpenetration of networks into each other, thus resulting in a low free internal volume.54,55 Control of the internal polarity and pore size in isometric MOFs can determine the structural and chemical factors of the derived material that are going to be crucial for the activity as an electrocatalyst. In hierarchical MOFs, mesopores and micropores coexist and favor intracrystalline molecular diffusion. A large surface area is desirable for performing catalytic reactions. The pore tunability and large surface area are very favorable properties for electrochemical applications.
A large variety of MOFs can be synthesized by selecting among a wide range of metal nodes and linkers. Also, post-synthetic modification can exchange or remove metal nodes and linkers, enlarging further the possible compositions and structures. Furthermore, the surface of MOFs can be controlled by the size and morphology of the crystallites and crystallographic phases.56 Such flexibility in design and synthesis are the strengths of MOFs that additionally can act as hosts incorporating guests, thus expanding the diversity of advanced composite materials that can be produced.57,58
Ion migration and electron transfer are two important elementary processes in electrochemical reactions. High internal electrical resistance generates high overpotential and diminishes considerably the efficiency of electrochemical reactions. Most MOFs are electrically insulating materials due to metal–oxygen bonds. Many research efforts have been made to overcome this drawback by modulating the electronic structure, including “through-bond” electron conduction strategies, and by improving the electronic conductivity, including “through-space” approaches, via π–π interactions.59–61 However, up to now, the inadequate electrical conductivity of MOFs accompanied by their large crystallite size (typically microns) has hampered their direct use as electrocatalysts. Efforts should be made at overcoming this limitation. In this sense, it could be that the special morphology of 2D MOFs characterized by a high aspect ratio and small thickness of only a few nanometers can aid in overcoming this limitation, opening the direct use of MOFs in electrocatalysis.
Regarding ionic conductivity, there are various strategies for improving the ion and proton conductivity of MOFs, one of which involves incorporating ionic guests to introduce sites that facilitate ion exchange and open an ion conduction mechanism.62–64 Proton conductivity has been studied in this class of materials because of the growing interest in membranes for hydrogen fuel cells. Due to the demand for solid electrolytes in energy storage devices, it is predicted that ion-conducting MOFs will attract increasing research attention. The tunability of composition and structural, electronic and mechanical properties of MOFs could make it possible to achieve the goals of electrical and ionic conductivity, considering the vast opportunities in the synthesis and post-synthetic modification offered by MOFs.
Another point to be considered regarding MOF synthesis is their processability and scalability. These aspects are important and necessary factors for moving from laboratory scale to commercial applications. In terms of scalability, some companies have produced these materials on a large scale.65–67 These companies employed electrochemistry, solvent-free mechanochemistry and flow chemistry methods to prepare different MOFs. In the mechanochemical method, only a physical mixture of the linker and metal salt is used, producing minimal chemical waste or without the requirement of a solvent or heating. Another method for scalability of MOF synthesis is microwave-irradiation, in which MOFs are rapidly synthesized from precursor solutions.68,69 Electrochemical syntheses provide uniform and rapid growth of MOFs on conductive substrates by in situ generation of metal ions that react as they are formed with the organic linker present in the solution.70 The use of different substrates and layer thickness control may allow electrochemical application. The facile synthesis of MOFs, their flexible composition and variable structure, the low cost and availability of organic linkers, the possibility of using abundant transition metals, accompanied by their large surface area and porosity, favorable reagent diffusion, the high percentage of metal sites, and excellent chemical and thermal stability have made MOFs among the preferred adsorbents and most versatile solid catalysts. One logical extension would be to consider MOFs also promising candidates as electrocatalysts, but as previously commented this has not still been possible in spite of the multiple redox centers that MOF lattice may contain.
Besides MOFs of a single metal, the preparation of mixed metal MOFs in a wide range of atomic ratios has become routine in many cases. Bimetallic MOFs offer the possibility of adjusting the redox pair potential and the structure of the active sites as well as defects to the requirements of an electrochemical process. This flexibility can be used to adapt the structure of the redox sites with improved catalytic properties that is crucial in electrocatalysis, since they could lead to a diminution of overpotentials, resulting in an improvement in HER and OER processes.49,71,72
It has been possible to prepare MOFs of virtually all transition metals. Particularly important are MOFs based on the first-row, earth-abundant transition metals. First row transition metals are less expensive and more abundant in comparison with metals such as Ru, Rh, Ir, and Pt. Therefore, some first-row metals are generally considered as advantageous elements from the point of view of resource availability. Besides higher natural abundance than heavier 4d and 5d metals, 3d metals have lesser toxicity in comparison with heavier metals, which make the use of these metals more practical and advisable in terms of environmental benignity and green chemistry principles.73
As it will be discussed below, MOFs based on metals like Ni, Fe, Co, and Cu have attracted special attention as precursors in various novel applications related to renewable electricity, including electrocatalysis. Moreover, a large number of different MOFs containing Cr, Ni, Co, Fe, Cu and Zn metals have been synthesized now, making use of the rich coordination chemistry of these transition metals with organic ligands.74,75 Among them, several Fe-based MOFs exhibit a considerable thermal and chemical structural stability and have been widely used in catalysis. Another earth-abundant 3d transition metal is Cu. Owing to its ability to coordinate with hydroxyl and its ability to break peroxy bonds, MOFs with this metal exhibit significant activity in oxidation reactions and MOF-derived materials are promising as stable electrocatalysts particularly in the OER process. These unique catalytic properties have made this metal widely utilized in electrochemical water splitting. Ni is among the most active transition metal with electrocatalytic activity for water splitting. Ni-containing MOFs in particular are of great interest when using water as the medium. Ni-MOFs exhibit significant redox activity and strong oxidizing potential. Ni-MOFs also show notable catalytic activity in alkaline media. Co is another transition element with versatile applications in electrocatalysis. Co has various oxidation states and the oxidation potential of the Co(III)/Co(II) pair is close to that of the required value for water oxidation (E = 1.23 V vs. RHE).76–79
3. Bimetallic MOF synthetic methods
Bimetallic MOFs are synthesized using many protocols. This section will introduce them shortly. Crystal phase characterization of bimetallic MOFs can be performed using appropriate techniques such as energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDAX) and X-ray diffraction. Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) and atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) are employed to calculate the metal composition. Also, the coordination sphere around metals can be determined using X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS). Deep characterization of bimetallic MOFs requires the combination of the previous techniques and high resolution electron microscopy.80,81
3.1 Direct synthesis
Bimetallic MOFs can be synthesized by mixing metal salts through a solvothermal process. According to the formation kinetics of bimetallic MOFs from different metal ions, the presence of two different metal salts is not enough to guarantee the formation of bimetallic MOFs. Hence, in order to prevent the formation of mixed phases and achieve a defined structure, it is necessary to control parameters such as solubility, molar ratios of metal ions and pH. The synthesis of pre-defined secondary building units (SBUs) as metal node precursors appears to be a promising strategy for the preparation of bimetallic MOFs with a defined composition. Thus, in order to obtain the mixed metal MIL-127, Serre et al. prepared FeIII2MIIO(H2O)2[O2C-CH3]6-nH2O (M: Co or Ni) as the building block and used it to synthesize bimetallic MOFs (Fig. 2a). EDAX analysis confirmed a 2:1 ratio of Fe(III)/metal(II).82
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation approach to produce bimetallic MIL-127 starting from preformed SBUs. Copyright© 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesized ZIF-71 by post-synthetic Mn(II) exchange. Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Post-synthetic cation exchange in MIL-53. Copyright© 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Template-directed approach for the heterogeneous phase preparation of bimetallic MOF-74 structures. Copyright© 2017, Wiley-VCH. (e) Zn-HKUST-1 and Zn-PMOF-2 with different framework flexibilities. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of Co20Zn80-ZIF, Co50Zn50-ZIF, and Co80Zn20-ZIF. Copyright© 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
3.2 Post-synthetic modification
If bimetallic MOFs cannot be synthesized using a direct method, a post-synthetic metal ion exchange method can be utilized.83 Factors like metal ion valence, SBU environment, MOF lattice and solvent affect the exchange process efficiency. If metals in SBUs have large coordination numbers, then, an exchange process is observed. Because of a higher electronegativity and the formation of more stable covalent bonds, Cu2+ usually tends to be exchanged with transition metals such as Mn2+ and Zn2+. The exchange process is easier for SBUs of those MOFs that have a more flexible network. The exchange process of Fe2+, Li+, Zn2+ and Co2+ in Mn3[(Mn4Cl)3(BTT)8(CH3OH)10]2(1-Mn2+; BTT: 1,3,5 benzenetristetrazolate) in methanol suspension has been reported by Long's group. The degree of exchange was determined using inductively coupled plasma-atomic absorption (ICP-AA). The exchange process was predicted to mostly occur in MOF structures that do not have high stability, but there are reports observing this process in robust MOF structures. For example, Zn2+ exchange by Mn2+ in ZIF-71(Zn) to obtain a bimetallic ZIF-71(Zn, Mn) was reported by Cohen's group (Fig. 2b).84 The metal exchange process can also happen between two solid MOFs, as Cohen et al. reported a solid–solid exchange process (Fig. 2c).85
3.3 Template synthesis
A template method can be used to properly control the composition of metal ions in bimetallic MOFs. This method is illustrated in Fig. 2d for the synthesis of bimetallic MOF-74 starting from an insoluble Zn(H2O)2(dcbcc)n solid as the template.86 The result is that the molar ratio of the two metals in the MOF is equal to 1:1 in the final MOF regardless of their initial value and they have uniform distributions. Additionally, hollow bimetallic MOFs can be synthesized via this synthesis method. These MOFs have advantages such as high active sites and easy mass transport. This synthesis method can be performed in two different ways including self-template and exterior-template methods. The self-template method is a facile method to synthesize hollow bimetallic MOFs since it is not required to remove the template and the method is as dissolution-regrowth. In the exterior-template method, a sacrificial template is employed which has to be removed after the synthesis.
3.4 Post-synthetic exchange
Post-synthetic metal ion exchange is particularly appropriate for the synthesis of core/shell MOFs. Typically ion exchange starts from the external surface going deeper into the solid as the exchange progresses. Hence, bimetallic MOFs with a core/shell morphology can be obtained by controlling the exchange process and selective transmetalation in this method. Lah's group reported Zn-HKUST-1 and Zn-PMOF-2 with a core–shell heterostructure obtained using this method (Fig. 2e).87
3.5 One-pot synthesis
A facile but challenging method to synthesize MOFs is the one-pot synthesis method in which single metal seeds appear first, and then the seeds grow slower into larger crystals incorporating the second metal. This is a simple synthesis method and needs no further steps for separation. In this synthesis method, the precursors required for the core and the shell are mixed together in a solution. The conditions must be controlled in such a way that the MOF shell merely grows on the core with dissolution. Temperature, time, modulators and solvents play a decisive role in the obtained material. In a report by Zou's group, core/shell CoZn-ZIFs were synthesized using a low Co/Zn ratio. First, the core containing Co2+ was formed quickly and afterwards, a layer containing Zn2+ was formed above it (Fig. 2f).88
4. MOF-derived materials
The high electrical resistance of MOFs and their micrometric large crystals preclude in most of the cases hampers their direct application of MOFs as electrocatalysts in water electrolysis. Thus, the many favorable MOF properties, such as the high percentage of isolated transition metal ions, large surface area and porosity, cannot be advantageously exploited in electrocatalysis. Fortunately this situation can be partially overcome by transforming MOFs into other materials. The types of MOF-derived electrocatalysts include oxides,89 sulfides,90 phosphides,91 nitrides,92 layered double hydroxides (LDHs),93 and monoatomic electrocatalysts.94 These MOF-derived materials inherit the metal composition, large porosity, surface area and even the particular crystal morphology, while exhibiting a much diminished electrical resistance. As a consequence, MOF-derived materials have been used as noble metal-free electrodes for the HER and OER in water electrolysis with comparable or even better electrocatalytic performance as well as greater electrochemical stability than the noble metal-containing electrocatalysts. Due to the immediate application in electrolyzers, recent studies have reported a high activity for many MOF-derived stable inorganic electrocatalysts. As a result of these studies, it has been found that bimetallic electrocatalysts can be even more effective electrocatalysts for the HER and OER than materials containing a single metal. Since the number of combinations of two metals, without counting the range of atomic ratio to tune their properties, is much larger than single transition metals, they offer a wider range to enhance the electrocatalytic performance.95 Thus, not surprisingly, first-row transition metal-containing bimetallic MOFs have been recently found as useful precursors for the preparation of various porous nanostructured derivatives and nanocomposites with good electrocatalytic activity for water splitting. MOFs as precursors of bimetallic electrocatalysts offer not only a wide range of atomic ratios, but also the resulting materials exhibit porosity, high surface area and even a defined particle morphology.
In spite of a large number of research articles in the area, there is no comprehensive review describing the use of MOFs as precursors of bimetallic electrocatalysts with advanced performance for water electrolysis. The present article intends to fill this gap, showing the advantage in terms of synthesis simplicity, versatility and properties that the use of bimetallic MOFs offer as precursors of materials for electrocatalysis.
Several reviews have been published summarizing the recent developments of MOF-based electrocatalysts for the OER or HER. In the last few years, the number of papers with the keywords “transition metals”, “MOF” and “water splitting” has increased considerably, which indicates an explosive growth in this field. However, no reviews have specifically focused on the first-row transition metal-containing bimetallic electrocatalysts that are either bimetallic MOFs (very few so far) or can be derived from bimetallic-MOFs (the vast majority). These reports show the advantages of bimetallic MOFs in terms of superior performance and their potential for a simple preparation of first-row transition bimetallic advanced electrocatalysts.
In the present review we intend to summarize the current state of the art and the recent advances in bimetallic first-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic MOFs for electrochemical water splitting. The review is organized according to the type of material derived from bimetallic MOFs (Scheme 1). For each class of material, electrocatalytic activity is considered and discussed in comparison with benchmark electrodes. The origin of this superior electrocatalytic activity is the high density of metal sites exposed on the surface and the synergism due to the presence of two metals in the same phase or in intimate interfacial contact. The combination of the two metals in the active site adjusts the redox potential of the active site to the requirements of a particular electrochemical reaction. This is something difficult or not possible to achieve with a single first-row transition metal and represents an important advantage of bi-/multimetallic materials. Finally, we summarize the current challenges and opportunities that allow us to forecast the rapid growth for these MOF-derived materials as electrocatalysts, even for commercial use. Table 1 collects the bimetallic electrocatalysts studied in this field, summarizing their excellent behavior in the HER/OER. The main general conclusion of these reports is the excellent electrocatalytic performance achieved by these bimetallic materials due to the control of the composition, particle morphology, uniform porosity and structuration of first-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts prepared from bimetallic-MOFs as precursors.
 Scheme 1  First-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts prepared using bimetallic MOFs as precursors. Examples include chalcogenides, phosphides, nitrides, oxides and composites in electrochemical water splitting. 
Table 1 Summary of activity data for electrochemical water splitting of first-row transition metal electrodes obtained from bimetallic MOFs




Electrocatalyst
Application
Overpotential (mV)@10 mA cm−2
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Electrolyte
Ref.




Co3FePxO
OER
291
85
6 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2

139



Ni2P–CoP
HER, OER
102, 320
64, 69
0.1 M, KOH

125



Ni1Co1P
HER, OER
169, 343
68, 77
1 M, KOH

126



CoFeP
OER
244
58
1 M, KOH

130



Ni2P/ZnP2
OER
210
57.8
1 M, KOH

127



CoNiP
HER
138
65
1 M, KOH

127



CoSe2/ZnSe
OER
320
66
1 M, KOH

158



Ni–Co–S
HER
129
96.1
1 M, KOH

159



Ni3ZnC0.7
HER, OER
93, 320
48, 52
1 M, KOH

283



CoxFe1−xP/NC
HER, OER
139, 299
57, 44
1 M, KOH

134



Co3ZnC/Co-NCCP
HER, OER
188, 295
108, 70
1 M, KOH

251



NiMo2C@C
HER
169, 181
127, 108
0.5 M, H2SO4, 1 M, KOH

99



CoNi1@C
OER
276
55.6
1 M, KOH

175



NiCo-MOF/rGOAS
HER
210
73
0.1 M, KOH

247



Ni2P/CoN-PCP
HER, OER
94, 270
41, 65
1 M, KOH

239



NiCoSe/C
HER, OER
143, 249
101, 54
1 M, KOH

157



ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs
OER
327
65
1 M, KOH

226



CoFe-MOF-74/Co/C
HER, OER
94, 226@20 mA cm−2
89.1, 85.1
1 M, KOH

197



CoxNiyN
HER, OER
129, 245
52, 61
1 M, KOH

124





5. The advantages of bimetallic materials as electrocatalysts
Bimetallic electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic MOFs show better electrocatalytic behavior and performance compared to monometallic derivatives. This superiority can be related to the factors such as adjusted redox potential and better catalytic performance derived from the synergistic effect between metal centers in the reaction mechanism. In fact, when the second metal is introduced into the MOF structure, properties such as electronic density distribution and stability of the material are improved. In bimetallic electrocatalysts, activation energy barriers can be reduced by optimizing the charge transfer rate and optimizing the electronic structure. The energy of the eg orbitals of transition metal sites of the bimetallic MOFs and derivatives, which also play a decisive role in the electrocatalytic behavior, is adjusted depending on the nature of the metals involved. For example, the NiCo-MOF was employed as an electrocatalyst towards the OER in a report by Thangasamy et al. The electronic configuration of the Co2+ valence shell is high-spin 3d7. The t2g orbitals of Co2+ contain unpaired electrons which can interact with O2, while the t2g orbitals in Ni2+ are fully occupied. This leads to repulsion between O2 and Ni2+. As a result, when Co2+ is hybridized with Ni2+ in the bimetallic MOF, the repulsion between Ni2+ and O2 leads to a partial charge transfer from Ni2+ to Co2+. Therefore, the presence of the two metals Co2+ and Ni2+ in bimetallic MOF causes a change in the eg orbital that improves the OER performance.96 In another report, Zhu's group described a synergistic effect between the two metals of a FeCo-MOF resulting in an excellent electrocatalyst performance towards the OER. According to the experimental and theoretical results, the optimal hybridization of the two metals in the reported structure has led to the excellent electrocatalytic behavior.97
In a report by Kramm's group, a bimetallic MOF-derived (Co, Mo)–N–C electrocatalyst was investigated towards the HER.98 In their study, this group found that the MeN4 site plays a significant role in electrocatalytic behavior and the synergic effect between Mo and Co has an important role in the differences between a bimetallic sample and a counterpart monometallic sample. A hydrogen binding energy value is obtained for M–N–C in a bimetallic sample as a semi-filled triangle which is different from that of the monometallic counterparts CoN4 and MoN4 due to electronic interaction with the second metal. The bimetallic electrocatalyst has also exhibited high stability in galvanostatic tests. Bimetallic MOFs containing Ni as electrocatalysts that accept hydride and proton on their surface are very suitable for the HER. The existence of Ni and Mo in a structure can give the material a significant HER performance owing to the synergistic effect. This claim can be confirmed based on a report from Su et al. They introduced NiMo2C@C as an electrocatalyst with ideal behaviour towards the HER in acidic and alkaline solutions.99 Graphitic carbon present in NiMo2C@C and characterized by its signature in Raman spectroscopy enhances the corrosion resistance, thereby improving its electrocatalytic stability.
6. Electrochemical water splitting fundamentals
Water splitting is thermodynamically an uphill process. Energy, such as electrical energy in the electrolysis process, is required to promote this reaction. As shown in Scheme 2a, the three main components of a water electrolyzer are the anode, the cathode, and the electrolyte. The HER and OER occur, respectively, at the cathode and anode, requiring an overpotential with respect to the thermodynamic value. Scheme 2b depicts the polarization curves of the HER and OER, as well as their corresponding reactions in the cathode and anode. Irrespective of the environment, the variation in the free energy (ΔG) of the water splitting reaction at a temperature of 25 °C and a pressure of 1 atm equals 237.2 kJ mol−1, which corresponds to the theoretically obtained cell voltage of 1.23 V needed for water splitting. However, in both HER and OER half-reactions, a voltage higher than the theoretical minimum value is required because of kinetic barriers to achieve a measurable current intensity. The overpotential to achieve a given current density depends on the material constituting the electrode. Overpotentials could be lowered upon modification of the electrode surface with a high-efficiency electrocatalyst to reduce the energy barriers. Typically, electrocatalyst performance is compared by the overpotential required to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Actually, in recent years, considerable research all around the world has been performed on nanomaterial preparation to improve the efficiency of the water splitting process.100
 Scheme 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the generation of H2 and O2 from water. (b) Polarization curves for the HER and OER and the corresponding half reactions in the acid electrolyte. 
The HER occurring at the cathode to form a hydrogen molecule is a two-electron transfer process. This two-step process can be characterized by Tafel slopes derived based on empirical overpotential–log(current density) graphs.101,102 The first step involves the Volmer reaction in which protons react on the surface of the electrode, forming an intermediate adsorbed hydrogen atom (Hads (H+ + e− → Hads)). Depending on the Hads coverage, the next step will be the electrochemical desorption of H2, known as the Heyrovsky reaction (Hads + H+ + e− → H2) that is favored at low Hads coverage, or the chemical desorption of H2 (2Hads → H2) called the Tafel reaction favored in the situation of high Hads coverage of the surface electrode. The two alternative mechanisms are depicted in Scheme 3a.
 Scheme 3  (a) The mechanism of the HER at low (left semicircle) and high H˙ coverage (right semicircle) and (b) the mechanism of the OER in alkaline (black arrows) and acidic (red arrows) media. 
The OER mechanism is different as it is a four-electron process that occurs on the anode. The OER kinetics may differ in acidic and alkaline media showing dependence on the type of the electrocatalyst. Noble and semi-noble metal-based catalysts (e.g. Ir, Ru, and their oxides) can more easily catalyze the OER in acidic media, rather than in an alkaline environment. However, electrocatalysts based on first row transition metals, including Fe, Co, and Ni, can catalyze the OER more favorably in alkaline media. Kinetic barriers impose an overpotential with respect to the thermodynamic value in each mechanistic step in order for the reaction to occur at a measurable rate. In fact, the OER process has in general a slower kinetics compared to the HER, since it involves a more complex reaction mechanism with three accepted intermediates adsorbed on the electrocatalyst surface: OOH*, O* and OH*. Metalloid catalysts have been extensively studied as electrodes. In these materials, water oxidation mostly takes place on the surface of the oxide/hydroxide layer.103 The accepted OER mechanism under alkaline and acidic conditions can be described as follows:
The OER mechanism in an alkaline electrolyte (Scheme 3b, black line) Step 1: OH− + * → HO* + e−(1) Step 2: HO* + OH−→ O* + H2O + e−(2) Step 3: O* + OH−→ HOO* + e−(3) Step 4: HOO* + OH− → * + O2 + H2O + e−(4)The OER mechanism in an acidic electrolyte (Scheme 3b, red line): * + H2O → HO* + H+ + e−(5) HO* → O* + H+ + e−(6) O* + H2O→ OOH* + H+ + e−(7) OOH* → * + O2 + H+ + e−(8)where OOH*, O* and OH* mean the surface adsorbed intermediates (Scheme 3b).
Overpotential, Tafel slope, and stability are three important parameters in the evaluation of the performance of HER and OER electrocatalysts. As commented, in order to have a high gas evolution real electrolytic systems require the extra potential for the HER and OER compared to their thermodynamically predicted standard values (0 V vs. RHE for the HER and 1.23 V vs. RHE for the OER at pH = 0).104 This difference between the real applied voltage and the thermodynamic value is called overpotential (denoted by the symbol η). Factors causing this overpotential for the HER and OER include activation barriers, concentration effects, and uncompensated resistance.
The overpotential of the HER and OER can be diminished by choosing efficient electrocatalysts. Since diffusion on or near the electrode surface is an important limitation, stirring is needed to decrease the concentration overpotential. The resistance induced overpotential can be removed from the experimental data by performing electrochemical ohmic drop restitution directly in electrochemical workstations or manually by using the product of current density and resistance derived from the Nyquist plot. The ohmic drop restitution (also called iR compensation) is expressed by the following equation: Ecomp = Emea − iRs(1)ehere Ecomp is the iR-compensated potential, Emea is the measured potential, and Rs is the resistance of electrolyte obtained from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements.
The Tafel plot corresponds to the variation of required overpotential η vs. the relative current intensity on a logarithmic scale. The slope of the Tafel plot is related to the rate of charge transfer; a low Tafel slope indicates a high charge transfer ability.105 The slope of the Tafel plot is measured from the linear part of the Tafel plot, which is obtained by replotting the polarization curve (i.e. LSV as a graph of logJ versus η). The related equation is as follows: η = a + blog(j)(2)where a, b η and j are the Tafel constant, the slope, the overpotential and the current density, respectively.
Another important parameter to determine the electrocatalyst performance is the stability of the activity in water splitting. Stability can generally be assessed in two ways: repeated cyclic voltammetry (CV) scans and potentiostatic/galvanostatic electrolysis.106 In the CV method, also known as the accelerated degradation test, the cycles are performed at onset potentials of the HER or OER regions. After performing several thousand cycles, the LSV curve is repeated and compared with the original curve. An electrocatalyst that has significant stability shows little change in overpotential after several thousand CV cycles. Galvanostatic or potentiostatic measurements are the time dependence of the potential (or current density) at a constant current density (or overpotential) of the electrocatalyst. The measurement time can last from several to tens of hours. The figure of merit is the time for which the voltage or current decreases below 80% of the initial value measured for the fresh sample.
7. First-row transition metal based bimetallic electrocatalysts
Transition metal based materials are ideal candidates as electrocatalysts for water splitting due to their various oxidation states with potentials that can be aligned with the values required for water electrolysis. The advantages of this type of electrocatalyst can be summarized as follows: (1) high activity and stability for the OER under alkaline conditions, (2) cost-effectiveness, (3) tunable electronic structure and electrical conductivity, and (4) possibility to prepare high surface area materials.
8. Bimetallic electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic-MOFs
In recent years, MOFs have been vastly employed as precursors in the synthesis of derived materials with remarkable properties in terms of particle morphology, porosity and specific surface area. This includes the use of MOFs as precursors of electrocatalysts due to their inherent porous structure that is partially retained by the derived material and as a source of metal.107–109 MOF-derived electrocatalysts can achieve porous and hollow structures by maintaining the porosity of the parent MOF and by releasing gas during the high-temperature calcination process, providing a larger specific surface area and subsequently, more accessible active sites.110 Thanks to their metal ion content, MOFs can form multimetallic materials. Transformation of these multimetallic MOFs can result in metal phases with extremely good interfacial contact or even to single phase mixed metal materials thus, synergistically enhancing the electrocatalytic performance.111
8.1 Bimetallic nitrides
Transition metal containing materials are good candidates for electrochemical applications.112,113 To date, many different transition metal-based materials such as carbides, chalcogenides, oxides, nitrides, phosphides and hydroxides have been used as promising HER and OER catalysts.114,115 Transition metal nitrides because of their unique electronic structures, chemical stability and high electrical conductivity in a wide range of pHs have received special attention recently.116,117 In particular, bonding with negatively charged nitrogen atoms can modify the d-band density of transition metals, causing metal nitrides to have in a certain way an electronic structure similar to that of noble metals from group VIII.118 Also, experimental and theoretical studies indicate that bimetallic materials can be better tuned compared to their monometallic counterparts for enhancing the electrocatalytic performance by tuning the potential of the active site to those required for the HER o OER.119 The introduction of the second metal can effectively adjust the electron density and the electronic structure of the bimetallic material, diminishing the free energy of hydrogen adsorption (a simple descriptor of the electrocatalytic HER activity) and increasing the HER performance. However, the synthesis of homogeneous bimetallic nitrides has remained a challenge due to the uncontrolled formation of several independent phases and the strict requirement of stoichiometric ratios for valence balance.120 The last requirement limits the range of atomic ratios that can result in a single mixed metal nitride phase. Among the different approaches, direct MOF pyrolysis can be used to effectively prepare transition metal-based composites.121,122 The use as a precursor of multivariate MOFs with diverse metal centers significantly simplifies the synthesis of controllable and homogeneous bimetallic composites in a wide range of atomic ratio compositions, wider than other alternative synthetic strategies. Due to the uniform distribution of metallic elements in MOF nodes, the derived composites have unique intrinsic electronic characteristics and elemental structures.123
Besides composition and porosity, particle morphology is another parameter that can also be controlled when using MOFs as precursors. Feng's research group reported porous Co-Ni (CoxNiyN) bimetallic nitrides with a rod-like morphology as HER electrocatalysts with a wide range of pH compatibility by nitridation of bimetallic MOF-74 (1D hexagonal channels) as a precursor.124 In order to synthesize CoxNiyN, first CoNi-MOF-74 samples were prepared with different Co/Ni ratios and then the samples were transferred into a furnace at 400 °C, whereby CoxNiyO was obtained. After that, these samples were converted to CoxNiyN under NH3 at a temperature of 500 °C (Fig. 3a). Conventional methods were utilized to characterize this material (Fig. 3b–g). Since the electronic environment of metal centres is very effective on catalytic behaviour, shifts can be observed in the XPS measurement of the CoxNiyO sample compared to that of individual samples of Co and Ni metals, indicating the electron transfer from Co to Ni leading to the better electrocatalytic performance for this material. According to the HRTEM images, bimetallic nitrides obtained from this specific precursor have a high surface area, good dispersion of metal active sites and a porous structure, which are essential properties for an ideal electrocatalyst. Also, the presence of nickel modifies the electronic environment of Co atoms and creates rich active sites. As a result, it was found that the Co2Ni1N electrocatalyst exhibits excellent stability and high performance in a range of different pHs. Thus, overpotentials of 102.6, 92.0, and 152.8 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 have been reported for Her in alkaline, acidic, and neutral solutions, respectively (Fig. 3h–j).
 Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis protocol for the CoxNiyN composite, (b–g) TEM, (c) HRTEM images and (d–g) elemental mapping of the Co2Ni1N composite, (h) LSV curves of samples in 1 M KOH, (i) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (j) 1 M PBS for the HER. Copyright©2019, American Chemical Society. 
8.2 Bimetallic phosphides
Using NiCo-MOFs based on the 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate linker (BDC) as precursors, Liang et al. obtained a Ni2P–CoP bifunctional electrocatalyst, which showed a more efficient electrocatalytic behavior than Ni2P + CoP mechanical mixtures due to the synergistic effect in water splitting derived from the intimate contact between Ni2P and CoP.125 To synthesize Ni2P–CoP, NaH2PO2 was placed in 5:1 excess in a separate upstream place of a quartz tube with respect to NiCo-MOF. The quartz reactor was submitted to an Ar flow and then the tube was heated at 350 °C for 3 h. The synthesized bimetallic phosphide is then separated, dried and characterized by TEM, HRTEM and SAED (Fig. 4a–d). According to the results, the numerous interfaces of Ni2P–CoP causes a strong electronic interaction and the Ni2P–CoP core levels all shift to a lower binding energy, indicating a different electronic environment around P, Co and Ni elements for Ni2P–CoP derived from NiCo-MOF in comparison with the mechanical mixture of the Ni2P + CoP phosphides. Ni2P–CoP bimetallic phosphide showed overpotentials of 320 mV and 105 mV for the OER and HER, respectively, at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The interfaces in the materials are one of the important parameters for good electrocatalytic activity. Therefore appropriate engineering of the interface can have a large impact on the electrocatalytic activity, as it was observed in the present case. The superior HER behavior of Ni2P–CoP compared with those of its components separately indicates a strong synergistic effect in comparison to the Ni2P + CoP mechanical mixture. Since the Ni2P + CoP and Ni2P–CoP samples have the same morphology, they have been synthesized by the same synthesis method and have the same elemental composition; it can be concluded that the synergism arises from the numerous interfaces existing in the Ni2P–CoP sample derived from the bimetallic NiCo-MOF in comparison with the Ni2P + CoP analogue in which the interfacial contact between the two constituents is much less. Therefore, it appears that the Ni2P–CoP interfaces favor the electron transfer between Ni2P and CoP, increasing the electronic conductivity and also affecting the H2 adsorption ability. The combination of all these factors was proposed to be responsible for the increase in the electrocatalytic activity of the sample.
 Fig. 4  (a) Fabrication of the Ni2P–CoP composite from NiCo–MOF, (b) TEM, HRTEM and SAED images of Ni2P–CoP, (c) LSV curves of Ni2P–CoP for the HER and (d) LSV curves of Ni2P–CoP for the OER. Copyright©2017, American Chemical Society. 
The Shuai group used the eNi1Co1-BDC precursor to synthesize Ni1Co1P with independent Ni2P and Co2P nanoparticles embedded in a carbon layer (Fig. 5a).126 The results indicated that at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, this electrocatalyst showed relatively low overpotentials of 343 and 169 mV, for the OER and HER, respectively. The comparison of these results with the behavior of NiP and CoP monometallic electrocatalysts as well as that of NiP and CoP mixture confirms the strong synergistic effect in the bimetallic Ni1Co1-P system, while this effect has not been observed for the other mentioned electrocatalysts. These results highlight the importance of having the best possible interfacial contact between two different crystal phases, meaning not only a homogeneous blending of the particles, but also good match and alignment between the facets of the two types of crystallites. The influence of the porous structure and polymetallic sites (Ni2P and Co2P) on the bimetallic Ni1Co1-P phosphide system has promoted bifunctional electrocatalytic activity at lower OER and HER overpotentials under alkaline conditions. These results also confirm the existence of a large interface between the Co-P and Ni-P phases, which appears to be a prerequisite for a strong synergistic effect. In this study, the existence of these interfaces and the favorable electron transfer between them have been proven by measuring a low resistance with electrochemical impedance. In addition, the porous structure can cause charge transfer with the electrolyte, diffusion of active intermediates and their reaction on the surface of the catalyst (see Fig. 5b–f). And more importantly, the carbon layer increases the electron transfer rate in addition to protecting the inner active sites (Ni2P and Co2P) against corrosion by the electrolyte solution.
 Fig. 5  (a) Fabrication of Ni1Co1P from NiCo–MOF for water splitting, (b) SEM, (c and d) and TEM images of Ni1Co1P, (e) LSV curves of samples in 1 M KOH solution for the OER and (f) LSV curves of samples in 1 M KOH solution for the HER. Copyright©2020, Elsevier. 
Zhang et al. prepared yolk/shell hollow microspheres of Ni2P/ZnP2 by phosphorization of a NiZn-MOF precursor based on the 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate ligand (BTC) employing PVP as a surfactant to control the morphology of NiZn-MOF crystallites. Ni2P/ZnP2 was employed to achieve OER with high performance (Fig. 6).127 This unique hollow yolk/shell architecture with nanoscale heterointerfaces ensures a greater electrochemical active surface area (i.e. the contact area between the electrolyte and the electrode), more favored charge transfer, and less free energy for the chemical adsorption of OH.128,129 As a result, good electrocatalytic behavior was observed for this electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the synthesis method for the yolk/shell hollow microspheres of Ni2P/ZnP2 and its OER application. Copyright©2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
An efficient and cost-effective electrocatalyst, CoFeP, for water splitting was prepared by the Muthurasu group using a cobalt-2-methylimidazolate (ZIF-67) assembled with Prussian blue [K3Fe(CN)6] as the source of Fe (Fig. 7a).130 The hierarchical three-dimensional structure inherited by CoFeP from the tridimensional ZIF-67 MOF increases the charge transfer rate between the electrolyte and the electrode, improving the electrochemical performance. CoFeP electrocatalysts have shown excellent electrochemical activity for overall water splitting in alkaline media (Fig. 7b and c). This electrocatalytic behavior can be mainly attributed to the resulting bimetallic phosphide with a 3D conductive network. This study also obtained mixed metal oxides derived from the same MOF structure observing again that the porosity of the MOF precursor is preserved on the bimetallic oxide and that porosity and bimetallic composition act synergistically in the water-splitting reaction in alkaline media.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of CoFeP, (b) illustration indicating the bifunctional electrocatalytic activity of CoFeP for overall water splitting and (c) LSV plots for a series of electrocatalysts derived from the MOF and Prussian blue analog in a two-electrode setup. Copyright©2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another report, Lu et al. obtained hollow nanoboxes of bimetallic CoNiP phosphide electrocatalysts constituted by CoP and Ni2P phases by low-temperature phosphorization of a mixed metal CoNi-MOF based on an imidazole surfactant as the linker (Fig. 8a). The surface of CoNiP nanoboxes is decorated by Co, Ni and P elements, which make available more active sites and favor electron transfer with the electrolyte, thus improving catalytic behavior (Fig. 8b–f). In this study, the synergistic effect of the bimetallic phosphide was assigned to the efficient electron transfer between CoP and Ni2P domains due to the favorable interface between the two phases. These interfaces also affect the ability to adsorb hydrogen, which in turn, also increases the electrocatalytic activity. Therefore, the hollow structure and synergistic effect contribute to the improved electrocatalytic performance for the HER in alkaline media. This bimetallic phosphide showed excellent electrocatalytic behavior for the HER with an overpotential of 138 mV at 10 mA cm−2 current density in alkaline media (Fig. 8g).131
 Fig. 8  (a) Fabrication process of CoNiP from NiCo-MOF. (b) SEM image of Co-MOF, (c) CoNi-MOF, and (d) CoNiP, (e) TEM image, (f) HRTEM image of CoNiP, (g) LSV curves of samples for the HER. Copyright©2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nitrogen-doped carbon (NC)-encapsulated metal phosphides have been also reported as efficient HER and OER electrocatalysts.132,133 For example, Chen et al. synthesized NC encapsulated CoxFe1−xP nanoparticles (CoxFe1−xP/NC) exhibiting an enhanced electrocatalytic performance by using CoFe-MIL88 with terephthalate linkers as the precursor.134 CoxFe1−xP/NC was prepared in a three step procedure in which first mixed metal CoFe-MIL-88B is pyrolyzed at a controlled temperature, and then the resulting carbonized material is submitted to mild oxidation, followed by a final phosphorization. To achieve appropriate phase composition in the final material, pyrolysis has to be carried out at a moderate temperature of about 600 °C. This relatively low temperature is essential for achieving optimal activity thereby avoiding the formation of inactive Fe3O4 and Fe2P phases. The XPS analysis proved the transfer of electrons from Co/Fe to P. Also, the Raman spectrum confirmed the successful doping by nitrogen that caused defects in the nitrogen-doped carbon scaffold. It was observed that the electrocatalytic activity of analogous materials based exclusively on Fe increased with the presence of Co. The addition of Co can significantly enhance the inherent catalytic performance of FeP. On the other hand, NC dramatically increases the surface area and prevents the agglomeration of active nanoparticles. The synergistic cooperation of all the components in the resulting CoFeP/NC leads to a low charge transfer resistance, fast reaction kinetics, large electrochemical surface area, and stable active species, resulting in an excellent electrocatalytic performance for the OER and HER.
Oxyphosphorization of metals can improve the OER activity. The enhanced charge transfer along with appropriate electronic structures that reduce the kinetic energy barriers of the electrochemical reactions is the main reason for the improved electrocatalytic performance. Thus, it is logical to infer that mixed metal oxyphosphides can be more efficient for the OER compared to their monometallic counterparts.135–138 Bimetallic MOFs are ideal precursors that can be used for the fabrication of porous mixed metal oxyphosphides.
Mixed metal oxyphosphides derived from bimetallic MOFs prepared by this method exhibit two properties. On one hand, the material favors the penetration of oxygen gas bubbles in the porous structure by maintaining the structural stability and rigidity. The second aspect is the cooperation between the two metals presenting a strong electronic coupling favorable for the electrocatalytic reaction and increasing the electron transfer. Both are expected to accelerate the OER. In this regard, Wang's group reported a promising strategy to integrate the benefits of multi-atomic doping and porous rigid structures. They synthesized an open CoFe-MOF with a BDC ligand. Later, the bimetallic-MOF was subjected to phosphorization with NaH2PO2 and subsequent annealing in air to obtain Co3FePxO (Fig. 9a–j).139 Co3FePxO requires for the OER an overpotential of only 291 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 current density with 85 mV dec−1 Tafel slope. A favorable four-electron transfer and excellent stability during the OER were also confirmed (Fig. 9k and l). This performance demonstrates the benefits of an effective transfer of electrons from metals to P atoms and the large electrochemical surface area for the rapid penetration of ions to the active sites of the porous material. In addition, XPS analysis confirmed the partial electron transfer by the positive binding energy shifts of Co 2p and Fe 2p and the negative shift for P 2p, indicating that the metal ions donate electrons to phosphide. This polarization increases the local electric dipole and diminishes the energy barriers in the reaction mechanism for the Co3FePxO electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 9  (a) Steps in the synthesis of the Co3FePxO electrocatalyst, (b) TEM image, (c and f), HRTEM image, (d and e) SAED pattern and (g–j) elemental mapping of Co3FePxO. (k) LSV curves and (l) stability test of Co3FePxO for the OER. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
NiFeP bimetallic phosphide with a rod-like morphology was synthesized in 2018 using NiFe-MOF as a precursor by Du et al.140 This electrocatalyst showed superior electrochemical performance for the HER in alkaline solution. This better NiFeP performance can be attributed to the strong synergistic effect and electronic interactions between FeP and NiP2 phases. On the other hand, the nanorod morphology provides a high specific surface area and adequate active sites that are essential for improving the electrocatalytic performance of NiFeP for the HER.
The importance of metallic sites with exchangeable coordination positions on the surface of electrocatalysts in the OER lies in the chemisorption of the metal ions of OH− and oxygen-containing species (OH* and OOH*) that are the intermediates in O2 evolution from H2O.141 Therefore, the optimal elemental distribution on the phosphide surface and the nature of the metallic sites appear to be very efficient ways for improving the water oxidation performance.142,143 Ni or Co phosphides have been successfully prepared through pyrolysis and the subsequent phosphorization step using MOFs as precursors.144–146 Due to the high carbon content of the organic ligands of the MOF, large specific surface area and controllable pores, nickel or cobalt phosphides obtained by MOF transformation exhibit significant electrocatalytic performance for the HER and OER in alkaline solution.146,147 A hybrid of CoFe phosphide with mixed FeP, CoP and Co2P phases was obtained from CoFe-MOF precursors by Zhang et al. and used as OER electrocatalysts.148 The optimized Co–Fe–P sample with a Co/Fe atomic ratio of 1.7 showed superior electrocatalytic performance and excellent OER stability which can be attributed to the synergism among the various phosphides, the high valence of Co ions due to P and N, and high electrochemical surface area due to the nanowire morphology of the particles. In addition, due to the significant stability of this electrocatalyst, the two-electrode cell fabricated with Co–Fe–P (Co/Fe 1.7) showed promising performance for water splitting.
8.3 Bimetallic chalcogenides
In recent decades, chalcogenides (sulfide, selenide, and telluride) have been studied as bifunctional HER and OER electrocatalysts.149–152 The electrocatalytic activity of chalcogenides can be attributed to the appropriate electronic band structure and the alignment of the valence and conduction edges with the potential required for the HER and OER.153–155 The electronegativity of chalcogens decreases with the increase in atomic number, leading to a decrease in the ionic character or an increase in the covalent character of the metal–chalcogen bond in the order S < Se < Te. According to Masuda et al. the higher covalent proportion of the M–X bond should facilitate redox reactions at the transition metal, as well as the appropriate alignment of valence and conduction band boundaries with the water redox potentials.156 Regarding stability it has been frequently found that first-row transition metal chalcogenides exhibit high electrocatalytic efficiency for the OER because they are converted to metal oxy hydroxides, which have adequate surface adsorption sites for oxygen species and aligned electronic states, together with electronic conductivity.
Recently, Chen et al. reported a new procedure for preparing carbon coated Co-doped nickel selenides based on NiCo-MOF (NiCoSe/C) using BDC as the linker and PVP to control the particle morphology.157 The preparation procedure uses Se powder that sublimes upstream and reacts with the MOF placed downstream under Ar flow. NiCoSe is a single phase NiSe2 having Co as the dopant element as deduced by the shift in the XRD pattern of the characteristic NiSe2 The resulting NiCoSe/C material showed efficient electrocatalytic behavior for the HER and OER with an overpotential of 143 mV for the HER and 249 mV for the OER at a 10 mA cm−2 current density under alkaline conditions. The outstanding electrocatalyst performance and stability could be assigned to the combination of a series of facts. First, the synergic effects of Co and Ni which modulate the electronic structure of the material, thus, dramatically enhance the activity as a bifunctional catalyst. Second, the inherited favorable properties, such as their great porosity and increased specific surface area from NiCo-MOF, drastically increased the number of available active sites. Interestingly, the degradation of organic MOF ligands at high temperatures led to the formation of a carbon outer shell, in addition to producing gases that upon escaping erode the surface, giving rise to a porous arrangement. Such a porous structure can greatly improve the mass transfer, hence using the active sites more efficiently. Eventually, the mentioned carbon layer protected NiCoSe2 particles against corrosion, hence further improving the stability of the catalysts. In another study, a bimetallic selenide heterostructure of CoSe2/ZnSe derived from a mixed metal CoZn-MOF has been reported as an electrocatalyst for the OER.158 It was proposed that the low overpotential is derived from a phase-boundary effect between cubic CoSe2 and hexagonal ZnSe particles in addition to an adequate electronic alignment (Fig. 10a–d). It should be stressed at this point that the use of bimetallic MOFs as precursors has as a main advantage of optimal intimate interfacial contact between the two phases evolved in the transformation. The potential of phase boundary engineering to significantly improve the electrocatalytic activity is currently under exploited, even though it appears as a powerful tool for overcoming the limitations that could appear for a single surface. In the case of CoSe2/ZnSe, it was suggested that the increased electron transfer from CoSe2 to ZnSe redistributed the interfacial charge and enhanced the positive charge on the CoSe2, hence facilitating the OH− adsorption on this particle and giving rise to its highly efficient conversion to O2. To evaluate the CoZn-Se geometry structure, the Fourier-transformed extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) technique was analyzed. The obtained results suggest the coexistence of heterogeneous spin states in the boundaries of phase and Jahn-Teller distortion in CoSe (Co2+, t2g6eg1) and no Jahn-Teller effect in ZnSe (Zn2+, 3d10). Also, the disordering in the structure was confirmed by the wavelet transform. These electronic and structural features of the mixed CoZn-Se have led to claim that the phase boundaries and lattice distortion are the factors that promote water oxidation.
 Fig. 10  (a) Phase boundary effect in the CoSe2/ZnSe electrocatalyst, (b) the k2-weighted Zn K-edge EXAFS signals for ZnSe and CoZn-Se, (c) the k2-weighted Co K-edge EXAFS signals for CoSe2 and CoZn-Se and (d) LSV curves of the samples. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Wu et al. successfully introduced Ni–Co–S microspheres (containing an intimate mixture of NiS2 and NiCo2S4 phases) with a hollow multi-shell structure, proving the superiority of MOFs to obtain in a simple way complex multi-shell structures with good interfacial contact for transition metal sulfides. These Ni–Co–S microspheres can be used as electrocatalysts for the HER in alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 11a).159 The behavior of the optimal sample exhibiting the lowest overpotential and the lowest Tafel slope was attributed to its exceptional hollow multi-shell structure with inherent porosity and bimetallic composition, and these features were easily obtained from the parent MOF. The details of the structure are shown in the TEM images (Fig. 11b–f). According to HRTEM images, there is also a clear boundary between NiCo2S4 and NiS2, which favors an easy interfacial electron transfer between them that enhances the electrocatalytic performance of the HER.160
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis steps of Ni–Co–S microspheres, (b) TEM images of NiCo-BTC, (c) TEM image of NiCoO, (d) TEM image of Ni–Co–S, (e) details of shell and (f) HRTEM image of Ni–Co–S. Copyright © 2019, Elsevier. 
Due to the abundance of unsaturated surface metal sites, 2D MOFs present an increased electron transfer rate and favorable substrate coordination to the unsaturated sites. Furthermore, functionalized MOFs possessing periodic network structures can serve as templates to prepare cobalt sulfides. A common observation is that MOF-based derivatives maintain the structure of the parent MOF, hence, exhibiting large surface area, uniform size distribution and enhanced porosity compared to analogous materials obtained from alternative routes.161,162 For these reasons, MOF-derived solids exhibit superior electrochemical activities with respect to analogous materials. Additionally, organic ligands and metal ions have found extensive applications in self-organizing templates for hollow functional materials to be used in water splitting.163,164 Among other effects, metal doping facilitates the optimization of the adsorption energy of substrates adjacent to the catalytic sites, the modulation of the electronic density of the surrounding atoms and the decrease of the activation energy of the reaction intermediates. Based on this, Du et al. synthesized hierarchical Cu-doped Co9S8 nanoarray structures using CuCo-MOF containing less Co2+ species (Fig. 12a).165 The synthesized material increases the H2O chemisorption and diminishes the activation energy or reaction intermediates, while Cu doping increases material conductivity. The optimal Cu-Co9S8-6 h nanorods exhibit excellent water reduction and oxidation performance under alkaline conditions. It was found that the electrocatalytic activity depends on the sulfurization time using thioacetamide as a sulfur precursor. For the optimal performance (sulfurization time of 6 h), the morphology of the MOF derived Cu-Co9S8-6 h material constitutes nanorods composed entirely of aggregated nanoparticles making the surface rough and resulting in the formation of many voids. During the procedure of sulfurization and decomposition from thioacetamide, S2− ions first react with Co ions. Then, during the sulfurization process, the reaction of S2− ions is controlled by the diffusion of Co2+ and a one-dimensional structure is obtained. The nanorod morphology leads to a shortened electron transfer path. The results of DFT calculations showed that the superior electrocatalytic activity of Co9S8-6 h can be attributed to the increase in adsorption energy and conductivity of water due to Cu doping. These DFT calculations indicate that the density of states for Cu-Co9S8 close to the Fermi level is higher than that of Co9S8, justifying a fast charge transfer and better electrical conductivity of the bimetallic material. In other words, Cu doping significantly modulates the activation energy of the intermediates, resulting in a substantial decrease in the overall activation energy, which can explain why bimetallic Cu-Co9S8 exhibits better catalytic activity that increases the performance of water splitting reactions (Fig. 12b–d). The optimal Cu-Co9S8-6 h electrocatalyst just needed 1.49 V under 1 M KOH at 10 mA cm−2 current density.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of CuCo-MOF and Cu-Co9S8 (b) differences in the electron density of H2O adsorbed on high-valence (Co3+), (Co2+) and Cu2+, (c) chemisorption free energies of H2O on the (440) plane of Co9S8 and Cu-Co9S8. Inset: Low-valence (Co2+), high-valence (Co3+) and Cu2+. (d) DFT-calculated water adsorption energy. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. 
8.4 Bimetallic oxides
Transition metal oxides, especially Ni and Co-based oxides, have received great attention and have been widely studied. Although phosphides, sulfides, and other derivatives have shown better electrocatalytic behavior than their oxide analogs, oxides present the advantage of a more convenient synthesis under less harsh and more amenable conditions, better controllability, and lesser probable contamination. Among these advanced catalysts, transition metal oxides (especially Co/Ni oxides) have attracted special interest due to their high stability and unique 3d electronic configuration. The special attention for first-row transition metal based electrocatalysts derives from their attractive properties such as low cost, availability, and superior activity.166–168 Meanwhile, transition metal oxides show excellent OER activity in alkaline media; their excellent performance is due to the strong binding energies for the OER intermediates (*O, *OH, *OOH) on the catalyst surface, the corrosion resistance in alkaline solution during the OER process and the distinctive redox features.169–171 However, Co/Ni oxides show poorer than expected electrocatalytic performance in the OER due to inevitable self-aggregation and low intrinsic electrical conductivity. These limitations can be overcome if the metal oxide nanoparticles are wrapped in a carbon matrix that in addition increases the electrical conductivity. Therefore, poor electrical conductivity and adequate control of the charge distribution of metal oxides are important limitations that have to be overcome for improving their electrocatalytic performance. An effective strategy in this regard could be the introduction of a second metal to the electrocatalyst, which can modulate the charge distribution and tune the energy levels to the required potentials to promote the HER and OER, resulting in a synergistic effect between the two metals.172,173 Thus, bimetallic oxides show higher electrocatalytic performance than their monometallic counterparts.174
Zhang et al. reported carbon-metal (or dual-metal oxide) electrocatalysts using bimetallic-MOFs with pillar linkers for the OER.175 Among all the prepared bimetallic derivatives, CoNi1@C demonstrated the lowest OER overpotential. After pyrolysis, bimetallic MOFs with a high Co ratio showed the best electrocatalytic OER performance, owing to their high valence state and exceptional structure. The electrocatalytic activity improvement for the OER was justified considering: (1) synergistic cooperation of the two metals in bimetallic oxides. In particular, the high-valence nickel (serving as an active site) promotes the OER. Spinel trivalent ions play a decisive role in activating the electrostatically adsorbed oxygen to form MOOH and then inducing the OOH deprotonation to generate O2.176–179 (2) Extraordinary hierarchical porous honeycomb arrangement that can promote interfacial electron and ion transfer and exhibits structural stability during electrochemical tests.180–182 Also, the carbon shell matrix ensures the electrical continuity of bimetallic oxide particles and prevents the aggregation of nanoparticles in the electrochemical tests and during pyrolysis.
8.5 Bimetallic composites
An effective solution to improve the conductivity of MOF-derived materials is to combine them with conductive materials.183–186 Carbon allotropes are among the preferred additional components of the composite. Synergistic electronic interactions of various components can make composite electrocatalysts more active than their individual components. In addition to the synergism of the bimetallic constituents, an additional favorable interaction can occur between metal species and the carbon support for composites derived from MOFs. Frequently, the bimetallic electrocatalyst is obtained from the transformation of a composite precursor containing the bimetallic MOF and other components. In this regard, Zhao et al. utilized FeNi3 nanoparticles embedded in an N-doped carbon–carbon nanotube matrix (Fe-Ni@NC-CNTs) synthesized from the FeNi-MIL-88-dicyandiamide composite precursor as a dual electrocatalyst for the HER and OER (Fig. 13a).187 FeNi3 nanoparticles are at CNT tips and are encapsulated by a carbon shell (Fig. 13b–d). This electrocatalyst consists of a continuous homogeneous carbon network with a large surface area and high pore volume in addition to oxide nanoparticles and Fe-Ni metal alloys. These properties have made this electrocatalyst an ideal candidate for water splitting (Fig. 13e–g). This electrocatalyst combines a hierarchical pore structure, high electrical conductivity and a stable three-dimensional framework. These properties provide fast mass transfer, high electrochemical activity, and good stability for the electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of the Fe-Ni@NC-CNT synthesis, (b–d) HRTEM images of the Fe-Ni@NC-CNT, (e) schematic electrolyzer for water splitting, LSV curves for the OER (f) and HER (g). Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
MOFs can serve as an ideal precursor for preparing different types of nanocomposites (carbon nanomaterials, metal-based materials and their hybrids) for special applications such as energy storage in supercapacitors, Li batteries, fuel cells, etc. In MOF-derived multicomponent hybrid nanomaterials, the different components, including carbon and metal nanoparticles, often have a uniform distribution.188–191 Organic ligands become converted into carbonaceous amorphous residues on their way to graphitization which could enhance the electrical conductivity, while protecting corrosion and aggregation of the transition metal component.192 Most importantly, MOF-derived composites are nanoporous structures with uniform pore sizes that are well-adjustable.193 Porosity increases the surface area and exposes more active sites to substrates and electrolytes. These multi-component composites derived from MOFs exhibit very high performance in electrocatalysis due to the adequate arrangement of individual components and synergistic effects among them.
Taking advantage of the porous structure of the MOF as the precursor, Fe3O4 nanoparticles and bimetallic FeNi3 alloy nanoparticles in the FeNi3−Fe3O4 NPs/MOF-CNT composite have been synthesized and proposed by Srinivas et al. as an ideal bifunctional electrocatalyst for electrochemical water splitting (Fig. 14a).78 The precise arrangement and appropriate structure for the association of Fe3O4 and FeNi3 nanoparticles obtained in the transformation of the MOF leads to the improvement in the electronic properties of the electrocatalyst and diminishes the kinetic barriers for electron transfer by preventing aggregation of nanoparticles at the electrode surface and increasing the area for the electrocatalyst. These benefits result in excellent electrocatalytic activity together with material stability due to the electron density of FeNi3 metal sites supplied by the Fe3O4-rich CNT support. Also, this electrocatalyst showed a superior performance in a two electrode cell for overall water splitting (Fig. 14b and c).
 Fig. 14  (a) Synthesis protocol of FeNi3−Fe3O4, (b) LSV curves for overall water splitting and (c) the amperometric i–t curve at an overpotential of 360 mV. Copyright© 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Also, attempts have been made through optimization of the particle morphology, introduction of other metals or through combination of conductive substrates to use micro/nano pristine MOFs as catalysts for electrochemical water splitting.194–196 In one study, Zha et al. reported an electrochemical deposition method followed by a solvothermal process for synthesizing a three component hybrid MOF–metal–carbon cloth (CC) hierarchical electrode.197 The resulting hybrid electrode containing a bimetallic Fe-Co H2DOBDC (2,5-dihydroxyterephthalate) MOF was utilized as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst in water splitting (Fig. 15a). Apparently, the synergism between Co and Fe increased the electrocatalytic performance of this composite.198–200 On the other hand, the distinct three-level hierarchical structure of the material largely contributes to facilitate the electron conduction and mass transfer (Fig. 15b–d).201,202 Co electrodeposited on carbon cloth provides a Co source for the subsequent synthesis of MOF-74 and also increases the electrode conductivity. In situ growth of MOF-74 on Co also diminishes the resistance between the various interfaces and increases the mechanical adhesion among them. Furthermore, the morphology of the MOF composite as ordered nanoarrays exposed more active catalytic sites at the liquid–solid interfaces. Moreover, electrocatalysis is largely influenced by the wettability of the electrode. The comparison of the wettability of CC, Co/CC and CoFe-MOF-74/Co/CC-2 based on contact angles is shown in Fig. 15e. The result of these measurements indicates the super hydrophilic properties of the CoFe-MOF-74/Co/CC-2 electrocatalyst compared to those of other electrocatalysts prepared in this study. So, CoFe-MOF-74/Co/CC-2 exhibited impressive OER and HER performance. After depositing Co, the H2O penetration rate improves significantly. Usually, the wettability of a solid surface depends on the intrinsic surface nature and its geometric structure.203 Since there are many hydrophilic groups in MOF-74, after the formation of MOF-74 on the surface of Co/CC, the hydrophilicity of the final product further increases. As a result, the penetration rate of water droplets in CoFe-MOF-74/Co/CC becomes enhanced. These facts are in agreement with the excellent electrocatalytic behavior for the OER derived from the three-level hierarchical structure. In any case, the relevance of the present study is that it represents a rare example in which bimetallic MOFs are used directly in the composition of an efficient electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 15  (a) Synthesis process, (b)–(d) FESEM images of the hierarchical structure of Co,Fe-MOF-74/Co/CC-2, and the (e) water contact angle measurements of samples. Copyright© 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Hollow structures have attracted special interest in energy storage because of their open geometry, high stability and low mass density.51,204–207 A general straight forward procedure for preparing hollow metal/metal oxides enclosed in a carbon matrix is the use of crystalline MOFs as a precursor.51,208–210 The controllable composition and selection of the structure of these MOF-derived materials are two of the advantages of this procedure. These derivatives consist of two parts: the carbon matrix which acts as a good electronic conductor and protector against corrosion, and the metal/metal oxide part which acts as active sites, the combination of the two components exhibiting a synergistic effect. Also, the internal cavity provides a greater contact surface between the electrolyte and the active sites in electrochemical reactions. Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) of MOFs with a defined crystal structure can be easily transformed into composites with this particular special hollow structure. However, the synthesis of crystalline MOFs controlling the structure, particle aggregation and morphology requires prolonged, high-temperature solvothermal treatments.211 As an alternative, less crystalline or even amorphous MOFs with highly irregular frameworks constituted by metal-linker bonds are promising materials for many applications, including drug delivery, CO oxidation, and electrochemical applications.212–215 An important requirement in this field is to find an efficient time-saving strategy for preparing this class of MOFs under mild temperature conditions and with a specific structure as precursors, to be transformed into multi-component hybrids that can allow studying the effects of composition and morphology on the electrocatalytic performance for HER and OER. In this regard, Qiao et al. employed amorphous MOFs as precursors for the bimetallic metal/metal oxide@N-graphene composite containing Fe with a tunable morphology of hollow polyhedron of mesoporous walls that was studied as an electrocatalyst for water splitting in alkaline solutions (Fig. 16a).216 There was a synergistic effect between FeNi alloy/oxide and a few-layers N-graphene shell that accelerated the transfer of electrons from the electrode to the electrocatalyst surface, resulting in lesser ohmic resistance of interfacial charge transfer and increased electrical conductivity.217 Another advantage of this morphology is that the electrochemically active surface area is increased, leading to the accessibility of more active sites on the electrocatalyst surface and facilitating ion penetration. Finally, multiple types of Fe(III) at the electrocatalyst surface are able to modulate the average Ni oxidation state, providing tunable active sites (Fig. 16b).218 Then Ni-Ni0.5Fe0.5-HP electrocatalyst (HP: hollow polyhedron) showed a good performance for the HER and OER (Fig. 16c and d). In addition, the same materials exhibit a high charge storage capacity that can be exploited in the preparation of supercapacitors.
 Fig. 16  (a) Hollow polyhedron (HP) structure of Ni-Ni0.5Fe0.5-HP and (b) schematic presentation of the charge storage and OER processes on Ni-Ni0.5Fe0.5-HP, (c) LSV curves of samples for the HER and (d) for the OER. Copyright © 2019, Elsevier. 
The stability against oxidation and excellent catalytic behavior of N-doped nanocarbons containing metals has received great attention. Recent reports have shown that hybrid metal/N-doped C electrocatalysts exhibit enhanced electrical conductivity and efficient electron transfer between intermediates and active electrocatalytic sites.219,220 DFT calculations have shown a partial bonding between the empty metal orbital (dz2) and the anti-bonding orbital of N, which favors the catalysis. Unfortunately, the limited number of accessible active sites and the inefficient mass transfer have hindered their practical use as electrodes. Co, in particular Co-Nx, has been reported to significantly enhance oxygen reduction by diminishing somewhat the adsorption of oxygen-containing intermediates.221 Ni has also been mentioned as another active transition metal for the OER. As a result, carbon nanomaterials containing both Co and Ni act as excellent electrocatalysts for the OER.222 In 2019, Zhou et al. used NiCo-ZIF-67 as a precursor to prepare a porous heteroatom-doped carbon electrocatalyst with the metal–N–C structure for the OER.223 Nitrogen doping, structure porosity and excellent electron transfer accelerate the OER process.
Metal oxides obtained from MOFs have advantages over similar samples prepared by other procedures, such as high surface area, porosity, possibility of a unique spatial structure and a high stability under alkaline conditions. Bimetallic oxides with a carbon matrix derived from MOFs significantly improve their electrocatalytic behavior compared to analogs of monometallic oxides. ZIFs are a class of MOFs with an open framework and polyhedral structural units that can be obtained with a defined particle morphology.224,225 These features are partially retained in the formation of the derived materials. In this regard, electrocatalysts of oxide nanoparticles with a spinel structure embedded in MWCNTs (denoted as ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNT) were reported by Liu et al. for the OER (Fig. 17a).226 ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNT with a unique structure containing more active sites exhibits high charge transports during the electrocatalytic process (Fig. 17b–e). The reported electrocatalysts show significant activity for the OER in the alkaline electrolyte. The interaction between ZnCo2O4 and the MWCNT as an electrically conductive substrate is one of the reasons for the improved OER performance. Improvement of the catalytic performance of ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs can be further enhanced by increasing the electrochemically active surface area that makes more active sites available (Fig. 17f). Also, its long-term stability shows its improved performance for a 25 h measurement (Fig. 17g). It was proposed that the increase in its electrochemical activity results from a strong covalent bond between ZnCo2O4@C and MWCNT.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the synthesis method of ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs, TEM images of (b) ZIF-8/ZIF-67, (c) ZIF-8/ZIF-67-MWCNTs, and (d) ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs, (e) HRTEM image of ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs, (f) LSV curves and (g) chronopotentiometry of ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs at 10 mA cm−2 and 50 mA cm−2 current densities. Copyright© 2017, Elsevier. 
ZIFs are a class of MOFs that are well-known for being ideal precursors to obtain structure-tailored nanocarbon frameworks. Among the various advantages of ZIFs, the most important ones are their abundant pores, high specific surface area and versatile surface modification. In particular, Co-based ZIF-67 is a precursor for the synthesis of Co-containing electrocatalysts.227,228 The optimization of the morphology and composition of an electrocatalyst containing a high density of surface active sites and a porous structure allowing rapid ion or electron transfer is a general strategy to improve its performance.229 Due to the very high surface area and low electrical resistance, ultrathin 2D MOF nanosheets show very good electrocatalytic performance. MoS2, on the other hand, exhibits a promising electrocatalytic activity for the HER due to its low overpotential, affordable cost and high chemical stability.230,231 Liu et al. synthesized a composite from these two materials and employed it as an electrocatalyst for the OER and HER in an alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 18a and b).232 The presence of a synergistic effect between CoNi-ZIF, metal oxide and MoS2 nanosheets and its notable stability rank this 2D MOF containing composite as an excellent electrocatalyst in alkaline solution (Fig. 18c and d). Also, the synthesis of this electrocatalyst did not require calcination and other time-consuming steps. Again, it seems in this example that by diminishing the thickness of crystallites to the 2D morphology, MOFs can be directly used as a component of advanced electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of MoS2@CoNi-ZIF, (b) schematic diagram of MoS2@CoNi-ZIF for overall water splitting, (c) LSV curves in a two electrode electrolyzer, (d) long-term stability of MoS2@CoNi-ZIF during overall water splitting. Copyright© 2019, Elsevier. 
As for the other metal composites, an effective method for enhancing the HER/OER electrocatalytic performance of transition metal phosphides is embedding them in a carbon based matrix.233–236 Therefore, the convenient synthesis of this class of carbon supported metal phosphide electrocatalysts is a very promising strategy for their application in commercial devices. As commented earlier, ZIFs are a class of highly crystalline and porous MOFs that can be prepared easily with mixed metal cations and their organic linkers contain N. Upon thermal treatment, ZIFs produce porous metal materials supported on N-doped carbon nanostructures.237 The excellent electrocatalytic performance of these ZIF derived electrocatalysts in water splitting has been proven.238 Not surprisingly, also transition metal phosphides embedded on N-doped carbon matrices exhibit excellent performance for dual HER and OER electrocatalysts. Sun et al. introduced a hybrid of Ni2P nanoparticles deposited on the MOF-derived Co, N-doped porous carbon polyhedra (Ni2P/CoN–PCP, where PCP stands for a porous carbon polyhedron) (Fig. 19a and b).239 The polyhedron morphology was imported from the ZIF precursor. Both ultrafine porosity and interaction with N atoms of carbon in CoN-PCP are apparently very effective in the prevention of Ni2P nanoparticle agglomeration, and the sample Ni2P/CoN-PCP consists of small Ni2P nanoparticles. In addition, CoN-PCP, as a support with excellent conductivity, has a high surface area with high active site density on it and many pores for easy electrolyte diffusion and mass transfer. Due to such advantages, this electrocatalyst has shown optimal behavior for the HER and OER (Fig. 19c–f).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of Ni2P/CoN-PCP synthesis, (b) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding EDAX mappings of Ni2P/CoN-PCP, (c) OER LSV curves, (d) Tafel plots of the series of samples for the OER, (e) LSV curves of the series of samples for the HER and (f) Tafel plots of the samples for the HER. Copyright© 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Ni- and Co-based MOFs have emerged as an interesting class of electrocatalytic materials due to their low cost and high performance. MOFs have the advantage of a unique structural diversity with a considerable degree of composition flexibility, particularly allowing the synthesis of bimetallic MOFs. Research on Ni-Co MOFs in the field of energy, particularly in the preparation of HER and OER electrocatalysts, is growing rapidly.240,241 However, MOFs have low stability in aqueous solutions and poor electrical conductivity, which slow electrochemical reactions. As a result, these materials face problems in long-term energy applications. As discussed, one way to overcome these problems while still taking advantage of porosity, flexible composition and structuration is the pyrolysis under an inert atmosphere of MOFs to produce metal-coordinated carbonaceous materials.242–245 Caution has to be taken to preserve as much as possible the intrinsic structural features of pristine MOFs.246 Electrode geometry, electron current between the catalyst and conductive electrode substrate and the accessibility to the active metal sites are important factors determining the activity of electrocatalysts. Therefore, the challenge is to achieve a highly efficient and stable MOF-derived electrocatalyst inheriting as better as possible the MOF structural organization, while enhancing the conductivity. An effective solution in this regard is the direct growth of the MOF particles on three-dimensional conductive porous scaffolds. This simple strategy increases the density of catalyst active sites accessible to the electrolyte. The adhesion of the grown particles also eliminates the need for adhesives that usually are insulators and affect negatively the transfer rate of electrons and ions, increasing the internal resistance. Khalid et al. synthesized NiCo-MOF nano-flocks using a chemical bath deposition method and coated them with graphene oxide using an aerosol deposition method (Fig. 20a). The role of graphene oxide is to prevent rapid dissolution of the NiCo-MOF in the electrolyte.247 The graphene oxide sheets are located at the top of the vertically aligned nano-flocks and provide physicochemical protection to the nano-flocks during the electrochemical reaction (Fig. 20b–d). The overcoat of graphene oxide ensures good electrocatalytic HER performance and electrochemical stability (Fig. 20e and f).
 Fig. 20  Schematic synthetic method of NiCo-MOF/rGOAS, SEM images of (b) NiCo-MOF coated Ni-mesh, (c) nano-flocks of NiCo-MOF and (d) the rGOAS covered nanoflocks of NiCo-MOF, (e) LSV curves of the series of samples for the HER, (f) Tafel plots of the series of samples for the HER. Copyright©2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As shown in Fig. 21a, Cui et al. synthesized electrocatalysts based on graphdiyne (GDY, see the precursor in Fig. 21a) and CoCu-ZIF for water oxidation that combine the excellent electrochemical behavior of GDY and the improved electrochemical performance of bimetallic ZIF nanosheets. A synergism between 1D and 2D structures compared to the individual components was observed. Among the reasons for the high efficiency, those that have been proposed are the existence of metal Co2+/Co3+ and Cu2+/Cu+ active sites, the very thin thickness of the nanosheets, the high surface area and the accessibility of abundant metal active sites in the CoCu-ZIF structure. Also, the presence of GDY nanowires having conjugated backbones generates many carbon dots, causing a synergistic effect between the carbon framework and the metal active sites of the MOF that results in an excellent OER performance of CoCu-ZIF@GDY. An excellent stability for 40 h and a potential of 1.48 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 has been reported for overall water splitting using this electrocatalyst (Fig. 21b and c).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the CoCu-ZIF@GDY and a cartoon on its use as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, (b) LSV curves of the series of samples in a two-electrode electrolyzer, (c) stability test of CoCu-ZIF@GDY. Copyright© 2020, Elsevier. 
As commented in the previous related examples, ZIF-derived nanocomposites exhibit improved electrocatalytic activity due to their large surface area and pore volume, while these materials present a notable stability, maintaining structure at high temperatures.248–250 For example, Yu et al. started with ZnCo-ZIFs and reported Co nanoparticles and Co3ZnC embedded in a N-doped CNT-grafted carbon polyhedra (Co3ZnC/Co-NCCP) for the HER and OER electrocatalysis.251 As expected in view of the behavior of similar materials, this electrocatalyst shows an excellent performance in electrochemical water splitting under alkaline conditions which can be attributed to its high surface area, exceptional structure, presence of active species and its highly porous structure.
FeNi nanoparticles deposited on porous N-doped graphene were prepared by Wang's research group in 2020 by laser induced graphitization of FeNi-MOF deposited on a polyamide membrane.252 The electrocatalytic behavior for the HER and OER indicated that the combination of porous N-doped graphene and FeNi nanoparticles exhibits a synergistic effect improving the composite electrocatalytic behavior.
Due to their high mechanical strength resulting from the presence of carbon atoms with sp2 hybridization, their hydrophobic nature, high surface area, elastic structure and low electrical resistance, CNTs as supports can increase the electrical conductivity and stability of pristine MOFs.253 The electrocatalytic behavior of composites containing FeNi-MOF and different weight percentages of CNTs was investigated by Yaqoob et al. with respect to their performance as an OER electrocatalyst in alkaline media. The composite with 5 wt% of CNT showed excellent behavior for the OER. The main reason for this excellent performance can be ascribed to the multivalent state of the two metals in the bimetallic MOF which easily favors the electron transfer process. Uniform dispersion of MOF on the CNT support facilitates charge transfer and electrolyte ion diffusion. The electrical conductivity and stability of CNTs and the synergistic effect between bimetallic sites and the support have resulted in the excellent electrocatalytic behavior.254 Chen's group studied bimetallic carbon nanocubes (FeNi@OCNC) for the OER using FeNi-MOF as the precursor. The obtained results showed the excellent electrocatalytic behavior of FeNi@OCNC that has been attributed to the exposure of active centers, high porosity of the material and synergistic effect of Fe-Ni.255
Anion or cation doping is one of the efficient and effective strategies to improve the performance of electrocatalysts as this approach regulates the surface electronic structure and optimizes hydrogen adsorption. In this regard, a group of researchers utilized FeNi-MIL-88 as a precursor for Ni-doped FeP/C hollow nanorods and tried to gain a deep understanding of the performance of this electrocatalyst in the HER through DFT analyses. Their studies suggest a high activity and stability of this electrocatalyst in a full pH range.256 Interestingly, the DFT results showed the importance of the material performance in the differential change distribution. Several holes of electrons around the Ni enhanced the charge transfer, hence, incrementing the electronic transfer from Ni to P and increasing the hydrogen adsorption free energy , while P–H bonding becomes weakened. All these factors improve the HER performance of the material (Fig. 22a–d).
 Fig. 22  (a)  as a function of surface coverage (θH) for Pt, FeP, and Ni-doped FeP. (b to d) DFT-calculated electronic structures. (b and c) charge density difference on Ni-doped FeP: yellow and cyan isosurfaces represent the electron accumulation and electron depletion, respectively. (d) Section line and isosurface two-dimensional view of charge density distribution. Copyright©2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Understanding the mechanisms of lattice oxygen oxidation is of crucial importance in the OER. Transition metal oxyhydroxides are a class of real OER electrocatalysts. Huang et al. used CoOOH as a model of this type of electrocatalyst to understand the influence of a second metal in the structure. By introducing Zn2+ (3d10) in the model, oxygen nonbonding states are available and holes of oxygen are created. These oxygen vacancies appear as crucial sites in the OER mechanism.257 If the neighboring lattice oxygen can bind with M–O without resulting in structural collapse, the OER mechanism can switch from the adsorbate evolution mechanism (AEM) to the lattice oxygen oxidation mechanism (LOM). Studies with these models showed Zn0.2Co0.8OOH as the optimal catalyst. Due to the Zn–O2–Co–O2–Zn configuration in the catalyst, a balance is established between refilling oxygen vacancy and O–O coupling, guaranteeing the possibility of turnover cycles and electrocatalyst stability (Fig. 23a and b).
 Fig. 23  (a) Thermodynamic stabilities between O22− and O2− species. Yellow and blue colors represent the charge accumulation and depletion, respectively, with an isosurface value of 0.015 eÅ−3. (b) Schematic of the chemical recognition of O22− species using TMA+ as a probe. Copyright©2019, Nature. 
In 2021, Li et al. reported the preparation of Mo0.84Ni0.16-Mo2C@NC by a simple hydrothermal method from the ZnNi-ZIF precursor. Mo0.84Ni0.16-Mo2C@NC exhibits very good activity as an electrocatalyst in real electrolyzers. Characterization data indicate that Mo2-C and Mo-Ni nanoparticles are homogeneously distributed in the nitrogen-rich carbon matrix. The high active site density and porous structure result in high overall water splitting performance of this electrocatalyst which showed an overpotential of 1.51 mV for overall water splitting.258
Kim et al. used NiMo-MOF as a precursor and synthesized Ni3S2/MoS2 that was used in a water electrolyzer.259 XPS analysis showed a positive shift of the Ni 2p binding energy in Ni3S2/MoS2 in comparison with Ni3S2, confirming the formation of the structure. This shift indicates a diminished electron density around Ni, suggesting a partial increase in the Ni valence state in Ni3S2/MoS2. This tuning of the Ni electron density plays a positive effect on HER and OER performance of the bimetallic Ni-Mo sulfide as an electrocatalyst. The abundance of S22− at edge sites in this heterostructure is also beneficial for the excellent overall water splitting performance of Mo0.84Ni0.16-Mo2C@NC.
Hollow NiFe2O4@N/rGO-800 is also an efficient HER and OER electrocatalyst that has been used as a cathode and an anode in a water electrolyzer. A low cell voltage and high electrocatalyst stability were observed for NiFe2O4@N/rGO-800. This notable performance was explained as derived from the abundance of active sites due to the hollow NiFe2O4@N/rGO-800 structure and fast electron transfer rate because of the presence of the carbon material. The presence of oxygen vacancies also diminishes the electrode resistance and improves the overall water splitting performance.260
8.6 Other derivatives
Spatially organized nanostructures may improve the electrocatalytic performance.261–263 Porous nanostructures make possible the diffusion of electrolyte ions to electrochemically active sites.264–266 Different substrates have also been used to increase the mass transfer efficiency and electrical conductivity, such as graphene,267,268 CNTs,269,270 porous carbon, etc.271,272 Recently, carbon/metal oxides with high electrocatalytic activity have been synthesized using well-organized MOF precursors.108,273 Nanostructured materials were obtained by pyrolysis from MOF precursors containing flexible organic ligands and active metal centers.274–276 Nanocarbons derived from the transformation of organic ligands embedding the active metal sites increase the electrical conductivity and corrosion resistance of catalysts.277–279 Also, organic ligands containing heteroatoms become converted into doped carbon nanostructures with distinct electronic properties and work functions that undoped analogues possess.280–282 Wang's group successfully synthesized the Ni3ZnC0.7 electrocatalyst using a bimetallic MOF precursor (Fig. 24).283 As Zn/Zn2+ has a d10 electronic configuration and the d orbitals are fully occupied, this metal is generally not able to contribute to the electrocatalytic activity. However, the presence of Zn can modulate the electrocatalytic properties by alloying with the active metal sites.284 The reported Ni3ZnC0.7 electrocatalyst exhibits excellent performance for the HER and OER and exhibits good stability. This notable performance was ascribed to the synergistic effect between the spatial structure of the material and the influence of Zn modulating Ni activity. It also confirms that tuning the electron density of the active sites is an efficient way to optimize the electrocatalytic performance by adjusting the redox potential of the Ni active site.
 Fig. 24  (a) Sketch of the synthesis of the cubic crystalline structure of Ni3ZnC0.7, (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Ni3ZnC0.7, (d) STEM and related elemental mapping of Ni3ZnC0.7. LSV curves of the series of samples for the HER (e) and OER (f). Copyright© 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
8.7 
          In situ techniques in the water splitting

In situ/Operando techniques provide important information regarding the nature of the active sites and the intermediates. These techniques have been amply used to gain insights into electrochemical processes,285 including examples in which the electrocatalysts are MOF-derived bimetallic materials. These techniques include transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction spectroscopy, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), Raman, Infrared spectroscopy (IR), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Not unfrequently, electrocatalysts undergo structural reconstruction during water splitting and in situ/operando monitoring can be employed to evaluate the evolution of the electrocatalyst sites under reaction conditions. The structural changes of the electrocatalyst can be complex and depend on numerous experimental factors, requiring the combination of the information of various techniques to gain a deeper understanding. The changes in the electrocatalyst can be in electronic configuration, oxidation state, particle morphology or crystal phase, limiting the performance of the electrocatalysts. In situ/operando techniques offer information on reaction intermediates which cannot be obtained by ex situ techniques.
Su et al. assessed the OER performance of NiFe-PBA (NF-PBA; PBA: Prussian Blue Analog) at the atomic level based on the operando techniques combined with the ex situ methods.286 Available data indicated the transformation of the material structure under OER conditions, leading to an excellent performance of the material. Thus, using operando techniques such as Ni K-edge XAS studies, it was revealed that in situ-produced amorphous Ni(OH)2 is the real electrocatalyst. The operando XAS technique also indicated that Ni ions are capable of being oxidized into high valence oxides in amorphous domains, thus they can exhibit high activity. DFT calculations of this system indicate the overlap of 3d orbitals of Ni4+ with the 2p orbitals of oxygen, resulting in an upward energy shift that favors the OER (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Operando Ni K-edge XAS spectra of NF-PBA-A under different potentials. (a) XANES spectra of NF-PBA-A as well as references. The inset shows the shift of the Ni K-edge position. (b) FT-EXAFS of NF-PBA-A. Copyright©2018, American Chemical Society. 
In a recent study by Zhao et al., the transformation undergone by Ni0.5Co0.5-MOF-74 in the OER was assessed using the operando XAS technique.287 They reported better OER performance upon the generation of oxygen vacancies and high oxidation states. Moreover, the ratio of Co to Ni determined the electronic structure and geometry of the formed active sites, improving the OER performance in such a way that an overpotential of 198 mV was obtained at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  (a) and (b) Ni K-edge XANES spectra and Fourier-transformed k3-weighted EXAFS signals recorded at different potentials in 1 M KOH. The arrows in (a) indicate the isosbestic points associated with the structural transformation. R is the peak location scale for the Fourier-transformed magnitude in real space, without phase shift correction, (c) change in the Ni and Co valence states and OER current as a function of applied potential, (d) changes in bond length and coordination number for the Ni–O and Ni–M coordination shells and (e) comparison of Ni K-edge EXAFS WTs recorded for the pristine sample, standard references and catalytic materials at 1.1, 1.3 and 1.5 V, with an optimum resolution at 3.0 Å. Copyright©2020, Nature. 
9. Conclusions and outlook
One of the most feasible ways to produce hydrogen is electrochemical water splitting. To date, various types of electrocatalysts have been explored in the field of electrochemical water-splitting. Among them, electrocatalysts derived from MOFs have attracted great attention. This class of MOF-derived materials have unique structural properties compared to other types of electrocatalysts with no alternative preparation procedure. Their advantages are related to the chemical composition, porous structures and defined morphology. Starting from MOFs it is also possible to introduce a second metal in a wide range of proportions. A common criticism of why to prepare a crystalline material with an organic component that later has to be decomposed is answered by the superior performance of the MOF-derived material as a consequence of the homogeneous distribution of the two metals located at the nodal position and the controlled particle morphology, frequently unique. The advantage of MOF-derived materials is also evident when the organic linker is an affordable organic linker, like terephthalate, trimesic acid, imidazole and others. Thus, derivatives of these bimetallic-MOFs exhibit improved advantages and enhanced electrocatalytic performance derived from the synergism between the redox pairs of the two metals, excellent interfacial contact among the various possible phases and increased electrical conductivity.
The present review has summarized the latest developments in first-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic-MOFs as advanced and efficient electrocatalysts for the HER/OER and various structural strategies to improve their electrocatalytic activity. Based on the current state of the art, the following conclusions can be drawn:
(1) The surface composition of bimetallic electrocatalysts is one of the major parameters determining their performance. The results show that the presence of two metals largely improves the performance and stability of this class of materials as electrocatalysts for the HER/OER.
(2) The unique structural properties of MOFs, including high surface area, porosity and composition, are inherited to a large extent when they are transformed into their derivatives. In the case of bimetallic MOFs a large number of active centers are formed as compared to monometallic-MOFs or even other precursors, resulting in a superior electrocatalytic performance.
(3) There is a paucity of theoretical studies and modeling to understand the present activity data and predict the performance of unexplored combinations. It is expected that DFT calculations will be more frequently used in the future to predict the electronic structure of bimetallic electrocatalysts, leading to the design of ideal surfaces for electrochemical reactions.
(4) New synthetic methodologies to transform first-row transition metal-containing bimetallic MOFs into electrocatalysts can result in even higher specific surface area, novel morphologies and appropriate structures. Besides pyrolysis, other chemical and electrochemical methods could be implemented.
(5) Surface functionalization and selection of the appropriate composition should further extend the application of bimetallic electrocatalysts derived from MOFs beyond water electrolysis in other electrocatalytic processes.
(6) Besides bimetallic, it can also be envisioned that tri- and multimetallic MOFs can render, upon transformation, derived multimetallic oxides, sulfides, phosphides and composites with even better performance as water splitting electrocatalysts.
(7) The direct use of MOFs as HER/OER electrocatalysts could be possible by appropriate control of the crystal morphology. Thin 2D MOF nanosheets appear to be specially suited for this purpose.
Despite advances in the design and synthesis of first-row transition metals-containing electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic-MOFs, academic and industrial research in this field faces challenges. At the academic level, the number of reports on the efficient design and synthesis of first-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic-MOF for electrochemical water splitting is considerable and is growing rapidly. Among them, the combination of cobalt and nickel is the one that has been most widely investigated in the development of cost-effective electrocatalysts for electrochemical water splitting. However, in most of these reports, strategies to improve the performance of electrocatalysts have been pursued by improving the electron and ion transfer and increasing the specific surface area. Few reports have focused on understanding the reaction mechanism and adapting surface and composition to each individual half-reaction. The combination of in situ/operando techniques with computational calculations on the model should provide insights into the origin of the improved performance and provide descriptors and hints to design new generations of advanced materials.
Electrocatalysts to be used for commercial hydrogen generation on a large scale via an electrochemical water splitting method are required to be inexpensive, earth abundant, and highly efficient for addressing the slow kinetics of the OER. As electrocatalysts that contain first row transition metals are cost effective, earth abundant, and can be utilized in basic media, they have made significant progress in this field. Detailed studies are needed to logically and accurately design these electrocatalysts with numerous active sites and ideal stability in industrial applications. Despite significant progress in this field, considerable efforts and research should be done to commercialize the first row transition metal based MOF derivative electrocatalyst. Discussions on active sites and details of the mechanism of these electrocatalysts require much more detailed research with an understanding of the reaction mechanisms and predictive tools. For commercial application of these electrocatalysts and their capability for practical applications, their stability needs to be determined at much higher current densities in the range of 100 mA cm2 and for extended periods. Therefore, in order to consider and apply the first row transition metal based electrocatalysts in industry and commerce, a series of challenges such as identification of active sites by suitable techniques, optimization of their performance and especially their stability under relevant conditions and investigation of their structure and composition during electrochemical processes should be addressed. Generally, a deep understanding of the behavior and performance of these electrocatalysts facilitates their design with improved performance. The growing efforts of the research community provide a valued aid for the screening and design of advanced electrocatalysts based on first row transition metals suitable for practical applications.
Industrially, the production-scale and cost are of the greatest importance for mass distribution of electrocatalysts. So far, although the number of reports on the synthesis of first-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic MOFs is large, reports on their use in high power electrolyzers are scarce. In current research, few studies have examined the effect of production scale-up on the electrocatalyst performance. Since the current evidence shows the improved performance of bimetallic electrocatalysts and considering the importance of water electrolysis in the future decarbonized energy, it is important to assess the techno-economical viability of large scale production for these bimetallic electrocatalysts derived from MOFs.
Methodologies designed for first-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic MOFs can be utilized to develop other electrocatalysts as well. In fact, heteroatom-doping, morphology engineering, hybridization with additional components, and defect engineering with the generation of oxygen vacancies have also been employed to increase the performance of other electrocatalysts. However, an optimal electrocatalyst with ready for commercialization in electrochemical devices still remains a major challenge. In summary, first-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts derived from bimetallic-MOFs are promising candidates as electrocatalysts which in addition to the excellent performance bring compatibility and simplicity to electrocatalytic systems. With continued research in this field, it is expected that first-row transition metal-containing bimetallic electrocatalysts derived from MOFs could play in the near future a valuable and prevalent role in the production of green hydrogen.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Tarbiat Modares University and financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (Severo Ochoa and RTI2018-98237-CO2-1), Generalitat Valenciana (Prometeo 2017-083) and the European Commission (ECO2Fuel) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, T. Xiong, H. Qu, J. J. Koh, D. K. Nandakumar, J. Wang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4891–4902 RSC .
P. E. Brockway, A. Owen, L. I. Brand-Correa and L. Hardt, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 612–621 CrossRef CAS .
H.-F. Wang, L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1414–1448 RSC .
H. Shao, Y.-C. Wu, Z. Lin, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3005–3039 RSC .
F. A. Mashkani, H. Gharibi, M. Amani, M. Zhiani and A. Morsali, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 584, 152529 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahmani, H. B. M. Emrooz, S. Abedi and A. Morsali, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2018, 80, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shang, Z. Z. Liu, S. S. Lu, B. Dong, J. Q. Chi, J. F. Qin, X. Liu, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43561–43569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ge, L. Li, J. Su, Y. Lin, Z. Tian and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901313 CrossRef .
K. Jiang, B. Liu, M. Luo, S. Ning, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, F. M. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, J. He, Y. Xiao, Y. Li and J.-J. Delaunay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3269–3306 RSC .
Z. Kang, H. Guo, J. Wu, X. Sun, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, S. Zhang, H. Si, P. Wu, L. Wang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807031 CrossRef .
H. Chen, M. Zhang, T. Tran-Phu, R. Bo, L. Shi, I. Di Bernardo, J. Bing, J. Pan, S. Singh, J. Lipton-Duffin, T. Wu, R. Amal, S. Huang, A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie and A. Tricoli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008245 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prasannachandran, T. Vineesh, M. Lithin, R. Nandakishore and M. Shaijumon, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8623–8626 RSC .
S. Li, X. Yang, S. Yang, Q. Gao, S. Zhang, X. Yu, Y. Fang, S. Yang and X. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5601–5611 RSC .
H. Zeng, X. Liu, F. Chen, Z. Chen, X. Fan and W. Lau, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 52549–52559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Khalakhan, M. Bogar, M. Vorokhta, P. Kúš, Y. Yakovlev, M. Dopita, D. J. S. Sandbeck, S. Cherevko, I. Matolínová and H. Amenitsch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17602–17610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. T. Aziz, S. Kumar, S. Riyajuddin, K. Ghosh, G. D. Nessim and D. P. Dubal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 5138–5149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, K. Wu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen and A. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8614–8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, R. Lu, Z. Pu, J. Zhu, H.-W. Li, F. Liu, S. Hu, X. Luo, J. Wu, Y. Zhao and S. Mu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 279, 119396 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rahmanifar, H. Hesari, A. Noori, M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali and M. F. Mousavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 275, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, X. Han, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, D. Nordlund, J. Wang, S. Chou, H. Liu, L. Li and C. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, Y. Yang, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13069–13080 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, M. Zhang, G. Yang, W. Song, W. Zhong, X. Wang, M. Wang, T. Sun and Y. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101532 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, M. Huang, S. Guo, Q. Wang, M. Li, X. Xiao, G. Cao, Y. Shao, Y. Shen and Y. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 424–431 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, Y. Sun, G. N. G. Scherer, A. C. Fisher, M. Sherburne, J. W. Ager and Z. J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7765–7775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Heshmatpour and R. Abazari, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 55815–55826 RSC .
N.-T. Suen, Z.-R. Kong, C.-S. Hsu, H.-C. Chen, C.-W. Tung, Y.-R. Lu, C.-L. Dong, C.-C. Shen, J.-C. Chung and H. M. Chen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5217–5222 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ortiz Peña, D. Ihiawakrim, M. Han, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, S. Carenco, C. Sanchez, C. Laberty-Robert, D. Portehault and O. Ersen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11372–11381 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Jo, M. W. Lee, C. H. Kim, J. W. Choung, H. C. Ham and K.-Y. Lee, Catal. Today, 2021, 359, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, S. Chen, L. Song, B. Zheng, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1198–1204 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abazari, S. Sanati, A. Morsali, A. M. Z. Slawin, C. L. Carpenter-Warren, W. Chen and A. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11953–11966 RSC .
R. Abazari, S. Sanati, A. Morsali, A. M. Kirillov, A. M. Z. Slawin and C. L. Carpenter-Warren, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 2056–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sanati, R. Abazari and A. Morsali, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6652–6655 RSC .
Y. Zhou, R. Abazari, J. Chen, M. Tahir, A. Kumar, R. R. Ikreedeegh, E. Rani, H. Singh and A. M. Kirillov, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 451, 214264 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abazari, S. Sanati and A. Morsali, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 3396–3405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abazari, S. Sanati, A. Morsali and A. M. Kirillov, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 9660–9672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abazari, S. Sanati, A. Morsali and D. P. Dubal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11001–11012 RSC .
Y. Yan, R. Abazari, J. Yao and J. Gao, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 2342–2349 RSC .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Abazari and A. R. Mahjoub, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 42, 577–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Berijani and A. Morsali, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 3618–3658 RSC .
X. Luo, R. Abazari, M. Tahir, W. K. Fan, A. Kumar, T. Kalhorizadeh, A. M. Kirillov, A. R. Amani-Ghadim, J. Chen and Y. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 461, 214505 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abazari, E. Yazdani, M. Nadafan, A. M. Kirillov, J. Gao, A. M. Z. Slawin and C. L. Carpenter-Warren, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 9700–9708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sanati, R. Abazari, J. Albero, A. Morsali, H. García, Z. Liang and R. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11048–11067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Abazari, Y. Wu, J. Gao and Q. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2021, 126, 107024 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, H. Jin, Z. Wang, Y. Xiong, S. Yuan, X. Zeng, D. He and S. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Li, M. A. Bañares, L.-T. Weng, Q. Gu, J. Price, W. Han and K. L. Yeung, Small, 2019, 15, 1903525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, Q. Huang, J. Ding, L. Zhong, T.-T. Li, J. Pan, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 22268–22276 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D.-D. Ma, C. Cao, R. Zou, Q. Xu, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1902218 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiao, B. Guo, J. Zhang, C. Hu, R. Ma, D. Wang and J. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 5730–5735 RSC .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gadipelli, T. Zhao, S. A. Shevlin and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1661–1667 RSC .
L. Zhang, Z. Su, F. Jiang, L. Yang, J. Qian, Y. Zhou, W. Li and M. Hong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6590–6602 RSC .
M. Gupta and J. J. Vittal, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 435, 213789 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, S. L. Hanna, L. R. Redfern, D. Alezi, T. Islamoglu and O. K. Farha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 386, 32–49 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seoane, S. Castellanos, A. Dikhtiarenko, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 147–187 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bon, N. Kavoosi, I. Senkovska, P. Müller, J. Schaber, D. Wallacher, D. M. Többens, U. Mueller and S. Kaskel, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4407–4415 RSC .
I. Strauss, A. Mundstock, M. Treger, K. Lange, S. Hwang, C. Chmelik, P. Rusch, N. C. Bigall, T. Pichler, H. Shiozawa and J. Caro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14175–14181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Johnson, S. Ilic and A. J. Morris, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 445–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Kung, A. E. Platero-Prats, R. J. Drout, J. Kang, T. C. Wang, C. O. Audu, M. C. Hersam, K. W. Chapman, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30532–30540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hua, P. W. Doheny, B. Ding, B. Chan, M. Yu, C. J. Kepert and D. M. D’Alessandro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6622–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Phang, H. Jo, W. R. Lee, J. H. Song, K. Yoo, B. Kim and C. S. Hong, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 5231–5235 CrossRef .
K. Biradha, A. Goswami, R. Moi and S. Saha, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 10655–10673 RSC .
R. Moi, A. Ghorai, S. Banerjee and K. Biradha, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20, 5557–5563 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, X. Dyosiba, N. M. Musyoka, H. W. Langmi, M. Mathe and S. Liao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 352, 187–219 CrossRef CAS .
P. Silva, S. M. Vilela, J. P. Tome and F. A. A. Paz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6774–6803 RSC .
M. Rubio-Martinez, C. Avci-Camur, A. W. Thornton, I. Imaz, D. Maspoch and M. R. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3453–3480 RSC .
I. Thomas-Hillman, A. Laybourn, C. Dodds and S. W. Kingman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11564–11581 RSC .
N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 285, 11–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Asghar, N. Iqbal, T. Noor, B. M. Kariuki, L. Kidwell and T. L. Easun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1220–1227 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Ye, M. Zhang and Y. Gong, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 4720–4726 RSC .
Q. Liu, J. Chen, P. Yang, F. Yu, Z. Liu and B. Peng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 416–424 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Egorova and V. P. Ananikov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12150–12162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, J. Chen, F. Wang and Y. Li, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 424, 213488 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, X. Li, B. Yan, Q. Hu, Y. Xu, X. Xiao, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602733 CrossRef .
B. Ye, R. Jiang, Z. Yu, Y. Hou, J. Huang, B. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and R. Zhang, J. Catal., 2019, 380, 307–317 CrossRef CAS .
Y. An, Y. Liu, P. An, J. Dong, B. Xu, Y. Dai, X. Qin, X. Zhang, M. H. Whangbo and B. Huang, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 3082–3086 CrossRef .
K. Srinivas, Y. Lu, Y. Chen, W. Zhang and D. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3820–3831 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Dou, X.-Q. Wu, A. Zhou, L. Shu and J.-R. Li, Small, 2020, 16, 1906564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Sapnik, H. S. Geddes, E. M. Reynolds, H. H.-M. Yeung and A. L. Goodwin, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9651–9654 RSC .
M. Lammert, C. Glißmann and N. Stock, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 2425–2429 RSC .
S. Wongsakulphasatch, F. Nouar, J. Rodriguez, L. Scott, C. Le Guillouzer, T. Devic, P. Horcajada, J.-M. Grenèche, P. Llewellyn and A. Vimont, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10194–10197 RSC .
Q. Yao, J. Sun, K. Li, J. Su, M. V. Peskov and X. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 3953–3955 RSC .
H. Fei, J. F. Cahill, K. A. Prather and S. M. Cohen, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 4011–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, J. F. Cahill, H. Fei, K. A. Prather and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18082–18088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim and A. Coskun, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 5153–5158 CrossRef .
X. Song, S. Jeong, D. Kim and M. S. Lah, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5753–5756 RSC .
W. Guo, W. Xia, K. Cai, Y. Wu, B. Qiu, Z. Liang, C. Qu and R. Zou, Small, 2017, 13, 1702049 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Shang, J. Li, Y. Wang, H. Xu, C. Wang, J. Guo and Y. Du, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129805 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ao, Q. Wei and W. A. Daoud, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33595–33602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Chai, J. Ding, L. Zhong, Y. Du, T.-T. Li, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 745–753 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, S. Wang, C. Feng, H. Wu, J. Zhang and H. Mei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 7414–7422 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Shi, Y. Chen, D. Li, G. Wu, C. Wang and L. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 376, 138040 CrossRef CAS .
A. Han, B. Wang, A. Kumar, Y. Qin, J. Jin, X. Wang, C. Yang, B. Dong, Y. Jia, J. Liu and X. Sun, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800471 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, B. Li, S. Zheng, P. Wu, J. Zhan, H. Xue, Q. Xu and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22070–22076 RSC .
P. Thangasamy, S. Shanmuganathan and V. Subramanian, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 2073–2079 RSC .
L. Zhuang, L. Ge, H. Liu, Z. Jiang, Y. Jia, Z. Li, D. Yang, R. K. Hocking, M. Li and L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 13699–13706 CrossRef .
A. Shahraei, A. Moradabadi, I. Martinaiou, S. Lauterbach, S. Klemenz, S. Dolique, H.-J. Kleebe, P. Kaghazchi and U. I. Kramm, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25184–25193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Yang, T. Su, X. Wang, C. Sun and Z. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5000–5006 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Wang, S. Peng, L. Zhang, A. M. Al-Enizi, H. Zhang, X. Sun and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501661 CrossRef .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11973–12000 RSC .
M. Fang, G. Dong, R. Wei and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700559 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Lv, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 951–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, J. Lin, X. Wang and Z. Shen, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700369 CrossRef .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3092–3096 RSC .
X. Wang, J. He, B. Yu, B. Sun, D. Yang, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, L. Gu and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117996 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan, X. Liu, A. M. Elshahawy, H. Zhang, H. Wu, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2017, 2, 342–348 RSC .
X. Wang, F. Li, W. Li, W. Gao, Y. Tang and R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17982–17989 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Li, K. Li, Y. Lin, J. Chen, L. Gao, V. Nicolosi, X. Xiao and J.-M. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1354–1390 RSC .
Q. Yun, L. Li, Z. Hu, Q. Lu, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, L. Cao, P. Dai, X. Gu, D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wang and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703455 CrossRef .
H. Tabassum, W. Guo, W. Meng, A. Mahmood, R. Zhao, Q. Wang and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601671 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, C. Xiao, S. Xie, J. Liang, X. Chen and Y. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6934–6941 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Kang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502585 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600221 CrossRef .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sengupta, C. Sandoval-Pauker, E. Schueller, A. M. Encerrado-Manriquez, A. Metta-Magaña, W.-Y. Lee, R. Seshadri, B. Pinter and S. Fortier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8233–8242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Dehcheshmeh, R. Karimi Shervedani and M. Torabi, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 327, 134895 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, S. Hou, S. A. Watzele, B. Garlyyev, W. Li, A. S. Bandarenka and R. A. Fischer, ChemElectroChem, 2022, 9, e202101476 CAS .
W. Liu, L. Liu, G. Ji, D. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Ma and Y. Du, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7961–7971 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, H. Wang, X. Bo and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8018–8024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, B. Zheng, L. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Zhuang and B. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23222–23229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shuai, Z. Mo, X. Niu, P. Zhao, Q. Dong, Y. Chen, N. Liu and R. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 847, 156514 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Hou and C. Yuan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1366–1374 RSC .
Z. Yin, C. Zhu, C. Li, S. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19129–19138 RSC .
Y. Yan, J. Lin, K. Bao, T. Xu, J. Qi, J. Cao, Z. Zhong, W. Fei and J. Feng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 552, 332–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Muthurasu, G. P. Ojha, M. Lee and H. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 14465–14476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Deng, S. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Lang, X. Cao and H. Gu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21259–21265 RSC .
Y. Pan, K. Sun, S. Liu, X. Cao, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2610–2618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Niu, D. Rakov, Y. Wang, M. Cabán-Acevedo, S. Zheng, B. Song and P. Xu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7291–7297 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Ye, J.-Q. Xie, Y. Li, C. Yan, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2734–2742 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14686–14693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-A. Stern, L. Feng, F. Song and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2347–2351 RSC .
X.-Y. Yu, Y. Feng, B. Guan, X. W. Lou and U. Paik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1246–1250 RSC .
D. Li, H. Baydoun, C. N. Verani and S. L. Brock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4006–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Babu, Y. Huang, G. Anandhababu, M. A. Ghausi and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38621–38628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, Z. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Yang and L. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 457, 1081–1086 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6814–6819 CrossRef .
J. Yu, Q. Li, Y. Li, C.-Y. Xu, L. Zhen, V. P. Dravid and J. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7644–7651 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, M. W. Bhushan and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 714–721 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2158–2165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tian, L. Ai and J. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 10290–10295 RSC .
X. Wei, Y. Zhang, H. He, L. Peng, S. Xiao, S. Yao and P. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10896–10899 RSC .
P. He, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3897–3900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, J. Du, P. Xi and C. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 362–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, J. Jin, H. Lin, Z. Yin, J. Li, M. Lu, L. Guo, P. Xi, Y. Tang and C.-H. Yan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fan, J. Huang, G. Chen, W. Chen, R. Zhang, S. Chu, X. Wang, C. Li and K. K. Ostrikov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1622–1632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Jiang, T. An and M. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25465–25498 RSC .
W. Zhao, S. Wang, C. Feng, H. Wu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40491–40499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Rasmussen and K. S. Thygesen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13169–13183 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, Y. Yan, X. Jin, C. Huang, W. Jin, B. Gao and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105234 CrossRef CAS .
U. De Silva, J. Masud, N. Zhang, Y. Hong, W. P. Liyanage, M. A. Zaeem and M. Nath, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7608–7622 RSC .
J. Masud, P. C. Ioannou, N. Levesanos, P. Kyritsis and M. Nath, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3128–3132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, B. Xu, X. Yang, H. Zhang and C. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 5983–5989 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fang, Q. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, A. Pan and S. Liang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5635–5645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, Y. Du, Y. Fu, W. Wang, T. Zhan, Y. Liu, Y. Yang and L. Wang, Composites, Part B, 2019, 177, 107252 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, J. Feng, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Liu, G.-C. Wang, F. Cheng and P. Xi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805298 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, L. Huang, X. Liu and L. Ai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7193–7201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Adegoke and N. W. Maxakato, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 21, 100816 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, G. Zhu, H. Wen, X. Guan, X. Sun, H. Feng, W. Tian, D. Zheng, X. Cheng and Y. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8771–8776 RSC .
H. Niu, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Luo, N. Xin and W. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8503–8509 RSC .
X. Du, H. Su and X. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16917–16926 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, Z. Xu, H. Pan, Y. Lin, Z. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12506–12514 RSC .
E. Hu, Y. Feng, J. Nai, D. Zhao, Y. Hu and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 872–880 RSC .
W. Liu, L. Yu, R. Yin, X. Xu, J. Feng, X. Jiang, D. Zheng, X. Gao, X. Gao, W. Que, P. Ruan, F. Wu, W. Shi and X. Cao, Small, 2020, 16, 1906775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Han, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Song and S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1698–1707 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, N. Gong, C. Ding, Y. Li, W. Peng, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 26118–26127 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, L. Li, D. Nordlund, H. Chen, L. Fan, B. Zhang, X. Sheng, Q. Daniel and L. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Jiang, T. Ding, G. Chen, W. Xu and Q. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500454 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, X. L. Li, B. X. Tao, X. H. Wang, Y. H. Deng, X. Y. Gu, L. J. Li, W. Xiao, N. B. Li and H. Q. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 634–646 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Luo, K. Wan, D. Plessers, B. Sels, J. Song, L. Chen, T. Zhang, P. Tang, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol and J. Fransaer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1616–1628 RSC .
G. F. Chen, T. Y. Ma, Z. Q. Liu, N. Li, Y. Z. Su, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3314–3323 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173–3181 RSC .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, R. Zhang, Y.-C. Wang, G. Shen, I. Aslam, M. Qadeer, N. Mahmood, W. Xu and L. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2177–2182 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Wang, Y.-Y. Hsu, R. Chen, T.-S. Chan, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500091 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Liu, D. Chao, J. Yan, J. Lin and Z. X. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7162–7169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, B. Zhao, S. Zhang, X. Gao and C. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7732–7740 RSC .
X. Wu, L. Jiang, C. Long and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 527–536 CrossRef CAS .
D. Senthil Raja, X.-F. Chuah and S.-Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801065 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, A.-M. Zhang, X.-X. Wang, Q. Huang, X. Zhu, X.-L. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8735–8741 RSC .
D. Duan, H. Yang, Y. Ding, L. Li and G. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 302, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Y.-P. Wu, X. Wang, J.-W. Tian, D.-D. Huang, J. Zhao, Y.-Q. Lan and D.-S. Li, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 4804–4809 RSC .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, J. R. J. Simke, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 9059–9064 CrossRef .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .
H. Mei, Y. Mei, S. Zhang, Z. Xiao, B. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Fan, Z. Huang, W. Kang and D. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10953–10960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, P. Wang, Z. Wang, S. K. Kær, Y. Zhang and Y. Yue, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104032 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jin, S.-Y. Lu, X. Zhong, H. Liu, H. Liu, M. Gan and L. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 1933–1942 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pachfule, D. Shinde, M. Majumder and Q. Xu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 718–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Xiang, Z. Shen, J. Yun and D. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 442–450 RSC .
K. Maity, K. Bhunia, D. Pradhan and K. Biradha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37548–37553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, P. Wang, C. Li, H. Li and Y. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37095–37102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Z. Liu and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zha, M. Li, Z. Liu and Y. Ni, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12025–12035 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, B. Pattengale, D. Fan, Z. Zou, Y. Zhao, J. Du, J. Huang and C. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2520–2526 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zou, T. Wang, X. Zhao, W.-J. Jiang, H. Pan, D. Gao and C. Xu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7356–7364 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Q. Zha and Y. Ni, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18332–18340 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, T. Tadesse Tsega, X. Liu, J. Zai, X.-H. Li, X. Liu, W. Li, N. Ali and X. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11903–11909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Xue, H. Su, Q.-Y. Yu, B. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602355 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. D. Baró, E. Pellicer and J. Sort, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12490–12499 RSC .
L. Yu, H. Hu, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604563 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, H. Wang and C. Guan, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 1188–1199 RSC .
L. Yu, J. F. Yang, B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 172–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, H. B. Wu and X. W. D. Lou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 293–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Lin, H. Jiang, C. Wu, H. Liu, C. Wang, S. Chen, T. Duan and L. Song, Small, 2018, 14, 1702074 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-F. Lu, L.-F. Gu, J.-W. Wang, J.-X. Wu, P.-Q. Liao and G.-R. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604437 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shang, H. Yu, X. Huang, T. Bian, R. Shi, Y. Zhao, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1668–1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Bennett and S. Horike, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 431–440 CrossRef .
J. Li, W. Huang, M. Wang, S. Xi, J. Meng, K. Zhao, J. Jin, W. Xu, Z. Wang and X. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 285–292 CrossRef .
C. Orellana-Tavra, E. F. Baxter, T. Tian, T. D. Bennett, N. K. Slater, A. K. Cheetham and D. Fairen-Jimenez, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13878–13881 RSC .
X. Zhang, H. Li, X. Lv, J. Xu, Y. Wang, C. He, N. Liu, Y. Yang and Y. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 8822–8832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiao, Y. Yang, X. Dai, H. Zhao, J. Yong, L. Yu, X. Luan, M. Cui, X. Zhang and X. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 430–439 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
O. Diaz-Morales, I. Ledezma-Yanez, M. T. Koper and F. Calle-Vallejo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5380–5387 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, Z. Liang, R. Zou and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2650–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, L. Ge, A. Veksha and G. Lisak, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13028–13033 RSC .
S. Kattel, P. Atanassov and B. Kiefer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 148–153 RSC .
B.-W. Zhang, Y.-X. Wang, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800497 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Xu, S. Zhao, Z. Guo, K.-H. Wu, C. Tan and Z. Wang, Front. Chem., 2019, 747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Yin, G. Li, B. Chen and Z. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 16179–16186 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, R. Li, G. Ma, X. Gou, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20674–20684 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Xie, Y. Nan, G. Gou, X. Li, Y. Fang, X. Wang, Y. Tang, H. Yang and J. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 257, 233–242 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, L. Ren, X. Xu, Y. Du and S. X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801257 CrossRef .
T. Wang, Z. Kou, S. Mu, J. Liu, D. He, I. S. Amiinu, W. Meng, K. Zhou, Z. Luo, S. Chaemchuen and F. Verpoort, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705048 CrossRef .
H. Li, F. Ke and J. Zhu, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 89 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Yin, L. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, D. Yan, Y. Song and S. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 537–544 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Wang, T. Cai, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Song, X. Dong and L. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 321, 366–374 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Hu, S. Wu, M. Wang, Z. Zhang, B. Cui, L. He and M. Du, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117970 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Wang, C. Ye, H. Liu, M. Xu and S. J. Bao, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 1981–1985 CrossRef .
H. Li, S.-M. Xu, H. Yan, L. Yang and S. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800367 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, M. Lin, J. Li, L. Huang, Z. Zhuang, C. Lin, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8372–8375 RSC .
Z. Pu, C. Zhang, I. S. Amiinu, W. Li, L. Wu and S. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16187–16193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, A. Han, Y. Zhai, J. Zhang, W.-C. Cheong, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9490–9493 RSC .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong and Z. Deng, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 10958–10963 CrossRef .
T. Sun, S. Zhang, L. Xu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12101–12104 RSC .
M. Khalid, A. M. Honorato, H. Varela and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khalid, A. M. Honorato, E. A. Ticianelli and H. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12106–12114 RSC .
B. Y. Guan, X. Y. Yu, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703614 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cao, C. Tan, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660–2677 RSC .
Y. V. Kaneti, J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, X. Jiang, A. Yu, K. C.-W. Wu and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604898 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, D. Zhu, C. Guo, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700518 CrossRef .
H. x Zhong, J. Wang, Y. w Zhang, W. l Xu, W. Xing, D. Xu, Y. f Zhang and X. b Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14235–14239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khalid, A. Hassan, A. M. Honorato, F. N. Crespilho and H. Varela, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11048–11051 RSC .
J. Kim, C. Young, J. Lee, M.-S. Park, M. Shahabuddin, Y. Yamauchi and J. H. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6073 RSC .
W. Zhou, J. Lu, K. Zhou, L. Yang, Y. Ke, Z. Tang and S. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, C. Young, J. Lee, Y.-U. Heo, M.-S. Park, M. S. A. Hossain, Y. Yamauchi and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15065–15072 RSC .
Z. Yu, Y. Bai, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Wei, Q. Wu and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6245–6252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Feng, M. Zhou, X. Bo and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 6336–6343 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali, D. Akyüz, M. A. Asghar, A. Koca and B. Keskin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 1123–1128 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yaqoob, T. Noor, N. Iqbal, H. Nasir, N. Zaman and K. Talha, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 850, 156583 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, E. Lv, Q. Ji, L. Zou, H. Liu, J. Yong and J. Gao, J. Solid State Chem., 2020, 291, 121679 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Xi, S. Dou, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, C. Wang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Ma, Y. Gu, L. Zhao, Q. Zhou and W. Xu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 592, 349–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, K. Min, H. Kim, R. Yoo, S. E. Shim, D. Lim and S.-H. Baeck, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 8165–8176 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, Z. Li, K. Su, M. Zhang and B. Cheng, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 54, 595–603 CrossRef .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahmood, W. Guo, H. Tabassum and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600423 CrossRef .
G. L. Tian, M. Q. Zhao, D. Yu, X. Y. Kong, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Pérez, S. H. Yeon, J. Ségalini, V. Presser, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1081–1089 CrossRef .
X. Y. Yu, Y. Feng, Y. Jeon, B. Guan, X. W. Lou and U. Paik, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9006–9011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, B. Guan, B. Xia and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5590–5595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, S. Liu, J. Yang, X. Fan, H. Huang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6913–6920 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, C. Tian, L. Wang, A. Wu, M. Meng, L. Zhao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 6423–6427 CrossRef .
T. Wang, Y. Guo, Z. Zhou, X. Chang, J. Zheng and X. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10397–10403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Tian, W. Cui, P. Jiang, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6710–6714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, S. Gul, J. Yano and Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7636–7642 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Yu, L. Yu, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 5421–5425 CrossRef .
X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia, S. Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 4662–4678 CrossRef .
H. B. Wu, B. Y. Xia, L. Yu, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Niu, Z. Wang, T. Zhou, M. Yu, M. Yu and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605332 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Chen, C. Wang, Z. Y. Wu, Y. Xiong, Q. Xu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5010–5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Ma, J. Duan, H. Liu, G. Liu, T. Wang, K. Chang, M. Li, L. Shi and X. Meng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 684–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Lun, G. Xia, F. Zheng, M. He and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3563–3571 RSC .
G.-L. Tian, Q. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y.-G. Jin, J.-Q. Huang, D. S. Su and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5956–5961 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Dong, C. Zhao, Z. Zhao, C. Yu, Z. Wang and J. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 578–587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Wu, Y. Rao, Z. Li, N. Tsubaki and M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6170–6177 RSC .
H. Zhu, J. Zhang, R. Yanzhang, M. Du, Q. Wang, G. Gao, J. Wu, G. Wu, M. Zhang, B. Liu, J. Yao and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4752–4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kornienko, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 1507–1514 RSC .
X. Su, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, S. Gu, J. Li and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11286–11292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, C. Tan, C.-T. He, P. An, F. Xie, S. Jiang, Y. Zhu, K.-H. Wu, B. Zhang, H. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, S. Liu, J. Dong and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 881–890 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
There is an ongoing shift from fossil fuels to alternative, renewable sources with zero CO2 footprints. In this context, green electricity from hydraulics, wind turbines, solar panels, tides, etc. appears to be a viable possibility that can be deployed at the massive scale needed to provide the enormous required energy in the range of TW. However, implementation of green electricity technology, in contrast to electricity from CO2 emitting power plants, requires vast energy storage systems to accumulate energy at moments of production surplus to be consumed during high-demand peaks. One appealing possibility is to store renewable electricity in chemical fuels (power-to-fuels), hydrogen obtained through water electrolysis being among the best options. To be efficient, water electrolysis requires special electrodes containing catalysts to decrease the overpotential for fast hydrogen evolution and increase electrocatalytic efficiency. The present review summarizes the state of the art on one of the most efficient electrocatalyst classes prepared using bimetallic MOFs as precursors. While electrolysis has been traditionally performed using noble metal electrodes, large scale water electrolysis is not possible based on precious metals and efficient alternative electrocatalysts are urgently needed. In this context, bimetallic materials derived from MOFs have considerable advantages in terms of availability, affordability, efficiency and stability.


 	Fig. 1  Tunable MOF properties for electrochemical applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation approach to produce bimetallic MIL-127 starting from preformed SBUs. Copyright© 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesized ZIF-71 by post-synthetic Mn(II) exchange. Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Post-synthetic cation exchange in MIL-53. Copyright© 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Template-directed approach for the heterogeneous phase preparation of bimetallic MOF-74 structures. Copyright© 2017, Wiley-VCH. (e) Zn-HKUST-1 and Zn-PMOF-2 with different framework flexibilities. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of Co20Zn80-ZIF, Co50Zn50-ZIF, and Co80Zn20-ZIF. Copyright© 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 1  First-row transition metal-containing electrocatalysts prepared using bimetallic MOFs as precursors. Examples include chalcogenides, phosphides, nitrides, oxides and composites in electrochemical water splitting.	 

Co3FePxO	OER	291	85	6 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	
139

Ni2P–CoP	HER, OER	102, 320	64, 69	0.1 M, KOH	
125

Ni1Co1P	HER, OER	169, 343	68, 77	1 M, KOH	
126

CoFeP	OER	244	58	1 M, KOH	
130

Ni2P/ZnP2	OER	210	57.8	1 M, KOH	
127

CoNiP	HER	138	65	1 M, KOH	
127

CoSe2/ZnSe	OER	320	66	1 M, KOH	
158

Ni–Co–S	HER	129	96.1	1 M, KOH	
159

Ni3ZnC0.7	HER, OER	93, 320	48, 52	1 M, KOH	
283

CoxFe1−xP/NC	HER, OER	139, 299	57, 44	1 M, KOH	
134

Co3ZnC/Co-NCCP	HER, OER	188, 295	108, 70	1 M, KOH	
251

NiMo2C@C	HER	169, 181	127, 108	0.5 M, H2SO4, 1 M, KOH	
99

CoNi1@C	OER	276	55.6	1 M, KOH	
175

NiCo-MOF/rGOAS	HER	210	73	0.1 M, KOH	
247

Ni2P/CoN-PCP	HER, OER	94, 270	41, 65	1 M, KOH	
239

NiCoSe/C	HER, OER	143, 249	101, 54	1 M, KOH	
157

ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs	OER	327	65	1 M, KOH	
226

CoFe-MOF-74/Co/C	HER, OER	94, 226@20 mA cm−2	89.1, 85.1	1 M, KOH	
197

CoxNiyN	HER, OER	129, 245	52, 61	1 M, KOH	
124


 	Scheme 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the generation of H2 and O2 from water. (b) Polarization curves for the HER and OER and the corresponding half reactions in the acid electrolyte.	 

 	Scheme 3  (a) The mechanism of the HER at low (left semicircle) and high H˙ coverage (right semicircle) and (b) the mechanism of the OER in alkaline (black arrows) and acidic (red arrows) media.	 
Step 1: OH− + * → HO* + e−	(1)
Step 2: HO* + OH−→ O* + H2O + e−	(2)
Step 3: O* + OH−→ HOO* + e−	(3)
Step 4: HOO* + OH− → * + O2 + H2O + e−	(4)
* + H2O → HO* + H+ + e−	(5)
HO* → O* + H+ + e−	(6)
O* + H2O→ OOH* + H+ + e−	(7)
OOH* → * + O2 + H+ + e−	(8)
Ecomp = Emea − iRs	(1)
η = a + blog(j)	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis protocol for the CoxNiyN composite, (b–g) TEM, (c) HRTEM images and (d–g) elemental mapping of the Co2Ni1N composite, (h) LSV curves of samples in 1 M KOH, (i) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (j) 1 M PBS for the HER. Copyright©2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Fabrication of the Ni2P–CoP composite from NiCo–MOF, (b) TEM, HRTEM and SAED images of Ni2P–CoP, (c) LSV curves of Ni2P–CoP for the HER and (d) LSV curves of Ni2P–CoP for the OER. Copyright©2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Fabrication of Ni1Co1P from NiCo–MOF for water splitting, (b) SEM, (c and d) and TEM images of Ni1Co1P, (e) LSV curves of samples in 1 M KOH solution for the OER and (f) LSV curves of samples in 1 M KOH solution for the HER. Copyright©2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the synthesis method for the yolk/shell hollow microspheres of Ni2P/ZnP2 and its OER application. Copyright©2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of CoFeP, (b) illustration indicating the bifunctional electrocatalytic activity of CoFeP for overall water splitting and (c) LSV plots for a series of electrocatalysts derived from the MOF and Prussian blue analog in a two-electrode setup. Copyright©2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Fabrication process of CoNiP from NiCo-MOF. (b) SEM image of Co-MOF, (c) CoNi-MOF, and (d) CoNiP, (e) TEM image, (f) HRTEM image of CoNiP, (g) LSV curves of samples for the HER. Copyright©2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Steps in the synthesis of the Co3FePxO electrocatalyst, (b) TEM image, (c and f), HRTEM image, (d and e) SAED pattern and (g–j) elemental mapping of Co3FePxO. (k) LSV curves and (l) stability test of Co3FePxO for the OER. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Phase boundary effect in the CoSe2/ZnSe electrocatalyst, (b) the k2-weighted Zn K-edge EXAFS signals for ZnSe and CoZn-Se, (c) the k2-weighted Co K-edge EXAFS signals for CoSe2 and CoZn-Se and (d) LSV curves of the samples. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis steps of Ni–Co–S microspheres, (b) TEM images of NiCo-BTC, (c) TEM image of NiCoO, (d) TEM image of Ni–Co–S, (e) details of shell and (f) HRTEM image of Ni–Co–S. Copyright © 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of CuCo-MOF and Cu-Co9S8 (b) differences in the electron density of H2O adsorbed on high-valence (Co3+), (Co2+) and Cu2+, (c) chemisorption free energies of H2O on the (440) plane of Co9S8 and Cu-Co9S8. Inset: Low-valence (Co2+), high-valence (Co3+) and Cu2+. (d) DFT-calculated water adsorption energy. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of the Fe-Ni@NC-CNT synthesis, (b–d) HRTEM images of the Fe-Ni@NC-CNT, (e) schematic electrolyzer for water splitting, LSV curves for the OER (f) and HER (g). Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Synthesis protocol of FeNi3−Fe3O4, (b) LSV curves for overall water splitting and (c) the amperometric i–t curve at an overpotential of 360 mV. Copyright© 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Synthesis process, (b)–(d) FESEM images of the hierarchical structure of Co,Fe-MOF-74/Co/CC-2, and the (e) water contact angle measurements of samples. Copyright© 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Hollow polyhedron (HP) structure of Ni-Ni0.5Fe0.5-HP and (b) schematic presentation of the charge storage and OER processes on Ni-Ni0.5Fe0.5-HP, (c) LSV curves of samples for the HER and (d) for the OER. Copyright © 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the synthesis method of ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs, TEM images of (b) ZIF-8/ZIF-67, (c) ZIF-8/ZIF-67-MWCNTs, and (d) ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs, (e) HRTEM image of ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs, (f) LSV curves and (g) chronopotentiometry of ZnCo2O4@C-MWCNTs at 10 mA cm−2 and 50 mA cm−2 current densities. Copyright© 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of MoS2@CoNi-ZIF, (b) schematic diagram of MoS2@CoNi-ZIF for overall water splitting, (c) LSV curves in a two electrode electrolyzer, (d) long-term stability of MoS2@CoNi-ZIF during overall water splitting. Copyright© 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of Ni2P/CoN-PCP synthesis, (b) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding EDAX mappings of Ni2P/CoN-PCP, (c) OER LSV curves, (d) Tafel plots of the series of samples for the OER, (e) LSV curves of the series of samples for the HER and (f) Tafel plots of the samples for the HER. Copyright© 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic synthetic method of NiCo-MOF/rGOAS, SEM images of (b) NiCo-MOF coated Ni-mesh, (c) nano-flocks of NiCo-MOF and (d) the rGOAS covered nanoflocks of NiCo-MOF, (e) LSV curves of the series of samples for the HER, (f) Tafel plots of the series of samples for the HER. Copyright©2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the CoCu-ZIF@GDY and a cartoon on its use as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, (b) LSV curves of the series of samples in a two-electrode electrolyzer, (c) stability test of CoCu-ZIF@GDY. Copyright© 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a)  as a function of surface coverage (θH) for Pt, FeP, and Ni-doped FeP. (b to d) DFT-calculated electronic structures. (b and c) charge density difference on Ni-doped FeP: yellow and cyan isosurfaces represent the electron accumulation and electron depletion, respectively. (d) Section line and isosurface two-dimensional view of charge density distribution. Copyright©2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Thermodynamic stabilities between O22− and O2− species. Yellow and blue colors represent the charge accumulation and depletion, respectively, with an isosurface value of 0.015 eÅ−3. (b) Schematic of the chemical recognition of O22− species using TMA+ as a probe. Copyright©2019, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Sketch of the synthesis of the cubic crystalline structure of Ni3ZnC0.7, (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Ni3ZnC0.7, (d) STEM and related elemental mapping of Ni3ZnC0.7. LSV curves of the series of samples for the HER (e) and OER (f). Copyright© 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Operando Ni K-edge XAS spectra of NF-PBA-A under different potentials. (a) XANES spectra of NF-PBA-A as well as references. The inset shows the shift of the Ni K-edge position. (b) FT-EXAFS of NF-PBA-A. Copyright©2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) and (b) Ni K-edge XANES spectra and Fourier-transformed k3-weighted EXAFS signals recorded at different potentials in 1 M KOH. The arrows in (a) indicate the isosbestic points associated with the structural transformation. R is the peak location scale for the Fourier-transformed magnitude in real space, without phase shift correction, (c) change in the Ni and Co valence states and OER current as a function of applied potential, (d) changes in bond length and coordination number for the Ni–O and Ni–M coordination shells and (e) comparison of Ni K-edge EXAFS WTs recorded for the pristine sample, standard references and catalytic materials at 1.1, 1.3 and 1.5 V, with an optimum resolution at 3.0 Å. Copyright©2020, Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
