Solution-gated transistors of two-dimensional materials for chemical and biological sensors: status and challenges  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR01125H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR01125H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11364-11394Solution-gated transistors of two-dimensional materials for chemical and biological sensors: status and challenges

        
          
            Qin 
            Fan†
a, 
      
        
          
            Lude 
            Wang†
b, 
      
        
          
            Duo 
            Xu†
c, 
      
        
          
            Yanhong 
            Duo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Gao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianbao 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Chen
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Jinhua 
            Li
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b
aHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials, Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Ministry of Education, Hubei Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, P. R. China. E-mail: jinhua_li@hubu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Microscale Optoelectronics, Collaborative Innovation Centre for Optoelectronic Science & Technology, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Photonic Information Technology, Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: hzhang@szu.edu.cn
cInstitute of Optoelectronics & Nanomaterials, MIIT Key Laboratory of Advanced Display Materials and Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, P. R. China. E-mail: xiangchen@njust.edu.cn
Received 
      9th February 2020
    , Accepted 12th May 2020First published on 13th May 2020AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) materials have been the focus of materials research for many years due to their unique fascinating properties and large specific surface area (SSA). They are very sensitive to the analytes (ions, glucose, DNA, protein, etc.), resulting in their wide-spread development in the field of sensing. New 2D materials, as the basis of applications, are constantly being fabricated and comprehensively studied. In a variety of sensing applications, the solution-gated transistor (SGT) is a promising biochemical sensing platform because it can work at low voltage in different electrolytes, which is ideal for monitoring body fluids in wearable electronics, e-skin, or implantable devices. However, there are still some key challenges, such as device stability and reproducibility, that must be faced in order to pave the way for the development of cost-effective, flexible, and transparent SGTs with 2D materials. In this review, the device preparation, device physics, and the latest application prospects of 2D materials-based SGTs are systematically presented. Besides, a bold perspective is also provided for the future development of these devices.
1. Introduction
Highly sensitive biochemical sensors are exceedingly desirable in various fields, including healthcare products, medical analysis, environmental monitoring, food safety tests, etc.1 A variety of detection methods, including optical, magnetic, and plasmonic analysis techniques, have been developed for the rapid and accurate identification of low-concentration target molecules. Although these findings exhibit attractive sensing mechanisms, they also have some limitations that should not be ignored, such as time-consuming operation, high cost, low resolution, and noisy background.2 The monitoring of changes in electrical signals can offer more accurate and specifically precise information about target molecules, and electrical sensing devices also support label-free and real-time measurements.3 The materials used in these devices profoundly influence the features of each sensing strategy. Consequently, the exploration of advanced materials for sensors can provide more opportunities to boost the advancement of this emerging area.4
Low-dimensional materials, in particular, two-dimensional (2D) materials, are more attractive, not only due to their novel physical phenomena that occur when charge and heat transport are confined to a plane,5 but also because of their unique electrical, optical, mechanical, and chemical properties.6 A 2D material refers to a type of material that is separated by van der Waals forces.7 Atoms form atomic layers in a 2D direction (in-plane) by tightly bound covalent bonds or ionic bonds, which are connected in the vertical direction (out-of-plane) by the weak van der Waals forces.8 The interactions of such weak van der Waals forces between adjacent layers allow the layered material to be separated by mechanical9,10 or liquid phase exfoliation11,12 techniques to form independent large-area atomic layers or even monoatomic layer.13
The wave of research into 2D nano-materials began in 2004,14–17 when the demonstration of how thin layers of carbon atoms can be separated from a large amount of graphite revolutionized the study of 2D materials.18,19 Therefore, graphene has been characterized with excellent chemical, mechanical, and electrical properties,20,21 which has aroused significant research interest in the fields of science and engineering.22,23 The unique 2D structure of graphene has led to a number of remarkable physical properties, such as massless carriers (electrons and holes), high transparency monolayer (97.7%), high electrical conductivity, and in particular, high carrier mobility of 105 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is approximately 2–3 orders of magnitude better than many representative semiconductors such as silicon. Many “low-hanging graphene fruits” have already been successfully harvested; therefore, researchers have now turned their attention to other 2D atomic crystals,24 ranging from transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, namely, MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2),25–27 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),28 to black phosphorus (BP)29 and other 2D-Xenes materials (Si, Ge, Sn, B) as well.30–32 Similar to graphene, these 2D materials have widely unique properties, such as electrical, thermal, optical, and mechanical properties, which are not very common in materials with 3D structures. Each 2D material has its specific advantages, so it is possible to fabricate a variety of sensors based on these advantages. For example, the conductivity and carrier mobility of graphene are significantly higher than those of many other semiconductors used in transistor-based sensors, including organic semiconductors,33–35 silicon nanowires,36–38 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs).39–41 TMDs have multiple synthesis methods, low cytotoxicity, and adjustable bandgap. Therefore, they are widely applied in implantable biosensors and wearable electric devices. BP has a direct bandgap, small work function, strong absorbability, and remarkable carrier mobility as well. Thus, it has been a popular channel material in transistor-based chemical sensors. This comes down to their dimensionally constrained effects and atomically thin band structures modulation.42,43 Owing to their unique properties and large SSA, these types of 2D materials are of great significance in a wide variety of applications, including optoelectronics, catalysts, biochemical sensors, supercapacitors, solar cells, and lithium-ion batteries.44–46 Moreover, 2D materials with complementary properties and fascinating functions enable rapid advances in science and engineering and accelerate the development of global nanotechnology applications to meet social challenges in the fields of energy, electronics, sensors, and health.47–49 2D materials also have tremendous appeal in a new generation of nano-electronic devices, because it is relatively easy to make complex structures using 2D materials compared to 1D materials.50

Scheme 1 illustrates that if the materials are compared with the roots of the tree, then their applications correspond to the branches and leaves. Noteworthy, the solution-gated transistor (SGT) is one of the strongest branches. In general, most of SGTs are considered to be highly sensitive because the device can act as both a sensor and an amplifier. Therefore, small changes in the environment around devices caused by the analytes can lead to significant changes in effective gate voltage and channel current.58 Recent research also reveals that electrical sensors can be well integrated with transistors to achieve highly sensitive sensing.59–63 SGT-based sensors have advantages such as high sensitivity, high throughput, easy miniaturization, and so on. Moreover, it has also been well recognized that 2D materials transistors-based sensors have a wide range of research directions, such as light sensing, artificial skin, environmental monitoring, food safety detection, drug delivery, and medical diagnostics. The direct contact between the SGT and analyte in the electrolyte is of great significance to the detection of various biologically-related reactions and molecules in the aqueous solution. Therefore, great application prospects are available for monitoring the neural signal and cell activity as well as for sensitive detection of a biological analyte. The performance of transistors in the electrolyte solution is reliable and has a broad application prospect in the field of biosensors. Furthermore, in order to meet the needs of the specificity test for biological analytes, it is necessary to deal with the functionalization of transistors. Thus the following aspects require thorough consideration: modification sites (channels, gates, or addition of electrolytes), modification methods (physical absorption, chemical bonding, or electrostatic interaction), and working mechanisms (surface potential changes, charge redistribution due to electrochemical reactions, or changes in capacitance due to bio-recognition).
 Scheme 1  The relationship between materials and applications is like the relationship between roots and branches of a tree. Materials are the basis of applications, while applications drive the progress of materials in turn. The solution-gated transistor (including graphene,51 Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society, TMDs,52 Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, black phosphorus,53 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society, and others,54 Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim) is one of the strongest branches of the tree named 2D materials (including graphene,55 Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved., TMDs,56 Copyright © 2016 Springer Nature, black phosphorus,57 Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society, and others). 
2. Solution-gated transistors of two-dimensional materials
2.1. Synthesis methods for two-dimensional materials
With the advancement in research and more systematic explorations, a growing number of 2D nanomaterials has been discovered.64–66 Moreover, the physical, chemical and photoelectrical properties of these materials have been theoretically explored.67,68 The excellent features and broad application prospects of these materials have prompted researchers to search for more perfect methods for the synthesis of 2D nanomaterials. Hence, the research on the preparation of 2D materials in recent years has entered a rapid development stage.69,70 The conventional preparation methods can be divided into the following two categories: one is the top-down methods, which start from the macroscopic block materials and utilize the layered structure with little damage to thin or separate the bulk material into fewer layers or even single layers.71 The commonly used top-down methods include mechanical exfoliation,72 liquid-phase exfoliation,73 ion intercalation, and electrochemical exfoliation. The other is the bottom-up method. The characteristics of this method include the realization of a range of well-defined nanostructured materials via association of starting elements, for synthesizing the required 2D materials by physical or chemical reaction.74,75 These methods include chemical vapor deposition (CVD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), physical vapor deposition (PVD), and thermal solution synthesis.

2.1.1. Mechanical exfoliation. 
The mechanical exfoliation method is a conventional method for realizing the preparation of 2D nanomaterials, which uses transparent tape to peel and separate layered crystals to obtain 2D materials.76 In fact, the principle of mechanical exfoliation technology involves the application of external force to weaken the van der Waals interaction between the crystal layers without breaking covalent bonds in each layer to separate 2D nanomaterials into fewer layers by mechanical force.77 For example, a block of bulk graphite material is first placed on the adhesive surface of the tape. Then the surface is peeled off and separated into thin sheets using the adhesive surface of another tape. This process can be repeated several times to obtain the desired number of appropriate layers of 2D materials.78,79 Then, the sheet material of the transparent tape is glued and pressed on a clean and flat substrate such as SiO2/Si. Finally, the single or multi-layer 2D nanosheets on the substrate can be obtained by stripping the transparent tape. When a suitable substrate is used, ultra-thin 2D crystals are obtained, which can be identified under optical microscope. Owing to layered structure characteristics of transition metal compounds, mechanical exfoliation method can also be far and wide used in the preparation of 2D transition metal compounds, such as MoS2 nanosheet materials with various thicknesses.80,81 Mechanical exfoliation method is simple and direct and thus advantageous to obtain high-quality single- or few-layer nanocrystals from their native multi-layer structures.82–84 Moreover, this method does not involve chemical reaction; therefore, the surface chemical activity of the obtained 2D samples is relatively low. Thus the 2D crystals obtained by this method can still maintain good stability even after being exposed to the air for several months.85 However, the disadvantages of this method are also obvious. It is challenging to obtain monolayer samples when there is little difference between non-layered or interlayer forces and in-plane forces. Moreover, the size of crystal materials fabricated by this method is usually less than 20 μm, and various layers of samples exist at the same time, which is not conducive to large-scale industrial production and only suitable for laboratory research.


2.1.2. Liquid phase exfoliation. 
Inspired by the mechanical exfoliation method, the researchers found that layered crystals dispersed in a liquid medium could also be peeled off into ultra-thin low-dimensional nanosheets if appropriate mechanical forces are applied to them.86 Compared to the low yield obtained via mechanical exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation makes it possible to prepare 2D nanocrystalline materials in large quantities.87 In this process, first, the layers of bulk materials are dispersed under ultrasonication in a specific solvent, with adjusted ultrasonic intensity and time. Then, under the action of ultrasonic vibration, the sample is exposed to a shear force, which leads to the breaking of the interlayer van der Waals bonds. However, at the same time, the stability of covalent bonds in the plane does not get damaged by ultrasonication, so that the suspension solution with a single layer or fewer layers of low-dimensional nanosheet can be obtained.88 After being centrifuged, the layered suspension is extracted layer by layer, dried or filtered out of the solvent, and the remaining part is low-dimensional material samples with various layer thicknesses. Compared to the mechanical exfoliation method, this method is more appropriate for preparing large-scale 2D nanofilm;89 however, the SSA of layered materials increases sharply after the achievement of 2D layered structure.90 Therefore, improved solvent or improved method is always the focus of liquid phase exfoliation method.91,92


2.1.3. Hydrothermal synthesis. 
Hydrothermal synthesis is a bottom-up preparation technique and is also the traditional preparation method commonly used to synthesize low-layer 2D nanomaterials.93,94 Hydrothermal synthesis refers to the preparation process in which the material reacts with the precursor in solution and crystallizes the substance from the organic or aqueous solution under higher vapor pressure and temperature. This method can be used to prepare a variety of 2D transition metal layered structural materials, including MoS2 and WS2.95,96 Hydrothermal synthesis can also be used for the preparation of 2D nanocrystals and other materials to form hybrid structures.97 Owing to its strong controllability, hydrothermal synthesis is considered as a convenient and repeatable method to prepare ultra-thin 2D nanomaterials with controllable size and thickness, thus it has potential industrial application value.98 In particular, this method is widely used because it can aid in preparing various types of 2D ultra-thin nanomaterials with non-layer structure without expensive top-down method. Wet-chemical synthesis can also be used to synthesize ultra-thin 2D nanomaterials with layered structure characteristics.99,100 Transition metal sulfide materials can be prepared in large quantities via this method. Therefore, this method has a good advantage in solution thermal synthesis of advanced functional materials such as energy catalysis. Synthesized 2D nanomaterials are easy to disperse in both organic and aqueous media. Thus they offer a board range of applications.


2.1.4. Chemical vapor deposition. 
The 2D material prepared by CVD has the advantages of high purity, good quality, and large area.101 It is a representative bottom-up method and a common III–V nanomaterials development technology. In the past decade, CVD method, as an effective and reliable method to prepare 2D ultra-thin nanomaterials with large area, has been continuously developed and recognized, which has significantly promoted the research on the application of 2D materials in the field of nano-electronic including photoelectric devices.44,102 In the cavity, precursors undergo high-temperature reactions or decomposition on the substrate surface, including oxidation reaction, reduction reaction, and redox reaction.103 Under appropriate experimental conditions, the required 2D nanomaterials can be obtained on the substrate. Compared to the low yield and productivity in micromechanical separation technologies, CVD can lead to industrial-scale production of materials, such as polysilicon.104 CVD technology is considered as a potential method to prepare ultra-thin 2D nanomaterials,105 which have excellent application prospects in the fields of electronics and optoelectronics.106,107 However, at present, CVD method still encounters some shortcomings, such as temperature, pressure, gas concentration, gas atmosphere, and other instability poles,108 which interfere with the experimental reaction process and uncontrollably affect the crystallinity and density of samples.109

2.2. Sensing mechanisms
The 2D material-based SGTs consist of three electrodes (source, drain, and gate), and a 2D-material channel, both of which are in direct contact with the electrolyte solution. Moreover, the source electrode is connected to the ground; and the drain electrode and the gate electrode are applied with different voltages. The electrolyte solution is conductive, thus the gate voltage corresponds to the voltage applied across the gate electrode/electrolyte interface and the electrolyte/channel interface. Both interfaces have an electronic double layer equivalent to a capacitor. In the case of other field-effect transistors (FETs), the channel current can be regulated by gate electrode field effect.
The typical channel current expressions for inorganic transistors are easily applicable to 2D materials transistors. The channel current of 2D materials transistors can be expressed in terms of the following formula:110,111  where IDS is the channel current; L and W denote the length and width of the 2D materials channel, respectively; μ is the carrier mobility of the 2D materials; Ci is the capacitance of the gate; and VG, VT, and VDS represent the gate voltage, threshold voltage, and drain voltage of the device, respectively.
According to the above-mentioned formula, four parameters (μ, Ci, VG, and VT) can be changed to adjust the current of the device. The analyte may vary one or more of these parameters, and the possible sensing mechanisms are summarized as follows:
(1) Changes of the carrier mobility in 2D materials. The interaction between analytes and 2D material channels of the device may significantly change the properties of the 2D materials, in particular, carrier mobility and Fermi levels, which can change the performance of the device and be used as a basis for detection. In particular, the surface of some 2D materials is rich in oxygen-containing functional groups with strong chemical activity, which can be easily detected by using this principle. Many biosensors, such as DNA,112 cells,113 and bacterial sensors,114 are based on this mechanism. However, an obvious problem (poor selectivity) is encountered in this principle, which needs to be improved by surface modification technique.
(2) Changes of the gate capacitance. SGTs can be regarded as two electronic double layers (EDLs) capacitors, and the change of these EDL capacitors directly affects the performance of the device. The EDL capacitance is related to the ion concentration and charge distribution near the channel or gate electrode.
(3) Changes in the interfacial potential. Owing to the transistor's intrinsic amplification, the Dirac point of its transfer characteristic curve gets shifted due to the slight changes of channel or gate interface upon chemical or biochemical absorption of the analyte. Current research focuses on potential changes at channel interfaces, and almost all pH and ion sensors are based on this mechanism. Many biosensors, such as bacterial115 and DNA116 sensors, work in similar manner. However, the modification of channel can affect the performance and stability of the active layer, thus some studies use the change of grid interface potential for detection. Although little research has been done in this area, many other types of chemical and biosensors with functional gates will be implemented in the future.
(4) Changes in the electrolyte potential. Electrolytes are electrically conductive and therefore equipotential in most cases. However, in some special cases, potential drop exists in the electrolyte between gate and channel, which also affects the performance of devices.
2.3. Advantages
FETs with 2D materials as channel materials are expected to be widely applied in food safety, environmental monitoring, biological disease diagnosis, and other biosensor fields. Compared to other detection technologies, 2D FETs have advantages, including high sensitivity, high selectivity, no labeling, simple operating process, less reagent consumption, and rapid analysis, etc. It is extremely suitable for the detection of biological molecules, and it can be predicted that in the future it will play an increasingly important role for specific detection applications in the medical field. Compared to the 1D silicon nanomaterials such as nanowires and CNTs,117,118 2D materials are becoming increasingly important because of their unique properties such as high electron mobility, bipolar field effect, large SSA, high transconductance, and easy functional characteristics. These characteristics are more suitable for solution-gated FET biosensors. The SGTs can operate in electrolyte solutions, directly in contact with the target substance, which indicates that they are good at detecting biologically relevant molecules and reactions in the solution system.
Noteworthy, sensitivity is an essential parameter of sensors. In analytical chemistry, the detection limit is not only the minimum concentration or amount of the analyte but also an important parameter to describe the sensitivity of a biochemical sensor. The detection limit is usually defined as the concentration of analyte that can produce an output signal three times the standard deviation of the noise level, and the noise profoundly impacts sensitivity. In a typical graphene-effect transistor, the noise in the low-frequency region is inversely proportional to the frequency.20 The changes of the environment around the transistors do not significantly affect the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio, thus the main factor affecting the S/N ratio is the internal quality of the devices.119 The SGTs have excellent sensitivity as a biosensor for the following reasons:
(1) Inherent signal sensitization of transistors. Transistor sensors act as both sensors and amplifiers. Even small changes in the surrounding environment can bring about significant changes in gate voltage and channel current. They are very sensitive to the small changes at the gate electrode/electrolyte interface and electrolyte/channel interface.
(2) Unique properties of 2D materials. 2D materials have higher carrier mobility than other semiconductors, such as organic semiconductors, silicon nanowires, and CNTs. Therefore, comparatively, 2D transistors have larger transconductance, which exhibits the ability of gate voltage to effectively regulate channel current. And it is also the critical reason for sensitization of transistor signal.
(3) Low working voltage of the transistor. The operating voltage of the transistors is usually below 1 V, so the sensors based on SGTs are easy to integrate and suitable for wearable applications.
(4) Transistor miniaturization. SGTs can be perfectly miniaturized without compromising the performance of the sensor and without losing S/N ratio. The channel current is merely related to the ratio of width to length of the channel and has nothing to do with the actual size of the channel.
3. Solution-gated transistors of two-dimensional materials for chemical and biological sensors
3.1. Graphene
Philip Wallace120 explored the unusual electronic structure of graphene in 1947. However, influenced by the prediction that 2D crystal materials could not exist because of thermodynamic instability at room temperature, graphene was only used as a 2D theoretical model and did not receive extensive attention. In 2004, Novoselov and Geim in the UK first obtained graphene and studied its properties for the first time.14 Graphene is a monolayer structure formed by sp2 hybridized carbon atoms covalently bonded in a honeycomb lattice. Moreover, the distance between two adjacent carbon atoms in a single sheet is approximately 1.42 Å. The rapid adoption of graphene as a material of interest is attributed to its unique thermal, optical, electronic, mechanical, physical, and chemical characteristics as follows:
(1) Large SSA: According to the theoretical calculation, the SSA of graphene is 2630 m2 g−1. Owing to the large SSA, graphene may be used in chemical catalytic processes as a catalyst or its nano-carrier.
(2) High electronic mobility: Graphene has a stable lattice structure, thus it has higher conductivity and less resistance among the existing 2D materials. At room temperature, the electrical conductivity of graphene is twice as high as that of indium antimonide, the semiconductor material currently used. Graphene has significant potential in the field of electronics and is likely to replace silicon in the future to produce electronic semiconductor devices with better performance and lower loss.
(3) The mechanical properties: Graphene has both good strength and toughness. Unlike its electrical properties, its mechanical properties are affected by temperature changes. Moreover, fascinating features of graphene such as tensile limit strain and young's modulus vary depending on temperature.
(4) The thermal properties: Graphene has a thermal conductivity of up to 5300 W m−1 K−1, more than twice that of conventional diamond materials (2200 W m−1 K−1). However, many difficulties are encountered in making graphene without defects. Through the study of single-atom defects, it was found that the graphite containing defects was significantly affected by the defect density. The thermal conductivity decreased sharply with the increase of defects.
(5) The optical properties: The transmittance of graphene monolayer over a broad range of wavelengths is 97.7%, and it does not vary with the wavelength of light. Theoretical and experimental results reveal that the large area of graphene film endows such excellent optical properties. The excellent light transmittance combined with ultra-high conductivity and elasticity makes graphene have a good application prospect in electronic devices.121–124
The significant advantages of highly conductive graphene include large SSA, high mechanical strength, and good production potential, which provide an excellent platform for the chemical sensing application. These unique electronic characteristics make it possible to produce high-performance conductive semiconductor devices using graphene as the channel material. The graphene surfaces are combined with a variety of analytes through van der Waals forces, electron transfer, or covalent bonds. Therefore, graphene has several uses as an electrocatalyst for electrical sensing applications. The high surface-volume ratio of graphene is attributed to the fact that each carbon atom in graphene can be regarded as a surface atom, which provides the largest superficial area per unit volume. Thus, the chemical environment has a significant influence on charge transfer by graphene. Graphene is also characterized with excellent flexibility and mechanical strength, making it compatible with flexible, elastic, and even conformal-performance electronic devices, which make it a promising candidate for a wearable electronic material.
Graphene's surface is essential for intermolecular interactions; therefore, the most important and direct way to regulate the graphene sensing performance is to control and manipulate its surface chemistry. In order to enhance the specific action and strength, various covalent and non-covalent methods have been used to modify its surface. The molecular level adjustment of the graphene surface can be carried out by doping or adding functional groups after synthesis and by high levels of control to reduce defects in structure and composition, which can improve its sensing performance for functional device manufacturing. The sensitivity and selectivity of graphene materials can be further improved by integrating graphene materials with other functional nanostructures, including metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, organic acceptors, conductive polymer, protein, or nucleic acid. Graphene should be considered in the application of biochemical sensors, surface chemistry and species, lattice defect and modification of electronic property, as well as in customization of each property.

3.1.1. Chemical sensors. 
Chemical sensor refers to a type of device that reacts with a specific substance to be analyzed selectively through a chemical reaction to qualitatively or quantitatively detect and analyze the analytical quality. Sensor is used for detection and measurement of one or more specific chemicals. The chemical sensor consists of a receiver having a selective trapping function for measuring the shape or molecular structure of a chemical substance, and a converter that can effectively convert the trapped stoichiometry into an electrical signal. The receptor connects a chemical parameter (usually concentration) to the conduction system. At present, SGGTs are successfully used to construct pH sensors and ion sensors (Table 1).
Table 1 Parameters of different types of chemical sensors based on SGGTs




Sensor type
Analyte
Detection limit
Ref., comments




pH
pH
2 pH

125, Exfoliation


pH
0.025 pH

126 and 127, Exfoliation


pH
0.21 pH

128, Exfoliation


pH
1 pH

129, CVD


pH
0.9 pH

130, CVD


pH
0.34 pH

131, CVD


pH
0.5 pH

132, CVD


pH
0.3 pH

133, CVD


pH
0.4 pH

134, CVD


pH
0.67 pH

135, rGO


Ion
Na+
1 nM

136, Exfoliation


NaCl
40 nM

137, CVD


Cl−
100 nM

138, CVD


K+
100 μM

139, CVD


K+
10 nM

140, Exfoliation


K+
1 μM

141, CVD


K+
0.1 mM

142, CVD


K+
0.058 pM

143, CVD


KCl
1 μM

144, CVD


Ca2+
0.1 mM

142, CVD


Ca2+
1 μM

145, rGO


Fe3+
0.1 fM

146, CVD


Cu2+
10 fM

147, CVD


Cu2+
10 nM

148, rGO


Cd2+
1 nM

145, rGO


Hg2+
10 ppm

149, Exfoliation


Hg2+
1 nM

145, rGO


Hg2+
10 pM

150, Exfoliation


Hg2+
0.1 ppb

151, rGO


Hg2+
40 pM

152, CVD


Pb2+
20 pM

153, CVD


Pb2+
37.5 pg mL−1

154, Exfoliation




3.1.1.1. pH sensors. 
pH is an essential parameter in many biochemical reactions. Bergveld's ion-sensitive FET made on silicon in 1970 was the first transistor-based pH sensor. Since 2008, SGGTs have been researched and used in pH sensors.125
Wang et al.130 deposited HfO2 film (20 nm) and SiO2 film (25 nm), as a passivation layer, respectively, on the graphene film (Fig. 1a and b). The top layer of SiO2 film was used as a sensing layer, while the bottom layer of high-quality HfO2 film protected the channel from the influence of electrolyte. The devices maintained high carrier mobility (5000 cm2 V−1 s−1) and improved the stability and reproducibility of the graphene sensor. They also used 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS) to functionalize the top layer of SiO2 film to allow immobilization of proteins and DNA. To discuss the principle of the device, they demonstrated a bare device and APTMS-functionalized device for pH sensing. Both devices were found to be sensitive to the pH of phosphate buffer saline (PBS) solutions in the range of 4–9 and the sensitivity of 46 and 34 mV per pH was acquired, respectively. They further demonstrated that the application of solution gate voltage to a pulse resulted in the elimination of hysteresis phenomenon in the graphene transducer transfer curve, leading to a significant increase in ion potential resolution of sensors. Their research opened the door to the selective detection of biomolecules using graphene-based devices.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic drawing of the oxide-on-graphene FET operating in solution. (b) The conductance of a graphene channel vs. the solution gate voltage Vsg (magenta solid triangles, bottom axis) and the back gate voltage Vbg (blue hollow squares, top axis).130 Copyright © 2014 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (c) Schematic of a phenomenon of the SGGT-based pH sensors: abnormal negative VDirac shift in high concentration buffer and typical positive VDirac shift in low concentration buffer.132 Copyright © 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematics (top) and SEM (bottom) images of graphene mesh for FET-based sensors. (e) A cross-sectional view of the electrolyte-gated Gr-based FET sensor.134 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Lee et al.132 found that the influence of unknown ions in the detection solution environment must be considered in order to comprehensively understand the graphene sensor. They prepared several groups of pH buffer solutions (pH = 6–8), which provided various ions within a specific concentration range, and studied the electrical response of these SGGTs. In contrast to previous results, the Dirac point voltage (VDirac) moved horizontally to the negative voltage with the increase in pH in the selected series of buffers. Moreover, significantly different VDirac values were observed in buffer solutions with the same pH values, but different ion composition and concentration. These results indicated that the sensitivity of the device to different pH values was not simply caused by changes in the concentration of hydroxyl or hydrogen ions. Instead, it must be considered that the buffer layer screens for the ability to charge impurities in graphene. Fig. 1c shows that an abnormal negative VDirac shift was found in high concentration buffer, while only a typical positive VDirac shift was observed in low concentration buffer. The results reveal that graphene transistors cannot be successfully applied for pH detection if the solution composition is not calibrated. This report offered valuable insight into the work of graphene transistors and provided appropriate guidance for the practical application of chemical or biological graphene sensors.
Kwon et al.134 fabricated a graphene-based electrolyte-gated pH sensor and introduced defects into channels to investigate the effect of engineering edge defects in the graphene mesh FETs. Furthermore, in order to reduce the side effects associated with graphene patterns, they directly synthesized the network-structured graphene using silica as a growth mask. At the copper–silica interface, due to the dissociation of carbon atoms, a hexagonal tightly wrapped single layer of silicon spheres overlying the copper foil and the graphene grid was formed. Compared to FETs, single-layer graphene is grown on copper by CVD. Fig. 1d shows that the resulting mesh is a set of hexagonal arrays with circular holes with an average diameter of 300 nm and a spacing of 600 nm. A cross-sectional view of the electrolyte-gated graphene-based FET sensor is shown in Fig. 1e. Compared to graphene FETs, graphene mesh FETs were characterized by a significant increase in Dirac point displacement (30–100 mV per pH) due to electrostatic gating of hydrogen ions. More importantly, when the defect sites are completely inactivated, the Dirac point displacements of the two sensors driven only by the graphene surface are similar, both in the range of 6–8 mV per pH. This result explained the significant differences in pH response reported for graphene FETs and the need to control graphene defects for credible multi-periodic sensor operations.
These studies clearly show that the pH sensors can be realized using SGGTs and the relationship between the pH value of the sensor and the gate voltage shifts basically conforms to the Nernst equation.155 Although these devices show a very large response, and their selectivity still requires improvement due to the limitations of the functionalization of graphene surfaces. For example, the interference of some ions, in particular, the pH detection in the case of complex ionic components in the solution, has not been well studied.
3.1.1.2. Ion sensors. 
Ion sensors have essential applications in environmental monitoring, food safety, and human health. Thus, investigation of the interaction between ions and graphene is of particular importance, which could be used as a basis for biosensors because these devices work in aqueous solutions. In recent years, except for pH sensors, various ion sensors fabricated based on graphene transistors have attracted extensive research attention.
An et al.150 reported a graphene-based flexible adapter sensor that could be used to detect Hg2+ ions with high selectivity and sensitivity (Fig. 2a). Graphene monolayer produced by the CVD method was effectively transferred onto a flexibly bendable substrate, and a specific adaptor for binding mercury ions was modified on the graphene surface. Fig. 2b demonstrates that the adaptor-functionalized graphene sensor exhibited an unprecedented detection limit (10 pM), excellent selectivity (both mixed solution and real sample), and fast response time (<1 s). Moreover, the devices with polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) as a substrate showed excellent mechanical stability and flexibility. Furthermore, the sensor exhibited good performances in the detection of the actual sample (Fig. 2c). This study provides an advanced method for mercury analysis equipment, which was expected to be applied to analyze real samples.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the SGGT, where aptamer was conjugated with graphene. (b) Real-time responses of SGGT-based aptamer sensors to different Hg2+ concentrations of 10 pM–100 nM. (c) Real-time responses of real mussel solution sample.150 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic image of the measurement setup incorporating a valinomycin-modified graphene FET device.140 Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. (e) Structure of the solution-gated graphene FET. (f) Schematic illustrating the interaction between K+ or Na+ cations and the graphene-based conducting channel with G-quadruplex immobilization.143 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. 
As shown in Fig. 2d, Maehashi et al.140 fabricated high-performance graphene FETs, which showed high sensitivity toward K+ ions in solution. Valinomycin, a unique dodecapeptide with high affinity and ion binding ability for K+ ions, was integrated into the devices to obtain good ion selectivity. The combination of K+ ions with valinomycin in graphene channels affected the channel potential; therefore, the transfer curve of the valinomycin-modified graphene FETs was negatively shifted with the increase of K+ concentration. Moreover, it was observed that the gate at the Dirac point voltage showed a semilogarithmic relationship with K+ concentration. The device could effectively detect K+ ions in solution in the range of 10 nM–1.0 mM. In contrast, the transfer characteristics of the valinomycin-modified graphene FETs did not change when Na+ ions were added. Therefore, modification of the ionosphere of the graphene FETs is advantageous for improving the performance of the ion sensor.
Li et al.141 utilized the valinomycin-based ion-selective membrane to realize the highly sensitive and selective detection of K+ ions in graphene-based FETs. The novel graphene ion-sensitive FETs could detect K+ ions in the ion concentration range of 1 μM–20 mM, reaching a sensitivity of 61 mV per decade. The K+ ion detection capability of the sensor remained unchanged and did not change in the Tris-HCl solution, when high concentration Na+ and Cu2+ ions were added, indicating that the sensor was effective in physiological solutions. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) was further used as a biocompatible substrate for devices. After more than a month of repeated testing, the sensor performance did not change significantly, highlighting its robustness and reliability. Moreover, the device exhibited high repeatability and reliability in the sensor experiment for more than two months.
Yuan et al.143 designed, manufactured and characterized a solution-gated FET based on high-quality CVD-grown graphene for detection of K+ ions with high sensitivity and selectivity (Fig. 2e). The graphene surface was coated with a G-rich DNA molecule, G-quadruplex, which showed a strong binding affinity to K+ and enhanced the device's selectivity (Fig. 2f). The detection limit of graphene-based FETs without oxygen plasma pretreatment reached 0.74 pM, and the linear dynamic range was 1 μM. Interestingly, after 10 s of plasma optimized pretreatment, the limit of detection (LOD) decreased to 0.058 pM, and the linear dynamic ranged was sub-0.1 pM to 100 nM. This result was attributed to the fact that the graphene surface was functionalized by oxygen plasma treatment, and the binding of guanine analogs was enhanced, thereby increasing the sensitivity of K+ detection. Moreover, the devices showed good discrimination of common cations such as Na+ and Fe3+ ions.
Graphene-based materials have many application prospects in ion electrochemical sensing. However, the structure and defects of graphene and the effects of chemical functionalization on the electrical sensing properties of prepared analytical devices undeniably need further study. Therefore, new chemical strategies are required to adapt the physical and chemical properties of graphene to the desired sensing properties for target applications.


3.1.2. Biological sensors. 
A biosensor is usually composed of two parts: bioreceptor and signal converter. The biosensor has specific selectivity and can achieve extremely high sensitivity. However, the signal converter is typically an independent chemical or physical sensitive element, which can operate on different principles such as electrochemical, optical, thermal, or piezoelectric. A combination of the molecular recognition base and the highly sensitive signal conversion device can lead to the formation of a variety of biological sensors. Graphene shows excellent biocompatibility, environmental sensitivity, and stability in biological systems, which is extremely important in sensing applications for point-of-care or real-time detection. In recent years, SGGTs have been extensively prepared and developed for many biosensors, such as biomolecules (glucose, protein, and dopamine), bacteria, cells, and so on (Table 2).
Table 2 Parameters of different types of biological sensors based on SGGTs




Sensor type
Analyte
Detection limit
Ref., comments




Glucose
Glucose
0.1 mM

156, CVD


Glucose
3.3 mM

157, CVD


Glucose
1 nM

158, rGO


Glucose
0.5 μM

159, CVD


Glucose
30 nM

160, CVD


Glucose
1 nM

161, CVD


Glucose
1.25 mM

162, CVD


Glucose
100 nM

163, CVD


DNA
DNA
0.175 mM

114, GO


DNA
0.01 nM

116, CVD


DNA
10 nM

164, rGO


DNA
1 pM

165, CVD


DNA
2.4 nM

166, rGO


DNA
1 pM

112, CVD


DNA
4 pM

167, CVD


DNA
10 pg mL−1

168, CVD


DNA
10 fM

169, Exfoliation


Protein
Bovine serum albumin (BSA)
0.3 nM

127, Exfoliation


Immunoglobulin E (IgE)
0.29 nM

170, Exfoliation


Fibronectin
0.5 nM

171, rGO


Avidin
80 nM

171, rGO


Immunoglobulin G
0.2 ng mL−1

172, rGO


Antivascular Endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
100 fM

173, CVD


Protective antigen (Anthrax toxin)
1.2 aM

174, rGO


Prostate specific antigen/α1-antichymotrypsin (PSA-ACT) complex
100 fg mL−1

175, rGO


IgG1
80 fM

176, CVD


Prostate specific antigen (PSA)
1.7 fM

177, rGO


Cell
Embryonic chicken cardiomyocyte cell
3.5 mV

113, Exfoliation


HL-1 mouse atrial tumor cell
100 μV

178, CVD


Malaria-infected red blood cells



179, CVD


Electrogenic HL-1 cells



180, CVD


Breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231)



181, rGO


Bacterial
Gram-positive Bacillus cereus



114, GO



E. coli, P. aeruginosa
10 cfu mL−1

115, CVD


Other molecules
Dopamine
1 nM

182, CVD


Cryptosporidium parvumoocysts
25 oocysts per mL

183, CVD


H2O2
100 pM

184, rGO


Nucleoside triphosphates
400 nM

185, rGO


Urea
1 μM

148, rGO


Kanamycin A
11.5 nM

186, CVD


Uric acid
100 nM

163, CVD


Bisphenol A
10 ng mL−1

187, CVD



L-histidine
300 fM

188, Exfoliation




3.1.2.1. Glucose sensors. 
Glucose is an irreplaceable part of metabolic activity. The blood glucose test has great significance to the human body, in particular, for diagnosing diabetes.189 Nowadays, glucose biosensors dominate most of the biosensors market. The research on electrochemical glucose sensors has been carried out for more than 50 years.190
Park et al.158 demonstrated a fast-response and high-sensitivity FET sensor that utilized reduced graphene oxide (rGO)–carboxylatedpolypyrrole (C-PPy) nanotube (NT) hybrids as conductive channels, which responded rapidly to the detection of glucose with high sensitivity and specificity. Comparative analysis of the characteristics of rGO, C-PPy NTs, and rGO/C-PPy NT hybrids indicated the successful preparation of the expected structure based on the specific interaction between graphene sheets and C-PPy NTs. The rGO/C-PPy NTs formed a reliable electrical contact that was established between the patterned-microelectrodes and remained stable even when exposed to liquid electrolyte. Owing to the bridge between graphene layers, which was formed by the insertion of the C-PPy NTs leading to effective electron transport, these rGO/C-PPy NT hybrids showed higher hole transportation ability than C-PPy NTs and graphene sheets. Glucose oxidase (GOx) was used as a capture probe to bind tightly to C-PPy NTs by chemical coupling reaction, and rGO/C-PPy NTs hybridization was used to catalyze glucose oxidation of GOx in the FET biosensor to detect glucose. The synergistic effects between graphene and C-PPy NTs, including enhanced conductivity, p-type semiconductor performance, and surface area, resulted in good sensitivity (LOD = 1 nM, S/R = 3.22) and fast real-time response (<1 s) for glucose sensing. Compared to the non-hybrid C-PPy NTs, the sensing performance of rGO/C-PPy NT hybrid was increased by 5 orders of magnitude, and the detection limit was 2–3 orders of magnitude higher than the sensitivity of glucose sensor reported in previous studies. Besides, FET biosensors show both good reproducibility and air stability. The specificity of biosensors to glucose was also demonstrated by the characterization of their reactions in biological fluids involving uric acid (UA) and ascorbic acid (AA). The FET biosensor based on rGO/C-PPy NTs shows a broad range of application prospects in many fields.
Zhang et al.159 presented a novel solution-gated graphene transistors (SGGTs)-based glucose sensor that used CVD-grown graphene to form its channels and grids (Fig. 3a and b). Graphene, a semi-metallic material, was used not only as a semiconductor channel but also as a gate electrode for SGGTs. Therefore, the sensor can be considered as a full graphene device. The graphene gate electrodes were modified using the enzyme GOx and two biocompatible polymers, namely, chitosan (CHIT) and Nafion. The graphene gate was changed with Pt nanoparticles (PtNPs), and the electrocatalytic activity of the electrode and the sensitivity were remarkably improved. Full graphene SGGTs with PtNPs-functionalized graphene gate electrodes were used to detect H2O2 with the detection limit down to 30 nm. Further, the optimized detection limit of glucose sensor was 0.5 μM with great selectivity, so as to achieve sufficiently sensitive detection of glucose in body fluids such as saliva. Fig. 3c illustrates that the sensing mechanism was the result of GOx catalyzing the oxidation of glucose. This is ascribed to the fact that GOx catalyzes the oxidation of H2O2 and H2O2 produced by glucose oxidation near the gate electrode, thereby adjusting the effective gate voltage applied to the transmission resistance. As a potential sensor, the sensitivity of SGGT sensor depends on its transconductance, and SGGT sensor has significantly higher transconductance than that of traditional transistors. Moreover, the device can be easily manufactured at low cost. The device has a very simple structure and could be cut with a layer of graphene to fabricate transistor arrays quickly.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the whole-graphene SGT based glucose sensor. (b) The potential drops on the two EDLs of graphene channel and gate surface. (c) The GOx-catalyzed glucose oxidation; and the cyclic oxidation of H2O2 on the surface of GOx-CHIT/Nafion/PtNPs/graphene gate electrode.159 Copyright © 2015 Springer Nature. (d) The schematic diagram of the new SGGTs with two gate electrodes. (e) Potential drop between the graphene channel and gate before (solid line) and after (dotted line) adding glucose or uric acid to PBS solution.163 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. 
Xiong et al.163 successfully fabricated highly sensitive sensors that could simultaneously detect glucose and UA based on SGGTs. The sensor has two separate Au gate electrodes, respectively, modified with GOx-chitosan and BSA-chitosan (Fig. 3e and f). With ZIF-67 as a template, porous Co3O4 hollow nanopolyhedron was synthesized to alter the Au gate as an electrocatalyst, which significantly improved the sensitivity of SGGTs, optimized the H2O2 reduction reaction, and thus enhanced the performance of SGGTs in the sensitive detection of H2O2 (LOD = 10 nM). Therefore, this method is excellent in realizing drastic improvement in the sensitivity of the optimized SGGT sensor, so that the detection limits of both glucose and UA are as low as 100 nM. The sensing mechanism of glucose and UA sensors corresponded to the H2O2 reaction generated by glucose oxidation around the gate and the direct electrooxidation of UA molecules on the gate. Moreover, the devices were successfully used to determine the concentration of glucose and UA in actual tear samples. Owing to porous Co3O4, hollow nano-polyhedral functionalized SGGT device has many advantages including cost-effectiveness, easy and facile preparation, and high biocompatibility. It provides an electrochemical sensing platform to rapidly and ultra-sensitively detect various biomarkers of the human body.
Noteworthy, glucose detection is mainly based on the effect of glucose enzyme or catalyst via a redox reaction. Although enzymatic glucose sensors have high selectivity and sensitivity, their practical application is often limited by the insufficient long-term stability of the enzyme. Therefore, a good choice is to develop non-enzymatic glucose sensors in which glucose can be identified directly with chemical molecules. Non-enzymatic glucose detection will be an attractive development direction in the future.
3.1.2.2. DNA sensors. 
DNA is a primary genetic material of most organisms, the center of life chemistry, and the key to the study of life phenomena. The research on DNA sensor is to meet the needs of rapid, convenient, highly sensitive, and highly selective detection of specific DNA sequences. Electrochemical DNA sensors have become a very active research field due to their sensitivity, capacity, low cost, and low energy consumption. Detection of nucleic acid molecules, in particular, short DNA strands is challenging, thus many studies have focused on the use of SGGTs in unlabeled DNA sensors.
Fu et al.167 fabricated a frequency-doubling biochemical sensor device based on bipolar characteristics of SGGT (Fig. 4a), which provided a new tenability and flexibility for designing graphene-based biochemical sensors. By applying a bias voltage to the ambipolar devices in the standard source structure, the sinusoidal voltage applied at a specific frequency on the electrolyte gate can be rectified into the sinusoidal wave of double frequency on the drain. Strong electrolyte gate coupling and ultra-high carrier mobility of graphene provided unprecedented gain (unit gain) and purity (over 95% of the total output energy) for graphene bipolar multipliers. Unoptimized devices showed an impressive 11-mer single-strand probe DNA (ssDNA) molecules detection limit of 4 pM in 1 mM PBS buffer solution with an ionic strength of above 20 mM. The principle was that the graphene frequency multiplier could detect single-stranded DNA molecules with a negatively charged short chain attached to the surface of graphene. The sensitivity of the devices was excellent due to the enhanced drift characteristics of the graphene bipolar frequency multiplier and improved low-frequency 1/f noise performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic presentation of an SGGT frequency-doubling device.167 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of SGGT with common gate, which showed the measurement circuit of the sensors, and the mechanism of proton release.168 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic diagrams of a general experimental process for fabricating SGGT, and surface modification. Also, the structure of the devices and detection systems was illustrated through this step.169 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. 
Han et al.168 designed monolithic SGGTs for real-time detection of the virus DNA (Fig. 4b). On a glass substrate, the device was fabricated with a thin-film co-planar electrode (graphene) as an active layer and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as a micro-channel that operated both as a sample reservoir and insulating layer. Lambda phage gene was successfully amplified and detected with the linear response of 0.23 V per pH by analyzing the buffer solution (pH = 5–9). The proton emission gradually changed the Dirac point voltage (ΔVDirac); therefore, the solution-gated graphene FET showed high sensitivity toward the virus DNA with a LOD of 10 fg μL−1 (200 copies per μL) within 16.5 min. Amplification of the effect of DNA produced a ΔVDirac of 0.27 V. Besides, the sensor was tested within a range of 10 fg μL−1 to 10 ng μL−1 of the target DNA. The device showed the advantages of high sensitivity, stability, low cost, and no interference, which could significantly reduce the cost, time, and complications of DNA detection.
Wang et al.169 described a method for fabricating liquid exfoliated graphene (LEG)-based SGGTs, which was applied for the detection of single-stranded DNA (Fig. 4c). LEG is an economical and efficient carbon material developed in recent years, which has distinct advantages over graphene materials prepared by other methods such as mechanical stripping, Hummers’ method,191 and epitaxial process. Through the characterization of LEG materials and LEG films, it was proved that the prepared LEG consisted of a multi-layer nanostructure. Electronic detection was also used to respond to the typical ambipolarity of the FET and to evaluate the pH or ionic screening effects when the surface was modified. The results indicated that the value of graphene FET in response to the intrinsic pH was effectively weakened with the change in the surface state from hydrophilic to hydrophobic. Moreover, the sensitivity of DNA detection in biomolecular detection was demonstrated by taking DNA detection as a prototype with LOD of 10 fM. Half-matched or mismatched ssDNA sequences were used as controls to verify the specificity of the device, which indicated that the DNA sensing mechanism of bio-LEG was based on the changes in molecular configuration among DNA hybridization states. The study provided an experimental and theoretical basis to apply and research the LEG in FET-based biosensor.
Li et al.192 exploited graphene electrochemical transistors with a functionalized gate to achieve sensitive label-free detection of DNA. The probe DNA was modified onto the gate electrodes by a new method for the detection of the target DNA molecules. The sensing mechanism could be attributed to the gate potential drop caused by immobilization and hybridization of DNA. The DNA sensor showed a low LOD of 1 fM as well as high current responsivity of 5 μA per decade. On the other hand, all device components except gate electrodes could be recycled to reduce the cost. The study provided a low-cost and simple method for highly sensitive detection of DNA. However, the graphene transfer process may result in fluctuations in SGGT performance.
Currently, DNA can be detected by molecular modification on graphene in the channel. However, graphene modification encounters certain limitations. In contrast, the gate of SGGT is generally Au metal, and it is relatively easy to assemble DNA probes on Au. Therefore, the method of gate-modified DNA probes may be a convenient and efficient method for detecting DNA in the future.
3.1.2.3. Protein sensors. 
Protein is a type of organic macromolecule, which determines the existence and movement of life. Protein plays a vital role in forming organisms and the completion of accurate biochemical metabolism pathways and various physiological functions in the body. Protein sensors have become the most promising platform for protein research and will definitely have a significant effect on disease diagnosis in the near future.193
Kim et al.175 demonstrated an rGO FET protein sensor for the highly sensitive detection of prostate cancer biomarkers (Fig. 5a), such as prostate-specific antigen/α-antichymotrypsin complex, PSA-ACT, and so on. The biosensor had advantages such as easy to manufacture, label-free detection, and high sensitivity. On the surface of rGO channel, the immunoreaction of PSA-ACT and PSA monoclonal antibodies led to the shift of gate voltage. The sensor showed a LOD as low as 1.1 fM, and a wide detection range of up to 106 M. Lower detection limits were shown in human serum samples. These characteristics may be related to the compact fixation of small molecules and small nonspecific binding in the recipient organisms. These devices may show high potential for future diagnostic systems to ultra-sensitively detect biological molecules both in in vitro and in vivo.
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of R-GO FET immunosensor with Pt reference electrode in the analyte solution.175 Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. (b) Functionalized GFET biosensor and measurement configuration shown schematically.176 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Real-time monitoring of prostate-specific antigen with the sensors. Schematic diagram of the current change mechanism to detect target PSA molecule caught by sensors.177 Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Soikkeli et al.176 presented a specific receptor module-based programmable and modular biochemical sensor, which used graphene FETs for charge sensing (Fig. 5b). The receptor modules (i.e., fusion proteins) performed the function of immobilizing and selecting the required analyte molecules. Thus, small hydrophobin protein could act as the anchor to immobilize the receptor. The receptor portion was selected to catch and detect the analyte, while the anchor portion was usually the HFBI hydrophobin protein. The results showed that on the graphene channels used for charge detection, the receptor modules formed dense directional monolayers by single-step directional self-assembly. Most biomolecules carried a charge, thus no special markers were required. The graphene FETs provided high sensitivity and were manufactured by a relatively standard microelectronic machining technology, thus facilitating the large-scale production of sensors. Two established detection systems were, respectively, HFBI anchor and ZE peptide as the receptors for the detection of ZR peptide and HFBI-Protein. The biometric identification sensitivity of the two model systems was very high in high concentration buffer, with the LOD of 100 fM and the detection time of below 1 s. The detection principle could be attributed to the cross-checking with immunoglobulin analyte, resulting in several order of magnitude smaller positive shift of the Dirac point, while the detection of the IgG1 analyte showed a significantly smaller response. The device could realize in situ detection of different analytes by changing the receptor module layer.
Wang et al.177 designed a flexible sensor with high sensitivity by modular assembly based on 3D layered biological composite material, which was composed of hollow natural pollen microcapsules covered with conductive graphene layer. Graphene-coated microcapsules were assembled on an ultra-thin PET substrate. Thus, highly flexible sensor configurations and tunable selectivity through subsequent covalent fixation of antibodies to target antigens were provided. Fig. 5c demonstrates that the network of GO@SFP capsules deposited on the surface showed p-type behavior, and PSA was negatively charged in PBS buffer, which led to potential field-effect behavior.194,195 Therefore, PSA combination was expected to improve the hole density of the rGO@SFP layer, which eventually resulted in an increase in current.196,197 The biosensor demonstrated the ultrasensitive detection of PSA, with a sensitivity of 1.7 × 10−15 M as well as a fast response time of 4 s. Compared to the traditional 2D rGO film sensing strategy, the measurement sensitivity was improved by 3–4 orders of magnitude. The device maintained similar sensing performance under various bending conditions. This study highlighted the advantages of using lightweight biomaterials as modules to design flexible biosensors to detect molecules with high responsiveness and sensitivity.
The electrical analysis performance of graphene depends largely on the presence of structural defects, edges, and functional groups on its surface, therefore, the development of a new synthesis method with a high degree of structure control is highly desirable to further improve its applicability in biosensors. Therefore, graphene analogs with a large number of surface functional groups, such as GO and rGO, have been more widely used in the field of biosensors due to their outstanding and unique properties.
3.1.2.4. Other sensors. 
Wang et al.186 proposed novel graphene FET-based nanosensors with high k solid gates to improve the sensitivity of biosensors (Fig. 6a). The gate was modified with HfO2 with a size of 30 nm to provide an electric field, and the dielectric layer was used to replace the external electrode with metal wire in the traditional liquid gate sensors, achieving highly integrated devices and improving the safety during electrolysis of water. Kanamycin A, a small molecule antibiotic, is the first application example of biosensors, which was detected using the principle of adaptive competitive affinity. Kanamycin A was successfully detected with a LOD of 11.5 × 10−9 M, which could be directly observed by a rapid biometric assay for 200 s with little noise elimination. The practicability of the device as a new analytical tool for label-free biosensors and in other important biomedical applications was demonstrated successfully.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic and fabrication of the high-κ solid-gate GFET device.186 Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Image of a device bent in convex shape.180 Copyright © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd. (c) Schematic illustration of the graphene transistor functionalized with AuNPs and ssDNA molecules.187 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Blaschke et al.180 fabricated SGGTs-based flexible arrays on biocompatible polymer substrate (polyimide), which were used to record cell action potentials because of their inherent characteristics of high signal amplification (Fig. 6b). The transistors exhibited low electronic noise and high transconductance. Thus the critical parameters of the sensitivity of these devices did not change significantly in bending experiments. The results indicated that these devices did not degrade when bent repeatedly. Moreover, the transconductance determined based on the electronic properties of graphene was not affected by bending. After the effective cultivation of electrogenic HL-1 cells, the cell action potential with an excellent S/N ratio could be recorded, and this was higher than that recorded for other technologies. The recording frequency of the action potential of the four transistors is in the range of 3 to 4 Hz, which is consistent with the beating frequency of HL-1 cells previously reported.198 These results highlighted the potential of flexible graphene SGFET in bioelectronics and paved the way for the development of the next generation of electrically flexible implants.
Liu et al.187 integrated DNA-functionalized SGGT into a microfluidic system for the first time for bisphenol A (BPA) recycling detection (Fig. 6c). The ssDNA and complementary dsDNA were used as identification elements to surface functionalize graphene using AuNPs. When BPA was present, both ssDNA and dsDNA molecules in aqueous solutions could be released from the surface of graphene, causing changes in the electrical properties of the sensor. BPA interacts with dsDNA more strongly than with ssDNA, thus the dsDNA-modified devices were more sensitive to BPA with detection limits of as low as 10 ng mL−1. The sensing mechanism may be attributed to the fact that BPA can be inserted into DNA molecules to disrupt its structure and separate DNA from the graphene surface. SGGTs are quite sensitive to changes in the charge environment within the channel, thus different concentrations of BPA produced different device performance. Furthermore, with the increase in the concentration of BPA, the channel current of the device changed monotonously. After treatment with a large concentration of BPA, the majority of DNA molecules were released from the surface of graphene, and the fresh DNA-modified SGGT could be reused. The highly sensitive unlabeled BPA sensor was prospective to be used in many applications to facilitate sensitive detection.
Currently, the applications of SGGT-based biosensors have shifted to a wider range of fields, including the detection of cholesterol, purine, biomarker molecules of some diseases, and even some stimulation of the brain or tissue. The biosensors are becoming increasingly miniaturized and flexible, in order to develop wearable and implantable sensors for the human body.

3.2. Transition metal dichalcogenides
2D TMDs, due to their atomic thickness, adjustable band gap width,199 excellent mechanical properties,200–202 and good biological safety, have broad application prospects in the fields of transient electronics,203 bioresorbable electronics, and clinical medicine.204,205 MX2 is the acknowledged chemical formula of TMDs, where M denotes transition metal element (such as Ti, Hf of group IVB; Ta and Nb of group VB; and Mo and W of group VIB, etc.), and X represents chalcogen (S, Se, and Te, etc.). As a new type of inorganic non-metallic materials, synthesis methods of TMDs mainly include mechanical exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), atomic layer deposition (ALD), CVD, and so on. Samples with different qualities are widely applied in electronic devices, sensors with high sensitivity, drug delivery, tumor therapy, biological imaging, etc. The absence of a bandgap in graphene restricts the sensitivity of SGGTs; however, solution-gated TMDs transistors, represented by MoS2, are prominent in the field of chemical and biological sensing because of their high sensitivity, easy patterning ability, and simple device fabrication.

3.2.1. Chemical sensors. 
A chemical sensor is a sensing platform that converts a sample component or other chemical information into electrical signals. In most TMD-based SGTs chemical sensors, the sensing mechanism involves the mutual effects between TMDs materials and analytes, which cause changes in electric potential. Then changes in channel currents are converted immediately. At present, pH sensor and ion sensor are the two main trends of TMD-based SGT chemical sensors.
The pH sensing is based on the process of protonation (engendering a positive charge) and deprotonation (generating a negative charge) of hydroxyl group in the solution. Both processes can change the surface potential of the gate dielectric. In a solution with a lower pH, the hydroxyls are more likely to undergo protonation. The higher the pH value, inversely, the easier the deprotonation of surface hydroxyls. Under a specifically applied bias with varying pH, the MoS2 pH sensors were successfully illustrated via a significant current change. Sarkar et al.206 developed a solution-gated MoS2 (2 nm) FET as a pH sensor. Sensing sensitivity of pH was usually inferred from the curves in subthreshold, saturation, and linear regions. Among them, the subthreshold region exhibited much higher sensitivity than other regions, which indicates that the subthreshold swing (SS, SS = dVGS/dlog10(ID)) is a critical parameter for pH sensors. The excellent SS (78 mV per decade) and high sensitivity are the results of the combination of the ultrathin property of MoS2, solution-gated structure, and original interface. When pH ranged from 3 to 9, the sensitivity ceiling achieved 713. Compared to SGGTs as pH sensors, TMD-based SGTs exhibit better performance in sensitivity because of the adjustable bandgap, which compensates for the shortcomings of TMDs such as low conductivity and electrostatics susceptivity.
For ion sensors, compared to the reported SGGTs used to detect a variety of ions such as Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Pb2+; TMD-based SGT chemical sensors expand the range of ions, such as As3+, Hg2+. The detection sensitivity, response time, ion selectivity, and other properties of TMD-based SGT are improved compared to those of previously reported sensors based on traditional electrochemical methods. An and Jang207 described the fabrication of SGT Apt-sensors for As3+ detection, based on CPPy-coated flower-like MoS2 nanosphere (CFMNS) (Fig. 7a). They utilized vapor deposition to form CFMNS and conjugated Ars-3 to it (Apt-CFMNS). Then Apt-CFMNS was conformed into a solution-gated system with a liquid electrolyte composed of 10 mM PBS solution. Noteworthy, the solution-gated system can effectively work under relatively low gate voltages, which can availably reduce the harm to sensor structure, provide low-power dissipation, and prevent redox reactions in water, ionic liquid, or other solutions. The measurement shows that CFMNSs SGT sensors have an extraordinary performance of response: less than 1 s (Fig. 7b). At the same time, because of the solution-gated structure, the target ionic solution directly contacts the channel material without a dielectric. Therefore, the direct reciprocity between aptamers and As3+ led to the variation of field-induced current, and the sensor exhibited an improved detection limit (1 pM) and a low S/N ratio of 4.57. Compared to that of conventional sensors, sensitivity of TMDs-based SGT sensors is 2–4 orders of magnitude higher (Fig. 7c).
 Fig. 7  (a) General view of Apt-CFMNSs solution-gated FET sensors. (b) Real-time response. (c) Calibration curves toward various As3+ concentrations.207 Copyright © 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Diagram of the MoS2 FET with Hg2+ (green dots) that can bond to surface sulfur atoms. (e) PMDS microfluidic delivery system. (f) Ids–Vg characteristics of SGT in different concentrations of Hg2+ solution.208 Copyright © 2014 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (g) Illustrative diagram of water-gated SnS2 based devices. (h) Transfer characteristic of a solution top gated FET with the near-ideal SS. (i) Contrast of the on:off current ratios between back gating and solution gating devices.210 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to detecting As3+ through modified TMDs materials, SGTs for the ion detection can also be constructed by the use of the interaction between ions and few-layer TMDs. Jiang et al.208 reported a study on mercury(II) SGT sensor based on the influence of Hg2+ on the electrical transport performance of a few-layer MoS2 (Fig. 7d and e). Owing to the high binding affinity of the sulfur sites on MoS2 surface to Hg2+, the strong binding between Hg2+ and MoS2 could produce a hole-doped effect, which reduced electron concentration in n-type MoS2. The conductance of MoS2 changed regularly in Hg2+ solutions with different concentrations. It has been demonstrated that solution-gated MoS2 FETs can work as ultra-sensitive Hg2+ sensors with the remarkable detection limit of 30 pM (Fig. 7f) and an on–off ratio exceeding 106. In 2010, Zhang et al.209 presented SGGTs as Pb2+ ion sensors employing AuNPs to modify the surface of graphene. In contrast, MoS2 SGT does not need further modification of MoS2, which makes the manufacturing costs and difficulties associated with MoS2-based Pb2+ ion sensors much lower than those of graphene. Many studies have shown that the TMDs-based SGT has extraordinary potential in highly sensitive and point-of-care testing (POCT) of ions in solution environments.
The enormous possibility of TMDs in chemical sensing is partly attributed to the unique chemical and physical capabilities of TMDs. Moreover, the design of the solution-gated structure also has a meaningful impact. Ultra-thin 2D layered semiconductive materials such as graphene and TMDs produce new electrical properties of carriers because of the quantum confinement effect and quantum tunneling effect. Thus, nowadays, most transistors are fabricated with ultra-thin channel materials. In other words, it reflects the inadequacy of traditional gate-control strategy in controlling channel conductance of thicker materials. For example, the back-gate via thick dielectrics and channels provides relatively weak gate coupling and field penetration. Therefore, thick channels cannot achieve a high switching current ratio in generic devices.211 SGTs may provide potential strategies to overcome these challenges. Huang et al.210 put forward that deionized (DI) water could act as a solution top gate for layered materials field-effect switching, including SnS2, BP, and MoS2, for the detection of glucose. Fig. 7 g exhibits the devices built by them, which consist of layered SnS2, which was exfoliated from bulk to a thickness of 80–100 layers (50–60 nm). Fig. 7i demonstrates that the electric field applied through SiO2 back gate could not effectively turn off the SnS2 channel of this thickness even with a large voltage. However, the channel was effectively closed under the solution top-gate structure, with on–off ratios of up to 105 (Fig. 7h). The DI water gate or other solution gates are facilely fabricated and can withstand rapid bias changes because the efficient coupling between electric field and layered materials provides near-ideal SS, high on–off current ratios, and enhanced short channel behavior even for FETs with bulk-like active materials. Nonetheless, such gate coupling and control is an elusive dream with a conventional back-gating structure.
For ultra-thin TMDs FET, the solution-gated structure can further improve the carrier mobility of materials. Perera et al.212 reported the manufacture of ionic solution-gated MoS2 (3 nm thick) FET with ambipolar behavior. With the decrease in temperature to 77 K, the mobility was more than 220 cm2 V−1 s−1, and on–off ratios reached 107 and 104 for electrons and holes, respectively. The enhancements of mobility and a near-optimal SS of 50 mV per decade are attributed to the solution gate. Solution gates play roles as ultra-thin dielectrics which effectively reduce the Schottky barrier of MoS2/metal contacts. It can be said that the solution-gated structure provides another way to construct FETs with good performance: through a vast electric field on the channel surface via a solution gate, a valid on–off switch for the thicker channel is feasible. It is not necessary to reduce the channel thickness to the ultimate 2D utmost for many materials.
Compared to ultra-thin single-layer or few-layer devices, SGTs with thicker channels213,214 are relatively insensitive to the thickness fluctuation of the active layer.215,216 Whether it is a few-layer or a multi-layer device, the solution-gated structure can availably improve the carrier mobility of channel materials, afford near-ideal SS, weaken the Schottky barrier, and thus the resistance of metal/semiconductor junctions.217,218 To a certain extent, SGTs overcome the limitation that TMDs transistors must use high-quality, ultra-thin channel materials, which significantly reduces the manufacturing cost. We believe that it will facilitate the manufacture of high-yielding chemical sensors shortly.


3.2.2. Biological sensors. 
Represented by MoS2, WS2 and WSe2, TMDs have become quintessential channels for biological sensors from the perspective of both security and device function. Owing to the excellent biological safety, the research on 2D TMDs is flourishing in flexible electronics, biomedicine, implantable biosensors, etc. Hurt et al.219 tested the cytotoxicity of exfoliated MoS2 nanoflakes and molybdate (MoS2 degradation product) on mouse macrophages and human lung epithelial cells. They measured the critical values of the non-toxic dose of MoS2 and molybdate, which were far lower than MoS2 content in one transistor. Chae et al.220 evaluated the cytotoxicity and genetic mutagenesis of MoS2 and WS2, and demonstrated that mechanical stripping and CVD-grown TMDs with low dose did not induce harmful effects on cell viability and genetic defects in a short time. Moreover, Chen et al.221 conducted a subcutaneous injection of MoS2 to test the tissue immune response and long-term biocompatibility of TMDs. No change was observed in CD4+T, B, and other lymphocytes that might trigger the immune response in the implanted area, which proved that transient MoS2 was non-toxic and compatible with bioelectronics. Many studies have demonstrated that TMDs have excellent biological compatibility222 and relatively low cytotoxicity, which guarantees the low risks and fewer side effects of TMDs-based SGTs as biological sensors.
Low concentration detection (LCD) of biomolecules such as polypeptide and protein, has emerged as a hot research topic in biosensing. Graphene gas sensors can detect a single target molecule by directly absorbing it, showing excellent sensitivity. However, the mechanism may also result in non-specificity.223 In contrast, good selectivity and interference immunity make the TMD-based SGT progressively more attractive in biosensing. In the case of CNTs, it is complex and complicates to create a bandgap, which leads to low yield.224 However, TMDs such as MoS2, even with 5 nm channel length, can maintain brilliant gate coupling over the channel to maintain a near-ideal SS. Thus, TMDs are highly conducive for the low-cost manufacture and scale-down of biosensors and can facilitate the fabrication of low-power and high-density biological sensors.225 In general, TMD-based SGTs not only retain the LCD capability but also show good interference immunity and high integration, which makes TMD-based SGTs become an ideal platform for biosensing.
Sarkar et al.206,226,227 employed four-layer MoS2 (2.7 nm thick) to fabricate SGT biosensor for the detection of biomolecules, as shown in Fig. 8a and b. Once the streptavidin PBS solution was added and target molecules were captured, a notable decrease in current occurred. In a specific detection experiment, on the addition of the nonspecific biotin (IgG) at pH 4.75, the current change of the biotin-functionalized devices did not unfold visually. To obtain improved SS and, thus, sensitivity, ultra-thin (2.7 nm) MoS2 was explored. Even under a thick dielectric (35 nm), an excellent SS of 90 mV per decade was obtained, and sensitivity (ΔI/I0) of 196 was achieved for 100 fM streptavidin solution (Fig. 8c). Yang and coworkers228 also used multi-layer MoS2 to fabricate an SGT biosensor for detecting prostate-specific antigens (PSA, a cancer marker protein). The specific binding events between PSA and receptor antibodies prompted the obvious change of drain current and improved the sensitivity and response rate. In another work, Lee et al.229 simplified the fabrication of MoS2 (n-type, 20–80 nm) FET biosensors, making direct use of the highly hydrophobic MoS2 surface for PSA detection (Fig. 8d). In their study, the hydrophobic MoS2 surface (the contact angle 75.77°) allowed for the adsorption of physical molecules on the sensor surface. The fluctuation of the off-current for anti-PSA modified MoS2 transistors decreased visibly, and a good minimum concentration (1 pg mL−1) was obtained (Fig. 8e and f).
 Fig. 8  (a) Graphical scheme design of MoS2-based FET biosensor with an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. (b) Pure buffer (green curve), addition of streptavidin (red curve), pure buffer again (black curve) measurements of biotin functionalized device. (c) Explanation of pH sensing principle and sensing properties.206 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) A MoS2 biosensor with PSA antibody receptors. (e) Change of Ioff with varying IgG concentrations (red: log-scale, blue: linear-scale). (f) Id–Vgs curves with different IgG concentrations.229 Copyright © 2014 Springer Nature. 
TMDs have been the popular materials for chemical and biological sensing because the TMD-based SGTs have great possibilities in sensitivity and selection specificity to some biological molecules; however, the types of molecules to detect have yet to be explored. Besides, more attention should be paid to work stability, reliability, service life, and other issues related to TMDs SGT. These sensors have potential applications such as flexible wearable devices, body surface sensors, and implantable sensors. As label-free, ultra-sensitive chemical and biological sensors with low-cost manufacturing and low-energy modes, TMD-based SGTs can provide great assistance in medical, biosecurity, legal medicine and guarantee the security of environment, and water supplies.

3.3. Few-layer black phosphorus
As a representative layered material, BP has attracted extensive attention in the field of batteries,230,231 photodetectors,232 fiber lasers,233–241 biomedicine,242–244 and basic and applied research.245,246 Among various FET channel materials, few-layer BP is also considered as promising candidate material because of its remarkable electrical properties. BP-based transistors can exhibit a larger current on–off ratio (103 to 105)247,248 than graphene transistors, and demonstrate higher carrier mobility (∼1000 cm2 V−1 s−1)249 than that of TMDs FETs. Moreover, considerable molecule adsorption energies, direct bandgap, large surface-to-volume ratios, and facile fabrication processes make BP have broad development prospects for chemical and biological sensing.

3.3.1. Chemical sensors. 
As chemical sensors, through the surveillance for the resistance change prompted by the adsorption of ions or molecules,250 BP FETs exhibit high sensitivity and accuracy for the label-free detection of target analytes in the circumstances with ultra-low concentration.
BP chemical sensors have good selectivity and sensitivity for many inimical ions in water, such as As3+, Ag+, and Hg2+. Zhou et al.251 developed a BP-based electronic sensor for As3+ real-time (less than 2 s) detection (Fig. 9a). Under the interference of other ions such as Ca2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, and Mg2+, the BP sensor showed excellent selectivity for the detection of water samples (Fig. 9b). The detection limit of 1 nM was achieved, which fully meets the testing biosecurity requirements of water samples. Wang et al.252 fabricated high-performance BP transistors for the detection of Ag+. They demonstrated that Ag+ could be absorbed on the BP surface and be detected rapidly (60 s) because of the conjugated π bond (Fig. 9c), and a low detection limit (10−10 mol L−1) was obtained.
 Fig. 9  (a) The BP-based chemical sensor for the As3+ detection. (b) Selectivity of As3+ with other ions.251 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic diagram of Ag+ adsorption and the change of band structure.252 Copyright © 2018 Chinese Physical Society and IOP Publishing Ltd. (d) Elementary diagram of suspended BP FET. (e) Comparison of the performance of suspended and non-suspended BP devices. (f) Transfer characteristics with different Hg2+ concentrations.259 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. (g) The BP FET sensor conjugated with AuNPs. (h) Dynamic response of the device to IgG. (i) Platting of sensitivity of target protein.257 Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. 
However, BP sensors reported so far have been mainly fabricated or transferred on substrates, where the dangling bonds pervade. Moreover, the scattering caused by defects on the substrate surface reduces the carrier mobility of few-layer BP and drastically exasperates its electrical properties and chemical stability.253 Li et al.254 first developed BP FETs with a solution-gated free-standing structure to overcome the disadvantages of the traditional BP-based transistors mentioned above. The transistors exhibited significant enhancements for the detection of Hg2+ with extremely low concentration in the absence of substrate. In this study, mechanically exfoliated few-layer BP flakes were transferred onto Si substrate (300 nm SiO2) (Fig. 9d). After the electrode deposition was completed, they applied 1:6 BOE to etch SiO2 layer beneath BP and created the suspended structure. The BP SGTs sensors could sense Hg2+ down to 0.01 ppb (far lower than the tolerance level recommended by WHO) with a response rate of 3 s (Fig. 9e and f). Comparative experiments proved that the detection results of Hg2+ would not be disturbed due to the interfering ions, including Na+, K+, and Ag+. A stability test was carried out in a nitrogen environment (1% relative humidity) as well. As a result, the BP transistors were still in good order 3 days later, with IDS variation of less than 5%.
Li et al.53 reported an air-stable BP chemical sensor for ion detection in 2015. In that device, BP was encapsulated with ionophore coating, and over the next 30 days, no significant degradation occurred. Although the air-stability of BP could be improved, it was far from enough compared to other chemical sensors,255 in particular, when BP sensors worked in humid environments or solution. This drawback significantly limits the practical application of BP-based SGTs in the field of chemical sensors. Thus, how to enhance the stability of BP without compromising its performance and capacity is still an enormous challenge.


3.3.2. Biological sensors. 
Zhang et al.256 reported that the puckered surface morphology between proteins and BP film produced unique interaction mechanisms. The interaction plays an important role in the generation of ultra-sensitivity toward biomolecules and indicates that BP possesses potential applications in biosensors.
Chen et al.257 used the mechanical exfoliation method to fabricate BP nanosheets (30–40 nm) for human IgG detection. The typical mechanically exfoliated magnitude of BP nanosheet was in the range from several hundred nanometers to several microns. Further, the antibody probe was conjugated with AuNP (5 nm) and then was sputtered on the BP. Under a constant bias (VDS = 0.01 V) across the electrodes, the response curves (IDS) of BP-based biosensors were recorded. The sensitivity of the BP device increased from 5 to 10% when the concentration of IgG increased from 10 to 500 ng mL−1 (Fig. 9g and h). This study demonstrated both a low detection limit (10 ng mL−1) and selective specificity to IgG (Fig. 9i). Wood et al.258 found that the atomic layer deposition of AlOx was an effective method to passivate the surface of BP nanosheet. The BP device covered by the Al2O3 passivation layer on the surface could maintain the desired on–off current ratio and mobility over 14 days under standard conditions.
At present, the fabrication of passivation layers is a temporary strategy to improve the stability of BP-based biosensors. However, the existence of passivation layers can reduce the sensitivity and extend the response time, thus it is an obstacle for the realization of high-performance biosensors. Moreover, the cytotoxicity and biocompatibility of BP are still debatable, which fundamentally restricts the development of BP-based SGTs as biological sensors.

3.4. Other two-dimensional layered materials

3.4.1. Chemical and biological sensors. 
Except 2D layered materials mentioned above (graphene, TMDs, and BP), other 2D materials can be used to construct SGTs as chemical or biological sensors, which have been demonstrated in fiber lasers,260–276 biomedicine,277 and cancer therapy.278
Yoshizawa et al.279 demonstrated the use of InP-based SGTs in acid electrolytes. The carrier concentration of epitaxial InP was 8 × 1016 cm−3, and Hall mobility was as high as 2700 cm2 V−1 s−1. Before it was utilized as a pH sensor, it was indispensable to evaluate and calibrate the linear region transfer characteristics (VG = 0 V, VD = 0.5 V). In the case of using H3PO4 electrolytes, the higher sensitivity (57 mV per pH) was acquired, which approached the theoretical value. However, when the H3PO4 electrolyte was replaced with HCl, the lower sensitivity (48 mV per pH) was obtained. In this research, SiN films (H+ selective membrane) of different thickness varying from 2 to 7 nm were employed, and it was found that the charged interface states acted as an essential factor affecting potential controllability of SGT and enhancing the sensitivity of chemical or biological sensors.
Majd et al.280 developed a new solution-gated FET biosensor (Fig. 10a) for label-free gene detection of HIV-1 using RF magnetron sputtering p-type NiO thin film (∼5–40 nm, band gaps: ∼3.0–3.58 eV, respectively). On the surface of NiO, HIV-1, 5′-amino-modified probe ssDNA was immobilized by a covalent bond. Electrical measurements showed that NiO SGTs provided high carrier mobility (>8.0 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 at VG = −0.1 V and VDS = −1.0 V), superior SS (312.67 mV per decade), and ideal on–off ratio (1.09 × 106) certainly. To summarize the advantages of the NiO and SGT, efficient HIV DNA sensors accomplished the detection of target HIV-1 DNA at the linear region from 1 aM to 10 nM with an LCD of 0.3 aM (Fig. 10b). The proposed biosensor exhibited a high percentage recovery (103.5–108.2%) in real blood samples. Thus it offers a reliable approach for quantitative and preventative assessment of HIV-1 target. These outcomes demonstrate that NiO SGT can provide new opportunities and openings in advanced medical diagnostics.
 Fig. 10  (a) Diagram of the fabricated NiO-based FET. (b) A histogram elaborates on the sensing performance of the NiO FET.280 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic of the Cr2Ge2Te6 SGT structure. (d) RXX dependence of O2 pressure with two VLG.281 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic of the MXene FET. (f) Real-time detecting of conductivity with different dopamine concentrations.282 Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
MXene, as a new member of the 2D material family, has a hydrophilic surface and good conductivity as high as that of metals. Its good electrical, mechanical, and chemical properties and cost-effective machinability make it a promising material in the fields of energy storage and electrochemical sensing, and it also has great potential for biosensing. Xu et al.282 reported an MXene-micropattern-based FET biosensor for monitoring neural activity (Fig. 10e and f). Neuronal growth was achieved on MXene, which demonstrated the biocompatibility of MXene. Compared to the calcium-sensitive dye (Fluo-4) for the detection of neural activity, a better temporal resolution was exhibited on the MXene SGT system.
In a word, the importance of solution-gated structure to SGT sensors is demonstrated herein, not simply relying on the superior channel materials. The solution-gate also provides a reliable guarantee and guidance for other 2D materials in the field of chemical and biological sensing.


3.4.2. Other applications. 
The solution gate has been pervasively taken to induce many intriguing physical properties by arising the carrier density through vast electric fields on materials.283,284 For one, superconductivity of large varieties of materials, including KTaO3, ZrNCl, and La2−xSrxCuO4, etc. has been implemented using the solution gate strategy.285–290 Furthermore, the magnetic phase transition has also been achieved via the solution gate.291,292 Lately, Chen et al.281 conducted solution gating experiments on ferromagnetic 2D Cr2Ge2Te6 (CGT), and explored the character of oxygen in the solution gating effect (Fig. 10c). The results proved that oxygen did not affect the solution gate on the CGT SGT but only affected leakage current of the solution gate. It provides a potential possibility for SGT to be used for the detection of O2 and other gases (Fig. 10d). Choi et al.293 explored that the superconducting critical temperature (Tc) could be modulated in the Nb film-based SGT. Tc could be degraded or enhanced depending on positive or negative VG applied. Furthermore, Maruyama et al.294 reported in situ modulations of the Tc of LiTi2O4 (LTO) thin films by solution gate. LTO thin films (Tc of 11.5 K) were synthesized on MgAl2O4 substrates. Double-layer LTO was integrated into a transistor system utilizing a solution with or without Li+. The present observation indicates the feasibility of modulations of superconductive properties by reversible lithiation and delithiation.
To sum up, by a solution gating configuration, the present studies imply the possibility of reversible modulation of superconductivity, magnetic properties, and many other alluring physical and chemical properties. It makes SGT a promising and practical high-efficiency device in many fields besides chemical biosensors.

3.5. Summary
Different 2D materials show different characteristics, and sensor performance is the extension of material properties. Thus, it is necessary to compare and summarize the advantages and disadvantages of 2D materials and SGT sensors (Scheme 2). As one of the earliest 2D materials, graphene exhibits ultra-high carrier mobility, remarkable chemical stability, and excellent biocompatibility. These advantages endow SGGTs with high sensitivity and make SGGTs suitable for the extremely low concentration detection. However, the zero bandgap of graphene indicates that SGGTs cannot implement the switch, and thus show the lack of selectivity. TMDs constitute a new class of 2D materials with low cytotoxicity and excellent mechanical properties. These two factors make TMDs have a broad range of potential applications in flexible electronic devices and implantable sensors. Moreover, the adjustable bandgap plays a significant role in the wonderful selective specificity of TMD-based SGTs. However, the low carrier mobility and biodegradability restrict the response rate and service life of TMDs-based sensors, respectively. BP has more distinct strengths and weaknesses than graphene and TMDs. First, BP possesses higher carrier mobility than graphene and maintains a direct bandgap, which makes BP become the first choice for electrochemical sensors. Nonetheless, the poor chemical stability and uncertain cytotoxicity limit the performance of BP-based SGTs as biological sensors. The main development strategies of sensors are to further expand the advantages of sensors or make up the obvious disadvantages.
 Scheme 2  Contrast of typical 2D materials and their sensors.58 Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4. Conclusions and outlooks
Graphene, TMDs, BP, and other 2D materials certainly have disadvantages whether they act as materials or sensors. Nonetheless, these materials still have good application prospects in the manufacturing of chemical and biological sensors, in particular, for constructing SGT sensors. Recently, with the rapid development of high quality and low-cost feasible methods for synthesis of 2D materials, large-scale manufacture of SGT sensors capable of complex and diversified functions has become a reality. SGGTs are hypersensitive to electriferous analytes or electric fields due to the electronic properties of graphene, which endow SGGTs with high sensitivity and ability of miniaturization. Compared to SGGTs and BP-based SGTs, TMD-based SGTs do not possess high mobility, but lower cytotoxicity and better biodegradability make such devices present more significant potential in the field of biosensors. The carrier mobility of BP-based SGT is as good as that of graphene-based SGT. Once the problem of low chemical stability is overcome, such a device operates as a critical role in the field of sensors. SGTs have been widely applied in various types of chemical or biological sensors, including pH, ion, DNA, and protein sensors. They are also extensively used to study the physical properties of various channel materials under field effects. However, because of the difficulty of fabricating equipment with ideal density and uniformity, these sensing technologies are still far from practical applications. Furthermore, the complex interaction between 2D channel materials and other organic or inorganic materials is still uncertain, and a large number of experiments are still required to verify the effectiveness and feasibility of SGTs application.
Combined with the unique structural advantages of the solution gate and the excellent performance of SGT sensors, Scheme 3 shows possible potential applications of SGT sensors in the biomedicine field.
 Scheme 3  Biological and chemical sensing applications of solution-gated transistors with 2D materials. 
In in vitro, SGTs can be placed in an oral cavity, nasal cavity, eyes, body surface, and blood. In the oral cavity, saliva provides a liquid environment for the sensor, while the sensor specifically combines with biomarkers in saliva to produce an electrical signal. Therefore, non-invasive diagnosis of some diseases can be successfully achieved by monitoring electrical signals. In 2012, researchers developed a type of SGGT as the ultra-sensitive bioelectronic nose (b-nose) capable of coupling with olfactory receptors 2AG1 that can selectively combine with the specific odorant AB. Based on this type of research, it is completely possible to realize the combination of SGT nasal gas sensors and flexible circuits to help human sensitively distinguish whether there are specific gas molecules in the environment. It can also fulfill the application of forewarning and tracking by improving the sense of smell.295 Studies have shown that micro-current can stimulate Muller cells to up-regulate the transcription of BDNF, which can effectively prolong the survival time of photoreceptor cells and delay the loss of retinal function. Therefore, it is feasible to use the SGTs micro-current system in moist eye environment for ophthalmology treatment, and it may provide a protective effect on the entire retina, in contrast, drug injection only works locally. Moreover, SGTs can also be used on the body surface because sweat can provide a liquid service environment for the sensor. Besides, sweat contains ions, amino acids, hormones, proteins, polypeptides, and other secretions. SGT sensor can non-invasively monitor human body electrolyte imbalance, lactate index, sweat glucose level, and dehydration status, which will be a very efficient and low-cost diagnostic mode in the future.
In in vivo, the applications of SGTs include modulation of conduction of nerve signals on synapse, detection of disease markers in the blood, measurement of blood viscosity, and monitoring of cell transmembrane potential (TMP).
SGT is the platform of “electric–chemical–electric” signal transmission, therefore can work in the neuromuscular junction (a contact point between the ends of a motor neurons axon on a skeletal muscle fiber). The nerve endings in the action potential cause the release of acetylcholine (Ach) and trigger action potentials of skeletal muscle. Ach ligand-modified SGT can be settled in the neuromuscular joint to facilitate the modulation and transmission of nerve signals. In blood, the principle for the identification and detection of disease markers is similar to that in the oral cavity assay mentioned above; nonetheless, the feasibility remains to be explored due to the more complex interaction between SGT and the internal environment. Recently, many reports about microfluidic solution delivery systems have been presented to detect ion concentration and fluid flow velocity. Based on these observations, we boldly envision a future where the SGT could be integrated into needles and even implanted directly into blood vessels for rapid detection of blood flow velocity (viscosity). With the continuous development of micro-machining technology, it is feasible for the low-cost mass production of high-performance SGTs in line with human cell size (average 10–20 μm), which paves the way for SGTs to detect the single-cell TMP in the humoral environment. With the continuous progress of micro-machining technology, it is probable to produce the low-cost and high-performance SGTs matching human cell size, which makes it possible for SGTs to detect single-cell TMP in the humoral environment. The normal TMP, an indicator of a cell's ability to make adenosine triphosphate, falls between 70 and 90 mV. However, age, disease, environmental chemicals, and even stress can change the TMP. When the TMP drops to 15–30 mV, cells are more likely to become cancerous. Therefore, the detection of cell TMP may become an important approach to monitoring human health in near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research was financially supported by National Natural Science Fundation of China (Grant No. 11574075, 61875138, 61435010, 91964103 and 61961136001), Department of Science and Technology, Hubei Provincial People's Government (2016CFA036), Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Commission (JCYJ20170811093453105), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20190476), and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (30919011296) of China.
References
F. Yan, M. Zhang and J. Li, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 313–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Oh, O. S. Kwon and J. Jang, Polym. Rev., 2013, 53, 407–442 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Park, H. Yoon and O. S. Kwon, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 38, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liao, M. Zhang, M. Yao, T. Hua, L. Li and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7493–7527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, H. Y. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 100–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xie, C. Mak, X. Tao and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603886 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nature, 2009, 459, 820–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Zhu and B. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3145–3187 RSC .
X. Cao, C. Tan, X. Zhang, W. Zhao and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6167–6196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Zhu, X. Yu, X. Zeng, Q. Xiao, X. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Wang, J. Shi, H. Zhang and L. Mei, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603276 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hass, W. A. de Heer and E. H. Conrad, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 323202 CrossRef .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, M. Pasta, K. J. Koski, J. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jung, S. Lee, D. Yoo, S. Jeong, P. Miro, A. Kuc, T. Heine and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7266–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Li, Y. Shi, C. C. Cheng, L. S. Lu, Y. C. Lin, H. L. Tang, M. L. Tsai, C. W. Chu, K. H. Wei, J. H. He, W. H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L. J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Molle, J. Goldberger, M. Houssa, Y. Xu, S. C. Zhang and D. Akinwande, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 163–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera and Z. Sofer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605299 CrossRef .
F. Cicoira, M. Sessolo, O. Yaghmazadeh, J. A. DeFranco, S. Y. Yang and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1012–1016 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, J. Li, C. Liu, S. Yang and F. Yan, Adv.
Mater., 2011, 23, 3648–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Sun and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, J. Xu, K. Gong, X. Shen, Y. Lu, Y. Qiu, J. Xu, Z. Zou, C. Wang, H. Yan, Y. Luo, A. Pan, H. Zhang, J. C. Ho and K. M. Yu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8474–8481 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wan, X. Wen, C. Sun, B. K. Chandran, H. Zhang, X. Sun and X. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 5409–5415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, C. Sun, H. Yan, X. Sun, H. Zhang, L. Luo, X. Lei, P. Wan and X. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, K. R. Ratinac, S. P. Ringer, P. Thordarson, J. J. Gooding and F. Braet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2114–2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Bao, H. Zhang and C. Pan, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2007, 39, 616–626 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bao, H. Zhang and C. Pan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 063124 CrossRef .
A. Gupta, T. Sakthivel and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 73, 44–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, H. Li and L. J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2744–2756 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
Y. Chen, C. Tan, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2681–2701 RSC .
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Akinwande, L. Tao, Q. K. Yu, X. J. Lou, P. Peng and D. Kuzum, IEEE Nanotechnol. Mag., 2015, 9, 6–14 Search PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Fal'ko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche, P. Bøggild, S. Borini, F. H. L. Koppens, V. Palermo, N. Pugno, J. A. Garrido, R. Sordan, A. Bianco, L. Ballerini, M. Prato, E. Lidorikis, J. Kivioja, C. Marinelli, T. Ryhänen, A. Morpurgo, J. N. Coleman, V. Nicolosi, L. Colombo, A. Fert, M. Garcia-Hernandez, A. Bachtold, G. F. Schneider, F. Guinea, C. Dekker, M. Barbone, Z. Sun, C. Galiotis, A. N. Grigorenko, G. Konstantatos, A. Kis, M. Katsnelson, L. Vandersypen, A. Loiseau, V. Morandi, D. Neumaier, E. Treossi, V. Pellegrini, M. Polini, A. Tredicucci, G. M. Williams, B. Hee Hong, J.-H. Ahn, J. Min Kim, H. Zirath, B. J. van Wees, H. van der Zant, L. Occhipinti, A. Di Matteo, I. A. Kinloch, T. Seyller, E. Quesnel, X. Feng, K. Teo, N. Rupesinghe, P. Hakonen, S. R. T. Neil, Q. Tannock, T. Löfwander and J. Kinaret, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598–4810 RSC .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Park, O. S. Kwon, S. H. Lee, H. S. Song, T. H. Park and J. Jang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5082–5090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, T. Palacios, J. Kong and H. Y. Yang, Small, 2014, 10, 1101–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, D. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Chang, Y. E. Sun and N. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24396–24402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, M. Zhu, W. Zhang, X. Zhen, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, C. Zhi and P. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3333–3339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, L. Zhang, K. Zhou, J. Li, X. Xie and Z. Li, Carbon, 2013, 65, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vancsó, G. Z. Magda, J. Pető, J. Y. Noh, Y. S. Kim, C. Hwang, L. P. Biró and L. Tapasztó, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29726 CrossRef PubMed .
C. D. Zhang, J. C. Lian, W. Yi, Y. H. Jiang, L. W. Liu, H. Hu, W. D. Xiao, S. X. Du, L. L. Sun and H. J. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18823–18826 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lin and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 34–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Viventi, D. H. Kim, L. Vigeland, E. S. Frechette, J. A. Blanco, Y. S. Kim, A. E. Avrin, V. R. Tiruvadi, S. W. Hwang, A. C. Vanleer, D. F. Wulsin, K. Davis, C. E. Gelber, L. Palmer, J. Van der Spiegel, J. Wu, J. Xiao, Y. Huang, D. Contreras, J. A. Rogers and B. Litt, Nat. Neurosci., 2011, 14, 1599–1605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Jun, N. A. Steinmetz, J. H. Siegle, D. J. Denman, M. Bauza, B. Barbarits, A. K. Lee, C. A. Anastassiou, A. Andrei, C. Aydin, M. Barbic, T. J. Blanche, V. Bonin, J. Couto, B. Dutta, S. L. Gratiy, D. A. Gutnisky, M. Hausser, B. Karsh, P. Ledochowitsch, C. M. Lopez, C. Mitelut, S. Musa, M. Okun, M. Pachitariu, J. Putzeys, P. D. Rich, C. Rossant, W. L. Sun, K. Svoboda, M. Carandini, K. D. Harris, C. Koch, J. O'Keefe and T. D. Harris, Nature, 2017, 551, 232–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Masvidal-Codina, X. Illa, M. Dasilva, A. B. Calia, T. Dragojevic, E. E. Vidal-Rosas, E. Prats-Alfonso, J. Martinez-Aguilar, J. M. De la Cruz, R. Garcia-Cortadella, P. Godignon, G. Rius, A. Camassa, E. Del Corro, J. Bousquet, C. Hebert, T. Durduran, R. Villa, M. V. Sanchez-Vives, J. A. Garrido and A. Guimera-Brunet, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 280–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hébert, E. Masvidal-Codina, A. Suarez-Perez, A. B. Calia, G. Piret, R. Garcia-Cortadella, X. Illa, E. Del Corro Garcia, J. M. De la Cruz Sanchez, D. V. Casals, E. Prats-Alfonso, J. Bousquet, P. Godignon, B. Yvert, R. Villa, M. V. Sanchez-Vives, A. Guimerà-Brunet and J. A. Garrido, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703976 CrossRef .
B. M. Blaschke, N. Tort-Colet, A. Guimerà-Brunet, J. Weinert, L. Rousseau, A. Heimann, S. Drieschner, O. Kempski, R. Villa, M. V. Sanchez-Vives and J. A. Garrido, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025040 CrossRef .
Z. Meng, R. M. Stolz, L. Mendecki and K. A. Mirica, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 478–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS .
R. Won, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 882 CrossRef .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. B. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. N. Xia, Y. L. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
W. Choi, I. Lahiri, R. Seelaboyina and Y. S. Kang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 35, 52–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, H. Lee, R. Ghaffari, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4203–4218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, J. A. Robinson, M. Dubey, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6398–6414 RSC .
S. Wang, J. Zhao, H. Yang, C. Wu, F. Hu, H. Chang, G. Li, D. Ma, D. Zou and M. Huang, Acta Biomater., 2017, 58, 442–454 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2425–2432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yi and Z. G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11700–11715 RSC .
P. Ares, F. Aguilar-Galindo, D. Rodríguez-San-Miguel, D. A. Aldave, S. Díaz-Tendero, M. Alcamí, F. Martín, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6332–6336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yi and Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11700–11715 RSC .
C. Cheng, P. Jia, L. Xiao and J. Geng, Carbon, 2019, 145, 668–676 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jawaid, D. Nepal, K. Park, M. Jespersen, A. Qualley, P. Mirau, L. F. Drummy and R. A. Vaia, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 337–348 CrossRef .
J. Wang, M. Yan, K. Zhao, X. Liao, P. Wang, X. Pan, W. Yang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604464 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Khan, S. Ghosh, B. Pradhan, A. Dalui, L. K. Shrestha, S. Acharya and K. Ariga, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2017, 90, 627–648 CrossRef .
H. Yu, H. Zhu, M. Dargusch and Y. Huang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 514, 642–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, J. Ge, X. Peng, Q. Zhang, Z. Wu, Y. Jian, X. Xiong, H. Yin and J. Han, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 125201 CrossRef .
C. Backes, T. M. Higgins, A. Kelly, C. Boland, A. Harvey, D. Hanlon and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2016, 29, 243–255 CrossRef .
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, T. Foroozan, C. Wang, M. Asadi, D. Tuschel, J. E. Indacochea, R. F. Klie and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, C. Xing, W. Huang, T. Fan, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, Z. Guo, J. Li, Z. Yang, B. Dong, J. Qu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705833 CrossRef .
Z. Wei and S. W. Prescott, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Y. Zhu, C. Shi and Y. T. Pei, Carbon, 2016, 109, 373–383 CrossRef CAS .
D. Parviz, F. Irin, S. A. Shah, S. Das, C. B. Sweeney and M. J. Green, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8796–8818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amiri, M. Naraghi, G. Ahmadi, M. Soleymaniha and M. Shanbedi, FlatChem, 2018, 8, 40–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Cao, Y. Xue, B. Li and W. Cai, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 942 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Han, S. Lee and J. Cheon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2581–2591 RSC .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, L. Pang, Y. Zhang, X. Ren, H. Fan and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10693–10697 RSC .
X. Qiao, F. Hu, D. Hou and D. Li, Mater. Lett., 2016, 169, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, X. Xiao, Y. Y. Xue, J. X. Jiang, J. H. Zeng, X. F. Li and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19755–19763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. Magdassi, Y. Gao and Y. Long, Small, 2017, 13, 1701147 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Darr, J. Zhang, N. M. Makwana and X. Weng, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11125–11238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. N. Azad, M. Ghaedi, K. Dashtian, S. Hajati and V. Pezeshkpour, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2016, 31, 383–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Azizi, M. R. Gadinski, Q. Li, M. A. AlSaud, J. Wang, Y. Wang, B. Wang, F. Liu, L. Q. Chen and N. Alem, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701864 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Meng, J. Xia, Z. Yin, Y. Wang, J. You and X.-M. Meng, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 031012 CrossRef .
J. Yu, J. Li, W. Zhang and H. Chang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 6705–6716 RSC .
K. Singh, R. Joyce, S. Varghese and J. Akhtar, Sens. Actuators, A, 2015, 223, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1079–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, N. Choudhary, J. Smith, G. Lee, M. Kim and W. Choi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 012104 CrossRef .
M. Hafeez, L. Gan, H. Li, Y. Ma and T. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8296–8301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Empante, Y. Zhou, V. Klee, A. E. Nguyen, I. H. Lu, M. D. Valentin, S. A. Naghibi Alvillar, E. Preciado, A. J. Berges, C. S. Merida, M. Gomez, S. Bobek, M. Isarraraz, E. J. Reed and L. Bartels, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 900–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ismach, H. Chou, P. Mende, A. Dolocan, R. Addou, S. Aloni, R. Wallace, R. Feenstra, R. S. Ruoff and L. Colombo, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025117 CrossRef .
J. Li, W. Tang, Q. Wang, W. Sun, Q. Zhang, X. Guo, X. Wang and F. Yan, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2018, 127, 1–36 CrossRef .
F. Chen, Q. Qing, J. Xia and N. Tao, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 2144–2153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Lin, P. T. K. Loan, T. Y. Chen, K. K. Liu, C. H. Chen, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2301–2307 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cohen-Karni, Q. Qing, Q. Li, Y. Fang and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1098–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohanty and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4469–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, X. Dong, Y. Liu, L. J. Li and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12358–12362 RSC .
X. Dong, Y. Shi, W. Huang, P. Chen and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1649–1653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Zhang, X. Qi, X. Ren, G. Xu, P. Wan, X. Sun and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13273–13279 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Ren, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, X. Qi, X. Wei and J. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 142–151 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Rajan, D. A. Routenberg and M. A. Reed, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 264107 CrossRef PubMed .
P. R. Wallace, Phys. Rev., 1947, 71, 622–634 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mu, Z. Wang, J. Yuan, S. Xiao, C. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Xue, H. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 832–841 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, Y. Chen, H. Huang, C. Zhao, S. Lu, S. Chen, H. Zhang and S. Wen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10288–10293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Wang, Y. Chen, C. J. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. C. Wen, IEEE Photonics J., 2012, 4, 869–876 Search PubMed .
L. Miao, Y. Jiang, S. Lu, B. Shi, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Photonics Res., 2015, 3, 214–219 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Ang, W. Chen, A. T. S. Wee and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14392–14393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi and K. Matsumoto, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 1727–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, Y. Yamashiro and K. Matsumoto, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3318–3322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheng, Q. Li, Z. Li, Q. Zhou and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1864–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, C. Nef, O. Knopfmacher, A. Tarasov, M. Weiss, M. Calame and C. Schonenberger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3597–3600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, K. L. Liddell, J. J. Wang, B. Koger, C. D. Keating and J. Zhu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1263–1270 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zhu, C. Wang, N. Petrone, J. Yu, C. Nuckolls, J. Hone and Q. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 123503 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Lee, B. J. Kim, K. H. Lee, I. S. Shin, W. Huh, J. H. Cho and M. S. Kang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7540–7544 RSC .
S. K. Ameri, P. K. Singh and S. R. Sonkusale, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2016, 934, 212–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Kwon, J. Yi, W. W. Lee, J. H. Shin, S. H. Kim, S. H. Cho, S. Nam and W. I. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 8, 834–839 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. R. Li, S. H. Chang, C. T. Chang, W. L. Tsai, Y. K. Chiu, P. Y. Yang and H. C. Cheng, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 55, 04EM08 CrossRef .
Y. Sofue, Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, K. Inoue and K. Matsumoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 06GE07 CrossRef .
A. K. Newaz, D. A. Markov, D. Prasai and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2931–2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiong, T. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Lin, H. Qu, W. Chen, L. Luo, Y. Wang, L. Zheng and L. Fu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1033, 65–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, C. Nef, A. Tarasov, M. Wipf, R. Stoop, O. Knopfmacher, M. Weiss, M. Calame and C. Schonenberger, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12104–12110 RSC .
K. Maehashi, Y. Sofue, S. Okamoto, Y. Ohno, K. Inoue and K. Matsumoto, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 187, 45–49 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Zhu, M. S. Islam, M. A. Rahman, K. B. Walsh and G. Koley, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 253, 759–765 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hasan, B. Hou, A. L. Moore and A. D. Radadia, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800133 CrossRef .
Q. Yuan, S. Wu, C. Ye, X. Liu, J. Gao, N. Cui, P. Guo, G. Lai, Q. Wei, M. Yang, W. Su, H. Li, N. Jiang, L. Fu, D. Dai, C. T. Lin and K. W. A. Chee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 285, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. He, P. Lin, Z. K. Liu, H. W. Zhu, X. Z. Zhao, H. L. W. Chan and F. Yan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Sudibya, Q. He, H. Zhang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1990–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fan, J. Li, J. Wang, Z. Yang, T. Shen, Y. Guo, L. Wang, M. S. Irshad, T. Mei and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4685–4689 RSC .
Q. Fan, J. Li, Y. Zhu, Z. Yang, T. Shen, Y. Guo, L. Wang, T. Mei, J. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4797–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Piccinini, C. Bliem, C. Reiner-Rozman, F. Battaglini, O. Azzaroni and W. Knoll, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 92, 661–667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Z. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Li, C. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. An, S. J. Park, O. S. Kwon, J. Bae and J. Jang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10563–10571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, B. Liu, D. Zhang, Y. Sun and J. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 153101 CrossRef .
J. Tu, Y. Gan, T. Liang, Q. Hu, Q. Wang, T. Ren, Q. Sun, H. Wan and P. Wang, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 333 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wen, F. Y. Li, X. Dong, J. Zhang, Q. Xiong and P. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 271–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Cui, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Huang, J. Bi, J. Luo, L. Q. Ma, W. Zhou, Y. Cao, B. Wang and F. Miao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan, P. Estrela, Y. Mo, P. Migliorato, H. Maeda, S. Inoue and T. Shimoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053901 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, X. Dong, Y. Shi, C. M. Li, L. J. Li and P. Chen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1485–1488 RSC .
Y. H. Kwak, D. S. Choi, Y. N. Kim, H. Kim, D. H. Yoon, S. S. Ahn, J. W. Yang, W. S. Yang and S. Seo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 37, 82–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Park, C. Lee and J. Jang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 208, 532–537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, C. Liao, C. H. Mak, P. You, C. L. Mak and F. Yan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liao, C. Mak, M. Zhang, H. L. Chan and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Vasu, S. Sridevi, S. Sampath and A. K. Sood, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 221, 1209–1214 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Cagang, I. H. Abidi, A. Tyagi, J. Hu, F. Xu, T. J. Lu and Z. Luo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2016, 917, 101–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiong, T. Zhang, W. Kong, Z. Zhang, H. Qu, W. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Luo and L. Zheng, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 101, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
R. Stine, J. T. Robinson, P. E. Sheehan and C. R. Tamanaha, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5297–5300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Chen, P. T. Loan, C. L. Hsu, Y. H. Lee, J. Tse-Wei Wang, K. H. Wei, C. T. Lin and L. J. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 103–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, Q. He, X. Huang, J. Zhang, S. Wu, P. Chen, G. Lu, P. Chen, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 293–297 RSC .
W. Fu, L. Feng, D. Mayer, G. Panaitov, D. Kireev, A. Offenhausser and H. J. Krause, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2295–2300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Han, R. Chand and Y. S. Kim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 93, 220–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and Y. Jia, Carbon, 2018, 130, 758–767 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi and K. Matsumoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18012–18013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, S. Wu, S. Gao, X. Cao, Z. Yin, H. Li, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5038–5044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, K. Yu, G. Lu and J. Chen, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 921–930 CrossRef .
O. S. Kwon, S. J. Park, J. Y. Hong, A. R. Han, J. S. Lee, J. S. Lee, J. H. Oh and J. Jang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1486–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kim, H. C. Park, I. Y. Sohn, J. H. Jung, O. J. Yoon, J. S. Park, M. Y. Yoon and N. E. Lee, Small, 2013, 9, 3352–3360 CAS .
D. J. Kim, I. Y. Sohn, J. H. Jung, O. J. Yoon, N. E. Lee and J. S. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 621–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Soikkeli, K. Kurppa, M. Kainlauri, S. Arpiainen, A. Paananen, D. Gunnarsson, J. J. Joensuu, P. Laaksonen, M. Prunnila, M. B. Linder and J. Ahopelto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8257–8264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. A. Jackman, W. B. Ng and N. J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8623–8630 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Hess, M. Jansen, V. Maybeck, M. V. Hauf, M. Seifert, M. Stutzmann, I. D. Sharp, A. Offenhausser and J. A. Garrido, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5045–5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Ang, A. Li, M. Jaiswal, Y. Wang, H. W. Hou, J. T. L. Thong, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5240–5246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Blaschke, M. Lottner, S. Drieschner, A. B. Calia, K. Stoiber, L. Rousseau, G. Lissourges and J. A. Garrido, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 025007 CrossRef .
X. Wang, A. Liu, Y. Xing, H. Duan, W. Xu, Q. Zhou, H. Wu, C. Chen and B. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 105, 22–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, C. Liao, Y. Yao, Z. Liu, F. Gong and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 978–985 CrossRef CAS .
J. It Wong, L. Wang, Y. Shi, T. Palacios, J. Kong, X. Dong and H. Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063705 CrossRef .
J. W. Park, S. J. Park, O. S. Kwon, C. Lee and J. Jang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 1822–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yu, X. Chang, J. Liu, L. Ding, J. Peng and Y. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10718–10726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhu, X. Zhou, Q. Lin and M. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7668–7678 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Fu, C. Xiong, Z. Liu, L. Zheng and F. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23522–23528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhan, J. Cervenka, S. Prawer and D. J. Garrett, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 930–935 RSC .
H. Tang, F. Yan, P. Lin, J. Xu and H. L. W. Chan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2264–2272 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Clark and C. Lyons, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1962, 102, 29–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers Jr. and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
S. Li, K. Huang, Q. Fan, S. Yang, T. Shen, T. Mei, J. Wang, X. Wang, G. Chang and J. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 136, 91–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Vestergaard, K. Kerman and E. Tamiya, Sensors, 2007, 7, 3442–3458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Armbruster, Clin. Chem., 1993, 39, 181–195 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. A. Gao, G. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 547–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Chen, B. R. Li and Y. T. Chen, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 131–154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Ko, J. G. Kang, J. G. Park, S. Lee and D. W. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455701 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xie, Z. Lin, L. Hanson, Y. Cui and B. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 185–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Dhakal, S. Roy, H. Jang, X. Chen, W. S. Yun, H. Kim, J. Lee, J. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5124–5133 CrossRef CAS .
T. Das, X. Chen, H. Jang, I. K. Oh, H. J. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Small, 2016, 12, 5720–5727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, Y. J. Park, X. Chen, Y. K. Park, M. S. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2556–2562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Shinde, T. Das, A. T. Hoang, B. K. Sharma, X. Chen and J. H. Ahn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706231 CrossRef .
H. Jang, K. P. Dhakal, K. I. Joo, W. S. Yun, S. M. Shinde, X. Chen, S. M. Jeong, S. W. Lee, Z. Lee, J. Lee, J. H. Ahn and H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705190 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, Y. Guo, P. Wan, X. Sun, H. Zhang, Z. Yu and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 869–874 RSC .
Z. Huang, W. Han, H. Tang, L. Ren, D. S. Chander, X. Qi and H. Zhang, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 035011 CrossRef .
D. Sarkar, W. Liu, X. Xie, A. C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri and K. Banerjee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3992–4003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. An and J. Jang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7483–7492 RSC .
S. Jiang, R. Cheng, R. Ng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. F. Ali, E. Dervishi, Y. Xu, Z. Li, D. Casciano and A. S. Biris, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3181–3186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, E. Sutter, L. M. Wu, H. Xu, L. Bao, H.-J. Gao, X. J. Zhou and P. Sutter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23198–23207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Kwon, J. Jang, S. Kim, V. Subramanian and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 152105 CrossRef .
M. M. Perera, M. W. Lin, H. J. Chuang, B. P. Chamlagain, C. Wang, X. Tan, M. M. C. Cheng, D. Tománek and Z. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4449–4458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, H. Wang, H. Xie, R. Liu, S. L. Zhang and Z. J. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Li, K. Komatsu, S. Nakaharai, Y. F. Lin, M. Yamamoto, X. Duan and K. Tsukagoshi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12836–12842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, A. Konar, W. S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Yang, C. Jung, H. Kim, J. B. Yoo and J. Y. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1011 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Bao, X. Cai, D. Kim, K. Sridhara and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 042104 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8563–8569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, A. von dem Bussche, Y. Qiu, T. M. Valentin, K. Gion, A. B. Kane and R. H. Hurt, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 7208–7217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Appel, D. O. Li, J. D. Podlevsky, A. Debnath, A. A. Green, Q. H. Wang and J. Chae, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 361–367 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. J. Park, M. Kang, S.-K. Kang, J. Koo, S. M. Shinde, J. Shin, S. Jeon, G. Park and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1690 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, S. M. Shinde, K. P. Dhakal, S. W. Lee, H. Kim, Z. Lee and J.-H. Ahn, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 810–820 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schedin, A. Geim, S. Morozov, E. Hill, P. Blake, M. Katsnelson and K. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, J. P. Small, J. E. Klare, Y. Wang, M. S. Purewal, I. W. Tam, B. H. Hong, R. Caldwell, L. Huang and S. O'Brien, Science, 2006, 311, 356–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. J. Park, T. Das, H. Jang, J. B. Lee and J. H. Ahn, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15181–15188 RSC .
P. K. Kannan, D. J. Late, H. Morgan and C. S. Rout, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13293–13312 RSC .
W. Zhang, P. Zhang, Z. Su and G. Wei, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18364–18378 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, T. Palacios, J. Kong and H. Y. Yang, Small, 2014, 10, 1101–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, P. Dak, Y. Lee, H. Park, W. Choi, M. A. Alam and S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, G. Xu, X. Ren, Z. Li, X. Qi, K. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Huang and J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6581–6588 RSC .
M. Qiu, Z. T. Sun, D. K. Sang, X. G. Han, H. Zhang and C. M. Niu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13384–13403 RSC .
X. Ren, Z. Li, Z. Huang, D. Sang, H. Qiao, X. Qi, J. Li, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606834 CrossRef .
J. Ma, S. Lu, Z. Guo, Xi. Xu, H. Zhang, D. Tang and D. Fan, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 22643–22648 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, S. Chen, Q. Zhang, L. Li, L. Zhao, H. Zhang and D. Tang, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 25933–25942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Xu, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. Sophia, C. Zhao, C. Xu, Y. Xiang, J. Li and H. Zhang, IEEE Photonics J., 2016, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Zheng, Z. Yang, C. Si, Z. Liang, X. Chen, R. Cao, Z. Guo, K. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Ji, M. Zhang, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1466–1476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, J. Chen, X. Zhu, G. Hu, P. Peng, Z. Zheng and H. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, X. F. Jiang, Y. Ge, Z. Guo, Z. Zeng, Q. H. Xu, H. Zhang, X. F. Yu and D. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3007–3013 RSC .
Z. Chu, J. Liu, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 2374–2379 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Guo, H. Zhang, W. Ma, J. Wang and L. Su, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 30289–30295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Luo, B. Zhai, R. Lu, Z. Guo, H. Zhang and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, H. Cui, Y. Zhou, W. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, H. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1602896 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yin, K. Hu, S. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Xie, D. Yang, M. Qiu, H. Zhang and Z.-G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 5433–5440 RSC .
M. Qiu, D. Wang, W. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, D. K. Sang, C. Xing, Z. Li, B. Dong, F. Xing, D. Fan, S. Bao, H. Zhang and Y. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 501–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Jiao, L. Zhang, Z. H. Liang, G. H. Peng and H. W. Lin, Microchim. Acta, 2014, 181, 1393–1399 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Kim, C. Jin, G. J. Ye, D. Y. Qiu, H. Felipe, Z. Shi, L. Chen, Z. Zhang and F. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 21–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Saito and Y. Iwasa, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3192–3198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zheng, N. Si, G. Xie and Q. Wang, Phys. Lett. A, 2017, 381, 792–795 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, H. Liu, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10035–10042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, T. Frauenheim and C. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2675–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, H. Pu, J. Chang, X. Sui, S. Mao and J. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 214–219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, D. K. Sang, Z. Guo, R. Cao, J. Zhao, M. N. U. Shah, T. Fan, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Chin. Phys. B, 2018, 27, 087308 CrossRef .
R. A. Doganov, S. P. Koenig, Y. Yeo, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and B. Özyilmaz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 083505 CrossRef .
P. Li, D. Zhang, C. Jiang, X. Zong and Y. Cao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 98, 68–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Island, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 011002 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, T. Huynh, P. Xiu, B. Zhou, C. Ye, B. Luan and R. Zhou, Carbon, 2015, 94, 895–902 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, R. Ren, H. Pu, J. Chang, S. Mao and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 505–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K.-S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhang, Q. F. Niu, L. X. Lan and T. D. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 793–800 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miao, J. Yi, Q. Wang, D. Feng, H. He, S. Lu, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 2244–2251 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, S. Gross, H. Zhang, Z. Guo, M. J. Withford and A. Fuerbach, Ann. Phys., 2016, 528, 543–550 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Z. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Song, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, B. Dong, Y. Xiang, F. Xing, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700221 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Miao, G. Jiang, S. Chen, J. Liu, X. Fu, C. Zhao and H. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 7681–7693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meng, L. Ai-Ping, Z. Xu-Wu, Z. Nian, L. Hao, L. Zhi-Chao, X. Wen-Cheng, C. Yu, Z. Chu-Jun and Z. Han, J. Lightwave Technol., 2015, 33, 2056–2061 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Miao, X. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Zhao, S. Datta, Y. Li, Q. Bao, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Wen and D. Fan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1769–1778 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Jiang, L. Miao, C. Zhao, X. Fu, S. Wen and H. Zhang, IEEE Photonics J., 2015, 7, 1–11 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, Z. R. Cai, S. Hu, A. P. Luo, C. J. Zhao, H. Zhang, W. C. Xu and Z. C. Luo, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40, 4767–4770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, H. Zhang, C. Zhao, S. Akhmadaliev, S. Zhou and F. Chen, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40, 637–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Wu, P. Tang, S. Chen, J. Du, G. Jiang, Y. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Laser Phys. Lett., 2014, 11, 055101 CrossRef .
C. Shuqing, W. Qingkai, Z. Chujun, L. Ying, Z. Han and W. Shuangchun, J. Lightwave Technol., 2014, 32, 4438–4444 Search PubMed .
L. Lu, X. Tang, R. Cao, L. Wu, Z. Li, G. Jing, B. Dong, S. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Xiang, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700301 CrossRef .
L. Gao, W. Huang, J. D. Zhang, T. Zhu, H. Zhang, C. J. Zhao, W. Zhang and H. Zhang, Appl. Opt., 2014, 53, 5117–5122 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Man, C. Yu, Z. Han and W. Shuangchun, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2014, 50, 393–396 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, G. Kim, T. K. Kim, S. Kwon, H. Back, J. Lee, S. H. Lee, H. Kang and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17291–17296 RSC .
Y. Peiguang, L. Rongyong, C. Hao, Z. Han, L. Aijiang, Y. Haipeng and R. Shuangchen, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2015, 27, 264–267 Search PubMed .
X. Jiang, S. Liu, W. Liang, S. Luo, Z. He, Y. Ge, H. Wang, R. Cao, F. Zhang, Q. Wen, J. Li, Q. Bao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700229 CrossRef .
H. Xie, Z. Li, Z. Sun, J. Shao, X. F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Wang, Q. Xiao, H. Wang, Q. Q. Wang, H. Zhang and P. K. Chu, Small, 2016, 12, 4136–4145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Xu, M. A. Islam, Z. Li, S. Chen, P. E. Saw, H. Zhang, Z. Bharwani, Z. Guo, J. Shi and O. C. Farokhzad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11896–11900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yoshizawa, T. Sato and A. Mizohata, IEEE Sens., 2008, 1305–1308 Search PubMed .
S. M. Majd, A. Salimi and B. Astinchap, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 266, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, W. Xing, X. Wang, B. Shen, W. Yuan, T. Su, Y. Ma, Y. Yao, J. Zhong and Y. Yun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 10, 1383–1388 CrossRef .
B. Xu, M. Zhu, W. Zhang, X. Zhen, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, C. Zhi and P. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3333–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Bisri, S. Shimizu, M. Nakano and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607054 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuan, H. Shimotani, A. Tsukazaki, A. Ohtomo, M. Kawasaki and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1046–1053 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, S. Nakamura, H. Shimotani, A. Ohtomo, N. Kimura, T. Nojima, H. Aoki, Y. Iwasa and M. Kawasaki, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 855–858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueno, S. Nakamura, H. Shimotani, H. Yuan, N. Kimura, T. Nojima, H. Aoki, Y. Iwasa and M. Kawasaki, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 408–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Bollinger, G. Dubuis, J. Yoon, D. Pavuna, J. Misewich and I. Božović, Nature, 2011, 472, 458–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, S. Inoue, K. Kobayashi, Y. Kasahara, H. Yuan, H. Shimotani and Y. Iwasa, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 125–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, Y. Zhang, R. Akashi, M. Bahramy, R. Arita and Y. Iwasa, Science, 2012, 338, 1193–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Saito, T. Nojima and Y. Iwasa, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 29, 093001 CrossRef .
M. Weisheit, S. Fähler, A. Marty, Y. Souche, C. Poinsignon and D. Givord, Science, 2007, 315, 349–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, K. Ueno, T. Fukumura, H. Yuan, H. Shimotani, Y. Iwasa, L. Gu, S. Tsukimoto, Y. Ikuhara and M. Kawasaki, Science, 2011, 332, 1065–1067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, R. Pradheesh, H. Kim, H. Im, Y. Chong and D.-H. Chae, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 012601 CrossRef .
S. Maruyama, J. Shin, X. Zhang, R. Suchoski, S. Yasui, K. Jin, R. Greene and I. Takeuchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 142602 CrossRef .
T. Wang, Y. Guo, P. Wan, H. Zhang, X. Chen and X. Sun, Small, 2016, 12, 3748–3756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  The relationship between materials and applications is like the relationship between roots and branches of a tree. Materials are the basis of applications, while applications drive the progress of materials in turn. The solution-gated transistor (including graphene,51 Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society, TMDs,52 Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, black phosphorus,53 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society, and others,54 Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim) is one of the strongest branches of the tree named 2D materials (including graphene,55 Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved., TMDs,56 Copyright © 2016 Springer Nature, black phosphorus,57 Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society, and others).	 

 		 

pH	pH	2 pH	
125, Exfoliation
pH	0.025 pH	
126 and 127, Exfoliation
pH	0.21 pH	
128, Exfoliation
pH	1 pH	
129, CVD
pH	0.9 pH	
130, CVD
pH	0.34 pH	
131, CVD
pH	0.5 pH	
132, CVD
pH	0.3 pH	
133, CVD
pH	0.4 pH	
134, CVD
pH	0.67 pH	
135, rGO
Ion	Na+	1 nM	
136, Exfoliation
NaCl	40 nM	
137, CVD
Cl−	100 nM	
138, CVD
K+	100 μM	
139, CVD
K+	10 nM	
140, Exfoliation
K+	1 μM	
141, CVD
K+	0.1 mM	
142, CVD
K+	0.058 pM	
143, CVD
KCl	1 μM	
144, CVD
Ca2+	0.1 mM	
142, CVD
Ca2+	1 μM	
145, rGO
Fe3+	0.1 fM	
146, CVD
Cu2+	10 fM	
147, CVD
Cu2+	10 nM	
148, rGO
Cd2+	1 nM	
145, rGO
Hg2+	10 ppm	
149, Exfoliation
Hg2+	1 nM	
145, rGO
Hg2+	10 pM	
150, Exfoliation
Hg2+	0.1 ppb	
151, rGO
Hg2+	40 pM	
152, CVD
Pb2+	20 pM	
153, CVD
Pb2+	37.5 pg mL−1	
154, Exfoliation

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic drawing of the oxide-on-graphene FET operating in solution. (b) The conductance of a graphene channel vs. the solution gate voltage Vsg (magenta solid triangles, bottom axis) and the back gate voltage Vbg (blue hollow squares, top axis).130 Copyright © 2014 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (c) Schematic of a phenomenon of the SGGT-based pH sensors: abnormal negative VDirac shift in high concentration buffer and typical positive VDirac shift in low concentration buffer.132 Copyright © 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematics (top) and SEM (bottom) images of graphene mesh for FET-based sensors. (e) A cross-sectional view of the electrolyte-gated Gr-based FET sensor.134 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the SGGT, where aptamer was conjugated with graphene. (b) Real-time responses of SGGT-based aptamer sensors to different Hg2+ concentrations of 10 pM–100 nM. (c) Real-time responses of real mussel solution sample.150 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic image of the measurement setup incorporating a valinomycin-modified graphene FET device.140 Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. (e) Structure of the solution-gated graphene FET. (f) Schematic illustrating the interaction between K+ or Na+ cations and the graphene-based conducting channel with G-quadruplex immobilization.143 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V.	 

Glucose	Glucose	0.1 mM	
156, CVD
Glucose	3.3 mM	
157, CVD
Glucose	1 nM	
158, rGO
Glucose	0.5 μM	
159, CVD
Glucose	30 nM	
160, CVD
Glucose	1 nM	
161, CVD
Glucose	1.25 mM	
162, CVD
Glucose	100 nM	
163, CVD
DNA	DNA	0.175 mM	
114, GO
DNA	0.01 nM	
116, CVD
DNA	10 nM	
164, rGO
DNA	1 pM	
165, CVD
DNA	2.4 nM	
166, rGO
DNA	1 pM	
112, CVD
DNA	4 pM	
167, CVD
DNA	10 pg mL−1	
168, CVD
DNA	10 fM	
169, Exfoliation
Protein	Bovine serum albumin (BSA)	0.3 nM	
127, Exfoliation
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)	0.29 nM	
170, Exfoliation
Fibronectin	0.5 nM	
171, rGO
Avidin	80 nM	
171, rGO
Immunoglobulin G	0.2 ng mL−1	
172, rGO
Antivascular Endothelial growth factor (VEGF)	100 fM	
173, CVD
Protective antigen (Anthrax toxin)	1.2 aM	
174, rGO
Prostate specific antigen/α1-antichymotrypsin (PSA-ACT) complex	100 fg mL−1	
175, rGO
IgG1	80 fM	
176, CVD
Prostate specific antigen (PSA)	1.7 fM	
177, rGO
Cell	Embryonic chicken cardiomyocyte cell	3.5 mV	
113, Exfoliation
HL-1 mouse atrial tumor cell	100 μV	
178, CVD
Malaria-infected red blood cells	
	
179, CVD
Electrogenic HL-1 cells	
	
180, CVD
Breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231)	
	
181, rGO
Bacterial	Gram-positive Bacillus cereus	
	
114, GO

E. coli, P. aeruginosa	10 cfu mL−1	
115, CVD
Other molecules	Dopamine	1 nM	
182, CVD
Cryptosporidium parvumoocysts	25 oocysts per mL	
183, CVD
H2O2	100 pM	
184, rGO
Nucleoside triphosphates	400 nM	
185, rGO
Urea	1 μM	
148, rGO
Kanamycin A	11.5 nM	
186, CVD
Uric acid	100 nM	
163, CVD
Bisphenol A	10 ng mL−1	
187, CVD

L-histidine	300 fM	
188, Exfoliation

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the whole-graphene SGT based glucose sensor. (b) The potential drops on the two EDLs of graphene channel and gate surface. (c) The GOx-catalyzed glucose oxidation; and the cyclic oxidation of H2O2 on the surface of GOx-CHIT/Nafion/PtNPs/graphene gate electrode.159 Copyright © 2015 Springer Nature. (d) The schematic diagram of the new SGGTs with two gate electrodes. (e) Potential drop between the graphene channel and gate before (solid line) and after (dotted line) adding glucose or uric acid to PBS solution.163 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic presentation of an SGGT frequency-doubling device.167 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of SGGT with common gate, which showed the measurement circuit of the sensors, and the mechanism of proton release.168 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic diagrams of a general experimental process for fabricating SGGT, and surface modification. Also, the structure of the devices and detection systems was illustrated through this step.169 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of R-GO FET immunosensor with Pt reference electrode in the analyte solution.175 Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. (b) Functionalized GFET biosensor and measurement configuration shown schematically.176 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Real-time monitoring of prostate-specific antigen with the sensors. Schematic diagram of the current change mechanism to detect target PSA molecule caught by sensors.177 Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic and fabrication of the high-κ solid-gate GFET device.186 Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Image of a device bent in convex shape.180 Copyright © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd. (c) Schematic illustration of the graphene transistor functionalized with AuNPs and ssDNA molecules.187 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) General view of Apt-CFMNSs solution-gated FET sensors. (b) Real-time response. (c) Calibration curves toward various As3+ concentrations.207 Copyright © 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Diagram of the MoS2 FET with Hg2+ (green dots) that can bond to surface sulfur atoms. (e) PMDS microfluidic delivery system. (f) Ids–Vg characteristics of SGT in different concentrations of Hg2+ solution.208 Copyright © 2014 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (g) Illustrative diagram of water-gated SnS2 based devices. (h) Transfer characteristic of a solution top gated FET with the near-ideal SS. (i) Contrast of the on:off current ratios between back gating and solution gating devices.210 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Graphical scheme design of MoS2-based FET biosensor with an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. (b) Pure buffer (green curve), addition of streptavidin (red curve), pure buffer again (black curve) measurements of biotin functionalized device. (c) Explanation of pH sensing principle and sensing properties.206 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) A MoS2 biosensor with PSA antibody receptors. (e) Change of Ioff with varying IgG concentrations (red: log-scale, blue: linear-scale). (f) Id–Vgs curves with different IgG concentrations.229 Copyright © 2014 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The BP-based chemical sensor for the As3+ detection. (b) Selectivity of As3+ with other ions.251 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic diagram of Ag+ adsorption and the change of band structure.252 Copyright © 2018 Chinese Physical Society and IOP Publishing Ltd. (d) Elementary diagram of suspended BP FET. (e) Comparison of the performance of suspended and non-suspended BP devices. (f) Transfer characteristics with different Hg2+ concentrations.259 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. (g) The BP FET sensor conjugated with AuNPs. (h) Dynamic response of the device to IgG. (i) Platting of sensitivity of target protein.257 Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Diagram of the fabricated NiO-based FET. (b) A histogram elaborates on the sensing performance of the NiO FET.280 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic of the Cr2Ge2Te6 SGT structure. (d) RXX dependence of O2 pressure with two VLG.281 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic of the MXene FET. (f) Real-time detecting of conductivity with different dopamine concentrations.282 Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Scheme 2  Contrast of typical 2D materials and their sensors.58 Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Scheme 3  Biological and chemical sensing applications of solution-gated transistors with 2D materials.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
