Towards more environmentally and socially responsible batteries   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE02511A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02511A
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4087-4097Towards more environmentally and socially responsible batteries†

        
          
            Shyam S. 
            Sharma
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Arumugam 
            Manthiram
          
        
      *
      Texas Materials Institute, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. E-mail: manth@austin.utexas.edu
Received 
      6th August 2020
    , Accepted 8th October 2020First published on 8th October 2020AbstractWhile rechargeable batteries are critical for fighting the climate crisis, they are not free of environmental and social impacts. Here, we provide a robust, holistic, and accessible framework for researchers to use to assess these impacts for any battery material. The framework addresses four key issues present during the battery manufacturing process: (i) total energy use and emissions, (ii) toxicity, (iii) habitat destruction, and (iv) social impact. This article also includes example impact assessments for three battery chemistries that are being intensely pursued for current and future energy storage applications: (i) LiNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2 (NMC811)-graphite, (ii) LiFePO4 (LFP)-graphite, and (iii) aqueous Na-ion. Based on the results of these assessments, we offer the following recommendations for making batteries more environmentally and socially responsible. First, given the human rights issues related to its extraction, cobalt usage must be eliminated entirely. To reduce energy use and emissions, the N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) solvent should be eliminated. To reduce battery toxicity significantly, low toxicity electrolyte salts and non-toxic binders should be used. Iron and manganese-based cathodes are less toxic, less energy-intensive alternatives to cobalt and nickel-based cathodes. Lastly, to preserve habitat, sodium should be used over lithium for grid storage and cellulose separators over polyethylene separators for all applications.

Broader context
Rechargeable batteries are at the core of the clean energy revolution due to their place both in electric vehicles and grid-scale clean energy storage. However, batteries are not free of impacts on the planet. The battery manufacturing process produces emissions, involves toxic compounds, and requires raw material extraction projects that can have a lasting impact on local communities/ecosystems. Given the massive volume of battery systems that must be deployed to combat the climate crisis, it is crucial that battery researchers and manufacturers design technologies that are environmentally and socially responsible. In this work, we propose a simple, holistic framework for evaluating the environmental and social impact of any battery chemistry. In addition, we provide recommendations for developing a more environmentally and socially responsible battery. We show that such a battery would contain a cobalt-free cathode, low toxicity electrolyte salts/binders, renewable cellulose separators, and utilize aqueous or solvent-free electrode fabrication. In addition, for lower energy density applications, sodium-ions would be a more sustainable alternative to lithium-ions. The insights of this work will help to steer battery research/manufacturing towards more sustainable compounds and practices, while offering a means for researchers to screen their materials of study for detrimental environmental and social impacts.

1. Introduction
Human activities, particularly those post-industrial revolution, have taken an immense toll on the natural world. Global temperatures have risen nearly 1 °C since pre-industrial times and are continuing to climb, resulting in a climate crisis that threatens to produce extreme drought, flooding, acidified oceans, increased poverty, and widespread biodiversity loss.1,2 Rapid intervention on a global scale is necessary to reduce the magnitude of these impacts and prevent the crisis from being further exacerbated.1 Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are the primary cause of global temperature rise.3 In order to reduce GHG emissions, fossil fuel utilization must be reduced. According to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the majority of GHG emissions (∼55%) produced in the United States in 2018 were attributed to the electricity generation and transportation sectors.3 Clean energy technologies, such as solar and wind power, hold tremendous promise as replacements for fossil fuels for electricity generation. Solar and wind power produce zero emissions at the point of generation and offer ∼10 to 45× and ∼20 to 75× fewer life cycle GHG emissions than natural gas and coal, respectively.4 However, deployment of these technologies has been hindered by their intrinsic intermittency (electricity can only be generated when the sun is shining, or wind is blowing). In the transportation sector, electric vehicles (EVs) are the best candidate to replace internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles. EVs offer much greater efficiency (>77%) than ICE vehicles (12–30%) and produce zero tailpipe emissions.5 Most importantly, the life cycle GHG emissions of EVs will continue to decrease as the electricity fuel mix incorporates more clean energy. In order to supplant ICE vehicles, however, EVs must be competitive on several metrics (i.e. cost, range, operating lifetime, and charge time).5
Rechargeable batteries are key to unlocking the potential held by both electric vehicles and clean energy technologies. In the electricity sector, batteries can smooth out the intermittency of solar and wind power. In the transportation sector, batteries are the core technology that enables electric mobility. While batteries are at the center of the clean energy revolution, they are not free of their own impacts on the planet. Battery manufacturing still requires energy and produces emissions that contribute to the climate crisis. In addition to emissions, the raw materials used in batteries (i.e. Li/Na, transition metals, and petrochemicals) are obtained through brine evaporation, mining, or oil and gas extraction projects. These projects can cause habitat destruction for animals, plants, and other organisms, leading to a higher risk of species extinction and biodiversity loss.2 Toxicity is a serious concern present throughout the battery production process as well. Mining operations and material manufacturing can expose workers to toxic chemicals/environments, potentially leading to serious health effects if proper safety measures are not taken.6 Toxicity concerns can extend beyond the mining site or factory to the local environment, where unregulated effluents and pollution can pose a severe threat to the well-being of the surrounding communities and ecosystems.7,8 Along with environmental impact, battery components can have a lasting social impact on the communities involved with their production. For example, cobalt, a ubiquitous Li-ion cathode component, is mined almost exclusively in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), where child labor, dangerous working conditions, and exploitative practices are pervasive.6 Given the massive volume of batteries that must be deployed to liberate humanity from reliance on fossil fuels, it is crucial that battery researchers and manufacturers take extreme care to develop technologies that are environmentally and socially responsible.
Some impact studies on batteries (both commercial Li-ion and prototype chemistries, such as Na-ion and Li-S) have already been conducted in the form of life cycle assessments (LCAs).9–11 While thorough, the conventional LCA methodology is typically complex, time consuming, and requires researchers to license data from private databases. In addition, minimal discussion of habitat destruction and the social impact of battery materials has been included in prior studies.
This perspective article aims to provide a robust, holistic, and accessible framework for researchers to use for assessing the environmental and social impact of any battery material. Ultimately, this framework should provide researchers an answer to the following question: “Is it worth using this material given its potential environmental and social impact?” The framework relies on simple calculations using only readily available, public data to assess environmental impact. The social impact of each material is qualitatively discussed. This article also includes impact assessments for the following battery chemistries that are being intensely pursued for current and future energy storage applications: (i) LiNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2 (NMC811)-graphite, (ii) LiFePO4 (LFP)-graphite, and (iii) Na0.44MnO2-NaTi2(PO4)3 (aqueous Na-ion). The purpose of these assessments is as follows: (i) showcase the capability of this article's framework, (ii) pinpoint battery components that produce the most adverse environmental and social impacts, and (iii) offer recommendations for mitigating those impacts.
2. Framework & methodology
This article's framework addresses four key issues present during the battery manufacturing process: (i) total energy usage and emissions, (ii) toxicity, (iii) habitat destruction, and (iv) social impact. Energy use for materials synthesis was quantified using the simple principles of heat capacity (available for most compounds through the NIST Chemistry WebBook) and heat transfer. Energy use for raw material extraction (i.e. mining equipment) and transportation (i.e. cargo ships and freight trains) was also included in the analysis. These quantities were converted to emissions for current and future electricity fuel mixes using Argonne National Laboratory's (ANL) GREET® Model.
Toxicity is evaluated using the Globally Harmonized System (GHS) of classification and labelling of chemicals. GHS chemical labels were obtained for all raw materials, intermediates, and products present during the manufacturing of each battery component. These chemical labels (widely available through the PubChem® database or MSDSs) were scrutinized to see if hazard statements were present for seven topics related to human and ecological toxicity. Scores were assigned to each compound depending on their GHS category classification for each topic (lower category = more toxic = higher score).
Habitat destruction was quantified using technical reports publicly released by mining companies, brine extraction companies, and federal oil & gas regulatory commissions. The yield of each raw material per unit of land used for its production (i.e. tons material per km2) was estimated from these reports.
The social impact of the battery materials was investigated and is discussed based on reports and publications from human rights organizations, newspapers, academics, and community members. An example framework for NMC811-graphite tracing its manufacturing process and noting contributions to the four impact areas is shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  A flowsheet outlining the environmental and social impact framework for the NMC811 cathode. 
2.1 Battery cell modelling
Prior to conducting the impact assessments for a battery chemistry, the components comprising the battery cell and the amount of each component required must first be evaluated. Batteries generally include: a cathode, anode, electrolyte, separator, conductive additives, binder, current collectors, and cell casing. In addition, solvents (typically N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) or water) are used to prepare electrode slurries. A pouch cell form factor with a double-sided cathode, two single-sided anodes, and four total layers of separator (one between each pair of electrodes and one on each of the outer ends of the electrode stack) was assumed for this article. Realistic pouch cell dimensions were obtained from literature. A practical areal capacity of 2 mA h cm−2 was assumed to calculate cathode mass.12 All other component masses were determined relative to the cathode.13,14 Detailed battery component mass calculations can be found in the ESI.†
2.2 Total energy use & emissions

Material manufacturing energy use & emissions. 
After determining the battery component masses, the energy required to manufacture each component was computed. Components were first traced down to the raw materials involved in their production. For example, NMC811 was traced down to lithium brine, nickel ore, manganese ore, and cobalt ore (Fig. 1). The intermediate compounds, reactions, and reaction conditions (i.e. temperature and time) that are needed to transform the raw materials into the final products were obtained through publications and patents.
After writing all intermediate synthesis reactions for a given component, the energy use of each reaction was calculated. There are two factors that influence the total energy used for each reaction: (i) the energy required to heat the reactants (Qreactants) and (ii) the energy required to maintain the reaction vessel temperature (Qreactor). Qreactants can be simply calculated from heat capacities. For Qreactor, it was first assumed that there are three possible reactor types used in the battery manufacturing process: (i) fixed bed reactor, (ii) batch reactor, and (iii) tube furnace.15,16 Fixed bed reactors are used for gas-state reactions, such as the conversion of fossil fuels into petrochemicals. Batch reactors are used for liquid-state reactions, such as the co-precipitation of NMC precursors. Tube furnaces are used for solid-state reactions, such as the calcination of cathode materials. For the fixed bed and batch reactors, Fourier's Law of Heat Conduction was used to estimate Qreactor.15,17 For the tube furnace, technical specifications obtained from a furnace manufacturer were used to correlate furnace temperature to power requirement.18 Power was then multiplied by reaction time to determine Qreactor. Finally, Qreactants and Qreactor were summed to compute a total thermal energy use for each reaction. As one would intuitively expect, slower reactions that require higher temperatures require more energy.
Data included in ANL's GREET® model was used to convert the energy use to emissions. For simplicity, these energy requirements were assumed to be completely satisfied using electricity. The emissions quantities obtained include: GHGs (CO2, CH4, N2O), acidifying gases (SOx), and particulate matter (PM10, PM2.5, black carbon, and organic carbon). The electricity fuel mix was varied to compare total emissions with the current fuel mix to future fuel mixes where clean energy technologies make up a larger share. Detailed energy use calculations and battery component tracing can be found in the ESI.†


Raw material extraction energy use & emissions. 
The energy required to extract the raw materials for each battery component contributes significantly to the total energy use value. Raw materials for batteries are typically obtained using one of the following methods: open-pit mining, brine evaporation or petroleum/natural gas extraction.
Open-pit mining is used to obtain the transition metals (i.e. nickel, cobalt, manganese, iron), carbonaceous compounds (i.e. natural graphite and coal), and other ores used in the production of the battery cell. The energy use for open-pit mining was assumed to be entirely for powering mining equipment (diesel fuel).19,20 There are two factors that influence the amount of fuel required to extract raw materials: stripping ratio and ore composition. Stripping ratio is defined as the ratio of the amount of waste rock removed to the amount of desired ore obtained.21 For example, in the case of cobalt mining, the Tenke Fungurume mine in the Democratic Republic of Congo has an estimated stripping ratio of 3.3, meaning 3.3 tons of waste rock must be removed to obtain one ton of cobalt-containing ore.22 Stripping ratios are widely available in the technical reports published by mining companies or through USGS Mineral Commodity Summaries. Ore composition also greatly influences the fuel requirement. For example, a cobalt-containing ore may have a cobalt content of only ∼0.28% whereas a manganese-containing ore may have a manganese content of ∼48%.23,24 Therefore, the yield of manganese could be up to two orders of magnitude higher than the yield of cobalt for the same amount of fuel burned. In order to minimize fuel usage/emissions, elements that can be obtained from highly concentrated ores in mines with low stripping ratios should be used.
Brine evaporation is another method utilized in the battery manufacturing process, mainly to obtain lithium and sodium. For this method, large pools of lithium- and sodium-containing compounds are repeatedly evaporated and concentrated until a high-purity salt can be obtained (i.e. LiCl, NaCl, or Na2SO4).25 As brine extraction primarily relies on solar evaporation, its energy use was assumed to be negligible.
Natural gas and petroleum extraction are required to obtain precursors for the production of the polymer separator, organic solvents, and conductive carbons used in batteries. “Energy return on investment” (EROI) values were used to approximate the amount of energy needed to extract natural gas and petroleum.26 Higher EROI fuels are more advantageous for minimizing fuel usage and emissions. All energy use values for the three extraction methods were converted into emissions using the GREET® model as previously described. Detailed sample calculations for raw material extraction energy use can be found in the ESI.†


Transportation energy use & emissions. 
The transportation of raw materials from their extraction sites to the factories where they are processed also requires significant energy. A map distance calculator was used to approximate the distance raw materials would need to be transported via cargo ship and/or freight train. Literature values for the energy usage of cargo ships and freight trains were used (units of Btu ton−1 mile−1). Energy use values were converted into emissions using the GREET® model as previously described. Detailed sample calculations for transportation energy use can be found in the ESI.†

2.3 Toxicity
The second category included in this article's framework is toxicity. For each compound involved in the battery manufacturing process, the GHS hazard category number (if included in the chemical label) was recorded for the following seven metrics: acute oral toxicity, acute dermal toxicity, acute inhalation toxicity, carcinogenicity, acute aquatic toxicity, chronic aquatic toxicity, and ozone layer depletion.27 As lethal dose/concentration (LD50/LC50) values for compounds generally increase by an order of magnitude for decreasing category numbers (i.e. category I is 10× more toxic than category II and 100× more toxic than category III), toxicity scores were given accordingly. For this article, only hazard statements present for categories 1–3 were considered in the toxicity score. However, it is important to note that chemicals classified in higher category numbers cannot automatically be considered to be safe. For example, lead, a well-known toxin, is only classified in GHS category 4 for acute oral toxicity. Therefore, the GHS labeling system should only be used as a general guideline for characterizing compound toxicity. Detailed toxicity calculations can be found in the ESI.†
2.4 Habitat destruction
The third category included in this article's framework is habitat destruction. Technical reports regarding mining, oil & gas extraction, and brine extraction operations were used to estimate a raw material yield per area of land used (i.e. tons km−2) and compute a habitat destruction value for the battery cell. Technical reports from prominent extraction sites were used whenever possible to account for geographic variability in resource abundance (i.e. cobalt mines in the DRC, lithium brine in Argentina, oil & gas extraction in the United States).23,28,29 Similar to the trend seen with raw material extraction energy, highly concentrated compounds tend to have a higher yield per area of land used and lower habitat destruction values. Example habitat destruction calculations can be found in the ESI.†
2.5 Social impact
The fourth and final category included in this article's framework is social impact. Social impact is difficult to assess quantitatively, so this framework utilizes a simple methodology of listing and discussing potential negative social impacts of battery materials (at the raw material extraction phase).30 These impacts were understood through newspaper articles, investigative reports, commentary from human rights organizations, and interviews from community members. Resources for obtaining information about the social impact of battery materials can be found in the ESI.†
3. Environmental & social impact assessments for NMC811-graphite, LFP-graphite, and aqueous Na-ion
3.1 Overview of the chemistries
NMC811-graphite utilizes the LiNi1−y−zMnyCozO2 (NMC) cathode framework that is ubiquitous in modern electric vehicles.47,48 Currently, NMC532 and NMC622 are the predominant chemistries being used commercially; however, NMC811 is being intensively pursued for the EV market and is expected to be widely deployed in the near future.48 LFP-graphite is derived from the polyanion class of materials and has a lower operating voltage than NMC cathodes.47,48 However, the use of Fe over Co/Ni in LFP offers a big cost and sustainability advantage. These advantages have enabled LFP-graphite to be used in both stationary storage systems and electric vehicles (particularly in China).48 Aqueous rechargeable batteries with alternative working ions (i.e., Na+, K+, Zn2+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and Al3+) have the potential to be safer, and are more sustainable alternatives to lithium-ion batteries due to the replacement of the fossil-fuel derived organic solvents in the electrolytes with water and the replacement of lithium with more terrestrially abundant metals.52,58 Given the narrow electrochemical stability window of water, these technologies are likely best suited for grid-scale clean energy storage, where energy density is not a critical metric.52,58 In this article, the aqueous Na-ion chemistry was selected for analysis for the following reasons: (i) the manufacturing processes of Li-based and Na-based chemistries are very similar, allowing for a direct comparison between the two (i.e., both Na and Li are extracted from brine deposits, processed into carbonates/hydroxides, and incorporated directly into cathode hosts); and (ii) Na-ion technology is relatively mature compared to many other alternative battery systems (there are several companies working to commercialize both aqueous and non-aqueous Na-ion batteries).59 The particular chemistry used in this article's analysis was commercialized by Aquion Energy in 2009 and employs a Na0.44MnO2 cathode, NaTi2(PO4)3 anode, 1 M Na2SO4 in water electrolyte, and cellulose separator.53,54 Recent advances in aqueous sodium-ion batteries have included the development of Prussian Blue Analogs (PBAs) as cathode materials.52 Few anode materials other than NaTi2(PO4)3 have been reported.52 While this chemistry does not yet have the commercial relevance of NMC811 or LFP, its potential to be a truly “eco-conscious” battery technology makes it well worth inclusion in this article's analysis.
3.2 Environmental impact summary
The environmental impact results for the NMC811-graphite, LFP-graphite, and aqueous Na-ion chemistries are summarized in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Summary of environmental impacts for NMC811-graphite, LFP-graphite, and aqueous Na-ion: (a) total energy use (BTU W h−1), (b) global warming potential (g CO2 eq. W h−1), (c) acidification potential (g H+ eq. W h−1), (d) cumulative toxicity score, (e) toxicity score distribution across battery life cycle, and (f) habitat destruction (m2 kW h−1). 

Total energy use & emissions. 
As shown in Fig. 2a, a large fraction (up to 45–60%) of the total battery manufacturing energy for the Li-ion chemistries is as a result of slurry solvent manufacturing, drying, and recovery. NMP and water are used as solvents for the cathode and anode slurries, respectively. NMP makes up over 90% of the slurry solvent energy requirement because, unlike water, it must be synthesized from organic precursors and recovered after evaporation from the electrode.
From an environmental standpoint, NMP recovery and recycling is preferable over continuously using fresh NMP as the overall energy requirement, emissions, and waste generation can be reduced.31 This technique is frequently used in industrial battery manufacturing.14,32 However, NMP recycling only reduces total battery manufacturing energy requirements by ∼15–20% as NMP drying and recovery still requires substantial energy. In order to drastically reduce battery manufacturing energy and emissions, the NMP solvent should be eliminated in favor of aqueous slurry processing or dry electrode fabrication techniques (utilized by the aqueous Na-ion chemistry).
Replacing NMP with water would eliminate the need for solvent manufacturing and recovery. This would potentially reduce total manufacturing energy requirements by 40–50%. It is worth noting, however, that the drying energy needed for aqueous slurries is not substantially lower than that of NMP-based slurries.14,32 In addition, aqueous slurry processing of transition-metal (TM) oxide cathodes, such as NMC poses a technical challenge. When exposed to water, Li can be leached out from the NMC structure and react with water to form LiOH, resulting in irreversible capacity loss. While the issue of water reactivity with TM oxides has been frequently reported, other Li battery cathode materials, including LiFePO4 and S8, can be processed in aqueous slurries without detrimental effects on battery performance.60 In addition, for aqueous batteries, one would expect that any practically viable electrode materials would also be compatible with aqueous slurry processing. Therefore, there is an inherent sustainability advantage to developing and utilizing water-stable electrode materials. Solvent-free (dry) electrode fabrication offers the best opportunity for further reductions in energy usage beyond those offered by aqueous slurry processing while simultaneously accommodating materials, such as NMC that may be reactive with water.
Solvent-free electrode manufacturing processes that utilize electrostatic spraying and hot-pressing/rolling have been investigated and are beginning to demonstrate commercial relevance.33–36 These processes are high-throughput and rapid, meaning they can have substantially reduced energy requirements (electrodes can be fabricated in minutes rather than hours as with conventional slurry coating).34–36 Assuming a dry spraying time of one minute and hot rolling at 175 °C (reported in literature), total Li-ion battery manufacturing emissions can be reduced by ∼45–55% for NMC811 and LFP, respectively.34–36 Admittedly, in order for dry electrode fabrication to be realized on a large scale, industrial battery manufacturing infrastructure and techniques must be expanded beyond what is currently well-established for conventional slurry-coated electrodes. In addition, binders that provide sufficient electrode mechanical integrity will need to be designed and developed.
For both Li-ion chemistries, cathode manufacturing requires significant energy as well. For NMC811-graphite, cathode production contributes the largest share (∼1/3rd) to the total manufacturing energy use (assuming NMP is recycled). This is primarily due to the energy intensive nature of nickel mining and the long, high temperature calcination reaction required to synthesize the cathode material. LFP cathode production offers significant energy use savings over NMC811 (∼50% reduction) due to the high abundance of iron and phosphorus (1.5 to 2 orders of magnitude higher than Co/Ni) (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Areal ore abundance of key cathode elements. 
Acidification potential (AP) is one of the primary differences between the NMC811 chemistry and the LFP and aqueous Na-ion chemistries (Fig. 2c). NMC811 has an ∼5× higher AP than both LFP and aqueous Na-ion due to its use of CoS and NiS ores as raw materials for NMC811 synthesis. During the metal refining process, sulfur is liberated from the CoS and NiS in the form of SO2 gas. SO2 gas can react with water in the atmosphere (i.e. acid rain) and oceans to produce sulfuric acid, which is potentially harmful to fish, plants, and animals.37 The LFP and aqueous Na-ion chemistries offer a significantly lower AP compared to NMC811 due to their use of cathodes that rely on sulfur-free transition-metal ores (Fe & Mn). LFP offers an additional AP advantage due to the domestic abundance of both Fe and P, meaning that highly sulfidic bunker fuel does not need to be combusted to transport the ores to the US via cargo ship. In order to minimize acidification potential of batteries, transition metals with sulfur-free ores, such as Fe and Mn, should be utilized. Domestically sourced materials should also be prioritized to promote further reductions in SO2 emissions.


Toxicity. 
Toxicity scoring for the three chemistries is given in Fig. 2d. NMC811 has the highest toxicity score due to its use of Co/Ni in the cathode and LiPF6 in the electrolyte. Co and Ni are toxic during all stages of the battery manufacturing process, both in the form of sulfidic ores and as the sulfates/hydroxides used in co-precipitation/calcination reactions. LiPF6 has a high toxicity score because of the many toxic compounds used for its production, including HF. The LFP cathode has an ∼10× lower toxicity score than the NMC811 cathode due to its use of essentially non-toxic Fe rather than Co or Ni. Once again, as with NMC811, LiPF6 contributes significantly to LFP's overall toxicity score.
Low toxicity salts should be heavily investigated as replacements for LiPF6. For example, the lithium bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB) salt has an ∼50× lower toxicity score than LiPF6 and has been shown to exhibit reasonable cycling performance in Li-ion full cells.51 Issues, such as comparatively low solubility in solvents and poor rate performance, however, exist for the LiBOB salt.51 Regardless, the potential for drastically reduced battery toxicity offered by alternative salts such as LiBOB provides more than sufficient justification for their development.
The aqueous Na-ion chemistry has a substantially lower toxicity score than both NMC811 and LFP because of the minimal toxicity of the Mn- and Ti-based electrodes. In addition, the Na2SO4 salt used in the aqueous electrolyte is non-toxic, unlike LiPF6. The majority of the aqueous Na-ion battery's toxicity score is attributed to its use of the fluorinated PTFE binder. A similar issue is present in the NMC811 and LFP chemistries with the PVDF binder. Non-toxic binders, such as CMC (cellulose-derived) and sodium alginate (algae-derived), have already begun to be utilized for both Li-ion and Na-ion batteries.55 As these compounds are water-soluble, their use could be enabled by aqueous processing, simultaneously eliminating the NMP solvent and toxic fluorinated binders. Therefore, given the potential of these “bio-derived” binders to reduce both emissions and toxicity, their use should be heavily pursued and encouraged for all battery chemistries.
To better develop safeguards for humans and the environment, it is also important to identify the phase(s) of the battery life cycle that contain the most toxic compounds (Fig. 2e). These phases are listed as: (i) raw material extraction, (ii) manufacturing, and (iii) end of life. Overwhelmingly, for all three chemistries, the “manufacturing” phase of the process has the highest toxicity score, due to the large number of toxic intermediates present for many materials. One caveat to using this method of characterization, however, is that it may downplay the toxicity risk of phases that have comparatively lower scores. For example, while the “raw material extraction” phase has an ∼5× lower toxicity score than the “manufacturing” phase for NMC811, it is not free of serious toxicity risks. Cobalt mining in the DRC has been reported to cause severe respiratory issues for miners (known as “hard metal lung disease”) and increase the risk of birth defects in communities surrounding the mining areas.6,7 Therefore, while the toxicity analysis proposed in this framework can generally elucidate high risk points along the battery manufacturing process, there is no substitute for direct communication with affected communities and frequent environmental monitoring.


Habitat destruction. 
Habitat destruction values for the three chemistries are shown in Fig. 2f. For both NMC811 and LFP, the largest contributor to habitat destruction is the polyethylene separator. Polyethylene is derived from natural gas (ethane), which has relatively low yield per area of land used. One of the primary reasons that the aqueous Na-ion chemistry has a low habitat destruction value is because of its use of a cellulose separator. Since the same plot of land can indefinitely produce cellulose, it is a renewable resource and thus has a continuously increasing yield per area of land used (unlike natural gas). Therefore, to preserve habitat and biodiversity, cellulose separators should be pursued for all battery chemistries. As shown in Fig. 2f, a noticeable fraction (∼15–20%) of total habitat destruction for NMC811 and LFP is attributed to cathode production. For both chemistries, >95% of cathode habitat destruction is a result of lithium brine extraction (∼97% for NMC811 and ∼99.5% for LFP). This is dually a product of lithium's relatively low concentration in brine deposits (∼500 ppm) and the large surface area required for solar evaporation at brine extraction sites.29 Sodium-ion batteries offer an opportunity to reduce habitat destruction significantly, as sodium is 102 to 104 times more concentrated in brine deposits than lithium (concentration is inversely proportional to land use).29 To put this in perspective, NREL estimates that ∼1.5 T W h of grid-scale clean energy storage will be needed in the United States in 2050.56 If LFP-graphite were deployed to achieve this target (as it is already used for stationary storage applications), ∼145 mi2 of land would be used to extract the necessary lithium (about ½ the area of New York City). If the aqueous Na-ion chemistry were deployed, only ∼0.8 mi2 of land would be used for sodium extraction (about ½ the area of Central Park) (Fig. 4). Therefore, large amounts of habitat and biodiversity could potentially be preserved if sodium-ion batteries are made viable for grid-scale storage.
 Fig. 4  Contextualizing the habitat conserved by using sodium-ion batteries over lithium-ion batteries for grid-scale clean energy storage. 


Social impact. 
The social impact of the key raw materials used in the three chemistries is discussed in Fig. 5a. Unsurprisingly, no raw materials were completely free of social impacts as raw material extraction inevitably affects the local communities. However, impact severity certainly varied between materials. As previously mentioned, cobalt mining produces some of the most alarming social impacts of all raw materials analyzed. About 70% of the global cobalt supply originates in the DRC in central Africa.46Fig. 5b traces the cobalt supply chain from the mining companies in the DRC to battery manufacturers to the major technology companies who produce cell phones, laptops, tablets, electric vehicles, and stationary energy storage systems.6 According to a report by Amnesty International, tens of thousands of children in the DRC work as artisanal miners (i.e. mining by hand) in dangerous mines for long hours every day without even basic safety equipment.6 The children are frequently exposed to toxic cobalt dust for prolonged periods of time, leading to heightened risk of respiratory diseases and organ damage.6
 Fig. 5  (a) Social impact assessment of common battery materials41,43–45 and (b) cobalt supply chain from the mines to consumer products. 
While is certainly positive that NMC cathodes are moving towards reduced cobalt content in new iterations of the technology, even using seemingly small amounts of cobalt in the materials can have shocking implications. Consider NMC811.
Even for this “low-cobalt” cathode chemistry, an estimated 6.6 kg of cobalt would still be required for production of a single 75 kW h EV battery pack. Based on an anticipated global production rate of 26 M EVs in 2030, it is estimated that ∼25000 children would be mining by hand for 10 hours a day in the DRC to produce the necessary cobalt for the EV battery packs if a NMC811 cathode is used (Fig. 6).6,49 Given the extremely problematic way in which cobalt is mined, battery researchers and manufacturers have a moral responsibility to completely eliminate cobalt from Li-ion battery cathodes. Li et al. recently demonstrated the practical viability of cobalt-free, high nickel cathodes through the synthesis of LiNi0.883Mn0.056Al0.061O2 (NMA-89).50 This chemistry exhibits comparable pouch-cell cycling performance to commercial NMC cathodes without relying on the cobalt supply chain.50
 Fig. 6  The consequences of a cobalt-containing cathode. 
Lithium brine extraction also produces some detrimental social impacts that must be addressed. Indigenous communities in the Atacama Desert, where over 1/3rd of the global lithium supply originates from, have expressed concern about their water resources as brine extraction companies withdraw large amounts of water from aquifers to obtain lithium (up to 2 M gallons per day).38–40 While brine water itself is not potable or used for agriculture, local scientists and community members are concerned that the aquifers containing the brine deposits are connected to those containing freshwater.38–40 As brine is continuously extracted, freshwater may flow into its place, depleting water resources used by the indigenous Atacamas.38–40
Lastly, an important social impact that also demonstrates the robust nature of this article's framework was observed in the analysis of nickel. Nickel refining plants have been reported to produce large sulfur dioxide emissions, which is in line with the acidification potential prediction made for NMC811-graphite in Fig. 2c.8,42 This reinforces the criticality of conducting a social impact assessment in tandem with the environmental impact assessment to corroborate quantitative predictions with real world testimony.

3.4 Effect of cycle life and recycling/re-use
Cycle life and recycling/re-use are topics not explicitly included in this article's framework, but significantly impact the environmental and social impact of batteries. From an energy use/emissions standpoint, batteries with long cycle lives are clearly advantageous as new cells need not be produced as frequently. The effect of cycle life on habitat conservation, however, is more ambiguous and chemistry dependent. For example, consider a battery comprised of ultra-abundant raw materials such as Na, Fe, and Mn that has half the cycle life of a battery comprised of significantly less abundant raw materials such as Li, Ni, and Co. While the battery with shorter cycle life needs to be replaced twice as often, it is comprised of materials that are orders of magnitude more abundant. Therefore, its habitat destruction contribution may ultimately still be lower. This concept is particularly important in the long-term as the electricity fuel mix moves towards clean energy and manufacturing energy use/emissions become less of a concern.
While still in its nascent stage, battery recycling offers an opportunity to maximize the utilization of materials before their eventual disposal. Two commercial methods for Li-ion battery recycling are currently utilized: (i) hydrometallurgy and (ii) pyrometallurgy.57 Hydrometallurgy uses solvent-based separation processes and pyrometallurgy uses high temperature smelting to extract metals from the spent batteries.57 Regardless of the method used, battery recycling has the potential to reduce both habitat destruction and raw material extraction energy use. However, significant work must be done to ensure that the recycling process produces as few emissions and toxic effluents as possible.
“Second-life” EV batteries for stationary storage are also a very promising pathway for reducing the cumulative environmental and social impacts of batteries. Lithium-ion batteries currently used in EVs are considered to have reached “end-of-life” when their capacity decays to 80% of the nominal capacity. While batteries at <80% capacity may not be sufficient to power an EV, these cells still have substantial energy that can be used for clean energy storage. By using “spent” EV batteries for stationary energy storage, utilization of the battery materials can be augmented (while simultaneously aiding the deployment of clean energy technologies).
4. Conclusions and future outlook
This perspective article establishes a simple, holistic framework for assessing the impact of battery materials on the planet. The four key impact areas were defined as follows: (i) total energy use & emissions, (ii) toxicity, (iii) habitat destruction, and (iv) social impact. The impact assessment frameworks for all four areas were developed with the goal of using only publicly available, easily accessible data and information. Three chemistries were selected as examples to showcase the framework and identify notable environmental and social impacts of batteries: (i) NMC811-graphite, (ii) LFP-graphite, and (iii) aqueous Na-ion.
Overall, to make batteries more environmentally and socially responsible, we offer the following recommendations. First and foremost, the use of cobalt must be eliminated entirely. The situation with child labor in the DRC is highly disturbing and is reason enough to push cathodes from “low-cobalt” to “no-cobalt”, aside from cost or energy density considerations. In order to reduce energy use and emissions, the NMP solvent should be eliminated in favor of aqueous slurry processing or dry electrode fabrication. To reduce battery toxicity, low toxicity salts should be used in place of LiPF6 and non-toxic binders in place of the fluorinated PVDF/PTFE binders. Iron and manganese-based cathodes offer an advantage over cobalt and nickel-based cathodes with regard to both toxicity and energy use. Lastly, to preserve habitat and biodiversity, sodium should be used over lithium for grid storage and cellulose separators over polyethylene for all battery chemistries.
Above all, the purpose of this article is to emphasize the responsibility that battery researchers have to develop chemistries and technologies that demonstrate care and consideration for the global ecosystem at large. Our hope is that is article fosters introspection and discussion amongst the battery community regarding the broader environmental and social impact of batteries and pathways towards a truly sustainable future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the University of Texas at Austin, Energy Institute (in partnership with the Office of the Vice President for Research) under the interdisciplinary Fueling a Sustainable Energy Transition (FSET) grant. The authors also thank Mr Richard Sim for his assistance with the tube furnace and batch reactor figures.
References

          V. Masson-Delmotte
          
            et al.
          , World Meteorological Organization,  2018 Search PubMed .

          J. S. Díaz
          
            et al.
          , Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services,  2019 Search PubMed .
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2018, https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/sources-greenhouse-gas-emissions.

          S. Schlömer, et al., Annex III: Technology-specific cost and performance parameters, in Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press,  2014 Search PubMed .
U.S. EPA, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, 2011, https://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/evtech.shtml.
Amnesty International, 2016, https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/afr62/3183/2016/en/.

          A. Kelly, The Guardian, 2020. https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2020/may/06/pollution-causing-birth-defects-in-children-of-drc-cobalt-miners-study.

          A. Luhn, The Guardian, 2016. https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/15/norilsk-red-river-russias-most-polluted-city-clean.
M. Zackrisson, L. Avellán and J. Orlenius, J. Cleaner Prod., 2010, 18(15), 1519–1529 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peters, D. Buchholz, S. Passerini and M. Weil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1744–1751 RSC .
Y. Deng, J. Li, T. Li, X. Gao and C. Yuan, J. Power Source, 2017, 343, 284–295 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baasner, 
            et al.
          , J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167(2) DOI:10.1149/1945-7111/ab68d7 .
F. J. Günter, C. Burgstaller, F. Konwitschny and G. Reinhart, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166(10), A1709–A1714 CrossRef .
D. L. Wood, 
            et al.
          , Drying Technology: An International Journal, 2018, 36(2), 234–244 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Dunn, et al., Argonne National Laboratory, 2015.

          R. C. Richardson
          
            et al.
           Retrospective Theses and Dissertations,  1963 DOI:10.31274/rtd-180813-1912 .

          T. Van Hoolst and A. Rivoldini, Encyclopedia of the Solar System, Chapter 18,  2014, p. 387 Search PubMed .
Carbolite Gero Limited. https://www.carbolite-gero.com/products/tube-furnace-range/universal-tube-furnaces/tf-range/.

          Q. Dai, J. C. Kelly and A. Elgowainy, Argonne National Laboratory: Energy Systems Division,  2018 Search PubMed .

          J. Nilsson and R. G. Simpson, Lundin Mining Corporation, 2014, https://www.miningdataonline.com/reports/TenkeFungurume_TR_2014-07-21.pdf.
Z. Lu and M. Cai, Procedia Environm. Sci., 2012, 16, 715–721 CrossRef CAS .

          J. F. Slack, B. E. Kimball and K. B. Shedd, U.S. Geological Survey, 2017.

          T. Usmani, C. Santos and N. Dempers, NI 43-101 Technical Report on the Material Assets of Katanga Mining Limited, Lualaba Province, Democratic Republic of Congo, Kamoto Copper Company S.A.,  2019 Search PubMed .

          L. A. Corathers, U.S. Geological Survey, 2020.
V. Flexer, C. F. Baspineiro and C. I. Galli, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 639, 1188–1204 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, A Comprehensive, Guide to Solar Energy Systems, 2018, 407–425 Search PubMed .
PubChem, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ghs/.

          M. Humphries, Congressional Research Service, 2018.

          F. Reidel, Flo Solutions, 2017.

          T. Luxton, United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2014.

          J. H. Clark, A. Hunt, C. Topi, G. Paggiola and J. Sherwood, Sustainable Solvents: Perspectives from Research, Business and International Policy, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2017 Search PubMed .
S. Ahmed, P. A. Nelson, K. G. Gallagher and D. W. Dees, J. Power Sources, 2016, 322, 169–178 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Duong, J. Shin and Y. Yudi, Dry Electrode Coating Technology, Maxwell Technologies, Inc.,  2018 Search PubMed .
B. Ludwig, Z. Zhangfeng, W. Shou, Y. Wang and H. Pan, Nat. Sci. Rep., 2016, 6 DOI:10.1038/srep23150 .
M. Al-Shroofy, 
            et al.
          , J. Power Sources, 2017, 352, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .

          J. J. Licari, Coating Materials for Electronic Applications: Polymers, Processing, Reliability, Testing,  2003, p. 232 Search PubMed .
Water Science School. U.S. Geological Survey. https://www.usgs.gov/special-topic/water-science-school/science/acid-rain-and-water?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects.

          T. C. Frankel and P. Whoriskey, The Washington Post, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/business/batteries/tossed-aside-in-the-lithium-rush/.

          D. Sherwood, Reuters, 2018, https://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-chile-lithium-insight/a-water-fight-in-chiles-atacama-raises-questions-over-lithium-mining-idUKKCN1MS1NJ.

          P. Joy, Bloomberg Law, 2019, https://news.bloomberglaw.com/environment-and-energy/water-use-in-atacama-salt-flat-trips-up-chilean-lithium-miner.

          A. Kelly, The Guardian, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2020/mar/10/human-rights-activist-forced-to-flee-drc-over-child-cobalt-mining-lawsuit.

          M. Opray, The Guardian, 2017, https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2017/aug/24/nickel-mining-hidden-environmental-cost-electric-cars-batteries.

          P. Whoriskey, The Washington Post, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/business/batteries/graphite-mining-pollution-in-china/.

          R. Colagiuri, J. Cochrane and S. Girgis, Beyond Zero Emissions, Australia,  2012 Search PubMed .
D. C. DiGiulio and R. B. Jackson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50(8), 4524–4536 CrossRef CAS .

          K. B. Shedd, U.S. Geological Survey,  2020 Search PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11 DOI:10.1038/s41467-020-15355-0 .
W. Li, E. M. Erickson and A. Manthiram, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .

          C. McKerracher, BloombergNEF, 2020, https://about.bnef.com/electric-vehicle-outlook/.
W. Li, S. Lee and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1002/adma.202002718 .
G. Hernández, 
            et al.
          , ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 10041–10052 CrossRef .
D. Bin, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2018 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201703008 .
J. F. Whitacre, Energy Technol., 2014, 3, 20–31 CrossRef .
J. F. Whitacre, A. Tevar and S. Sharma, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12(3), 463–466 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bresser, D. Buchholz, A. Moretti, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3096–3127 RSC .

          C. Augustine
          
            et al.
          , National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2012 Search PubMed .
A. Mayyas, D. Steward and M. Mann, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2019, 19 DOI:10.1016/j.susmat.2018.e00087 .
J. Huang, 
            et al.
          , Small Methods, 2019, 3 DOI:10.1002/smtd.201800272 .
A. Bauer, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(17) DOI:10.1002/aenm.201702869 .
W. Porcher, P. Moreau, B. Lestriez, S. Jouanneau and D. Guyomard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11(1), A4–A8 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed energy use/emissions, toxicity, and habitat destruction calculations. Resources for finding environmental and social impact data/information. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee02511aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
Rechargeable batteries are at the core of the clean energy revolution due to their place both in electric vehicles and grid-scale clean energy storage. However, batteries are not free of impacts on the planet. The battery manufacturing process produces emissions, involves toxic compounds, and requires raw material extraction projects that can have a lasting impact on local communities/ecosystems. Given the massive volume of battery systems that must be deployed to combat the climate crisis, it is crucial that battery researchers and manufacturers design technologies that are environmentally and socially responsible. In this work, we propose a simple, holistic framework for evaluating the environmental and social impact of any battery chemistry. In addition, we provide recommendations for developing a more environmentally and socially responsible battery. We show that such a battery would contain a cobalt-free cathode, low toxicity electrolyte salts/binders, renewable cellulose separators, and utilize aqueous or solvent-free electrode fabrication. In addition, for lower energy density applications, sodium-ions would be a more sustainable alternative to lithium-ions. The insights of this work will help to steer battery research/manufacturing towards more sustainable compounds and practices, while offering a means for researchers to screen their materials of study for detrimental environmental and social impacts.


 	Fig. 1  A flowsheet outlining the environmental and social impact framework for the NMC811 cathode.	 

 	Fig. 2  Summary of environmental impacts for NMC811-graphite, LFP-graphite, and aqueous Na-ion: (a) total energy use (BTU W h−1), (b) global warming potential (g CO2 eq. W h−1), (c) acidification potential (g H+ eq. W h−1), (d) cumulative toxicity score, (e) toxicity score distribution across battery life cycle, and (f) habitat destruction (m2 kW h−1).	 

 	Fig. 3  Areal ore abundance of key cathode elements.	 

 	Fig. 4  Contextualizing the habitat conserved by using sodium-ion batteries over lithium-ion batteries for grid-scale clean energy storage.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Social impact assessment of common battery materials41,43–45 and (b) cobalt supply chain from the mines to consumer products.	 

 	Fig. 6  The consequences of a cobalt-containing cathode.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed energy use/emissions, toxicity, and habitat destruction calculations. Resources for finding environmental and social impact data/information. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee02511a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
