Tailoring photoelectrochemical properties of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide nanolayers with porphyrin functionalization   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC02861J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC02861J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11233-11238Tailoring photoelectrochemical properties of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide nanolayers with porphyrin functionalization†

        
          
            Hanyu 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jaehoon 
            Ji
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Adalberto A. 
            Gonzalez
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jong Hyun 
            Choi
          
        
      *
      School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. E-mail: jchoi@purdue.edu
Received 
      27th June 2017
    , Accepted 8th September 2017First published on 8th September 2017AbstractWe report a facile interfacial engineering method that can drastically modulate the photoelectrochemical properties of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) semiconductors. We find that the adsorption of Zn-centred protoporphyrins strongly influences the photocurrent, depending on the relative energy levels of the TMDs against those of the chromophore molecules.
Introduction
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are layered materials with a sandwich structure of XMX, where X is a chalcogen atom and M is a transition metal. These materials have received significant attention due to their unique layer-number-dependent bandgaps.1–5 Semiconducting TMD monolayers display direct bandgaps and corresponding photoluminescence (PL) properties, while there is no photoemission in the bulk phase due to indirect bandgaps.5–8 This layer-number-dependent property makes TMDs favourable in diverse applications, such as microelectronics, energy storage, photothermoelectrics, photovoltaics, and solar fuels.9–16 In particular, atomically-thin TMDs exhibit tremendous potential for light harvesting and solar energy conversion, given their strong absorption in the visible spectrum.17–19
Recently, Grossman and co-workers showed that monolayer MoS2 has an extraordinary power density while working as a light absorber.20 King et al. investigated the photoelectrochemical properties of monolayer MoS2 as a photo-sensitizer on TiO2 nanoparticles, and examined the possibility of using MoS2 as a cost-effective light harvesting material.21 The Sivula group explored MoS2 and WS2 as charge separation layers in a photoelectrochemical cell, reporting a 6-fold efficiency increase with hybrid TMD/organic semiconductor heterojunctions.22 Their transient spectroscopic measurements revealed a hole transfer process from TMDs to a functionalized perylene-diimide layer. Hersam and co-workers also observed efficient charge separation properties in MoS2/pentacene heterojunctions due to type II band alignment.23 Choi et al. observed photo-induced electron transfer processes from micromechanically exfoliated TMDs to physisorbed phthalocyanine molecules.24 In our previous report, we fabricated large-area MoS2 nanolayers from liquid-phase exfoliation with Li+ intercalation and investigated their interactions with 8 porphyrin species.25 We found that the photocurrents were closely correlated with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the porphyrins. A maximum 10-fold photocurrent increase was observed when the TMD surface was functionalized with zinc-centered protoporphyrin IX or ZnPP. The adsorbed porphyrins suppressed the recombination of electron–hole pairs in the photoexcited MoS2 films, thus enhancing the photocurrents.
In this work, we asked whether other semiconducting TMDs interact with organic chromophores differently and whether more than one light-harvesting mechanism could play a role in photocurrent generation. We thus investigated the light-harvesting properties of WS2, MoSe2, and WSe2 nanolayers functionalized with ZnPP and compared the results with the MoS2–ZnPP case (Fig. 1a). These 4 TMDs hold various energy levels and bandgaps as shown in Fig. 1b where the potentials of the monolayer TMDs are plotted.26,27 In our experiments, TMD nanolayers from surfactant-assisted exfoliation were examined in a photoelectrochemical cell. With ZnPP functionalization on nanolayer TMDs, we observed two distinct mechanisms of photocurrent enhancement. Porphyrin-coated MoS2 and WS2 produced anodic photocurrents where photogenerated electrons are collected at the working electrode and their magnitudes are much greater than those of pristine TMDs. In contrast, MoSe2 and WSe2 demonstrated moderate anodic photocurrents, while strong cathodic photocurrents emerged after ZnPP functionalization. Our proposed mechanisms elucidate the observed photocurrent phenomena based on TMD bandgap alignments relative to the HOMO/LUMO levels of the porphyrin. The photocurrent enhancement and control are significant, because there are only slight increases (e.g. less than 5% change) in photo-absorption of porphyrin-functionalized TMD samples, suggesting that this simple interfacial engineering approach could drastically improve the photoelectrochemical conversion efficiency and modulate the photo-properties of nanolayer TMDs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of photo-induced charge transfer mechanisms in TMD nanolayers functionalized with ZnPP porphyrins. Path 1: porphyrin-assisted charge separation in TMD nanolayers. Path 2: TMD serving as a charge conducting tunnel with porphyrins functioning as photoactive layers. (b) Energy levels of ITO, TMDs, and ZnPP porphyrin in an electrochemical cell. 
Experimental
Processing procedures
Approximately 500 mg of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, and WSe2 powders were sonicated in 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) water solution at 20 Watts for 1 hour.28 The soltuion was then centrifuged at 4000 rpm to remove large unexfoliated flakes. The supernatant was collected, which was then subjected to a second centrifugation at 7000 rpm. The precipitates were collected and resuspended in water for deposition. Surfactant free exfoliation of TMD flakes was also performed with N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). MoS2 and WSe2 powders (∼500 mg) were sonicated in 30 mL NMP at 20 W for 2 hours. The resulting solutions were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 9 min.
The exfoliated TMD flakes were deposited on indium tin oxide (ITO) or silicon wafer surfaces via two-step membrane-filtration and transfer processes, making 1 cm2 nanolayered films. The detailed procedures of large-area film fabrication from nanomaterials in aqueous solutions were reported previously.25,29,30 Due to the incompatibility of polycarbonate with NMP, the polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane was used for the NMP exofliated samples.25,26 We used 15–20 Ω □−1 ITO slides (MTI) for photoelectrochemical characterization and silicon wafers for AFM images and Raman measurements.
ZnPP porphyrin powder (Frontier Scientific) was desolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and diluted to 100 μM for functionalization.31 An aliquot of ZnPP solution was drop-cast onto TMD films and left for 15 min to allow the ZnPP molecules to adsorb onto the TMD nanolayers. The unbounded porphyrins were then rinsed off with DMSO and water.
Characterization
A Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 UV/Vis spectrophotometer was used to measure the absorbance of the TMD films on ITO before and after ZnPP functionalization. Raman spectra of the TMD samples on a slicon wafer were obtained using an inVia Renishaw confocal Raman microscope with a 632.8 nm HeNe laser. We used a Princeton 263 A galvanostat for photoelectrochemical measurements. A 150 W xenon lamp was used as the light source with visible pass filter sets (400–710 nm). In our custom-built photoelectrochemical apparatus, short-circuit currents were measured with a platinum-coated-glass counter electrode pinned with a reference electrode. TMD-coated ITO served as the working electrode, and 10 mM ascorbate was used as the electrolyte in aqueous solution. Action spectrum measurements were performed by recording photocurrent reponses as a function of excitation wavelength using an Oriel 1/8 m monochromator with a 360 nm blaze grating.
Results and discussion
The surfactant-assisted exfoliation effectively produces mono- to few-layer TMD flakes in aqueous solution which can then be deposited onto ITO or silicon wafer surfaces. The deposited TMD films have a thickness ranging from 5 to 15 nm on average, while individual monolayer flakes can also be found as 1-nanometre-thick areas with a lateral size of hundreds of nanometres. Representative AFM images of such SDS-exfoliated TMD samples on a silicon wafer are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). In comparison, the films of Li+-exfoliated TMD flakes deposited via similar methods exhibited ∼3 nm thickness on average.25,32 Nanolayered TMDs exhibit characteristic Raman features as shown in Fig. 2b. Here both WS2 and MoSe2 samples demonstrate the in-plane (E2g) and out-of-plane (A1g) modes, yet their phonon energies are different.33–35
 Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of SDS-exfoliated MoSe2 and WS2 flakes. (b) Absorption spectra of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 nanolayers on ITO substrates. 
The surfactant-exfoliated TMD flakes deposited on an ITO substrate show distinct excitonic behaviours as presented in the absorption spectra of Fig. 2b. The nanolayered MoS2 film demonstrates A and B excitonic peaks between 600 and 700 nm. Deep excitonic features from 350 to 450 nm are also observed.32 Similar to MoS2, the A excitonic peak from WS2 is observed distinctly at approximately 630 nm, and deep exciton features are also evident from 400 to 500 nm. The MoSe2 spectrum is less distinct with only the exciton C feature peaking at approximately 400 nm. The lowest-lying exciton is located in the near infrared, which is beyond the current measurements.36 The WSe2 film provides a clear absorption spectrum, with a direct bandgap peaking at approximately 760 nm.17 Overall, the excitonic features in the absorption spectra reflect well-defined bandgaps of the semiconducting TMD samples, and also indicate a good dispersion of SDS-exfoliated flakes in aqueous solution. The strong visible absorption bands of nanolayered TMDs should be useful for light harvesting in solar cells, solar fuels and light detectors.
We also observed interesting differences between SDS-exfoliated MoS2 and lithium-exfoliated MoS2 in photo-absorption, while NMP-exfoliated MoS2 was comparable with an SDS-MoS2 sample (Fig. S2, ESI†). For the Li+-intercalated MoS2 sample without thermal annealing, no obvious excitonic band features were observed due to its 1T metallic phase.37 After thermal annealing in an inert gas, MoS2 converts to the semiconducting trigonal prismatic 2H phase, which then shows distinct peaks in its absorption spectrum as in Fig. S2 (ESI†).32 Such annealing process is not necessary with a surfactant-exfoliated sample, because the flakes retain their natural 2H form and display well-defined excitonic features.38 It is worth noting that there are strong spectral shifts between SDS-MoS2 and Li-MoS2 samples in the deep exciton region around 400–450 nm as well as the A and B exciton peaks. The spectral shifts of the excitons are likely caused by different thicknesses and lateral dimensions of the exfoliated flakes. A similar observation was recently reported that larger and thicker flakes exhibit red-shifted exciton features.39
Photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out in a two-electrode setup, where exfoliated TMD films on ITO served as the working electrode and a Pt-coated glass slide worked as the counter electrode. The reference electrode was pinned with the counter electrode, providing short-circuit currents with a 10 mM ascorbate electrolyte. Fig. 3a presents photocurrents from a WS2 sample before and after ZnPP adsorption. Without porphyrins, approximately 0.2 μA currents were recorded when white light in the visible range illuminated the WS2 sample. Here, photogenerated electrons were collected at the working electrode (i.e. anodic photocurrents), as in other photoelectrochemical cells such as dye-sensitized solar cells.40 A 5-fold increase in photocurrent (∼1.1 μA) was recorded after the adsorption of ZnPP molecules on the WS2 nanolayers. It should be noted that the changes in the absorption spectra of TMD nanolayers with and without adsorbed porphyrins are minimal (i.e. less than 5%; also see Fig. S3, ESI†) and AFM measurements also indicate no significant differences in thickness before and after functionalization (Fig. S1, ESI†). Nevertheless, the adsorbed porphyrins fully covered the TMD surfaces, as the strong porphyrin emissions dominated on the entire films compared to pristine TMDs (Fig. S4, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent responses of (a) WS2 and (b) MoSe2 nanolayers with and without zinc protoporphyrin (ZnPP) adsorption. White light in the visible range (400–710 nm) was used for photoexcitation. (c) Summary of short-circuit photocurrents from SDS-exfoliated TMD samples before (green) and after (orange) ZnPP functionalization. 
In contrast, MoSe2 nanolayers demonstrated completely different photocurrent behaviours as shown in Fig. 3b. A pristine MoSe2 sample generated stable anodic photocurrents of ∼60 nA, which is smaller in magnitude, yet in a similar pattern with the WS2 case. After ZnPP functionalization, however, strong cathodic photocurrents of roughly 0.7 μA were recorded. Thus, holes were collected at the TMD/ITO working electrode, while the electrons were measured at the counter electrode. With this drastic change, we examined other TMD samples for their photocurrent behaviours (Fig. 3c). The MoS2 film exhibited a similar pattern as WS2, but the enhancement following ZnPP adsorption was more than double, reaching approximately 2.8 μA from ∼0.2 μA of pristine MoS2. The pristine WSe2 barely produced any photocurrent. However, the ZnPP–WSe2 sample generated nearly 3 μA cathodic photocurrents. To rule out the possible effects of SDS molecules, we performed surfactant free exfoliation of MoS2 and WSe2 samples in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone or NMP and measured their photocurrents (Fig. S5, ESI†). Both NMP-exfoliated MoS2 and WSe2 films demonstrated similar trends of photocurrents. The MoS2 sample exhibited an order of magnitude increase in anodic photocurrents after ZnPP functionalization, whereas the WSe2 film displayed a reversal of the trend with strong cathodic photocurrents with porphyrins. This observation strongly indicates that there is no significant effect of SDS on the photocurrent.
To understand the drastically different ZnPP-TMD photocurrent behaviours, we performed action spectra measurements as shown in Fig. 4. Here, photocurrents from porphyrin-TMD hybrids were measured as a function of wavelength from 350 to 800 nm with a 25 nm interval. However, the photocurrent spectra of pristine TMDs were not measured, because the excitation light at the exit of the monochromator was too weak to generate stable photocurrents. The photocurrents of the ZnPP–MoS2 sample closely follow the MoS2 excitonic peaks A and B as well as part of deep exciton below 400 nm. In particular, the photocurrents correspond to exciton A and B very well, indicating that the photocurrents are predominantly generated from TMD nanolayers. However, the photocurrent peak at 450–475 nm (C exciton) shows a quite distinct feature with high magnitude compared to other wavelengths. The fact that this photocurrent peak does not follow the ZnPP absorption (red curves in Fig. 4d and e) suggests that the photocurrents might not be directly generated from ZnPP. It is not clear how this photocurrent peak emerges, and whether the excitons at ∼400 and ∼450 nm would contribute differently to the photocurrent. Further experiments such as transient absorption measurements and parametric analyses are needed to provide more detailed insights into the photocurrent phenomena.
 Fig. 4  Photocurrent responses as a function of excitation wavelength in (a) MoS2 and (b) WS2 films with ZnPP adsorption. Corresponding TMD absorption spectra with (green) and without (black) ZnPP are co-plotted. (c) Proposed electron transfer mechanism that explains the enhancement of anodic photocurrents of MoS2 and WS2 by ZnPP functionalization. Photocurrents from (d) MoSe2 and (e) WSe2 nanolayers with ZnPP as a function of wavelength. ZnPP-TMD absorption spectra are also plotted in green along with that of ZnPP in solution (red). (f) Proposed hole transfer mechanism that describes the photocurrent behaviors of MoSe2 and WSe2 samples with ZnPP. 
WS2 demonstrates similar patterns with MoS2 as shown in Fig. 4b. ZnPP–WS2 photocurrents almost perfectly match the WS2 absorption from 600 to 800 nm including exciton A and B. A strong photocurrent band around 450–475 nm is observed, as in the MoS2 action spectrum. Based on our observation, we propose a mechanism that explains the photocurrent activities in the MoS2 and WS2 samples as illustrated in Fig. 4c. In this mechanism, photoexcited electrons in MoS2 and WS2 nanolayers inject into the ITO electrode, while holes are shuttled to the HOMO of ZnPP and then to the counter electrode by an electrolyte (via ascorbate/dehydroascorbic acid redox reaction), completing an electrical circuit. Photoexcited ZnPP could contribute to the electron injection, but its contribution may not be significant. Rather, it can reduce the TMDs via electron transfer from its LUMO. Therefore, the ZnPP molecules facilitate the charge separation and transfer in TMD nanolayers, suppressing the back-reaction and ultimately improving anodic photocurrent generation. It is evident that even a very small amount of adsorbed porphyrins can drastically enhance the TMD photocurrents.

Fig. 4d and e present the photocurrent spectra of porphyrin-functionalized MoSe2 and WSe2 along with the absorption spectrum of unbound ZnPP molecules in solution (red curve). Here several interesting phenomena are observed. Firstly, the photocurrents are cathodic (i.e. holes are collected at the TMD/ITO electrode), which is consistent with Fig. 3c under white light illumination. Secondly, the photocurrents from both MoSe2 and WSe2 samples follow with ZnPP absorption rather than their own absorption spectra. For example, the photocurrents generally match distinct signatures of the porphyrin Q band (525–625 nm) and Soret band (centred at around 400 nm). This observation clearly indicates that the photocurrents primarily originate from photoexcited ZnPP molecules that serve as the photoactive layer, while MoSe2 and WSe2 flakes work as charge transfer media.

Fig. 4f illustrates this proposed charge transfer mechanism. Unlike the MoS2 and WS2 cases, the valence band maxima (VBM) of MoSe2 and WSe2 are located above the HOMO level of ZnPP, while their conduction band minima (CBM) are still below the ZnPP LUMO level in the energy diagram (type I or Straddling gap; also see Fig. 1b). The photoexcitation in ZnPP molecules leave electrons in the LUMO and holes in the HOMO. The holes then transfer to the VBM of MoSe2 and WSe2 given the favorable band alignment. Once the holes are separated from ZnPP, they can be collected at the ITO working electrode, while photogenerated excited electrons are transferred to the counter electrode by the electrolyte. Thus, MoSe2 and WSe2 serve as charge transfer carriers between the porphyrin and ITO electrode as well as the platform that anchors the porphyrins. This behavior is starkly different from MoS2 and WS2 that serve as photoactive layers while the porphyrins facilitate charge separation and transfer.
Our results suggest that the relative TMD band energies vs. HOMO/LUMO levels determine not only the photocurrent directions (anodic vs. cathodic), but also the magnitudes (as shown in Fig. 3c). For example, a ZnPP–MoS2 sample demonstrates two-times stronger anodic photocurrents compared to ZnPP–WS2, because the larger difference between MoS2 and ZnPP in the energy levels leads to a greater driving potential for charge transfer. Likewise, a ZnPP–WSe2 sample shows a significantly greater magnitude in photocurrent than ZnPP–MoSe2 due to the greater potential difference. These findings should be useful in 2D TMD based light-harvesting and optoelectronic devices.
Conclusions
In this study, we elucidated photoinduced charge transfer mechanisms in porphyrin/TMD nanolayers. SDS-exfoliated TMD flakes were deposited to form large-area films via vacuum filtration. We found that there are two distinct mechanisms that describe photocurrent behaviours, primarily depending on the differences in the energy levels of TMDs against the HOMO/LUMO of Zn-centred protoporphyrins. WS2 and MoS2 demonstrate 5- to 15-times greater anodic photocurrents after ZnPP adsorption, working as photoactive layers. MoSe2 and WSe2, on the other hand, serve as charge transfer media, showing strong cathodic photocurrents with the porphyrins. The porphyrin molecules adsorbed on TMDs show less than 5% changes in photo-absorption, yet drastically modulate the photocurrents. This facile interfacial engineering approach should be useful in TMD-based devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant No. 1055866, 1134376, and 1334088).
Notes and references
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Atomically thin MoS2: A New Direct-Gap Semiconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, S. Da, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, Recent Advances in Two-Dimensional Materials beyond Graphene, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, C. Lee, G. H. Lee, J. Hone, T. F. Heinz and J. Shan, Tightly Bound Trions in Monolayer MoS2, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Scheuschner, O. Ochedowski, A.-M. Kaulitz, R. Gillen, M. Schleberger and J. Maultzsch, Photoluminescence of Freestanding Single- and Few-layer MoS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125406 CrossRef .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, The Chemistry of Two-dimensional Layered Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Nanosheets, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, S.-F. Shi, F. H. da Jornada, Y. Zhang, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, F. Wang, S. G. Louie and M. F. Crommie, Giant Bandgap Renormalization and Excitonic Effects in a Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Semiconductor, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1091–1095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amani, D.-H. Lien, D. Kiriya, J. Xiao, A. Azcatl, J. Noh, S. R. Madhvapathy, R. Addou, K. C. Santosh, M. Dubey, K. Cho, R. M. Wallace, S.-C. Lee, J.-H. He, J. W. Ager III, X. Zhang, E. Yablonovitch and A. Javey, Near-unity Photoluminescence Quantum Yield in MoS2, Science, 2015, 350, 1065–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Metal Dichalcogenide Nanosheets: Preparation, properties and Applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
X. Yu and K. Sivula, Toward Large-Area Solar Energy Conversion with Semiconducting 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lembke, S. Bertolazzi and A. Kis, Single-Layer MoS2 Electronics, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 100–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, C. Tan, X. Zhang, W. Zhao and H. Zhang, Solution-Processed Two-Dimensional Metal Dichalcogenide-Based Nanomaterials for Energy Storage and Conversion, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6167–6196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, W. Huang, Q. Gong, C. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Li and H. Dai, Ultrathin WS2 Nanoflakes as a High-Performance Electrocatalyst for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7860–7863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Wu, D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, T. J. Marks, M. C. Hersam and L. J. Lauhon, Elucidating the Photoresponse of Ultrathin MoS2 Field-Effect Transistors by Scanning Photocurrent Microscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2508–2513 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, D. Hou, Y. Zhou, W. Zhou, G. Li, Z. Tang, L. Li and S. Chen, MoS2 Nanosheet-Coated CoS2 Nanowire Arrays on Carbon Cloth as Three-Dimensional Electrodes for Efficient Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22886–22891 CAS .
D. Hou, W. Zhou, X. Liu, K. Zhou, J. Xie, G. Li and S. Chen, Pt Nanoparticles/MoS2 Nanosheets/Carbon Fibers as Efficient Catalyst for The Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, M. S. Prevot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Self-Assembled 2D WSe2 Thin Films for Photoelectrohcemical Hydrogen Production, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7596 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Mahler, V. Hoepfner, K. Liao and G. A. Ozin, Colloidal Synthesis of 1T-WS2 and 2H-WS2 Nanosheets: Applications for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14121–14127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, J. Yang and M. Chhowalla, Recent Strategies for Improving the Catalytic Activity of 2D TMD Nanosheets Toward the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6197–6206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Extraordinary Sunlight Absorption and One Nanometer Thick Photovoltaics Using Two-Dimensional Monolayer Materials, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3664–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. King, W. Zhao, M. Chhowalla, D. J. Riley and G. Eda, Photoelectrochemical properties of chemically exfoliated MoS2, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8935–8941 CAS .
X. Yu, A. Rahmanudin, X. A. Jeanbourquin, D. Tsokkou, N. Guijarro, N. Banerji and K. Sivula, Hybrid Heterojunctions of Solution-Processed Semiconducting 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 524–531 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jariwala, S. L. Howell, K.-S. Chen, J. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, S. A. Filippone, R. Turrisi, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Hybrid, Gate-Tunable, van der Waals p–n Heterojunctions from Pentacene and MoS2, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 497–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, H. Zhang and J. H. Choi, Modulating Optoelectronic Properties of Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Semiconductors by Photoinduced Charge Transfer, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1671–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Choi, A. Ramani, D. Voiry, S. N. Natoli, M. Chhowalla, D. R. McMillin and J. H. Choi, Engineering Chemically Exfoliated Large-Area Two-Dimensional MoS2 Nanolayers with Porphyrins for Improved Light Harvesting, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 2854–2862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Band Offsets and Heterostructures of Two-Dimensional Semiconductors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef .
T. B. J. Pinter, E. L. Dodd, D. S. Bohle and M. J. Stillman, Spectroscopic and Theoretical Studies of Ga(III)protoporphyrin-IX and Its Reactions with Myoglobin, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 3743–3753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Backes, T. M. Higgins, A. Kelly, C. Boland, A. Harvey, D. Hanlon and J. N. Coleman, Guidelines for Exfoliation, Characterization and Processing of Layered Materials Produced by Liquid Exfoliation, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 243–255 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, B. A. Baker, T. G. Cha, M. D. Sauffer, Y. Wu, N. Hinkson, M. A. Bork, C. M. McShane, K. S. Choi, D. R. McMillin and J. H. Choi, DNA Oligonucleotide Templated Nanohybrids Using Electronic Type Sorted Carbon Nanotubes for Light Harvesting, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5447–5451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Pan, S. Ghimire, M. A. Bork, M. M. Riccitelli, D. R. McMillin and J. H. Choi, Regeneration of Light-Harvesting Complexes via Dynamic Replacement of Photodegraded Chromophores, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7833–7837 CAS .
H. Zhang, M. A. Bork, K. J. Riedy, D. R. McMillin and J. H. Choi, Understanding Photophysical Interactions of Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes with Porphyrin Chromophores, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11612–11619 CAS .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Photoluminescence from Chemically Exfoliated MoS2, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X.-F. Qiao, W. Shi, J.-B. Wu, D.-S. Jiang and P.-H. Tan, Phonon and Raman Scattering of Two-dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides from Monolayer, Multilayer to Bulk Material, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2757–2785 RSC .
J. Choi, H. Chen, F. Li, L. Yang, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, P. D. Ye and J. H. Choi, Nanomanufacturing of 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Materials Using Self-Assembled DNA Nanotubes, Small, 2015, 11, 5520–5527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, H. Zhang, H. Du and J. H. Choi, Understanding Solvent Effects on the Properties of Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8864–8869 CAS .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, Solvent Exfoliation of Transition Metal Dichalcogenides: Dispersibility of Exfoliated Nanosheets Varies Only Weakly between Compounds, ACS Nano, 2012, 4, 3468–3480 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Liquid Exfoliation of Layered, Mater. Sci., 2013, 340, 1226419 Search PubMed .
R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O’Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, J. Chen, J. Wang, A. I. Minett, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Large-Scale Exfoliation of Inorganic Layered Compounds in Aqueous Surfactant Solutions, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Backes, R. J. Smith, N. McEvoy, N. C. Berner, D. McCloskey, H. C. Nerl, A. O’Neill, P. J. King, T. Higgins, D. Hanlon, N. Scheuschner, J. Maultzsch, L. Houben, G. S. Duesberg, J. F. Donegan, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Edge and Confinement Effects Allow in situ Measurement of Size and Thickness of Liquid-Exfoliated Nanosheets, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4576 CAS .
M. Gratzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02861jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of photo-induced charge transfer mechanisms in TMD nanolayers functionalized with ZnPP porphyrins. Path 1: porphyrin-assisted charge separation in TMD nanolayers. Path 2: TMD serving as a charge conducting tunnel with porphyrins functioning as photoactive layers. (b) Energy levels of ITO, TMDs, and ZnPP porphyrin in an electrochemical cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of SDS-exfoliated MoSe2 and WS2 flakes. (b) Absorption spectra of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 nanolayers on ITO substrates.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent responses of (a) WS2 and (b) MoSe2 nanolayers with and without zinc protoporphyrin (ZnPP) adsorption. White light in the visible range (400–710 nm) was used for photoexcitation. (c) Summary of short-circuit photocurrents from SDS-exfoliated TMD samples before (green) and after (orange) ZnPP functionalization.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photocurrent responses as a function of excitation wavelength in (a) MoS2 and (b) WS2 films with ZnPP adsorption. Corresponding TMD absorption spectra with (green) and without (black) ZnPP are co-plotted. (c) Proposed electron transfer mechanism that explains the enhancement of anodic photocurrents of MoS2 and WS2 by ZnPP functionalization. Photocurrents from (d) MoSe2 and (e) WSe2 nanolayers with ZnPP as a function of wavelength. ZnPP-TMD absorption spectra are also plotted in green along with that of ZnPP in solution (red). (f) Proposed hole transfer mechanism that describes the photocurrent behaviors of MoSe2 and WSe2 samples with ZnPP.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02861j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
