High photo-electrochemical activity of thylakoid– carbon nanotube composites for photosynthetic energy conversion   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE40634B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE40634B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1891-1900Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHigh photo-electrochemical activity of thylakoid–carbon nanotube composites for photosynthetic energy conversion†

        
          
            Jessica O. 
            Calkins
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yogeswaran 
            Umasankar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hugh 
            O'Neill
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ramaraja P. 
            Ramasamy
          
        
      *a
aNano Electrochemistry Laboratory, Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center, College of Engineering, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. E-mail: rama@uga.edu;  Fax: +1-706-542-3804
bOak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
Received 
      25th February 2013
    , Accepted 8th April 2013First published on 9th April 2013AbstractSpinach thylakoids were immobilized onto multiwalled carbon nanotubes using a molecular tethering chemistry. The resulting thylakoid–carbon nanotube composites showed high photo-electrochemical activity under illumination. Multiple membrane proteins have been observed to participate in direct electron transfer with the electrode, resulting in the generation of photocurrents, the first of its kind reported for natural photosynthetic systems. Upon inclusion of a mediator, the photo-activity was enhanced. The major contributor to the photocurrent was the light-induced water oxidation reaction at the photosystem II complex. The thylakoid–MWNT composite electrode yielded a maximum current density of 68 μA cm−2 and a steady state current density of 38 μA cm−2, which are two orders of magnitude larger than previously reported for similar systems. The high electrochemical activity of the thylakoid–MWNT composites has significant implications for both photosynthetic energy conversion and photofuel production applications. A fuel cell type photosynthetic electrochemical cell developed using a thylakoid–MWNT composite anode and laccase cathode produced a maximum power density of 5.3 μW cm−2, comparable to that of enzymatic fuel cells. The carbon based nanostructured electrode has the potential to serve as an excellent immobilization support for photosynthetic electrochemistry based on the molecular tethering approach as demonstrated in this work.

Broader context
The article reports a photosynthetic electrochemical cell composed of a thylakoid-based photo-anode and laccase based enzymatic cathode. The cell generates electricity based on photo-induced water oxidation at the cathode and enzyme catalyzed oxygen reduction at the cathode under neutral pH conditions. The thylakoids and laccase were molecularly tethered to carbon nanotube modified electrodes using hetero bi-functional cross-linkers. For the first time in natural photosynthetic systems, multiple membrane proteins have been shown to participate in direct electron transfer with the nanostructured electrode. The origin of photo-activity was confirmed to be from the light induced water-splitting reaction at the oxygen-evolving site of thylakoids. The thylakoid–MWNT composite electrode yielded a maximum current density of 68 μA cm−2 and a steady state current density of 38 μA cm−2, which are two orders of magnitude larger than those previously reported for similar systems. The direct conversion of light into electricity using plant thylakoids demonstrated in this work offers great potential for green energy harvesting. The high photo-electrochemical activity of thylakoids reported here has potential implications in photofuel production and other artificial photosynthesis applications.

1 Introduction
Plant photosynthesis has evolved over 2.5 billion years to convert solar energy into chemical energy using only water, with an unmatched quantum efficiency of nearly 100%.1,2 In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in mimicking the natural photosynthetic process for energy conversion and photofuel (ethanol, H2, etc.) production.3–5 This is being carried out using synthetic routes involving metal oxides, semiconductors or chemical catalysts for carrying out the light-driven water splitting reaction.6–11 Alternatively, components of the naturally occurring photosynthetic apparatus of bacteria,12 algae and plants13–16 have been employed for bioconversion applications. For example, the direct conversion of light into electricity based on photosynthesis in an electrochemical cell has been investigated in the past,17–20 using natural systems such as thylakoids, chlorophyll molecules, photosynthetic reaction centers,21–28 and even whole cells such as cyanobacteria.29–31 Besides these representative attempts, the low electron transfer efficiency of the photosynthetic machinery to the electrodes still plagues the power output performance of these systems. Isolated photosynthetic component systems possess multiple advantages over whole cells such as: they do not have respiration competing with photosynthesis in sharing the electron transfer pathways and do not require nutrients to sustain. However when isolated plant photosynthetic systems are used on electrodes they suffer from low efficiencies due to biomolecule stability, improper immobilization, lack of electrical communication, etc.10 For light energy harvesting applications, it is thermodynamically advantageous to collect electrons directly from the molecules at high-energy states along the photosynthetic electron transport pathway, such as an excited photosystem II (PSII).26,32,33 Moreover for direct light–electricity conversion applications, it is preferable to use a higher order plant based system that uses only water as the electron donor such as PSII, rather than isolated PSI complexes, which require an alternate electron donor. For this purpose, attempts have been made to immobilize PSII reaction centers onto electrodes using cytochromes34 or nickel–nitrilotriacetic acid35 as cross-linkers or through some terminal electron acceptors such as CoIII complexes.36 All these methods use precious metals (gold) as the immobilization support and use expensive immobilization procedures that cannot be extended to other electrode materials (e.g. carbon). Accordingly the precious metal based electrochemistry carries less practical value for energy conversion applications.
On the other hand, photosynthetic organelles or membranes possess many advantages over isolated reaction center complexes for electrochemical applications such as: high individual protein stability,37 fairly simpler immobilization procedures and multiple electron transfer routes. For example, if thylakoid membranes are used in place of isolated PSII complexes, then the electron transfer from oxygen evolving complex (OEC) sites to the electrode can be achieved via plastoquinone, cytochrome (cyt) b6f, plastocyanin, ferredoxin, PSI, etc. in addition to a direct transfer from PSII.34 Moreover retention of their natural partners will result in enhanced stability of the individual proteins in thylakoids in comparison to their isolated counterparts.38 Therefore using thylakoids as photo-biocatalysts offers the potential for high photo-electrochemical activity as well as high stability for both energy conversion and fuel production applications. In this work, we studied the photo-electrochemical activity of spinach thylakoids immobilized onto multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) modified electrodes. By employing a carbon-based material, we eliminate the necessity to use expensive precious metal-based catalyst supports to immobilize photosynthetic machinery onto electrode surfaces. The molecular tethering approach used here helps establish multiple attachments between the thylakoid membranes and the electrode surface. Moreover we have demonstrated that by using the entire membrane instead of isolated photosystem complexes, we will be able to manipulate the electron transfer pathways to achieve high electron transfer flux for photo-current generation. We also report the demonstration of direct light to energy conversion with water as the only input using a photosynthetic fuel cell composed of a thylakoid based anode and laccase based cathode, the first of its kind employing a plant photosynthetic membrane and an enzymatic cathode operating at neutral pH. A schematic of the thylakoid membranes immobilized on MWNT modified electrodes and the associated electron transport pathways are conceptually shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a thylakoid membranes tethered to a MWNT modified electrode using PBSE linkers and the likely electron transport pathways (a–c) between thylakoid membrane proteins and the electrode. OEC, PQ, Cyt, PC, FD, and ATP Syn represent the oxygen evolving complex, plastoquinone, cytochrome, plastocyanin, ferredoxin and ATP synthase respectively. PSI and PSII represent the photosynthetic reaction centers I and II respectively. Other components of the thylakoid membrane are not shown. 
2 Experimental
2.1 Materials
Thylakoids were extracted from fresh organic spinach obtained from the local market. MWNTs, 10 nm in diameter and 1–2 μm in length (Dropsens, Spain), were used as the immobilization support for the thylakoids. 1-Pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (PBSE) (Anaspec) was used as the molecular tethering agent to attach thylakoids onto MWNTs. Potassium ferricyanide redox mediator, and the N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) solvent used for reagent preparation, were purchased from Acros Organics. 3-(3,4-Dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU) was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry. Laccase from Trametes versicolor (Sigma) was the enzyme used on the cathode. Potassium cyanide (KCN) was purchased from Fisher Scientific. Paraquat/diquat was purchased from Ultra Scientific. Tricine (OmniPur), sorbitol (EMD Chemicals Inc.), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (VWR), and potassium hydroxide (Mallinckrodt Baker) were used for preparing buffer solutions. Phosphate buffer for electrochemical testing was prepared using monobasic and dibasic potassium phosphates (VWR). All buffers were prepared using nanopure distilled water (ddH2O). Electrolyte (buffer) solutions were purged for 30 min with N2 to remove any dissolved O2.
2.2 Methods
Thylakoids were isolated from Spinacia oleracea (spinach) leaves based on the procedure given in the literature39 using a refrigerated centrifuge (Beckman Coulter Avanti J-E). The procedure is known to produce a mixture of both intact organelles and broken thylakoid membranes. During isolation the chlorophyll concentration was determined to be between 2.5 and 3.0 mg mL−1 (average of 2.8 mg mL−1) via UV-Visible absorbance measurements in a spectrophotometer (UV-Vis) (Cary Varian 50 Bio, Sparta, NJ) using the formula given in the ESI, Fig. S1.† The oxygen evolution activity of isolated thylakoids was measured in oxygen deprived tricine buffer of pH 7.8 with a standard Clark O2 electrode. The isolated thylakoids were in the form of a pellet and were stored in the dark at −80 °C. The pellets were re-suspended in the buffer when needed for electrode preparation. For control experiments, the DCMU exposed thylakoids were prepared by suspending thylakoids in 0.1 mM DCMU solution and incubated in an ice bath for 30 min. Similarly in another control experiment, 250 μg mL−1 solution of paraquat–diquat solution was used to suspend thylakoids and incubated in an ice bath for 30 min. Slurries of MWNTs were prepared by dispersing 1 mg mL−1 of MWNTs in 10 mM DMF by 10 min ultrasonication using an ultrasonic homogenizer (Omni International) at the power output of 20 watts. The dispersion was sonicated again for 1 h in a bath sonic cleaner (XP-Pro). The obtained MWNT dispersion was used as it is for electrode modifications. We used an in-house developed molecular tethering approach to immobilize thylakoid membranes on the carbon nanotube matrix using PBSE as the tethering agent, which has been previously demonstrated to produce excellent bio-electrochemical characteristics.40–42 In this method, first the electrodes (0.02 cm2) were polished with 0.05 μm alumina slurry. The polished electrode was rinsed and ultrasonicated in ddH2O for 8 min. Then the electrode was modified with 4 μL of MWNT dispersion and later dried at 70 °C. After drying, a desired volume of 10 μM PBSE was drop cast on the MWNT modified electrode and incubated for 15 min in an ice bath. The resulting modified electrode was washed first with DMF to remove the loosely bound PBSE and then with tricine buffer to neutralize the pH of the electrode surface. Finally, 5 μL of the thylakoid suspended solution (corresponding to 0.44 μg cm−2 chlorophyll loading) was drop cast on the electrode surface and incubated for 1 h in the dark in an ice bath. The modified electrode was then washed with tricine buffer prior to experimentation.
2.3 Testing
Bare or thylakoid modified MWNTs were used as the working electrode in a 3-electrode electrochemical cell setup with a platinum wire counter electrode (Alfa Aesar) and a silver–silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) reference electrode (CH Instruments). All electrochemical experiments were conducted at 25 ± 2 °C using 0.1 M tricine buffer of pH 7.8 as the electrolyte. Electrochemical tests were performed both in the presence and absence of [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− as a redox mediator. The operating conditions for electrochemical tests were chosen based on a series of optimization tests for thylakoid loading, immobilization duration, mediator concentration and anode potential over a reasonable range, the results of which are given in the ESI, Fig. S2.† The O2 evolution activity during experiments was monitored via a Clark-type O2 electrode (VWR Symphony Dissolved Oxygen Probe). Cyclic voltammetry (CV), current vs. time (i–t curve, steady state current) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy studies were conducted using a CHI-920c model potentiostat (CH Instruments). A Dolan-Jenner Industries Fiber-Lite model 190 lamp was used for light illumination with a ‘high’ intensity setting of 80 mW cm−2. Surface morphology of the immobilized thylakoids was studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (FEI Inspect F FEG-SEM) and atomic force microscope (AFM) (Veeco Multimode Nanoscope). Absorption spectra were obtained using a Genesys 10S UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). The photosynthetic fuel cell was constructed using a thylakoid–MWNT composite modified anode and laccase–MWNT composite modified cathode. The electrodes were held inside a glass vial containing 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (pH 6.8) as the electrolyte. No oxygen was bubbled during the experiment and the oxygen available in the electrolyte was reduced to water at the cathode.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Physical characterization
Tapping mode AFM and SEM were used to study the morphology of thylakoid-modified MWNT electrodes. The AFM topography, amplitude and phase images of the unmodified MWNT (control) and thylakoid-modified MWNT electrodes are shown in Fig. 2. The unmodified control electrode with the bare MWNT matrix shows clear and identifiable nanotubes as seen in Fig. 2a. The thylakoid modified-MWNT composite matrix shown in Fig. 2b has a similar morphology to that of the control, but with distinct thylakoids on the surface. Due to the blanketing effect of biological structures, the underlying MWNT fibrils in the composite are not obvious in the topography image, but are evident in amplitude and phase images shown in Fig. 2b. The presence of thylakoids is shown by the lighter extruding region in the composite (Fig. 2b), sized approximately 3 μm ± 0.5 in length which agrees with the typical size of a thylakoid unit.43 A thylakoid modified electrode surface in the absence of MWNT is also shown in Fig. 2c for comparison and verification. The surface roughness of the thylakoid matrix is 9 nm ± 0.5, which is close to the roughness of a monolayer. The roughness values are similar for both thylakoids (Fig. 2c) and thylakoid–MWNT composite matrices (Fig. 2b). The surface coverage of active membrane proteins of thylakoids on the electrode surface is discussed in Section 3.3.1. The morphology studied using SEM also shows the length of thylakoids to be 3 μm ± 1 as shown in Fig. 3. This is in good agreement with the AFM observations.
 Fig. 2  AFM images of gold electrodes modified with (a) MWNTs without thylakoid, (b) thylakoid–MWNT composites and (c) thylakoid without MWNTs. The topography, amplitude and phase images correspond to the left, middle and right columns respectively. Thylakoids are marked by arrows in the images. 
 Fig. 3  SEM image of a bare electrode modified with (a) thylakoids, (b) MWNTs and (c) thylakoids–MWNT composites. Thylakoids are shown by arrows. 
3.2 Electron transfer pathways in thylakoids
The thylakoid membrane consists of several integral membrane proteins that could take part in electron transfer to the electrode. As schematically depicted in Fig. 1, electrons generated as a result of the photo-induced water oxidation reaction at the OEC site of the PSII complex in thylakoids could be conducted to the electrode in three possible routes as indicated by arrows in Fig. 1. The arrows (a) indicate the first electron transfer pathway (ETP1): PSII → plastoquinone → cyt b6f → MWNT → electrode. ETP1 is possible if cyt b6f is adsorbed or molecularly tethered to the MWNT surface and its redox site is placed closely to MWNTs to enable direct electron transfer. The second possible electron transfer pathway (ETP2) is depicted by arrows (b): PSII → plastoquinone → cyt b6f → plastocyanin → MWNT → electrode. Here the electron gets routed to plastocyanin before reaching the MWNT matrix. Since plastocyanin may freely diffuse between the stromal and lumenal sides of a ruptured thylakoid membrane (as in the case of our experiments) it is likely to participate in the electron conduction as well. Both ETP1 and ETP2 serve as direct electron transfer routes for electrochemical charge transfer. Upon addition of a mediator such as [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−, a third pathway as indicated by arrows (c) is also possible for electron conduction to the electrode (ETP3): PSII → plastoquinone → cyt b6f/plastocyanin → [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− → MWNT → electrode. In this case, ferricyanide mediates the electron transfer from multiple membrane proteins in the thylakoid to the MWNT electrode. Therefore the lack of electrical connectivity between those membrane proteins and electrode is not of concern.
In addition to the three ETPs discussed above, other routes for electrochemical communication between thylakoids and MWNT electrodes are possible. For example a direct electron transfer from the plastoquinone site of PSII to MWNTs is possible if the stromal side of the PSII complex is orientated towards the electrode. However our experimental results (discussed in the following paragraphs) indicated no significant contribution from any additional routes to the electrochemical charge transfer and hence are not depicted in Fig. 1 or explored in detail. Also since the focus is only on the electrons generated at the PSII complex by water splitting reaction, other ETPs originating from PSI44 or from electrolyte impurities45 are not discussed here.
3.3 Redox electrochemistry of immobilized thylakoid membranes

3.3.1 Direct electron transport. 
Cyclic voltammetry was used to study the redox activity of the unmodified and thylakoid–MWNT composite modified electrodes and to verify the existence of the ETPs discussed above in Fig. 1. The electrodes were cycled between −0.7 and 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl at a scan rate of 0.02 V s−1. Fig. 4a compares the cyclic voltammograms of thylakoid–MWNT composites in the presence and absence of [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− as a mediator. The formal potential (E0) values for peaks 1peak and 3peak as observed in our results were ∼0.035 and ∼0.2 V (see Fig. 4a), which fell close to that of the redox potentials of cyt b6f (FeII/III) and plastocyanin (CuI/II) respectively when the pH difference was accounted.46–48 No redox peak directly attributable to plastoquinone was observed in our experiments, which is located inside the thylakoid lipid bilayer. The surface coverage of cyt b6f and plastocyanin was 1.2 × 10−9 and 0.6 × 10−9 mol cm−2 respectively. These values were calculated using the equation Γ = Q/nFA, where Γ is the surface coverage, Q is the charge measured from the cyclic voltammogram's cathodic peak, and n is the number of electrons. F is the Faraday constant and A is the geometric area of the electrode. Since thylakoids may exist as broken membrane particles instead of intact organelles in our samples, the observance of redox peaks for a lumen-side soluble protein such as plastocyanin is not surprising. The cyt b6f and plastocyanin redox centers are much smaller than other reaction center complexes such as PSII and PSI. Therefore, naturally the MWNTs have easier access to cyt b6f and plastocyanin for a direct electrochemical charge transfer resulting in distinct redox peaks as observed in Fig. 4a. To confirm that the peaks at 0.2 V can be attributed to plastocyanin redox activity, a separate plastocyanin-inhibition experiment was conducted to study the effect of inhibition on this redox peak. For this purpose KCN (10 mM) was added as an inhibitor to the thylakoid solution prior to immobilization. KCN inhibits the plastocyanin activity in photosynthesis by blocking its CuI/II active site at high concentrations (>10 mM) and high pH values (>7.5).49 The voltammograms of thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes with KCN inhibitor showed a dramatic 73% reduction in the oxidation peak at 0.2 V as shown in the ESI, Fig. S3.† This supports our hypothesis that the redox response in the 0.19–0.2 V range was that of plastocyanin in thylakoid modified electrodes. This is one of the few reports that demonstrate a direct electrochemistry for thylakoid-based electrodes.
 Fig. 4  Cyclic voltammograms of the thylakoid–MWNT composite modified electrode: (a) in the presence and absence of a 1.5 mM mediator; the inset graph shows the capacitance subtracted voltammogram (b) under light and dark conditions with a 1.5 mM mediator; the inset graph shows the background subtracted voltammograms. 1peak, 2peak and 3peak represent the redox reactions of cyt b6f, ferricyanide mediator and plastocyanin respectively. 


3.3.2 Mediated electron transport. 
In a separate set of experiments, a 1.5 mM [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− couple was added to the electrolyte to assist electron transfer from the thylakoid membrane to the MWNT electrode. Ferricyanide is a suitable choice because of its minimal photo-activity,50,51 compared to benzoquinone mediators used elsewhere,52 as confirmed in our studies (see ESI, Fig. S4† for relevant data). As shown in Fig. 4a, in the presence of [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−, a single dominant oxidation peak (2peak at E0 0.16 V) was observed masking the redox responses of both cyt b6f and plastocyanin observed. This confirms the existence of the mediated electron transport pathway (ETP3) as suggested in Fig. 1. This also indicates that the electron flux due to mediated transport was much higher than that of direct transport through the membrane bound proteins. The O2 evolution due to photo-induced water splitting in thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes upon illumination is also evident in the voltammograms shown in Fig. 4b. Oxygen reduction and ferricyanide oxidation were observed at Epc = −0.4 V and Epa = 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl respectively as shown in Fig. 4b. Upon illumination the peak currents for their reactions increased by 1.0 (Ipa) and 0.2 (Ipc) μA respectively, indicative of photo-catalysis by immobilized thylakoids. The rate of oxygen evolution from the photo-induced water oxidation was measured to be 253 μmol O2 mg per chl per h (using a Clark electrode) indicating the high photo-activity of the reaction center complexes in thylakoids. The results suggest that the electron flux to the electrode could be greatly enhanced by [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−, which acts as a mediator for electrochemical charge transfer between thylakoid and MWNT electrodes. To ensure that the mediator did not interfere with the light-absorbance activity of thylakoids, individual absorption spectra were obtained for both thylakoids (in 80% acetone solution) and [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− couple using UV-Vis spectroscopy. As shown in the ESI, Fig. S5,† the absorption spectrum for the [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− mediator did not show any absorbance at 673 nm, the wavelength at which chlorophyll-a absorbs light in PSII. Also the presence of the mediator did not hinder the light absorbance of chlorophyll-a molecules in our thylakoid–MWNT composites (see ESI, Fig. S5a† for relevant data).

3.4 Photo-electrochemical activity of thylakoid–MWNT composites
The photo-electrochemical activity of thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes was evaluated using open circuit potential (OCP), potentiostatic polarization, and AC impedance measurements.

3.4.1 Open circuit potentials. 

Fig. 5a compares the open circuit potentials (OCPs) of unmodified and thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes in the presence of a mediator. Within 100 seconds after the addition of a mediator under dark conditions, the OCP of the unmodified and thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes stabilized at 0.23 and 0.19 V respectively. The slightly lower OCP for the thylakoid–MWNT electrode could be dictated by the mixed potential caused by a variety of thylakoid membrane proteins whose individual redox potentials range from −1.3 to +1.0 V vs. SHE.46 Upon changing the illumination conditions between light and dark over several light on–light off cycles, a clear variation in the open circuit potential was observed, indicative of photo-electrochemical activity for the thylakoid–MWNT composite electrode. The variation was as high as 90 mV during the first on–off cycle, which eventually subsided during subsequent cycles, consistent with the attainment of dynamic equilibrium over time. No such variation in OCP between light and dark was observed for the unmodified MWNT electrode (control) in Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 5  (a) Open circuit potentials of unmodified (control) and thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes in the presence of 1.5 mM [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−. (b) Photo-current responses of the unmodified (control) and thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes at a fixed potential of 0.2 V in the presence of 1.5 mM [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−. (c) Nyquist plots (Z′ vs. −Z′′) for thylakoid–MWNT composites under light and dark conditions. The inset in (c) shows the equivalent circuit model used to fit the Nyquist data. In (a and b), ↑ and ↓ represent light on and light off conditions respectively. 


3.4.2 Potentiostatic polarization. 
The photo-electrochemical activity of the thylakoid–MWNT composite was evaluated at a constant anode potential of 0.2 V and the variation of anode current with time was evaluated during light on–light off cycles. The photocurrent densities ranged from 30 to 70 μA cm−2 during initial cycles eventually attaining steady state within ≈400 s in the range of 23 to 38 μA cm−2 that lasted for 1 week (ESI, Fig S6†). Table 1 compares the photo-current densities observed in this work with that of other photosynthetic systems reported in the literature and shows that the anodic photocurrents observed here are about two orders of magnitude larger than the highest values reported in the literature for natural plant systems, either PSII based energy conversion52–54 or PSI based bio-hydrogen production.55 The thylakoid–MWNT composite was also found to be very responsive to light intensity (see ESI, Fig. S6† for light intensity data). No significant photo-electrochemical activity was noticed for the unmodified MWNT electrode without thylakoids or for thylakoids physically adsorbed onto the MWNT without the tethering cross-linker. The small photo-currents seen in the case of unmodified MWNTs in Fig. 5b is primarily due to the light absorbance of Fe(CN)6]3−/4− in the 410–420 nm range which did not interfere with the light absorbance of chlorophyll in thylakoids in the 660–675 nm range (as shown in the absorption spectrum in the ESI, Fig. S5a†). In order to understand if immobilized thylakoids have significant advantages over freestanding suspended thylakoids in solution, separate polarization experiments were performed using thylakoids suspended in the electrolyte without immobilization on MWNT electrodes. For such electrodes the photo-electrochemical activity was drastically reduced (as shown in the ESI, Fig. S7†), indicating that the composite based immobilization methods are best suited to establish high photo-electrochemical activity in natural systems.
Table 1 Comparison of various photosynthetic anodes' photocurrent density




Electrode material
Photocurrent/areab
Reference





a SAM – self assembled monolayer; RC – reaction center; RBS – Rhodobacter sphaeroides.
b The photocurrent density was calculated using the photocurrent and the active surface area provided in the respective literature.





Au–MWNT–thylakoid
68 μA cm−2
This work


Au–poly(mercapto-p-benzoquinone)
3.1 μA cm−2

52



Au nanoparticles–PSII
2.4 μA cm−2

53



Au–thylakoid
0.2 μA cm−2

60



Au–PSII
0.1 μA cm−2

54



Au–thylakoid
1.1 μA cm−2

61



Au SAM–RC–RBSa
0.2 μA

34



Carbon coated Au–RC–RBS
0.05 μA

62





The decrease in the amplitude of photo-currents over continuous light on–off cycles observed in Fig. 5b could be due to a combination of two effects: (i) transience in mediator diffusion between thylakoids and electrodes before the attainment of a steady state; (ii) photo-damage of proteins under extended light exposure.56 The contribution of the first effect was studied and confirmed in a separate set of experiments where the thylakoid–MWNT composite electrodes were tested under different duty cycles (different ratios of timeon/timeoff) as well as under continuous light on and continuous light off (dark) conditions (see ESI, Fig. S8† for relevant data). The second effect namely photo-damage (photoinhibition) occurs under continuous and extended illumination conditions57 and is an inherent property of natural systems. In plants, natural biological mechanisms repair the photo-damaged proteins.58 Understanding and addressing this challenge is beyond the scope of this work and is critically dependent on the progress in the molecular biology techniques for photosynthetic systems.


3.4.3 AC impedance. 
AC impedance studies were also carried out on thylakoid–MWNT composites under light and dark conditions in the presence of a mediator to understand the influence of individual resistances on photocurrent generation. The Nyquist plots (−Z′′ vs. Z′) of the impedance data and the equivalent electrical circuit (to which the data were fitted for parametric analysis) are given in Fig. 5c. Rs represents the electrolyte resistance, Rct is the charge transfer resistance, CPE is the constant phase element between the electrolyte solution and the modified electrode, and lastly Zw represents the Warburg impedance due to the diffusion of mediator. The shape of the Nyquist profiles shows a clear difference in the impedance between light and dark conditions, with the composites showing lower impedance for charge transfer under the illuminated condition. The fitted values for Rct were 87 and 317 kΩ under light and dark conditions respectively. The results indicate an enhanced kinetic activity due to lowered charge-transfer impedance for electrochemical charge transfer in thylakoid–MWNT composites under illumination. Though a Warburg element was included in the equivalent circuit to ensure completeness in the representation of the system, we did not observe the diffusion limitations to play a major role in this kinetic limited system, as can be noticed from the shape of the Nyquist plots in Fig. 5c, where there was no 45° Warburg slope. At the same time, an equivalent circuit without the Warburg component did not result in the perfect fit of the equivalent circuit data indicating that Warburg and kinetic impedances (Rct) were expressed with similar time constants.
Impedance observation in the absence of mediator also showed high charge transfer impedance indicating that this system was not limited by the mediator diffusion. Separate measurements performed on thylakoid modified electrodes with and without a MWNT platform indicated lower ohmic resistance (after eliminating the solution impedance contribution) for the MWNT electrodes. This confirmed the existence of high electronic conductivity for the thylakoid–MWNT composite electrodes.

3.5 Role of PSII vs. PSI in photocurrent generation
In order to confirm that the light-induced water splitting reaction is the electron source for the observed photocurrents in our composite electrodes, two control experiments were performed. The first control experiment was aimed at studying the effect of blocking the PSII reaction center complex and the second was aimed at blocking the PSI reaction center complex from participating in the photosynthetic electron transport. For inhibiting PSII activity, DCMU was added to the thylakoid solution prior to immobilization. DCMU is a herbicide that specifically blocks the QA → QB site in the PSII complex, severing the electron transport from PSII to the subsequent proteins in the pathway.59 As shown in Fig. 6, potentiostatic tests at 0.2 V on thylakoid–MWNT composites showed that when DCMU was used, the thylakoid activity was severely inhibited thereby drastically reducing the photocurrents during the light on–off tests. This confirms that the electrons originate from PSII. Interestingly the cyclic voltammograms of thylakoid–MWNT composites (ESI, Fig. S9†) showed retention of redox electro-activity by both cyt b6f and plastocyanin even when PSII was inhibited by DCMU. This suggests that blocking the PSII complex with DCMU did not significantly affect the redox activities of the other thylakoid membrane proteins individually, an indication that the direct electron properties of thylakoid can be utilized for electrochemical charge transfer as suggested earlier in this paper. The inhibition of PSI (as shown in the ESI, Fig. S10†) reveals that the presence of the PSI inhibitor did not significantly reduce the photo-electrochemical response of the thylakoid–MWNT composites. The results reiterate that water oxidation at PSII was the major source for photocurrents in the thylakoid composites and contribution of the PSI complex to photocurrent generation was insignificant in our study. This also confirms that the major routes for electron conduction from the OEC site to the electrode were the three ETPs proposed in Fig. 1, which assume that all the membrane integral proteins in the thylakoid membrane are intact and participate in photosynthetic linear electron transport.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of the photo-current responses of unexposed and DCMU exposed thylakoid–MWNT composites. ↑ and ↓ represent light on and light off conditions respectively. 
3.6 Thylakoid–laccase photosynthetic electrochemical cell
A fuel cell type electrochemical cell was constructed using a thylakoid–MWNT composite anode and laccase–MWNT composite cathode and tested in an electrolyte solution (PBS buffer, pH 6.8). The anode oxidizes water upon illumination with light using thylakoid–MWNT composites as photo-biocatalysts, whereas the cathode reduces oxygen to regenerate water in the system using laccase as an enzymatic bio-electrocatalyst. The use of laccase for bio-electrocatalytic oxygen reduction in biological fuel cells has been well established.40–42 The molecular tethering approach used for thylakoid immobilization was also used for laccase immobilization on MWNTs at the cathode. The open circuit potential of the cell was ∼0.4 V. Polarization tests were performed under illumination, at constant applied potentials between 0.35 V and 0 V and the resulting steady state currents were measured and shown in Fig. 7. The polarization curves showed a maximum current density of ∼70 μA cm−2 and a maximum power density of 5.3 μW cm−2. The power density values were comparable to the ones reported for the PSII electrochemical cell using a gold–poly(mercapto-p-benzoquinone) anode and bilirubin oxidase cathode.52 It is worth pointing out that our system was not optimized for power density in any way. Rather this work was a simple demonstration of power generation using a thylakoid membrane and laccase cathode. Further enhancements in current and power densities can be achieved by reducing the anode–cathode separation distance (to lower ohmic impedance), increasing the loading of thylakoids and laccase onto the electrodes (to enhance electro-kinetics) and by managing the mediator diffusion (to minimize mass transfer limitation) for achieving high performance. Pursuing these approaches in detail was beyond the scope of this work and could be explored in a separate study.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of a photo-electrochemical cell containing a thylakoid–MWNT based photo-anode and laccase–MWNT based biocathode. (b) Steady state polarization and power density curves of the photo-electrochemical cell. Picture of the simple photo-electrochemical cell setup is shown in the inset. 
4 Conclusion
We have demonstrated the high photo-electrochemical activity of immobilized thylakoid–MWNT composites for light energy harvesting applications. The findings have significant implications for photosynthetic energy conversion and photofuel production. The composites exhibited direct electron transfer activity, which can be significantly enhanced by using a suitable mediator. Our control experiments confirmed that the light-induced water splitting reaction at the PSII complex was the source of electrons for photo-current generation. The advantage of using thylakoid membranes as opposed to isolated photosystems lies in the self-assembly and utilization of direct electrochemical redox activities of more than one membrane proteins present in the thylakoid. The thylakoid–MWNT composite electrode yielded a maximum current density of 68 μA cm−2 and a steady state current density of 38 μA cm−2, which are higher than the previously reported values (Table 1). The photo-electrochemical cell delivered a maximum power output of 5.3 μW cm−2. No optimization efforts to enhance the power density were attempted in this work. Accordingly dramatic improvements in power densities can be realized by simple engineering optimization such as designing a suitable membraneless electrochemical cell, selecting proper materials for electrode substrates, developing superior immobilization methods, etc., which could be part of a future study. Future work must focus on understanding the electron transport pathways for enhancing direct electron transfer and developing a mediator-free system to demonstrate direct light to electricity conversion. The bio-inspired photosynthetic energy conversion technology using plant thylakoids demonstrated in this work offers great potential for green energy harvesting based on a natural process that has evolved over millions of years.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the help of Dr Gareth Sheppard and Dr Jason Locklin (UGA) in AFM imaging. We also acknowledge the University of Georgia Research Foundation for financial support. H. O’Neill acknowledges the support of the Photosynthetic Antenna Research Center, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U. S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC 0001035.
Notes and references

          R. E. Blankenship, Molecular Mechanisms of Photosynthesis, Blackwell Science, Oxford, U.K.,  2002 Search PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2001, 332, 805–809 CrossRef .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
McConnell, G. Li and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Biol., 2010, 17, 434–447 CrossRef CAS .
I. Listorti, J. Durrant and J. Barber, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 929 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis, Am. Sci., 1995, 83, 534–541 Search PubMed .
L. Sun, L. Hammarstrom, B. Akermark and S. Styring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30 Search PubMed .
T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1989, 22, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
I. J. Iwuchukwu, M. Vaughn, N. Myers, H. O'Neill, P. Frymier and B. D. Bruce, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
I. Esper, A. Badura and M. Rögner, Trends Plant Sci., 2006, 11, 543–549 CrossRef .
K. B. Lam, E. F. Irwin, K. E. Healy and L. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 117, 480–487 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ptak, A. Dudkowiak and D. Frgckowiak, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1998, 115, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435–461 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rybtchinski, L. E. Sinks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12268–12269 CrossRef .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Bhardwaj, R. L. Pan and E. L. Gross, in Photosynthesis VI. Photosynthesis and Productivity, Photosynthesis and Environment, ed. G. Akoyunoglou, Balaban International Science Services, Philadelphia,  1981, pp. 719–728 Search PubMed .
R. L. Pan, R. Bhardwaj and E. L. Gross, Photochem. Photobiol., 1982, 35, 655–664 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sanderson, R. Pan and E. Gross, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 1983, 8, 395–405 CrossRef .
K. B. Lam, E. A. Johnson, M. Chiao and L. Lin, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2006, 15, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .
M. Okano, T. lida, H. Shinohara, H. Kobayashi and T. Mitamura, Agric. Biol. Chem., 1984, 48, 1977–1983 CrossRef CAS .
R. Carpentier and M. Mimeault, Biotechnol. Lett., 1987, 9, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lemieux and R. Carpentier, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1988, 2, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Katz, A. Y. Shkuropatov and V. A. Shuvalov, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1990, 298, 239–247 CrossRef .
K. Abe, A. Ishii, M. Hirano and J. F. Rusling, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 2266–2272 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, D. Guschin, B. Esper, T. Kothe, S. Neugebauer, W. Schuhmann and M. Rögner, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1043–1047 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das, P. J. Kiley, M. Segal, J. Norville, A. A. Yu, L. Wang, S. A. Trammell, L. E. Reddick, R. Kumar, F. Stellacci, N. Lebedev, J. Schnur, B. D. Bruce, S. Zhang and M. Baldo, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1079–1083 CrossRef CAS .
I. Katz, A. Y. Shkuropatov and V. A. Shuvalov, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1990, 23, 239–247 CrossRef .
S. Tsujimuraa, A. Wadanob, K. Kanoa and T. Ikedaa, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2001, 29, 225–231 CrossRef .
A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, A. M. Scott, A. J. Philips, A. G. Smith, A. C. Fisher and C. J. Howe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4699–4709 CAS .
M.-H. Ham, J. H. Choi, A. A. Boghossian, E. S. Jeng, R. A. Graff, D. A. Heller, A. C. Chang, A. Mattis, T. H. Bayburt, Y. V. Grinkova, A. S. Zeiger, K. J. V. Vliet, E. K. Hobbie, S. G. Sligar, C. A. Wraight and M. S. Strano, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vittadello, M. Y. Gorbunov, D. T. Mastrogiovanni, L. S. Wielunski, E. L. Garfunkel, F. Guerrero, D. Kirilovsky, M. Sugiura, A. W. Rutherford, A. Safari and P. G. Falkowski, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 471–475 CrossRef .
J. Barber, Q. Rev. Biophys., 2003, 36, 71–89 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lebedev, S. A. Trammell, A. Spano, E. Lukashev, I. Griva and J. Schnur, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12044–12045 CrossRef CAS .
T. Noji, H. Suzuki, T. Gotoh, M. Iwai, M. Ikeuchi, T. Tomo and T. Noguchi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2448–2452 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ulas and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13260–13263 CrossRef .
E. Fuhrmann, S. Gathmann, E. Rupprecht, J. Golecki and D. Schneider, Plant Physiol., 2009, 149, 735–744 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Meunier, P. Van Cutsem, Y.-U. Kwon and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1535–1542 RSC .

          R. Carpentier, Photosynthesis Research Protocols, Humana Press, Totowa, NJ,  2004 Search PubMed .
R. P. Ramasamy, H. R. Luckarift, D. M. Ivnitski, P. B. Atanassov and G. R. Johnson, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6045–6047 RSC .
N. S. Parimi, Y. Umasankar, P. Atanassov and R. P. Ramasamy, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lau, E. R. Adkins, R. P. Ramasamy, H. R. Luckarift, G. R. Johnson and P. Atanassov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 162–168 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Semenova, J. Plant Physiol., 2002, 159, 613–625 CrossRef .
M. Salin, Physiol. Plant., 1987, 72, 439 Search PubMed .
K. B. Lam, E. A. Johnson, M. Chiao and L. Lin, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2006, 15, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .

          P. N. Bartlett, Bioelectrochemistry Fundamentals, Experimental Techniques and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, UK,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Richard and J. A. Pedro, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1975, 63, 1157–1160 CrossRef .
D. G. Sanderson, L. B. Anderson and E. L. Gross, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1986, 852, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ouitrakul and S. Izawa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1973, 305, 105–118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abdollahi, A. H. Abdullah, U. I. Gaya, S. Ahmadzadeh, A. Zakaria, K. Shameli, Z. Zainal, H. Jahangirian and N. A. Yusof, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2012, 23, 236–240 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ivanov and S. Lyashkevich, High Energy Chem., 2011, 45, 210–213 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, J. Wasserman, A. Trifonov, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 742 CrossRef .
N. Terasaki, M. Iwai, N. Yamamoto, T. Hiraga, S. Yamada and Y. Inoue, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2553–2557 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bhalla and V. Zazubovich, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 707, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, B. Esper, K. Ataka, C. Grunwald, C. Wöll, J. Kuhlmann, J. Heberle and M. Rögner, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Powles, Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol., 1984, 35, 15–44 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sarvikas, M. Hakala-Yatkin, S. Donmez and E. Tyystjarvi, J. Exp. Bot., 2010, 61, 4239–4247 CrossRef CAS .
I. Baroli and A. Melis, Planta, 1996, 198, 640–646 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. M. Duysens, Biophys. J., 1972, 12, 858–863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahmed, W. Park and S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2009, 30, 2195–2196 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lam, E. A. Johnson, M. Chiao and L. Lin, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2006, 15, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Trammell, A. Spano, R. Price and N. Lebedev, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1023–1028 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee40634bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
The article reports a photosynthetic electrochemical cell composed of a thylakoid-based photo-anode and laccase based enzymatic cathode. The cell generates electricity based on photo-induced water oxidation at the cathode and enzyme catalyzed oxygen reduction at the cathode under neutral pH conditions. The thylakoids and laccase were molecularly tethered to carbon nanotube modified electrodes using hetero bi-functional cross-linkers. For the first time in natural photosynthetic systems, multiple membrane proteins have been shown to participate in direct electron transfer with the nanostructured electrode. The origin of photo-activity was confirmed to be from the light induced water-splitting reaction at the oxygen-evolving site of thylakoids. The thylakoid–MWNT composite electrode yielded a maximum current density of 68 μA cm−2 and a steady state current density of 38 μA cm−2, which are two orders of magnitude larger than those previously reported for similar systems. The direct conversion of light into electricity using plant thylakoids demonstrated in this work offers great potential for green energy harvesting. The high photo-electrochemical activity of thylakoids reported here has potential implications in photofuel production and other artificial photosynthesis applications.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a thylakoid membranes tethered to a MWNT modified electrode using PBSE linkers and the likely electron transport pathways (a–c) between thylakoid membrane proteins and the electrode. OEC, PQ, Cyt, PC, FD, and ATP Syn represent the oxygen evolving complex, plastoquinone, cytochrome, plastocyanin, ferredoxin and ATP synthase respectively. PSI and PSII represent the photosynthetic reaction centers I and II respectively. Other components of the thylakoid membrane are not shown.	 

 	Fig. 2  AFM images of gold electrodes modified with (a) MWNTs without thylakoid, (b) thylakoid–MWNT composites and (c) thylakoid without MWNTs. The topography, amplitude and phase images correspond to the left, middle and right columns respectively. Thylakoids are marked by arrows in the images.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM image of a bare electrode modified with (a) thylakoids, (b) MWNTs and (c) thylakoids–MWNT composites. Thylakoids are shown by arrows.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cyclic voltammograms of the thylakoid–MWNT composite modified electrode: (a) in the presence and absence of a 1.5 mM mediator; the inset graph shows the capacitance subtracted voltammogram (b) under light and dark conditions with a 1.5 mM mediator; the inset graph shows the background subtracted voltammograms. 1peak, 2peak and 3peak represent the redox reactions of cyt b6f, ferricyanide mediator and plastocyanin respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Open circuit potentials of unmodified (control) and thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes in the presence of 1.5 mM [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−. (b) Photo-current responses of the unmodified (control) and thylakoid modified MWNT electrodes at a fixed potential of 0.2 V in the presence of 1.5 mM [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−. (c) Nyquist plots (Z′ vs. −Z′′) for thylakoid–MWNT composites under light and dark conditions. The inset in (c) shows the equivalent circuit model used to fit the Nyquist data. In (a and b), ↑ and ↓ represent light on and light off conditions respectively.	 


Au–MWNT–thylakoid	68 μA cm−2	This work
Au–poly(mercapto-p-benzoquinone)	3.1 μA cm−2	
52

Au nanoparticles–PSII	2.4 μA cm−2	
53

Au–thylakoid	0.2 μA cm−2	
60

Au–PSII	0.1 μA cm−2	
54

Au–thylakoid	1.1 μA cm−2	
61

Au SAM–RC–RBSa	0.2 μA	
34

Carbon coated Au–RC–RBS	0.05 μA	
62


 	Fig. 6  Comparison of the photo-current responses of unexposed and DCMU exposed thylakoid–MWNT composites. ↑ and ↓ represent light on and light off conditions respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of a photo-electrochemical cell containing a thylakoid–MWNT based photo-anode and laccase–MWNT based biocathode. (b) Steady state polarization and power density curves of the photo-electrochemical cell. Picture of the simple photo-electrochemical cell setup is shown in the inset.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee40634b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
