Carbon dioxide and nitrogen reduction reactions using 2D transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) and carbide/nitride (MXene) catalysts  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03211A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03211A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6242-6286Carbon dioxide and nitrogen reduction reactions using 2D transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) and carbide/nitride (MXene) catalysts

        
          
            Zhaodong 
            Li†
, 
      
        
          
            Nuwan H. 
            Attanayake†
, 
      
        
          
            Jeffrey L. 
            Blackburn
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Elisa M. 
            Miller
          
          
        
      *
      Materials and Chemical Science and Technology Directorate, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: Jeffrey.Blackburn@nrel.gov; Elisa.Miller@nrel.gov
Received 
      13th October 2021
    , Accepted 3rd November 2021First published on 3rd November 2021AbstractImproving the carbon dioxide and nitrogen reduction reactions (CO2RR and NRR) can reduce anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions while selectively producing chemicals needed for the fuel, plastic, and chemical industries. Efficient CO2RR can be used to replace fossil fuels as well as repurpose captured CO2, while new NRR pathways can be used to supplement or replace the energy intensive Haber–Bosch process for NH3 generation with no CO2 emissions. Therefore, this review article focuses on (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic conversion of CO2 and N2 molecules into useful products, such as carbon monoxide, methanol, formic acid, and ammonia, using 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes). These highly tunable 2D catalysts will be evaluated for their ability to selectively and efficiently undergo CO2RR and NRR by controlling defects, phases, edge sites, interfaces, and functional groups. We first address the CO2RR and NRR challenges, with a particular focus on theoretical mechanisms and minimum energy pathways. We follow this discussion with a detailed review of state-of-the-art 2D TMDC and MXene experimental catalysts for CO2RR and NRR (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic reactions, and then address areas of opportunity for these catalytic reactions.
Zhaodong Li
Dr. Zhaodong Li is a postdoctoral researcher at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), supervised by Dr. Jeffrey Blackburn, studying charge and energy transfer across nanoscale hybrid interfaces with transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and catalytic applications of such interfaces for water splitting and CO2 reduction. He is also interested in the bio-materials hybrid systems for catalytic CO2 reduction. He received his doctorate in materials engineering at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Before joining NREL, he worked as a postdoctoral associate at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute for the investigation of two-dimensional, vanadium-based materials synthesis and applications.
Nuwan H. Attanayake
Dr. Nuwan H. Attanayake received his PhD from Temple University, USA. He is currently a Postdoctoral Associate at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). His work is focused on two-dimensional (2D) materials for solar fuel generation reactions with a particular research interest towards the electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction. He is engaged in photo-electrochemical studies of 2D materials on semiconductor materials such as gallium arsenide. He is also interested in growth of 2D TMDCs with chemical vapor deposition to be employed in catalysts and opto-electronic studies. Nuwan received his bachelor's degree in Chemistry from the University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
Jeffrey L. Blackburn
Dr. Jeffrey L. Blackburn is a senior scientist, Distinguished Member of the Research Staff, and group manager of the Materials Physics group at NREL. He received his BS in Chemistry from Wake Forest University and his PhD in Chemistry from CU, Boulder. He studies charge transfer, energy transfer, and excited state dynamics in low-dimensional materials for energy conversion and storage. His research interests include solar photoconversion, thermoelectric energy conversion, (photo)catalytic processes, and neuromorphic information processing.
Elisa M. Miller
Dr. Elisa M. Miller studies the surface of semiconductors that are applicable for electrocatalysis, such as hydrogen evolution and nitrogen reduction to form ammonia. She is interested in manipulating and controlling surface energetics, charge transfer, and surface reactions by doping, surface passivation, straining, and quantum confinement. Her research focuses on transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), quantum dots, perovskites, carbon nanotubes, and other nanocrystalline films. Elisa got her PhD from the University of Colorado Boulder and then joined NREL as an NREL Director's Fellowship recipient for her post-doctoral research. She is currently an NREL research scientist, RASEI Fellow, and postdoc liaison for her directorate.

Broader context
Converting carbon dioxide into useful C-based products and revolutionizing industrial ammonia generation are two scientific grand challenges with the potential to solve critical global energy and greenhouse gas threats. In this review article, we discuss (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic methods as potential solutions to these grand challenges, specifically by addressing state-of-the-art 2D transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) and transition metal nitrides/carbide (MXene) catalysts. We address the key advantages and challenges for these highly tunable 2D materials for carbon dioxide and nitrogen reduction reactions, and how defects, phases, edge sites, interfaces, doping, and functional groups can be engineered to improve catalytic performance. Finally, we provide our perspective on advancing these two material classes within (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic setups before they could be considered industrially viable catalysts. Overall, this review article highlights both key (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic trends and lessons learned for improving 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts for carbon dioxide and nitrogen reduction reactions, with an eye towards next-generation technologies with lower energetic costs and greenhouse gas emissions.

1. Introduction
Motivated by growing environmental concerns and the demand for sustainable feedstocks in the chemical sector, carbon dioxide reduction reactions (CO2RR)1 and nitrogen reduction reactions (NRR)2 have garnered significant attention. Improving these catalytic production processes could reduce anthropogenic CO2 and replace/supplement the Haber–Bosch process, the industrial ammonia (NH3) production process that consumes ∼1–2% of the world's energy production and is responsible for ∼1% of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions3 (Scheme 1). While many new catalysts are being researched and developed to overcome these challenges, more progress needs to be made before these catalysts are widely deployable. One promising class of materials for such catalytic reactions are two-dimensional (2D) layered materials.
 Scheme 1  Future CO2RR and NRR by novel 2D layered catalysts for sustainable feedstocks and fuels. 
Since graphene was successfully isolated from graphite in 2004, 2D materials (quantum confined in one dimension only) have thrived due to their intriguing mechanical, chemical, electronic, and optical properties.4–8 Building on the appeal of graphene, several other 2D materials have received a surge of interest, such as 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), 2D transition metal carbides/carbonitrides/nitrides (MXenes), Xenes (such as silicene, stanene, and germanene), 2D hexagonal boron nitrides (h-BNs), 2D metals, phosphorenes, graphynes, covalent organic frameworks (COFs), and 2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).9–16 We focus in this review on 2D TMDCs and MXenes, since they are highly tunable, relatively easy to synthesize/exfoliate, light-active, and cost-effective compared to other classes of 2D materials. Additionally, they are composed of transition metal catalysts (e.g., Mo and W), which can be catalytically active. TMDCs have the general formula MX2, where M is a transition metal (e.g., Mo or W) and X is a chalcogen (i.e., S, Se, or Te). MXenes have the typical formula of Mn+1XnTx, where M is an early transition metal, X is carbon and/or nitrogen, and T is a surface functional group (e.g., O, OH, and/or F).17
TMDCs and MXenes are attractive for a number of catalytic applications – including water splitting, CO2RR, and NRR – for several reasons. First, theoretical simulations have predicted that the under coordinated active sites on 2D TMDCs and MXenes lower the activation energy barriers for chemisorption and hydrogenation of gaseous molecules (e.g., CO2 and N2), which significantly overcomes the sluggish kinetics and poor selectivity of the reactions.18,19 Second, the surface structures, electronic states, and mechanical properties of TMDCs and MXenes are generally more tunable than other 2D materials to target different reactions and reduce unwanted side reactions, e.g., the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).20,21 Specifically, rich tunability of the electronic structure of the TMDCs and MXenes results from (1) the ability to combine numerous transition metal atoms with non-transition metal atoms, (2) additional tunability via doping or alloying, and (3) phase engineering via doping, strain, etc. Third, the typical transition metal elements in TMDCs and MXenes, W and Mo for example, are roughly 250 times more abundant in the earth's crust than Pt and Ru (traditional metal catalysts). Sulfur is also an abundant element, and while Se is less abundant than S (by ∼3 orders of magnitude), it is ten times more abundant than Pt and Ru and is typically produced as a byproduct of mining metal sulfide (e.g. copper sulfide) ores.22 All of these advantages suggest that 2D TMDCs and MXenes may be promising catalysts for eco-friendly chemical conversion to produce fuels and value-added chemicals under mild conditions. In recent years, 2D TMDCs especially have led to a breakthrough in catalytic studies, specifically water splitting, hydrocarbon fuel output, and chemical feedstock production.19,23,24 While less studied for catalytic applications than TMDCs, MXenes have a number of attractive properties for heterogeneous catalysis and are now finding their way into pioneering fundamental and applied studies.25
To frame the research needed to realize commercially viable 2D catalysts, it is important to note that heterogeneous catalysis relies upon a delicate balance of the thermodynamics and kinetics of surface-reactant interactions. A highly efficient and selective catalytic surface can be designed by optimizing the substrate ↔ reactant interaction strength per the Sabatier principle: strong enough to drive a reaction forward by absorbing the reactants, but weak enough to regenerate the catalytic surface by desorbing the products.26 As such, appreciable research on 2D TMDCs and MXenes catalysis has focused on surface activation, charge separation and transport, and electronic structure manipulation for redox reactions. For example, the electronic and crystal structures of certain 2D TMDC compounds can be tuned by phase engineering and optimized for catalytic reactions.27 Many fundamental and applied studies have focused on metallic TMDCs, which feature higher conductivity and activated basal plane sites.28 In contrast, many studies on semiconducting TMDCs search for mechanisms that improve charge transport and the activity of (typically inactive) basal plane sites. In this vein, surface functionalization, defect engineering, and doping have emerged as potential routes towards tuning catalytically active sites on both the edge and basal planes.29,30 TMDCs can also be integrated with nanoparticles and single-atom catalysts to trigger catalytic activity by forming new electronic states.31 Similar to 2D TMDCs, modification of surface termination and heteroatom incorporation of 2D MXenes are mainly applied to optimize the chemical and electronic configurations of active sites for intrinsically enhanced catalytic kinetics.32,33 Fabrication of various nanostructures, heterostructures, and hybrid interfaces for increased density and accessibility of active sites is another common method for superior 2D catalysts.28,34
Several recent reviews have covered either advanced CO2RR and NRR catalysts by using 2D materials other than TMDCs and MXenes (e.g., graphene, g-C3N4, CuS, ZnIn2S4, layered double hydroxides (LDHs))35–37 or electrochemical HER and pollution degradation catalysts by 2D TMDCs and MXenes.38–41 However, there is a gap in the literature reviewing 2D TMDCs and MXenes for CO2RR and NRR. The reported yields and faradaic efficiencies for CO2 RR and NRR are currently low, but there is a lot of space and opportunity to optimize and learn from these transition metal-based catalysts, which could lead to large-scale deployment. When compared to other 2D materials, there are more variables on 2D TMDCs and MXenes that can be adjusted to manipulate binding sites and reaction pathways to increase faradaic efficiencies and yield rates. The aim of this review article is to highlight the potential of these two broad classes of 2D materials that arises from this tunability. Moreover, it is necessary for a review of the current mechanistic understanding, much of it theory-based, of reduction reactions within the transition metal-based 2D materials. As such, we hope that this grouping of 2D TMDCs and MXenes can identify additional mechanistic understanding that still needs to be gleaned (especially experimentally), both for these materials and generally for 2D nanostructures in catalytic CO2RR and NRR. Challenges and opportunities still exist in 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts for CO2RR and NRR, which will be thoroughly discussed below.
This review article focuses on (photo)electrochemical and photochemical CO2RR and NRR using 2D TMDCs and MXenes. Electrochemical reactions utilize electricity from an external circuit (Scheme 2a), photoelectrochemical reactions use both electrical and photon energy (Scheme 2b), and photochemical catalytic reactions utilize only photon energy (Scheme 2c). The structure, optoelectronic properties, and synthesis of 2D TMDC- and MXene-based catalysts will be introduced in Section 2. Then the features of CO2RR state-of-art achievements using 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts are reviewed with separate discussions on the CO2RR mechanism and the (photo)electrochemical/photochemical processes in Section 3. Section 4 provides a comprehensive review of 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts for NRR and addresses the remaining challenges in this field, which includes selectivity, faradaic efficiencies, and impurities. Finally, in Section 5, we will provide a summary and outlook highlighting opportunities for 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts in (photo)electrochemical and photochemical systems.
 Scheme 2  Schematic of (a) electrochemical catalytic, (b) photoelectrochemical catalytic, and (c) photochemical CO2/N2 reduction when 2D materials are applied as the catalyst. 
2. Structure and electronic properties as well as synthesis of 2D TMDCs and MXenes
2.1 Classification of 2D layered materials
In 2D layered materials, each layer is held together by van der Waals (vdW) forces along the crystallographic c-axis; therefore, the thickness of these materials is increased by incremental amounts that are determined by the thickness of one layer (monolayer). From the bulk, it is possible to apply sheer mechanical stress42 or chemical methods43 to exfoliate the bulk material to obtain few-layer and monolayer sheets due to the weak vdW forces.44
2.2 Structure and electronic properties

2.2.1 TMDCs. 
The most common TMDCs are composed of Mo or W as the transition metal and S or Se as the chalcogenide; therefore, we will be detailing properties of TMDC materials by using these Mo and W series as examples unless otherwise specified. Modification of interlayer interactions,45–47 symmetry elements, and quantum confinement of carriers in these few-layer to monolayer materials yields unique physical and electronic properties relative to their bulk counterparts. For example, during the transition of bulk MoX2 and WX2 to monolayer, the electronic structure evolves from an indirect to a direct bandgap. For the monolayer, this direct bandgap is accompanied by strong photoluminescence (PL), large exciton binding energy, and high charge carrier mobility.48–51 These characteristics make these materials attractive candidates in a variety of opto-electronic devices such as solar cells, light emitting diodes, phototransistors, photodetectors, chemical sensors, and logic applications.50,52–57 TMDCs also have the ability to intercalate ions/atoms in the vdW gaps (between layers), making them strong candidates for energy storage devices such as supercapacitors.58–61 Moreover, these unique and tunable properties make TMDCs great candidates for facilitating various catalytic reactions.45,47
TMDCs are generally found in three polymorphic forms: hexagonal, tetragonal, or rhombic. Hexagonal (2H or 1H), where 2H refers to 2 or more layers and 1H refers to monolayer, has trigonal prismatic coordination of chalcogen atoms around the transition metal, tetragonal (1T) has octahedral coordination of the chalcogen atoms around the transition metal, and less common rhombic (3R) has trigonal prismatic coordination around the transition metal.50 The number used to denote each phase is the number of layers along the crystallographic plane that comprise a repeating stacking unit, and the letter refers to the symmetry (Fig. 1a). 2H TMDCs have a point group of D3h, 1T TMDCs have a point group of D3d, and 3R TMDCs have a point group of C3v. For the most common TMDCs, 2H and 3R are semiconducting, while the 1T phase is metallic.
 Fig. 1  (a) Atomic arrangements of the polymorphic forms of MoS2. Top row shows atomic models of monolayer 1H, 1T, and 1T′, respectively, and bottom row shows the arrangement of atoms and layers in bilayer 2H and 3R as well as trilayer 3R respectively. Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. The density of states (DOS) and orbital configuration with electron occupancy for the (b) 2H/3R and (c) 1T MoS2 phases, the pink arrows denote the occupancy of a donor electron in each structure. Reprinted with permission.62 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 
For MoS2, the symmetry-induced ligand field splits the Mo 4d orbitals into three states in 2H and 3R (Fig. 1b); the filled, non-degenerate lower energy 4dz2 orbital leads to the semiconducting properties observed for 2H and 3R MoS2. In the case of metallic 1T-MoS2, the ligand field splitting of the 4d orbitals results in two states: the three lower energy degenerate Mo 4dxy,yz,xz orbitals and two higher energy unoccupied Mo 4dz2 and 4dx2−y2 orbitals (Fig. 1c). The lower energy, degenerate orbitals are incompletely occupied by two electrons, leading to a metallic ground state and unstable 1T phase.62
It has been found that in most cases the 1T structure observed in MoS2 is not stable and distorts to the 1T’ phase.63 This distortion is a result of Mo atoms clustering in pairs in a zig-zag Mo–Mo path along the a lattice direction (Fig. 1a).63 The resulting distortion is considered to be a (2 × 1) superlattice structure of the 1T lattice. Computation results indicate that the 1T′ structure is more stable than the 1T structure by 0.30 eV per Mo atom, but 0.57 eV higher in energy than the corresponding 2H phase per Mo atom.64 Therefore, the 1T′ phase is a metastable state between the less stable 1T phase and the stable 2H phase. Though many recent experimental studies have indicated the distorted 1T MoS2 structure (1T’) to be metallic in nature, many computation studies have calculated a small band gap of 0.1–0.2 eV.64–66
The 2D TMDCs in the 2H phase, particularly Mo and W sulfides and selenides, have been heavily studied and employed in electronic devices as they are highly tunable 2D semiconductors. First-principles calculations and experimentally obtained results have predicted indirect optical band gaps of 1.2 eV for bulk MoS2 and 1.4 eV for bulk WS2 that increases in the monolayers to direct band gaps of 1.9 eV and 2.0 eV, respectively (Fig. 2b).48 B band structures of MoS2 from bulk to few layers to monolayer, calculated from first principles calculations, are shown in Fig. 2a.48
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated band diagrams for MoS2 with the change in the layer numbers, left most being the bulk material then four layers, bilayers, and right most is a monolyer. Reprinted with permission.48 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) Band gaps of common semiconductors and TMDCs with reduction potentials for nitrogen to ammonia and CO2 to CO, CH4, and CO2−. 
Relevant to this review article are the band edge positions of 2D TMDCs relative to the reduction potentials for CO2RR products and NRR to ammonia. Fig. 2b summarizes the reduction potentials for some CO2RR products, such as CO and CH4, as well as the NRR product NH3 at pH = 0, which are higher than 0 V vs. RHE. The conduction band minimum (CBM) of the semiconducting 2D TMDC should have a more reducing potential (i.e., closer to vacuum and more negative on the NHE scale) than the reduction potentials of CO2RR/NRR product(s) of interest. For these reduction reactions, the counter reaction to complete the circuit would ideally be the oxidation of water to O2, with a thermodynamic oxidation potential of 1.23 V vs NHE at pH = 0. Fig. 2b shows that monolayers of Mo and W dichalcogenides have CBMs with enough reducing potential to reduce protons, CO2, and N2 to certain products. While the MoS2 valence band maximum (VBM) is also positioned for driving water oxidation, the other TMDCs have VBMs with insufficient oxidizing potential for this reaction. As such, they require either band edge engineering or pairing with other semiconductor electrodes to carry out the complete reactions photocatalytically or pairing with an electrode for photoelectrochemical reactions. Tuning the band gap of TMDCs have been extensively discussed by others, and we direct interested readers to these articles for more details.67–69


2.2.2 MXenes. 
The latest additions to the 2D layered materials class are the transition metal carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides, collectively known as MXenes. Most common MXenes that have been experimentally realized are carbides and more recently nitrides and carbonitrides have also been synthesized.70–72 The first MXene to be synthesized was Ti3C2Tx in 2011 and since then more than 60 MXenes have been realized.72,73 MXenes are also considered to be the 2D version of transition metal carbides and nitrides with face centered cubic rock salt structures. Nevertheless, the MXene exposes the (0001) basal plane surface that is analogous to the transition metal carbide (111) surface that has a large surface energy, hence the preparation of MXenes from transition metal carbides is challenging.74
The initial MXenes were derived from etching off the A layers of a so-called MAX phase. The MAX phase derives its name from the chemical composition Mn+1AXn, where M and X are the same elements in the MXenes and A is usually a group IIIA or a IVA element (e.g., Al, Si).72 The MAX phase has a layered structure with hexagonal P63/mmc symmetry where the metal occupies a close-packed structure with the X atoms filling octahedral interstitial sites.75 M–X bonds have a mix of covalent/metallic/ionic nature and the M–A bonds are metallic in nature. Utilizing the differences in the MAX phase bonding strengths of the various bonds, it is possible to selectively etch the A layer.71 After the etching process, A layers are replaced with surface termination groups: O, OH, and/or F bonded to the terminal transition metals on the surface.71,72 Overall, the resulting MXene is a hexagonal-close packed structure. Nevertheless, the ordering of the metal atom changes based on MXene stoichiometry. For example, M2X has a hexagonal close-packed stacking with ABABAB repeating units, whereas the M3X2 and M4X3 type MXenes have face-centered cubic stackings with ABCABC ordering.71 Note that the stacking of MXenes can also vary with other factors such as the number of d electrons in the metal M, the identity of X (i.e. a carbide, nitride, or carbonitride), and the surface termination group. For example, a DFT study by Gouveia et al. that took into account thermodynamic and kinetic data, showed that ABABABAB stacking is more frequent among nitrides than the corresponding carbides and also is favored by oxygen terminations.76
DFT calculations have predicted MXenes with both metallic and semiconducting electronic structures that depend on the composition.77–79 Shein and coworkers used first principles calculations to probe the chemical structures, electronic properties, and stability of pristine MXenes (without surface termination groups Tx) of Tin+1Cn and Tin+1Nn for n = 1, 2, and 3.79 Relative to the corresponding MAX phases (Fig. 3a), it has been calculated that the density of states (DOS) of the MXenes increases around the Fermi level (Fig. 3b). This observation was justified by the redistribution of the surface Ti 3d states in the Ti–Ti surface bonds after breaking the Ti–Al bonds and the removal of the Al layers in the respective MAX phase.79 Experimentally, such pristine MXene surfaces are hard to obtain after the etching process of the MAX “A” layers. Recent studies have revealed that certain post-etch treatments can eliminate the surface terminations to a large extent. Person and coworkers employed a post-etch annealing followed by hydrogen treatment at elevated temperatures to successfully reduce F and O terminations in the Ti3C2Tx MXene.80 Thermal treatment at 650 °C at 10−6 mbar inside an environmental transmission electron microscope (ETEM) resulted in the desorption of F. The resulting MXene rearranges the O to the thermodynamically favorable orientations. Then, treatment of the O-terminated MXene with H2 gas at 8 mbar and 750 °C, pristine surfaces with a Ti:O ratio of 3:0.6 was obtained, a significant decrease from 3:2.1 at room temperature.80
 Fig. 3  Partial density of states plots (DOS) for the MAX phase (a) Ti2AlC and (b) Ti2AlN along with the corresponding MXenes with various surface functional groups. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2013 American Physical Society. 
In addition to the dependence on layer composition, surface functional groups impact the metallic or semiconducting nature of MXenes. Xie et al. investigated the electronic properties of surface-terminated (O, OH, H, and F) Tin+1Cn and Tin+1Nn MXenes.78Fig. 3a shows the partial DOS of the Ti2AlC and the derived MXenes with surface terminations. The DOS near Ef for the MAX phase is dominated by the Ti 3d orbitals (Fig. 3a) and removal of the Al layers from the MAX phase causes the Ti 3d orbitals to redistribute or delocalize giving rise to Ti–Ti metallic bonds. The surface terminations lead to depopulation of states near Ef. Thus, the metallic Ti2C has a small band gap opening when adding O2 surface termination groups, with a 0.24 eV band gap calculated with PBE functional and 0.88 eV band gap calculated by HSE06 hybrid functional.78 All other materials retain their metallic nature but a clear decrease in the DOS near the Ef is observed. A similar result is calculated for Ti2AlN and the corresponding MXenes (Fig. 3b).
Calculations by Sang et al. suggest metallic character for defect-rich monolayer Ti3C2Tx MXene with OH terminations. Compared to the pristine Ti3C2Tx MXene surface, the authors observe a decrease in the DOS near Ef for the defect-rich MXene, which was expected to reduce the conductivity.81 Nevertheless, different Ti vacancy concentrations on OH terminated Ti3C2 MXene showed very similar DOS; thus it was predicted to exhibit high conductivity comparable to the pristine surfaces. These theoretical results are supported by recent experimental results by Hart et al. They studied the effect of surface termination and intercalants on the electronic properties of Ti3C2Tx, Ti3CNTx, Ti3CNTx (TBA+), and Mo2TiC2Tx (delaminated using tetrabutylammonium hydroxide, TBAOH).82 Vacuum annealing partially eliminated the F, OH, and O surface terminations, and O terminations were more stable than F terminations. The removal of the surface terminations improved the electronic conductivity of all the MXenes that were probed.82 With regard to the particular CO2RR and NRR in this review, it is noteworthy that the bare surface of MXenes without any surface functional groups are naturally quite reactive and have low energy barriers for, the typically rate-determining, dissociation of CO2 and N2.83 This interesting “surface-determining” activity and selectivity property of MXenes has been explored and will be discussed in the following sections.84,85

2.3 Synthesis

2.3.1 TMDC synthesis. 
Two-dimensional TMDCs can be obtained from both top-down (mechanical and chemical exfoliation) and bottom-up approaches (chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and solution-based hydrothermal techniques). Bulk TMDCs are needed for top-down approaches, but these can be hard to obtain naturally. The only known naturally occurring TMDCs are MoS2 and WS2 in the form of molybdenite and tungstenite minerals, respectively. Bulk TMDCs are also widely synthesized with chemical vapor transport techniques.52,86,87 Mechanical exfoliation to nanosheets, often using the scotch tape method, can provide high-quality monolayer sheets of TMDCs (Fig. 4a), providing the base for fundamental studies and device fabrications.87 Nevertheless, this technique has limited scalability and the small flake sizes and poor film uniformity hinders the repeatability and widespread use of the technique. Liquid-phase exfoliation of bulk materials under sonication has been utilized to obtain single to few-layer sheets of TMDCs. This technique relies on the synergy between the solvent or a surfactant to balance the cohesive energy between the sheets.88–90 Low yields, non-stoichiometric mixtures, and difficulty in controlling the thickness (number of layers) has prevented the widespread use of liquid-phase exfoliation. More recent liquid phase exfoliation methods involve Li intercalation and exfoliation in water, a highly scalable technique that has produced single layers of MoS2 (Fig. 4b),51,91 WS2,91 TaS2, MoSe2,92 TiS293,94 and TiSe2.95 However, exfoliation of some TMDCs such as MoS2 and WS2 through Li intercalation causes a phase transformation from the semiconducting 2H to the metallic 1T or 1T′ phases,93 limits the flake size to sub-micron sizes, and generally requires a relatively long processing time.
 Fig. 4  (a) Mechanically exfoliated MoS2 on a SiO2 substrate. From left to right, optical image of a monolayer MoS2 nanosheet, AC mode AFM image and the right most plots are the corresponding contrast and the height profiles. Reprinted with permission.87 Copyright 2011 IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) Left: Colloidal suspension of chemically exfoliated MoS2 using an organo-lithium salt. Right: AFM image of flakes from this dispersion, with height profile (white trace) taken along the red trace. Reprinted with permission.51 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) CVD technique involving the precursors MoO3 reduced by the chalcogen source (S) heated in a N2 environment to obtain high quality films (MoS2), AFM image of a MoS2 film obtained by this CVD technique with the height profile showing a monolayer thickness. Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic of ALD deposition of MoS2 film with the inset showing an AFM image with triangular monolayers. Reprinted with permission.97 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) AFM image of a MoS2 film obtained from molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Reprinted with permission.98 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (f) SEM and TEM images of MoS2 on reduced graphene oxide support obtained via a hydrothermal reaction. Reprinted with permission.102 Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
Recent attempts to grow high quality TMDCs with controlled thickness and wafer scale lateral dimensions have utilized techniques such as chemical vapor deposition (Fig. 4c),96 metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD, Fig. 4d),97 molecular beam epitaxy (MBE, Fig. 4e),98 and solvothermal methods (Fig. 4f). CVD is a practical bottom-up technique where precursors react and/or decompose at elevated temperatures onto a substrate, producing mono- or few-layer TMDCs with high crystal quality, scalable size, tunable thickness, and tunable electronic properties (Fig. 4c). MOCVD, a technique that uses gas- or solid-phase metal–organic precursors in a CVD setup,99–101 has been used to synthesize high-quality wafer scale MoS2 and WS2100 and other chalcogenides of Mo and W (e.g., mono/few layer WSe2).75
Hydrothermal synthesis of TMDCs is a versatile technique for obtaining 2D and 3D structures with large surface area for applications in energy conversion and storage applications.103 While this technique benefits from lower temperatures and better scalability, relative to CVD, ALD, or MBE, precise control over structure and layer number is challenging. Synthesis of MoS2 in both 2H and 1T phase has been realized with this technique.63,65,104–106 Vertically aligned or edge-oriented TMDCs with maximized edges obtained via a hydrothermal route have been studied extensively on a large number of substrates such as carbon cloth,105,107,108 carbon nanotubes,109,110 graphene/graphene oxide (Fig. 4f),111 reduced graphene oxide,102,112–114 amorphous carbon,115 and MXenes.116–121 The versatile nature of the technique also allows easy incorporation or doping of TMDCs by mixing respective dopants in the reaction mixture during the synthesis.65,105,122,123


2.3.2 MXene synthesis. 
MXenes are typically derived by etching atomic layers from their corresponding precursors, which are usually MAX phases. There are over 60 MAX phases reported so far, and the number is much higher when solid solutions and ordered double transition metal structures are considered.71,72 Selective etching of the metallic M–A bond within MAX structures stems from the higher M–A bond reactivity compared to the more labile M–X bond.72,124 Unlike vdW bonded graphene and TMDC sheets, the relatively strong inter-layer bonds in MAX structures preclude the use of shear mechanical strain to exfoliate the corresponding MXenes.70,71 Non-MAX phase precursors have also been used to obtain MXenes. Mo2CTx MXene was the first of its kind to be synthesized from a non-MAX phase precursor Mo2Ga2C (Fig. 5a).125–127 Unlike the MAX phases, this compound has two A-elemental (Ga) layers separating the M–X layers.125,126 Other examples of non-MAX phase derived MXenes include Zr3C2Tx128 and U2CTx,129 obtained by etching of Al3C3 layers from Zr3Al3C5 and U2Al3C4 precursors, respectively.128,129
 Fig. 5  SEM micrographs of (a) Mo2C MXene obtained from a non-MAX phase precursor, Mo2GaC. Reprinted with permission.127 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM micrographs of Ti3AlC2 MAX phase before etching to produce (c) Ti3C2Tx MXene. Reprinted with permission.130 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d–f) HAADF-STEM images of Ti3C2Tx MXene synthesized using varying HF concentrations 2.7 wt%, 5.3 wt%, and 7 wt%, respectively. The smaller red circles are single Ti atom vacancies and larger blue circles indicate clusters of Ti vacancies. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (g) SEM micrograph of the few layer Ti4N3Tx MXene obtained from etching the Al layer in Ti4AlN3 MAX phase using a molten salt approach. Reprinted with permission.77 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Selective etching of MAX or non-MAX phases is carried out in an aqueous fluoride-containing acidic solution for both metal carbides and nitrides.72 The HF etchant is either added directly or can be generated in situ by using mixtures of HCl and fluoride-containing salts (lithium fluoride, ammonium fluoride, or ammonium hydrogen bifluoride).72 Ti3C2Tx was the first MXene to be synthesized by selective HF etching of the Al layer from the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase (Fig. 5b and c).44,130 A series of other MXene structures followed Ti3C2Tx that were derived from various MAX phases (Ti2AlC, Ta4AlC3, (Ti0.5,Nb0.5)2AlC, (V0.5,Cr0.5)3AlC2, and Ti3AlCN).130 The surface termination, defect concentration, and crystalline quality of 2D MXene sheets rely heavily on both the etching and delamination conditions. For instance, Sang et al. studied the surface defects of monolayer Ti3C2Tx MXene using mild conditions (HCl and LiF instead of HF) for etching the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase.81 Single titanium atoms or clusters of Ti atom vacancies were observed on the MXene sheets (Fig. 5d–f), depending on the HF concentration in the etching process.81
Nitride MXenes took a longer time than the carbide MXenes to be realized,71 likely because of two factors. First, calculations show that the cohesive forces in Tin+1Nn MXenes are lower than in Tin+1Cn MXenes, whereas the formation energy (ΔEf) of Tin+1AlNn is higher than that of Tin+1AlCn.79 Therefore, the Al in the nitride MAX phase has stronger bonding than those in carbide counterparts, making extraction harder.70,79 Second, nitride MXenes dissolve in strong HF acid solutions, due to their lower stability. Urbankowski et al. reported the first nitride MXene (Ti4N3Tx, Fig. 5g) in 2016 using a molten salt approach to etch the Al layer in the Ti4AlN3 MAX phase.77 When a broader series of 486 MAX phases of MnANn−1 was considered by Dolz et al., the DFT results indicated that most nitride MAX phases had a lower exfoliation energy relative to their carbide counterparts.131 These results were in agreement with the previous calculations of Shein and coworkers, that saw a larger exfoliation energy for N-based MAX phases containing Al as the ‘A’ layer.79,131

3. CO2 reduction reactions
The growing concerns of anthropogenic fossil fuel consumption, greenhouse gas emissions, and associated climate change have motivated various CO2RR approaches to convert CO2 into useful C-based materials, such as C-based fuels and plastics.132 Along with the modification of processes to reduce the CO2 emissions, the CO2RR could result in the highly desirable goal of “zero-carbon emission”. For catalytic CO2 conversion to become a reality, suitable catalysts are required to activate the CO2 molecule and transform it into a wide range of chemical compounds. The low solubility and chemical inertness of CO2 makes CO2 activation challenging and can lead to HER dominating over CO2RR. Sufficient adsorption (physisorption and/or chemisorption) of CO2 on a catalyst surface is therefore a prerequisite for efficient dissociation/weakening of the CO bond and further transduction of electrons to form complex C–C bonds for energy-rich molecules with high-specificity.133,134 Conventional homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts (e.g., metal–organic complexes, Cu, Ag, and Au) for CO2RR have various disadvantages, such as poor chemical durability, high-cost, or photo-inactivity.135 As such, 2D TMDCs and MXenes featuring tunable surfaces are gaining interest in the CO2RR community.
3.1 CO2RR mechanism
Electrochemical CO2RR using 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts relies on good electrical conductivity and CO2 adsorption properties of the materials, where the sole energy driving the reaction is electricity. In contrast, photoelectrochemical and photochemical CO2RR utilize photoexcited electrons to drive the reaction and, therefore, require the 2D TMDCs and MXenes to be semiconductors or coupled to semiconductors. For successful photo-driven CO2RR, the energy of the conduction band minimum (CBM) needs to provide a thermodynamic driving force for the desired CO2 reduction half-reaction. (Scheme 2c). Semiconducting MoS2136 and WSe2137 have been extensively studied for photo-driven CO2 reactions. In contrast, MXenes are usually combined with other photoactive materials for CO2 photoreduction since most MXenes are not photoactive (Section 2).121 Nevertheless, the discussion of the CO2RR mechanism by using 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts mainly relies on charge transfer, CO2 activation, and intermediate formation for both (photo)electrochemical and photochemical catalysts.
To form C-based products from CO2, the CO2 must be first activated on the appropriate surface and then undergo proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions to generate various products. Importantly, MXenes are predicted to adsorb and activate CO2 molecules quite strongly.138 Depending on the number of electrons/protons transferred and surface groups available, different catalytic reactions can occur to generate intermediates and consequently different carbon products, such as C1 compounds and C2+ hydrocarbons.133,139–141 Thus, controlling the product distribution from CO2RR is a critical consideration for any catalyst. The conventional CO2RR products from 2D TMDCs and MXenes are usually C1 products, including carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methane (CH4), methanol (CH3OH), and formaldehyde (HCHO). Trace amounts of C2+ products can also be obtained (e.g., ethylene (C2H4), ethane (C2H6), ethylene glycol(C2H6O2), propane (C3H8), propanol (C3H8O), and t-butanol (C4H10O)). The thermodynamic potentials of these selective CO2RR pathways are summarized in Table 1, and the detailed mechanisms are discussed below.
Table 1 Summary of the possible CO2RR pathways by 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts as well as the corresponding standard redox potential




CO2RR pathways
Standard redox potential (E0vs. RHE, pH = 7)




C1
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.116


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.196


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O
−0.066


CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
0.034


CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
0.174


C2
2CO2 + 10H+ + 10e− → C2H6O2 + 2H2O
0.014


2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O
0.065


2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O
0.144


C3
3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H8O + 5H2O
0.103


3CO2 + 20H+ + 20e− → C3H8 + 6H2O
0.277


C4
4CO2 + 24H+ + 24e− → C4H10O + 7H2O
0.110




In general, the simplest CO2RR involves two PCET steps, and the final products are mainly CO and HCOOH. As shown in Fig. 6, the first PCET happens when CO2 is coupled to a metal–hydrogen bound surface or H+ from solution, resulting in formate (*OHCO) or carboxyl (*COOH) intermediates. Further PCET reduces these species to form HCOOH and CO.133 In addition to HCOOH and CO, three other C1 molecules can be produced from CO2RR, including HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4, which are believed to be produced by the step-by-step hydrogenation of the surface intermediates (*CO, *CHO, *CH2O, and *CH3O)134 or glyoxal converted from *CO2−142 (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 6  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCOOH or HCOO−, including: a monodentate or bidentate intermediate route (black); a CO2* radical intermediate route (orange); and a surface-bound carbonate intermediate route (green). In addition, the reaction pathways for CO2 to CO are shown (blue). Red color highlights the CO2 reduction products. Purple color marks the byproducts. Redeveloped based on the information from ref. 133. 
 Fig. 7  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4. Red color marks the CO2 reduction products. Purple color highlights the byproducts. Redeveloped based on the discussion from ref. 133, 134 and 142. 
Higher order C products can be formed from surface intermediates. Surface CO can react to produce *CHO and *COCHO intermediates, and these intermediates can then selectively generate C2 compounds—C2H4, C2H6, and C2H6O2—following the ethylene and ethanol pathway.143 Alternatively, the association of CO with hydrogenation induces the *COCHOH intermediate on the catalyst surface and produces C2H4 (Fig. 8). Although the mechanistic pathways of C3+ chemicals have been proposed on the coupling of C1 and C2 surface intermediates with PCET, such products are typically only produced in very low yields. So far, 1-propanol, propane, and t-butanol are the only reported C3+ products from CO2RR using 2D TMDC catalysts.144
 Fig. 8  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to form C2 products: C2H4, C2H6, and C2H6O2. Redeveloped based on the discussion from ref. 133 and 145. 
The maximum efficiency and selectivity of a catalytic surface occurs when the adsorbate–surface interaction strength is optimal as per the Sabatier principle: strong enough to drive the reactions forward but weak enough to permit product desorption.26 Therefore, stabilizing a reacted intermediate (more negative binding energy) but weakening the corresponding sequential intermediate in a certain CO2RR is crucial for a high performance CO2RR catalyst. For example, calculations by Chan et al.146 found a linear scaling relationship between the reacted and sequential produced intermediates in the selective CO2RR for CO production when evaluating different transition metals, where the binding strength linearly increased or decreased for *COOH and *CHO compared to the produced intermediate *CO, which prevented tuning the reaction pathway by changing the transition metal. However, they found that the linear scaling relationship could be overcome when evaluating MoS2 and MoSe2 edge sites, where the *COOH and *CHO binding strength were constant but *CO binding strength could be reduced, which would propel the CO2RR reaction forward (Fig. 9).147–150
 Fig. 9  Breaking of the linear scaling relations between (a) *COOH and (b) *CHO with *CO on MoS2 or MoSe2 edges. The vertical dotted lines indicate the Eb(CO) at which an isolated *CO is in equilibrium with 0.01 bar gaseous CO. The catalysts to the right of this line bind CO weakly and are expected to be selective for CO production. The catalysts to the left should further reduce adsorbed CO to hydrocarbons and/or alcohols. Θ was defined as the edge site coverage by different atoms (H, S, Se) and doping of edge sites was also evaluated. Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
The CO2RR mechanism using 2D MXene catalysts follow the aforementioned pathways for possible products. MXenes are attractive as catalysts because of (1) sufficient surface metal atoms with empty d-orbitals for gas-phase molecule activation and (2) efficient electron transport, arising from the metallic electronic structure. Several theoretical simulations have been conducted for CO2RR using MXenes.151,152 Cr3C2 and Mo3C2 are predicted to selectively reduce CO2 to CH4 due to the three-coordinated terminal metals, which are active due to the empty d-like orbitals.134 As an example, the surface termination –O or –OH groups on Mo3C2 reduced the CO2 energy barrier significantly during the reduction process to CH4.134 However, the reaction pathway was influenced by the surface termination group (Fig. 10a and b). Additionally, selective processes for CO2 to CH4 have also been found to occur over hydroxyl (–OH)-terminated Sc2C(OH)2. Simulations showed the interaction and change of the intermediates on the MXene surface by exploring the migration of electrons on the carbon atoms of the different intermediates. The charge difference for the *(H)COOH → *CO potential-determining step has the smallest values on Sc2C(OH)2 and Yc2C(OH)2 among all studied M2C(OH)2 and M2N(OH)2 MXenes (M = Sc, Y, Ti, Ta, Nb, Zr, Hf), indicating less charge transfer during this elementary step with less free energy change, which ensured the exceptional CO2RR performance (Fig. 10c shows the Sc2C(OH)2 catalyst).152
 Fig. 10  Minimum energy path for the CO2 conversion into CH4 and H2O catalyzed by (a) Mo3C2(OH)2 and (b) Mo3C2O2. Gibbs free energies (vs. SHE in eV) along the pathway (top). Corresponding surface chemical structures (middle) and formula distances (bottom) are shown. Blue and red texts represent spontaneous and nonspontaneous reactions (in eV), respectively. Reprinted with permission.134 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated free energy diagrams for the lowest energy pathways to CH4 using Sc2C(OH)2 catalyst. Reprinted with permission.152 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 2D TMDCs

3.2.1 Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical CO2RR. 
Both theoretical and experimental studies have successfully demonstrated the activity for electrochemical CO2 reduction via TMDC catalysts in aqueous electrolytes under cathodic polarization.135,154 TMDCs typically exhibit remarkably different scaling relationships of adsorption energies for key reaction intermediates on their edges versus the basal plane,155 so that manipulating the ratio of basal sites to edge sites can manipulate the scaling relationship for CO2 reduction.156 Owing to the metallic character, a high d-electron density, and relatively low work function of ∼3–4 eV, metal-terminated edges of TMDCs generally contribute to higher catalytic activity, but this higher activity is not always directed towards the products of choice. For example, Francis et al. demonstrated electrochemical reduction of CO2 to 1-propanol at single-crystal terraces (low edge density) of bulk MoS2, while thin films (high edge density) produced more H2 and less 1-propanol.144 This study suggests that complex reactions (e.g., CO2 to 1-propanol is 18e−/18H+) may actually proceed more efficiently on TMDC basal planes, albeit at lower overall rates.
Reducing MoS2 thickness reduces the work function157 and increases the available surface area, relative to bulk MoS2, resulting in faster electron transfer and intermediate adsorption (e.g., COOH*, CO*) as well as higher overall CO2RR catalytic activity. Lv et al. exfoliated bulk MoS2 powders dispersed in N-vinyl pyrrolidone (NVP) by high-energy ball milling to generate 2D few-layer MoS2 nanosheets.158 This exfoliated catalyst could electrochemically reduce CO2 to CO with a faradaic efficiency (FE) of 41.2% at −0.9 V vs. RHE, which is 2-fold higher (FE = 19.8%) than bulk MoS2 (Fig. 11a). Similar improvements for electrochemical CO2RR were also demonstrated by Asadi and co-workers by reducing the TMDC catalyst dimensions. In their studies, 10% FE of the CO formation was achieved with CVD-grown 2D MoS2 nanoflakes while 3% FE was reached for bulk MoS2 at −0.164 V vs. RHE.155,159
 Fig. 11  (a) CO faradaic efficiency (FE) at different applied potentials for exfoliated-MoS2 catalysts. Inset is the CO FE at different applied potentials for bulk MoS2. Reprinted with permission.158 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Faradaic efficiency for CO (red bars) and H2 (blue bars) as a function of potential when using amorphous MoS2 2D flakes. Error bar associated with each value is also provided. Reprinted with permission.280 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Experimental work function measurement for Ag nanoparticles (Ag-NPs) and TMDC nanoflakes. Reprinted with permission.159 Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (d) Scheme shows the free energy of the system decreased for the reaction CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O over platinum catalyst surface in EMIM–BF4 (dashed line) compared to that in water (solid line). The label CO2–In1 refers to the intermediate that forms when the first electron is transferred during the reaction. Reprinted with permission.160 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) Stability test of WSe2 nanoflakes in 50 vol% ionic liquid (IL) at potential of −0.364 V vs. RHE (254 mV overpotential). The chronoamperometry (CA) experiment indicates 10% decay after 27 h. Reprinted with permission.159 Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (f) Chronoamperometry results at a potential of −0.8 V vs. RHE and the corresponding FE of formate when using monolayer 2D SnS2 nanosheets over 80 h. (g) Atomic models of DFT-relaxed SnS2 monolayer and the calculated free-energy profiles for CO2 reduction to HCOOH on the SnS2 monolayer and bulk counterpart surface at 0 V vs. RHE, in which the insets are the most stable configurations of the intermediates adsorbed on the surface. Reprinted with permission.161 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc. (h) Electroreduction scheme of CO2 into methane on the ultrathin MoTe2 layers. (i) CH4 FEs for ultrathin MoTe2 in ionic liquid compared to other electrocatalysts. Reprinted with permission.281 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 
Amorphous MoS2 2D flakes have also been explored for CO2RR catalysis. These materials have the advantage of being prepared by scalable techniques (e.g., electrodeposition) at room temperature and atmospheric pressure as well as containing a large amount of catalytically active edges. Li et al. introduced amorphous MoS2 on a polyethylenimine modified reduced graphene oxide substrate as an effective CO2RR catalyst.154 The authors observed CO production when the overpotential reached 140 mV, and a overpotential of 290 mV catalyzed CO2 reduction to syngas, a promising feedstock for producing ethanol and methanol through Fischer–Tropsch or microbial synthesis process.162,163 Further incremental increases of the overpotential to 540 mV resulted in more CO formation with 85.1% FE (Fig. 11b).280 The synergistic effect of polyethylenimine and MoS2 was believed to facilitate selective CO2 reduction, where polyethylenimine adsorbs CO2 and intermediate molecules and MoS2 selectively binds the intermediates for CO2 reduction. Nevertheless, the CO2RR performance was still limited by the intrinsic catalytic activity of MoS2 and the inherent competition between CO2RR and HER.
Other 2D TMDC catalysts beyond MoS2 have begun receiving attention for electrocatalytic CO2RR. Asadi et al. evaluated the CO2RR performance of a series of nanoflakes of MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2.159 MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 all exhibited CO2 reduction performance much higher than the MoS2 nanoflakes and conventional Ag nanoparticle catalysts. CO2 conversion efficiency to CO was anti-correlated with the TMDC work function (Fig. 11c),159 where the most active catalyst was identified as low-work function WSe2 nanoflakes terminated with W atoms. In the same study, the ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM-BF4) was introduced in the electrolyte to form the [EMIM–CO2]+ complex. The authors proposed that the [EMIM–CO2]+ complex helps the selective reduction of CO2 but suppressed the HER.155,159 As shown in Fig. 11d,160 the [EMIM–CO2]+ complex can thermodynamically reduce the reaction barrier for electrons passing into CO2 over the catalyst surface, such as silver, platinum, and TMDCs, inducing the high CO production. Consequently, WSe2 nanoflakes showed exceptional current density of 19 mA cm−2 and FECO of 24% at a low overpotential (54 mV), with a CO production turn over frequency (TOF) of 0.28 s−1 at −0.164 V vs. RHE. Good catalytic stability, exceeding 27 h, was attributed to the stable W-terminated edges (Fig. 11e).154
Additional studies have focused on tin disulfide (SnS2) and molybdenum telluride (MoTe2). While Sn is not a transition metal, SnS2 shares the MX2 composition and layered crystal structure with the well-known TMDCs. SnS2 has emerged as a highly promising 2D semiconductor, with performance comparable to MoS2 in a number of applications, including CO2RR catalysis.164 Thus, we include some advances of 2D SnS2 in this section. Monolayer 2D SnS2 nanosheets—obtained by Li-intercalation/exfoliation of bulk SnS2161 performed as a robust catalyst, achieved high FE of 94 ± 5% at −0.8 V vs. RHE, and had excellent long-term durability (over 80 h) for CO2 electroreduction to formate in 0.1 M KHCO3 (Fig. 11f). DFT results suggested this high activity results from the potential-determining-step of HCOO* intermediate formation on (001) SnS2 surface (Fig. 11g). For MoTe2 catalysts in 0.1 M KHCO3, adsorbed CO2 molecules preferred to be reduced as CO2*− intermediates and coupled with another CO2 molecule to form the CO2–CO2*− adduct. This adduct then ultimately converted to CH4 through PCET reactions (Fig. 11h). The FE of methane production from CO2 was ∼83% at −1.0 V vs. RHE, a 137% improvement over bulk MoTe2 and similar to the best CO2RR catalysts reported thus far (Fig. 11i). The activity retention lasted for more than 45 h.281
Energy state engineering and band structure tailoring of TMDCs have emerged as promising strategies for stimulating selective CO2RR by facilitating CO2 activation and product desorption. Mo-terminated edges of bulk MoS2 have shown efficient CO2RR to CO with low overpotential, where the available electrons for a given reaction can be also roughly be described by the DOS at the Fermi level.1,155 Therefore, modulating the edges of 2D TMDCs could affect the adsorption strength of intermediates with edge atoms. As such, recent studies have explored the effect of transition metal doping on MoS2 edge electronic structure and CO2RR. DFT calculations on Nb-doped MoS2 have revealed low concentrations of Nb near the Mo edge atoms enhance TOF of CO formation by modifying the binding energies of intermediates to MoS2 edge atoms.154 Experimentally, doping of 5% Nb in vertically aligned MoS2 enabled a small overpotential of 31 mV and a CO TOF of one order of magnitude higher than pristine MoS2 and two orders of magnitude higher than Ag nanoparticles (Fig. 12a).
 Fig. 12  (a) Calculated CO formation TOF at different applied overpotentials for vertically aligned (VA)-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2, pristine VA-MoS2, and Ag nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Relationship between the binding energies of CO and the d-band center energy positions for MoS2 and transition metal-doped MoS2. The transition metal atoms are all doped next to the Mo edge. (c) Different transition metal-doped MoS2 edge structures and binding energies of CO and CO2 with different doping concentrations. Reprinted with permission.166 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Nickel doping in atomically thin SnS2 nanosheets enables highly efficient CO2 reduction. (e) Secondary electron cutoff of photoelectron spectra for pristine SnS2 and 5% Ni–SnS2 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission.167 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (f) The CO FE at different applied potentials for E-MoS2 (exfoliated-MoS2), N–MoS2@NCDs-X (X: 180, 200, 220) electrodes in EMIM–BF4 solutions (94 mol% water), where NCD = nitrogen-doped carbon dots. Reprinted with permission.168 Copyright Elsevier Inc. 
Metal sites at transition-metal terminated edges are believed to be the active sites for CO2RR from previous studies on pure TMDCs.155,165 Theoretical studies by Mao et al.166 found that the overall higher d-band center energy, relative to Ef, induced stronger CO adsorption at MoS2 edges. This scaling relationship between the d-band center position and the binding energy of CO could help screen transition metal dopants. Doping V, Zr, and Hf to the active Mo site could lead to the shift of the d-band center and accordingly decrease the CO binding energy, significantly promoting CO desorption from the MoS2 edge (Fig. 12b). Interestingly, dopant concentration did not influence catalytic activity (Fig. 12c). However, no experimental investigations confirm these results yet. In contrast, CO2RR activity was predicted to depend on Ni dopant concentration in monolayer SnS2 (Fig. 12d), with the FE for CO and formate increasing with Ni content up to 5%.167 Experimentally, higher Ni doping levels induced inhomogeneous incorporation into SnS2 nanosheets, creating NiS that promoted the HER over CO2RR. For example, the 5% Ni–SnS2 nanosheets exhibited the highest FECO+formate of 93% at −0.9 V vs. RHE compared to 71% FECO+formate for 7% Ni–SnS2 nanosheets. CO and formate production rates for 5% Ni–SnS2 nanosheets were 81 mmol h−1 g−1 and 587.5 mmol h−1 g−1, respectively. The low work function (Fig. 12e) and intraband defect states introduced by Ni doping below the SnS2 CBM facilitated electron transfer and improved CO2RR.
Non-metal doping can also enhance MoS2 catalytic activity. Nitrogen doping was found to enhance electron density on the Mo edge, decrease the energy barrier of COOH* intermediate formation, and weaken CO* adsorption strength for CO production.168 As shown in (Fig. 12f), optimized composites of N-doped MoS2 and N-doped carbon dots exhibited catalytic CO production with FECO of 90.2% at −0.9 V vs. RHE and a low overpotential of 130 mV, superior to exfoliated MoS2 (41.2%, 260 mV) and hydrothermal-synthesized MoS2 (67%, 340 mV).
In addition to substitutional doping of TMDCs, alloying of multiple transition-metal elements in the 2D TMDC lattice has been explored for CO2 electrocatalysis.169 With the synergetic effects from low CO desorption energy by the presence of various transition metal sites and high electron transfer for minimum overpotential, the (MoWVNbTa)S2 catalyst exhibited the formation of CO with a small onset potential of −0.129 V vs. RHE (19 mV overpotential). The extremely high activity was achieved with an excellent current density of 0.51 A cm−2 and a turnover frequency of 58.3 s−1 at −0.8 V vs. RHE. The FE for the formation of CO was maintained above 92% at a potential between −0.31 V vs. RHE and −0.4 V vs. RHE, where H2 evolution started to increase.
Engineering the metal atom on the exposed edges of TMDC could avail the CO2RR, while ternary TMDCs with various chalcogenides also revealed the enhanced electrical conductivity and tailored d-band electronic structure of metal atoms. Xu et al. presented a theoretical calculation on ternary MoSeS alloy, confirming the faster electron transport ability by increased density of states near the conduction band edge compared to pristine MoS2 and MoSe2.170 In addition, the asymmetry of Mo–S bond and Mo–Se bond from the different electronegativities of S and Se atoms partially deviated the charge density from the center of Mo atoms, which not only potentially benefits stabilizing the COOH* intermediate (confirmed by the most negative formation energy), but also facilitates the rate-limiting CO desorption step. Their experimental results showed the MoSeS alloy monolayers attain the highest 45.2% faradaic efficiency for CO production, much larger than that of MoS2 monolayers (16.6%) and MoSe2 monolayers (30.5%) at −1.15 V vs. RHE.
The intrinsic semiconducting 2H phase of 2D MoS2 is usually not ideal for electrochemical CO2RR due to relatively poor charge transport. The 2H phase can be converted to the metallic 1T phase, and the 1T phase has exhibited facile kinetics, low resistance, and a high density of catalytic active sites.172,173 Lv et al. used high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) to show the two MoS2 phases (Fig. 13a). The metallic polymorph governed the FE of CO2RR, which is higher than that of 2H MoS2 as shown in Fig. 13a. Further decoration with fluorosilane produced a more hydrophobic electrode surface, enhancing CO2 transport to active sites and increasing FECO to 81.2% at (Fig. 13b).158 Similarly, XPS results (Sn-3d and S-2p) demonstrate the conversion of the semiconducting phase (1T) of 2D SnS2-based catalyst to the metastable semimetal phase (1H) (Fig. 13c) which enhanced CO2RR activity, resulting in stable (>15 h) and selective CO production.166 Theoretical calculations showed that the *COOH intermediate was more stable on the 1H-SnS2 surface than the 1T-SnS2 surface. The 1H-SnS2 catalyst exhibited a high FE of 98.2% at −0.8 V vs. RHE under ambient conditions while 1T-SnS2 showed a maximum FE of 13.7% (Fig. 13d). This semimetal phase with excellent conductivity also has been observed for other TMDCs, displaying enhanced CO2RR. Aljabour et al. showed excellent CO2 conversion to CO and formate for semi-metallic TiS2 with the combined faradaic efficiency of 95% and overpotential below 0.4 mV at the current density of 5 mA cm−1. The CO2 molecules were bound to the 2D conductive sulfur planes in TiS2 as intermediate monothiocarbonate, which conducts the reducing kinetics mainly toward CO.174
 Fig. 13  (a) HRTEM images of an exfoliated-MoS2 nanosheet, showing atomic resolution structural information, and their corresponding fast Fourier transforms. (Insets show the 2H and 1T phases, top and bottom, respectively.) (b) The hydrophobic exfoliated 1T MoS2 shows the 81.2% FE of CO from CO2 reduction. Reprinted with permission.158 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Deconvoluted S 2p and Sn 3d spectra of 1T-SnS2 and 1H-SnS2. (d) FEs of CO, HCOOH, and H2 at various applied potentials for 1T-SnS2 and 1H-SnS2. Reprinted with permission.171 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
Another method to guide electrons to CO2RR is forming heterostructures between TMDCs and other highly conductive CO2RR active materials. Shi et al. dispersed ultrasmall Cu nanoparticles on flower-like MoS2 for CO, C2H4, and CH4 production from CO2RR.175 The ultrasmall Cu nanoparticles decreased HER compared to bare MoS2, and the optimum Cu loading led to a 7-fold improvement to CH4 production (Fig. 14a). A theoretical study by Li et al. showed significant electron transfer to the electron-deficient MoS2 edge for effective CO2RR when the MoS2 edge was interfaced with N-doped carbon, even though the electron-rich N-doped carbon substrate was weakly bound to the MoS2 edge.176 The potential-determining step for MoS2/N-doped carbon heterojunction was reduction of the *COOH intermediate to CO, whereas the potential-determining step for bare MoS2 was formation of the *COOH intermediate from CO2. This predicted electron donation from the N-doped carbon support to the exposed Mo edge sites could facilitate *COOH reduction to CO and recovery of the original active Mo site (Fig. 14b and c). Experimental studies of hydrothermally synthesized MoS2/N-doped carbon electrocatalysts found that the abundant active sites on MoS2 exposed edges led to a low onset potential of ∼40 mV and a remarkable FECO of 92.68% at −0.7 V vs. RHE (590 mV overpotential).176 The activity remained stable for more than 24 h. He et al. integrated 2D SnS2 nanosheets with Ag nanowires (NWs) for CO2RR (Fig. 14d).282 Owing to the similar Ef of the two materials, Ag NW free electrons participated in electron transport in the SnS2/Ag NW heterojunction. Both defect sites and the increased carrier density in the heterojunction (5.5-fold larger than the bare SnS2 nanosheet) enhanced the conductivity and binding strength for CO2 and led to FE of carbon products (CO and formate) of ∼84% at −0.9 V vs. RHE. The FE of bulk SnS2 and SnS2 nanosheets were 77% and 80%, respectively (Fig. 14e).
 Fig. 14  (a) Top panel: HRTEM of Cu/MoS2 (the insets are the detailed image of white dashed circle); bottom panel: faradaic efficiency of CO2 reduction for different products over all prepared Cu/MoS2 samples (−0.75 V vs. RHE). Samples Cu/MoS2-1, Cu/MoS2-2, Cu/MoS2-3 are corresponding to the weight ratios of Cu(NO3)2·3H2O to MoS2 as 10%, 15%, and 20%. Reprinted with permission.175 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The DFT calculations for demonstrating free energy profiles for CO2RR catalyzed by different models at the equilibrium potential of −0.11 V. (c) The illustration of charge density changes in the N-doped carbon (NC) and edge-exposed 2H MoS2 model. The turquoise-colored regions represent hole density, and the brown-colored regions represent electron density, and thus it was expected that there would be significant electron transfer from the NC substrate to the MoS2 edge, resulting in more active edges exposed. Reprinted with permission.176 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (d) TEM image of Ag–SnS2 hybrid nanosheets. (e) Faradaic efficiencies for carbonaceous product over the three SnS2-based catalysts. Reprinted with permission.282 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
Photoelectrochemical reactions use both photons and electrons to help drive the reaction. This type of reaction separates the photoinduced electron–hole pairs more efficiently via band bending generated by an external potential. In one example, 2D MoS2 and MoSe2 thin films were deposited on Si substrates by photoelectrochemical deposition of corresponding metal oxides, followed by thermal annealing with sulfur and selenium. Visible illumination of MoS2/Si or MoSe2/Si photocathodes increased the current density by 2.6 and 9.3 times compared to the dark electrochemical reaction, respectively. The authors argue that the narrower bandgap, and thus broader visible absorption, of MoSe2 is the main reason for enhanced CO2RR,177 but more detailed mechanistic studies and product investigations are needed.


3.2.2 Photochemical CO2RR. 
Many TMDCs are semiconducting in their few- or mono-layer forms. Strong (in many cases direct-bandgap) and tunable visible absorption178,179 in semiconducting TMDCs, coupled with good charge transport and catalytic sites,180 promote potential applications in photochemical catalytic reactions. However, only a few reports focus on the reduction of CO2 using 2D TMDCs as photocatalysts, which makes this area promising for future exploration.
MoS2 nanoflowers have been utilized to photoreduce CO2 to CO in the gas phase, acting as both the photoabsorber and catalyst site (Fig. 15a).136 The nanoflower shape increases the number of catalytically-active edge sites and the authors explored growth and post-growth conditions to manipulate flake edge morphology, lateral size, and MoS2 thickness. A faster temperature ramp during CVD growth increased the nanoflower flake thickness and edge planes while post-synthetic H2 treatment impacted stacking geometry and introduced more edge sites, which decreased the band gap of MoS2 from 1.83 eV to 1.38 eV. Simultaneously, structural strain stretched the lattice toward the unstable MoS2 3R phase. The highest activity occurred for the small band gap material, which exhibited lower recombination and increased charge transport at thick edge sites and basal defect sites. A 30 min post-treatment under reducing conditions (1% H2/Ar) increased the photocatalytic CO generation rate from ∼0.17 (non-treated) to ∼0.35 μmol gcat−1 h−1.
 Fig. 15  (a) MoS2 nanoflowers for gas-phase CO2 photoreduction to generate CO. Reprinted with permission.136 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Photocatalytic CO2RR over MoS2 nanosheets to produce CH3OH and CH3CHO. Reprinted with permission.181 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc. (c) TEM image of WSe2–graphene and possible carriers transport scheme of photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Reprinted with permission.137 Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. (d) SEM images of T-SnS2 (top) and F-SnS2 (bottom). (e) CH4 and CO yield under visible-light irradiation for T-SnS2 and F-SnS2. Reprinted with permission.284 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. 
2D MoS2 sheets with the co-existence of 2H and 3R phases were also explored for CO2 photoreduction,181 where ultraviolet illumination generated CH3OH and CH3CHO (Fig. 15b). Manipulating the electrolyte cations influenced scavenging of photoinduced holes, providing a different number of accumulated electrons for selective CO2RR product generation. Using NaHCO3 medium, 27.4 μmol gcat−1 h−1 CH3OH and 2.2 μmol gcat−1 h−1 CH3CHO were produced; while Cl− in NaCl solution acted as an efficient hole scavenger for higher-order hydrocarbon products to give a production rate of 7.8 μmol gcat−1 h−1 for CH3OH and 4.8 μmol gcat−1 h−1 for CH3CHO. Table 2 summarizes CO2RR results on 2D TMDC-based catalysts.
Table 2 Summary of experimental CO2RR results on 2D TMDCs-based catalyst




Materials
Condition
Activity
Product
Ref.




Electrochemical process


Nb-doped MoS2
CO2 and EMIM–BF4 solution
∼31 mV overpotential, TOF = 0.36 s−1 (overpotential = 100 mV)
CO

154



Single-crystal MoS2 film
N2-purged KH2PO4 with Na2CO3 solution
FE1-propanol = ∼3.5% (MoS2 single crystals)
C3H8O, HCOOH, C2H6O2, C4H10O

144



FE1-propanol = ∼1% (MoS2 thin film)


Vertically aligned MoS2 Nanoflakes
CO2 with EMIM–BF4 solution
FECO = 98% (overpotential = 600 mV)
CO

155



Cu/MoS2
CO2-saturated NaHCO3 solution
Max. FECO = 43.81%
CO

175



Max. FECH4 =17.08%
C2H4


Max. FEC2H4 = 3.45%
CH4


MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2 nanoflakes
CO2 and EMIM–BF4 solution
FECO = 24% (overpotential = 54 mV), TOF = 0.28 s−1 (−0.164 V vs. RHE)
CO

159



Ultrathin MoTe2
CO2-sparged [Bmim]BF4 solution
FECH4 = 83 ± 3% (25.6 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V vs. RHE)
CH4

281



TiS2
NBu4–PF6 and EMIM–BF4 in acetonitrile water
FECO = 83% (−0.5 V vs. RHE, 390 mV overpotential, 5 mA cm−2)
CO

174



HCOOH


MoS2/N–carbon
CO2 Emim–BF4 solution
FECO = 92.68% (34.31 mA cm−2, 590 mV overpotential)
CO

176



Fluorosilane decorated exfoliated MoS2
CO2-saturated EMIM–BF4 solutions
FECO = 81.2% (−0.9 V vs. RHE)
CO

158



rGO/PEI/MoSx
CO2 sparged NaHCO3 solution
∼140 mV overpotential, FECO = 85.1%, TOF = 2.4 s−1 (overpotential 540 mV)
CO

280







Photoelectrochemical process


2D MoS2, MoSe2/Si
CO2 sparged NaHCO3 electrolyte
2.2 (MoS2/Si) and 1.2 (MoSe2/Si) times higher current density (CO2), 2.6 (MoS2/Si) and 9.4 (MoSe2/Si) times higher current density (light),
N/A

177







Photochemical process


MoS2 nanoflowers
CO2 in H2O, ∼589 W m−2 illumination (400–700 nm)
0.22 to 0.35 μmol gcat−1 h−1
CO

136



WSe2
NaHCO3 solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)
115 μmol g−1 h−1
CH3OH

199



ReS2/Cds
0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1.01 μmol g−1 h−1
CO

194



MoS2/SiC
CO2 with H2O vapor, visible light
323 μL g−1 h−1
CH4

200



MoS2/g-C3N4
CO2 with H2O vapor, Xe lamp
8.37 μmol g−1 h−1
CO

201



MoS2/Bi2WO6
CO2 in H2O, visible light
36.7 μmol gcat−1 (methanol)
CH3OH, CH3CH2OH

187



36.6 μmol gcat−1 (ethanol)


1D TiO2/2D MoS2
CO2 with H2O vapor, Xe lamp
2.86 μmol g−1 h−1 (methane)
CH4, CH3OH

196



2.55 μmol g−1 h−1 (methanol)


TiO2/MoS2 nanosheet
CO2 saturated NaHCO3 solution, Xe lamp
3.1–10.6 μmol g−1 h−1
CH3OH

188



MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S
CO2 saturated NaOH solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1.18–2.13 μmol g−1 h−1
CH3OH

283



NiSe2/WSe2
NaHCO3 solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)
380 μmol g−1 h−1
CH3OH

199



WSe2/graphene
NaHCO3 solution
3.55 μmol g−1 h−1 (visible light)
CH3OH

137



Visible light and UV light
4.35 μmol g−1 h−1 (UV light)




Sacrificial agent-Na2SO3:




4.33 μmol g−1 h−1 (visible light)




5.03 μmol g−1 h−1 (UV light)


2H and 3R phase MoS2
NaHCO3, NaOH, and NaCl solution, UV light (254 nm)
In NaHCO3: 27.4 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH) and 2.2 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3CHO)
CH3OH, CH3CHO

181



In NaOH: 11.2 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH) and 2.5 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3CHO); In NaCl: 7.8 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH) and 4.8 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3CHO)


MoS2/g-C3N4
CO2 with H2O vapor, Xe lamp
8.37 μmol g−1 h−1
CO

201





Photocatalytic CO2RR has also been achieved for 2D WSe2. WSe2–graphene nanocomposites were synthesized via ultra-sonication and measured under irradiation with UV/visible light for photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH3OH (Fig. 15c)137 The nanoscale morphology of the as-synthesized WSe2–graphene powder included nanoparticles, nanowires, and several-layer nanosheets. The binary structure of WSe2 and graphene promoted electron transport and suppressed electron–hole recombination compared to pure WSe2, resulting in CH3OH yields of ∼3.55 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light and 2.35 μmol g−1 h−1 under UV light for 48 h. Coupling with sacrificial agent Na2SO3 further enhanced photocatalytic CO2RR activity, with CH3OH yields of 4.33 μmol g−1 h−1 and 5.03 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively.
It is well known that catalyst morphology affects catalytic activity due to unique adsorption energies and catalytic activities of different crystal facets.183–185 Li et al. confirmed this principle for photocatalytic CO2RR in TMDCs by synthesizing and comparing tablet-like (T) and flower-like (F) SnS2 flakes.284 While both morphologies were in the 2T phase, they were dominated by different facets, with the [0 0 1] direction being inhibited in F-SnS2. The smaller thickness compared to the electron mean-free-path shortened the carrier diffusion time to the catalyst surface in F-SnS2. The flower-like morphology (Fig. 15d) also had larger specific surface area and Sn2+ surface defects. While F-SnS2 produced 5.7× higher yield of CH4 compared to the T-SnS2, the main CO2RR product on both catalysts was still CO (Fig. 15e), except for the very last time point (24 h).
Doping is another route to influence CO2RR activities of 2D TMDC photocatalysts. Billo et al. studied selective photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 in carbon-implanted 2D SnS2 thin films grown by chemical vapor transport.186 As shown in Fig. 16a, both CBM and VBM of carbon doped SnS2 (C–SnS2) shift downward by 0.24 and 0.13 eV compared to the as-grown SnS2, leading to better redox potentials for multielectron CO2 reduction and H2O oxidation. This C–SnS2 sample demonstrated high densities of surface electrons and CO2 adsorption sites, discrete electronic states, enhanced charge mobility and light harvesting, and reduced electron–hole recombination. These C–SnS2 properties resulted in over two orders of magnitude enhancement in CO2 conversion efficiency—relative to SnS2—and about 89% product selectivity toward CH4 formation as shown in Fig. 16b.
 Fig. 16  Photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity and the reaction mechanism using different 2D TMDCs. (a) (left panel) Comparative band diagram of SnS2 and C–SnS2 showing the band position shifting downward by C doping. Different reduction potentials are present in red (CH3CHO), blue (CH4), and black (H2) horizontal dotted lines, and (right panel) schematic of the reaction mechanism and charge transfer behavior. (b) Cumulative CO2 conversion to CH4 and CH3CHO using SnS2 and C–SnS2 photocatalysts during 6 h reaction time under a visible light source (AM 1.5 solar simulator). Reprinted with permission.186 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (c) Schematic for CO2 reduction using Bi2WO6/MoS2 catalysts to generate methanol. Reprinted with permission.187 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. (d) 1D/2D TiO2/MoS2 used to photoreduce CO2 to methane and methanol. Reprinted with permission.196Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the MoS2/TiO2 system for the photoreduction of CO2 to CH3OH, and Mo sites especially Mo-terminated edges on MoS2 nanosheets stabilize the intermediate products (CHxOy). Reprinted with permission.188 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Diagram of the energy band structure and electron transfer in the SnS2/SnO2 composite semiconductors. (g) Free energy diagrams of CO2 photoreduction to CO for the SnS2 atomic layers, the poorly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers, and the mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers. Reprinted with permission.189 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (h) HRTEM image of SnS2/SnO2 with schematic (right panel) showing the lattice distortion at the SnS2/SnO2 interface. (i) Photocatalytic CO2 reduction of SnS2/SnO2 nanoparticles and hollow spheres with different numbers of shells. Reprinted with permission.190 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
Although the strategies of phase engineering, doping, and introducing defects in pristine TMDC materials are promising avenues for CO2RR activity enhancement, investigating other TMDC materials with unique intrinsic photochemical properties among the 40+ TMDC family members could be another essential route to achieve highly efficient CO2RR photocatalysts. With a narrow and direct bandgap (∼1.5–1.6 eV), ReS2 has significant visible and near-IR absorbance. Weak interlayer coupling in ReS2, compared to other TMDCs, leads to more exposed active sites and lower energetic barriers for interlayer molecular diffusion. Trion formation in ReS2 also would not necessarily depend on the precise control of layer number.191 These advantages make ReS2 a promising photo-catalytic candidate.192,193 Zhang et al. reported a heterojunction composed of 2D ReS2 nanosheets and CdS nanoparticles for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Because of the high-efficiency interfacial photogenerated electron–hole separation and migration as well as the adsorption/activation of CO2 intermediates from surface sulfur vacancies, the ReS2/CdS heterostructure exhibited a high photocatalytic CO yield of 7.1 μmol g−1 with a high selectivity of 93.4% over 7 hours.194
Similar as above, integrating a 2D TMDC with another semiconductor in a Type-II (staggered band) heterostructure is a simple way to increase optical absorption and improve photocatalytic activity. In such heterojunctions, the 2D TMDC serves as surface catalyst for charge transfer and stabilizing intermediates, while another semiconductor serves as the photoactive absorber. Dai et al. combined Bi2WO6 nanoflowers with few-layered MoS2 co-catalysts for CO2 photoreduction into methanol and ethanol.187 Photoinduced charge separation at the Bi2WO6/MoS2 interface yielded electron transfer to MoS2 for reduction reactions, resulting in 36.7 μmol gcat−1 of methanol and 36.6 μmol gcat−1 of ethanol after 4 h of visible light excitation. The authors propose that CO2 in aqueous solutions produces CO32−, HCO3−, and H2CO3, which are reduced on the few-layered MoS2 (Fig. 16c).
Another heterostructure configuration employed for 2D TMDC CO2RR photocatalysts was demonstrated by coupling 2D MoS2 to TiO2.195,196 Under UV-vis illumination, photoexcited electrons in 1D TiO2 are transferred to 2D MoS2 and used for CO2RR (Fig. 16d). In this catalytic reaction, methane and methanol are produced at 2.86 and 2.55 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively. The possible mechanism for methanol production was detailed in another work.188 Here, it was proposed that photoexcited electrons in TiO2 transfer to Mo sites, and they participate in CO2 reduction with the CHxOy intermediates stabilized on Mo-terminated edges (Fig. 16e).
Efficient charge transfer across heterostructure interfaces can be achieved by low-dimensional TMDC layers that produce a depletion region with large electric fields that can be created by in situ synthesis.197,198 Jiao et al. presented a facile in situ oxidization of 2D SnS2 to achieve atomically bonded SnO2/SnS2 heterostructures for visible light CO2 photoreduction, where the SnO2 layer has high electron conductivity and SnS2 efficiently absorbs light.189 As predicted by the band structure diagram (Fig. 16f) and simulation results (Fig. 16g), this atomically thin SnS2/SnO2 heterojunction supports electron–hole separation and active site exposure, while electron localization on Sn atoms lowers the CO2 activation energy barrier through stabilizing the COOH* radical intermediate. The mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers resulted in a CO formation rate of 12.28 μmol g−1 h−1, roughly 2.3 and 2.6 times higher than those of the poorly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers and the SnS2 only atomic layers, respectively. By utilizing the reverse process, You and co-workers sulfurized hollow multi-shelled structured SnO2 to create a SnS2/SnO2 heterostructure.190 Sulfurization introduced a large amount of oxygen vacancies and interfacial lattice distortions (Fig. 16h) that increased the active sites for CO2 adsorption. Additionally, reflection and scattering in the hollow spherical multi-shell structure increased light absorption, relative to the planar SnO2/SnS2 heterostructure. These advantages led to 100% CO selectivity with a production rate of 47.5 μmol g−1 h−1 for over 20 h (Fig. 16i).
TMDCs have been interfaced with other nanomaterials for CO2RR. Lu et al. hydrothermally synthesized 2D MoS2-wrapped Mn0.2Cd0.8S nanospheres with varying weight percentages of MoS2 to tune photocatalytic activity.283 Photoinduced electrons are transferred from Mn0.2Cd0.8S to MoS2 to reduce CO2 to CH3OH (Fig. 17a). The heterostructure with an optimal MoS2 loading of 3 wt% yielded 2.13 μmol h−1 of CH3OH, which was 5.4 times more than bare Mn0.2Cd0.8S nanospheres (Fig. 17b). NiSe2, a high electrical conductivity TMDC, was interfaced with WSe2 for photocatalytic CO2 reduction into methanol.199 When NiSe2 was incorporated into the hydrothermal synthesis process of WSe2, it reduced the size of WSe2 flakes, which maintained the rich exposed edges and active sites. The specific surface area increased to 8.52 m2 g−1 compared to 3.01 m2 g−1 of bare WSe2 flakes sample. The NiSe2/WSe2 catalyst showed 380 μmol g−1 h−1 yield of CH3OH from CO2RR, which is more than 3 times the bare WSe2 catalyst.
 Fig. 17  (a) Reaction energetics for the improved activity of MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S nanosphere composites for CO2 photoreduction. (b) CH3OH production rate comparison among MoS2, Mn0.2Cd0.8S and MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S composites: MCSMSX, where X is the wt% of MoS2. Inset is an SEM image of MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S composite. Reprinted with permission.283 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) and (d) MoS2 interfaced with SiC undergoes a Z-scheme redox reaction to reduce CO2 and oxidize H2O. Bottom panel of (d) is the SEM morphology of MoS2@SiC. Reprinted with permission.200 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Z-scheme band energetics of the MoS2 and g-C3N4 interface for CO2 photoreduction. Reprinted with permission.201 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Z-scheme band energetics of MoS2/SnS2/r-GO system under UV light irradiation which increases charge separation to photoreduce CO2 to CO and CH4. Reprinted with permission.202 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (g) Comparison of average gas production rates of SnS2, S-covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs), and SnS2/S-CTFs. (h) Schematic diagram of the photogenerated charge separation and transfer in SnS2/S-CTFs. Reprinted with permission.203 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
Compared to the Type II heterostructure configuration, an all-solid-state artificial Z-scheme heterojunction has been considered as a more efficient photocatalyst by expanding the light absorption spectrum and providing long-lived, photoinduced electrons and holes. In a Z-scheme, both sides of the interface absorb photons and the lowest energy photoexcited electrons and holes recombine leaving behind high-energy electrons and holes on each side of the interface. As an example, 2D MoS2/SiC nanoflower interfaces support oxidation on the MoS2 side and reduction on the SiC side (Fig. 17c and d).200 This Z-scheme interface yields CH4 and O2 at 323 and 621 μL g−1 h−1, respectively, under visible light without sacrificial reagents. Another Z-scheme heterojunction for CO2 photoreduction was constructed by fabricating MoS2/g-C3N4 composites (Fig. 17e).201 The MoS2/g-C3N4 composites have strong visible light response, efficient exciton dissociation, and high specific surface area. This Z-scheme optimally generates CO (58.59 μmol gcat−1) with 10 wt% MoS2/g-C3N4 catalyst for 7 h with visible light irradiation, which was up to three times more than bare g-C3N4.
Z-schemes can also be constructed by interfacing 2D materials together. Yin et al. reported 2D MoS2/SnS2/reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) heterostructures for ultraviolet light CO2 reduction.202 Reduced graphene oxide provided the high specific surface area, conductivity, and carrier mobility needed for efficient CO2RR. Electron spin resonance spectroscopy revealed the composite of MoS2/SnS2/r-GO has preferred active species for production of superoxide radicals (˙O2−), indicating a more negative CBM potential compared to the redox potential E(O/˙O2−) (−0.33 eV vs. NHE). Since the CBM of individual SnS2 is more negative than E(O/˙O2−) but that of individual MoS2 is more positive than E(O/˙O2−), the Z-scheme energetics suggest that SnS2 electrons produce superoxide, while the MoS2 CB electron recombines with the VB hole of SnS2 (Fig. 17f). The yield of CO and CH4 was 173- and 222-fold higher than bare MoS2 photocatalyst, respectively.
Z-scheme interfaces pairing SnS2 with other materials have been reported for CO2RR, including g-C3N4/Au/SnS2,204 SnS2/TiO2,205,206 and SnS2/SrTiO3.182 In these heterostructures, product selectivity and light absorption were governed by the semiconductor other than SnS2, which enhanced CO2 photoreduction performance. Guo et al. used 2D SnS2/triazine frameworks for a Z-scheme CO2 photocatalyst.203 The covalent triazine framework (CTF) captured and activated CO2 molecules.207,208 The addition of 2D SnS2 to the covalent triazine framework improved electronic conductivity, carrier lifetime, and efficiency of the bare covalent triazine framework. Both CO2 uptake and reduction yield of the SnS2/triazine framework showed remarkable improvement of CO and CH4 generation compared to the individual components (Fig. 17g).203

3.3 2D MXenes

3.3.1 Electrochemical CO2RR. 
The viability of MXene catalysts for CO2RR was recently investigated by computational screening.153,209 The activity and selectivity of CO2 reduction over MXenes are closely related to the hydrogenation process and surface-terminated active sites. Hydrogenation of CO2 on M3C2 (M = Sc, V, Mn, Zr, Nb, Hf, Hf, Mo, and W) MXene surfaces was theoretically studied by Xiao et al.19 The calculation results predicted two mechanisms, distinguished by the first protonation step, for CO2RR over M3C2 MXenes, with methane as the final product. The formation of bicarbonate intermediate species *HCO2, from CO2 and successive protonation (*HCO2 → *H2CO2 → *H2COOH → *H2CO → *H3CO → *O (+ *CH4) → *OH → *H2O), is the energetically favorable pathway for most studied MXenes, whereas the mechanism of *COOH → *HCOOH → *CHO → *HCHO → *H2COH → *H3COH → *CH3 → *CH4 is more favorable on Ta3C2 and W3C2. Such binding features of *HCO2 or *COOH were suggested to be determined by the M–O–C or M–C–O binding.
Further experimental investigation was conducted on the hydrogenation of CO2 on pristine β-Mo2C and β-Mo2C modified with Cu nanoparticles in a gas-phase reactor by Posada-Pérez et al.,84 which showed the surface-determining CO2RR activity and selectivity phenomena. The results revealed the direct activation and dissociation of the CO2 molecule to methane and CO on clean β-Mo2C, whereas hydrogen-assisted CO2RR occurred on Cu/β-Mo2C for CO and methanol production. It is believed that CO* and H3CO* dissociation are favorable processes on bare β-Mo2C surfaces for methane and CO. New routes involving the hydrogenation of CO2* for the formation of HCOO* and subsequent H2COO* at the interface of Cu/β-Mo2C could ultimately produce CH3O* and then CH3OH. These observations demonstrate a critical aspect of MXenes—even the surface of pristine MXenes can dissociate highly stable molecules such as CO2, which are normally the rate-determining steps of the studied reactions. The activity and selectivity for CO2 hydrogenation can be controlled by basal plane modification. Such low energy barriers are also featured on clean patches of MXenes for efficient catalytic dry reforming of methane from CO2RR.85
The influence of oxygen and hydroxide MXene-termination groups on CO2RR has also been theoretically investigated. Owing to the hydrogen-bond interaction between *HCOOH and the surface groups, particularly –O, the unique CO2RR behavior on Ti2CTx and Mo2CTx MXenes has been noticed, where the *HCOOH pathway dominates the surface CO2RR instead of the typical *CO pathway over most transition metal catalysts. The C atoms on the MXene surface determine the type of surface groups. In general, *COOH binds to the –OTx group on MXene surfaces through the C atom, whereas *HCOOH binds through the H atom. Such *HCOOH intermediate preferences result in non-linear scaling with *COOH in terms of their binding energies, as these two intermediates are coordinated differently on the MXene surfaces.210 With –O and –OH surface functionalization, the energy barrier for CO2 reduction to CH4 over Cr3C2Tx and Mo3C2Tx could be reduced compared to the unfunctionalized MXenes.211 Handoko and co-workers reported a CO2 reduction pathway on O-terminated MXene catalysts that preferentially binds *CO to selectively generate CH4 at low overpotentials. They concluded that W2CO2 and Ti2CO2 are highly promising MXenes for CO2RR to form CH4 with theoretical overpotentials of 0.52 and 0.69 V, respectively (Fig. 18a).212
 Fig. 18  (a) O-terminated MXenes display low theoretical overpotential for CO2RR. Plot of UL(CO2) − UL(H2) as a function of UL(CO2) showing the selectivity of CO2RR to generate CH4 relative to HER for MXenes. Vertical line marks the equilibrium potential for the reduction of CO2 to CH4 (0.17 V vs. RHE). Reprinted with permission.212 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Volcano curve of OH-terminated MXenes to generate CH4. For most OH-terminated MXenes, the potential-limiting step is determined to be *(H)COOH → *CO. The equilibrium potential for CO2RR to CH4 is 0.17 V vs. RHE. Reprinted with permission.152 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) DFT results for CO2RR to generate formic acid on Ti2CTx with varying ratios of Tx. Reprinted with permission.210 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (d) The free energy diagram for CO2RR at the oxygen vacancy on Ti3C2 (in black) and Mo2C (in red) calculated using the PBE functional. Reprinted with permission.213 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chen et al. utilized thermodynamic and kinetic first-principles approaches to study CO2 reduction over various (–OH)-terminated M2C and M2N MXenes (M = Hf, Nb, Sc, Ta, Ti, V, Y, and Zr). The simulations resulted in the potential-limiting step of *(H)COOH → *CO for most OH-terminated MXenes, where the adsorbed *CO is stabilized by capturing H atoms from the OH termination group. Due to the proximity to the peak of the volcano curve, Sc2C(OH)2 and Y2C(OH)2 (Fig. 18b) were identified as the most promising catalysts for CO2 to CH4 conversion with the least negative limiting potential of −0.53 V and −0.61 V, respectively, in aqueous reaction conditions.152
Although experimental studies on the role of MXene-termination groups for CO2RR are still rare, a few pioneering studies have been reported. In the experimental work by Handoko et al., formic acid was the main CO2 reduction product on Ti2CTx and Mo2CTx MXenes, where a maximum FE of over 56% at −1.73 V vs. RHE was observed for Ti2CTx. According to their DFT results, CO2RR activity depended on the Ti2CTx fraction of –F and –O surface termination groups, where lower amounts of –F and higher amounts of –O led to lower potential energy steps for formic acid generation (Fig. 18c).210 The impact of oxygen terminated MXenes on CO2RR was further explored in detail by Attanayake et al.213 The DFT results indicated that the surface-terminated oxygen vacancies performed as CO2RR active sites. With regards to the free energy, CO2 exhibited weak binding at the vacancy site on oxygen terminated Ti3C2, while it is physically adsorbed at the oxygen vacancy on the oxygen terminated Mo2C. Following activation of *CO2 to *COOH, the hydrogenation step required 0.26 eV less free energy input of Mo2C compared to Ti3C2, which spontaneously dissociated and formed H2O and *CO, promoting better CO2RR on Mo2C (Fig. 18d). Adding the ionic liquid 1-ethyl-2-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate as an electrolyte in acetonitrile suppressed the competing HER, and Mo2C and Ti3C2 exhibited faradaic efficiencies of 90% (250 mV overpotential) and 65% (650 mV overpotential), respectively. To the best of our knowledge, there are no reports of photoelectrochemical CO2RR; however, there are a few reports of photochemical CO2RR with MXenes.


3.3.2 Photochemical CO2RR. 
Both computational and experimental results indicate that MXenes can exhibit high carrier mobilities and appropriate band gaps (when semiconducting) for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Zhang et al. theoretically investigated CO2 photoreduction at oxygen vacancies on three MXene monolayers (Ti2CO2, V2CO2, and Ti3C2O2) and found the best performance from monolayer Ti2CO2, a semiconductor with 0.91 eV band gap and large electron mobility.151,214 They proposed that incomplete O-termination, along with CO and H2 introducing additional oxygen vacancies, promoted the selective reaction pathway of CO2 → HCOO → HCOOH.151,214
Since most MXenes exhibit metallic behavior, coupling MXenes to other photoactive materials is an important strategy for CO2 photoreduction. For example, Ye and coworkers coupled TiO2 nanoparticles (P25) to Ti3C2–OH MXenes for CO2 photoreduction (Fig. 19a).215 These MXene/TiO2 heterostructures have superior electrical conductivity and charge-carrier separation ability as well as abundant CO2 adsorption and activation sites, where the heterostructure activities for CO2RR to generate CO (11.74 μmolg−1 h−1) and CH4 (16.61 μmol g−1 h−1) were greater than that of bare P25 (Fig. 19b) and for P25 loaded with 5 wt % Pt (5Pt/P25). Annealing a Ti3C2 MXene precursor has also been used to produce TiO2/Ti3C2 hybrids with a unique “rice-crust” like structure (Fig. 19c).216 Efficient interfacial charge transfer enabled outstanding photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction to CH4 with a rate of 0.22 μmol h−1, 3.7-fold higher than a P25 TiO2 control (Fig. 19d).
 Fig. 19  (a) HRTEM image of the interface structure of Ti3C2–OH and TiO2 P25 NPs. (b) Evolution rates of CO and CH4 over P25, 5% Pt/P25 (5Pt/P25), 5% Ti3C2/P25 (5TC/P25), 5% Ti3C2-OH/P25 (5TC-OH/P25) under irradiation by a 300 W Xe lamp; Reprinted with permission.215 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) image of rice-crust like TiO2/Ti3C2 composite. (d) Comparison of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction of the TiO2/Ti3C2 composite samples without calcination and with calcination (TT350, TT450, TT550 and TT650 were defined as the TiO2/Ti3C2 prepared under different calcination temperatures) and P25 for CH4 production. Reprinted with permission.216 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc. (e) TEM image of 2% Ti3C2 in Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 and the element mappings of Bi, W, O, Ti, C of the selected area. The red circles indicate the Bi particles derived from Bi2WO6 nanosheets under the high-power electron beam. (f) Photocatalytic activity of TB0 to TB5, where TBX = Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 and X = the % of Ti3C2. Reprinted with permission.217 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (g) SEM image of 5% Ti3C2/g-C3N4 sample. (h) 5 h accumulated production of CO and CH4 on g-C3N4 (CN), 5% Ti3C2-CN (5% TC-CN), and 5% Ti3C2–OH–CN (5% TCOH-CN). Reprinted with permission.218 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (i) Co–Co layered double hydroxide/Ti3C2Tx nanosheets (LDH/TNS) for CO2 reduction with triethanolamine (TEOA) as sacrificial agent. Inset is the SEM image of the catalyst morphology. Reprinted with permission.219 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. 
Cao et al. prepared ultrathin Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 nanosheets via hydrothermal methods (Fig. 19e).217 The interface energetics of this heterostructure induced photoexcited electron transfer from Bi2WO6 nanosheets to metallic, O-terminated Ti3C2 and subsequent reduction of adsorbed CO2. As shown in Fig. 19f, the optimized Ti3C2 loading of 2% in Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 (TB2) gave CH4 and CH3OH yields of 1.78 and 0.44 μmol h−1 g−1, respectively, while significantly outperforming pristine Bi2WO6. Similarly, MXene fraction-dependent photocatalytic CO2RR was also observed by Tang et al. for heterostructures between graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and Ti3C2–OH (Fig. 19g), with the optimal composite producing CO and CH4 yields that were ∼6× times and 4× higher than pure g-C3N4, respectively (Fig. 19h).218 In addition, Liu et al. synthesized the CeO2@Ti3C2 composite, where a Schottky junction was realized by the built-in electric field between CeO2 and MXene.220 The best CO yield catalyzed by CeO2@Ti3C2 under visible illumination was 40.2 μmol m−2 h−1, ∼1.5× higher than pure CeO2.
Another recent study demonstrated nanocomposites pairing Co–Co layered double hydroxides with Ti3C2Tx for CO2RR photocatalysis (Fig. 19i). The MXene enhanced conductivity and surface activity, which resulted in rapid electron transfer and adequate catalytic sites for the separation and utilization of electrons. It also exhibited good CO2RR quantum efficiency (0.92% at 420 nm) and stability (5 cycles, 5 h per cycle) to produce CO. The CO generation yield was much higher than that of the pristine Co–Co photocatalyst, reaching 12500 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible-light irradiation (>400 nm).219
Recent efforts have coupled CsPbX3 perovskite nanocrystals to 2D MXenes due to the favorable bandgap, high carrier mobility, and long carrier lifetimes of perovskites. For example, Pan et al. found that CsPbBr3@Ti3C2Tx composites reduced CO2 under simulated solar irradiation.278 Ethyl acetate was used as the solvent for enhanced CO2 solubility and CsPbBr3 nanocrystal stability. The 1.5 eV conduction band offset drove electron transfer from photoexcited CsPbBr3 to Ti3C2Tx, resulting in higher product yields compared to that of pure CsPbBr3 and other CsPbBr3-based heterostructures (e.g., CsPbBr3/GO, CsPbBr3/g-C3N4, CsPbBr3/TiO2, CsPbBr3/Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework). Only CO and CH4 were detected with the yield of 26.32 and 7.25 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively, with no H2 being detected, indicating a highly selective CO2 reduction. Table 3 summarizes CO2RR results on 2D MXene-based catalysts.
Table 3 Summary of experimental CO2RR results on 2D MXene-based catalysts




Materials
Electrolyte
Activity
Product
Ref.




Electrochemical process


Ti2CTx (KF-HCl etching)
CO2 sparging, acetonitrile, water, and (BEMIMBF4) electrolyte
FEformicacid = 56% (−1.73 V vs. RHE)
HCOOH, CO, CH4

210



Mo2CTx (HF etching)
CO2 sparging, acetonitrile, water, and (BEMIMBF4) electrolyte
FEformicacid = 33% (−1.23 V vs. RHE)
HCOOH, CO, CH4

210



Delaminated Mo2C and Ti3C2
CO2 saturated EMIMBF4
FECO = 90% (−2.24 V vs. SCE, Mo2C)
CO

213



FECO = 65% (−2.54 V vs. SCE, Ti3C2)






Photochemical process


P25/Ti3C2
CO2 in de-ionized H2O, Xe lamp
11.74 μmol g−1 h−1 (CO)
CO, CH4

215



16.61 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)


TiO2/Ti3C2
NaHCO3 and HCl in H2O, Xe lamp
4.4 μmol g−1 h−1
CH4

216



Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 nanosheets
NaHCO3 and H2SO4 in H2O, Xe lamp
1.78 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)
CH4, CH3OH

217



0.44 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH)


Ti3C2/g-C3N4
CO2 in H2O, Xe lamp
2.24 μmol g−1 h−1 (CO)
CO, CH4

218



0.04 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)


CeO2/Ti3C2
NaHCO3, HCl and H2O vapor, Xe lamp
40.2 μmol m−2 h−1
CO

220



CsPbBr3/Ti3C2Tx
CO2, ethyl acetate solvent, Xe lamp (420 nm cut-off)
26.32 μmol g−1 h−1 (CO)
CO, CH4

278



7.25 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)





4. N2 reduction reactions
In this section, we review the performance of 2D TMDC and MXene materials used in electrochemical, photoelectrochemical, and photochemical NRR. To compare the available studies, we first discuss the NRR reaction mechanisms and underlying factors that influence each reaction before reviewing NRR results with 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts. Since these NRR occur via concerted PCET reactions, the mechanisms involved in these reduction reactions proceed similarly. Thus, in this section, we will introduce the pathways deciphered by DFT calculations that are deemed the most probable. There are two basic associative reaction mechanisms that have been proposed for PCET NRR to NH3: distal and alternating, which are distinct from the dissociative reaction mechanism that the Haber–Bosh process follows.222
4.1 NRR mechanisms
The major challenges of employing NRR catalysts discussed in this review stem from a lack of selectivity and activity for (photo)electrochemical and photochemical processes. First the selective synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen has been plagued by the competition with HER, which occurs with far fewer kinetic barriers. Thus, there are no known reports of heterogeneous or homogeneous catalysts showing 100% faradaic efficiencies or quantum yields for NRR to ammonia. To circumvent the selectivity issue arising from the competing binding of H+vs. N2, it is desirable to realize materials that preferentially bind N2 over H+. Although the reduction of N2 to ammonia or NH4+ is thermodynamically favorable, the potential window between the HER and NRR is quite small across the entire pH scale (Fig. 20a).223 For most electrocatalysts reported the applied potentials are more negative than 0 V vs. SHE (Fig. 20b),224 where the potential window for NRR becomes even smaller. Second, sluggish NRR kinetics have translated to low yield rates for the reaction. The large energy (945 kJ mol−1@298 K) required to break or weaken the inert triple bonds of N2 molecules and the 6e−/6H+ PCET steps to yield two NH3 molecules slows down the reaction rates further. Third, the contamination of adventitious ammonia has been a clear problem for verifying the low yields observed in the experimental results presented. Most studies have yields of ammonia that are in the parts per billion concentrations (<10 μg mL−1). Reports point to the presence of NH3 or NH4+ contamination giving false results where the contamination could be from aqueous solutions, low purity gases, contaminated surfaces (latex gloves, lab coats, and tubing), human breath, and Nafion membranes.225–228 The possibility of catalyst decomposition has also been reported to produce ammonia.229
 Fig. 20  (a) Pourbaix diagram for the N2/water system with dashed lines indicating the water oxidation (labeled (b)) and water reduction (labeled (a)). Reprinted with permission.223 Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (b) Theoretical onset potentials for NRR and HER on different materials obtained through DFT calculations that are classified according to different families of materials. The materials that are favorable for the NRR are shown below the dashed line. Reprinted with permission.224 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc. (c) Volcano plots for the N binding energy on (111) surfaces of transition metals and the H binding energies versus calculated limiting potentials. Reprinted with permission.209 Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Different reaction pathways on heterogenous/homogeneous catalysts for the NRR, the blue spheres indicate N atoms, and the white spheres indicate H atoms. 
To address contamination issues, stringent protocols and control experiments are required for verifying ammonia yields in (photo)electrochemical and photochemical catalytic NRR results.220,228,230 To rule out contamination of ammonia species from the catalyst or experimental setups, control experiments should be performed in an Ar gas atmosphere under identical conditions to the NRR experiments. To rule out NH3 contamination from the N2 gas feed, running the experiments at open circuit potential has also been strongly encouraged. Moreover, to avoid other nitrogen containing species such as NOx, running the N2 gas through an absorbent such as copper has been suggested.220,225,227,228,230 To confirm the origin of the NH3, control experiments should employ isotopically labelled 15N2, where 1H-NMR can confirm the presence of 15NH3, and quantitative analysis of 15NH3 and 14NH3 under identical conditions should provide similar concentrations of detected ammonia.220,230
The 6 PCET steps for the (photo)electrochemical and photochemical NRR to NH3 results in many intermediates and intermediate steps. Depending upon the minimum energy pathways, the reaction proceeds along a purely distal or alternating pathway, or the reaction can alternate between the two mechanisms. However, the basic mechanism of PCET remains unchanged. Skulason et al. first proposed a DFT model based on the associative NRR.231 Since then other models have been explored and scaling relations predicted based on DFT calculations (Fig. 20c).232,233
In these three basic pathways (Fig. 20d), many intermediates can be formed, such as N2Hx or NHx (where n = 0, 1, or 2), where hydrogenation occurs from H atoms adsorbed on the catalyst surface (Tafel type mechanism) or from protons in solution (Heyrovsky type mechanism). Skulason et al. have shown that the Tafel type mechanism has a large activation barrier for most transition metals, thus giving a relatively slow rate for NRR and suggesting that an associative or dissociative Heyrovsky-type reaction route is more likely.231 For the dissociative pathway, the N2 molecule dissociates on the catalyst surface and the adsorbed N atoms undergo PCET. The dissociative reaction mechanism is predicted for surfaces with exothermic N adsorption enthalpies.231 Metals on the right hand side of the plot in Fig. 20c have weaker binding towards N atoms and are therefore predicted to follow an associative pathway (e.g., Ru, Rh, Pt, Mo, Fe). The adsorption of molecular nitrogen and the first protonation step to form *N2H is usually the potential limiting step for such metals. In these studies, the authors show that the adsorption free energy of the N adatoms scale linearly with the adsorption free energy of the N2Hx intermediate species.231,232 Thus, volcano plots, based on the N adsorption free energy versus the calculated onset potential, can be constructed to identify the most catalytically active metal surfaces (Fig. 20c). From the volcano plot in Fig. 20c, it is clear none of the metals would have an ideal binding free energy. In aqueous solution, HER competes with NRR, and according to Montoya et al., HER will always prevail over NRR on metal surfaces, which limits the selectivity for NRR.232 Hence, the necessity arises to probe materials that are alloys, have defects, or contain compounds with hetero single-atoms234 that can be tuned to break the scaling relations and selectively bind N2 over H+.
2D TMDCs and MXenes have been explored as potential catalysts for (photo)electrochemical and photochemical NRR. Zhang et al. performed DFT calculations on 2D MoS2 to map out NRR pathways.235 They identified that the most active site was the Mo edge (Fig. 21a), owing to the partial positive charge on undercoordinated Mo atoms. This partial positive charge polarizes the N2 molecules to activate N2 on the surface. They also showed that the NRR potential determining step to be PCET of the first hydrogenation (Fig. 21a) along a distal pathway. The DFT results indicated that the N–N bond length significantly increased upon adsorption and the first protonation step (*NNH), which implied that a charge transfer occurred between the adsorbed N2 and the Mo-edge atoms, thus weakening the N2 triple bond.235 A similar distal mechanism has been predicted by X. Li et al. on defect rich MoS2.235 They showed that the bond lengths of the adsorbed N2 significantly increase on defect sites, which lowers the barrier for the first protonation step (Fig. 21b).235 In contrast to Zhang et al.'s findings, the potential determining step for MoS2 defect sites was the last PCET step (*NH2 to *NH3). Nevertheless, both studies revealed that the most favorable reaction pathway to be a Heyrovsky type distal pathway for 2D MoS2.235
 Fig. 21  (a) Minimum energy pathway for NRR on edge sites of MoS2, Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Vacancy sites of MoS2 influence the minimum energy pathway. Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Minimum energy pathway for NRR on edge sites of V3C2 MXene. Schematic in panel (c) shows bound reaction intermediates and N–N triple bond lengths (blue labels) for V3C2 reaction pathway. Reprinted with permission.222 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Li and coworkers systematically explored the 2H phases of MS2 (M = Mo, W, V, Nb, Ti, and Ta) using first principles calculations towards electrochemical NRR.221 Similar to studies by X. Li et al. and Zhang et al., F. Li et al. investigated zig-zag edges of the metal-terminated TMDCs as the most probable reaction sites.221,235 F. Li and coworkers initially probed the adsorption configuration of the N2 molecules on the edge sites of the six TMDCs and showed that a bridge-on chemisorption is preferred over the end-on and side-on configurations. Comparing alternating and distal pathways, the authors showed that the distal pathway is more thermodynamically favorable. Thus, a comparison of the distal pathways on these TMDC systems showed that the edge sites of VS2 to have the most favorable NRR energetics, with catalytic activity of 2D nanoribbons following the trend: VS2 > NbS2 > TiS2 > MoS2 > WS2 > TaS2.221
Fewer theoretical reports exist for MXenes and NRR; however, there are similarities with the 2D TMDCs, such as favoring Heyrovsky type distal mechanisms. Azofra and coworkers evaluated metal carbide MXenes for N2 capture and conversion to NH3 using DFT.222 They looked at pristine MXene surfaces—without surface termination groups—to reveal that M3C2 MXenes, such as V3C2 and Nb3C2, exhibited promising results for NRR (Fig. 21c). They showed that N2 adsorption free energy is exergonic (thus spontaneous) on MXenes having d2, d3, and d4 configurations on the transition metals, such as Ti, V, and Mo, respectively. Due to the strong adsorption energy, the N–N bonds are activated, making the first hydrogenation step (*N–N to N–NH) more feasible. The minimum energy pathway observed in these DFT studies was the Heyrovsky type distal pathway, with the potential determining step being the last hydrogenation step (NH2 to *NH3). Zhao et al. made similar observations for Ti3C2Tx MXene, Tx = F or OH,236 where the surface functional groups did not change the mechanism outlined by Azofra and coworkers.222 Side-on adsorption of the N2 molecule was slightly preferred over the end-on adsorption (Fig. 21c).236 Since thermodynamics simulations typically assume only a small kinetic contribution to the activation barrier for electrochemical reactions, this assumption can lead to contradictions with both experimental results and kinetics studies. Recent simulation advances for electrocatalytic processes attempt to accurately capture these kinetic contributions,237,238 and would be more realistic for better understanding 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts.
4.2 2D TMDCs

4.2.1 Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical NRR. 
Undercoordinated sites of 2D MoS2 are the primary sites shown to be active towards electrochemical NRR. Edge and vacant sites on 2H-MoS2 and phase-engineered MoS2 polarize the adsorbed N2 atoms, a necessary but insufficient parameter.221,235,239 N2 polarization is identified as a key step to activate N2 for NRR, without which a large energy penalty (1–1.5 eV for metal surfaces) exists for the first PCET step.235 As a proof of concept, Zhang et al. synthesized MoS2 on a carbon cloth support (Fig. 22a) for NRR.235 The MoS2 catalyst achieved 1.7% FE and an ammonia yield of 2.8 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2 at an applied potential of −0.5 V vs. RHE (Fig. 22b). As discussed in the previous section, DFT calculations on this system suggested that the partial positive charge on the Mo edge atoms were catalytically active towards NRR (Fig. 21a).235 2D MoS2 defect sites have also resulted in enhanced NRR activity. Li et al. investigated the influence of defects on NRR for hydrothermally synthesized MoS2 nanoflowers,240 where defects were introduced by changing the sulfur source and reactant molar ratios. Defect-rich MoS2 outperformed defect-poor MoS2 nanoflowers for NRR (Fig. 22c). The optimized defect rich-catalyst had a FE of 8.34% and a yield rate of 29.28 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.40 V vs. RHE, while the defect poor catalyst had a FE of 2.18% and 13.41 μg h−1 mg−1 ammonia yield rate (Fig. 22d). First principles calculations suggested that nitrogen adsorption and activation occurred at the rim sites of sulfur vacancies. The distal pathway was favored over the alternating pathway, and the potential-determining step was identified as the conversion of *NH2 to *NH3.240
 Fig. 22  (a) SEM images of MoS2 on a carbon cloth. (b) Ammonia yield rate and FE for the NRR to ammonia from MoS2 on carbon cloth. Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) HRTEM of basal plane (100) of defect rich MoS2 showing dislocations and distortions, and (d) average yield and faradaic efficiency of ammonia production at different applied potentials. Reprinted with permission.240 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (e) SEM image of Co–MoS2 for (20:1) of Co:Mo, (f) HRTEM image showing the carbon support and the Co–MoS2 and (g) plot of ammonia production rate and FE for Co–MoS2 at various potentials vs. RHE. Reprinted with permission.241 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) TEM image of Au incorporated MoS2 showing the (111) facet of Au. (i) Comparison of the yield rate and the FE of AuNP@MoS2 with MoS2 and AuNP@C in different electrolytes. Reprinted with permission.242 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc. 
Incorporating transition metals into 2H MoS2 structures has been evaluated as a strategy to improve NRR. Zeng et al. synthesized 3D hollow nanostructures of MoS2 incorporated with cobalt, and nickel–iron (NiFe) in two separate studies.241 With Co–MoS2 NCs (nano cubes) (Fig. 22e and f), Zeng et al. achieved an NH3 yield rate of 129.93 μg h−1 mg−1 with a FE of 11.21% at −0.4 V vs. RHE (Fig. 22g). The unique cube-like structure of Co–MoS2 allowed more accessibility to active sites, and the cell design promoted mass transfer of N2 molecules, which contributed to the improved catalyst performance. Moreover, interfacing Co–MoS2 with nitrogenated (pyrrolic, pyridinic, graphitic, and oxidized) amorphous carbon increased charge transfer (lowering charge transfer resistance) and performance.241 NiFe-incorporated MoS2 nano cubes showed similar activity for NRR, with NH3 production rate of 128.17 μg h−1 mg−1 and FE of 11.34% at −0.3 V.243 DFT calculations revealed that the extensive surface area and unsaturated NiFe sites act as centers for adsorbing and activating N2 molecules. Using evidence from in situ electrochemical FTIR and DFT calculations, an alternating associative pathway was suggested for the NiFe–MoS2 catalyst.243
Other groups have evaluated 2D MoS2 incorporated with transition metals for NRR with the goal of reducing HER. Zhou et al. investigated NRR on MoS2 nanosheets interfaced with gold (Au) particles (AuNPs@MoS2) at varying pH (Fig. 22h).242 MoS2 nanosheets prepared under hydrothermal conditions were reacted with HAuCl4 (gold source) and C6H5Na3O7·2H2O (reducing agent) to produce AuNPs@MoS2. The highest FE of 9.7% was observed for neutral pH (0.1 M Na2SO4) at −0.3 V vs. RHE with a modest ammonia yield rate of 5.65 μg h−1 mg−1 (Fig. 22i). However, the ammonia yield rate was greatest when electrocatalysis occurred under basic (0.1 M KOH) conditions: 25 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.3 V vs. RHE, but with a much lower FE: 3.9%. Under both acidic and basic conditions, the FE suffers due to competition with HER.242
Suryanto and coworkers synthesized Ru-decorated MoS2 for selective NRR.244 They hypothesized that the MoS2 phase (i.e., 1T or 2H) controls the extent of parasitic HER. To make the various phases, lithiated MoS2 (LixMoS2) was reacted with a Ru precursor at 80 °C for 72 h to obtain the 1T phase, and the 2H phase was obtained by hydrothermal treatment of Ru/1T-MoS2 at 150 °C for 12 h. Comparison of the HER and NRR activities showed that pure 2H MoS2 and Ru/2H-MoS2 were better for NRR than pure 1T MoS2 and Ru/1T-MoS2. Ru/2H-MoS2 was the best NRR catalyst in the series, with ammonia yield rate of 6.98 μg h−1 mg−1 and a FE of 17.6% at 50 °C and −0.15 V vs. RHE. Notably, a dissociative reaction mechanism for NH3 formation was predicted by DFT calculations for these Ru based system.244
1T-MoS2 offers higher conductivity of electrons and more active basal plane sites than the semiconducting phase, but few reports have studied 1T-MoS2 for NRR. Patil and coworkers explored the electrochemical NRR activity of 1T-MoS2 grown on a Ni foil (Fig. 23a), employing LiClO4 as the electrolyte.245 In the presence of the Li, the 1T-MoS2-Ni showed a FE of 27.66% at −0.3 V vs. RHE (Fig. 23b), yielding NH3 at a rate of 1.05 μg min−1 cm−2 (63 μg h−1 cm−2). DFT calculations on this system predicted that a pseudo-six-membered ring with N2 (Fig. 23c) forms in the presence of Li+. This pseudo-ring formation reduced the energy barrier towards NRR and was also believed to suppress HER through the formation of strong Li–S interactions. Comparison of the adsorption free energies of NRR intermediates for the 1T phase, the 2H phase, and the 1T phase in the presence of Li+, suggested the most favorable pathway to be the 1T phase in the presence of Li+ (Fig. 23d).245
 Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of 1T MoS2 on Ni foil and (b) plot of NH3 yield rate and FE at different potentials vs. RHE in 0.25 M LiClO4 electrolyte. (c) Representative electron contour map of adsorbed N2 intermediate on a Mo atom of Li–MoS2, and (d) energy landscape of different MoS2 catalysts. Reprinted with permission.245 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) TEM images of 1T-MoS2 heterostructure on Ti3C2Tx MXene. (f) Ammonia yield rate and faradaic efficiency of 1T-MoS2 grown on Ti3C2 MXene. Reprinted with permission.279 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) TEM image of 1T-MoS2 on g-C3N4, and (h) ammonia production rate and faradaic efficiency for 1T-MoS2 on g-C3N4. Reprinted with permission.239 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. 
In addition to 1T MoS2 nanostructures, 1T MoS2 heterostructures have been reported for NRR. Xu et al. grew 1T MoS2 nanoparticles on exfoliated Ti3C2Tx using a hydrothermal method (Fig. 23e).279 The optimized NH3 yield rate was 36.28 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.35 V vs. RHE with a FE of 5.26%. FE increased at lower applied voltages, albeit at the expense of lower ammonia production rates (Fig. 23f). In a separate study, Xu et al. constructed 1T-MoS2 nanodot (ND) catalysts anchored on g-C3N4 (Fig. 23g), where the 1T-MoS2 was obtained via a hydrothermal reaction and interfaced with the g-C3N4via ultrasonic mixing.239 Optimized N2 electrolysis had an NH3 yield rate of 29.97 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.3 V, with a FE of 20.48% (Fig. 23h). At higher applied potentials, the rate decreased significantly to 7.9 μg h−1 mg−1 and the FE dropped to 0.62%. This large drop in FE was attributed to increased competition with HER.239 DFT calculations performed to explore the NRR mechanism on the 1T-MoS2 NDs indicated favorable N2 adsorption. The alternating pathway was found to be more favorable (*NNH to *NHNH), where the potential determining step was the fourth PCET step (*NHNH2 to *NH2 + NH3).239 In analyzing the results presented in Table 4, the 1T-MoS2 catalysts do not show a clear advantage in comparison to the 2H phase. With an increase in both conductivity and active sites one would expect a higher yield rate on these 1T materials. Nonetheless, the increase in conductivity and the active basal plane sites provide more sites for the parasitic HER, which could in turn reduce the sites available for N binding and NRR.
Table 4 Comparison of the experimental NRR activities of 2D TMDCs




Materials
Electrolyte
Activity
FE%
Potential V vs. RHE
Ref.




CC-carbon cloth, DR-defect rich, rGO-reduced graphene oxide, NC-nanocube, ND-nano dots, the rates indicated are the amount of ammonia in μg produced per hour of electrolysis on a unit mass of catalyst in mg. N/A-not applicable.




Electrochemical process


MoS2/CC
0.1 M Na2SO4
4.94 μg h−1 cm−2
1.17
−0.5 V

235



DR MoS2
0.1 M Na2SO4
29.28 μg h−1 mg−1
8.34
−0.4 V

240



MoS2 with Li interaction
0.1 M Li2SO4
43.4 μg h−1 mg−1
9.81
−0.2 V

259



MoS2–rGO
0.1 M LiClO4
24.82 μg h−1 mg−1
4.58
−0.45 V

246



3D hollow Co–MoS2
0.1 M Na2SO4
129.93 μg h−1 mg−1
11.21
−0.4 V

241



NiFe@MoS2 NCs
0.1 M Na2SO4
128.17 μg h−1 mg−1
11.34
−0.3 V

243



AuNP@MoS2
0.1 M HCl
4.40 μg h−1 mg−1
<1%
−0.3 V

242



0.1 M KOH
25.0 μg h−1 mg−1
3.9


0.1 M Na2SO4
5.65 μg h−1 mg−1
9.70


Ru/2H-MoS2
0.1 M Na2SO4
6.98 μg h−1 mg−1
17.6
−0.15 V

244



1T-MoS2 NDs/g-C3N4
0.1 M HCl
29.97 μg h−1 mg−1
20.48
−0.3 V

239



1T-MoS2-Ni
0.25 M LiCLO4
63 μg h−1 cm−2
27.66
−0.3 V

245



F-MoS2
0.05 M H2SO4
35.7 μg h−1 mg−1
20.6
−0.2 V

261



N-doped MoS2
0.1 M Na2SO4
69.82 μg h−1 mg−1
9.14
−0.3 V

260



1T-MoS2@Ti3C4
0.1 M HCl
30.33 μg h−1 mg−1
10.94
−0.3 V

279



MoS2/C3N4
0.1 M LiClO4
18.5 μg h−1 mg−1
17.8
−0.3 V

248



MoS2/C3N4
0.1 M Na2SO4
19.86 μg h−1 mg−1
6.87
−0.5 V

249



MoS2 NDs/RGO
0.1 M Na2SO4
16.41 μg h−1 mg−1@0.75 V vs. RHE
27.93
−0.35 V

247



Hollow MoSe2
0.1 M Na2SO4
11.2 μg h−1 mg−1
0.2
−0.6 V

250



1T@2H MoSe2
0.1 M Na2SO4
19.91 μg h−1 mg−1
2.82
−0.6 V

254



NbSe2
0.1 M Na2SO4
89.5 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.45 V vs. RHE
13.9
−0.4 V

253



NbS2
0.1 M HCl
37.58 μg h−1 mg−1
10.12
−0.5 V

251



Fe–ReS2@N-CNF
0.1 M Na2SO4
80.4 μg h−1 mg−1
12.3
−0.2 V

262



TiS2
0.1 M Na2SO4
16.02 μg h−1 mg−1
5.50
−0.6 V

255



B-doped VS2/CC
0.5 M LiClO4
55.7 μg h−1 mg−1
∼9
−0.4 V

252







Photoelectrochemical process


MoS2@TiO2
0.1 M Na2SO4
1.42 μmol h−1 cm−2
65.52
−0.2 V

256



100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G






Photochemical process


Ultra-thin MoS2
500 W xenon lamp in pH 3.5
5.525 μg h−1 mg−1
N/A



114



Pt/N–MoS2
300 W xenon lamp
2.060 μg h−1 mg−1





257



300 W xenon lamp, ultrasonication
2.275 μg h−1 mg−1


SV-1T-MoS2/CdS
Simulated solar AM 1.5G in 20 vol% methanol
139.8 μg L−1 h−1 mg−1cat





258



Fe–MoTe2
300 W xenon lamp in Milli-Q water
129.08 μmol g−1 h−1





263





Heterostructures of C-based materials, such as reduced graphene oxide and g-C3N4, with 2H MoS2 also generate NH3. Li et al. found that a reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/MoS2 (Fig. 24a) heterostructure generated an ammonia yield rate of 24.82 μg h−1 mg−1 and FE of 4.56% at −0.45 V vs. RHE (Fig. 24b).246 DFT calculations predicted that the PCET step *NH2NH2 to *NH2NH3 is the potential-determining step (Fig. 24c).246 Liu Y. et al. studied MoS2 nanodots anchored on rGO (Fig. 24d) as catalysts and achieved an NH3 yield rate of 16.41 μg h−1 mg−1 with a FE of 27.9% at −0.75 V vs. RHE (Fig. 24e).247 The authors note that strong bridging between the C–S–C bridging bonds enhanced electron transfer, thus improving electrocatalytic NRR on this hybrid structure (Fig. 24f).247 A study by Chu and coworkers found that 2D/2D MoS2/g-C3N4 heterostructures (Fig. 24g) produced NH3 at a yield rate of 18.5 μg h−1 mg−1 and 17.8% FE at −0.3 V vs. RHE (Fig. 24h).248 DFT calculations revealed that interfacial charge transfer from g-C3N4 to MoS2 stabilized a key intermediate *NH2 on Mo edge sites, concurrently decreasing the reaction energy barrier in the consequent step (Fig. 24i). Moreover, their DFT results showed that S edge sites favorably bind H atoms, thereby protecting the Mo edge sites that are active for NRR.248 In another study of a MoS2/g-C3N4 heterostructure catalyst,249 Zhao et al. found an NH3 yield rate of 19.86 μg h−1 mg−1 and 6.87% FE at −0.5 V vs. RHE. The authors suggested that interfacial Mo–N coordination and associated charge redistribution aided N adsorption and activation.249
 Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of MoS2 heterostructure grown on rGO, (b) the yield and FE% for ammonia generation on MoS2/rGO, and (c) comparison of the free energy pathways for MoS2 edge sites with and without the rGO. Reprinted with permission.246 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM showing MoS2 nanodots anchored on a rGO (MoS2 NDs/rGO) support, (e) ammonia yield rates and FE% for the MoS2 NDs/rGO heterostructure, and (f) comparison of the yields of ammonia at −0.75 V vs. RHE for MoS2 catalyst with and without the rGO support. Reprinted with permission.247 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) TEM image for MoS2 catalyst on graphitic C3N4 support (MoS2/C3N4), (h) the yield and FE% for ammonia generation for the corresponding catalyst, and (i) free energy diagram of the distal pathway for NRR on Mo edge sites of MoS2 in the presence (Mo1h) and absence of the graphitic C3N4 (Mo1). Reprinted with permission.248 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Most of the TMDCs employed for electrochemical NRR are MoS2 based. There are a few reports of MoSe2 based catalysts, and we did not find any NRR studies on MoTe2 being employed as catalysts for electrochemical NRR. Yang et al. employed a hydrothermal technique to synthesize hollow MoSe2 (H-MoSe2) for NRR (Fig. 25a).250 The study reports a FE of 14.2% at −0.1 V, and the highest yield rate reported was 11.2 μg h−1 mg−1 at an applied voltage of −0.6 V vs. RHE. The FE was low (0.2%) at −0.6 V, which the authors claim to be the NRR threshold voltage (Fig. 25b). DFT calculations were used to identify the probable reaction pathways and revealed that H-MoSe2 edge sites were the probable reaction sites. The calculations also show that the alternating path is preferred over the distal, with the rate-determining step being the protonation of *NHNH2 to *NH2NH2.250
 Fig. 25  (a) TEM image of hollow MoSe2 (H-MoSe2) with a flower like morphology, and (b) the yield and FE% for ammonia generation on (H-MoSe2) in 0.1 M LiClO4. Reprinted with permission.250 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of the NH3 yield rates and FE% of exfoliated and bulk NbS2 catalysts for the NRR. Reprinted with permission.251 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (d) HRTEM of boron doped VS2 with sulfur vacancies circled, (e) comparison of free energy pathways for NRR on VS2 with S vacancies (VS2-VS), and boron doped VS2 with S vacancies (B-VS-VS2) along a mixed pathway, and (f) NH3 yield rates and FE% for B-VS2 in a LiClO4 electrolyte. Reprinted with permission.252 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) SEM images of self-supported NbSe2 nanosheet arrays (NbSe2 NSA) on a Ni foam, (h) FE and yield rate plot for NbSe2 NSA in a Na2SO4 electrolyte, and (i) free energy pathways (distal and alternating) for NRR on NbSe2 catalyst. Reprinted with permission.253 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. 
Wu et al. studied multiphasic (1T/2H) MoSe2 for electrochemical NRR.254 1T@2H MoSe2 was synthesized using a hydrothermal technique that formed aggregates of sheets, and the ammonia yield rate reached 19.91 μg h−1 mg−1 at an applied potential of −0.6 V vs. RHE. The authors also examined different solvents (0.1 M KOH, 0.1 M LiClO4, and 0.1 M HCl), where the highest ammonia FE and yield rates were in neutral solvents LiClO4 and Na2SO4. For all solvents, the highest FE was observed at −0.5 V vs. RHE and the highest yield rate occurred at −0.6 V vs. RHE. The decrease of the FE at higher potentials was attributed to increased HER.254 Since the results from these MoSe2 studies are on par with the FEs and yield rates of MoS2 catalysts, it is not yet clear if changing the chalcogen atom can lead to considerable differences in NRR.
Studies have also explored different transition metal TMDCs other than Mo. DFT studies performed by Li and coworkers, described earlier in this chapter, predicted that among six transition metal sulfides (V, Nb, Ti, Mo, W, and Ta) the activity for the NRR to follow VS2 > NbS2 > TiS2 > MoS2 > WS2 > TaS2.221 Among the series of 2D TMDCs studied, independent studies led by various groups have explored V, Nb, Mo, and Ti disulfides (Table 4) for electrochemical NRR, and we did not find NRR studies on W or Ta disulfides.251,255 Interestingly, the disulfides of vanadium and niobium show superior ammonia yield rates to most of the molybdenum disulfide-based catalysts. Wang et al. synthesized NbS2 nanosheets via a liquid exfoliation method using N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and reported a maximum NRR FE of 10.12% and a NH3 yield rate of 37.58 μg h−1 mg−1 (−0.5 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M HCl electrolyte, Fig. 25c).251 Li et al. investigated VS2 as a potential NRR catalyst by activating the basal plane using a synergistic effect of creating S vacancies and boron doping (Fig. 25d).252 The results indicate a relatively high yield rate for NH3 generation (55.7 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.4 V) in a LiClO4 electrolyte. The highest FE of 16.4% was recorded at −0.2 V vs. RHE (Fig. 25e). In comparison to pure VS2, which produced NH3 at a rate of ∼18 μg h−1 mg−1, the B doping and sulfur vacancies improved the activity at least three-fold. DFT calculations on the basal plane of VS2 did not show favorable binding towards nitrogen, nevertheless the sulfur vacancy sites on the basal plane showed sufficient binding of N2 molecules in an end-on orientation. Relative to VS2 with S vacancies, B-doped VS2 showed stronger binding of N2; moreover, the binding free energy for H (ΔGH) becomes >0 eV, implying a lower binding for H and preferential binding of N2 over H.252 The electron deficient site due to boron doping creates a partial positive charge on the site, which has been shown to enhance N2 activation.235,252 More importantly, the potential-determining step (*N2 to *NNH) has a lower reaction barrier on the B doped surface, thus improving NRR catalytic activity (Fig. 25f). Jia et al. probed the catalytic activity of TiS2 nanosheets (TiS2 NSs) in electrochemical NRR, where electrolysis of N2 in 0.1 M Na2SO4 for 2 h produced ammonia at a yield rate of 16.02 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.6 V with a FE of 5.50%.255 Overall, it is not possible at this time to provide a direct comparison of each system due to the use of various experimental conditions and fabrication techniques of the catalysts and electrodes. Nevertheless, theory-led predictions on TMDCs can be utilized to identify reaction sites and improve the catalytic activity of TMDC based electrocatalysts for NRR.
Wang et al. has reported the use of a self-supported NbSe2 nanosheet array (NbSe2-NSA) on a Ni foam as a NRR catalyst (Fig. 25g).253 The use of the Ni foam led to a 3D nanoarchitecture that increased the exposure of active NbSe2 active sites and reduced mass diffusion limitations. The catalyst achieved a highest FE of 13.9% at −0.4 V vs. RHE and a highest yield rate of 89.5 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.45 V vs. RHE in a Na2SO4 electrolyte (Fig. 25h). DFT calculations revealed that Nb edge sites favorably bind nitrogen molecules and activate the N2 molecule for NRR (Fig. 25i). Charge transfer from Nb atoms helps in the activation of the N–N triple bond. The calculations also revealed that the most favorable pathway for the reaction is the alternating pathway, owing to the potential determining step of the first hydrogenation step (*N2 to *NNH).
In addition to electrochemical nitrogen reduction, 2H MoS2 has also been successfully interfaced with TiO2 to form ammonia in photoelectrochemical studies. Ye et al. proposed NRR on a MoS2/TiO2 heterostructure catalyst 256 The authors show coupling to MoS2 reduces the optical band gap of TiO2 from 3.15 eV to 2.98 eV, allowing the catalyst to utilize a wider range of the solar spectrum (Fig. 26a). The transient photocurrent response is shown in Fig. 26b. The presence of the heterostructure provided good charge separation (electrons and holes) minimizing charge recombination. The catalyst recorded a yield rate of 1.42 μmol h−1 cm−2 with FE of 65.52% at −0.2 V vs. RHE (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G) (Fig. 26c). In this heterostructure, MoS2 accepts photogenerated electrons from TiO2 and acts as NRR cocatalyst (Fig. 26a).256
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of the N2 reduction mechanism on MoS2@TiO2 under PEC conditions. (b) Transient photocurrent response for the MoS2@TiO2 (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G) with repeated ON–OFF cycles and (c) ammonia yield rates under PEC. Reprinted with permission.256 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2 Photochemical NRR. 
The use of TMDCs as NRR photochemical catalysts has only been reported in a few studies. Although most of these photochemical studies have focused on TMDCs coupled to metal co-catalysts or heterostructures, one report used ultrathin MoS2 alone in photocatalytic NRR.114 Ultrathin MoS2 sheets were obtained by sonication of hydrothermally synthesized MoS2 bulk particles. The authors suggest that photogenerated excitons (electron–hole pairs) and negative trions (two electrons and a hole) allow multiple electrons to transfer to nitrogen adsorbed at S vacancies (Fig. 27a). These multi-electron transfers reduce the number of intermediates towards NH3 production, thus reducing the kinetic and the thermodynamic barriers associated with multiple intermediates. The authors show that a simultaneous six-electron reduction on these ultrathin sheets of MoS2 yields ammonia at a yield rate of 325 μmol g−1 h−1 (5.525 μg h−1 mg−1) (Fig. 27b) using a 500 W xenon lamp as the illumination source.114
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic representation of trion formation and nitrogen fixation on ultra-thin MoS2. (b) Plot of ammonia yield of ultra-thin MoS2 samples under illumination from a 500 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter. Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. (c) Band diagram with schematic representation of the NRR on Pt/N–MoS2 under sonophotofixation conditions. (d) Plot of NH3 yield rate and FE for Pt/N–MoS2 under irradiation (300 W xenon lamp). Reprinted with permission.257 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. 
Most 2D MoS2 photocatalysts require a metal co-catalyst or heterostructure to undergo N2 photoreduction to generate NH3. Zhu and coworkers synthesized a Pt loaded, N-doped MoS2 (Pt/N–MoS2) (Fig. 27c) microsphere for nitrogen fixation.257 In this study, the authors showed that Pt/N–MoS2 microspheres generate NH3 at a yield rate of 121.2 μmol g−1 h−1 (300 W xenon lamp), and the NH3 yield rate was improved by performing photochemical NRR under ultrasonication (sonophotofixation): 133.8 μmol g−1 h−1 (2.275 μg h−1 mg−1) (Fig. 27d). N doping is believed to introduce an impurity energy level above the VBM of MoS2, which reduces the band gap (Fig. 27c). The presence of the Pt nanoparticles creates a Schottky barrier, such that conduction band electrons become centralized on surface Pt and have a higher chance of reducing N2.257
Sun et al. employed an oxygen doped 1T-MoS2/CdS heterostructure rich in sulfur vacancies (SV-1T-MoS2/CdS) for the photochemical NRR.258 The 30 wt% SV-1T-MoS2/CdS (30 wt% refers to the percentage of SV-1T-MoS2 relative to CdS) outperformed a 0.1 wt% Pt/CdS catalyst under similar reaction conditions (simulated solar AM 1.5G). The 30 wt% SV-1T-MoS2/CdS showed an NH3 yield rate of 8220.83 μmol L−1 h−1 g−1 (139.8 μg L−1 h−1 mg−1cat) in a 20 vol% methanol solution, where methanol acts as a hole scavenger. The sulfur vacancies introduce defect sites that act as electron capture sites for the photoexcited electrons to reduce N2. According to their DFT results, the reaction mechanism contains mixed alternating and distal pathways, where the potential determining step is *NHNH2 to *NH2 + *NH3.258 The 2D TMDCs as NRR catalysts are showing promising results; however, there are still areas of opportunity within the structure, composition, and phase engineering to overcome the NRR challenges.

4.3 2D MXenes

4.3.1 Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical NRR. 
In 2016, Azofra and coworkers predicted the 2D d2–d4 M3C2 transition metal carbides (MXenes) to be prospective NRR catalysts.222 Since then, a handful of studies have looked at electrochemical NRR with MXenes (Table 5). Zhao et al. found that Ti3C2Tx, Tx = F, OH (Fig. 28a) could achieve an NH3 yield rate of 20.4 μg h−1 mg−1 with FE of 9.3% at −0.4 V vs. RHE (Fig. 28b).236 DFT calculations revealed that the most favorable orientation for N2 adsorption was side-on, where the N–N bond elongates to 1.268 Å. In contrast, end-on adsorption showed bond elongation to 1.194 Å. First-principles calculations showed that a distal pathway is preferred over the alternating pathway (labeled as mixed in Fig. 28c).236 Xia and coworkers engineered Ti3C2Tx surfaces to obtain OH, F, and O surface-terminated MXenes as shown in Fig. 28d, e and f, respectively.264 They found that the best performance was with OH surface termination at 60 °C (reaction temperature) to give an ammonia yield rate of ∼12 μg h−1 cm−2 (0.8 μg h−1 mg−1) with FE of 9.03% at −0.2V vs. RHE (Fig. 28g). DFT results suggested that OH terminations, compared to the F and O surface terminations, increase the DOS around the Fermi level and thus lower the charge transfer resistance to the adsorbed N2.264
Table 5 Comparison of the NRR activities of 2D MXenes




Materials
Electrolyte
Activity
FE%
Potential V vs. RHE
Ref.





a SSM-stainless steel mesh, the rates indicated are the amount of ammonia in μg produced per hour of electrolysis on a unit mass of catalyst in mg.





Electrochemical process


Ti3C2Tx
0.1 M HCl
20.4 μg h−1 mg−1
9.3
−0.4 V

236



Ti3C2OH
0.1 M KOH
1.17 μg h−1 cm−2
7.01
−0.2 V@20 °C

264



12 μg h−1 cm−2
9.03
−0.2 V@60 °C


Ti3C2Tx-SSMa
0.5 M Li2SO4
2.68 μg h−1 mg−1
4.62
−0.1 V

265



Ti3C2Tx-FeOOH
0.33 μg h−1 mg−1
0.09
−0.5 V


Ti3C2Tx ironed
0.05 M H2SO4
21.9 μg h−1 mg−1
25.44
−0.2 V

266



TiO2/Ti3C2Tx
0.1 M HCl
32.17 μg h−1 mg−1
16.07
−0.55 V

267



Au@Ti3C2
0.05 M HCl
30.06 μg h−1 mg−1
18.34
−0.2 V

269



Ru@Ti3C2
0.1 M KOH
2.3 μmol h−1 cm−2
13.13
−0.4 V

270



Ru–Mo2CTx
0.5 M K2SO4
40.57 μg h−1 mg−1
25.77
−0.3 V

268







Photochemical process


Ti3C2Tx/TiO2 hybrid
Full spectrum xenon
7.174 μg h−1 mg−1





271



Ti3C2Tx/P25
300 W xenon lamp
10.74 μmol h−1 g−1





272



Methanol
43.44 μmol h−1 g−1


RuO2@TiO2–MXene
Xenon lamp
425 μmol L−1 g−1





273





 Fig. 28  (a) SEM image of Ti3C2Tx (Tx = F, OH) MXene. (b) Ammonia yield rate plots for the Ti3C2Tx MXenes at different applied potentials and (c) reaction scheme for the nitrogen fixation for Ti3C2 MXene for distal and mixed mechanisms. Reprinted with permission.236 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) are HR-TEM images of the Ti3C2Tx MXene with varying functional groups OH, F and O, respectively. (g) Plot of ammonia yield for different surface functional groups on Ti3C2Tx MXene and for different surface terminations. Reprinted with permission.264 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. 
Other reports have increased NRR performance with MXenes by using heterostructures, defects, and metal cocatalysts. Luo et al. explored Ti3C2Tx MXenes attached to a vertically (perpendicular) and horizontally (parallel) aligned metal host electrode (FeOOH nanosheets) for NRR (Fig. 29a and b).265 The vertically configured Ti3C2Tx assembly had better NRR electrochemical activity yielding 5.78% FE at −0.2 V vs. RHE (Fig. 29c) but with a low yield rate of 0.148 μg h−1 mg−1. DFT results revealed that Ti3C2O2 edge sites have optimal N2 binding energies, with exposed Ti atoms being particularly active towards NRR. Thus, the vertical orientation with more exposed Ti edges (confirmed with HRTEM and FFT patterns) had better NRR activity.265
 Fig. 29  (a) SEM images of vertical configured Ti3C2Tx on FeOOH and (b) HRTEM image of MXene nanosheets with exposed Ti. (c) Yield rate for the formation of ammonia on the Ti3C2Tx grown on vertically aligned FeOOH. Reprinted with permission.265 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc. (d) Schematic of surface functional groups being replaced with Fe calcination on the Ti3C2Tx surface. (e) HRTEM showing the TiO2/Fe2O3 on the MXene surface. (f) Comparison of the NH3 yield rates and FE of pristine MXenes with TiFeOx heterostructures. Reprinted with permission.266 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) STEM-EDS mapping of single atom (SA) Ru on Mo2CTx MXene, and (h) ammonia yield rate comparison on the pure MXene, Ru/C, and SA Ru–Mo2CTx. Reprinted with permission.268 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
The etching process used in MXene synthesis is thought to reduce the density of surface metal sites that are predicted to be most active for NRR, since O, F, and OH surface terminations are unavoidable.266 Guo et al. modified the surface terminations by introducing iron (Fe) in the etching step to replace F*/OH* surface terminations with Fe atoms (Fig. 29d).266 The Fe surface modification reduced the Ti3C2Tx surface work function, which increased the DOS near EF and lowered the energy barrier for efficient electron transfer from the catalyst to the adsorbed N2 molecules and reaction intermediates. This Fe-modified Ti3C2Tx (Fig. 29e) catalyst generated ammonia at a yield rate of 21.9 μg h−1 mg−1 with FE of 25.44% at −0.2 V vs. RHE (Fig. 29f).266 Fang et al. coupled oxygen-vacancy-rich TiO2 to Ti3C2Tx by reacting Ti3C2Tx in ethanol under hydrothermal conditions, where TiO2 nanoparticles attached to exposed edge Ti sites.267 The Ti3C2Tx support prevents TiO2 nanoparticle aggregation and also provides a conductive backbone to give an ammonia yield rate of 32.17 μg h−1 mg−1 with FE of 16.07% at −0.55 V vs. RHE. DFT results identified oxygen vacancies as the active sites, where the adsorbed N2 had an increased bond length from 1.109 Å to 1.136 Å, and then the activated N2 proceeds via a distal pathway with an end-on orientation. The potential-determining step was identified as the second PCET step (NNH* to NNH2*), whereas the potential-determining steps for pure TiO2 and Ti3C2Tx surfaces were identified as the first PCET step (i.e., NN* to NNH*).267
MXenes have also been coupled with metal co-catalysts for NRR. Liu and coworkers interfaced gold nanoparticles with a Ti3C2Tx (Tx = OH) MXene.269 The interface between the Au and Ti3C2 weakened (activated) N2 molecules by increasing the N–N triple bond length. The Au@Ti3C2 showed an ammonia yield rate of 30.06 μg h−1 mg−1 reaching a FE of 18.34% at −0.2 V. DFT calculations identified an alternating pathway as the most probable route for NH3 production with the potential-determining step being *NH2NH2 to *NH2 + NH3.269 Ru-decorated Ti3C2 MXene (Ru@Ti3C2) was studied as an ambient NRR catalysis by Liu et al., where they achieved an ammonia yield rate of 2.3 μmol h−1 cm−2 with a FE of 13.13% at −0.4 V vs. RHE.270 Peng et al. demonstrated Ru-decorated Mo2CTx MXenes (Fig. 29g) that produce NH3 at a yield rate of 40.57 μg h−1 mg−1 and 25.77% FE at −0.3 V vs. RHE (Fig. 29h).268 X-ray absorption studies revealed a positive valence state (+3.27) of Ru in the heterostructure, which under operando electrochemical conditions increased up to +3.56. This increase is due to a delocalization of the unpaired electrons in the Ru 3d orbital and charge transfer from Ru atoms to the N2 antibonding π* orbitals activating N2 for NRR.268 To the best of our knowledge, photoelectrochemical NRR with MXenes is very rare; therefore, this is an area ripe with opportunity.


4.3.2 Photochemical NRR. 
Since most MXenes are metallic, photochemical catalytic reactions primarily use MXenes as NRR co-catalysts with a second semiconducting photoabsorber, which is similar to CO2RR in the previous section. As an example, several studies have successfully converted some of the surface Ti atoms in Ti3C2Tx to TiO2 to act as a photoabsorber. Hou and coworkers synthesized a Ti3C2Tx/TiO2 hybrid structure by heating Ti3C2Tx (Tx = OH, O, F) at 400 °C under ambient conditions (Fig. 30a).271 The Ti3C2Tx/TiO2 hybrid structure produced NH3 at a yield rate of 7.174 μg h−1 mg−1 under full spectrum irradiation of a xenon lamp. The hybrid catalyst also exhibited a considerable yield rate of ammonia (∼80 μmol h−1 mg−1) with near infrared (NIR) illumination only (Fig. 30b). The Ti3C2Tx/TiO2 hybrid showed a broad plasmonic absorption band at ∼550 nm, which resulted in visible and NIR light generating hot electrons. The presence of defect states (oxygen vacancies) on the TiO2 enabled charge separation, efficiently trapping electrons at these oxygen vacancies for NRR, and DFT results supported this conclucusion.271
 Fig. 30  (a) HAADF-STEM image of TiO2 grown on Ti3C2Tx MXene (Ti3C2Tx/TiO2-400). (b) Plots of ammonia yield rates for (Ti3C2Tx/TiO2) with monochromatic light. Reprinted with permission.271 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (c) SEM micrograph of 6% Ti3C2Tx MXene-P25, and (d) corresponding ammonia yield rates for samples with varying weight fraction of Ti3C2 (full spectrum irradiation with a 300 W Xe lamp) carried out in methanol. Reprinted with permission.272 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (e) SEM image of as-prepared RuO2@TiO2–MXene, and (f) ammonia yield rate comparison for RuO2@TiO2-MXene with TiO2–MXene and RuO2 samples irradiated with a Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2). Reprinted with permission.273 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. 
Liao et al. constructed a Ti3C2Tx/P25 heterostructure (P25 = 80% anatase and 20% rutile phases of TiO2) by mixing P25 with different MXene weight ratios followed by calcination at 300 °C in a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 30c).272 NRR in water showed an optimal NH3 yield rate of 10.74 μmol h−1 g−1 with 6% MXene loading. The same reaction carried out in methanol produced a 4-fold improvement (43.44 μmol h−1 g−1), where the improved activity was attributed to methanol being a better hole scavenger than water (Fig. 30d). The authors claim the MXene loading generated oxygen vacancies (due to partial migration of oxygen from P25 to the interface between the P25 and the MXene during the calcination) that slowed electron–hole pair recombination and promoted N2 adsorption and activation.272 Hao et al. used a TiO2–Ti3C2Tx loaded with RuO2 (Fig. 30e), where photoexcited TiO2 can transfer electrons to Ti3C2Tx for NRR catalysis.273 Under irradiation with a xenon lamp, the RuO2@TiO2–MXene catalyst yielded 425 μmol L−1 g−1 of NH3 after 450 min (Fig. 30f). The authors claim the large adsorption energies on the Ti3C2Tx captured and activated the N2 molecules for NRR and that RuO2 nanoparticles with significant amounts of Ru(0) reduced the energy barrier for the first PCET step, thus increasing the NRR activity.273 With 2D MXenes still being realized, there is a lot of opportunity for overcoming the current NRR challenges with these emerging 2D catalysts.

5. Conclusion and perspective
Environmental concerns related to greenhouse gas emissions and energy-intensive chemical manufacturing processes have instigated a large push for fuels, fertilizers, and feedstocks to come from renewable materials and chemicals in an energy efficient manner. One emerging strategy involves 2D TMDCs and MXene catalysts for CO2RR and NRR that we have highlighted in this review to be a potential environmentally friendly and low-cost option. To realize commercially viable 2D catalysts, innovative strategies seek to use the tunable structures, energetics, and mechanical properties of 2D TMDCs and MXenes to lower activation energy barriers for chemisorption and hydrogenation of CO2 and N2 and improve reaction kinetics and selectivity.
In this Review, we introduced the recent progress on developing 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts through (photo)electrochemical and photochemical processes for CO2RR and NRR. We discuss the relevant electronic and physical structures along with the various synthesis methods, possible reaction mechanisms including key intermediates and final products, and the current achievements in theoretical and experimental studies for CO2RR and NRR. Despite recent efforts on 2D materials and their heterostructures for enhanced intrinsic catalytic activity, it is important to note that CO2RR and NRR continue to face challenges on the slow reaction kinetics and poor product selectivity. In practice, there are still several uncultivated ‘lands’ for rational design of CO2RR and NRR catalysts based on 2D TMDCs and MXenes, which remain to be ‘ploughed’ for reaching the efficiency, stability, and cost needed for industrial applications.
First, the active sites of most intrinsic 2D TMDCs and MXenes are usually limited to the edges. Developing strategies for activating the inert basal planes (e.g., strain, phase change, defects, and functionalization) and increase edge densities through different morphologies (e.g., vertically oriented 2D materials and flower shape) are promising avenues for efficient CO2RR and NRR. Second, the recent development of single-atom catalysts opens additional avenues for 2D materials as host materials. Coupling single atom catalysts (SAC) with 2D host materials has the opportunity for dense decoration of single atoms, due to the large surface/volume ratio. The single atom catalyst also has the potential to locally perturb the electronic states of 2D TMDC/MXene and could impact the activation/intermediate steps, as has been previously suggested.31 The roles of catalytic control and regulation by each component within these SAC-TMDC/MXene catalysts are still poorly understood and represent areas of opportunity. The engineering of the single atom/2D material is suitable for both theoretical and experimental studies for CO2RR and NRR, where controllable synthesis methods need to be developed for the desired configurations.
Third, the current synthesis procedures of 2D TMDCs and MXenes are complex and are typically performed on the microscale. Therefore, industrial-scale production and manufacturing of these 2D materials with low-cost, repeatability, and high stability is urgently needed before commercialization of these catalysts can be realized. Some potential scalable synthesis routes would be liquid exfoliation, chemical exfoliation, hydrothermal growth, etc.274,275 Fourth, the catalysts (composition, size, shape, oxidation state, and crystallographic structure), electrolytes (cation, anion, concentration, and pH), temperature, pressure, and applied potentials are all critical to the CO2RR and NRR scheme and still need to optimized.134 For example, the most studied compositions of TMDCs in the literature revolve around Mo or W for the transition metal and S or Se for the chalcogenide. Further composition explorations are necessary to develop other TMDCs and MXenes for CO2RR and NRR.
Overall, such 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts are not industrially viable yet for CO2RR and NRR due to low yields and conversion efficiencies. Although recent lab-scale electrocatalysts can transform CO2 into C1 products (CO or formate) with over 95% FE with high production rates (>20 mA cm−2 for H-type cell and >100 mA cm−2 for flow cell), the large intrinsic energy barrier of CO2 capture and selective production of long-chain (C2+) feedstocks in high efficiencies are still far away from the magnitude of industrial catalysts (>100s mA cm−2).245 As a goal for electrochemical NH3 generation, DOE ARPA-E has targeted NH3 yield rates of 10−6 mol−1 cm−2, FE of 90%, and energy efficiencies of 60% with minimal catalyst degradation over 1000 h, which are also much greater than the current state of the art.246,276 Therefore, the immediate challenge of 2D TMDCs and MXenes for CO2RR and NRR is understanding how to enhance and control the catalytic activities and then scaling up the appropriate catalysts.
Besides the mechanistic understanding and catalyst development, future research efforts also need to go beyond the catalyst to focus on the surrounding microenvironment to understand how the catalytic site is affected by these other reaction conditions. For example, trace impurities in the electrolyte can deactivate catalytic sites and affect catalyst performance, while nonaqueous and ionic-liquid electrolyte could increase the CO2 and N2 solubility and product selectivity. Also, to increase the N2 and CO2 solubility at the catalyst surface and improve product seperation, the reactors and electrodes could be designed to have better seperation of cathodic/anodic products as well as control the reaction kinetics at the three-phase boundary. For example, gas diffusion electrodes (GDE) have been widely studied as critical components in gas-phase electrolyzers for overcoming diffusion limitations of gas molecules from the bulk solution to the electrode surface.277 This exploration is still limited within the 2D TMDC and MXene catalyst community and could be an area of opportunity to increase the FE and yield rates. 2D TMDCs and MXenes offer great opportunities to repurpose emitted CO2 into C-based fuels and provide lower energy routes to NH3 production via (photo)electrochemical and photochemical routes and, therefore, should continue to be studied and investigated.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was authored by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, operated by Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. Funding provided by the Solar Photochemistry Program, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
References
X. Zhu and Y. Li, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2019, 9, e1416 CAS .
X. Guo, H. Du, F. Qu and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3531–3543 RSC .
C. Smith, A. K. Hill and L. Torrente-Murciano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 331–344 RSC .
S. Lukman, L. Ding, L. Xu, Y. Tao, A. C. Riis-Jensen, G. Zhang, Q. Y. S. Wu, M. Yang, S. Luo, C. Hsu, L. Yao, G. Liang, H. Lin, Y. W. Zhang, K. S. Thygesen, Q. J. Wang, Y. Feng and J. Teng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 675–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, H. Polshyn, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and A. F. Young, Nat. Phys., 2019, 16, 154–158 Search PubMed .
H. Jiang, L. Zheng, Z. Liu and X. Wang, InfoMat, 2019, 2, 1077–1094 Search PubMed .
D. Akinwande, C. Huyghebaert, C. H. Wang, M. I. Serna, S. Goossens, L. J. Li, H. P. Wong and F. H. L. Koppens, Nature, 2019, 573, 507–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Nam, S. S. Park, R. Dos Reis, V. P. Dravid, H. Kim, C. A. Mirkin and J. F. Stoddart, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4948 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, J. Li, F. Wu, S.-S. Li and J.-B. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20466–20470 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, J. Wu, T. Yu, J. Lv, H. Liu and X. Xu, Front. Phys., 2020, 16, 23201 CrossRef .
A. Molle, J. Goldberger, M. Houssa, Y. Xu, S.-C. Zhang and D. Akinwande, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 163–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Côté, H. M. El-Kaderi, H. Furukawa, J. R. Hunt and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12914–12915 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Colson, A. R. Woll, A. Mukherjee, M. P. Levendorf, E. L. Spitler, V. B. Shields, M. G. Spencer, J. Park and W. R. Dichtel, Science, 2011, 332, 228–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, J. Xue and W. Kang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 595–596, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7660–7673 RSC .
Z. Fu, N. Wang, D. Legut, C. Si, Q. Zhang, S. Du, T. C. Germann, J. S. Francisco and R. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11980–12031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .

          D. L. Anderson, Theory of the Earth, Blackwell Scientific Publications,  1989 Search PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Sayahpour, P. Abbasi, A. T. Ngo, K. Karis, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Liu, B. Narayanan, M. Gerard, P. Yasaei, X. Hu, A. Mukherjee, K. C. Lau, R. S. Assary, F. Khalili-Araghi, R. F. Klie, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nature, 2018, 555, 502–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, J. Yang and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6197–6206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, A. V. Kuklin, A. Baev, Y. Ge, H. Ågren, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Phys. Rep., 2020, 848, 1–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kakekhani and S. Ismail-Beigi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4537–4545 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712 RSC .
W. Yuan, L. Cheng, Y. An, H. Wu, N. Yao, X. Fan and X. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8976–8982 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, P. Sherrell, Y. Liu, W. Lei, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903870 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vikraman, S. Hussain, K. Akbar, K. Karuppasamy, S.-H. Chun, J. Jung and H.-S. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 458–469 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, P. Tuo, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Bao, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Hart, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. C. Lang, B. Anasori, D. Pinto, Y. Pivak, J. T. van Omme, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. L. Taheri, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, N. Gao, S. Zhou and J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 19390–19397 RSC .
A. Hasani, M. A. Teklagne, H. H. Do, S. H. Hong, Q. Van Le, S. H. Ahn and S. Y. Kim, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 158–175 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiao, K. Zheng, L. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6592–6604 RSC .
G. Zhang, Y. Li, C. He, X. Ren, P. Zhang and H. Mi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003294 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huan, J. Shi, G. Zhao, X. Yan and Y. Zhang, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1801025 Search PubMed .
Y. Wei, R. A. Soomro, X. Xie and B. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 55, 244–255 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Q. Huang, H. Huang, L. Mao, M. Liu, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3574–3592 RSC .
Y. Yuan, R.-T. Guo, L.-F. Hong, X.-Y. Ji, Z.-S. Li, Z.-D. Lin and W.-G. Pan, Colloids Surf. A, 2021, 611, 125836 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. H. Pan, R. Yang, L. H. Bao, L. Meng, H. L. Luo, Y. Q. Cai, G. D. Liu, W. J. Zhao, Z. Zhou, L. M. Wu, Z. L. Zhu, M. Huang, L. W. Liu, L. Liu, P. Cheng, K. H. Wu, S. B. Tian, C. Z. Gu, Y. G. Shi, Y. F. Guo, Z. G. Cheng, J. P. Hu, L. Zhao, G. H. Yang, E. Sutter, P. Sutter, Y. L. Wang, W. Ji, X. J. Zhou and H. J. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Attanayake, A. C. Thenuwara, A. Patra, Y. V. Aulin, T. M. Tran, H. Chakraborty, E. Borguet, M. L. Klein, J. P. Perdew and D. R. Strongin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Motter, K. J. Koski and Y. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2313–2317 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, K. Leng, X. Zhao, S. Malkhandi, W. Tang, B. Tian, L. Dong, L. Zheng, M. Lin, B. S. Yeo and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ayari, E. Cobas, O. Ogundadegbe and M. S. Fuhrer, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 014507 CrossRef .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, K. Ganapathi and S. Salahuddin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3768–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Anichini, W. Czepa, D. Pakulski, A. Aliprandi, A. Ciesielski and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4860–4908 RSC .
Y. F. Lin, Y. Xu, S. T. Wang, S. L. Li, M. Yamamoto, A. Aparecido-Ferreira, W. Li, H. Sun, S. Nakaharai, W. B. Jian, K. Ueno and K. Tsukagoshi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3263–3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Thi Xuyen and J.-M. Ting, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 17348–17355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Y. Xiao, X. Luo, Z. Wu, Y.-J. Wang and B. Fang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2509–2515 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Soon and K. P. Loh, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A250 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Enyashin, L. Yadgarov, L. Houben, I. Popov, M. Weidenbach, R. Tenne, M. Bar-Sadan and G. Seifert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24586–24591 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, W. Sun, W. Wu, B. Chen, A. Al-Hilo, M. Benamara, H. Zhu, F. Watanabe, J. Cui and T.-P. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Calandra, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 245428 CrossRef .
N. H. Attanayake, L. Dheer, A. C. Thenuwara, S. C. Abeyweera, C. Collins, U. V. Waghmare and D. R. Strongin, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3606–3615 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Putungan, S.-H. Lin and J.-L. Kuo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21702–21708 RSC .
D. B. Sulas-Kern, E. M. Miller and J. L. Blackburn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2684–2740 RSC .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. E. Pam, Y. Shi and H. Y. Yang, FlatChem, 2017, 4, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hantanasirisakul and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804779 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, B. C. Wyatt, S. K. Nemani and B. Anasori, MRS Bull., 2020, 45, 850–861 CrossRef .
Á. Morales-García, M. Mayans-Llorach, F. Viñes and F. Illas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23136–23142 RSC .
S. M. Eichfeld, L. Hossain, Y.-C. Lin, A. F. Piasecki, B. Kupp, A. G. Birdwell, R. A. Burke, N. Lu, X. Peng, J. Li, A. Azcatl, S. McDonnell, R. M. Wallace, M. J. Kim, T. S. Mayer, J. M. Redwing and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2080–2087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Gouveia, F. Viñes, F. Illas and J. R. B. Gomes, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2020, 4, 054003 CrossRef CAS .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
Y. Xie and P. R. C. Kent, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235441 CrossRef .
I. R. Shein and A. L. Ivanovskii, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 65, 104–114 CrossRef CAS .
I. Persson, J. Halim, H. Lind, T. W. Hansen, J. B. Wagner, L.-Å. Näslund, V. Darakchieva, J. Palisaitis, J. Rosen and P. O. Å. Persson, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805472 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. C. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Hart, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. C. Lang, B. Anasori, D. Pinto, Y. Pivak, J. T. van Omme, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. L. Taheri, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Gouveia, Á. Morales-García, F. Viñes, J. R. B. Gomes and F. Illas, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5049–5056 CrossRef CAS .
S. Posada-Pérez, P. J. Ramírez, R. A. Gutiérrez, D. J. Stacchiola, F. Viñes, P. Liu, F. Illas and J. A. Rodriguez, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 6766–6777 RSC .
A. Kurlov, E. B. Deeva, P. M. Abdala, D. Lebedev, A. Tsoukalou, A. Comas-Vives, A. Fedorov and C. R. Muller, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Benameur, B. Radisavljevic, J. S. Héron, S. Sahoo, H. Berger and A. Kis, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 125706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Grayfer, M. N. Kozlova and V. E. Fedorov, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 245, 40–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O'Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, J. Chen, J. Wang, A. I. Minett, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, A. Gomathi, A. K. Manna, D. J. Late, R. Datta, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4059–4062 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Gupta, B. S. Naidu, U. Maitra, A. Singh, S. N. Shirodkar, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 092802 CrossRef .
M. A. Py and R. R. Haering, Can. J. Phys., 1983, 61, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lin, X. Zhu, J. Feng, C. Wu, S. Hu, J. Peng, Y. Guo, L. Peng, J. Zhao, J. Huang, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5144–5151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Patel and A. A. Balchin, J. Mater. Sci., 1985, 20, 917–921 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Tan, B. Liu, J. H. Teng, S. Guo, H. Y. Low and K. P. Loh, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10584–10588 RSC .
D. Fu, X. Zhao, Y.-Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Xu, A. R. Jang, S. I. Yoon, P. Song, S. M. Poh, T. Ren, Z. Ding, W. Fu, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9392–9400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheon, J. E. Gozum and G. S. Girolami, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1847–1853 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Hofmann, J. Mater. Sci., 1988, 23, 3981–3986 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, S. Gao, K. Wang, M. Zhou, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7963 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Peng, Z. Meng, C. Zhong, J. Lu, W. Yu, Z. Yang and Y. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 159, 170–173 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, H. Xu, D. Zhang and S. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 55, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2789–2793 RSC .
D. Wang, Z. Pan, Z. Wu, Z. Wang and Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Gan, T. Wu, W. Ma, D. Han and L. Niu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12193–12202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, N. Li, Z. Xu, A. Fisher and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 131–135 RSC .
H. Yuan, J. Li, C. Yuan and Z. He, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1828–1833 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhou, J. Liu, Y. Shi, S. Jiang, D. Wang, Y. Hu and Z. Gui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6070–6081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liu, L. Zhao, J. Zhang, L. Lin and H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25210–25218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chatti, T. Gengenbach, R. King, L. Spiccia and A. N. Simonov, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3092–3099 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, F. Alimohammadi, D. Zhang and G. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1963–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, H. Zhu and X. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10680–10685 RSC .
N. H. Attanayake, S. C. Abeyweera, A. C. Thenuwara, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, Y. Sun and D. R. Strongin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16882–16889 RSC .
F. Alimohammadi, M. Sharifian Gh, N. H. Attanayake, A. C. Thenuwara, Y. Gogotsi, B. Anasori and D. R. Strongin, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 7192–7200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Xu, Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, L. Ai, M. Wang, J. Jiang and S. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 965–976 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiao and L. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 18141–18148 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, C. Li, H. Li, G. Ren, L. Wang, W. Wang and X. Meng, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 9581–9603 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, Y. Liang, P. Zhou, F. Tong, Z. Wang, P. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Dai, Z. Zheng and B. Huang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 244, 122642 CrossRef CAS .
I. Roger, R. Moca, H. N. Miras, K. G. Crawford, D. A. J. Moran, A. Y. Ganin and M. D. Symes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1472–1480 RSC .
B. Soundiraraju and B. K. George, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8892–8900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Meshkian, L.-Å. Näslund, J. Halim, J. Lu, M. W. Barsoum and J. Rosen, Scr. Mater., 2015, 108, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M.-Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5008–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, H. Wang, P. Urbankowski and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8744–8765 RSC .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dolz, Á. Morales-García, F. Viñes and F. Illas, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
N. Li, X. Chen, W. J. Ong, D. R. MacFarlane, X. Zhao, A. K. Cheetham and C. Sun, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10825–10833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Meier, A. Garg, B. Sutter, J. N. Kuhn and V. R. Bhethanabotla, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 265–275 CrossRef .
A. Ali and W. C. Oh, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1867 CrossRef PubMed .
Á. Morales-García, A. Fernández-Fernández, F. Viñes and F. Illas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3381–3385 RSC .
S. Xie, Q. Zhang, G. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Garza, A. T. Bell and M. Head-Gordon, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1490–1499 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Francis, J. M. Velazquez, I. M. Ferrer, D. A. Torelli, D. Guevarra, M. T. McDowell, K. Sun, X. Zhou, F. H. Saadi, J. John, M. H. Richter, F. P. Hyler, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4902–4908 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vasileff, Y. Zhu, X. Zhi, Y. Zhao, L. Ge, H. M. Chen, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 19817–19821 CrossRef .
K. Chan, C. Tsai, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1899–1905 CrossRef CAS .
F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Greeley, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, T. R. Munter, P. G. Moses, E. Skulason, T. Bligaard and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 016105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo, D. Loffreda, M. T. Koper and P. Sautet, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 403–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, K. Chan, C. Tsai and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4428–4437 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chan, C. Tsai, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1899–1905 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Li, X. Zhao, D. Wu and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12899–12903 RSC .
H. Chen, A. D. Handoko, J. Xiao, X. Feng, Y. Fan, T. Wang, D. Legut, Z. W. Seh and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36571–36579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, V. Kochat, P. Pandey, S. Kashyap, S. Chattopadhyay, A. Samanta, S. Sarkar, P. Manimunda, X. Zhang, S. Asif, A. K. Singh, K. Chattopadhyay, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700364 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Abbasi, M. Asadi, C. Liu, S. Sharifi-Asl, B. Sayahpour, A. Behranginia, P. Zapol, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, ACS Nano, 2016, 11, 453–460 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Kral, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, J. K. Nørskov and K. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4256–4261 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, Z. Shaolin and W. Yang, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2014, 64, 1550–1555 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lv, C. Teng, M. Shi, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, Z. Kong, X. Lu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802339 CrossRef .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, J. L. Haan, P. Mukherjee, B. Braunschweig, W. Zhu, A. Salehi-Khojin, D. D. Dlott and R. I. Masel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15307–15312 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, X. Liu, H. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Ding and J. Luo, J. Catal., 2018, 364, 125–130 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Dry and J. C. Hoogendoorn, Catal. Rev., 2006, 23, 265–278 CrossRef .
M. Yasin, Y. Jeong, S. Park, J. Jeong, E. Y. Lee, R. W. Lovitt, B. H. Kim, J. Lee and I. S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 177, 361–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mattinen, P. J. King, L. Khriachtchev, K. Meinander, J. T. Gibbon, V. R. Dhanak, J. Raisanen, M. Ritala and M. Leskela, Small, 2018, 14, e1800547 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gu, C. S. Hsu, L. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mao, L. Wang, Y. Xu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 10523–10529 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, R. He, H. Li, Y. Chen, T. Kong, K. Li, H. Ju, J. Zhu, W. Zhu and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10954–10958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lv, W. Suo, M. Shao, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, J. Feng, M. Fang and Y. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103834 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cavin, A. Ahmadiparidari, L. Majidi, A. S. Thind, S. N. Misal, A. Prajapati, Z. Hemmat, S. Rastegar, A. Beukelman, M. R. Singh, K. A. Unocic, A. Salehi-Khojin and R. Mishra, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2100347 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Sun, Z. Ju, T. Yao, C. Wang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9121–9125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, S. Lai, M. Hu, S. Ge, R. Xie, F. Li, D. Hua, H. Xu, H. Zhou, R. Wu, J. Fu, Y. Qiu, J. He, C. Li, H. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Sun, X. Liu and J. Luo, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000567 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ding, F. Meng, C. R. English, M. Caban-Acevedo, M. J. Shearer, D. Liang, A. S. Daniel, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8504–8507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aljabour, H. Coskun, X. Zheng, M. G. Kibria, M. Strobel, S. Hild, M. Kehrer, D. Stifter, E. H. Sargent and P. Stadler, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 66–72 CrossRef .
G. Shi, L. Yu, X. Ba, X. Zhang, J. Zhou and Y. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 10569–10577 RSC .
H. Li, X. Liu, S. Chen, D. Yang, Q. Zhang, L. Song, H. Xiao, Q. Zhang, L. Gu and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900072 CrossRef .
S. Hong, C. K. Rhee and Y. Sohn, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 494 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. Sumesh and S. C. Peter, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12772–12802 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Geioushy, S. M. El-Sheikh, I. M. Hegazy, A. Shawky, S. El-Sherbiny and A.-H. T. Kandil, Mater. Res. Bull., 2019, 118, 110499 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, X. Wu, Y. Li, J. Xiong, Z. Tang, Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. Liu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 2774–2778 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Luna, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C.-T. Dinh, M. B. Ross, O. S. Bushuyev, P. Todorović, T. Regier, S. O. Kelley, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, Y. Xu, Z. Chen, M. He, M. Xie, J. Liu, H. Xu, S. Huang and H. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5132–5141 CrossRef CAS .
A. McLaren, T. Valdes-Solis, G. Li and S. C. Tsang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12540–12541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Billo, I. Shown, A. K. Anbalagan, T. A. Effendi, A. Sabbah, F.-Y. Fu, C.-M. Chu, W.-Y. Woon, R.-S. Chen, C.-H. Lee, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104717 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dai, J. Yu, Y. Deng, X. Hu, T. Wang and X. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 403, 230–239 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Li, L. Kuai, Y. Zhou, Q. Xu, H. Li, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9065–9070 RSC .
X. Jiao, X. Li, X. Jin, Y. Sun, J. Xu, L. Liang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, Y. Pan, W. Yan, Y. Lin and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18044–18051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. You, J. Wan, J. Qi, D. Mao, N. Yang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 721–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang and L. Fu, Chem, 2019, 5, 505–525 CAS .
W. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, S. Wan, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804559 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, E. Song, J. Zhou, J. Lin, R. Ma, Y. Wang, W. Qiu, R. Shen, K. Suenaga, Q. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Liu and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4486–4493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, D. Yao, B. Xia, H. Xu, Y. Tang, K. Davey, J. Ran and S.-Z. Qiao, Small Sci., 2021, 1, 2000052 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Shi and Y. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9346–9384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800911 CrossRef .
Q. Fu, X. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Xia, Q. Zeng, D. Lv, C. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Shen, X. Li, Y. Hua, F. Liu, Z. Shen, C. Jin and Z. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4001–4007 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, R. Wu, Z. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Ma, W. Dang, Z. Wei, K. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Yan, M. Sun, B. Li, X. Pan, J. Luo, G. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Duan and X. Duan, Nature, 2020, 579, 368–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Y. Li, F. Guo, K. Zhang, K. Liu, W. Jia, Y. Zhao and Y. Sun, Energies, 2020, 13, 4330 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Shen, H. Lin, J. Long, J. C. S. Wu, X. Fu, X. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14595–14598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qin, R. T. Guo, X. Y. Liu, W. G. Pan, Z. Y. Wang, X. Shi, J. Y. Tang and C. Y. Huang, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 15155–15163 RSC .
S. Yin, J. Li, L. Sun, X. Li, D. Shen, X. Song, P. Huo, H. Wang and Y. Yan, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 15590–15601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, P. Yang, Y. Zhao, X. Yu, Y. Wu, H. Zhang, B. Yu, B. Han, M. W. George and Z. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6278–6283 CAS .
S. Yin, L. Sun, Y. Zhou, X. Li, J. Li, X. Song, P. Huo, H. Wang and Y. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126776 CrossRef CAS .
A. Han, M. Li, S. Zhang, X. Zhu, J. Han, Q. Ge and H. Wang, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 927 CrossRef CAS .
H. She, H. Zhou, L. Li, Z. Zhao, M. Jiang, J. Huang, L. Wang and Q. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 650–659 CrossRef .
P. Puthiaraj, Y.-R. Lee, S. Zhang and W.-S. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16288–16311 RSC .
X. Zhu, C. Tian, G. M. Veith, C. W. Abney, J. Dehaudt and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11497–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Handoko, H. Chen, Y. Lum, Q. Zhang, B. Anasori and Z. W. Seh, iScience, 2020, 23, 101181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Li, Two-dimensional early transition metal carbides as supports for platinum catalysts, Doctor of Philosophy Graduate Theses and Dissertations, Iowa State University,  2019 Search PubMed .
A. D. Handoko, K. H. Khoo, T. L. Tan, H. Jin and Z. W. Seh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21885–21890 RSC .
N. H. Attanayake, H. R. Banjade, A. C. Thenuwara, B. Anasori, Q. Yan and D. R. Strongin, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 1675–1678 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Wu, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16020–16025 RSC .
M. Ye, X. Wang, E. Liu, J. Ye and D. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1606–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, L. Zhang, T. Tong, B. Shen and J. Yu, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 255–266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, B. Shen, T. Tong, J. Fu and J. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800136 CrossRef .
Q. Tang, Z. Sun, S. Deng, H. Wang and Z. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 406–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, B. Han, Y. Xie, S. Liang, H. Deng and Z. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123519 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, J. Shen, W. Zhang, X. Yu, H. Tang, M. Zhang, Zulfiqar and Q. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 24146–24153 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, L. Chen, H. Liu, D. Wang, C. Shi and H. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 22221–22227 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Azofra, N. Li, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2545–2549 RSC .
J. G. Chen, R. M. Crooks, L. C. Seefeldt, K. L. Bren, R. M. Bullock, M. Y. Darensbourg, P. L. Holland, B. Hoffman, M. J. Janik, A. K. Jones, M. G. Kanatzidis, P. King, K. M. Lancaster, S. V. Lymar, P. Pfromm, W. F. Schneider and R. R. Schrock, Science, 2018, 360, eaar6611 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Martín, T. Shinagawa and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem, 2019, 5, 263–283 Search PubMed .
L. F. Greenlee, J. N. Renner and S. L. Foster, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7820–7827 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3166–3180 RSC .
R. Lan, J. T. S. Irvine and S. Tao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1145 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-F. Chen, S. Ren, L. Zhang, H. Cheng, Y. Luo, K. Zhu, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800337 CrossRef .
M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 618–622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Andersen, V. Čolić, S. Yang, J. A. Schwalbe, A. C. Nielander, J. M. McEnaney, K. Enemark-Rasmussen, J. G. Baker, A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, M. J. Statt, S. J. Blair, S. Mezzavilla, J. Kibsgaard, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. Cargnello, S. F. Bent, T. F. Jaramillo, I. E. L. Stephens, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nature, 2019, 570, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Skúlason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdóttir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Vegge, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1235–1245 RSC .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Voss, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oschinski, Á. Morales-García and F. Illas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 2477–2484 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Zhang, X.-Y. Xie, X. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Liu, W.-H. Fang, X. Shi, G. Cui and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24031–24035 RSC .
K. S. Exner and H. Over, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1240–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Exner, J. Anton, T. Jacob and H. Over, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7501–7504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, X. Tian, B. Sun, Z. Liang, H. Cui, J. Tian and M. Shao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118984 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Wei, W. Qiu, H. Guo, X. Shi, P. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801357 CrossRef .
L. Zeng, X. Li, S. Chen, J. Wen, F. Rahmati, J. van der Zalm and A. Chen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6029–6036 RSC .
Y. Zhou, X. Yu, X. Wang, C. Chen, S. Wang and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 317, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, X. Li, S. Chen, J. Wen, W. Huang and A. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7339–7349 RSC .
B. H. R. Suryanto, D. Wang, L. M. Azofra, M. Harb, L. Cavallo, R. Jalili, D. R. G. Mitchell, M. Chatti and D. R. MacFarlane, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 430–435 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Patil, H.-L. Chou, Y.-M. Chen, S.-H. Hsieh, C.-H. Chen, C.-C. Chang, S.-R. Li, Y.-C. Lee, Y.-S. Lin, H. Li, Y. J. Chang, Y.-H. Lai and D.-Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1230–1239 RSC .
X. Li, X. Ren, X. Liu, J. Zhao, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, X. Kuang, T. Yan, Q. Wei and D. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2524–2528 RSC .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, S. Zhang, W. Li, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Han and H. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2320–2326 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chu, Y. P. Liu, Y. B. Li, Y. L. Guo and Y. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7081–7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, S. Luo, P. Ma, Y. Luo, W. Wu, Y. Long and J. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8814–8822 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, H. Wang, X. Wang, W. Luo, C. Wu, C.-A. Wang and C. Xu, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 12941–12946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Si, T. Zhang, Y. Li, B. Yang, Z. Li, J. Chen, Z. Wen, C. Yuan, L. Lei and Y. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118892 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Guo, Y. Tian, W. Liu and K. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16195–16202 RSC .
Y. Wang, A. Chen, S. Lai, X. Peng, S. Zhao, G. Hu, Y. Qiu, J. Ren, X. Liu and J. Luo, J. Catal., 2020, 381, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, R. Zhang, H. Fei, R. Liu, D. Wang and X. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 532, 147372 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jia, Y. Wang, L. Qiu, J. Gao, Q. Pan, W. Kong, X. Zhang, A. A. Alshehri, K. A. Alzahrani, B. Zhong, X. Guo and L. Yang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1986–1989 RSC .
W. Ye, M. Arif, X. Fang, M. A. Mushtaq, X. Chen and D. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28809–28817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Maimaitizi, A. Abulizi, T. Zhang, K. Okitsu and J. J. Zhu, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2020, 63, 104956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, Z. Liang, Y. Qian, X. Xu, Y. Han and J. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7257–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Han, Q. Xiong, S. Zhang, C. Zhao, W. Gong, G. Wang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803935 CrossRef .
L. Zeng, S. Chen, J. van der Zalm, X. Li and A. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7386–7389 RSC .
J. Liang, S. Ma, J. Li, Y. Wang, J. Wu, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Yang, K. Qu and W. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10426–10432 RSC .
F. Lai, N. Chen, X. Ye, G. He, W. Zong, K. B. Holt, B. Pan, I. P. Parkin, T. Liu and R. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907376 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Gu, Z. Sun, F. Guo, Y. Xie, B. Tao, X. He, W. Zhang and H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13038–13048 RSC .
J. Xia, S.-Z. Yang, B. Wang, P. Wu, I. Popovs, H. Li, S. Irle, S. Dai and H. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104681 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, G.-F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, T. Wang, Q. Yang, X. Li, H. Li, Y. Wang, T. Jiao, Z. Huang, B. Dong, W. Zhang, J. Fan and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 9089–9097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Z. Liu, J. Han, Z. Jin, Y. Han, F. Wang, Y. Niu, Y. Wu and Y. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803406 CrossRef .
W. Peng, M. Luo, X. Xu, K. Jiang, M. Peng, D. Chen, T. S. Chan and Y. Tan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, G. Zhang, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25758–25765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liu, M. Gao, X. Ren, F. Meng, Y. Yang, Q. Yang, W. Guan, L. Gao, X. Liang and T. Ma, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 10933–10938 RSC .
T. Hou, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Zhu, K. Yu, S. Wang, Q. Xu, S. Liang and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 273, 119072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, J. Qian, G. Xie, Q. Han, W. Dang, Y. Wang, L. Lv, S. Zhao, L. Luo, W. Zhang, H.-Y. Jiang and J. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 273, 119054 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hao, Y. Liao, Y. Wu, Y. An, J. Lin, Z. Gu, M. Jiang, S. Hu and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2020, 136, 109141 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Shuck, A. Sarycheva, M. Anayee, A. Levitt, Y. Zhu, S. Uzun, V. Balitskiy, V. Zahorodna, O. Gogotsi and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1901241 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kozhakhmetov, R. Torsi, C. Y. Chen and J. A. Robinson, J. Phys.: Mater., 2020, 4, 012001 Search PubMed .
F. Rehman, M. Delowar Hossain, A. Tyagi, D. Lu, B. Yuan and Z. Luo, Mater. Today, 2021, 44, 136–167 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Nguyen and C. T. Dinh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7488–7504 RSC .
A. Pan, X. Ma, S. Huang, Y. Wu, M. Jia, Y. Shi, Y. Liu, P. Wangyang, L. He and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6590–6597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, B. Sun, Z. Liang, H. Cui and J. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(23), 26060–26067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, S. Zhao, L. Chen, K. Khan, D. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 216–223 RSC .
X. Liu, H. Yang, J. He, H. Liu, L. Song, L. Li and J. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1704049 CrossRef PubMed .
R. He, X. Yuan, P. Shao, T. Duan and W. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Z. Zhang, L. Cheng and H. Liu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 13728–13737 RSC .
G. Li, Y. Sun, S. Sun, W. Chen, J. Zheng, F. Chen, Z. Sun and W. Sun, Adv. Powder Technol., 2020, 31, 2505–2512 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Zhaodong Li
	Dr. Zhaodong Li is a postdoctoral researcher at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), supervised by Dr. Jeffrey Blackburn, studying charge and energy transfer across nanoscale hybrid interfaces with transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and catalytic applications of such interfaces for water splitting and CO2 reduction. He is also interested in the bio-materials hybrid systems for catalytic CO2 reduction. He received his doctorate in materials engineering at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Before joining NREL, he worked as a postdoctoral associate at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute for the investigation of two-dimensional, vanadium-based materials synthesis and applications.

Nuwan H. Attanayake
	Dr. Nuwan H. Attanayake received his PhD from Temple University, USA. He is currently a Postdoctoral Associate at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). His work is focused on two-dimensional (2D) materials for solar fuel generation reactions with a particular research interest towards the electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction. He is engaged in photo-electrochemical studies of 2D materials on semiconductor materials such as gallium arsenide. He is also interested in growth of 2D TMDCs with chemical vapor deposition to be employed in catalysts and opto-electronic studies. Nuwan received his bachelor's degree in Chemistry from the University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.

Jeffrey L. Blackburn
	Dr. Jeffrey L. Blackburn is a senior scientist, Distinguished Member of the Research Staff, and group manager of the Materials Physics group at NREL. He received his BS in Chemistry from Wake Forest University and his PhD in Chemistry from CU, Boulder. He studies charge transfer, energy transfer, and excited state dynamics in low-dimensional materials for energy conversion and storage. His research interests include solar photoconversion, thermoelectric energy conversion, (photo)catalytic processes, and neuromorphic information processing.

Elisa M. Miller
	Dr. Elisa M. Miller studies the surface of semiconductors that are applicable for electrocatalysis, such as hydrogen evolution and nitrogen reduction to form ammonia. She is interested in manipulating and controlling surface energetics, charge transfer, and surface reactions by doping, surface passivation, straining, and quantum confinement. Her research focuses on transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), quantum dots, perovskites, carbon nanotubes, and other nanocrystalline films. Elisa got her PhD from the University of Colorado Boulder and then joined NREL as an NREL Director's Fellowship recipient for her post-doctoral research. She is currently an NREL research scientist, RASEI Fellow, and postdoc liaison for her directorate.

Broader context
Converting carbon dioxide into useful C-based products and revolutionizing industrial ammonia generation are two scientific grand challenges with the potential to solve critical global energy and greenhouse gas threats. In this review article, we discuss (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic methods as potential solutions to these grand challenges, specifically by addressing state-of-the-art 2D transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) and transition metal nitrides/carbide (MXene) catalysts. We address the key advantages and challenges for these highly tunable 2D materials for carbon dioxide and nitrogen reduction reactions, and how defects, phases, edge sites, interfaces, doping, and functional groups can be engineered to improve catalytic performance. Finally, we provide our perspective on advancing these two material classes within (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic setups before they could be considered industrially viable catalysts. Overall, this review article highlights both key (photo)electrocatalytic and photocatalytic trends and lessons learned for improving 2D TMDC and MXene catalysts for carbon dioxide and nitrogen reduction reactions, with an eye towards next-generation technologies with lower energetic costs and greenhouse gas emissions.


 	Scheme 1  Future CO2RR and NRR by novel 2D layered catalysts for sustainable feedstocks and fuels.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic of (a) electrochemical catalytic, (b) photoelectrochemical catalytic, and (c) photochemical CO2/N2 reduction when 2D materials are applied as the catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Atomic arrangements of the polymorphic forms of MoS2. Top row shows atomic models of monolayer 1H, 1T, and 1T′, respectively, and bottom row shows the arrangement of atoms and layers in bilayer 2H and 3R as well as trilayer 3R respectively. Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. The density of states (DOS) and orbital configuration with electron occupancy for the (b) 2H/3R and (c) 1T MoS2 phases, the pink arrows denote the occupancy of a donor electron in each structure. Reprinted with permission.62 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated band diagrams for MoS2 with the change in the layer numbers, left most being the bulk material then four layers, bilayers, and right most is a monolyer. Reprinted with permission.48 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) Band gaps of common semiconductors and TMDCs with reduction potentials for nitrogen to ammonia and CO2 to CO, CH4, and CO2−.	 

 	Fig. 3  Partial density of states plots (DOS) for the MAX phase (a) Ti2AlC and (b) Ti2AlN along with the corresponding MXenes with various surface functional groups. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2013 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Mechanically exfoliated MoS2 on a SiO2 substrate. From left to right, optical image of a monolayer MoS2 nanosheet, AC mode AFM image and the right most plots are the corresponding contrast and the height profiles. Reprinted with permission.87 Copyright 2011 IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) Left: Colloidal suspension of chemically exfoliated MoS2 using an organo-lithium salt. Right: AFM image of flakes from this dispersion, with height profile (white trace) taken along the red trace. Reprinted with permission.51 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) CVD technique involving the precursors MoO3 reduced by the chalcogen source (S) heated in a N2 environment to obtain high quality films (MoS2), AFM image of a MoS2 film obtained by this CVD technique with the height profile showing a monolayer thickness. Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic of ALD deposition of MoS2 film with the inset showing an AFM image with triangular monolayers. Reprinted with permission.97 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) AFM image of a MoS2 film obtained from molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Reprinted with permission.98 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (f) SEM and TEM images of MoS2 on reduced graphene oxide support obtained via a hydrothermal reaction. Reprinted with permission.102 Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM micrographs of (a) Mo2C MXene obtained from a non-MAX phase precursor, Mo2GaC. Reprinted with permission.127 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM micrographs of Ti3AlC2 MAX phase before etching to produce (c) Ti3C2Tx MXene. Reprinted with permission.130 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d–f) HAADF-STEM images of Ti3C2Tx MXene synthesized using varying HF concentrations 2.7 wt%, 5.3 wt%, and 7 wt%, respectively. The smaller red circles are single Ti atom vacancies and larger blue circles indicate clusters of Ti vacancies. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (g) SEM micrograph of the few layer Ti4N3Tx MXene obtained from etching the Al layer in Ti4AlN3 MAX phase using a molten salt approach. Reprinted with permission.77 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

C1	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.116
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.196
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	−0.066
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	0.034
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	0.174
C2	2CO2 + 10H+ + 10e− → C2H6O2 + 2H2O	0.014
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O	0.065
2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O	0.144
C3	3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H8O + 5H2O	0.103
3CO2 + 20H+ + 20e− → C3H8 + 6H2O	0.277
C4	4CO2 + 24H+ + 24e− → C4H10O + 7H2O	0.110

 	Fig. 6  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCOOH or HCOO−, including: a monodentate or bidentate intermediate route (black); a CO2* radical intermediate route (orange); and a surface-bound carbonate intermediate route (green). In addition, the reaction pathways for CO2 to CO are shown (blue). Red color highlights the CO2 reduction products. Purple color marks the byproducts. Redeveloped based on the information from ref. 133.	 

 	Fig. 7  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4. Red color marks the CO2 reduction products. Purple color highlights the byproducts. Redeveloped based on the discussion from ref. 133, 134 and 142.	 

 	Fig. 8  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to form C2 products: C2H4, C2H6, and C2H6O2. Redeveloped based on the discussion from ref. 133 and 145.	 

 	Fig. 9  Breaking of the linear scaling relations between (a) *COOH and (b) *CHO with *CO on MoS2 or MoSe2 edges. The vertical dotted lines indicate the Eb(CO) at which an isolated *CO is in equilibrium with 0.01 bar gaseous CO. The catalysts to the right of this line bind CO weakly and are expected to be selective for CO production. The catalysts to the left should further reduce adsorbed CO to hydrocarbons and/or alcohols. Θ was defined as the edge site coverage by different atoms (H, S, Se) and doping of edge sites was also evaluated. Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Minimum energy path for the CO2 conversion into CH4 and H2O catalyzed by (a) Mo3C2(OH)2 and (b) Mo3C2O2. Gibbs free energies (vs. SHE in eV) along the pathway (top). Corresponding surface chemical structures (middle) and formula distances (bottom) are shown. Blue and red texts represent spontaneous and nonspontaneous reactions (in eV), respectively. Reprinted with permission.134 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated free energy diagrams for the lowest energy pathways to CH4 using Sc2C(OH)2 catalyst. Reprinted with permission.152 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CO faradaic efficiency (FE) at different applied potentials for exfoliated-MoS2 catalysts. Inset is the CO FE at different applied potentials for bulk MoS2. Reprinted with permission.158 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Faradaic efficiency for CO (red bars) and H2 (blue bars) as a function of potential when using amorphous MoS2 2D flakes. Error bar associated with each value is also provided. Reprinted with permission.280 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Experimental work function measurement for Ag nanoparticles (Ag-NPs) and TMDC nanoflakes. Reprinted with permission.159 Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (d) Scheme shows the free energy of the system decreased for the reaction CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O over platinum catalyst surface in EMIM–BF4 (dashed line) compared to that in water (solid line). The label CO2–In1 refers to the intermediate that forms when the first electron is transferred during the reaction. Reprinted with permission.160 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) Stability test of WSe2 nanoflakes in 50 vol% ionic liquid (IL) at potential of −0.364 V vs. RHE (254 mV overpotential). The chronoamperometry (CA) experiment indicates 10% decay after 27 h. Reprinted with permission.159 Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (f) Chronoamperometry results at a potential of −0.8 V vs. RHE and the corresponding FE of formate when using monolayer 2D SnS2 nanosheets over 80 h. (g) Atomic models of DFT-relaxed SnS2 monolayer and the calculated free-energy profiles for CO2 reduction to HCOOH on the SnS2 monolayer and bulk counterpart surface at 0 V vs. RHE, in which the insets are the most stable configurations of the intermediates adsorbed on the surface. Reprinted with permission.161 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc. (h) Electroreduction scheme of CO2 into methane on the ultrathin MoTe2 layers. (i) CH4 FEs for ultrathin MoTe2 in ionic liquid compared to other electrocatalysts. Reprinted with permission.281 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Calculated CO formation TOF at different applied overpotentials for vertically aligned (VA)-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2, pristine VA-MoS2, and Ag nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Relationship between the binding energies of CO and the d-band center energy positions for MoS2 and transition metal-doped MoS2. The transition metal atoms are all doped next to the Mo edge. (c) Different transition metal-doped MoS2 edge structures and binding energies of CO and CO2 with different doping concentrations. Reprinted with permission.166 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Nickel doping in atomically thin SnS2 nanosheets enables highly efficient CO2 reduction. (e) Secondary electron cutoff of photoelectron spectra for pristine SnS2 and 5% Ni–SnS2 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission.167 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (f) The CO FE at different applied potentials for E-MoS2 (exfoliated-MoS2), N–MoS2@NCDs-X (X: 180, 200, 220) electrodes in EMIM–BF4 solutions (94 mol% water), where NCD = nitrogen-doped carbon dots. Reprinted with permission.168 Copyright Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) HRTEM images of an exfoliated-MoS2 nanosheet, showing atomic resolution structural information, and their corresponding fast Fourier transforms. (Insets show the 2H and 1T phases, top and bottom, respectively.) (b) The hydrophobic exfoliated 1T MoS2 shows the 81.2% FE of CO from CO2 reduction. Reprinted with permission.158 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Deconvoluted S 2p and Sn 3d spectra of 1T-SnS2 and 1H-SnS2. (d) FEs of CO, HCOOH, and H2 at various applied potentials for 1T-SnS2 and 1H-SnS2. Reprinted with permission.171 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Top panel: HRTEM of Cu/MoS2 (the insets are the detailed image of white dashed circle); bottom panel: faradaic efficiency of CO2 reduction for different products over all prepared Cu/MoS2 samples (−0.75 V vs. RHE). Samples Cu/MoS2-1, Cu/MoS2-2, Cu/MoS2-3 are corresponding to the weight ratios of Cu(NO3)2·3H2O to MoS2 as 10%, 15%, and 20%. Reprinted with permission.175 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The DFT calculations for demonstrating free energy profiles for CO2RR catalyzed by different models at the equilibrium potential of −0.11 V. (c) The illustration of charge density changes in the N-doped carbon (NC) and edge-exposed 2H MoS2 model. The turquoise-colored regions represent hole density, and the brown-colored regions represent electron density, and thus it was expected that there would be significant electron transfer from the NC substrate to the MoS2 edge, resulting in more active edges exposed. Reprinted with permission.176 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (d) TEM image of Ag–SnS2 hybrid nanosheets. (e) Faradaic efficiencies for carbonaceous product over the three SnS2-based catalysts. Reprinted with permission.282 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) MoS2 nanoflowers for gas-phase CO2 photoreduction to generate CO. Reprinted with permission.136 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Photocatalytic CO2RR over MoS2 nanosheets to produce CH3OH and CH3CHO. Reprinted with permission.181 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc. (c) TEM image of WSe2–graphene and possible carriers transport scheme of photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Reprinted with permission.137 Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. (d) SEM images of T-SnS2 (top) and F-SnS2 (bottom). (e) CH4 and CO yield under visible-light irradiation for T-SnS2 and F-SnS2. Reprinted with permission.284 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.	 

Electrochemical process
Nb-doped MoS2	CO2 and EMIM–BF4 solution	∼31 mV overpotential, TOF = 0.36 s−1 (overpotential = 100 mV)	CO	
154

Single-crystal MoS2 film	N2-purged KH2PO4 with Na2CO3 solution	FE1-propanol = ∼3.5% (MoS2 single crystals)	C3H8O, HCOOH, C2H6O2, C4H10O	
144

FE1-propanol = ∼1% (MoS2 thin film)
Vertically aligned MoS2 Nanoflakes	CO2 with EMIM–BF4 solution	FECO = 98% (overpotential = 600 mV)	CO	
155

Cu/MoS2	CO2-saturated NaHCO3 solution	Max. FECO = 43.81%	CO	
175

Max. FECH4 =17.08%	C2H4
Max. FEC2H4 = 3.45%	CH4
MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2 nanoflakes	CO2 and EMIM–BF4 solution	FECO = 24% (overpotential = 54 mV), TOF = 0.28 s−1 (−0.164 V vs. RHE)	CO	
159

Ultrathin MoTe2	CO2-sparged [Bmim]BF4 solution	FECH4 = 83 ± 3% (25.6 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V vs. RHE)	CH4	
281

TiS2	NBu4–PF6 and EMIM–BF4 in acetonitrile water	FECO = 83% (−0.5 V vs. RHE, 390 mV overpotential, 5 mA cm−2)	CO	
174

HCOOH
MoS2/N–carbon	CO2 Emim–BF4 solution	FECO = 92.68% (34.31 mA cm−2, 590 mV overpotential)	CO	
176

Fluorosilane decorated exfoliated MoS2	CO2-saturated EMIM–BF4 solutions	FECO = 81.2% (−0.9 V vs. RHE)	CO	
158

rGO/PEI/MoSx	CO2 sparged NaHCO3 solution	∼140 mV overpotential, FECO = 85.1%, TOF = 2.4 s−1 (overpotential 540 mV)	CO	
280



Photoelectrochemical process
2D MoS2, MoSe2/Si	CO2 sparged NaHCO3 electrolyte	2.2 (MoS2/Si) and 1.2 (MoSe2/Si) times higher current density (CO2), 2.6 (MoS2/Si) and 9.4 (MoSe2/Si) times higher current density (light),	N/A	
177



Photochemical process
MoS2 nanoflowers	CO2 in H2O, ∼589 W m−2 illumination (400–700 nm)	0.22 to 0.35 μmol gcat−1 h−1	CO	
136

WSe2	NaHCO3 solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)	115 μmol g−1 h−1	CH3OH	
199

ReS2/Cds	0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1.01 μmol g−1 h−1	CO	
194

MoS2/SiC	CO2 with H2O vapor, visible light	323 μL g−1 h−1	CH4	
200

MoS2/g-C3N4	CO2 with H2O vapor, Xe lamp	8.37 μmol g−1 h−1	CO	
201

MoS2/Bi2WO6	CO2 in H2O, visible light	36.7 μmol gcat−1 (methanol)	CH3OH, CH3CH2OH	
187

36.6 μmol gcat−1 (ethanol)
1D TiO2/2D MoS2	CO2 with H2O vapor, Xe lamp	2.86 μmol g−1 h−1 (methane)	CH4, CH3OH	
196

2.55 μmol g−1 h−1 (methanol)
TiO2/MoS2 nanosheet	CO2 saturated NaHCO3 solution, Xe lamp	3.1–10.6 μmol g−1 h−1	CH3OH	
188

MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S	CO2 saturated NaOH solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1.18–2.13 μmol g−1 h−1	CH3OH	
283

NiSe2/WSe2	NaHCO3 solution, Xe lamp (>420 nm)	380 μmol g−1 h−1	CH3OH	
199

WSe2/graphene	NaHCO3 solution	3.55 μmol g−1 h−1 (visible light)	CH3OH	
137

Visible light and UV light	4.35 μmol g−1 h−1 (UV light)

	Sacrificial agent-Na2SO3:

	4.33 μmol g−1 h−1 (visible light)

	5.03 μmol g−1 h−1 (UV light)
2H and 3R phase MoS2	NaHCO3, NaOH, and NaCl solution, UV light (254 nm)	In NaHCO3: 27.4 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH) and 2.2 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3CHO)	CH3OH, CH3CHO	
181

In NaOH: 11.2 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH) and 2.5 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3CHO); In NaCl: 7.8 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH) and 4.8 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3CHO)
MoS2/g-C3N4	CO2 with H2O vapor, Xe lamp	8.37 μmol g−1 h−1	CO	
201


 	Fig. 16  Photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity and the reaction mechanism using different 2D TMDCs. (a) (left panel) Comparative band diagram of SnS2 and C–SnS2 showing the band position shifting downward by C doping. Different reduction potentials are present in red (CH3CHO), blue (CH4), and black (H2) horizontal dotted lines, and (right panel) schematic of the reaction mechanism and charge transfer behavior. (b) Cumulative CO2 conversion to CH4 and CH3CHO using SnS2 and C–SnS2 photocatalysts during 6 h reaction time under a visible light source (AM 1.5 solar simulator). Reprinted with permission.186 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (c) Schematic for CO2 reduction using Bi2WO6/MoS2 catalysts to generate methanol. Reprinted with permission.187 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. (d) 1D/2D TiO2/MoS2 used to photoreduce CO2 to methane and methanol. Reprinted with permission.196Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the MoS2/TiO2 system for the photoreduction of CO2 to CH3OH, and Mo sites especially Mo-terminated edges on MoS2 nanosheets stabilize the intermediate products (CHxOy). Reprinted with permission.188 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Diagram of the energy band structure and electron transfer in the SnS2/SnO2 composite semiconductors. (g) Free energy diagrams of CO2 photoreduction to CO for the SnS2 atomic layers, the poorly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers, and the mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers. Reprinted with permission.189 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (h) HRTEM image of SnS2/SnO2 with schematic (right panel) showing the lattice distortion at the SnS2/SnO2 interface. (i) Photocatalytic CO2 reduction of SnS2/SnO2 nanoparticles and hollow spheres with different numbers of shells. Reprinted with permission.190 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Reaction energetics for the improved activity of MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S nanosphere composites for CO2 photoreduction. (b) CH3OH production rate comparison among MoS2, Mn0.2Cd0.8S and MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S composites: MCSMSX, where X is the wt% of MoS2. Inset is an SEM image of MoS2/Mn0.2Cd0.8S composite. Reprinted with permission.283 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) and (d) MoS2 interfaced with SiC undergoes a Z-scheme redox reaction to reduce CO2 and oxidize H2O. Bottom panel of (d) is the SEM morphology of MoS2@SiC. Reprinted with permission.200 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) Z-scheme band energetics of the MoS2 and g-C3N4 interface for CO2 photoreduction. Reprinted with permission.201 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Z-scheme band energetics of MoS2/SnS2/r-GO system under UV light irradiation which increases charge separation to photoreduce CO2 to CO and CH4. Reprinted with permission.202 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (g) Comparison of average gas production rates of SnS2, S-covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs), and SnS2/S-CTFs. (h) Schematic diagram of the photogenerated charge separation and transfer in SnS2/S-CTFs. Reprinted with permission.203 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) O-terminated MXenes display low theoretical overpotential for CO2RR. Plot of UL(CO2) − UL(H2) as a function of UL(CO2) showing the selectivity of CO2RR to generate CH4 relative to HER for MXenes. Vertical line marks the equilibrium potential for the reduction of CO2 to CH4 (0.17 V vs. RHE). Reprinted with permission.212 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Volcano curve of OH-terminated MXenes to generate CH4. For most OH-terminated MXenes, the potential-limiting step is determined to be *(H)COOH → *CO. The equilibrium potential for CO2RR to CH4 is 0.17 V vs. RHE. Reprinted with permission.152 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) DFT results for CO2RR to generate formic acid on Ti2CTx with varying ratios of Tx. Reprinted with permission.210 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (d) The free energy diagram for CO2RR at the oxygen vacancy on Ti3C2 (in black) and Mo2C (in red) calculated using the PBE functional. Reprinted with permission.213 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) HRTEM image of the interface structure of Ti3C2–OH and TiO2 P25 NPs. (b) Evolution rates of CO and CH4 over P25, 5% Pt/P25 (5Pt/P25), 5% Ti3C2/P25 (5TC/P25), 5% Ti3C2-OH/P25 (5TC-OH/P25) under irradiation by a 300 W Xe lamp; Reprinted with permission.215 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) image of rice-crust like TiO2/Ti3C2 composite. (d) Comparison of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction of the TiO2/Ti3C2 composite samples without calcination and with calcination (TT350, TT450, TT550 and TT650 were defined as the TiO2/Ti3C2 prepared under different calcination temperatures) and P25 for CH4 production. Reprinted with permission.216 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc. (e) TEM image of 2% Ti3C2 in Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 and the element mappings of Bi, W, O, Ti, C of the selected area. The red circles indicate the Bi particles derived from Bi2WO6 nanosheets under the high-power electron beam. (f) Photocatalytic activity of TB0 to TB5, where TBX = Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 and X = the % of Ti3C2. Reprinted with permission.217 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (g) SEM image of 5% Ti3C2/g-C3N4 sample. (h) 5 h accumulated production of CO and CH4 on g-C3N4 (CN), 5% Ti3C2-CN (5% TC-CN), and 5% Ti3C2–OH–CN (5% TCOH-CN). Reprinted with permission.218 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (i) Co–Co layered double hydroxide/Ti3C2Tx nanosheets (LDH/TNS) for CO2 reduction with triethanolamine (TEOA) as sacrificial agent. Inset is the SEM image of the catalyst morphology. Reprinted with permission.219 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.	 

Electrochemical process
Ti2CTx (KF-HCl etching)	CO2 sparging, acetonitrile, water, and (BEMIMBF4) electrolyte	FEformicacid = 56% (−1.73 V vs. RHE)	HCOOH, CO, CH4	
210

Mo2CTx (HF etching)	CO2 sparging, acetonitrile, water, and (BEMIMBF4) electrolyte	FEformicacid = 33% (−1.23 V vs. RHE)	HCOOH, CO, CH4	
210

Delaminated Mo2C and Ti3C2	CO2 saturated EMIMBF4	FECO = 90% (−2.24 V vs. SCE, Mo2C)	CO	
213

FECO = 65% (−2.54 V vs. SCE, Ti3C2)


Photochemical process
P25/Ti3C2	CO2 in de-ionized H2O, Xe lamp	11.74 μmol g−1 h−1 (CO)	CO, CH4	
215

16.61 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)
TiO2/Ti3C2	NaHCO3 and HCl in H2O, Xe lamp	4.4 μmol g−1 h−1	CH4	
216

Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 nanosheets	NaHCO3 and H2SO4 in H2O, Xe lamp	1.78 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)	CH4, CH3OH	
217

0.44 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH3OH)
Ti3C2/g-C3N4	CO2 in H2O, Xe lamp	2.24 μmol g−1 h−1 (CO)	CO, CH4	
218

0.04 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)
CeO2/Ti3C2	NaHCO3, HCl and H2O vapor, Xe lamp	40.2 μmol m−2 h−1	CO	
220

CsPbBr3/Ti3C2Tx	CO2, ethyl acetate solvent, Xe lamp (420 nm cut-off)	26.32 μmol g−1 h−1 (CO)	CO, CH4	
278

7.25 μmol g−1 h−1 (CH4)

 	Fig. 20  (a) Pourbaix diagram for the N2/water system with dashed lines indicating the water oxidation (labeled (b)) and water reduction (labeled (a)). Reprinted with permission.223 Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (b) Theoretical onset potentials for NRR and HER on different materials obtained through DFT calculations that are classified according to different families of materials. The materials that are favorable for the NRR are shown below the dashed line. Reprinted with permission.224 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc. (c) Volcano plots for the N binding energy on (111) surfaces of transition metals and the H binding energies versus calculated limiting potentials. Reprinted with permission.209 Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Different reaction pathways on heterogenous/homogeneous catalysts for the NRR, the blue spheres indicate N atoms, and the white spheres indicate H atoms.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Minimum energy pathway for NRR on edge sites of MoS2, Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Vacancy sites of MoS2 influence the minimum energy pathway. Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Minimum energy pathway for NRR on edge sites of V3C2 MXene. Schematic in panel (c) shows bound reaction intermediates and N–N triple bond lengths (blue labels) for V3C2 reaction pathway. Reprinted with permission.222 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) SEM images of MoS2 on a carbon cloth. (b) Ammonia yield rate and FE for the NRR to ammonia from MoS2 on carbon cloth. Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) HRTEM of basal plane (100) of defect rich MoS2 showing dislocations and distortions, and (d) average yield and faradaic efficiency of ammonia production at different applied potentials. Reprinted with permission.240 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (e) SEM image of Co–MoS2 for (20:1) of Co:Mo, (f) HRTEM image showing the carbon support and the Co–MoS2 and (g) plot of ammonia production rate and FE for Co–MoS2 at various potentials vs. RHE. Reprinted with permission.241 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) TEM image of Au incorporated MoS2 showing the (111) facet of Au. (i) Comparison of the yield rate and the FE of AuNP@MoS2 with MoS2 and AuNP@C in different electrolytes. Reprinted with permission.242 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of 1T MoS2 on Ni foil and (b) plot of NH3 yield rate and FE at different potentials vs. RHE in 0.25 M LiClO4 electrolyte. (c) Representative electron contour map of adsorbed N2 intermediate on a Mo atom of Li–MoS2, and (d) energy landscape of different MoS2 catalysts. Reprinted with permission.245 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) TEM images of 1T-MoS2 heterostructure on Ti3C2Tx MXene. (f) Ammonia yield rate and faradaic efficiency of 1T-MoS2 grown on Ti3C2 MXene. Reprinted with permission.279 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) TEM image of 1T-MoS2 on g-C3N4, and (h) ammonia production rate and faradaic efficiency for 1T-MoS2 on g-C3N4. Reprinted with permission.239 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.	 


Electrochemical process
MoS2/CC	0.1 M Na2SO4	4.94 μg h−1 cm−2	1.17	−0.5 V	
235

DR MoS2	0.1 M Na2SO4	29.28 μg h−1 mg−1	8.34	−0.4 V	
240

MoS2 with Li interaction	0.1 M Li2SO4	43.4 μg h−1 mg−1	9.81	−0.2 V	
259

MoS2–rGO	0.1 M LiClO4	24.82 μg h−1 mg−1	4.58	−0.45 V	
246

3D hollow Co–MoS2	0.1 M Na2SO4	129.93 μg h−1 mg−1	11.21	−0.4 V	
241

NiFe@MoS2 NCs	0.1 M Na2SO4	128.17 μg h−1 mg−1	11.34	−0.3 V	
243

AuNP@MoS2	0.1 M HCl	4.40 μg h−1 mg−1	<1%	−0.3 V	
242

0.1 M KOH	25.0 μg h−1 mg−1	3.9
0.1 M Na2SO4	5.65 μg h−1 mg−1	9.70
Ru/2H-MoS2	0.1 M Na2SO4	6.98 μg h−1 mg−1	17.6	−0.15 V	
244

1T-MoS2 NDs/g-C3N4	0.1 M HCl	29.97 μg h−1 mg−1	20.48	−0.3 V	
239

1T-MoS2-Ni	0.25 M LiCLO4	63 μg h−1 cm−2	27.66	−0.3 V	
245

F-MoS2	0.05 M H2SO4	35.7 μg h−1 mg−1	20.6	−0.2 V	
261

N-doped MoS2	0.1 M Na2SO4	69.82 μg h−1 mg−1	9.14	−0.3 V	
260

1T-MoS2@Ti3C4	0.1 M HCl	30.33 μg h−1 mg−1	10.94	−0.3 V	
279

MoS2/C3N4	0.1 M LiClO4	18.5 μg h−1 mg−1	17.8	−0.3 V	
248

MoS2/C3N4	0.1 M Na2SO4	19.86 μg h−1 mg−1	6.87	−0.5 V	
249

MoS2 NDs/RGO	0.1 M Na2SO4	16.41 μg h−1 mg−1@0.75 V vs. RHE	27.93	−0.35 V	
247

Hollow MoSe2	0.1 M Na2SO4	11.2 μg h−1 mg−1	0.2	−0.6 V	
250

1T@2H MoSe2	0.1 M Na2SO4	19.91 μg h−1 mg−1	2.82	−0.6 V	
254

NbSe2	0.1 M Na2SO4	89.5 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.45 V vs. RHE	13.9	−0.4 V	
253

NbS2	0.1 M HCl	37.58 μg h−1 mg−1	10.12	−0.5 V	
251

Fe–ReS2@N-CNF	0.1 M Na2SO4	80.4 μg h−1 mg−1	12.3	−0.2 V	
262

TiS2	0.1 M Na2SO4	16.02 μg h−1 mg−1	5.50	−0.6 V	
255

B-doped VS2/CC	0.5 M LiClO4	55.7 μg h−1 mg−1	∼9	−0.4 V	
252



Photoelectrochemical process
MoS2@TiO2	0.1 M Na2SO4	1.42 μmol h−1 cm−2	65.52	−0.2 V	
256

100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G


Photochemical process
Ultra-thin MoS2	500 W xenon lamp in pH 3.5	5.525 μg h−1 mg−1	N/A	
	
114

Pt/N–MoS2	300 W xenon lamp	2.060 μg h−1 mg−1	
	
	
257

300 W xenon lamp, ultrasonication	2.275 μg h−1 mg−1
SV-1T-MoS2/CdS	Simulated solar AM 1.5G in 20 vol% methanol	139.8 μg L−1 h−1 mg−1cat	
	
	
258

Fe–MoTe2	300 W xenon lamp in Milli-Q water	129.08 μmol g−1 h−1	
	
	
263


 	Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of MoS2 heterostructure grown on rGO, (b) the yield and FE% for ammonia generation on MoS2/rGO, and (c) comparison of the free energy pathways for MoS2 edge sites with and without the rGO. Reprinted with permission.246 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM showing MoS2 nanodots anchored on a rGO (MoS2 NDs/rGO) support, (e) ammonia yield rates and FE% for the MoS2 NDs/rGO heterostructure, and (f) comparison of the yields of ammonia at −0.75 V vs. RHE for MoS2 catalyst with and without the rGO support. Reprinted with permission.247 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) TEM image for MoS2 catalyst on graphitic C3N4 support (MoS2/C3N4), (h) the yield and FE% for ammonia generation for the corresponding catalyst, and (i) free energy diagram of the distal pathway for NRR on Mo edge sites of MoS2 in the presence (Mo1h) and absence of the graphitic C3N4 (Mo1). Reprinted with permission.248 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) TEM image of hollow MoSe2 (H-MoSe2) with a flower like morphology, and (b) the yield and FE% for ammonia generation on (H-MoSe2) in 0.1 M LiClO4. Reprinted with permission.250 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of the NH3 yield rates and FE% of exfoliated and bulk NbS2 catalysts for the NRR. Reprinted with permission.251 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (d) HRTEM of boron doped VS2 with sulfur vacancies circled, (e) comparison of free energy pathways for NRR on VS2 with S vacancies (VS2-VS), and boron doped VS2 with S vacancies (B-VS-VS2) along a mixed pathway, and (f) NH3 yield rates and FE% for B-VS2 in a LiClO4 electrolyte. Reprinted with permission.252 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) SEM images of self-supported NbSe2 nanosheet arrays (NbSe2 NSA) on a Ni foam, (h) FE and yield rate plot for NbSe2 NSA in a Na2SO4 electrolyte, and (i) free energy pathways (distal and alternating) for NRR on NbSe2 catalyst. Reprinted with permission.253 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of the N2 reduction mechanism on MoS2@TiO2 under PEC conditions. (b) Transient photocurrent response for the MoS2@TiO2 (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G) with repeated ON–OFF cycles and (c) ammonia yield rates under PEC. Reprinted with permission.256 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic representation of trion formation and nitrogen fixation on ultra-thin MoS2. (b) Plot of ammonia yield of ultra-thin MoS2 samples under illumination from a 500 W xenon lamp with a 420 nm cutoff filter. Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. (c) Band diagram with schematic representation of the NRR on Pt/N–MoS2 under sonophotofixation conditions. (d) Plot of NH3 yield rate and FE for Pt/N–MoS2 under irradiation (300 W xenon lamp). Reprinted with permission.257 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.	 


Electrochemical process
Ti3C2Tx	0.1 M HCl	20.4 μg h−1 mg−1	9.3	−0.4 V	
236

Ti3C2OH	0.1 M KOH	1.17 μg h−1 cm−2	7.01	−0.2 V@20 °C	
264

12 μg h−1 cm−2	9.03	−0.2 V@60 °C
Ti3C2Tx-SSMa	0.5 M Li2SO4	2.68 μg h−1 mg−1	4.62	−0.1 V	
265

Ti3C2Tx-FeOOH	0.33 μg h−1 mg−1	0.09	−0.5 V
Ti3C2Tx ironed	0.05 M H2SO4	21.9 μg h−1 mg−1	25.44	−0.2 V	
266

TiO2/Ti3C2Tx	0.1 M HCl	32.17 μg h−1 mg−1	16.07	−0.55 V	
267

Au@Ti3C2	0.05 M HCl	30.06 μg h−1 mg−1	18.34	−0.2 V	
269

Ru@Ti3C2	0.1 M KOH	2.3 μmol h−1 cm−2	13.13	−0.4 V	
270

Ru–Mo2CTx	0.5 M K2SO4	40.57 μg h−1 mg−1	25.77	−0.3 V	
268



Photochemical process
Ti3C2Tx/TiO2 hybrid	Full spectrum xenon	7.174 μg h−1 mg−1	
	
	
271

Ti3C2Tx/P25	300 W xenon lamp	10.74 μmol h−1 g−1	
	
	
272

Methanol	43.44 μmol h−1 g−1
RuO2@TiO2–MXene	Xenon lamp	425 μmol L−1 g−1	
	
	
273


 	Fig. 28  (a) SEM image of Ti3C2Tx (Tx = F, OH) MXene. (b) Ammonia yield rate plots for the Ti3C2Tx MXenes at different applied potentials and (c) reaction scheme for the nitrogen fixation for Ti3C2 MXene for distal and mixed mechanisms. Reprinted with permission.236 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) are HR-TEM images of the Ti3C2Tx MXene with varying functional groups OH, F and O, respectively. (g) Plot of ammonia yield for different surface functional groups on Ti3C2Tx MXene and for different surface terminations. Reprinted with permission.264 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) SEM images of vertical configured Ti3C2Tx on FeOOH and (b) HRTEM image of MXene nanosheets with exposed Ti. (c) Yield rate for the formation of ammonia on the Ti3C2Tx grown on vertically aligned FeOOH. Reprinted with permission.265 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc. (d) Schematic of surface functional groups being replaced with Fe calcination on the Ti3C2Tx surface. (e) HRTEM showing the TiO2/Fe2O3 on the MXene surface. (f) Comparison of the NH3 yield rates and FE of pristine MXenes with TiFeOx heterostructures. Reprinted with permission.266 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) STEM-EDS mapping of single atom (SA) Ru on Mo2CTx MXene, and (h) ammonia yield rate comparison on the pure MXene, Ru/C, and SA Ru–Mo2CTx. Reprinted with permission.268 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) HAADF-STEM image of TiO2 grown on Ti3C2Tx MXene (Ti3C2Tx/TiO2-400). (b) Plots of ammonia yield rates for (Ti3C2Tx/TiO2) with monochromatic light. Reprinted with permission.271 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (c) SEM micrograph of 6% Ti3C2Tx MXene-P25, and (d) corresponding ammonia yield rates for samples with varying weight fraction of Ti3C2 (full spectrum irradiation with a 300 W Xe lamp) carried out in methanol. Reprinted with permission.272 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc. (e) SEM image of as-prepared RuO2@TiO2–MXene, and (f) ammonia yield rate comparison for RuO2@TiO2-MXene with TiO2–MXene and RuO2 samples irradiated with a Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2). Reprinted with permission.273 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.	 
Footnote
† Authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
