Direct visualization of photo-induced disulfide through oxidative coupling of para -aminothiophenol   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC00587A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC00587A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4190-4193Direct visualization of photo-induced disulfide through oxidative coupling of para-aminothiophenol†

        
          
            Wei 
            He
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chang 
            Xia
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Peng Fei 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuan Fang 
            Li
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Cheng Zhi 
            Huang
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Luminescence Analysis and Molecular Sensing (Southwest University), Ministry of Education, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: chengzhi@swu.edu.cn
bChongqing Key Laboratory of Inorganic Special Functional Materials, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangtze Normal University, Chongqing 408100, P. R. China
cKey Laboratory of Luminescent and Real-Time Analytical System (Southwest University), Chongqing Science and Technology Bureau, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: liyf@swu.edu.cn
Received 
      1st February 2021
    , Accepted 16th March 2021First published on 16th March 2021AbstractChemical transformations under visible irradiation are interesting in green preparation. Herein, a photo-oxidative coupling reaction of para-aminothiophenol (p-ATP) dimerizing to 4-aminophenyl disulfide (APDS) rather than 4,4′-dimercaptoazobenzene (DMAB) was achieved in water by visible light irradiation, producing monodispersed organic nanoparticles in situ with strong light scattering visualized by the dark-field microscopy (DFM) imaging technique, owing to the formation of disulfide.
Solar-driven chemical transformation is particularly attractive for converting solar energy to chemical energy. Most photo-induced chemical transformations need the participation of photocatalysts such as metal complexes or plasmonic nanoparticles to improve the light-absorbing ability,1,2 while other photo-induced chemical transformations can take place in the absence of additional photocatalysts, both of which have received considerable attention for green and sustainable synthesis under visible irradiation.
Among the plasmon-catalysis photochemical reactions, para-aminothiophenol (p-ATP), which has been widely used as a Raman-active molecule and a model reactant, is generally accepted to undergo an azo-coupling reaction to form 4,4′-dimercaptoazobenzene (DMAB) when plasmonic nanoparticles such as gold or silver nanoparticles are used as a source of hot-carriers and as a surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrate, and the mechanism and factors affecting the model reaction have been extensively studied using the SERS technique to improve the energy conversion efficiency.3,4 However, the p-ATP molecule with a para-bifunctional structure has another coupling reaction path, namely, the sulfhydryl functional group can be oxidatively coupled to form 4-aminophenyl disulfide (APDS).5 Considering that disulfides play an important role in stabilizing the secondary and tertiary structure of proteins, and are also widely used in self-healing rubber or other polymers,6 using visible-light to synthesize disulfides under mild conditions is of practical importance and understanding the photo coupling reaction mechanism theoretically is worthwhile.7
As mentioned above, the photooxidative coupling reactions of p-ATP, including the formation of both disulfide and azo-compound, have been investigated in the presence of catalysts such as CdSe quantum dots and plasmonic nanoparticles. However, these investigations did not involve the visible-light photooxidation of p-ATP without photocatalysts, and little is known about the coupling priority either to form S–S or azo bonds between the amino group and the sulfhydryl group under light irradiation. It is obvious that a catalyst-free reaction is highly anticipated owing to the reduced cost and very simple reaction process. Furthermore, the coupling reaction priority is critical to adjust the organic reaction pathway and improve the selectivity of photo-induced organic transformations.
Light-scattering dark-field microscopy (DFM) imaging technology has been successfully exploited to monitor the Cu(I)-catalyzed click reaction and photopolymerization reactions in organic transformation by using gold nanoparticles as dark-field scattering probe.8,9 Here, catalyst-free photooxidation dimerization of p-ATP to APDS instead of DMAB in water was identified and monitored in real time and in situ by obtaining the dark-field images of the produced organic nanoparticles. Scheme 1 shows our working route. Organic nanoparticles were nucleated at first and then grew in the p-ATP aqueous solution under the irradiation of the light source of the microscope due to the insolubility of the APDS formed through the photooxidative coupling reaction of p-ATP. The formed APDS nanoparticles have strong light scattering signals, and thus the photooxidative coupling process of the p-ATP aqueous solution could be monitored and imaged at the single nanoparticle level through the DFM imaging technology,10 wherein a homemade reaction cell with the volume of about 200 μL was employed. Moreover, the physicochemical factors affecting the photo-induced disulfide formation were further investigated.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the real-time monitoring of the photo-oxidation dimerization of p-ATP. 
At first, the photooxidation reaction of 0.1 mM aqueous solution of p-ATP was investigated in real time by dynamically capturing the DFM images (Fig. 1A). Upon the irradiation of a 100 W halogen lamp with the wavelength in the range from 400 to 800 nm, blue spots appeared at about 15 min. As time elapsed, these spots turned brighter and bigger, and gradually changed to cyan and bluish white in color. DFM imaging and time-dependent intensity analysis at the single nanoparticle level (Fig. 1B and C) showed that, for a typical nanoparticle, the scattering intensity increased with continuous illumination, and there was a linear relationship between intensity and reaction time, indicating that the photoreaction of p-ATP was a kinetic process. It was noticed that when the image exposure time was increased, the scattering spots in the DFM image can be observed as early as 5 min (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†). Colocalization tests for the same region in both the DFM image and scan electron microscopy (SEM) image showed that these scattering spots are derived from the newly formed spherical organic nanoparticles on the glass slide, which have good dispersibility and uniformity (Fig. 1D). The photoproduct is water-insoluble, which helps the organic nanoparticles to be nucleated, grow and be deposited on the solid–liquid interface of the glass slide. Dynamic monitoring through SEM imaging showed that obvious spherical organic nanoparticles were formed at about 5 min, and their diameters generally increased from 57.84 ± 8.86 nm to 179.44 ± 8.45 nm within 1 h (Fig. 1E and F and Fig. S3, ESI†), which was consistent with the increased scattering light intensity of the nanoparticles in the DFM images (Fig. 1C).
 Fig. 1  Monitoring the nanoparticle-forming photooxidative coupling reaction of p-ATP. (A) Dynamic DFM images of the same area captured at different time points of p-ATP aqueous solution, cp-ATP, 1.0 × 10−4 mol L−1, exposure time, 1 s. (B) Dynamic DFM images of a single nanoparticle numbered 3 in Fig. 1A. (C) Time-dependent intensity evolution of the particles numbered 1–3 in Fig. 1A obtained by Image-Pro Plus software, where k is the fitted rate constant. (D) SEM images of organic nanoparticles in the same area of Fig. 1A after illumination for 60 min. SEM images (E) and size evolution (F) of the organic nanoparticles formed with different illumination times. 
The as-formed photoproduct was characterized by high-resolution mass spectra and normal Raman spectra. As observed, the molecular ion peak in positive-ion mode [M + H]+ at m/z 249.05 was assigned to the H + H2N–Ph–S–S–Ph–NH2 fragment (Fig. S4, ESI†). The Raman spectrum of the photoproduct is identical to that of commercial solid APDS (Fig. S5, ESI†), wherein the strong band at 465 cm−1 is attributed to the stretching vibration of the S–S bond, and the bands at 1082 and 1590 cm−1 are assigned to the C–S stretching mode and C–C stretching coordinates of the benzene ring, respectively.11 It should be noted that the characteristic Raman bands near to 1438 and 1388 cm−1 assigned to −NN–, related vibrational modes of DMAB,3 were not detected, clearly indicating that the photooxidation coupling reaction of p-ATP aqueous solution in the absence of a photocatalyst or plasmonic nanoparticles forms disulfide rather than azo-compounds.
It was found that the nanoparticle-forming reaction of p-ATP was indeed photo-dependent. In our DFM microscope system, the light spot of the light source focused on the glass slide is about 3 mm in diameter through the dark-field condenser of the microscope (Fig. 2A), which in fact is the illumination area of our reaction cell. It was easily understandable that the irradiation intensity was gradually attenuated outward from the center of the light spot (Fig. 2B), making the photoreaction much more intense near the center than in the outer areas (Fig. 2C and D(a–e)), while in the area without illumination on the same glass slide, no photochemical reaction occurred (Fig. 2D(f)). This phenomenon was identified by further SEM imaging after the DFM imaging (Fig. 2E and F), showing that the diameters of the photo-induced nanoparticles were gradually reduced from the center to the outward region in the illumination area, and no nanoparticle was observed in the SEM image in the area without illumination.
 Fig. 2  The effect of light intensity on the photooxidative coupling reaction in different areas of the same glass slide. (A) Image of the light spot formed on the glass slide. 0–500 represents the image size in pixels. (B) Light intensity distribution of the light spot in Fig. 2A. (C) Schematic diagram of the randomly selected illumination areas along the cross lines in the glass slide. (D) DFM images of the different illumination areas obtained after 1 h of irradiation as shown in Fig. 2C. cp-ATP, 1.0 × 10−4 mol L−1, exposure time, 0.5 s. (E) SEM images of different illumination areas and magnified images of single particle. (F) Size distribution histograms of the organic nanoparticles in Fig. 2E (g–k), respectively, where n = 50. 
Control experiments were performed to further confirm that organic nanoparticles were formed owing to the photooxidative coupling reaction of p-ATP and subsequent crystallization of the photoproduct, not owing to factors including precipitation of the reactant, auto-oxidation of thiols or thermal effects of irradiation. At first, a total black DFM image without any scattering spots was obtained (Fig. S6A, ESI†) when p-ATP aqueous solution was added into the reaction cell and then placed in the dark for 1 h. This experiment excluded the possibility that the reactant p-ATP was precipitated on the glass slide in aqueous medium by itself, and also indicated that the organic nanoparticles were not formed by the slow auto-oxidation of thiols in neutral aqueous medium containing dissolved oxygen.12 Secondly, a total black DFM image without any scattering spots was available also by using p-ATP solution that was heated in the dark at 60 °C for 1 h, which also excluded that the formation of organic nanoparticles was due to the heat generated by irradiation (Fig. S6B, ESI†).
The dissolved oxygen in aqueous solution takes a positive role in the photooxidative coupling reaction of p-ATP. Compared with the p-ATP aqueous solution without deaeration for irradiation, it was obvious that only a few blue spots could be available with careful observation if the p-ATP aqueous solution were deaerated with N2 for 15 min and then irradiated for 1 h (Fig. S6C and D, ESI†), indicating that the photoreaction was accelerated by the dissolved oxygen in water.
The effect of the p-ATP concentration on the photo-coupling reaction was investigated. Through the DMF images of different concentrations of p-ATP and the corresponding scattering light intensity change as a function of the illumination time (Fig. S7, ESI†), we found that the reaction got more intense with increasing concentration of p-ATP, producing organic nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 66.33 ± 6.8 nm to 299.41 ± 9.68 nm with 60 min of illumination (Fig. S8, ESI†).
The acidity of the medium also has an effect during the photo-coupling reaction. The characteristic absorption of p-ATP aqueous solution shifts from 242 to 264 nm with increasing pH value (Fig. S9, ESI†), indicating that the change in composition of the solution, including +NH3C6H4SH, NH2C6H4SH and NH2C6H4S−, depends on the pH value of the medium.13 It was found that the photooxidation coupling reaction proceeded more completely in neutral (pH, 7.00) and alkaline conditions (pH, 9.86) than in acidic conditions (pH, 3.86). If the pH value of the solution is equal to 1.98, the reaction cannot take place (Fig. S10, ESI†). The reason was that the main species at pH 1.98 is +NH3C6H4SH and most acidic thiols are resistant to oxidation.14 With increasing pH, deprotonation of both the NH3+ ion and thiol resulted in neutral amino and thiolate ions. Considering that the pKa of p-ATP in aqueous solution has been reported to be 6.9,15 both the thiol and thiolate coexist under neutral or weakly alkaline conditions, favoring the formation of a disulfide under illumination.16 Under strongly alkaline conditions, however, aerobic oxidative coupling of the thiols was further catalyzed by the base.12 Furthermore, no bluish white spots formed in the DFM images if p-ATP ethanol solution was irradiated (Fig. S11, ESI†). Only the neutral thiol form of p-ATP exists in ethanol, greatly different from that in neutral water wherein both the thiol and anionic thiolate forms of p-ATP coexist because of the dissociation equilibrium of p-ATP, demonstrating that thiolate formed by the deprotonation of thiol in aqueous medium is critical for the photooxidation coupling reaction.
Quantitative investigations of the effect of the light power density on the reaction kinetics clearly indicated that a higher light power density accelerated the photodimerization reaction (Fig. S12, ESI†). It was worth mentioning that unfocused conditions, which are generally used in SERS measurements to avoid the azo-dimerization of p-ATP under high-power laser irradiation,3 greatly weakened the photoinduced disulfide-dimerization of p-ATP (Fig. S13, ESI†), indicating that the photodimerization of p-ATP in the DFM system was greatly dependent on the high light power density of the focused light spot, rather than the power of the light source. Furthermore, both ultraviolet-light and visible-light have been utilized for the synthesis of disulfide through the photo-oxidative coupling reaction of p-ATP (Fig. S14, ESI†), and disulfide were successfully obtained by exposing neutral p-ATP aqueous solutions to natural solar light at the outdoor temperature (Fig. S15, ESI†), which supplied a promising green strategy for synthesizing disulfides from thiols.
The photo-induced transformation from p-ATP to APDS involves the production of p-aminophenylthiyl radicals as intermediate transition states, which is verified by the ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectra and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra. After irradiation with a pump beam at 350 nm, on one hand, the characteristic absorption band of p-aminophenylthiyl radicals around 572 nm in the TA spectra was observed in aqueous solution (Fig. 3A), which was broadened and bathochromically shifted as the delay time increased because of the solvation of radicals (Fig. 3B). The time-dependent TA signal magnitudes obtained at the probe wavelength of 572 nm (Fig. 3C) indicated that the maximum absorption intensity appeared at 0.35–0.50 ps, and then quickly decayed in the range of tens of picoseconds, which can be attributed to the recombination of p-aminophenylthiyl radicals to form disulfide.17
 Fig. 3  Characterization of p-aminophenylthiyl radicals. Evolution of the transient absorption spectra of 1 mM p-ATP aqueous solution acquired at different delay times following 350 nm excitation during the rising (A) and decaying (B) of the radical absorption. (C) Time-dependency of the radical absorption intensities obtained at 572 nm; the insert shows an expanded view for the first 1.0 ps. (D) EPR spectra of the DMPO/p-aminophenylthiyl radical adduct. Spectrum obtained before (a, red line) and after (b, green line) irradiation of 100 mM DMPO with 50 mM p-ATP water-DMF mixture solution by a xenon lamp (300 W, with a 400 nm cut-off filter) for 10 min. Computer simulation of the spectrum observed in spectrum b with hyperfine splitting constants aN = 14.23 G and aH = 16.17 G (c, blue line). EPR spectrometer settings: modulation amplitude, 1.0 G; microwave frequency, 10 GHz; microwave power, 19 mW; time constant, 10 ms. 
With visible light irradiation from a Xenon lamp for 10 min, on the other hand, the characteristic lines of 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO)-trapped thiyl radicals were observed in the EPR spectrum,15 and the intensity of the EPR signal was greatly enhanced in the presence of p-ATP and DMPO as compared with the non-irradiation conditions, which is consistent with the computer simulation of the spectrum with hyperfine splitting constants aN = 14.23 G and aH = 16.17 G (Fig. 3D). The control experiment in the absence of p-ATP did not show an EPR signal (Fig. S16, ESI†). The EPR signal of DMPO-trapped thiyl radicals was also observed without irradiation, further indicating that dissolved oxygen plays a very important role in the initial production of sulfhydryl radicals.18
The photooxidation of para-nitrothiophenol (p-NTP) dimerizing to 4-nitrophenyl disulfide (NPDS) instead of DMAB19 was also investigated in the absence of plasmonic nanoparticles (Fig. S17, ESI†). The as-formed NPDS has poor water-solubility, and then nucleated, grew and deposited on the glass slide to form organic nanoparticles as NPDS. Obviously, the formation of disulfides through photooxidative coupling reaction of thiophenol derivatives proceeds successfully regardless of electron-donating or electron-withdrawing substituents in the para positions. The different reaction mechanism between disulfide-coupling and azo-coupling was further discussed in the ESI.†
In conclusion, a visible-light photooxidative coupling reaction for the formation of disulfides was achieved using p-ATP as a model reactant in the absence of photo catalyst or plasmonic nanoparticles. Very similar to the conversion of p-ATP to DMAB with plasmon-assisted photocatalysis, high light power density, neutral to alkaline conditions, dissolved oxygen and water are more favorable for the formation of photo-induced disulfide through the p-aminophenylthiyl radical reaction pathway, providing a green and important route for disulfide synthesis. In addition, DFM was successfully exploited to monitor the visible-light photo-induced organic transformation in real time and in situ at the single organic nanoparticle level, providing a supplementary visualization approach to monitor some reactions easily ignored in SERS research because the normal Raman signal of the p-ATP solution is weak.20 The photo-induced disulfide formation mechanism at the precise atomic/molecular level should be further explored and understood by more spectral analysis and theoretical calculations.21
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, No. 21874109).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
L. Marzo, S. K. Pagire, O. Reiser and B. König, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10034–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gellé, T. Jin, L. de la Garza, G. D. Price, L. V. Besteiro and A. Moores, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 986–1041 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, H. P. Zhu, G. K. Liu, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren and Z. Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9244–9246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhan, X. J. Chen, Y. F. Huang, D. Y. Wu and Z. Q. Tian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2784–2792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Li, Z. J. Li, Y. J. Gao, Q. Y. Meng, S. Yu, R. G. Weiss, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2085–2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Utrera Barrios, R. Verdejo, M. A. López Manchado and M. Hernández Santana, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2882–2902 RSC .
N. Spiliopoulou and C. G. Kokotos, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 546–551 RSC .
Y. X. Wang, S. S. Wang, S. P. Zhang, O. A. Scherman, J. J. Baumberg, T. Ding and H. X. Xu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 6384–6390 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, C. Jing, W. Ma, D. W. Li, J. E. Halls, F. Marken and Y. T. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6011–6014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Gao, G. Lei and C. Z. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2021, 93, 4707–4726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Xia, S. W. Wu, J. Wang, C. Q. Ma and P. Song, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4358 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xan, E. A. Wilson, L. D. Roberts and N. H. Horton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1941, 63, 1139–1141 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Benesch and R. Benesch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1955, 77, 5877–5881 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wallace and A. Schriesheim, J. Org. Chem., 1962, 27, 1514–1516 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Weller, A. Dhall, F. Ding, E. Linares, S. D. Whedon, N. A. Senger, E. L. Tyson, J. D. Bagert, X. Li, O. Augusto and C. Chatterjee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Kim, J. H. Yoon and S. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 12010–12015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Koyama and A. J. Orr-Ewing, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12115–12127 RSC .
A. Fava, G. Reichenbach and U. Peron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 6696–6700 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, W. C. Xie, W. L. Wang, M. K. Li, J. Tang, G. K. Liu, R. W. Yan and D. Y. Wu, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2018, 49, 520–525 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Seo, G. W. Kim, P. V. Tsalu, S. W. Moon and J. W. Ha, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 345–349 RSC .
P. An, R. Anumula, C. N. Cui, Y. Liu, F. Zhan, Y. Tao and Z. X. Luo, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2589–2596 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and Fig. S1–S18. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc00587aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the real-time monitoring of the photo-oxidation dimerization of p-ATP.	 

 	Fig. 1  Monitoring the nanoparticle-forming photooxidative coupling reaction of p-ATP. (A) Dynamic DFM images of the same area captured at different time points of p-ATP aqueous solution, cp-ATP, 1.0 × 10−4 mol L−1, exposure time, 1 s. (B) Dynamic DFM images of a single nanoparticle numbered 3 in Fig. 1A. (C) Time-dependent intensity evolution of the particles numbered 1–3 in Fig. 1A obtained by Image-Pro Plus software, where k is the fitted rate constant. (D) SEM images of organic nanoparticles in the same area of Fig. 1A after illumination for 60 min. SEM images (E) and size evolution (F) of the organic nanoparticles formed with different illumination times.	 

 	Fig. 2  The effect of light intensity on the photooxidative coupling reaction in different areas of the same glass slide. (A) Image of the light spot formed on the glass slide. 0–500 represents the image size in pixels. (B) Light intensity distribution of the light spot in Fig. 2A. (C) Schematic diagram of the randomly selected illumination areas along the cross lines in the glass slide. (D) DFM images of the different illumination areas obtained after 1 h of irradiation as shown in Fig. 2C. cp-ATP, 1.0 × 10−4 mol L−1, exposure time, 0.5 s. (E) SEM images of different illumination areas and magnified images of single particle. (F) Size distribution histograms of the organic nanoparticles in Fig. 2E (g–k), respectively, where n = 50.	 

 	Fig. 3  Characterization of p-aminophenylthiyl radicals. Evolution of the transient absorption spectra of 1 mM p-ATP aqueous solution acquired at different delay times following 350 nm excitation during the rising (A) and decaying (B) of the radical absorption. (C) Time-dependency of the radical absorption intensities obtained at 572 nm; the insert shows an expanded view for the first 1.0 ps. (D) EPR spectra of the DMPO/p-aminophenylthiyl radical adduct. Spectrum obtained before (a, red line) and after (b, green line) irradiation of 100 mM DMPO with 50 mM p-ATP water-DMF mixture solution by a xenon lamp (300 W, with a 400 nm cut-off filter) for 10 min. Computer simulation of the spectrum observed in spectrum b with hyperfine splitting constants aN = 14.23 G and aH = 16.17 G (c, blue line). EPR spectrometer settings: modulation amplitude, 1.0 G; microwave frequency, 10 GHz; microwave power, 19 mW; time constant, 10 ms.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and Fig. S1–S18. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc00587a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
