Highly stable inverted methylammonium lead tri-iodide perovskite solar cells achieved by surface re-crystallization   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE03736E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE03736E
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 840-847Highly stable inverted methylammonium lead tri-iodide perovskite solar cells achieved by surface re-crystallization†

        
          
            Hyungcheol 
            Back‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Geunjin 
            Kim‡
ac, 
      
        
          
            Heejoo 
            Kim
          
        
      *ad, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Yong 
            Nam
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jinhyun 
            Kim
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Yong Ryun 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Taejin 
            Kim
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Byoungwook 
            Park
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            James R. 
            Durrant
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Kwanghee 
            Lee
          
        
      *ah
aHeeger Center for Advanced Materials & Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea
bHanwha Solutions, 305 Pangyo-ro, Bundanggu, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 13488, Republic of Korea
cDivision of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, 141 Gajeong-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea
dInstitute of Integrated Technology, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: heejook@gist.ac.kr
eCenter for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA
fDepartment of Chemistry and Centre for Plastic Electronics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
gDepartment of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA
hSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: klee@gist.ac.kr
Received 
      18th November 2019
    , Accepted 14th February 2020First published on 17th February 2020AbstractDespite the promise of simple manufacturing via an entirely solution-based process at low temperature (<100 °C), the planar-type inverted perovskite solar cells (PeSCs) based on methylammonium lead tri-iodide (MAPbI3) still suffer from a notorious instability problem under operational conditions. Here, we found that the operational stability of PeSCs with MAPbI3 is significantly related to a high density of ionic defects and correlated amorphous regions at the interface between the electron transport layer and the MAPbI3 film. By recrystallizing the surface of the MAPbI3 layer, we fabricate defect-free stoichiometric MAPbI3 crystals and demonstrated burn-in loss-free and intrinsically stable inverted MAPbI3 PeSCs. The inverted MAPbI3 PeSCs exhibited a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.8% and maintained over 80% and 90% of their initial PCEs even after 1000 hours of real operation (under AM 1.5G irradiation) and continuous heating conditions (at 85 °C in the dark), respectively. Our work demonstrates that the MAPbI3 layer under ionic defect-free conditions is ‘intrinsically’ stable under operational conditions.

Broader context
The perovskite solar cells (PeSCs) are one of the most promising energy devices due to the superior opto-electrical properties of the organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite materials and their facile solution processability even at low temperature. However, despite the promising advantages, their intrinsic operational stability, known as notorious ‘burn-in loss’, has been a central issue to be overcome for their successful commercialization. In this work, we reveal the origin of the burn-in loss, which is related to the stoichiometric defects and the correlated amorphous regions on the perovskite surface. Such amorphous surface can be re-crystalized even in solid-state film form and it turns into a more stoichiometric perovskite crystal surface. Through this reconstruction process, we achieved burn-in loss-free operational stability in methylammonium lead tri-iodide (MAPbI3)-based PeSCs by maintaining over 80% and 90% of their initial power conversion efficiencies even after 1000 hours of real operation (under AM 1.5G irradiation) and continuous heating conditions (at 85 °C in the dark), respectively. Our work demonstrates that notoriously weak MAPbI3 based PeSCs can be ‘intrinsically’ stable with a stoichiometric defect-free condition.

The development of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite semiconductors has sparked tremendous research on solution-processed thin-film solar cells because of their superior optoelectronic properties, such as a large exciton diffusion length, a long carrier lifetime, and a high absorption coefficient.1–6 Therefore, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the perovskite solar cells (PeSCs) continues to increase, exceeding 25.2%.7–9 Because this value is comparable to that of multicrystalline Si solar cells, the real commercialization of PeSCs is expected to be achieved soon. However, the lack of reliable operational stability of PeSCs under continuous photoirradiation or thermal stress has been a crucial barrier to this purpose.
As a consequence of huge efforts to improve the operational stability of PeSCs in the last few years, their stability has been widely accepted to be significantly related to the decomposition of organic parts of the perovskite, such as methylammonium halide (MAX); this inevitably causes the generation of defects in thin perovskite films, resulting in the degradation of PeSCs under continuous photoirradiation, thermal stress, oxygen, and moisture.8–11 One considers that the MAX-based PeSCs are ‘intrinsically’ unstable even with suitable encapsulation or under dry inert conditions, so that PeSCs undergo ‘self-degradation’.12–15 Therefore, to overcome the instability problem in the MAX-based PeSCs, two strategies have been adapted. The first approach is interfacial engineering of PeSCs by introducing perfect interfacial layers with a superior smoothness, a hydrophobic nature, and a pinhole-free morphology.16,17 Among these layers, graphene or a combination of graphene and copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) exhibited successful protection from external and/or internal contaminants such as moisture, oxygen, and iodide ions, thus resulting in excellent stability for the mesoporous-type PeSCs.17
The other approach is compositional engineering of the photoactive materials, which introduces new or mixed cation systems, such as through replacement of MA with formamidinium (FA), cesium (Cs), and other cations or their mixture system in a formula of ABX3. Because this approach results in many improvements in the material quality of the perovskite layers, including a decrease of defects, an increase of the crystal grain size, fewer pinholes on the surface, and an increase in the vertical transport in the films, a substantial enhancement in the device stability has been demonstrated.18–20 The use of a two-dimensional (2-D)/three-dimensional (3-D) heterostructure in the perovskite material has also led to improved stability of PeSCs by passivating defect sites in the crystalline perovskite.21–23
Despite these successes, some issue still remain that need to be understood: the fundamental questions regarding the origin of the instability of MAX based PeSCs under operational conditions. Because the aforementioned approaches could overcome the stability issues by using methods such as interfacial engineering, compositional engineering and, an introduction of new hetero-material systems, a rigorous study on the intrinsic properties for the degradation in the MAX layer has not been fully explored. In general, the doped interlayer in the device structure, such as the hole transport layer (HTL) and electron transport layer (ETL), could affect the stability of the MAX layer significantly.24 Thus, to rule out extrinsic effects from these layers, the planar-type inverted (p-i-n) PeSCs, which have undoped organic layers for the HTL and ETL, would be useful (for example, poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) for the HTL and a fullerene derivative, [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) for the ETL).
Here, we demonstrate that the operational stability of PeSCs based on MAPbI3, which is the simplest mixture of methylammonium iodide (MAI) and lead(II) iodide (PbI2), is significantly related to the surface stoichiometry of the perovskite layers by systematically exploring the degradation process of p-i-n planar-type inverted MAPbI3 PeSCs under operational conditions; their off-stoichiometry at the surface leads to the generation of a high density of ionic defects and amorphous regions, deteriorating the operational stability of the PeSCs. Then, by applying a vacuum-assisted solid-phase recrystallization process to the MAPbI3 layer with the PCBM, we were able to successfully remove the amorphous region at the surface of the MAPbI3 layer, resulting in a reconstructed surface stoichiometry, approaching to an ideal stoichiometry for the MAPbI3 layer. The PCBM layer holds the ionic defects extracted from the MAPbI3 layer during the vacuum process and facilitates stoichiometric recrystallization of MAPbI3. After subsequent removal and redeposition of the PCBM layer on the vacuum-processed MAPbI3 layer, we demonstrated a long-term operational and thermal stability in the p-i-n planar-type inverted PeSCs, which maintain over 80% of their initial PCEs even after ‘1000 hours’ of operation at their maximum power points (MPPs) under full air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) irradiation (Xe lamp without a UV cutoff filter) and retain 90% of their initial PCEs after ‘1000 hours’ of storage at 85 °C under inert nitrogen (N2) gas conditions. Therefore, we demonstrate that the MAPbI3 perovskite layer under ionic defect-free conditions has ‘intrinsically’ excellent operational stability and thermal stability.
Device structure and the vacuum curing and redeposition of PCBM (VCRP) process
The structure of the p-i-n planar-type inverted PeSCs based on MAPbI3 for this work is illustrated in Fig. 1. PTAA is used as the HTL, while the ETL is a PCBM/titanium suboxide (TiOx) bilayer. To increase the wettability of the MAPbI3 solution on the PTAA layer, poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) is used as an interfacial compatibilizer.25 As previously reported, during the PeSC aging process, the excess defects inside the MAPbI3 layer inevitably migrate to the top electrode, leading to the deterioration of the PeSC interface and gradually reduced device performance even under dark and inert N2 gas storage conditions.14,26 Furthermore, this migration of ionic defects in the PeSCs can be accelerated by an external electrical and/or light bias, which causes extremely fast degradation of the device performance within several hours, a phenomenon typically referred to as, burn-in loss.27,28 To simulate the burn-in loss process, we degraded the performance of PeSCs by using maximum power point tracking (MPPT) measurements under continuous AM 1.5G irradiation for 20 hours in inert N2 gas conditions (see Fig. S1, ESI†). As shown in Table S1 (ESI†), the parameters of PeSCs that are mainly degraded under continuous irradiation are the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF), in which their degradation can be originated from damage of the perovskite layer and/or interfaces with iodide ions diffused from the degraded perovskite layer within 100 hours (Fig S2, ESI†). Therefore, to clarify the origin of the degradation of PeSCs, we removed the upper layers (i.e., the PCBM/TiOx bilayer and metal electrode) and redeposited them (Fig. S3, ESI†). Surprisingly, in the redeposited devices, we found that the performance of the aged device was recovered after this reconstruction process and that the decay rate (% per hour) was dramatically reduced as the redeposition process was repeated. This observation implies a reduction of the burn-in process as the number of reconstruction processes increases (see the normalized MPPT curve in the inset of Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI†). In other words, the origin of the burn-in process in PeSCs is effectively suppressed by replacing the upper interfacial layers, and the interface of the perovskite layer is stabilized by reducing the defects at the interface.
 Fig. 1  The fabrication process of VCRP perovskite solar cells. 
To clarify the redeposition effect of the devices, we tested MPPT on the redeposition-only PeSC (a redeposition of a fresh PCBM on the pristine MAPbI3/PCBM layer). Compared to the pristine device, the operational stability of the redeposition-only device was slightly improved despite the fast burn-in process with large decay rates (an operation time to 80% of the initial PCEs) of 10% per hour (13% per hour for pristine device) (Fig. S4, ESI†). However, a case with a vacuum-only processed device (depositing PCBM on vacuum processed MAPbI3 layer) exhibits delayed burn-in degradation with the rate of 0.33% per h. To investigate this different behaviour in terms of the stability for the above devices, we conducted X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) on the surfaces of the MAPbI3 and we found that nitrogen (N) and lead (Pb) atoms at the surface of pristine MAPbI3 and the redeposition processed MAPbI3 are mismatched with N/Pb = 0.84 for the pristine and 0.88 for the redeposition only MAPbI3 layer, respectively. In contrast, as we expected, the vacuum-only processed case shows a matched ratio of 0.99 (Fig. S5, ESI†). Despite the improvement of the operational stability with a vacuum process of the MAPbI3 layer, the devices still exhibit burn-in degradation within a hundred hours.
A significant improvement in the operational stability is observed in the device with the vacuum processed film of MAPbI3/PCBM. As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†), this device exhibited a significant decrease of decay rate (0.20% per h). In contrast to the above cases, this additional improvement cannot be interpreted with the relationship between the fast decay rate and the atomic ratio as shown in Fig. S6b (ESI†). However, this result indicates that the vacuum process with PCBM can be a key to solve the burn-in loss problem of the MAPbI3 based PeSCs. Therefore, we assumed that the operational stability of PeSCs is significantly related with matching stoichiometry of the MAPbI3 layer and removing defects inside the active layer; the halide defects inside the stoichiometrically and structurally imperfect perovskite layer migrate to the interlayers, which can subsequently capture defects. Furthermore, it also means that a certain environment for stabilizing the perovskite layer and a refreshing process by removing the damaged interface between PeSCs and the interlayer can overcome the fast burn-in loss of the PeSCs.
To stabilize the perovskite layer and minimize the interaction between the two layers, we developed a vacuum curing and redeposition of PCBM (VCRP) method. Our VCRP process consists of (1) preparing PCBM-deposited perovskite film on an indium-tin oxide (ITO)/PTAA/PFN substrate, (2) maintaining this film under high vacuum conditions (<10−6 Torr) for over 100 hours, (3) removing the PCBM layer using an organic solvent, and (4) completing device fabrication with a redeposited PCBM layer, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Photovoltaic performance of the VCRP devices
Our VCRP devices exhibit a reasonable device performance without significant degradation compared to the reference device (Fig. S7 and Table S2, ESI†), and the hysteresis behaviours were negligible (Fig. S7 and S8, ESI†) within 7%. After confirming the performance of our VCRP devices, we measured the long-term operational photostability of VCRP PeSCs under operational conditions using the MPPT method (Fig. S9–S11, ESI†) as well as their thermal stability under storage at 85 °C in the dark for 1000 hours. In addition, to exclude any undesirable effect, the MPPT method and the storage test at 85 °C were carried out in a N2-filled glove box without a UV filter and any encapsulation.

Fig. 2a exhibits the long-term stabilities of VCRP PeSCs under operational (Fig. 2a top) conditions and under continuous thermal exposure (Fig. 2a bottom) conditions, respectively. After 1000 hours, the PCEs of VCRP PeSCs are maintained at 80% (continuous operation under AM 1.5 illumination, as directly determined by MPPT) and 90% (continuous heating condition at 85 °C) of their pristine performances. Compared with the pristine devices, a burn-in loss-free behaviour can be observed for VCRP PeSCs in their initial stage with negligible degradation of Jsc and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) (Fig. S11 and S12, ESI†). Surprisingly, we observed that the aged VCRP PeSC (i.e., 2nd VCRP PeSC) with a reconstructed PCBM layer and electrode exhibited a recovered Jsc value of 20.31 mA cm−2 (the Jsc values for the initial device and 1000 hour aged VCRP PeSC are 19.78 mA cm−2 and 17.82 mA cm−2, respectively, as shown in Fig. S12 and Table S3, ESI†). These results indicate that the bulk properties of the perovskite layer (such as, absorption and charge generation) are reversible even after the real operation conditions under light and electrical bias.
 Fig. 2  
J–V, operational and thermal stability measurements. (a) Continuous maximum power point (MPP) tracking for 1000 hours of unencapsulated VCRP perovskite solar cells in a N2-filled glove box under continuous full-sun illumination without a cutoff UV filter (top). Thermal stability for 1000 hours at 85 °C of VCRP perovskite solar cells in a N2-filled glove box, PCE values taken from J–V scans every 24 hours (down). (b) J–V curve of VCRP perovskite solar cells before and after operational aging. (c) J–V curve of VCRP perovskite solar cells before and after thermal aging. 
To date, although several reports have shown excellent long-term operational stability (>1000 hours) the mixed cation/halide based PeSCs,17,23,29 they also stated fast burn-in degradation processes even for the operation in inert conditions or encapsulated cases; only after introducing additional passivation methods, such as adding 2D materials or inorganic passivating interlayer, have their operational stabilities been improved. Moreover, under thermal stress, despite the decrease of the FF (from 0.77 to 0.65 after continuous thermal exposure for 1000 hours) of the VCRP PeSCs, unchanged values for both Jsc and Voc are observed, as shown in Fig. 2c.
Crystalline structure of VCRP PeSCs
To clarify the effect of the VCRP process on the crystalline structure at the surface of the MAPbI3 layer, we carried out grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements at each step of the PeSC VCRP process: on pristine MAPbI3 films, MAPbI3/PCBM films, vacuum-cured MAPbI3/PCBM films, and a processed MAPbI3 film, which was prepared by removing the PCBM layer from the vacuum-cured MAPbI3/PCBM film. GIWAXS measurements were performed at the Complex Materials Scattering (CMS, 11-BM) beamline of the National Synchrotron Light Source II at Brookhaven National Laboratory (Fig. S13 and S14, ESI†). To assess the difference between the surface and bulk crystallinities of the MAPbI3 layer obtained with the VCRP method, the samples were analysed at two different X-ray incidence angles, each probing the surface and entire bulk of the films, respectively: 0.1 degrees (surface) and 0.3 degrees (bulk) as shown in Note S2 and Fig. S15 (ESI†). Fig. 3 presents 2-D GIWAXS pattern images (a and c) and the corresponding circular averages (b and d) for the samples. The neat MAPbI3 film exhibits a strong crystalline nature with several noticeable peaks at approximately 1.0 Å−1 (110 peak of the MAPbI3 film) and 2.0–2.5 Å−1 as shown in Fig. 3b and Fig. S16 and S17 (ESI†).30,31 In addition, we can recognize a broad amorphous peak at approximately 1.5–2.5 Å−1 (even after the background subtraction and profile normalization) and a weak peak at approximately 0.6 Å−1, arising from an intermediate phase of MAPbI3.30 Although GIWAXS cannot elucidate which part of the MAPbI3 film contributes amorphous region,32 this result implies that the surface of the pristine MAPbI3 film has a mixed state of well-crystalline perovskite crystals and amorphous regions, including decomposed states of MAPbI3. The same feature is observed in the MAPbI3/PCBM layer, with a slightly decreased peak intensity at 0.6 Å−1. However, after the vacuum curing process is applied to the MAPbI3/PCBM film, we found a dramatic change in the GIWAXS pattern: the disappearance of the intermediate and amorphous peaks (see Fig. 3b). In addition, a clearer peak was observed at approximately the 1.0 Å−1 position. After removing the PCBM layer from the vacuum-cured MAPbI3/PCBM film, the same GIWAXS pattern was observed.
 Fig. 3  GIWAXS. 2-D GIWAXS image and circular average of (a and b) surface crystallinity and (c and d) bulk crystallinity of perovskite films. 
To clarify the vacuum curing effect on the MAPbI3/PCBM film, GIWAXS measurements were carried out on a vacuum-cured MAPbI3 film without PCBM atop. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. S18–S20 (ESI†), the GIWAXS pattern for the vacuum-cured MAPbI3 film is almost the same as that for the neat MAPbI3 film without the vacuum curing process. In addition, we observed two distinct features between neat MAPbI3 and the VCRP sample: (1) without the vacuum curing process, just a washing PCBM process does not reduce the amorphous phase in the MAPbI3 (Fig. S17, ESI†); (2) in the case of a vacuum processed neat MAPbI3, the amorphous phase still remained (Fig. S19c, d and S20c, d, ESI†), which is absent in the vacuum-cured MAPbI3/PCBM film (Fig. 3b). This result implies that the surface of the MAPbI3 film is extremely unstable, thus causing a deterioration of the surface of the MAPbI3 film even under vacuum processes. Furthermore, the vacuum curing process applied to the structure of the MAPbI3/PCBM film is effective in achieving a well-crystalline surface in the MAPbI3 film. Because Lewis acid materials such as PCBM are a good acceptor of negatively charged ionic defects, such as PbI3− or I−,8,33,34 the ionic defects extracted from the MAPbI3 film can be easily captured by the PCBM layer. Furthermore, this PCBM layer, including ionic defects, induces a surface reconstruction of the MAPbI3 film during the vacuum curing process, resulting in a well-crystalline surface in the vacuum-cured MAPbI3/PCBM films, as shown in Fig. 3b.
In contrast, the bulk crystalline structure of the MAPbI3/PCBM film exhibits no significant change in the GIWAXS patterns before and after the vacuum curing process (Fig. 3c and d). However, we observed slight changes in the peak position and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the circular averages for the GIWAXS patterns; the 110 peak at q = 1.0 Å−1 is slightly shifted to a lower angle at q = 0.98 Å−1, and the FWHM of the corresponding peak decreases from 0.050 Å−1 to 0.038 Å−1 after the VCRP process (Fig. 3d and Table S5, ESI†). These results imply that the vacuum curing process applied to the MAPbI3/PCBM film leads to a slight expansion of crystalline MAPbI3 and an increase in its mean size in the bulk film, respectively.35
Surface reconstruction of VCRP PeSCs
To evaluate the morphological change of the MAPbI3 film that occurs during the VCRP method, we carried out atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements on the MAPbI3 and VCRP MAPbI3 films. As presented in Fig. 4a and b, we observed granules with smaller sizes in the VCRP MAPbI3 film compared to the MAPbI3 film. This result indicates that the surface of the VCRP MAPbI3 film is reconstructed; thus, a change in the stoichiometry of the Pb:N:I atomic ratio at the surface of the MAPbI3 film during the VCRP process is expected. To verify this expectation, we carried out XPS on the surfaces of the MAPbI3 and VCRP MAPbI3 films. For the VCRP MAPbI3 film, the PCBM layer was removed before performing XPS measurements. As shown in Fig. S21 and Table S6 (ESI†), the surface of the pristine MAPbI3 film shows an atomic ratio of 1.00:0.84:2.83 corresponding to Pb:N:I, which means the atomic ratio for Pb and N is inadequate compared to the ideal ratio.
 Fig. 4  AFM image and depth-profile XPS of perovskite films. AFM images of (a) pristine perovskite and (b) VCRP processed perovskite. Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy of (c) pristine perovskite/PCBM and (d) VCRP processed-redeposited perovskite/PCBM. 
However, rearrangement of the Pb:N:I atomic ratio is observed to occur at the interface of the VCRP MAPbI3 film; the stoichiometry of the Pb:N:I atomic ratio is 1.00:1.04:3.30, which approaches the ideal stoichiometry of crystalline MAPbI3. Therefore, we infer that rearrangement of the stoichiometry at the surface of the VCRP MAPbI3 film can be achieved by reducing mobile iodide ions (I−) and stabilizing CH3NH3+ (MA+) ions through the recrystallization of the amorphous surface of the perovskite film during the VCRP process.
To obtain more detailed information on the reconstructed surface of the VCRP MAPbI3 film, we carried out time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and XPS depth profiling on the MAPbI3/PCBM and VCRP MAPbI3/PCBM films. As shown in the ToF-SIMS depth profile for the MAPbI3/PCBM and VCRP MAPbI3 films (Fig. 4c, d and Fig. S22, S23, ESI†), the iodide elements (I−) diffuse from MAPbI3 to PCBM even in the pristine MAPbI3/PCBM film. However, comparing the results in Fig. S22 (ESI†), different distributions of I− are observed; in the VCRP MAPbI3 film, the decay rate for I− from the MAPbI3 layer to the PCBM layer is slightly lower than that of the MAPbI3 film. Based on this result, we speculate that slow diffusion of iodide into the PCBM layer occurred in the VCRP MAPbI3 film during the vacuum curing process (Fig. S24, ESI†). Furthermore, in contrast to the pristine MAPbI3 film, because the PCBM scavenging layer contains iodide ions, which are extracted from the grain boundaries in the MAPbI3 layer, these excess iodide ions may contribute to the rearrangement of the stoichiometry at the interface of the VCRP MAPbI3 film, as observed in the XPS data. Therefore, it can be hypothesized that the VCRP process applied to the MAPbI3/PCBM film leads to the evolution of a well-crystalline surface with significant reduction of amorphous regions through the extraction of ionic defects from the MAPbI3 film (GIWAXS and ToF-SIMS data). Additionally, because of the ionic defects extracted from the grain boundaries and/or the large-size MAPbI3 crystals and excess iodide ions from the PCBM layer, large-size crystals are reduced, and amorphous regions may transform to crystals (Fig. 4), resulting in small-size granules in the VCRP MAPbI3 film, as observed in the AFM images.
Charge dynamics of VCRP PeSCs
Because of the reduced structural defects in the VCRP MAPbI3 film, different charge dynamics can be expected in the MAPbI3 and VCRP MAPbI3 films. Therefore, we conducted time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) measurements on the perovskite films and transient photovoltage (TPV) and impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements on the PeSCs. As shown in Fig. 5, the TCSPC data (Fig. 5a) clearly exhibit two phases typically assigned to fast trapping processes (∼1 ns) and slower recombination/charge transfer processes (>10 ns).36,37 It is apparent that the VCRP process results in a reduction in the amplitude of the fast phase relative to the slow phase, consistent with this process passivating trap states at grain boundaries as discussed above.36–38
 Fig. 5  Characterization of VCRP processed perovskite films and devices. (a) Time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) of perovskite films. (b) Transient photovoltage of PeSCs (under 0.01 sun illumination). (c) Open-circuit voltage (Voc)-light intensity plot of PeSCs. (d) J–V characteristics of electron-only devices (ITO/PCBM/TiOx/pristine or VCRP processed MAPbI3/PCBM/TiOx/Al) and their characteristic energy (Ech). 
The difference in charge recombination lifetime of real devices was confirmed using TPV decay measurements. As shown in Fig. 5b, the VCRP-processed device exhibits a longer charge recombination lifetime (27.8 μs) compared to the control device (17.5 μs).39 The dependence of Voc on the light intensity shows a decreased Voc-light intensity slope from 1.64 (pristine PeSC) to 1.57kBT/q (VCRP PeSC), where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and q is the elementary charge, as shown in Fig. 5c; this result represents reduced trap-assisted recombination in the VCRP PeSC, which is consistent with the TCSPC measurement result.40 However, the energy disorder profiles of both devices obtained from light-dependent IS exhibit similar values (∼90 meV). Therefore, the difference in the energy disorder in the PCBM layer of the pristine PeSC and VCRP PeSC can be inferred to be negligible (Fig. S25, ESI†).41 In contrast, because of the reduced ionic defects at the surface of the MAPbI3 layer due to the VCRP process, the deep-trap widths of the perovskite layer decrease from 190 meV to 145 meV, as derived from the linear slopes of the J–V characteristics of electron-only devices (from 8.59 to 6.80) shown in Fig. 5d.42
Photovoltaic Performance of 1 cm2 PeSCs

Fig. 6a and b show the J–V characteristics and incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of our optimized VCRP device (area of 0.0464 cm2) with Voc of 1.12 V, a Jsc of 21.63 mA cm−2, and an FF of 77.9% (a corresponding PCE of 18.89% for both the reverse and forward biases). We also fabricated a larger (1 cm2) PeSC (Voc of 1.11 V, a Jsc of 21.41 mA cm−2, and an FF of 67.8%) and conducted a MPPT test under the same full operation conditions of AM 1.5G irradiation with the inert N2 condition. The device exhibited operational stability without burn-in process and maintained more than 80% of the initial PCE during the 600 hour operation (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  Photovoltaic properties of PeSCs and MPPT of a 1 cm2-area device. (a) J–V characteristics of optimized VCRP perovskite solar cells. (b) EQE spectrum and Jsc integrated from the EQE spectrum of the best-performing VCRP perovskite solar cells and (c) continuous MPP tracking for 600 hours of unencapsulated VCRP PeSC (1 cm2 area) in a N2-filled glove box under continuous full-sun illumination without a cutoff UV filter. 
Conclusions
We found that a nonstoichiometric amorphous phase exists on the surface of the MAPbI3 film in its as-cast state and confirmed that such imperfections lead to the fast burn-in degradation of the performance of MA-based PeSCs under operational conditions. Based on these observations, we developed a new method to reconstruct a stoichiometric crystal structure at the surface of the MAPbI3 film and demonstrated burn-in loss-free planar-type inverted PeSCs with a long-term operational and thermal stability. Our reconstructed devices maintained over 80% of the initial PCEs even after ‘1000 hours’ of operation at their maximum power point under 1 sun irradiation without a UV cutoff filter and 90% of the initial PCEs after ‘1000 hours’ of storage at 85 °C under inert gas conditions. Finally, to evaluate the possible use of our VCRP process for large-area devices, we successfully fabricated large-area (1 cm2) VCRP PeSCs. Our results imply that ‘Stoichiometric MAPbI3 is intrinsically stable’ and provide fundamentally important and ground-breaking information to the perovskite research field, and also solve the critical lifetime issues of the PeSCs with a new defect self-healing concept.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Heeger Center for Advanced Materials (HCAM) at the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST) of Korea for help with device fabrication and measurements. This research was supported by the Global Research Laboratory Program of the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2017K1A12013153). K. L. also acknowledges support provided by the GIST Research Institute (GRI) grant funded by the GIST in 2020. In addition, H. K. acknowledges the financial support from the Basic Science Research Program through the NRF funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF-2017R1A2B4012490). In addition, this research used the 11-BM Complex Materials Scattering (CMS) beamline and other resources of the National Synchrotron Light Source II and the Center for Functional Nanomaterials, which are U.S. DOE Office of Science Facilities, at Brookhaven National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-SC0012704. We thank Drs Kevin G. Yager and Xiao Tong for their assistance with GIWAXS and XPS depth-profiling experiments, respectively.
References
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20200218.pdf, (accessed 2020-02-18).
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alsari, A. J. Pearson, J. T.-W. Wang, Z. Wang, A. Montisci, N. C. Greenham, H. J. Snaith, S. Lilliu and R. H. Friend, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5977 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Pearson, G. E. Eperon, P. E. Hopkinson, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. T.-W. Wang, H. J. Snaith and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600014 CrossRef .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655–1660 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
Y. C. Kim, T. Y. Yang, N. J. Jeon, J. Im, S. Jang, T. J. Shin, H. W. Shin, S. Kim, E. Lee, S. Kim, J. H. Noh, S. I. Seok and J. Seo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2109–2116 RSC .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Jodlowski, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, M. Salado, M. Ralaiarisoa, S. Ahmad, N. Koch, L. Camacho, G. de Miguel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 972–979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cho, A. M. Soufiani, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. Seidel, X. Deng, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703392 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, T.-H. Han, C. Choi, S.-Y. Chang, S.-J. Lee, N. De Marco, H. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3021 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323–356 RSC .
J. Lee, H. Kang, G. Kim, H. Back, J. Kim, S. Hong, B. Park, E. Lee and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606363 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 RSC .
G. Y. Kim, A. Senocrate, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 445–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-K. Kim, Y. H. Min, S. Noh, E. Cho, G. Jeong, M. Joo, S.-W. Ahn, J. S. Lee, S. Kim, K. Ihm, H. Ahn, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4645 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7692–7709 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. P. Adhyaksa, S. Brittman, H. Āboliņš, A. Lof, X. Li, J. D. Keelor, Y. Luo, T. Duevski, R. M. A. Heeren, S. R. Ellis, D. P. Fenning and E. C. Garnett, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804792 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Pham, V. T. Tiong, P. Chen, L. Wang, G. J. Wilson, J. Bell and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5195–5203 RSC .
J. Kim, R. Godin, S. D. Dimitrov, T. Du, D. Bryant, M. A. McLachlan and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802474 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1972–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kiermasch, P. Rieder, K. Tvingstedt, A. Baumann and V. Dyakonov, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15001 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Mandoc, B. de Boer, G. Paasch and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 193202 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee03736e‡ H. Back and G. Kim contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
The perovskite solar cells (PeSCs) are one of the most promising energy devices due to the superior opto-electrical properties of the organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite materials and their facile solution processability even at low temperature. However, despite the promising advantages, their intrinsic operational stability, known as notorious ‘burn-in loss’, has been a central issue to be overcome for their successful commercialization. In this work, we reveal the origin of the burn-in loss, which is related to the stoichiometric defects and the correlated amorphous regions on the perovskite surface. Such amorphous surface can be re-crystalized even in solid-state film form and it turns into a more stoichiometric perovskite crystal surface. Through this reconstruction process, we achieved burn-in loss-free operational stability in methylammonium lead tri-iodide (MAPbI3)-based PeSCs by maintaining over 80% and 90% of their initial power conversion efficiencies even after 1000 hours of real operation (under AM 1.5G irradiation) and continuous heating conditions (at 85 °C in the dark), respectively. Our work demonstrates that notoriously weak MAPbI3 based PeSCs can be ‘intrinsically’ stable with a stoichiometric defect-free condition.


 	Fig. 1  The fabrication process of VCRP perovskite solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  
J–V, operational and thermal stability measurements. (a) Continuous maximum power point (MPP) tracking for 1000 hours of unencapsulated VCRP perovskite solar cells in a N2-filled glove box under continuous full-sun illumination without a cutoff UV filter (top). Thermal stability for 1000 hours at 85 °C of VCRP perovskite solar cells in a N2-filled glove box, PCE values taken from J–V scans every 24 hours (down). (b) J–V curve of VCRP perovskite solar cells before and after operational aging. (c) J–V curve of VCRP perovskite solar cells before and after thermal aging.	 

 	Fig. 3  GIWAXS. 2-D GIWAXS image and circular average of (a and b) surface crystallinity and (c and d) bulk crystallinity of perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 4  AFM image and depth-profile XPS of perovskite films. AFM images of (a) pristine perovskite and (b) VCRP processed perovskite. Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy of (c) pristine perovskite/PCBM and (d) VCRP processed-redeposited perovskite/PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 5  Characterization of VCRP processed perovskite films and devices. (a) Time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) of perovskite films. (b) Transient photovoltage of PeSCs (under 0.01 sun illumination). (c) Open-circuit voltage (Voc)-light intensity plot of PeSCs. (d) J–V characteristics of electron-only devices (ITO/PCBM/TiOx/pristine or VCRP processed MAPbI3/PCBM/TiOx/Al) and their characteristic energy (Ech).	 

 	Fig. 6  Photovoltaic properties of PeSCs and MPPT of a 1 cm2-area device. (a) J–V characteristics of optimized VCRP perovskite solar cells. (b) EQE spectrum and Jsc integrated from the EQE spectrum of the best-performing VCRP perovskite solar cells and (c) continuous MPP tracking for 600 hours of unencapsulated VCRP PeSC (1 cm2 area) in a N2-filled glove box under continuous full-sun illumination without a cutoff UV filter.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee03736e
‡ H. Back and G. Kim contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
