Recent developments in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides: phase transition and applications of the (quasi-)metallic phases  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00236H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00236H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 10087-10115Recent developments in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides: phase transition and applications of the (quasi-)metallic phases

        
          
            Xinmao 
            Yin†
a, 
      
        
          
            Chi Sin 
            Tang†
bc, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Zheng
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Gao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hua 
            Zhang
          
        
      def, 
      
        
          
            Manish 
            Chhowalla
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ch and 

        
          
            Andrew T. S. 
            Wee
          
          
        
      *c
aShanghai Key Laboratory of High Temperature Superconductors, Physics Department, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
bInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering, A-STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 2 Fusionopolis Way, 138634, Singapore
cDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117542, Singapore. E-mail: phycw@nus.edu.sg; phyweets@nus.edu.sg
dDepartment of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
eHong Kong Branch of National Precious Metals Material Engineering Research Center (NPMM), City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
fShenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 518057, China
gDepartment of Materials Science & Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB30FS, UK
hDepartment of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore
Received 
      23rd April 2021
    First published on 16th August 2021AbstractThe advent of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D-TMDs) has led to an extensive amount of interest amongst scientists and engineers alike and an intensive amount of research has brought about major breakthroughs in the electronic and optical properties of 2D materials. This in turn has generated considerable interest in novel device applications. With the polymorphic structural features of 2D-TMDs, this class of materials can exhibit both semiconducting and metallic (quasi-metallic) properties in their respective phases. This polymorphic property further increases the interest in 2D-TMDs both in fundamental research and for their potential utilization in novel high-performance device applications. In this review, we highlight the unique structural properties of few-layer and monolayer TMDs in the metallic 1T- and quasi-metallic 1T′-phases, and how these phases dictate their electronic and optical properties. An overview of the semiconducting-to-(quasi)-metallic phase transition of 2D-TMD systems will be covered along with a discussion on the phase transition mechanisms. The current development in the applications of (quasi)-metallic 2D-TMDs will be presented ranging from high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices to energy storage, catalysis, piezoelectric and thermoelectric devices, and topological insulator and neuromorphic computing applications. We conclude our review by highlighting the challenges confronting the utilization of TMD-based systems and projecting the future developmental trends with an outlook of the progress needed to propel this exciting field forward.
Xinmao Yin
Prof. Xinmao Yin is currently a professor at the Physics Department of Shanghai University, China. He received his bachelor's degree in Physics from Zhejiang University in 2010 and his PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore under the supervision of Prof. Andrew Wee in 2015. After that, he continued his research in the National University of Singapore. His research interests focus on the electronic and spin structures of different quantum materials using optical spectroscopic techniques in different spectral regimes. He also studies the underlying mechanisms that govern superconductivity, ferromagnetism, phase transition and other exotic quasi-particle quantum excitations.
Chi Sin Tang
Dr Chi Sin Tang received his bachelor's degree in Physics from Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) and his PhD under the Integrative Sciences and Engineering Programme (ISEP) from the National University of Singapore. He is currently a scientist in the Nano Electronic and Thermal Transport (NETT) group at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. His research interests focus on the electronic and magnetic properties of strongly-correlated systems, heterostructures and 2D materials where unique quantum properties and quasi-particle dynamics can be uncovered.
Wei Chen
Prof. Wei Chen is currently a professor in both the Chemistry and Physics Departments at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He received his bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University (China) in 2001 and his PhD degree from the Chemistry Department at the NUS in 2004. His current research interests include molecular-scale interface engineering for organic, graphene and 2D material-based electronics and optoelectronics, and interface-controlled nanocatalysis for energy and environmental research.
Andrew T. S. Wee
Prof. Andrew T. S. Wee is a Class of ‘62 Professor of Physics at the National University of Singapore (NUS). His research interests are in surface and nanoscale science, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and synchrotron radiation studies of molecule–substrate interfaces, graphene and related 2D materials. He was a Commonwealth Fellow as well as a Rhodes Scholar at the University of Oxford, where he received his received his DPhil (1990). He holds a Bachelor of Arts (Honours) in Physics (1994) as well as a master's degree from the University of Cambridge. He is an Associate Editor of the journal ACS Nano and serves or has served on several other journal editorial boards.
1. Introduction
Since graphene was first exfoliated from graphite using a mechanical cleavage method,1 two dimensional (2D) materials have garnered widespread interest. Atomically thin 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with a formula of MX2 (M: transition metal atom; X: chalcogen atom) form a diverse class of 2D materials with about 60 members. With their unique optoelectronic properties and robust mechanical features, this class of low-dimensional materials are an ideal platform for multiple applications in electronics, optoelectronics and valleytronics.2–4 With the combination of their non-zero bandgap structure and chemically stable layered surface properties, 2D-TMDs have also emerged as favourable materials in applications related to field-effect-transistor (FET)-based systems. Hence, research studies to both uncover the fundamental properties and unleash new frontiers for possible 2D-TMD based device applications have taken centerstage over the past decade.
At the molecular level, variations to the chemical bonding and crystal configurations of the transition metal atom component can lead to multiple structural phases. The semiconducting H-phase – the general term for semiconducting phase monolayer (1H) and multilayer (2H) TMD materials – is a quintessential case in point. The transformation of the structure of one chalcogen plane leads to the formation of a metallic 1T-phase. In addition, a unique quasi-metallic 1T′-phase arises which comprises a distorted sandwich structure where an array of one-dimensional zigzag transition-metal chains are formed.5,6
With the diversity in the structural phases and the unique properties arising that can be exploited for different device applications, it is important to ensure the reliability and efficiency in accessing the respective phases via relevant phase engineering techniques. The greater availability and increasing accessibility to TMD materials in their metallic (quasi-metallic) phases either through direct synthesis or phase conversion have led to rapidly growing interest in optoelectronics, integrated circuitry, spintronics, catalysis and even emerging fields such as neuromorphic computing. Nevertheless, achieving precise control of the semiconducting H to (quasi-)metallic 1T/1T′ phase transition in TMD systems remains a challenge especially with regard to the yield of uniform, large-area, highly crystalline, low-defect samples. The fundamental issue lies in unraveling the mechanism and optimizing the phase engineering methods that would allow the large-scale production and effective utilization of TMDs in the development of next-generation device applications. Therefore, it is paramount to provide a broad and balanced coverage to keep practitioners in this field abreast with the latest developments, and to introduce the fundamentals to those who are new to polymorphic TMD systems and their diverse applications. Moreover, by leveraging on the conductivity of metallic 1T/1T′ phases, superior metal–TMD contact devices can potentially be achieved. This provides TMDs with opportunities to not only fully exploit the merits of the respective phases, but also provide a diversity of electronic structures for novel device applications.
A number of reviews provide a good summary of the phase transition mechanisms in TMD systems and the progress made in phase engineering techniques.7–9 Apart from providing a comprehensive and clear analysis in terms of distinguishing the different phases of 2D-TMDs in the review by Chhowalla and co-workers in 2013,10 another excellent review by Chhowalla and other co-workers in 20157 further provided a thorough analysis of the structures and phases of single- and few-layered TMDs and described the progress in phase engineering methods. Hua Zhang and co-workers provided an insightful review in 2018 that introduces the electronic properties of 2D-TMDs, an update to the phase transition strategies and mechanisms, and a wide range of emerging applications.9 Since then, the rapid scientific development has led to the emergence of more efficient synthesis techniques of high-quality and large-scale 1T′-phase TMDs.11 Resolving the actual crystal structures of multiple 1T′-phase TMD species and newly derived insights into thickness-dependent superconductivity have further promised new opportunities that 2D-TMDs and their respective polymorphic structural phases can offer in applications related to high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices, as well as energy storage, catalysis, hydrogen evolution reactions, and piezoelectric and thermoelectric related devices. Besides, the drive for alternative sources of clean and renewable energy has prompted increasing interest and scientific developments in utilizing polymorphic TMD systems for multiple photocatalytic applications that promise a medium that is more compact, versatile and with greater energy efficiency. Hence, it is timely that an updated in-depth review is given in areas related to new insights into interfacial metal–TMD phase transition mechanisms, and to keep both insiders and those outside of the discipline abreast with the latest developments in the emerging applications in relation to their topologically non-trivial properties, potential neuromorphic computing needs and growing catalytic applications as a means of clean and renewable energy sources. This comprehensive review aims to cover a broad range of topics that encompass the rapid scientific and technological developments of polymorphic TMDs in recent years in multiple disciplines and applications (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  The availability of multiple efficient phase engineering techniques has enabled the use of layered TMD materials in multiple electronic and photodevice applications. With further developments in this discipline, we expect bright prospects in the utilization of this class of materials in areas such as photocatalysts, neuromorphic computing, and even artificial intelligence and smart technologies. 
The increasing efforts to improve the phase engineering methods of TMD systems in novel device applications provide strong motivation to review and critically discuss recent theoretical and experimental progress. At the fundamental level, a comprehensive overview of the semiconducting to metallic (quasi-metallic) phase transition of 2D-TMD systems and discussion on the phase transition mechanism will be presented. Specifically, reports on how metal substrates can be used to regulate the structural phase transition of 2D-TMDs based on the high-temperature annealing technique will be discussed. This is followed by a broad coverage on the opportunities that metallic (quasi-metallic) 2D-TMD based nanoengineering techniques offer and their potential for high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices, energy storage, catalysis, hydrogen evolution reactions, and piezoelectric and thermoelectric devices, and also in the topological insulator and neuromorphic computing fields. Finally, we conclude our review with an outlook of the work needed to propel this exciting field forward and to cater to the demands of future technology.
2. Crystal and electronic structures of different phases of 2D-TMDs
TMDs present various structural polymorphs which have attracted huge attention in the last decade both as an ideal platform for the fundamental study of layered quantum systems, and for their potential for multiple applications. They consist of a transition metal layer sandwiched between two chalcogen layers as a unit layer. In their single-layer form (2D-TMDs), the common polymorphs are the trigonal-prismatic semiconducting 1H-phase, the octahedral metallic 1T-phase and the distorted quasi-metallic 1T′-phase.
Structurally, the 1H-phase corresponds to an ABA stacking configuration as shown in Fig. 2a, where the chalcogen atoms in the top and bottom atomic planes are in the same position and are located on top of each other in the direction perpendicular to the layer. Fig. 2d displays the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of 1H-phase monolayer-WSe2 where a hexagonal structure with uniform interplanar spacings is clearly imaged.12
 Fig. 2  Molecular structures of 2D-TMDs in their polymorphic phases: (a) trigonal prismatic (1H), (b) octahedral (1T), and (c) distorted (1T′) phases. The characteristic zig-zag configuration of the transition metal atoms in 1T′-phase 2D-TMDs is indicated by the grey dashed lines in the bottom panel. The stacking configurations of the atomic planes are indicated. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy images of (d) 1H-phase monolayer-WSe2, (e) 1T-phase MoS2 (blue circles indicate the positions of Mo-atoms), and (f) 1T′-phase monolayer-WSe2. In the overlaid crystal models of (d) and (f), purple circles represent W-atoms, while green circles represent Se-atoms. Panels (d) and (f) reproduced from ref. 12 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panel (e) reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
With the gliding action of one of the chalcogen planes, the 1H-phase can transform into the 1T structure that comprises an ABC stacking configuration. This results in a perfect octahedral coordination geometry of the transition metal atom shown in Fig. 2b. Fig. 2e shows the high-resolution scanning TEM image of MoS2 with its 1T structure.5
Both experimental and theoretical studies have suggested that the 1T-phase structure of 2D-TMDs is unstable under free-standing conditions. It will spontaneously buckle and form a distorted structure known as the 1T′-phase. The collective clustering transition metal atoms and the buckling chalcogen planes lead to the formation of a period doubling 2 × 1 structure that, from the top view, consists of an array of 1D zigzag transition metal chains (Fig. 2c). This structure can be observed in high-resolution TEM imaging of 1T′-monolayer-WSe2 grown via the solution phase synthesis method as shown in Fig. 2f.12 The contrasting zigzag transition metal chains are characteristic of the 1T′-phase structure. A previous study of 1T′-phase monolayer-WSe2 grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) also confirmed this unique zigzag chain structure via scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).13
The calculated band structures of monolayer-MoS2 in the 1H, 1T and 1T′ phases are displayed in Fig. 3a, b, and c, respectively.6,14,15 The 1H-phase system is a direct K–K bandgap semiconductor (see the dashed box in Fig. 3a). The K–K transitions are strongly related to the transition metal d-orbitals (Mo). There are 2 electrons in the transition metal d-orbitals, which tend to be paired and fully occupied in their lowest dz2 state due to the hexagonal symmetry of its 1H-phase. Therefore, the 1H-phase semiconducting structure is stabilized by the electron count of the transition metal d-orbitals. The large-scale STM image showing the single-layer, bilayer, and trilayer MoS2 regions is displayed in Fig. 3d and the high-resolution scanning tunneling spectroscopic (STS) measurement is depicted in Fig. 3e. The STS measurement reveals a 2.4 eV bandgap for monolayer-MoS2 synthesized on a graphite substrate via chemical vapour deposition (CVD).16 The inevitable presence of complex many-body interactions, strong electronic correlations, and sample defects results in a discrepancy between the computationally derived bandgap (Fig. 3a) and the experimental value (Fig. 3e). Nevertheless, theoretical calculations provide an accurate representation of the actual TMD systems in very essential aspects such as the evolution from an indirect bandgap to a direct bandgap system as the layer number reduces into its monolayer form. Besides, it has been demonstrated that this bandgap decreases significantly as the thickness increases (Fig. 2e).
 Fig. 3  Theoretically and experimentally determined band structures of 2D-TMDs in their respective phases: (a) 1H, (b) 1T, and (c) 1T′-phase monolayer-MoS2. The green lines in (a) show the top (bottom) valence (conduction) bands in MoS2 with the direct bandgap at the K-point in the red dashed box. The red and blue lines in (b) represent the bands, contributed mainly by the Mo 4d-orbitals and S 3p-orbitals, respectively. The metallic phase is distinct with the disappearance of the bandgap at the Γ-point as highlighted in the red dashed box. The band structure of 1T′-phase monolayer-MoS2 in (c) with the fundamental gap, Eg, and inverted gap, 2δ. The metal d-orbital (in red) is located below the chalcogenide p-orbital due to band inversion. Inset: Comparison of band structures with (red dashed line) and without (black solid line) spin–orbit coupling. (d) Large-scale STM image of single-layer, bilayer, and trilayer MoS2 (150 × 150 nm2; VTip = 2.4 V), and (e) dI/dV spectra measured in regions with different layer numbers (set point: VTip = 1.5 V, ITip = 80 pA). (f) High-resolution ARPES band dispersion along the Y–Γ–Y direction of 1T′-phase monolayer-WSe2. Inset: Schematic of the first Brillouin zone of 1T′-phase WSe2 with the relevant high-symmetry points indicated. (g) Calculated bands along the Γ–Y (brown) and Γ–P (green) directions. Optical spectra of (h and i) MoS2 and (j and k) WSe2 monolayers on gold substrates in their respective spectral range which indicate the emergence of the fundamental (h and j) and inverted gaps (i and k). Panel (a) reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012. Panel (b) reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from the American Institute of Physics Publishing, copyright 2013. Panel (c) reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014. Panels (d) and (e) reproduced from ref. 16, under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (f) and (g) reproduced from ref. 13, under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (h) and (i) reproduced from ref. 17 and 18, under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (j) and (k) reproduced from ref. 17 and 18 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
For the 1T-phase, the degeneracy of the electronic structure (lowest dxy,yz,zx degenerate orbitals) attributed to its tetragonal symmetry results in partially occupied d-orbitals which in turn form its metallic character. Around the Γ-point, its Fermi-level crosses both the Mo d- and S p-orbitals (see dashed boxes in Fig. 3b). While the 1H-phase structure is stabilized by the electron count of the transition metal d-orbitals, charge doping processes such as intercalation, alloying, gating and the introduction of defects can be expected to modify the d-orbital electron count. Therefore, destabilizing the 1H-phase structure leads to the formation of a 1T metallic phase. Apart from modifying the electron count, external forces in the form of atomic distortion can also destabilize the 1H-phase electronic structure, leading to the formation of a 1T/1T′-phase.
In 1T′-phase 2D-TMDs, the zigzag chain structure lowers the transition metal d-orbitals below the chalcogen p-orbitals. This leads to a band inversion, which in turn results in the formation of an inverted gap, 2δ, at the Γ-point in the Brillouin zone, along with two Dirac cones near the Γ-point in the 2D Brillouin zone. Under the influence of spin–orbit coupling, there is an opening of a fundamental gap, Eg, at the Dirac points (Fig. 3c). The presence of both the inverted and fundamental gaps has also been experimentally observed via multiple experimental techniques over different species of 1T′-phase 2D-TMDs where the energy gap varies from one system to the next. Fig. 3f is a case in point where it displays the high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopic (ARPES) characterization of 1T′-phase monolayer-WSe2 grown by MBE.13 It shows a ∼0.12 eV fundamental gap that is consistent with the magnitude as derived via band structure calculations as shown in Fig. 3g. Both Γ–Y and Γ–P directional contributions are detected in a single ARPES measurement (Fig. 3f). Other STS and ARPES studies further exhibit the direct observation of the ∼56 meV fundamental gap for epitaxially grown 1T′-phase monolayer-WTe2.19 Interestingly, other optical techniques can also be employed to probe these characteristic 1T′-phase features as in the case of Keum et al., where the use of Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) has led to the observation of an absorption feature at ∼0.06 eV, which corresponds to the fundamental gap of mechanically exfoliated 1T′-phase monolayer-MoTe2 samples.20 Spectroscopic ellipsometry is another effective optical technique which allows for the direct observation of the characteristic fundamental and inverted gap features where Fig. 3h–k display the optical spectra containing the fundamental and inverted gaps of both 1T′-phase MoS2 and WSe2 monolayers.17,18
Apart from the three main structural phases mentioned above, TMDs also display other structural phases with their respective optical and electronic properties. For instance, MoTe2 and WTe2 can undergo a phase transition from the monoclinic 1T′-phase to an orthogonal 1Td structure as the temperature decreases. Both the 1T′ and 1Td-phases possess rather similar structures and their main difference lies in the dislocations between the stacking layers (Fig. 4a). This dislocation results leads to a symmetry change between these two structural phases.22,23 Nevertheless, 1Td-phase TMDs also exhibit similar quasi-metallic electronic properties to their 1T′-phase counterparts due to their similar crystal structures.20,23,24
 Fig. 4  Structures of 1Td and 1T′′-phase TMDs. (a) Comparing the stacking orders to distinguish between the 1T′ and 1Td phases. (b) Atomic structures of the 1T′′-phase monolayer TMD. The transition metal and chalcogen atoms are represented using the cyan and yellow spheres, respectively. Panel (b) reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
As for TMD monolayers, apart from the 1T′-phase that arises from the structural distortion of the 1T-phase precursor, another stable polymorph includes the 1T′′-phase which also has an octahedral structure (Fig. 4b).25 While the transition metal atoms are also associated in the form of an M–M configuration in the distorted phases, dimerization occurs for the M atoms in the 1T′-phase and trimerization for the 1T′′-phase.26 Furthermore, computational studies by Ma et al. suggested that the 1T′′-phase is a wide bandgap semiconductor. For instance, 1T′′-phase monolayer-MoS2 has an indirect bandgap of ∼0.27 eV.21 However, there is no agreement regarding the relative stability between the 1T′ and T′′ phases where separate studies have reported varying degrees of stability between the structural phases.21,27,28
TMD systems exhibit a myriad of rich physical phenomena especially in their monolayer form and hold immense promise both for fundamental science and for future device and optoelectronic applications of their respective polymorphs. To effectively investigate and exploit the unique properties of each polymorph, efficient phase engineering strategies must be implemented to access the respective phases with minimal damage and interference to the system. The subsequent section will discuss the development of multiple phase transition strategies alongside the challenges and advantages each of them hold.
3. Phase transition in TMDs
While semiconducting polymorphs of monolayer TMDs have attractive features due to their direct bandgap, high mobility and room-temperature on/off current ratio, their metallic (quasi-metallic) counterparts have another set of uniquely attractive features. These (quasi-)metallic phases can be accessed via phase transformation processes, or direct synthesis under controlled conditions. As different 2D-TMDs have different energy barriers between their respective structural phases, multiple experimental approaches have been reported to induce phase transformations between the semiconducting and metallic (quasi-metallic) phases. Two methods are generally used to destabilize the semiconducting 1H-phase structure – via charge doping and crystal structure distortion. Therefore, the phase transition strategies can be classified into two approaches, namely, mediation by external forces and charge-doping techniques.
3.1 External-force-mediated phase transition

3.1.1 Pressure. 
For the external force technique, structural distortion can be induced via high-pressure. It was experimentally reported in 2004 that the resistance of MoS2 and MoSe2 single crystals decreases with a pressure increase.29 Dave and coworkers indicated that such an effect is probably attributed to the injection of valence band charges into the conduction band due to the pressure on the MoS2. They found that the samples became increasingly metallic with higher pressures (>6.5 GPa). The injection of charges near the Fermi level should be similar for both bulk TMDs and TMD nanosheets.29
In the case of TMD layered nanosheets, first-principles calculations by S. Bhattacharyya and A. K. Singh predicted that the band gap of bilayer TMDs can be reduced by increasing pressure, and a semiconductor-to-metal transition can occur at a critical pressure.30 This semiconductor-to-metal phase transition is attributed to the lifting of degeneracy of the bands at the Fermi level via charge-transfer from the metal to the chalcogen. Similar pressure-induced phase transitions for multilayered TMD systems have also been reported in other first-principles studies.31–33
Experimentally, Nayak et al. reported a structural distortion followed by a semiconductor-to-metallic transition at ∼19 GPa in multilayered MoS2.34Fig. 5a shows a high-pressure diamond anvil cell technique coupled with a hydrostatic pressure medium for compression experiments on multilayer H-phase MoS2. The pressure-dependent electrical resistivity of multilayered H-phase MoS2 (Fig. 5b) shows three different phases – the semiconducting phase (∼0–10 GPa), the intermediate state (∼10–19 GPa), where there is a weakening of the phonon modes associated with the electrical resistivity of the MoS2 layer, and the metallic phase (∼19 GPa). This form of electronic transition is different from the actual structural phase transition where there is no formation of specific 1T or 1T′-structures. Specifically, the metallic state is attributed to the overlapping conduction and valence bands as the interlayer spacing decreases. This report of electronic transitions is further substantiated by experimental reports of other types of pressure-induced metallization in multilayered TMDs.35,36 However, with the difficulty in controlling the distortion of the transition metal atoms, the application of high pressure alone cannot lead to a H–1T (1T′) structural phase transition.
 Fig. 5  Phase transformation process due to high pressure, ion intercalation and chemical doping processes. (a) 3D illustration of multilayer MoS2 in a diamond anvil cell pressure medium for compression experiments. (b) Pressure-dependent electrical resistivity of MoS2. Three characteristic regions were identified: semiconducting (SC), intermediate state (IS) and metallic regions. Inset: Theoretically calculated pressure-dependent electrical resistivity. (c) Temperature–force phase diagram for H and 1T′-phase MoTe2. (d) Scanning transmission electron microscopy image of monolayer and bilayer h-LixMoS2 regions. Inset: Zoom-in filtered image of the 1T′-phase region. (e) Degradation of h-LixMoS2 under ambient conditions, investigated by the percentage change in 1T′-phase composition. (f) High-magnification view of a Re-doped MoSe2 monolayer in the 1T′-phase. Panels (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 34 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panel (c) reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Panels (d) and (e) reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. Panel (f) reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. 


3.1.2 Strain engineering and lattice mismatch. 
Compared to the high-pressure technique where the external force is applied in the out-of-plane direction of the layered material, strain engineering techniques are carried out in-plane in the form of either compressive or tensile force. As such, the strain-mediated method provides greater ease of inducing a structural phase transition via the distortion of the transition metal atom configuration.
The density functional calculations by Johari and Shenoy predict that the band gap of 1H-phase 2D-TMDs can be reduced via the application of mechanical strain.40 This notion was then experimentally verified in studies that demonstrated the bandgap tuning of H-phase MoS2.41–43 Thereafter, density functional calculations by Duerloo et al. predicted a 1H–1T′ phase transition by introducing a tensile strain.44 They show that tensile strains are crucial in decreasing the 1H/1T′ phase energetics of monolayer TMD systems, and a tensile strain of 10–15% is required to obtain the quasi-metallic phase for most 2D-TMDs.44,45 With this drop in the energy difference between the two phases, a uniaxial tensile strain of 0.3 to 3% applied on 1H-phase MoTe2 monolayers can facilitate their transformation into the 1T′-phase at room temperature.44 The strain-induced process involves the distortion of the transition metal sublattice that is accompanied by a gliding and rippling of the chalcogen plane.46 This was experimentally confirmed in mechanically exfoliated thin-film MoTe2 containing both mono- and multilayer structures where H–1T′ phase transition was realized at room temperature by introducing a 0.2% tensile strain.37Fig. 5c shows the temperature–force phase diagram for thin-film MoTe2. A minute lattice strain is an effective control technique to regulate the phase transformation temperature even down to room temperature.
Strain arising from interfacial lattice mismatch also plays a pivotal role in the phase engineering process of TMD materials. In a recent study, the lattice engineering phase transition technique involves a cobalt (Co) array that is covalently bonded onto MoS2 nanosheets in the form of Co–S bonds via the electrochemical cyclic voltammetry leaching of Co nanodisk (ND)–MoS2 nanosheet hybrids.47 Through the formation of the Co–S bonds, a strain is induced by the lattice mismatch between Co and MoS2 in the Co ND–MoS2 nanosheet hybrids that eventually results in the 1H–1T′ phase transformation of the MoS2 layer.48 In addition to the above case study, the use of lattice engineering to induce a similar phase transformation process in TMD systems has been reported in systems involving Au/Pd–MoS2 nanosheets.49


3.1.3 Electron beam and plasma treatments. 
Surface treatment techniques such as electron beam treatment48,50 and microwave plasma treatment51,52 are also effective phase transformation techniques for 2D-TMDs. By applying a high-energy plasma beam on the target region, the irradiation process removes or restructures bonds present in the material, which in turn leads to changes in the system's crystallinity and microstructure without embedding any ions. Lin et al. showed that the 1H–1T phase transition can be controlled in monolayer-MoS2 using an electron beam,48 where continuous electron beam irradiation leads to the gliding of atomic sulfur planes that eventually induces the phase transition.
Microwave plasma treatment was reported to form a 1T-phase in exfoliated H-phase MoS2 nanosheets.51 This was followed by another study where gas microwave plasma treatment was used to induce the H–T phase in exfoliated MoS2 flakes with a 70% efficiency.52 This can be attributed to the momentum transfer from the plasma ions to the MoS2 layers where the gliding action of the chalcogen plane eventually resulted in the phase transformation.

3.2 Charge-doping-mediated phase transition

3.2.1 Ion intercalation and chemical doping. 
Another important phase transformation method in 1H-phase 2D-TMDs is the addition of charges to change the electron count in the transition metal d-orbitals, which not only destabilizes the 1H-phase lattice structure by reducing the energy barrier between the semiconducting H-phase and the quasi-metallic 1T′-phase, but also stabilizes the 1T′-phase structure after the phase transformation process. This process commonly involves the intercalation of bulk TMD systems with alkali metals – typically n-butyllithium (n-buLi) diluted in hexane.53–55 Alkali metal intercalation leads to the generation of hydrogen gas bubbles that split the TMD layers apart. The metallic phase 2D-TMD crystals eventually form via chemical exfoliation from the bulk sample. During this process, there is an onset of charge transfer between the alkali ion and the TMD system. Most phase transition studies employing this ion intercalation technique yielded 2D-TMDs where all 1H, 1T and 1T′ phases are present.5,55 As such, it remains an important challenge to improve the phase transition yield during the ion intercalation process. A recent study showed that the stability of 1H-phase MoS2 decreases in correspondence with the layer number during the n-buLi process.56 Another study of the thickness-modulated phase transition of PtSe2 showed that its band gap decreases with increasing layer number.57 These results indicate that there is an optimal TMD layer number for the enhancement of the phase transition yield. Tan et al. developed an approach by combining the Li-ion intercalation method and the ball milling treatment to enhance the 1T-phase yield of 2D-TMDs.58 By alloying 2D-TMDs with metal atoms in forms such as MoS2xSe2(1−x) and MoxW1−xS2, the metallic 1T-phase yield can be further enhanced to ∼66% during the Li-intercalation process.59 Another study of the semiconducting-to-metallic phase evolution by lithiation in an ultrahigh vacuum showed that the 100% air stability of the 1T′-phase MoS2 structure can be obtained by hydrogenating the intercalated Li to form lithium hydride.38 In this case, scanning transmission electron microscopy images revealed the presence of zigzag transition metal chains that correspond to the 1T′-phase (Fig. 5d). Furthermore, the 1T′-phase was found to remain relatively stable when sampled periodically over time as shown in Fig. 5e.
Alloying with metal atoms is also a method to add charges to TMD layers. Yu et al. reported chemical vapor transport (CVT)-grown ternary WSe2(1−x)Te2x, displaying distinct H and 1Td structural phases when tuning the concentration of Te between 0 and 1.60 As discussed earlier in Section 2, while the 1T′-phase is formed by the distortion of the 1T structure with the formation of metal–metal bonds, the 1Td-phase structure has a slightly distorted octahedral coordination pattern of the transition metal atom, which leads to its relatively lower symmetry as compared to its 1T-phase counterpart.61 Specifically, the 1Td structure emerged at a concentration of x > 0.5. CVD-grown Mo1−xWxTe2 were reported to undergo a similar H–1T′ phase transition62 when x varies from 0 to 1.
Re-Doped monolayer-MoSe2 synthesized by chemical vapor deposition was reported to undergo the 1H–1T′ phase transition as a function of Re doping concentration.39Fig. 5f shows a high-magnification High-Angle Annular Dark-Field imaging (HAADF) image of the Re-doped MoSe2 structure with the distinct labelling of the Re, Mo and Se atoms, where the structure transforms into a 1T′-phase when the Re doping concentration goes above the 40% threshold. Another report demonstrated that 1T-phase MoS2 can be derived by alloying with Re.63 Hence, the metallic structure of both RexMo1−xSe2 and RexMo1−xS2 can be stabilized with increasing Re doping concentration. Apart from alloying with metal atoms, a recent computational study reported the possibility of composition-gradient-mediated semiconductor–metal transition based on MoS2−xOx bilayers which is driven by the concentration gradient of the chalcogen atom across the van der Waals (vdW) gap of the disordered bilayers.64
Charge-doping during metal nanoparticle adsorption can also result in a semiconducting-to-metallic phase transition. The charge transfer process reduces the energy barrier between the semiconducting H-phase and the quasi-metallic 1T′-phase of the TMD system, thereby facilitating the H–T′ phase transition process. The quasi-metallic 1T′-phase TMD system is then stabilized via this charge transfer process. This has been confirmed via first principles calculations which have predicted that the adsorption of Cu atoms can induce a 1H–1T′ phase transition in MoS2.65 The adsorption of Cu atoms leads to electron transfer from Cu to MoS2, thus reducing the 1H–1T′ energy difference in MoS2. A similar process is also apparent in iridium atomic adsorption by MoTe2 as reported by a separate density functional theory study.66 Experimentally, the H–T phase transition process has been reported in MoS2 with the adsorption of iridium (Ir) where the transition has been attributed to the strong interaction between the Ir atoms and MoS2 layer.67 In the presence of the Ir nanocrystals, the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image in Fig. 6a shows regions that fully consist of 1T-phase MoS2 with octahedral coordination and an ABC atomic stacking sequence. Conversely, in regions without Ir nanocrystal decoration, HAADF-STEM imaging reveals that the MoS2 remains in the pristine 1H-phase with trigonal prismatic coordination and an ABA atomic stacking sequence (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  Phase transformation characterization via imaging and spectroscopic techniques. Effects of Ir nanocrystal decoration on MoS2 layers. (a) HAADF-STEM image of T-phase MoS2 because of the phase transition induced by the Ir nanocrystals. This is in comparison with (b) the image of H-phase MoS2 in its pristine state. (c) Representative Raman spectra across the phase transition process from the H to 1T′-phase. (d) Gate-dependent Raman intensity ratios. The transformation of phonon modes and the corresponding hysteresis loop indicating H–1T′ structural phase transition under gate control. (e) Schematics of the phase-controlled synthesis strategy. The inset plot at the bottom shows the calculated formation-energy difference between 1T′-phase and H-phase KxMoS2 with respect to K concentration. Panels (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Panels (c) and (d) reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2017. Panel (e) reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2018. 


3.2.2 Electrostatic gating and plasmonic hot electrons. 
The phase transition in 2D-TMDs by electrostatic gating has been used as a doping control method which is based on a similar mechanism where charge doping destabilizes the H-phase to induce its transition towards the 1T′-phase. Theoretically, the phase control between the semiconducting and quasi-metallic phases can be regulated via electrostatic gating for 2D-TMDs such as MoS2, MoTe2 and TaSe2.68 While only a small gate voltage of about 2–4 eV is required to drive the 1H–1T′ phase transition of the MoTe2 monolayer, a significantly higher magnitude is required for atomically lighter 2D-TMDs. Experimentally, a reversible 1H–1T′ phase transition of monolayer MoTe2 has been reported to be driven by ionic liquid gating in a field-effect transistor.69 The Raman characterization results shown in Fig. 6c suggest that the 1H-phase MoTe2 monolayer has an A1′-mode at 171.5 cm−1 and an E′ mode at 236 cm−1. A new Ag mode at 167.5 cm−1 emerges in the 1T′-phase. In Fig. 6d, the gate dependent Raman intensity ratio (F = 1T′(Ag)/[2H(A1′) + 1T′(Ag)]) plotted as a function of gate voltage shows that the 1T′ structure appears at a gate voltage of ∼2.8 V, thus indicating that the structural phase transition can be regulated via the gating process. By further alloying the monolayer-MoTe2 sample with W (forming WxMo1−xTe2), the required gate voltage for the structural 1H–1T′ phase transition can be significantly reduced to about 0.3–1 eV.70,71
A reversible 1H–1T phase transformation process has been further observed in CVD-grown monolayer-MoS2via the transfer of plasmonic hot electrons generated by Au nanoparticles.73 This phase transformation process can be controlled via parameters such as the incident light intensity and wavelength and the area of the MoS2 structures. These are clear suggestions that charge doping is the underlying mechanism inducing the structural phase transition.


3.2.3 Vacancy and defect engineering. 
Chalcogen vacancy and defect engineering is another electron-doping method for 2D-TMDs. The chalcogen vacancies in 2D-TMDs not only generate extra charges, they can also weaken the M–X bonds. For weakly bonded TMDs such as MoTe2, the H–1T′ phase transition can take place in few-layered MoTe2 due to the formation of Te vacancies by laser irradiation.74 The proportion of the H and 1T′ phases in the MoTe2 system can be carefully modulated via the irradiation time and laser power.
A theoretical study by Tang on Mo-based TMDs showed that the presence of chalcogen vacancies and lattice strain can reduce the 1H–1T′ energy difference. The combination of these two effects may in turn lead to the 1H–1T′ phase transition.45 This was experimentally confirmed in a study by Zhu et al. on monolayer-MoS2 where weak Ar-plasma bombardment induced chalcogen vacancies result in a 1H–1T phase transition.75 As indicated by scanning tunneling microscopy measurements, the phase transformation generally occurs near point defects (single S-vacancies). A similar phenomenon was also reported in MoS2 nanosheets where S vacancies were introduced via electrochemical etching.76

3.3 Direct synthesis of 1T/1T′ TMD phases
The direct growth technique is another method to obtain 1T/1T′-phase TMDs. MoTe2 is an ideal material for the direct synthesis of 1T′-phase samples because of its low H–1T′ energy difference. High-quality 1T′-phase MoTe2 single crystals have been grown via CVT20,77,78 under high-temperature conditions (900–1100 °C).20 With the rapid temperature quenching down to room temperature, the 1T′-phase structure can be preserved as the final product.77 High-quality large-area 1T′-phase MoTe2 nanosheets have also been directly synthesized by CVD by controlling the Mo precursor.79,80 For example, using Mo and MoO3 as precursors during the synthesis process, the resulting MoTe2 products are in either the 1T′ and H phase, respectively.80
A direct method to reversibly control the H–1T′ phase transition has been reported in CVD-grown large-area MoTe2 multilayers via temperature and tellurization rate control.81 This is particularly the case for MoTe2 which tends to display acute structural metastability where slight variations in the CVD growth parameters easily result in phase transition. By regulating the rate of tellurization, the system can be regulated to be entirely in the H or 1T′ phase as reported for large-area few-layered MoTe2 samples.81,82 Specifically, besides controlling the temperature and the rate of gas flow into the reaction chamber, the speed at which the Te vapour enters the reaction zone – defined as tellurization velocity in the work – has to be carefully modulated in order to determine the phase of the synthesized MoTe2 layers.81 At 750 °C, it is reported that 100% H-phase MoTe2 can only be synthesized at the ‘extremely controlled tellurization velocity’ with an N2 flow rate of 3 standard cm3 min−1 (sccm).81 On the other hand, a fully 1T′-phase sample can be acquired under a ‘fast tellurization velocity’ with an N2 flow rate of >60 sccm.
A recent study by Lai et al. further reported the direct synthesis of high-quality 1T′-phase TMD crystals on a large scale. The development of this facile and general synthesis technique has allowed for the synthesis of multiple species including WS2, WSe2, MoS2, MoSe2, WS2xSe2(1−x) and MoS2xSe2(1−x).11 Single-crystal X-ray diffraction has allowed for the systematic characterization to effectively distinguish between the TMD systems in their 1H and 1T′-phases. Furthermore, when fabricated into an electrical transport device, it is notable that 1T′-phase WS2 exhibits intrinsic thickness-dependent superconductive properties − Tc = 8.6 K at 90.1 nm thickness and Tc = 5.7 K for the monolayer sample. The superconductive properties can be attributed to the high intrinsic carrier concentration and semi-metallic nature of 1T′-phase WS2.
The H, 1T, and 1T′ phases of few-layered MoTe2 can also be derived by CVD and properly controlling the growth quench temperature.83 CVD-grown MoTe2 sheets in the H, 1T′ and 1T phases can be derived by cooling down the system to 100, 350, and 450 °C, respectively. This study demonstrates that the 1T structure has better thermodynamic stability than the other phases at high temperature.83 Highly crystalline 1T′-phase MoTe2 flakes can also be grown via the introduction of iodine medium during the CVD growth process.84 During the synthesis of 1T′-phase MoTe2, the iodine atoms modify the Mo–Te bond length, and act as a catalyst and a transporter to induce the formation of a volatile intermediate like MoO2I2. The iodine atoms can thereafter be easily removed to reduce the residual impurities.84
In the case of MoS2, the energy difference between the semiconducting H and (quasi)-metallic 1T/1T′ phases is relatively high. Hence, it is necessary to incorporate a charge-doping intermediary to induce the structural phase transition. The use of a gold substrate is found to be beneficial for molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) deposition of 1T′-phase MoS2 nanocrystals.85 1T′-phase MoS2 can be synthesized on Au(111) at high temperature with a low sulfur chemical potential. The introduction of potassium (K) metal is also useful for the direct synthesis of 1T′-phase monolayer-MoS2.72,86 This technique is distinct from the previously mentioned chemical doping-induced phase transition processes where ionic intercalation is carried out as a form of post-growth treatment on CVD-grown H-phase TMD materials87,88 where the 1T′-phase yield is limited to ∼80%. By capitalizing on the greater stability of 1T′-phase MoS2 when the K ion concentration exceeds 44% (Fig. 6e), the direct synthesis method involves K2MoS4 as a growth precursor.72 The final 1T′-phase MoS2 product is then obtained when the K2MoS4 material is further decomposed under inert gas (pure Ar) conditions.89
As discussed, the key methods to induce a semiconducting-to-metallic phase transition include charge doping and structural distortion. With the interfacial method being one of the key phase engineering techniques, we will discuss in detail the mechanism at the atomic scale. From a wider perspective, the physical mechanism governing metal–TMD contacts (or more generally, channel effects in metal–semiconductor contacts) is of fundamental importance especially in basic applications related to field-electric transistor (FET) devices, and this will be discussed in the next section.
4. 2D-TMD–metal interfaces: interfacial mechanisms and effects of phase engineering
The structural and electronic behaviours at 2D-TMD–metal interfaces have significant influences on the performance of 2D electronic devices.90 There are two types of contacts, including covalent and van der Waals contacts existing at the semiconductor–metal interface, as suggested by previous theoretical investigations in systems such as MoS2/Ti and MoS2/Au.91,92
It has been suggested that metal–TMD contacts such as the MoS2/Au system are of van der Waals instead of covalent nature. With the removal of the Au substrate, the optical and electronic properties of monolayer-MoS2 resemble those of the semiconducting 1H-phase that has been exfoliated directly onto insulating substrates.93,94 While this implies the reversibility in the interfacial effects of TMD layers endowed by the metallic substrates,94,95 concerted efforts are needed to understand the interactions between TMDs and metals as well as the effects of these interactions. They are crucial in attempting to unravel the interfacial dynamics at the atomic level in order to better facilitate phase engineering processes.
4.1 Effects of interfacial interactions of 2D-TMD/metal systems in phase engineering processes
The quest to enhance and better facilitate phase engineering processes for multiple applications of 2D-TMDs in their respective phases has been previously discussed. The use of a high-temperature annealing process to induce a 1H–1T′ structural phase transition in CVD-grown 2D-TMDs transferred onto metal substrates has been reported – monolayer-MoS2 on a gold substrate where a maximum yield of ∼37% 1T′-phase MoS2 is recorded.17 To account for the underlying mechanism, the onset of electron doping from the gold substrate91 that is further facilitated by interfacial tensile strain37 has been highlighted to promote the 1H–1T′ phase transition process. Besides, Au substrates are found to promote the 1H–1T′ phase transformation of monolayer-MoS2via the induction of in-plane shifting of the transition metal (Mo) and/or chalcogenide (S) atomic layers.96,97
To further unravel interfacial dynamics facilitating this process so as to the improve the phase transition yield of 1T′-phase 2D-TMDs involving metal–TMD contacts, a follow-up mechanistic study was conducted to clarify the inherent charge dynamics and physical mechanisms that underlie this phase transition behavior.98 The high-temperature annealing process enhances the interfacial hybridizations between 2D-TMDs and metallic substrates at the atomic scale, thus holding the key to the 1H–1T′ phase transition of the 2D-TMDs on metallic substrates.
While transition metal substrates such as Au are inherently inert in their bulk form, they exhibit very rich chemical properties at the surface and interfacial level. For instance, their surface atoms show rich ligand chemistry due to the multiple oxidation states of gold. Hence, these properties serve as important precursors in the understanding of chemical dynamics at the metal–TMD interfaces. In systems such as the MoS2–Au interface, various Au–thiolate complexes and low-temperature chemisorbed sulfur have been observed.99,100 Apart from being an effective substrate for the CVD growth of 2D-TMDs, the large surface area and conductivity of 3D nano-porous gold can significantly enhance the electrocatalysis and photo-electrocatalysis of 2D-TMD samples.96,101 Using 3D nano-porous gold, atomic-scale observational studies of interfaces between Au and MoS2 and WS2 monolayers were conducted by Luo et al. It was reported that the atomic structures at the TMD–Au interfaces are well-preserved with the formation of an unconventional Au4S4 superstructure on the Au substrate surface (Fig. 7a–c).102 There is also an enhancement in van der Waals interaction between the MoS2 layer and the reconstructed Au surface, which converts the interface from an n-type TMD–Au Schottky contact to a p-type contact with reduced barrier height. This provides a new understanding on the construction of perfect van der Waals metal–TMD interfaces, and promotes the development of new functionalities in TMD–metal heterostructures such as in the fabrication of p-type transistors.103,104
 Fig. 7  Au4S4 structures at the MoS2–Au interface and the metal–TMD contacts with the implementation of (quasi-)metallic phase TMDs. (a) HAADF-STEM image of a MoS2–Au sample with (b) the corresponding intensity line profile of the Mo-layer in MoS2 (green line), the Au4S4 interfacial layer (red line), and the Au sublayer (gray line). (c) Molecular dynamics simulation indicating the stability of the Au4S4 structure at the interface. (d) Plot of resistance against channel lengths of H-phase MoS2 with Au electrodes deposited directly on 1T-phase MoS2 (schematic). Inset: Percentage decrease in contact resistance with gate bias. Inset: Electrostatic force microscopy phase image of locally patterned H and T phases in the respective regions. (e) Schematic comparing the device where the H-phase MoTe2 channel is directly contacted by metal electrodes (top) and where H-phase MoTe2 is connected with metal electrodes via 1T′-phase MoTe2 (bottom). (f) Optical image of a MoTe2 ribbon that is contacted by the labelled metal electrodes, where electrodes 1–3 are in contact with 1T′-phase MoTe2, while electrodes 4–6 are in contact with the H-phase counterparts. (g) Optical image of a MoTe2 ribbon with a T′/H/T′ configuration with electrodes 7 and 8 in contact with 1T′-phase MoTe2. (h) Normalized source drain current, Ids, and voltage, Vds (Ids–Vds), curves acquired by electrodes 4 and 5, and 7 and 8. The increase in the slope between electrodes 7 and 8 indicates a higher current passing through. Thus implying a lower contact resistance for electrode in contact with the 1T′-phase MoTe2. Panels (a)–(c) reproduced from ref. 102 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panel (d) adapted from ref. 87 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2014. Panels (e)–(h) reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
4.2 Role of phase engineering in overcoming contact resistance
To create high-quality, low-resistance metal–TMD contacts, the presence of the Schottky barrier is the primary challenge.106,107 While techniques such as substitutional doping can be used to reduce the contact resistance for bulk semiconductors, it is unsuitable for 2D-TMDs as doping impurities introduce large strain to the lattice. As such, other techniques have to be considered to address this problem facing 2D-TMD-based FET systems.
Hence, the utilization of phase engineering comes in especially handy in addressing this issue. This is because TMDs in their 1T and 1T′ phases possess superior electrical conductivity especially for use as electrode materials to alleviate the issue of contact resistance at the metal–semiconductor contacts. A case in point is that of 1T/1T′-phase MoS2, which can improve the device performance through its high carrier injection and low contact resistances. The H–T phase engineering process allows one to enhance the performance of ultrathin transistors. This eventually leads to the realization of a high-performance MoS2 FET, with local 1T-phase MoS2 serving as the electrode material, as described by Kappera et al. (Fig. 7d).87 Through n-butyl lithium treatment, the 1H–1T reversible phase transition process was also performed for WSe2.108 When 1T-phase monolayer-WSe2 is used as the contact material in the FET device, the device shows good performance with a charge mobility of up to 66 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off ratio of 107. This is in comparison with crystalline silicon, which has an electron mobility of ∼1400 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off ratio of up to ∼104.109,110 Comparing the FET performances with those of well-established materials like silicon, we note that the development of 2D-TMD-based FETs is heading in the right direction as fabrication capabilities continue their upward improvement trends.
Large-scale device fabrication can be achieved through phase engineering by taking advantage of CVD. Zhang et al. reported the phase-controllable synthesis of large-area MoTe2 that can be either a purely H and 1T′-phase or an in-plane H/1T′ heterostructure where its semiconducting phase is planarly contacted by its quasi-metallic phase counterpart.105 Both theoretical simulation and experimental measurements confirmed a lower Schottky barrier in the H–T′ junction than in the Ti–H-phase MoTe2 contact (Fig. 7e–h). This confirms the improved performance of the 2D lateral metal–semiconductor junction, which in turn enhanced the device performance of 2D electronic devices.
Having considered the role that interfacial dynamics and phase engineering techniques play in the discipline of metal–TMD contacts, we have highlighted their importance in countering the effects related to the Schottky barrier in FET systems. Besides, the underlying interfacial mechanisms are also of considerable significance to be duly addressed especially with regard to the utilization of such contact systems in numerous potential TMD-based applications.
5. Applications
Having considered different phase transformation techniques and other important details in relation to the interfacial mechanisms, it is an imperative to delve into the realm of applications where polymorphic TMD materials are incorporated into functional devices and catalytic systems. Of course, the unique properties that the respective polymorphic phases exhibit play an important role in ensuring the versatility and functionality of different devices and systems. Hence, from a more general perspective, control of different structural phases is necessary to customize the electronic properties according to the functionality of the device at any specific location. In this section, a diverse range of applications including electronic devices, and catalytic and energy storage systems will be discussed.
5.1 Electronic and optoelectronic devices
While properties such as the direct electronic bandgap, high charge mobility and room-temperature on/off current ratio have been attractive features of semiconducting phase 2D-TMDs, the growing ease of accessibility to other metallic phases has created new opportunities for applications. The gapped band structure of TMDs in the semiconducting and quasi-metallic phases makes them exceptionally favorable as active materials for the fabrication of logic transistors. Furthermore, the intrinsically large spin–orbit coupling in the TMD allows one to tap on their valleytronic and spintronic functionalities either on their own or in the form of heterostructure systems.
While the development of TMD-based electronics remains in its infancy, it holds important potential for the creation of new logical circuitry systems that go beyond FETs. Microdevices such as integrated transistors, logic inverters, and prototypical microprocessors based on various TMD materials have previously been reported.111–113 Improvements to these devices have been made in recent years in the push towards possible scalable device fabrication. For instance, Xu et al. demonstrated the fabrication of high-performance MoS2 transistors at the wafer-scale via the introduction of multilayered MoS2 on the film during the synthesis process.114 Results reveal an average effective mobility of 70 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a subthreshold swing of ∼150 mV dec−1 and that these parameters show very small deviations. In addition, a logic inverter with a high gain of 23 has also been achieved in this study. This is in comparison with silicon-based metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs), where an effective mobility of 375 cm2 V−1 s−1 alongside the subthreshold swing ranging between 63 and 71 mV dec−1 is reported.115,116 With further improvements to the fabrication capabilities of MoS2 transistors, their performances can continue to improve.
With the previous example in mind, it is important to develop electronic systems with significantly deeper complexity such as logical circuitry which requires a cascade of multiple basic devices integrated into a compact entity. The unique properties that the respective polymorphic phases exhibit play an important role in making such systems functional. Hence, control of different structural phases is necessary to customize the electronic properties according to the functionality of the device at any specific location. A case in point is the tellurization of a MoO3 precursor leads to the formation of 1T′-phase MoTe2. Conversely, a similar process carried out for MoO2.0–2.5 would lead to the formation of 2H-phase MoTe2.117 Therefore, this allows for the simultaneous synthesis of MoTe2 in both the semiconducting and metallic phases where they are used as different components in a customized complex circuitry system (Fig. 8a). By designing the dimensions, shapes and location of the device with the respective precursor materials, one can fabricate circuitry components such as logic inverters and radiofrequency transistors on the centimeter scale. The fabricated device presented in Fig. 8b is a MoTe2 FET with very short gate lengths with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) used as gating electrodes. An array of CNTs are first embedded within HfO2 dielectrics. This is followed by the synthesis of 1T′/2H-phase MoTe2 FETs on the HfO2 dielectrics (Fig. 8b). This FET shows an excellent switching characteristic with a sub-threshold swing of ∼73 mV dec−1 along with an on/off current ratio of ∼105.
 Fig. 8  Device fabrication based on MoTe2 and its applications in complex logic circuitry systems. (a) Schematic depicting the process for constructing ultrathin MoTe2 circuits by simultaneously synthesizing and integrating the monolayer components via a single-step H/1T′ phase-selective chemical synthesis technique. (b) Example of a phase selective device in the form of a representative carbon nanotube gated MoTe2 FET. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of MoTe2 device arrays on two layers. Inset: Enlarged image of a pair of vertically connected devices in different layers. Cross-sectional TEM images displaying the vertical structures of the circuits along the respective white dashed lines. Panels (a)–(c) adapted from ref. 117 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019. 
To further assess the feasibility of such a multi-phase circuitry system for 3D integration, this electronic device is synthesized and stacked at different vertical levels with an interconnective system. Eventually, a complex array of MoTe2 FETs was successfully fabricated at different levels (Fig. 8c) and the obtained FETs exhibit p-type conductance switching with similar on/off ratios (∼105) and mobilities (∼30 cm2 V−1 s−1). All in all, these proof-of-concept devices highlight the potential and economic viability that 2D-TMD systems hold in integrated circuit manufacturing, and possibly integrated into current silicon electronics.
To improve the responsivity and to increase the functionality of the photodetector, hybrid devices that consist of high-performance materials assembled into heterogenous stacks have also been reported. The hybrid devices come in the form of MoS2–graphene stacks118,119 or transistor systems. They consist of graphene electrodes that are connected to MoS2120 or WS2121 to form a bilayer Schottky barrier junction which can absorb more sunlight than other conventional Si-based solar cells and they possess high carrier mobility. This device can be compacted into an ultrathin solar cell with atomic-thickness, which exhibit the ideal properties of low series resistance, large voltages, and near-optimal I−V curves. Another example comes in the form of blue phosphorene (BlueP)/TMD, where the TMD layer acts as the electron donor and the blue phosphorene acts as the acceptor.122 While this system is still in the computational phase, the upper limit energy conversion efficiencies have been predicted to be up to 1.16% and 0.98% for the BlueP/MoS2 and BlueP/MoSe2 heterostructures, respectively. Furthermore, when taking phase engineering into perspective, it is interesting to note that the integration of organolead trihalide perovskites (CH3NH3PbI3) and 1T-phase MoS2 has been studied.123 The former class of materials possesses long free-carrier diffusion lengths and strong photo-absorption features suitable for solar cell applications.124,125 The collective properties of these two materials in a stacked heterostructure device (Fig. 9a) make the device serve as a potentially effective hybrid photodetector with exceptionally high photoresponsivity and external quantum efficiency (EQE) values (Fig. 9b and c). However, the metallic feature of the 1T-phase MoS2 results in high dark currents – electric current present in photosensitive systems even when no photons are entering the device. The current–voltage curves of 1T-phase MoS2/CH3NH3PbI3 devices show very close resemblance with low contact resistance with or without any photon illumination. This leads to an impractical on/off photo-resistivity ratio (below 2), which renders it unsuitable for any integrated circuit devices. While semiconducting H-phase MoS2 has a relatively inferior photoresponsivity and detectivity, a compromise is achieved with a considerable improvement of the on/off ratio at ∼300. Hence, this study highlights how TMDs in different phases can be utilized in optimal mixtures for photodetection based on their respective properties.
 Fig. 9  Quantum efficiency and anisotropic features of metallic and quasi-metallic phase devices. (a) Schematic and (b) optical microscopy image of a hybrid 1T-phase MoS2/CH3NH3PbI3 photodetection device where the blue regions are the MoS2 channels, while the pink regions are the gold electrodes. (c) Enhancement in the photo-responsivity and EQE of the device under 400 nm light exposure. (d) Optical microscopy image of a FET-like 1T′-phase MoS2 device with twelve electrodes patterned with a step size of 30°. The 1T′-phase lattice structure is overlaid with the MoS2 flake and the direction parallel to Mo zigzag chains has been defined as 0°. (e) Resulting Ids–Vds curves of the 1T′-phase MoS2 device along the respective orientations. (f) Normalized experimental and theoretical conductance, G. (g) Schematic representation of a linear polarization-dependent photocurrent measurement setup for the prototype metal–MoTe2–metal photodetector. Anisotropic PC response for the linear polarized excitation at (h) 10.6 μm, (i) 4 μm, and (j) 633 nm with the anisotropy ellipse ratios at 2.72, 1.92, and 1.19, respectively. Panels (a), (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. Panels (d)–(f) reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2018. Panels (g)–(j) reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018. 
Photodetection in the terahertz regime (∼0.1–10 THz) plays an important role in applications ranging from medical diagnosis to process control, and in applications related to security and communications. This is attributed to properties including the low photon energy, strong penetration ability and transmission rate of radiation in this energy range. Terahertz-range photodetectors based on graphene have previously shown a decent detection range and signal-to-noise ratio.126,127 For instance, the graphene-based FET reported by Vicarelli et al. can conduct room temperature operations at 0.3 THz and with a minimum noise equivalent power (NEP) of ∼200 nW Hz−1/2.126 Meanwhile, another room-temperature graphene-based terahertz detector reported by Cai et al. shows a range photo-responsivity from 0 to 2 THz with an NEP of 16 pW Hz−1/2.127 However, graphene has a limited responsivity due to the material's weak optical absorption and fast quenching effect which hampered its ability for any further development.128,129 Hence, the need for scalability and implementation in flexible devices makes it necessary to consider other classes of atomically layered materials for further development. Meanwhile, the intrinsic properties of metallic-phase TMD systems are also of notable importance. The presence of Charge Density Waves (CDWs) in 1T-phase TaS2130,131 is an quintessential case in point which can carry electric current in a collective fashion. This unique fundamental property was capitalized by Wu et al. as a highly sensitive photodetector. Specifically, significant changes can be effected to the electronic properties of 1T-phase TaS2via incident light due to their effects on the CDW properties varying over a wide photon energy range. When utilized as a photodetection system, the 1T-phase TaS2-based device reports a room temperature photocurrent responsivity of ∼0.76 A W−1 at a fast-rising time of ∼1.5 ns.132 Hence, this intrinsic condensed matter property in the form of CDWs in 1T-phase TaS2 renders it a superior system as a highly sensitive photodetector over an ultra-broadband range from the visible down to the terahertz regime at room temperature.132 This finding highlights the advantages of the unique structure that metallic-phase TMDs in general hold when it comes to ambient-temperature ultrabroadband photo-response in applications such as efficient photo-electronics, detectors and even spectroscopic techniques.
1T′- and 1Td-structural phases have unique anisotropic properties absent from their semiconducting counterparts.133–135 Phase engineering therefore provides an essential avenue to capitalize on these anisotropic properties desirable for applications related to direction-dependent electronic applications as well as polarization-dependent photo-detective systems. Liu et al. investigated the anisotropic properties of 1T′-phase MoS2 where its conductance was found to be highly direction-dependent (Fig. 9d–f).72 As seen in Fig. 9d and 12 evenly spaced electrodes were fabricated on a triangular-shaped 1T′-phase MoS2 flake and the conductance for each diagonal electrode pair was measured in an anti-clockwise direction. Interestingly, the conductance reading is highly angle-dependent, and it maximizes at ∼0°, while minimum conductance occurs along the 120° direction (Fig. 9e and f). This result suggests that our 1T′-phase MoS2 is a 2D anisotropic conductor with an anisotropic ratio of the maximum to minimum conductance of ∼2.0 – larger than that of black phosphorus.136,137 The differences in magnitude between the theoretical and experimental conductance (Fig. 9f) can be attributed to the conductance by the Cr–Au contact in the system, thereby rendering the experimental conductance relatively higher. In the anisotropic broad-range photo-response study, Lai et al. investigated the properties of 1Td-phase MoTe2 – a Type-II Weyl semimetal – via a prototype metal–MoTe2–metal photodetector (Fig. 9g).138 Not only did it record a broadband response from 532 nm to 10.6 μm, but it also exhibited a photo-responsivity of 0.40 mA W−1 along with a specific directivity of 1.07 × 108 Jones with 43 μs response time at 532 nm. The response of the photodetector is also polarization-sensitive, with the anisotropy being wavelength dependent; it increases as the excitation wavelength approaches the Weyl nodes. The polar plots of photocurrent response are shown in Fig. 9h–j with different excitation polarization angles at 10.6 μm, 4 μm, and 633 nm; the anisotropic ratio stood at 2.72, 1.92 and 1.19, respectively.
5.2 Energy storage
TMDs in both the 1T and 1T′ phases show superior electrical conductivity, and they have been extensively studied for potential applications in energy storage systems, such as supercapacitors, batteries and wireless energy harvesting.
Acerce et al. reported that the electrode fabricated using 1T-phase MoS2 is a promising candidate for supercapacitors.88 It can achieve a volumetric capacitance ranging between 400 and 650 F cm−3 at 20 mV s−1 – higher than what was previously reported in restacked graphene nanosheets139,140 with a volumetric capacitance of ∼300 F cm−3. Besides, as compared to its semiconducting 2H-phase counterpart, the 1T-phase MoS2 phase exhibits hydrophilic properties and is 107 times more conductive.88 These properties enhance its appeal as an electrode material for use in both aqueous and organic supercapacitor systems. Hence, the combination of these intrinsic properties and its high volumetric capacitance makes metallic-phase MoS2 a promising material to be used as a power source in portable electronics. A high capacitance of 199 F cm−3 in TEA BF4/MeCN and 250 F cm−3 in EMIM BF4/MeCN with good stability over 5000 cycles has been demonstrated.88 This excellent electrochemical performance of 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheets can be attributed to the hydrophilicity, the high electrical conductivity, and the ability of the nanosheets to dynamically intercalate ions. Hence, conductive 1T-phase 2D-TMDs have garnered increasing interest as highly efficient electrode materials in fabricating supercapacitors. Wang et al. reported the synthesis of highly ambient-stable pure 1T-phase MoS2 multilayered nanosheets via a magneto-hydrothermal method. They exhibit a high areal capacitance of 310 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 and show a good stable cycling performance of 30000 cycles.141
To enhance the electrochemical properties of 1T-phase 2D-TMDs, additional treatment processes have been developed. Naz et al. reported the growth of highly defective 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheets on a 3D reduced graphene oxide (RGO) network by a one-pot hydrothermal method142 to deliver a high capacitance of 442 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Fig. 10a and b show the high-resolution TEM image of the 1T-phase MoS2 sample and the comparison of the electrochemical performances of different samples. They show that the capacitance retention of the defect-rich 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheet/RGO heterostructure can remain above 84.5% after 3000 cycles.142 The excellent electrochemical properties can be attributed to the fast charge-transfer rate and the presence of more ion diffusion channels induced by the additional active sites. Liu et al. further reported a 1T-phase MoS2 hydrogel with a 3D porous network fabricated by a surface-charge-control strategy.143 The electrode of symmetric supercapacitors can deliver a capacitance of 147 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 with a stable cycling performance of 5000 cycles.143 This capacitive performance is ascribed to the interpenetration of ion diffusion and electron transport paths in the 1T MoS2 nanosheets.
 Fig. 10  Energy storage and catalyst applications of 1T/1T′ phase TMDs. (a) High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy image of a 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheet/reduced graphene oxide heterostructure synthesized for 6 hours (M/RGO-6). (b) Relation between specific capacitance (at 1 A g−1) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) of different M/RGO composites. (c) Schematic of a lateral Schottky diode based on a MoS2 semiconducting–metallic phase junction. (d) Proposed schematic illustration of the HER for 1T-phase Ir/MoS2. (e) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of 1T-MoS2 quantum dots with g-C3N4 composites under simulated solar light irradiation. Panels (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. Panel (c) reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019. Panel (d) reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Panel (e) reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
Metallic 2D-TMDs are also a good class of electrode materials for battery systems. The first-principles calculations study by Xu et al. investigated Li adsorption and diffusion on 1T-phase monolayer-MoS2.144 Their results suggested that 1T-phase monolayer-MoS2 could potentially be used as an electrode material in lithium ion batteries because the binding energy decreases with the increase in Li concentration.144 The diffusion energy barrier of Li atoms on 1T-phase MoS2 is closely related to the Li concentration and this energy barrier is larger compared to the case of 1H-phase MoS2. Jiao et al. also reported that metallic porous nanotubes can be assembled with metallic phase MoS2 nanosheets for use as a carbon-free, binder-free electrode material in lithium ion batteries.145 The metallic porous 1T-phase MoS2 nanotubes are a feasible system owing to their intrinsically high electrical conductivity, and that their structure avoids the restacking of the nanosheets, thereby shortening the ion diffusion path in the 1D metallic MoS2 porous nanotubes.
Hollow cobalt sulfide polyhedrals with 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheets have also been studied as efficient electrode materials for Li storage due to their hierarchical hollow framework and intrinsic conductive properties.146 Bai et al. showed that the 1T-MoS2/C hybrid synthesized through a facile hydrothermal method mediated using a glucose additive has potential for use as an electrode material in high-performance lithium-ion batteries.147 The high electrochemical performance of the 1T-MoS2/C hybrid in lithium-ion batteries can be attributed to the enlarged interlayer spacing, the high conductivity, and the short diffusion path of lithium ions.
The potential application of 2D-TMDs as effective electrode materials in lithium-ion battery systems has been reported in other metallic phase 2D-TMDs. For instance, Gao et al. reported that vertically-grown 1T-ReS2 nanosheets using CVD can also be used as an efficient electrode material in lithium–sulfur batteries.148 Measurements revealed that this electrode material can deliver a high capacity and rate capability with discharge capacities of ∼1100, ∼960, ∼903, ∼876, ∼787 and ∼732 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, 0.5C, 0.8C, 1C, 2C and 3C (1C = 1675 mA g−1), respectively. After 300 cycles, the specific capacity was retained over 750 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, with only ∼0.063% capacity decay per cycle.
Apart from Li ion systems, metallic phase TMDs have also proven to be promising alternatives to the electrode materials in sodium ion batteries. Geng et al. reported 1T-phase MoS2 grown on graphene tubes as electrodes to deliver superior electrochemical performance.149 Again, this is due to the freestanding, porous and hollow structure of the 1T MoS2 electrode and its high intrinsic conductivity that benefit the electronic transport of the Na+ ions. Moreover, using hollow 1T-phase MoS2 arrays as an electrode material in sodium ion batteries, Tang et al. reported excellent sodium ion storage properties due to their favourable electrical conductivity and the fact that the 1T-phase hollow structure can accommodate large volume changes and shorten the electron/sodium ion diffusion during the cycling process.150
The ubiquity of Wi-Fi technology in both the indoor and outdoor environments provides an abundant source of radio-frequency energy to be tapped via wireless energy harvesting methods using flexible rectifier systems. As such, Zhang et al. fabricated a rectifier based on an atomically-thin MoS2 semiconducting–metallic phase junction with a cutoff frequency of 10 GHz.151Fig. 10c shows the schematic of a lateral Schottky diode based on a MoS2 semiconducting–metallic phase junction, with a junction capacitance lower than 10 fF. It is notable that this battery-free rectenna can achieve a wireless energy harvesting of electromagnetic radiation by integrating the rectifier with a flexible Wi-Fi-band antenna. These results are clear indications that metallic phase TMDs have immense potential for application as efficient, flexible energy-harvesting devices for self-powered systems.
5.3 Catalysis
Metallic phase 2D-TMDs have also emerged as a suitable platform for catalytic applications based on their atomically thin nature. These include processes such as the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and photocatalysis, which are important for sustainable hydrogen-production routes of renewable energy. 1T/1T′-phase 2D-TMDs are promising candidates for examining electrochemical activities due to their ability to form low resistance contacts on the basal plane and the higher electrocatalytic activity especially with their superior charge transport capabilities.153 Tan et al. reported that high-percentage 1T-phase monolayer MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 nanodots can significantly enhance the electrochemical HER performances as compared to their corresponding 1H-phase nanosheets. This is attributed to the high density of the active edge sites, high-proportion of the 1T-phase 2D-TMD and basal-plane Se-vacancy.58
To improve the HER activity, metal atoms have also been bound onto the surfaces of 1T-phase 2D-TMDs. Wei et al. reported that 1T-phase Ir/MoS2 exhibited higher catalytic activity for overall water splitting than commercial Pt/C and IrO2 in alkaline media due to the interfacial effect between Ir and MoS2 that facilitates the reaction kinetics.67 With the introduction of the Ir species onto MoS2, there is an increase in structural disorder and atomic rearrangement, which in turn weakens the Mo–Mo bond at the Ir–MoS2 interface.154,155 With the hydrophilic feature of the Ir/MoS2 surface that facilitates water adsorption and the eventual electrolytic processes, Fig. 10d shows the proposed schematic illustration of the HER for the 1T-phase Ir/MoS2, which proposes that the interfacial effects between Ir and 1T-phase MoS2 are the main reason for the superior catalytic activity of Ir/MoS2.
Capitalizing on the advantageous properties of 1T′-phase 2D-TMDs in electrochemical applications, Yu et al. reported that their basal plane has considerably higher HER efficiency as compared to that of H-phase MoS2.86 With a higher catalytic activity on the basal plane and more favourable charge transport properties, 1T′-phase MoS2 exhibits an overpotential of only 65 mV and a current density of 607 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 400 mV. Qi et al. reported an interfacial catalyst consisting of a single-atom Co array bound onto 1T′-phase MoS2 nanosheets which exhibits a Pt-like electrocatalytic activity for the HER in acidic electrolyte. The commendable HER performance of this interfacial catalytic system can be attributed to the synergizing features of both the Co- and S-atoms.47 Nam et al. reported the effects of anisotropic charge transport of 1T′-phase monolayer-MoS2 on the electrocatalytic HER performance.156 The crystal orientation of this monolayer system has a direct impact on altering its HER performance due to its anisotropic charge transport properties. Apart from 1T′-phase MoS2, Sokolikova et al. reported that 1T′-phase WSe2 nanosheets demonstrated a good catalytic activity with an overpotential of 510 mV at a current density of −10 mA cm−2 alongside a Tafel slope of 150 mV dec−1. This performance is better than its H-phase counterpart, which has an overpotential of 640 mV and a Tafel slope of 230 mV dec−1.12 Further improvements can be made to the HER performance with higher catalyst loadings. In this case, a current density of −10 mA cm−2 is achieved at only 300 mV overpotential under a mass load of 250 μg cm−2.12
All in all, the catalytic performance of the 1T′-phase WSe2 nanosheets reported here is comparable to those of chemically exfoliated 1T-phase MoS2 and WS2. Besides, this performance exceeds those of other H-phase TMD nanosheets.
Due to their excellent electrical properties, metallic phase 2D-TMDs can be utilized as co-catalysts in photocatalytic systems. Maitra et al. reported the use of 1T-phase monolayer-MoS2 as a photocatalyst in a photocatalytic H2 evolution system with Eosin Y used as the sensitizer.157 The catalyst evolves 30 mmol g−1 h−1 of H2 with high stability, which is 600 times higher than that of few-layered H-phase MoS2. The combination of 1T-phase MoS2 quantum dots with g-C3N4 nanosheets gives an excellent photocatalytic performance of 1857 μmol h−1 g−1, attributed to the exposed catalytic edge atoms and the high intrinsic conductivity of 1T-MoS2 quantum dots.152Fig. 10e shows a possible photocatalytic HER process of 1T-phase MoS2 quantum dots with g-C3N4 nanosheets under simulated solar light irradiation. The electron transfer between g-C3N4 and 1T-phase MoS2 facilitates the photocatalytic H2 evolution. 1T′-phase MoS2/MoO3 heterostructure nanosheets also serve as a robust photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution.158 Under the photocatalytic process, this system has an excellent H2 production of up to 22.108 mmol g−1 h−1, which is ascribed to the activated inert basal plane, the hollow structure with a large surface area between the 1T′-phase MoS2 and MoO3 layers and the high content of edge sites. Apart from MoS2, the 1T′-phase WS2 nanostructure is another effective photocatalyst for H2 evolution as reported by Mahler et al., where the H2 evolution rates are reported to be superior to those of its semiconducting counterpart.159
5.4 Photothermal and thermoelectric applications
TMDs exhibit superior properties compared to other 2D van der Waals systems such as graphene in aspects related to lower thermal conductivity, effective tunable transport properties, large effective masses and band structures and phonon sensitivity to quantum confinement. In general, this makes TMDs a viable class of materials for multiple thermoelectric and photothermal applications. In the case of thermoelectric devices, they function as systems to convert heat into electrical energy via the Seebeck effect. With greater accessibility to TMD systems in different structural phases, studies of thermoelectric properties are no longer restricted to the semiconducting H phase and have ventured into other TMD materials and phases.160–162 Unlike the conventional H phase, the low-dimensionality and anisotropic properties unique to phases such as the 1T′-phase are considered to increase the thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT) and efficiency.
On the theoretical front, while the Peierls distortion of 1T-phase TMDs in one direction leads to the formation of a 1T′-phase, this distortion in two directions leads to the trimerization of the nearest-neighbour transition metal atoms as discussed earlier in Section 2.163 A recent study by Ge et al. has extended the investigation to Mo-based TMDs in the 1T′′-phase (Fig. 11a),164 where it has been reported that MoSe2 has a large thermoelectric power factor with a value of ∼6.0 × 10−3 W m−1 K−2 in the range of 100–500 K. This is a clear suggestion that 1T′′-phase MoSe2 is a high-performance carrier transport material suitable for use as a thermoelectric material. In terms of experimental studies, 1T′-phase Weyl semi-metallic MoTe2 is known to undergo a phase transition at ∼250 K where it converts from the orthorhombic (Weyl semi-metallic phase) to a monoclinic (conventional metallic phase) structure.165,166 While the transition temperature can be suppressed via methods such as doping167 and application of external pressure,168 the cryogenic Seebeck coefficient can also be significantly enhanced due to the increase of electron–phonon scattering by softening the phonon modes. With the application of a high pressure of 0.75 GPa, Takahashi et al. showed that while the electrical resistivity of 1T′-phase MoTe2 decreases to 10 μΩ cm, a thermopower of up to 60 μV K−1 can be attained (Fig. 11b and c).168 This in turn can generate a giant thermoelectric power factor of 300 μW K−2 cm−1 (Fig. 11d),168 exceeding even that of YbAgCu4, a heavy-fermion system that is considered to be one of the best thermoelectric materials for cryogenic applications.169 This significant enhancement of thermopower based on TMD materials not only provides a new avenue for high-efficiency thermoelectric applications at low temperature, but also creates a new direction and a promising strategy to explore new thermoelectric materials based on these classes of low-dimensional materials. To examine the effects of phase engineering properties on thermoelectric systems, Ng et al. examined how the phase composition in mixed-phase LixMoS2 regulated its thermoelectric properties in the thermoelectric device as displayed in Fig. 12a.170 It is shown that with a decreasing proportion of the 1T/1T′ phase and a corresponding increase of the H-phase, the system registers a crossover from p- to n-type carrier conduction where the Seebeck coefficient converts from positive to negative. From 20 μW m−1 K−2, the thermoelectric power factor decreased nearly to zero with an initial increase in H-phase proportion. This is followed by an increase to ∼27 μW m−1 K−2 with further annealing (Fig. 12b). These findings suggest that the hybrid electronic properties of the mixed-phase LixMoS2 system allow for the control of thermoelectric performance by tuning between the T/1T′ and H phases.
 Fig. 11  Theoretical studies of the thermoelectric properties of metallic phase TMD systems. (a) Comparing the structures of monolayer TMDs in the 1T, 1T′ and 1T′′ phases. (b) Theoretical (top) and experimental (bottom) temperature-dependences of thermopower, S, at pressures up to 2.0 GPa with a maximum attainable S at 60 μV K−1. (c) Contour plot of S as a function of temperature T and pressure P. (d) Power factors (PF) as functions of temperature for MoTe2 and other materials. A large PF of ∼300 μW K−2 cm−1 is observed for 1T′-phase MoTe2 at a critical pressure of ∼0.75 GPa. Panel (a) reproduced from ref. 164 with permission under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (b)–(d) reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2019. 
While device applications based on thermoelectric effects are still in their infancy, glimpses of future applications can be seen in some prototypical studies. Liang et al. designed a solid-state thermionic device to be used as a power generator or a refrigerator with a TMD-based van der Waals heterostructure sandwiched between two graphene electrodes.171 Specifically, WSe2 and MoSe2 are ideal TMD materials to harvest waste heat with efficiencies of ∼7–8% at 400 K. On the biological front, Oh et al. proposed that thermal energy from humans can be tapped via a highly foldable and stretchable thermoelectric generator based on 1T-phase WS2 and NbSe2 sheets172 whose thermoelectric power factors are found to be 5–7 μW K−2 m−1 and 26–34 μW K−2 m−1. This thermoelectric generator could possibly open new opportunities for future wearable electronic power supplies, with reports that it can generate up to 38 nW output power at a temperature differential of 60 K.172
TMD materials in nanodot structures exhibit photoacoustic and photothermal properties that have applications related to medical therapies.173,174 Photothermal therapy (PTT) involves a localized heating effect induced by near-infrared laser irradiation with potential for tumor treatment so that side effects can be minimized and localized.175 To distinguish how TMD nanodots in different phases affect the PTT performance, Zhou et al. reported a significantly stronger near-infrared absorption of 1T-phase MoS2 with a photothermal power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 43.3% as compared to its H-phase counterpart (PCE: 21.3%).176 Upon further modification with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), the 1T-phase MoS2 nanodots display excellent stability in biological media with low bio-toxicity so that they can be used as a potentially effective agent to treat cancer or tumors under near-infrared irradiation (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 12  Experimental study on the thermoelectric properties of metallic phase TMD systems. (a) Schematic depicting the LixMoS2 device with Li+ ions intercalated within the interlayer van der Waals gaps. While regions near the intercalated Li+ ions are the 1T′-phase, the remaining are in the H-phase. (b) Top: Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity, and bottom: thermoelectric power factor (PF) of the LixMoS2 device across the annealing cycles. The PF maximizes to ∼27 μW m−1 K−2 with further annealing cycles. Panels (a) and (b) adapted from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
 Fig. 13  Medical applications of TMDs in their 1T/1T′-phases. Schematic of 1T-phase MoS2 nanodots as an efficient agent for photoacoustic imaging guided photothermal therapy. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020. 
5.5 Neuromorphic computing
In an age where data are ubiquitous, it is important to constantly develop new computing architectures. Hence, inspiration from the brain structure has led to the conception of neuromorphic computing where the intensive amount of research in recent years is likely to impact the computing of the future. This involves the replacement of digital binary systems with biological neural network-like synaptic connections in the decision-making and machine-learning processes. Memristive devices, or what are known as memristors (memory-resistors) and ReRAM (Resistive Random-access Memory), have emerged as the fundamental device components for the eventual realization of neuromorphic computing. Specifically, 2D materials in the form of 2D-TMDs particularly fit the criteria in aspects including non-volatility, high-speed switching, compact integration, and high endurance.177–179 As neuromorphic computing mimics neurobiological operations such as synapses in the central nervous system, it too has a very direct relevance towards the development of artificial intelligence (AI) that requires a rigorous computational workload in a compact and energy-efficient platform. As highlighted in Section 6, an outlook will be provided where future projections will be provided in terms of the technological development over the next decade or so. In this case, 2D-TMDs provide a conducive platform to meet this demand as we progress towards future computation.
At the monolayer level, Ge et al. reported the observation of stable nonvolatile resistance switching (NVRS) of semiconducting phase MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 stacked between two metal electrodes and that the resistance can be adjusted between a high-resistance state (HRS) and a low-resistance state (LRS) (Fig. 14a).180 This study shows that nonvolatile switching can be scaled to the sub-nanometer level based on 2D-TMD materials for suitable applications for neuromorphic computing. With the distinct structural phases leading to their respective electronic properties, phase engineering methods can effectively regulate the transport properties of TMD-based memristive systems. The work by Zhu et al. is an exceptional example where the reversible modulation of the phases of MoS2 films between the H and 1T′ phases can be conducted effectively via the migration of Li+ ions under an electric field.181 The ion exchange process carried out at the MoS2 device level (Fig. 11c) mimics the biological processes in a synaptic neural network. As such, ion-regulated MoS2-based memristive devices serves systems that could potentially emulate neural processes resembling synaptic competition and synaptic cooperation effects (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  Neuromorphic applications of TMDs in their 1T/1T′-phases. (a) Schematic of metal–insulator–metal structures of stable nonvolatile resistance switching (NVRS) based on MoS2 grown on Au foil (left). Right: Representative I–V curve of bipolar resistive switching behavior indicating transition (SET) between the HRS and LRS. (b) Schematic of implementing synaptic cooperation in the LixMoS2 device (left) that mimics the synaptic interactions among multiple synapses (right). Bottom: Optical and scanning electron micrographs of the network structure that comprises four LixMoS2 devices. Panel (a) reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Panel (b) adapted from ref. 181 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019. 
Apart from the ion-regulated phase transition process, an electric-field-induced H–1Td transition process was reported by Zhang et al. in MoTe2 and Mo1−xWxTe2 for application in Resistive Random-Access Memory (RRAM) devices.71 With the application of an electric field, MoTe2-based devices can be tuned to either the HRS or LRS. The device can be reset and tuned multiple times, with the switching taking place in the order of 10 ns timescales – comparable to or even faster than those of current flash memory technologies.182 The predictability and ease in tuning the structural phases during the resetting/setting processes make MoTe2a material of choice for use in RRAM devices. Since the Mo1−xWxTe2 alloy system has an even lower H–1T′ energy difference, an even smaller electric field can be used to induce such phase transition processes.68 This further signifies the greater ease of modulating the system in engineering more compact RRAM devices based on the structural and electronic phases of TMD materials.
6. Outlook and conclusion
TMD systems in both their few-layered and monolayer forms are promising candidates as alternative materials to replace bulk semiconductors and semi-metallic materials in FETs and other novel functional devices. Their atomic-scale feature and robust material properties position them as an ideal class of materials for device miniaturization and novel electronic applications that promise enhancement of energy efficiency. Apart from highlighting the progress made in the treatment, phase engineering and device fabrication processes of ultra-thin TMD systems in recent years, this review also provides a comprehensive discussion on the current developments where metallic phase TMDs are utilized in multiple areas related to microdevices, computing systems and catalytic applications. Furthermore, we attempt to project the future scientific and technological trends in the development of this burgeoning discipline.
As the precursor to these novel applications, one ought to consider the myriads of TMD phase engineering techniques critical for a diverse range of applications that have been discussed and reviewed in this article. While methods such as lattice strain engineering and irradiation techniques are effective in inducing structural phase transition, their potential are highly restricted because these effects are localized to small areas within the samples. One has to overcome the immense difficulty of scaling up the preparation process to increase the percentage phase transition yield. In the case of ion intercalation, it is certainly a well-established phase engineering technique effective for 2D-TMDs such as MoS2 with large energy differences between the respective structural phases. Therefore, it is important to use this technique in other 2D-TMD systems such as WTe2 and MoTe2. Their behavior as Weyl semimetals brings great interest to both fundamental science and practical applications.6 With the strong influence of spin–orbit coupling, their attributes as topological insulators183,184 make 2D-TMDs a suitable class of materials for further intercalation studies.
In interfacial metal–TMD systems where phase transition is mediated via charge-doping and lattice strain induced by high-temperature annealing, this high-temperature annealing induced phase transition technique also shows promise, especially due to the ease of achieving a high 1H–1T′ phase transition yield. The interfacial mechanism underlying this process is generally well-established. Nevertheless, concerted efforts must be made towards improving the quality of CVD- or CVT-grown 2D-TMD samples in order to fulfill the potential in upscaling to the centimeter scale in both the growth and phase transformation processes of 2D-TMDs. While the focus of this review is mainly on the phase engineering methods of TMD systems to derive other phases, other directions to enable their functionalization would be the direct synthesis of materials with the desired phase as briefly discussed in the previous section. This is likewise a feasible channel to derive the desired (quasi)-metallic 1T/1T′ phases where concerns arising during the phase transformation process such as defects and percentage yields could be eliminated. As such, direct access to the quasi-metallic 1T′-phase and metastable phases such as the metallic 1T-phase is of great interest for practical device applications where the sample quality has to be of considerable standards. Nevertheless, concerted efforts are required to transcend materials such as MoTe2 and WTe2 whose H–1T′ energy differences are low, for the direct synthesis of 1T/1T′-phase WSe2, WS2 and MoS2 which are generally more stable and possibly viable for multiple device applications.
As we consider the current state of technology, the scaling down of semiconductor-based integrated circuits has remained stagnant over more than a decade, especially due to the fundamental quantum limits of the material. While atomic-scale and low-dimensional TMD systems have potential to overcome the limits because of their monolayer thickness, much more technological developments are still needed to attain the current manufacturing standards of conventional 3D silicon-based devices where their defect densities are measured in the order of parts-per-billion. TMD systems currently have their defect concentrations and structural phase yields at a rather high percentage scale. Although TMD synthesis methods and TMD-based device fabrication techniques have made considerable progress over the past decades, they have yet to go beyond the research laboratory due to multiple manufacturability issues such as large-area growth and reproducible mechanical transfer of 2D materials.
Nevertheless, experimental reports of prototypical low-dimensional TMD-based devices displaying high-performance and low-power outcomes in FET systems, radiofrequency (RF) and thin-film transistors, neuromorphic components, Light-Emitting Diode (LED) devices, solar cells, mechanical resonators, waveguides, and ultrasensitive device sensors provide compelling reasons that they will become more important in the next few decades. Due to their attractive material, optical and electronic properties, low-dimensional TMD systems can potentially complement or replace conventional silicon-based devices that pervade virtually all aspects of human lifestyle ranging from communication infrastructures to smart wearables, electronic entertainment to healthcare, and so forth, where they promised to be more energy efficient, versatile, robust and low-cost.
The existential threat of climate change and pollution will continue to drive the demand for clean and renewable energy sources. With solar power being one of the most ubiquitous and viable renewable energy sources, developments in photocatalytic applications involving the hydrogen evolution reaction and CO2 reduction based on TMD materials are expected to grow over the next decades. Major challenges remain regarding the efficiency, reliability and stability for the HER and CO2 reduction processes especially under harsh experimental conditions for potential industrial applications. Precise control of the phase engineering process of TMDs is a fundamental issue that must be solved to optimize the material for photocatalytic applications. While the maximization of the H–1T′ phase transition yield is important for certain device applications, the precise modulation of TMDs in their respective phases plays an essential role in optimizing the HER performances. The work on MoSe2 nanosheets by Yin et al. is instructive, whereby a H:1T-phase content of 45% by 55% maximizes the system's HER photocatalytic performance.185 Further research is needed to move this discipline forward with better and more efficient devices for future commercialization.
In the quest to create an ideal platform for future quantum computing, low-dimensional 1T/1T′-phase TMD-based materials emerged as the prime candidates particularly with their diverse material properties including their Dirac electronic structure,6 Weyl semi-metallic feature,186 topologically non-triviality184 and superconductivity attribute.187 These again are absent from conventional bulk crystals or semiconductor materials.
As the demand for AI rapidly increases, there is a need to develop domain-specific hardware devices customized for AI applications. Neuromorphic computing mimics the neurobiological operations such as synapses in the central nervous system. A more compact and energy-efficient platform is an important consideration to meet the rigorous workload required by AI computing. 2D-TMDs in the form of MoS2 in a lateral device configuration display memristive behavior. Their resistance can be switched between the high- and low-resistance states via external electrical bias,188,189 and that such systems could be further scaled down to sheet thicknesses of ∼0.7 nm employing a metal–insulator–metal structure.180,190
Indeed, the development of quantum computing and neuromorphic devices may be the future of computing. They form the very basis of edge computing and the Internet of Things (IoT) which require an all-round development of novel chip architectures and device technologies. The use of 2D materials as the basis of synaptic devices allows the integration of a memristor and sensor into a single entity. This is an important leap forward for multifunctional neuromorphic computing to materialize.191 Nevertheless, major challenges remain for the eventual scaling of the relevant qubit system, including issues related to material growth, defect control and characterization. Nevertheless, extensive experimental and theoretical studies continue to improve the reliability and overcome the challenges in alleviating the impact of Fermi level pinning and Schottky barrier injection in heterostructure systems, while expanding the scalability of current device fabrication and sample growth techniques.
In conclusion, we have provided a comprehensive discussion on critical aspects related to the polymorphic features of 2D-TMD systems and the relevant phase engineering techniques. A detailed mechanistic discussion on multiple investigative studies has also been provided to address the TMD–metal interfacial dynamics in driving the phase transition properties at the atomic scale. With the accessibility to the unique structural phases, they can be harnessed for a wide range of practical device applications. This review emphasizes the immense opportunities that 2D-TMD based nanoengineering techniques offer in the technological advances over the next decades. Intensive experimental and theoretical studies continue unabated in the relentless quest to propel this exciting field forward.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
X. Yin acknowledges the funding support from MOE Tier 2 grant MOE2017-T2-2-139. W. Chen acknowledges the financial support from Singapore MOE Grant MOE-2019-T2-1-002 and the Science and Engineering Research Council of A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research) Singapore, under Grant No. A20G9b0135. H. Zhang acknowledges the support from ITC via the Hong Kong Branch of National Precious Metals Material Engineering Research Center (NPMM), the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (AoE/P-701/20), the Start-Up Grant (Project No. 9380100) and the grants (Project No. 9610478, 9680314, 7020013 and 1886921) from the City University of Hong Kong, and the Science Technology and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality (grant no. JCYJ20200109143412311).
References
K. S. Novoselov, 
            et al., Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669,  DOI:10.1126/science.1102896 .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2012.193 .
X. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao and T. F. Heinz, Spin and pseudospins in layered transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 343–350,  DOI:10.1038/nphys2942 .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Two-dimensional material nanophotonics, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907,  DOI:10.1038/nphoton.2014.271 .
G. Eda, 
            et al., Coherent atomic and electronic heterostructures of single-layer MoS2, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7311–7317,  DOI:10.1021/nn302422x .
X. Qian, J. Liu, L. Fu and J. Li, Quantum spin Hall effect in two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Science, 2014, 346, 1344–1347,  DOI:10.1126/science.1256815 .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Phase engineering of transition metal dichalcogenides, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712,  10.1039/C5CS00151J .
R. Wang, 
            et al., Strategies on phase control in transition metal dichalcogenides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802473,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201802473 .
X. Zhang, Z. Lai, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Novel structured transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3301–3338,  10.1039/C8CS00094H .
M. Chhowalla, 
            et al., The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275,  DOI:10.1038/nchem.1589 .
Z. Lai, Q. He and T. H. Tran, 
            et al. Metastable 1T′-phase group VIB transition metal dichalcogenide crystals, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1113–1120,  DOI:10.1038/s41563-021-00971-y .
M. S. Sokolikova, P. C. Sherrell, P. Palczynski, V. L. Bemmer and C. Mattevi, Direct solution-phase synthesis of 1T′ WSe2 nanosheets, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 712,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-08594-3 .
M. M. Ugeda, 
            et al., Observation of topologically protected states at crystalline phase boundaries in single-layer WSe2, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3401,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-05672-w .
E. S. Kadantsev and P. Hawrylak, Electronic structure of a single MoS2 monolayer, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 909–913,  DOI:10.1016/j.ssc.2012.02.005 .
T. Hu, R. Li and J. Dong, A new (2 × 1) dimerized structure of monolayer 1T-molybdenum disulfide, studied from first principles calculations, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 174702,  DOI:10.1063/1.4827082 .
Y. L. Huang, 
            et al., Bandgap tunability at single-layer molybdenum disulphide grain boundaries, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6298,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms7298 .
X. Yin, 
            et al., Tunable inverted gap in monolayer quasi-metallic MoS2 induced by strong charge-lattice coupling, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 486,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-017-00640-2 .
C. S. Tang, 
            et al., Anisotropic collective charge excitations in quasimetallic 2D transition-metal dichalcogenides, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902726,  DOI:10.1002/advs.201902726 .
S. Tang, 
            et al., Quantum spin Hall state in monolayer 1T′-WTe2, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 683–687,  DOI:10.1038/nphys4174 .
D. H. Keum, 
            et al., Bandgap opening in few-layered monoclinic MoTe2, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 482–486,  DOI:10.1038/nphys3314 .
F. Ma, 
            et al., Predicting a new phase (T′′) of two-dimensional transition metal di-chalcogenides and strain-controlled topological phase transition, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4969–4975,  10.1039/C5NR07715J .
W. G. Dawson and D. W. Bullett, Electronic structure and crystallography of MoTe2 and WTe2, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1987, 20, 6159–6174,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3719/20/36/017 .
Y. Sun, S.-C. Wu, M. N. Ali, C. Felser and B. Yan, Prediction of Weyl semimetal in orthorhombic MoTe2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 161107,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.92.161107 .
M. N. Ali, 
            et al., Large, non-saturating magnetoresistance in WTe2, Nature, 2014, 514, 205–208,  DOI:10.1038/nature13763 .
J. Heising and M. G. Kanatzidis, Structure of restacked MoS2 and WS2 elucidated by electron crystallography, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 638–643,  DOI:10.1021/ja983043c .
J. Heising and M. G. Kanatzidis, Exfoliated and restacked MoS2 and WS2: Ionic or neutral species? Encapsulation and ordering of hard electropositive cations, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11720–11732,  DOI:10.1021/ja991644d .
E. Bruyer, 
            et al., Possibility of combining ferroelectricity and Rashba-like spin splitting in monolayers of the 1T-type transition-metal dichalcogenides MX2 (M = Mo, W; X = S, Se, Te), Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 195402,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.94.195402 .
H. L. Zhuang, M. D. Johannes, A. K. Singh and R. G. Hennig, Doping-controlled phase transitions in single-layer MoS2, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 165305,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.96.165305 .
M. Dave, R. Vaidya, S. G. Patel and A. R. Jani, High pressure effect on MoS2 and MoSe2 single crystals grown by CVT method, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2004, 27, 213–216,  DOI:10.1007/BF02708507 .
S. Bhattacharyya and A. K. Singh, Semiconductor–metal transition in semiconducting bilayer sheets of transition-metal dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075454,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.86.075454 .
H. Guo, T. Yang, P. Tao, Y. Wang and Z. Zhang, High pressure effect on structure, electronic structure, and thermoelectric properties of MoS2, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 013709,  DOI:10.1063/1.4772616 .
X. Fan, D. J. Singh, Q. Jiang and W. T. Zheng, Pressure evolution of the potential barriers of phase transition of MoS2, MoSe2 and MoTe2, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12080–12085,  10.1039/C6CP00715E .
D. Zhou, 
            et al., Pressure-induced metallization and superconducting phase in ReS2, npj Quantum Mater., 2017, 2, 19,  DOI:10.1038/s41535-017-0023-x .
A. P. Nayak, 
            et al., Pressure-induced semiconducting to metallic transition in multilayered molybdenum disulphide, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3731,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms4731 .
Z. Zhao, 
            et al., Pressure induced metallization with absence of structural transition in layered molybdenum diselenide, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7312,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms8312 .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Pressure-induced iso-structural phase transition and metallization in WSe2, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46694,  DOI:10.1038/srep46694 .
S. Song, 
            et al., Room temperature semiconductor–metal transition of MoTe2 thin films engineered by strain, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 188–193,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b03481 .
S. J. R. Tan, 
            et al., Chemical stabilization of 1T′ phase transition metal dichalcogenides with giant optical Kerr nonlinearity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2504–2511,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.6b13238 .
V. Kochat, 
            et al., Re doping in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides as a new route to tailor structural phases and induced magnetism, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703754,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201703754 .
P. Johari and V. B. Shenoy, Tuning the electronic properties of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides by applying mechanical strains, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5449–5456,  DOI:10.1021/nn301320r .
K. He, C. Poole, K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Experimental demonstration of continuous electronic structure tuning via strain in atomically thin MoS2, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2931–2936,  DOI:10.1021/nl4013166 .
S. Manzeli, A. Allain, A. Ghadimi and A. Kis, Piezoresistivity and strain-induced band gap tuning in atomically thin MoS2, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5330–5335,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b01689 .
S.-W. Wang, 
            et al., Thermally strained band gap engineering of transition-metal dichalcogenide bilayers with enhanced light–matter interaction toward excellent photodetectors, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8768–8776,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.7b02444 .
K.-A. N. Duerloo, Y. Li and E. J. Reed, Structural phase transitions in two-dimensional Mo- and W-dichalcogenide monolayers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4214,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms5214 .
Q. Tang, Tuning the phase stability of Mo-based TMD monolayers through coupled vacancy defects and lattice strain, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9561–9568,  10.1039/C8TC03430C .
H. H. Huang, 
            et al., Controlling phase transition for single-layer MTe2 (M = Mo and W): modulation of the potential barrier under strain, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4086–4094,  10.1039/C5CP06706E .
K. Qi, 
            et al., Single-atom cobalt array bound to distorted 1T MoS2 with ensemble effect for hydrogen evolution catalysis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5231,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-12997-7 .
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Atomic mechanism of the semiconducting-to-metallic phase transition in single-layered MoS2, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 391–396,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2014.64 .
B. Shang, 
            et al., Lattice-mismatch-induced ultrastable 1T-phase MoS2–Pd/Au for plasmon-enhanced hydrogen evolution, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2758–2764,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b04104 .
Y. Katagiri, 
            et al., Gate-tunable atomically thin lateral MoS2 Schottky junction patterned by electron beam, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3788–3794,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01186 .
S. Reshmi, M. V. Akshaya, B. Satpati, P. K. Basu and K. Bhattacharjee, Structural stability of coplanar 1T-2H superlattice MoS2 under high energy electron beam, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 205604,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/aab3c3 .
C. H. Sharma, A. P. Surendran, A. Varghese and M. Thalakulam, Stable and scalable 1T MoS2 with low temperature-coefficient of resistance, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 12463,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-30867-y .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Single-layer MoS2, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461,  DOI:10.1016/0025-5408(86)90011-5 .
G. Eda, 
            et al., Photoluminescence from chemically exfoliated MoS2, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116,  DOI:10.1021/nl201874w .
D. Voiry, 
            et al., Enhanced catalytic activity in strained chemically exfoliated WS2 nanosheets for hydrogen evolution, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855,  DOI:10.1038/nmat3700 .
L. Sun, 
            et al., Layer-dependent chemically induced phase transition of two-dimensional MoS2, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3435–3440,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b00452 .
A. Ciarrocchi, A. Avsar, D. Ovchinnikov and A. Kis, Thickness-modulated metal-to-semiconductor transformation in a transition metal dichalcogenide, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 919,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-03436-0 .
C. Tan, 
            et al., Preparation of high-percentage 1T-phase transition metal dichalcogenide nanodots for electrochemical hydrogen evolution, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705509,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201705509 .
C. Tan, 
            et al., Preparation of single-layer MoS2xSe2(1−x) and MoxW1−xS2 nanosheets with high-concentration metallic 1T phase, Small, 2016, 12, 1866–1874,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201600014 .
P. Yu, 
            et al., Metal–semiconductor phase-transition in WSe2(1−x)Te2x monolayer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603991,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201603991 .
M. Xu, 
            et al., A hidden symmetry-broken phase of MoS2 revealed as a superior photovoltaic material, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16087–16093,  10.1039/C8TA05459B .
Y.-C. Zou, 
            et al., Atomic insights into phase evolution in ternary transition-metal dichalcogenides nanostructures, Small, 2018, 14, 1800780,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201800780 .
S.-Z. Yang, 
            et al., Rhenium-doped and stabilized MoS2 atomic layers with basal-plane catalytic activity, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803477,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201803477 .
Q. Chen, 
            et al., Composition-gradient-mediated semiconductor–metal transition in ternary transition-metal-dichalcogenide
bilayers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 45184–45191,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.0c13104 .
H. H. Huang, X. Fan, D. J. Singh and W. T. Zheng, First principles study on 2H-1T′ transition in MoS2 with copper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 26986–26994,  10.1039/C8CP05445B .
Y. Zhou and E. J. Reed, Structural phase stability control of monolayer MoTe2 with adsorbed atoms and molecules, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21674–21680,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b05770 .
S. Wei, 
            et al., Iridium-triggered phase transition of MoS2 nanosheets boosts overall water splitting in alkaline media, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 368–374,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.8b01840 .
Y. Li, K.-A. N. Duerloo, K. Wauson and E. J. Reed, Structural semiconductor-to-semimetal phase transition in two-dimensional materials induced by electrostatic gating, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10671,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms10671 .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., Structural phase transition in monolayer MoTe2 driven by electrostatic doping, Nature, 2017, 550, 487–491,  DOI:10.1038/nature24043 .
C. Zhang, 
            et al., Charge mediated reversible metal–insulator transition in monolayer MoTe2 and WxMo1−xTe2 alloy, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7370–7375,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b00148 .
F. Zhang, 
            et al., Electric-field induced structural transition in vertical MoTe2- and Mo1−xWxTe2-based resistive memories, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 55–61,  DOI:10.1038/s41563-018-0234-y .
L. Liu, 
            et al., Phase-selective synthesis of 1T′ MoS2 monolayers and heterophase bilayers, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1108–1114,  DOI:10.1038/s41563-018-0187-1 .
Y. Kang, 
            et al., Plasmonic hot electron induced structural phase transition in a MoS2 monolayer, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6467–6471,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201401802 .
Y. Tan, 
            et al., Controllable 2H-to-1T′ phase transition in few-layer MoTe2, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19964–19971,  10.1039/C8NR06115G .
J. Zhu, 
            et al., Argon plasma induced phase transition in monolayer MoS2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10216–10219,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.7b05765 .
X. Gan, 
            et al., 2H/1T phase transition of multilayer MoS2 by electrochemical incorporation of S vacancies, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4754–4765,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.8b00875 .
L. Zhou, 
            et al., Sensitive Phonon-Based Probe for Structure Identification of 1T′ MoTe2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8396–8399,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.7b03445 .
R. Sankar, 
            et al., Polymorphic layered MoTe2 from semiconductor, topological insulator, to Weyl semimetal, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 699–707,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b04363 .
L. Zhou, 
            et al., Large-area synthesis of high-quality uniform few-layer MoTe2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11892–11895,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.5b07452 .
L. Zhou, 
            et al., Synthesis of high-quality large-area homogenous 1T′ MoTe2 from chemical vapor deposition, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9526–9531,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201602687 .
L. Yang, 
            et al., Tellurization velocity-dependent metallic–semiconducting–metallic phase evolution in chemical vapor deposition growth of large-area, few-layer MoTe2, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1964–1972,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b08109 .
Y. Yoo, Z. P. DeGregorio, Y. Su, S. J. Koester and J. E. Johns, In-plane 2H-1T′ MoTe2 homojunctions synthesized by flux-controlled phase engineering, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605461,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201605461 .
T. A. Empante, 
            et al., Chemical vapor deposition growth of few-layer MoTe2 in the 2H, 1T′, and 1T phases: Tunable properties of MoTe2 films, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 900–905,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b07499 .
Q. Zhang, 
            et al., Iodine-mediated chemical vapor deposition growth of metastable transition metal dichalcogenides, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4641–4644,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b05065 .
H. Xu, 
            et al., Observation of gap opening in 1T′ phase MoS2 nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5085–5090,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b01953 .
Y. Yu, 
            et al., High phase-purity 1T′-MoS2- and 1T′-MoSe2-layered crystals, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 638–643,  DOI:10.1038/s41557-018-0035-6 .
R. Kappera, 
            et al., Phase-engineered low-resistance contacts for ultrathin MoS2 transistors, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128–1134,  DOI:10.1038/nmat4080 .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheets as supercapacitor electrode materials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2015.40 .
N. Barreau and J. C. Bernède, MoS2 textured films grown on glass substrates through sodium sulfide based compounds, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2002, 35, 1197–1204,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3727/35/11/316 .
Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, van der Waals integration before and beyond two-dimensional materials, Nature, 2019, 567, 323–333,  DOI:10.1038/s41586-019-1013-x .
I. Popov, G. Seifert and D. Tománek, Designing electrical contacts to MoS2 monolayers: A computational study, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 156802,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.156802 .
J. Kang, W. Liu, D. Sarkar, D. Jena and K. Banerjee, Computational study of metal contacts to monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenide semiconductors, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 031005,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevX.4.031005 .
S. B. Desai, 
            et al., Gold-mediated exfoliation of ultralarge optoelectronically-perfect monolayers, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4053–4058,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201506171 .
M. Velický, 
            et al., Mechanism of gold-assisted exfoliation of centimeter-sized transition-metal dichalcogenide monolayers, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10463–10472,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.8b06101 .
B. T. Blue, 
            et al., Metallicity of 2H-MoS2 induced by Au hybridization, 2D Mater., 2020, 7, 025021,  DOI:10.1088/2053-1583/ab6d34 .
Y. Tan, 
            et al., Monolayer MoS2 films supported by 3D nanoporous metals for high-efficiency electrocatalytic hydrogen production, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8023–8028,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201403808 .
Z. Liu, 
            et al., Synthesis of MoX2 (X = Se or S) monolayers with high-concentration 1T′ phase on 4H/fcc-Au nanorods for hydrogen evolution, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1301–1305,  DOI:10.1007/s12274-018-2212-8 .
X. Yin, 
            et al., Unraveling high-yield phase-transition dynamics in transition metal dichalcogenides on metallic substrates, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802093,  DOI:10.1002/advs.201802093 .
H. Häkkinen, The gold–sulfur interface at the nanoscale, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 443–455,  DOI:10.1038/nchem.1352 .
H. Walen, 
            et al., Identification of Au–S complexes on Au(100), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4891–4901,  10.1039/C5CP07817B .
J. Shi, 
            et al., Controllable growth and transfer of monolayer MoS2 on Au foils and its potential application in hydrogen evolution reaction, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10196–10204,  DOI:10.1021/nn503211t .
R. Luo, 
            et al., van der Waals interfacial reconstruction in monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides and gold heterojunctions, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1011,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-020-14753-8 .
S. Chuang, 
            et al., MoS2 P-type transistors and diodes enabled by high work function MoOx contacts, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1337–1342,  DOI:10.1021/nl4043505 .
M. Farmanbar and G. Brocks, Ohmic contacts to 2D semiconductors through van der Waals bonding, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500405,  DOI:10.1002/aelm.201500405 .
X. Zhang, 
            et al., Low contact barrier in 2H/1T′ MoTe2 in-plane heterostructure synthesized by chemical vapor deposition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12777–12785,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b00306 .
Y. Yoon, K. Ganapathi and S. Salahuddin, How good can monolayer MoS2 transistors be?, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3768–3773,  DOI:10.1021/nl2018178 .
N. Kaushik, 
            et al., Schottky barrier heights for Au and Pd contacts to MoS2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 113505,  DOI:10.1063/1.4895767 .
Y. Ma, 
            et al., Reversible semiconducting-to-metallic phase transition in chemical vapor deposition grown monolayer WSe2 and applications for devices, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7383–7391,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b02399 .
L. Weber and E. Gmelin, Transport properties of silicon, Appl. Phys. A, 1991, 53, 136–140,  DOI:10.1007/BF00323873 .
M. A. Rafiq, 
            et al., High on/off ratio and multimode transport in silicon nanochains field effect transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 113108,  DOI:10.1063/1.3694046 .
H. Wang, 
            et al., Integrated circuits based on bilayer MoS2 transistors, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4674–4680,  DOI:10.1021/nl302015v .
W. J. Yu, 
            et al., Vertically stacked multi-heterostructures of layered materials for logic transistors and complementary inverters, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 246–252,  DOI:10.1038/nmat3518 .
S. Wachter, D. K. Polyushkin, O. Bethge and T. Mueller, A microprocessor based on a two-dimensional semiconductor, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14948,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms14948 .
H. Xu, 
            et al., High-performance wafer-scale MoS2 transistors toward practical application, Small, 2018, 14, 1803465,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201803465 .
S. C. Rustagi, 
            et al., CMOS inverter based on gate-all-around silicon-nanowire MOSFETs fabricated using top-down approach, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2007, 28, 1021–1024,  DOI:10.1109/LED.2007.906622 .

          Y. Taur and T. H. Ning, Fundamentals of modern VLSI devices,  2009 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, 
            et al., Simultaneous synthesis and integration of two-dimensional electronic components, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 164–170,  DOI:10.1038/s41928-019-0233-2 .
K. Roy, 
            et al., Graphene–MoS2 hybrid structures for multifunctional photoresponsive memory devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826–830,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2013.206 .
W. Zhang, 
            et al., Ultrahigh-gain photodetectors based on atomically thin graphene–MoS2 heterostructures, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3826,  DOI:10.1038/srep03826 .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Extraordinary sunlight absorption and one nanometer thick photovoltaics using two-dimensional monolayer materials, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3664–3670,  DOI:10.1021/nl401544y .
T. Georgiou, 
            et al., Vertical field-effect transistor based on graphene–WS2 heterostructures for flexible and transparent electronics, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 100–103,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2012.224 .
Q. Peng, Z. Wang, B. Sa, B. Wu and Z. Sun, Electronic structures and enhanced optical properties of blue phosphorene/transition metal dichalcogenides van der Waals heterostructures, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31994,  DOI:10.1038/srep31994 .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., Solution-processed MoS2/organolead trihalide perovskite photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603995,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201603995 .
W. Nie, 
            et al., High-efficiency solution-processed perovskite solar cells with millimeter-scale grains, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525,  DOI:10.1126/science.aaa0472 .
S. D. Stranks, 
            et al., Electron–Hole diffusion lengths exceeding 1 micrometer in an organometal trihalide perovskite absorber, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344,  DOI:10.1126/science.1243982 .
L. Vicarelli, 
            et al., Graphene field-effect transistors as room-temperature terahertz detectors, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 865–871,  DOI:10.1038/nmat3417 .
X. Cai, 
            et al., Sensitive room-temperature terahertz detection via the photothermoelectric effect in graphene, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 814–819,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2014.182 .
C.-H. Liu, Y.-C. Chang, T. B. Norris and Z. Zhong, Graphene photodetectors with ultra-broadband and high responsivity at room temperature, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 273–278,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2014.31 .
D. Spirito, 
            et al., High performance bilayer-graphene terahertz detectors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 061111,  DOI:10.1063/1.4864082 .
T. Ishiguro and H. Sato, Electron microscopy of phase transformations in 1T-TaS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 2046–2060,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.44.2046 .
M. J. Hollander, 
            et al., Electrically driven reversible insulator–metal phase transition in 1T-TaS2, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1861–1866,  DOI:10.1021/nl504662b .
D. Wu, 
            et al., Ultrabroadband photosensitivity from
visible to terahertz at room temperature, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao3057,  DOI:10.1126/sciadv.aao3057 .
A. A. Soluyanov, 
            et al., Type-II Weyl semimetals, Nature, 2015, 527, 495–498,  DOI:10.1038/nature15768 .
K. Deng, 
            et al., Experimental observation of topological Fermi arcs in type-II Weyl semimetal MoTe2, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 1105–1110,  DOI:10.1038/nphys3871 .
Y. Liu, 
            et al., Raman signatures of broken inversion symmetry and in-plane anisotropy in type-II Weyl semimetal candidate TaIrTe4, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706402,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201706402 .
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Rediscovering black phosphorus as an anisotropic layered material for optoelectronics and electronics, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms5458 .
J. Wu, N. Mao, L. Xie, H. Xu and J. Zhang, Identifying the crystalline orientation of black phosphorus using angle-resolved polarized Raman spectroscopy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2366–2369,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201410108 .
J. Lai, 
            et al., Anisotropic broadband photoresponse of layered type-II Weyl semimetal MoTe2, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707152,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201707152 .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Liquid-mediated dense integration of graphene materials for compact capacitive energy storage, Science, 2013, 341, 534–537,  DOI:10.1126/science.1239089 .
Y. Tao, 
            et al., Towards ultrahigh volumetric capacitance: Graphene derived highly dense but porous carbons for supercapacitors, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2975,  DOI:10.1038/srep02975 .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Unveiling highly ambient-stable multilayered 1T-MoS2 towards all-solid-state flexible supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19152–19160,  10.1039/C9TA06305F .
R. Naz, 
            et al., Highly defective 1T-MoS2 nanosheets on 3D reduced graphene oxide networks for supercapacitors, Carbon, 2019, 152, 697–703,  DOI:10.1016/j.carbon.2019.06.009 .
C. Liu, 
            et al., Freestanding, three-dimensional, and conductive MoS2 hydrogel via the mediation of surface charges for high-rate supercapacitor, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4458–4463,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.9b00699 .
B. Xu, 
            et al., Adsorption and diffusion of lithium on 1T-MoS2 monolayer, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 93, 86–90,  DOI:10.1016/j.commatsci.2014.06.033 .
Y. Jiao, 
            et al., Ion transport nanotube assembled with vertically aligned metallic MoS2 for high rate lithium-ion batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702779,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201702779 .
J. Lu, 
            et al., Metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheets decorated hollow cobalt sulfide polyhedra for high-performance lithium storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12613–12622,  10.1039/C8TA02716A .
J. Bai, 
            et al., Glucose-induced synthesis of 1T-MoS2/C hybrid for high-rate lithium-ion batteries, Small, 2019, 15, 1805420,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201805420 .
J. Gao, 
            et al., Vertically oriented arrays of ReS2 nanosheets for electrochemical energy storage and electrocatalysis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3780–3787,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01180 .
X. Geng, 
            et al., Freestanding metallic 1T MoS2 with dual ion diffusion paths as high rate anode for sodium-ion batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702998,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201702998 .
W.-j. Tang, 
            et al., Hollow metallic 1T MoS2 arrays grown on carbon cloth: A freestanding electrode for sodium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18318–18324,  10.1039/C8TA06905K .
X. Zhang, 
            et al., Two-dimensional MoS2-enabled flexible rectenna for Wi-Fi-band wireless energy harvesting, Nature, 2019, 566, 368–372,  DOI:10.1038/s41586-019-0892-1 .
Z. Liang, B. Sun, X. Xu, H. Cui and J. Tian, Metallic 1T-phase MoS2 quantum dots/g-C3N4 heterojunctions for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12266–12274,  10.1039/C9NR02714A .
D. Voiry, 
            et al., The role of electronic coupling between substrate and 2D MoS2 nanosheets in electrocatalytic production of hydrogen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1003–1009,  DOI:10.1038/nmat4660 .
Q. Liu, 
            et al., Electron-doped 1T-MoS2via interface engineering for enhanced electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4738–4744,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b00446 .
Z. Luo, 
            et al., Chemically activating MoS2via spontaneous atomic palladium interfacial doping towards efficient hydrogen evolution, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2120,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-04501-4 .
G.-H. Nam, 
            et al., In-plane anisotropic properties of 1T′-MoS2 layers, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807764,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201807764 .
U. Maitra, 
            et al., Highly effective visible-light-induced H2 generation by single-layer 1T-MoS2 and a nanocomposite of few-layer 2H-MoS2 with heavily nitrogenated graphene, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13057–13061,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201306918 .
X. Xue, 
            et al., Rational inert-basal-plane activating design of ultrathin 1T′ phase MoS2 with a MoO3 heterostructure for enhancing hydrogen evolution performances, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16531–16538,  10.1039/C8NR05270K .
B. Mahler, V. Hoepfner, K. Liao and G. A. Ozin, Colloidal synthesis of 1T-WS2 and 2H-WS2 nanosheets: Applications for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14121–14127,  DOI:10.1021/ja506261t .
S. Meziane, H. Feraoun, T. Ouahrani and C. Esling, Effects of Li and Na intercalation on electronic, bonding and thermoelectric transport properties of MX2 (M = Ta; X = S or Se) dichalcogenides – Ab initio investigation, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 581, 731–740,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.07.033 .
T. Wang, 
            et al., Solution-processed two-dimensional layered heterostructure thin-film with optimized thermoelectric performance, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 17560–17567,  10.1039/C7CP02011B .
W. Ding, 
            et al., Defect modification engineering on a laminar MoS2 film for optimizing thermoelectric properties, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1909–1914,  10.1039/C9TC06012J .
Y. Linghu, N. Li, Y. Du and C. Wu, Ligand induced structure and property changes of 1T-MoS2, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 9391–9398,  10.1039/C9CP00917E .
Y. Ge, W. Wan, Y. Ren and Y. Liu, Large thermoelectric power factor of high-mobility transition-metal dichalcogenides with 1T′′ phase, Phys. Rev. Res., 2020, 2, 013134,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.013134 .
B. Brown, The crystal structures of WTe2 and high-temperature MoTe2, Acta Crystallogr., 1966, 20, 268–274,  DOI:10.1107/S0365110X66000513 .
W. G. Dawson and D. W. Bullett, Electronic structure and crystallography of MoTe2 and WTe2, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1987, 20, 6159–6174,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3719/20/36/017 .
H. Sakai, 
            et al., Critical enhancement of thermopower in a chemically tuned polar semimetal MoTe2, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601378,  DOI:10.1126/sciadv.1601378 .
H. Takahashi, 
            et al., Giant enhancement of cryogenic thermopower by polar structural instability in the pressurized semimetal MoTe2, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 100, 195130,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.195130 .

          G. D. Mahan, in Solid State Physics, ed. H. Ehrenreich and F. Spaepen, Academic Press,  1998, vol. 51, pp. 81–157 Search PubMed .
H. K. Ng, 
            et al., Effects of structural phase transition on thermoelectric performance in lithium-intercalated molybdenum disulfide (LixMoS2), ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12184–12189,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b22105 .
S.-J. Liang, B. Liu, W. Hu, K. Zhou and L. K. Ang, Thermionic energy conversion based on graphene van der Waals heterostructures, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46211,  DOI:10.1038/srep46211 .
J. Y. Oh, 
            et al., Chemically exfoliated transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheet-based wearable thermoelectric generators, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1696–1705,  10.1039/C5EE03813H .
C. Tan, 
            et al., Preparation of ultrathin two-dimensional TixTa1−xSyOz nanosheets as highly efficient photothermal agents, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7842–7846,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201703597 .
Z.-H. Miao, 
            et al., Liquid exfoliation of colloidal rhenium disulfide nanosheets as a multifunctional theranostic agent for in vivo photoacoustic/CT imaging and photothermal therapy, Small, 2018, 14, 1703789,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201703789 .
X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Plasmonic photo-thermal therapy (PPTT), Alexandria J. Med., 2011, 47, 1–9,  DOI:10.1016/j.ajme.2011.01.001 .
Z. Zhou, 
            et al., Metallic 1T phase enabling MoS2 nanodots as an efficient agent for photoacoustic imaging guided photothermal therapy in the near-infrared-II window, Small, 2020, 16, 2004173,  DOI:10.1002/smll.202004173 .
H. P. Wong, 
            et al., Metal–oxide RRAM, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1951–1970,  DOI:10.1109/JPROC.2012.2190369 .
J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov and D. R. Stewart, Memristive devices for computing, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 13–24,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2012.240 .
W. Sun, 
            et al., Understanding memristive switching via in situ characterization and device modeling, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3453,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-11411-6 .
R. Ge, 
            et al., Atomristor: Nonvolatile resistance switching in atomic sheets of transition metal dichalcogenides, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 434–441,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b04342 .
X. Zhu, D. Li, X. Liang and W. D. Lu, Ionic modulation and ionic coupling effects in MoS2 devices for neuromorphic computing, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 141–148,  DOI:10.1038/s41563-018-0248-5 .

          S. Yu and P. Chen, Emerging memory technologies: recent trends and prospects, IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine,  2016, vol. 8, pp. 43–56 DOI:10.1109/MSSC.2016.2546199.
Z. Fei, 
            et al., Edge conduction in monolayer WTe2, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 677–682,  DOI:10.1038/nphys4091 .
S. Wu, 
            et al., Observation of the quantum spin Hall effect up to 100 Kelvin in a monolayer crystal, Science, 2018, 359, 76–79,  DOI:10.1126/science.aan6003 .
Y. Yin, 
            et al., Synergistic phase and disorder engineering in 1T-MoSe2 nanosheets for enhanced hydrogen-evolution reaction, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700311,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201700311 .
P. Li, 
            et al., Evidence for topological type-II Weyl semimetal WTe2, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2150,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-017-02237-1 .
H. Wang, 
            et al., High-quality monolayer superconductor NbSe2 grown by chemical vapour deposition, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 394,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-017-00427-5 .
D. Son, 
            et al., Colloidal synthesis of uniform-sized molybdenum disulfide nanosheets for wafer-scale flexible nonvolatile memory, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9326–9332,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201602391 .
V. K. Sangwan, 
            et al., Multi-terminal memtransistors from polycrystalline monolayer molybdenum disulfide, Nature, 2018, 554, 500–504,  DOI:10.1038/nature25747 .
M. Kim, 
            et al., Zero-static power radio-frequency switches based on MoS2 atomristors, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2524,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-04934-x .
G. Cao, 
            et al., 2D material based synaptic devices for neuromorphic computing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005443,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202005443 .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Xinmao Yin
	Prof. Xinmao Yin is currently a professor at the Physics Department of Shanghai University, China. He received his bachelor's degree in Physics from Zhejiang University in 2010 and his PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore under the supervision of Prof. Andrew Wee in 2015. After that, he continued his research in the National University of Singapore. His research interests focus on the electronic and spin structures of different quantum materials using optical spectroscopic techniques in different spectral regimes. He also studies the underlying mechanisms that govern superconductivity, ferromagnetism, phase transition and other exotic quasi-particle quantum excitations.

Chi Sin Tang
	Dr Chi Sin Tang received his bachelor's degree in Physics from Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) and his PhD under the Integrative Sciences and Engineering Programme (ISEP) from the National University of Singapore. He is currently a scientist in the Nano Electronic and Thermal Transport (NETT) group at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. His research interests focus on the electronic and magnetic properties of strongly-correlated systems, heterostructures and 2D materials where unique quantum properties and quasi-particle dynamics can be uncovered.

Wei Chen
	Prof. Wei Chen is currently a professor in both the Chemistry and Physics Departments at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He received his bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University (China) in 2001 and his PhD degree from the Chemistry Department at the NUS in 2004. His current research interests include molecular-scale interface engineering for organic, graphene and 2D material-based electronics and optoelectronics, and interface-controlled nanocatalysis for energy and environmental research.

Andrew T. S. Wee
	Prof. Andrew T. S. Wee is a Class of ‘62 Professor of Physics at the National University of Singapore (NUS). His research interests are in surface and nanoscale science, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and synchrotron radiation studies of molecule–substrate interfaces, graphene and related 2D materials. He was a Commonwealth Fellow as well as a Rhodes Scholar at the University of Oxford, where he received his received his DPhil (1990). He holds a Bachelor of Arts (Honours) in Physics (1994) as well as a master's degree from the University of Cambridge. He is an Associate Editor of the journal ACS Nano and serves or has served on several other journal editorial boards.

 	Fig. 1  The availability of multiple efficient phase engineering techniques has enabled the use of layered TMD materials in multiple electronic and photodevice applications. With further developments in this discipline, we expect bright prospects in the utilization of this class of materials in areas such as photocatalysts, neuromorphic computing, and even artificial intelligence and smart technologies.	 

 	Fig. 2  Molecular structures of 2D-TMDs in their polymorphic phases: (a) trigonal prismatic (1H), (b) octahedral (1T), and (c) distorted (1T′) phases. The characteristic zig-zag configuration of the transition metal atoms in 1T′-phase 2D-TMDs is indicated by the grey dashed lines in the bottom panel. The stacking configurations of the atomic planes are indicated. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy images of (d) 1H-phase monolayer-WSe2, (e) 1T-phase MoS2 (blue circles indicate the positions of Mo-atoms), and (f) 1T′-phase monolayer-WSe2. In the overlaid crystal models of (d) and (f), purple circles represent W-atoms, while green circles represent Se-atoms. Panels (d) and (f) reproduced from ref. 12 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panel (e) reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 3  Theoretically and experimentally determined band structures of 2D-TMDs in their respective phases: (a) 1H, (b) 1T, and (c) 1T′-phase monolayer-MoS2. The green lines in (a) show the top (bottom) valence (conduction) bands in MoS2 with the direct bandgap at the K-point in the red dashed box. The red and blue lines in (b) represent the bands, contributed mainly by the Mo 4d-orbitals and S 3p-orbitals, respectively. The metallic phase is distinct with the disappearance of the bandgap at the Γ-point as highlighted in the red dashed box. The band structure of 1T′-phase monolayer-MoS2 in (c) with the fundamental gap, Eg, and inverted gap, 2δ. The metal d-orbital (in red) is located below the chalcogenide p-orbital due to band inversion. Inset: Comparison of band structures with (red dashed line) and without (black solid line) spin–orbit coupling. (d) Large-scale STM image of single-layer, bilayer, and trilayer MoS2 (150 × 150 nm2; VTip = 2.4 V), and (e) dI/dV spectra measured in regions with different layer numbers (set point: VTip = 1.5 V, ITip = 80 pA). (f) High-resolution ARPES band dispersion along the Y–Γ–Y direction of 1T′-phase monolayer-WSe2. Inset: Schematic of the first Brillouin zone of 1T′-phase WSe2 with the relevant high-symmetry points indicated. (g) Calculated bands along the Γ–Y (brown) and Γ–P (green) directions. Optical spectra of (h and i) MoS2 and (j and k) WSe2 monolayers on gold substrates in their respective spectral range which indicate the emergence of the fundamental (h and j) and inverted gaps (i and k). Panel (a) reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012. Panel (b) reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from the American Institute of Physics Publishing, copyright 2013. Panel (c) reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014. Panels (d) and (e) reproduced from ref. 16, under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (f) and (g) reproduced from ref. 13, under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (h) and (i) reproduced from ref. 17 and 18, under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (j) and (k) reproduced from ref. 17 and 18 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structures of 1Td and 1T′′-phase TMDs. (a) Comparing the stacking orders to distinguish between the 1T′ and 1Td phases. (b) Atomic structures of the 1T′′-phase monolayer TMD. The transition metal and chalcogen atoms are represented using the cyan and yellow spheres, respectively. Panel (b) reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  Phase transformation process due to high pressure, ion intercalation and chemical doping processes. (a) 3D illustration of multilayer MoS2 in a diamond anvil cell pressure medium for compression experiments. (b) Pressure-dependent electrical resistivity of MoS2. Three characteristic regions were identified: semiconducting (SC), intermediate state (IS) and metallic regions. Inset: Theoretically calculated pressure-dependent electrical resistivity. (c) Temperature–force phase diagram for H and 1T′-phase MoTe2. (d) Scanning transmission electron microscopy image of monolayer and bilayer h-LixMoS2 regions. Inset: Zoom-in filtered image of the 1T′-phase region. (e) Degradation of h-LixMoS2 under ambient conditions, investigated by the percentage change in 1T′-phase composition. (f) High-magnification view of a Re-doped MoSe2 monolayer in the 1T′-phase. Panels (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 34 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panel (c) reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Panels (d) and (e) reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. Panel (f) reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 6  Phase transformation characterization via imaging and spectroscopic techniques. Effects of Ir nanocrystal decoration on MoS2 layers. (a) HAADF-STEM image of T-phase MoS2 because of the phase transition induced by the Ir nanocrystals. This is in comparison with (b) the image of H-phase MoS2 in its pristine state. (c) Representative Raman spectra across the phase transition process from the H to 1T′-phase. (d) Gate-dependent Raman intensity ratios. The transformation of phonon modes and the corresponding hysteresis loop indicating H–1T′ structural phase transition under gate control. (e) Schematics of the phase-controlled synthesis strategy. The inset plot at the bottom shows the calculated formation-energy difference between 1T′-phase and H-phase KxMoS2 with respect to K concentration. Panels (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Panels (c) and (d) reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2017. Panel (e) reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 7  Au4S4 structures at the MoS2–Au interface and the metal–TMD contacts with the implementation of (quasi-)metallic phase TMDs. (a) HAADF-STEM image of a MoS2–Au sample with (b) the corresponding intensity line profile of the Mo-layer in MoS2 (green line), the Au4S4 interfacial layer (red line), and the Au sublayer (gray line). (c) Molecular dynamics simulation indicating the stability of the Au4S4 structure at the interface. (d) Plot of resistance against channel lengths of H-phase MoS2 with Au electrodes deposited directly on 1T-phase MoS2 (schematic). Inset: Percentage decrease in contact resistance with gate bias. Inset: Electrostatic force microscopy phase image of locally patterned H and T phases in the respective regions. (e) Schematic comparing the device where the H-phase MoTe2 channel is directly contacted by metal electrodes (top) and where H-phase MoTe2 is connected with metal electrodes via 1T′-phase MoTe2 (bottom). (f) Optical image of a MoTe2 ribbon that is contacted by the labelled metal electrodes, where electrodes 1–3 are in contact with 1T′-phase MoTe2, while electrodes 4–6 are in contact with the H-phase counterparts. (g) Optical image of a MoTe2 ribbon with a T′/H/T′ configuration with electrodes 7 and 8 in contact with 1T′-phase MoTe2. (h) Normalized source drain current, Ids, and voltage, Vds (Ids–Vds), curves acquired by electrodes 4 and 5, and 7 and 8. The increase in the slope between electrodes 7 and 8 indicates a higher current passing through. Thus implying a lower contact resistance for electrode in contact with the 1T′-phase MoTe2. Panels (a)–(c) reproduced from ref. 102 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panel (d) adapted from ref. 87 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2014. Panels (e)–(h) reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  Device fabrication based on MoTe2 and its applications in complex logic circuitry systems. (a) Schematic depicting the process for constructing ultrathin MoTe2 circuits by simultaneously synthesizing and integrating the monolayer components via a single-step H/1T′ phase-selective chemical synthesis technique. (b) Example of a phase selective device in the form of a representative carbon nanotube gated MoTe2 FET. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of MoTe2 device arrays on two layers. Inset: Enlarged image of a pair of vertically connected devices in different layers. Cross-sectional TEM images displaying the vertical structures of the circuits along the respective white dashed lines. Panels (a)–(c) adapted from ref. 117 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  Quantum efficiency and anisotropic features of metallic and quasi-metallic phase devices. (a) Schematic and (b) optical microscopy image of a hybrid 1T-phase MoS2/CH3NH3PbI3 photodetection device where the blue regions are the MoS2 channels, while the pink regions are the gold electrodes. (c) Enhancement in the photo-responsivity and EQE of the device under 400 nm light exposure. (d) Optical microscopy image of a FET-like 1T′-phase MoS2 device with twelve electrodes patterned with a step size of 30°. The 1T′-phase lattice structure is overlaid with the MoS2 flake and the direction parallel to Mo zigzag chains has been defined as 0°. (e) Resulting Ids–Vds curves of the 1T′-phase MoS2 device along the respective orientations. (f) Normalized experimental and theoretical conductance, G. (g) Schematic representation of a linear polarization-dependent photocurrent measurement setup for the prototype metal–MoTe2–metal photodetector. Anisotropic PC response for the linear polarized excitation at (h) 10.6 μm, (i) 4 μm, and (j) 633 nm with the anisotropy ellipse ratios at 2.72, 1.92, and 1.19, respectively. Panels (a), (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. Panels (d)–(f) reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2018. Panels (g)–(j) reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  Energy storage and catalyst applications of 1T/1T′ phase TMDs. (a) High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy image of a 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheet/reduced graphene oxide heterostructure synthesized for 6 hours (M/RGO-6). (b) Relation between specific capacitance (at 1 A g−1) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) of different M/RGO composites. (c) Schematic of a lateral Schottky diode based on a MoS2 semiconducting–metallic phase junction. (d) Proposed schematic illustration of the HER for 1T-phase Ir/MoS2. (e) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of 1T-MoS2 quantum dots with g-C3N4 composites under simulated solar light irradiation. Panels (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. Panel (c) reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019. Panel (d) reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Panel (e) reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  Theoretical studies of the thermoelectric properties of metallic phase TMD systems. (a) Comparing the structures of monolayer TMDs in the 1T, 1T′ and 1T′′ phases. (b) Theoretical (top) and experimental (bottom) temperature-dependences of thermopower, S, at pressures up to 2.0 GPa with a maximum attainable S at 60 μV K−1. (c) Contour plot of S as a function of temperature T and pressure P. (d) Power factors (PF) as functions of temperature for MoTe2 and other materials. A large PF of ∼300 μW K−2 cm−1 is observed for 1T′-phase MoTe2 at a critical pressure of ∼0.75 GPa. Panel (a) reproduced from ref. 164 with permission under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Panels (b)–(d) reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  Experimental study on the thermoelectric properties of metallic phase TMD systems. (a) Schematic depicting the LixMoS2 device with Li+ ions intercalated within the interlayer van der Waals gaps. While regions near the intercalated Li+ ions are the 1T′-phase, the remaining are in the H-phase. (b) Top: Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity, and bottom: thermoelectric power factor (PF) of the LixMoS2 device across the annealing cycles. The PF maximizes to ∼27 μW m−1 K−2 with further annealing cycles. Panels (a) and (b) adapted from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  Medical applications of TMDs in their 1T/1T′-phases. Schematic of 1T-phase MoS2 nanodots as an efficient agent for photoacoustic imaging guided photothermal therapy. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  Neuromorphic applications of TMDs in their 1T/1T′-phases. (a) Schematic of metal–insulator–metal structures of stable nonvolatile resistance switching (NVRS) based on MoS2 grown on Au foil (left). Right: Representative I–V curve of bipolar resistive switching behavior indicating transition (SET) between the HRS and LRS. (b) Schematic of implementing synaptic cooperation in the LixMoS2 device (left) that mimics the synaptic interactions among multiple synapses (right). Bottom: Optical and scanning electron micrographs of the network structure that comprises four LixMoS2 devices. Panel (a) reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Panel (b) adapted from ref. 181 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
