Solar fuels generation and molecular systems: is it homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysis?   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35334B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35334B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2338-2356Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSolar fuels generation and molecular systems: is it homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysis?†

        
          
            Vincent 
            Artero
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Marc 
            Fontecave
          
          
        
      *b
aLaboratoire de Chimie et Biologie des Métaux (CEA/Université Grenoble 1/CNRS), 17 rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble cedex 09, France. E-mail: vincent.artero@cea.fr
bCollège de France, 11 place Marcelin-Berthelot, 75231 Paris cedex 05, France. E-mail: marc.fontecave@cea.fr
Received 
      13th August 2012
    First published on 20th November 2012AbstractCatalysis is a key enabling technology for solar fuel generation. A number of catalytic systems, either molecular/homogeneous or solid/heterogeneous, have been developed during the last few decades for both the reductive and oxidative multi-electron reactions required for fuel production from water or CO2 as renewable raw materials. While allowing for a fine tuning of the catalytic properties through ligand design, molecular approaches are frequently criticized because of the inherent fragility of the resulting catalysts, when exposed to extreme redox potentials. In a number of cases, it has been clearly established that the true catalytic species is heterogeneous in nature, arising from the transformation of the initial molecular species, which should rather be considered as a pre-catalyst. Whether such a situation is general or not is a matter of debate in the community. In this review, covering water oxidation and reduction catalysts, involving noble and non-noble metal ions, we limit our discussion to the cases in which this issue has been directly and properly addressed as well as those requiring more confirmation. The methodologies proposed for discriminating homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis are inspired in part by those previously discussed by Finke in the case of homogeneous hydrogenation reaction in organometallic chemistry [J. A. Widegren and R. G. Finke, J. Mol. Catal. A, 2003, 198, 317–341].
Vincent Artero
Vincent Artero is a graduate of the Ecole Normale Supérieure, rue d’Ulm. He obtained his PhD in 2000 from the University Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 6). His doctoral work under the supervision of Prof. A. Proust dealt with organometallic derivatives of polyoxometalates. After a postdoctoral stay in Aachen with Prof. U. Kölle, he joined in 2001 the Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals in Grenoble where he obtained a position in the Life Science Division of the CEA. His current research interests are in the structural and functional modelisation of hydrogenases and the design of artificial systems for the photo- and electro-production of hydrogen.
Marc Fontecave
Marc Fontecave is a member of the French Academy of Science and Professor at the Collège de France in Paris since 2008, where he holds the chair of “Chemistry of Biological Processes”. He spent 20 years as Professor in the University Joseph Fourier in Grenoble, after a PhD at the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris and postdoctoral research at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm. His research group studies the structural and functional properties of complex biological redox systems, mostly implying metal centers, and related bioinspired chemical complexes.
1. Introduction
The global energetic context requires that original solutions be provided regarding alternatives to fossil fuels, oil, coal and gas, and probably to nuclear energy.1 It is very likely that electricity will be increasingly used as an energetic vector, including in transportation (electrical vehicles), and that new fuels, such as hydrogen, will be developed.2,3 There is also a need to capture increasing amounts of carbon dioxide and to valorise it at the industrial level as a source of carbon to make valuable organic compounds (fibres, polymers,…) and also carbon-based fuels (methanol for example).4
With such objectives, there are a number of issues to be addressed. Obviously the most important one is the source(s) of energy, preferentially renewable, that we should use in place of fossil fuels. The most abundant one is solar energy but, as it is diffuse and intermittent, we need to find technological strategies to collect it and convert it into usable forms of energy, such as electrical energy (photovoltaics) or chemical energy (“solar fuels”). Nature, through the amazing process of photosynthesis which allows light-induced reduction of CO2 by H2O and splitting of H2O into H2 and O2 under certain conditions, is doing such a conversion of solar energy into chemical fuels (biomass, H2) and thus provides a fascinating model of how this can be achieved.5 Practically, there is an increasing interest in developing photoelectrochemical processes as well as coupling a photovoltaic device to an electrolyser for solar fuels production.6,7 In this review, we will focus on synthetic water splitting systems for H2 production. Reduction of CO2 into CO or organic compounds is another option for solar fuel generation that will not be discussed here.8–10
The second critical issue, discussed in this paper, is catalysis. Indeed, the chemical reactions at work in the targeted devices mentioned above are complex multielectronic processes with high energetic barriers which absolutely require to be catalysed. Because natural reactions, such as those involved in photosynthesis and in bioenergetic processes, are carried out in aqueous solutions and are facilitated by homogeneous catalysts (metalloenzymes), there has been in the recent past a great deal of effort among the scientific community to evaluate the potential of homogeneous metal complexes and metal ions as catalysts and photocatalysts for applications in the field of solar fuels.11–14 However, the conditions under which these catalysts are used (strongly oxidizing or reducing potentials, strongly acidic or basic media, aqueous solutions...) make them susceptible to (generally irreversible) transformations. Thus, a difficult and recurring question that one has to answer is whether the primary compound is the true catalyst or just a precursor (a pre-catalyst) while the true active species is produced in situ by these transformations. Obviously this is an important issue if one wants to understand the catalytic process as a prerequisite for further improvement of the catalyst. One such transformation, much more prevalent than currently appreciated, is the formation of small amounts, sometimes difficult to evidence, of coordination polymer, metal or metal-oxide particles, in the form of colloids, films or powders, derived from the homogeneous complex. This question of distinguishing true homogeneous catalysis by metal complexes from heterogeneous catalysis by metal or metal-oxide particles is obviously not limited to this specific domain and is a general one in catalysis. In the past it has been nicely and extensively discussed by Finke and Widegren in the context of hydrogenation reactions.15 In this review article, we will discuss the recent reports having addressed such an issue in the field of electro- or photo-chemical hydrogen generation and water oxidation. Unfortunately the outcome is that a definitive conclusion can be given only in a few cases, reflecting the extreme complexity of the question. However we hope that the presentation of the adequate methodologies that are currently available to address this question will be useful to those involved in catalysis projects related to solar fuel generation.
2. Reductive processes
2.1 Methodology: lessons from hydrogenation reactions
In several papers specifically investigating the actual nature of the catalyst in hydrogenation reactions catalysed by complexes of iridium,16 rhodium17–19 and ruthenium,20 Finke and Widegren provided a general methodology for making the distinction between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis.15
In a number of cases,15–22 it has been demonstrated that the molecular organometallic complex introduced as a catalyst is actually transformed in situ into bulk metal film/particles or soluble metal colloids/nanoclusters. The two situations are not equivalent: in the first case evidence for such a transformation might be easy since precipitation or deposition of generally coloured solid materials might be visible even in relatively small quantities in the reaction glassware. In the second case, evidence is more difficult to obtain directly since metal colloids or nanoclusters derived from an aggregation process are soluble species and cannot be easily detected. Still, these species should be considered as heterogeneous catalysts since they may display multiple types of active sites at their surface, while homogeneous catalysts have a single type of active site according to Schwartz’s definitions for catalysis.23 In both cases a combination of experimental approaches is required for a more definitive distinction between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. In the following we select three types of experiments from the original review article from Finke and Widegren,15 the combination of which allows characterizing, quite unambiguously, whether the catalytic process under study is homogeneous or heterogeneous. Throughout the text, the terms colloids, nanoclusters or nanoparticles should be understood with the same meaning, i.e. soluble heterogeneous catalysts.

1. Kinetics. 
A first indication that the molecular complex might be converted into another species which is the true catalyst (in that case the introduced complex is defined as a pre-catalyst) is the presence of an initial induction period and the observation of a sigmoidal reaction kinetics. Further support to the fact that the complex is a pre-catalyst can be obtained for example if: (i) the induction period is supressed when the complex is reduced in the absence of the substrate before addition to the catalytic assay; (ii) the catalyst isolated after a first catalytic run generates a second catalytic run, in the presence of new reactants, without a lag phase. It should be noted that the absence of such a kinetic behaviour obviously does not rule out a transformation of the complex under study if the process is fast. In addition, the presence of a lag phase does not tell per se whether the new catalytic species is homogeneous or heterogeneous in nature. Testing the metal itself, in a finely divided form, can provide additional information, especially if the reaction displays a kinetics without any induction period.


2. Mercury poisoning. 
This widely used test is particularly suitable for assessing the presence of metal particles made from Pt, Pd, Ni but less for Ir, Rh and Ru. It is based on the fact that metal particles are inactivated by the formation of an amalgam or through adsorption at the surface of Hg(0).24 By doing so it inactivates those particles. Thus if catalysis is suppressed or impaired upon addition of Hg(0), it is likely that the true catalyst is a metal particle derived from the initial pre-catalyst. To be valid, this method has to be carried out with caution: (i) Hg(0) should be added under efficient stirring in large excess, at least 500 equivalents for metals that easily amalgamate (Pt, Pd, Ni25…) and even more for the other metals more difficult to poison such as Ir, Rh,18,26 Ru and Fe; (ii) it should be checked that the pre-catalyst itself or other key components of the catalytic assay do not react with Hg(0); (iii) Hg(0) should be left in contact with the solution during the whole catalytic assay so as to poison the heterogeneous catalyst formed in situ during catalytic turnover. Alternatively, Hg(0) can be introduced after the catalytic reaction has begun and the true catalyst formed. Other poisoning tests can be used, based on the specific inhibition of metal sites by specific reagents or ligands (typically CS2, PPh3 or thiophene). In that case, a discrimination between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis can be made on the basis of the amount of the reagent required to supress the catalytic activity: more than one equivalent of the reagent per catalytic metal is expected for a molecular catalyst, while nanoclusters with only a fraction of metal atoms exposed at their surface can be readily poisoned with low amounts of ligands.15,27


3. Spectroscopy, electron microscopy and light scattering. 
Formation of metallic precipitates or metal powders can be directly evidenced using a variety of physical techniques. The presence of elemental metal particles can be confirmed by XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy). This quite sensitive surface (1–10 nm depth) chemical analysis technique allows us to identify the elements present in a material and to precise their oxidation state. For such an analysis, the solution must be deposited and evaporated onto an inert support such as glass. Another useful analytical technique is EDX (Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) which is also used for elemental analysis and chemical characterization of a surface. If this technique probes deeply into the deposited film, in contrast to XPS which probes only a few nanometers below the surface, EDX is less sensitive than XPS. Finally, metal nanoparticles can be imaged by TEM (transmission electron microscopy) which is a sensitive technique for detecting particles even of a few nanometers in size. It should be noted however that small (less than 1 nm) nanoclusters and nanoclusters of light first-row transition metals display a lower contrast in TEM and are thus difficult to image. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) is another very useful technique that can be used to identify the presence (or to establish the absence) of nanoparticles in solution. This technique allows determining the size profiles of large objects in solution or small particles in suspension. The advantage over TEM is that the analysis can be performed in situ, without an evaporation step on a substrate.

2.2 Photocatalytic H2 evolution
In the recent years, a large number of molecular catalytic systems for light-driven H2 evolution have been reported, with initial emphasis on the construction of supramolecular assemblies. The field has been recently reviewed and the reader is referred to these articles.11,28–31 These systems contain either noble metals (Pt, Rh or Pd) or first-row transition metals (Co, Ni or Fe) as catalytic centers and metal–organic photosensitizers (based on Ru, Ir, Re or Pt) or fully organic dyes. These reactions have much in common with the hydrogenation reactions discussed above since (i) they are carried out under homogeneous conditions, (ii) H2 is present in the reaction mixture as a product of the reaction and (iii) reducing power is provided to the catalytic system as a consequence of light absorption by the photosensitizer in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor. Thus the question whether metal particles are formed under these conditions and participate in catalysis is highly relevant.

Noble metals. 
Rhodium. 
Among the different systems based on homogeneous molecular noble-metal catalysts, an apparently clear-cut situation is found with Rh-based catalytic systems, such as the supramolecular species mainly developed by Brewer. If the first published [{(bipy)2Ru(dpp)}2RhCl2]5+ system (dpp = 2,3-bis(2-pyridyl)pyrazine; bipy = bipyridine)32 displayed a linear kinetics for light-driven H2 evolution, other systems are characterized by sigmoidal kinetic behaviors and, in some cases, lag phases ranging from a few minutes to an hour.33,34 Other multi-component photocatalytic systems have been studied by Sakai et al.35 or Bernhard et al.36 and display the same kinetic behavior, which indicates the transformation of the molecular catalyst into rhodium nanoclusters, well-known as active H2-evolving catalysts.37 In fact, a deep analysis of a system consisting of a heteroleptic cyclometalated iridium photosensitizer and homoleptic rhodium–bipyridine catalyst excluded the involvement of Rh particles.36 First, Rh colloid preparations, including one consisting of polymer protected nanoparticles, displayed negligible catalytic activity. Second, the activity of the molecular system was retained after addition of Hg(0) (>10.000 equiv. and vigorous stirring) to the reaction mixture (Fig. 1). Variations, such as increased initial rates and shorter system lifetime, were observed upon addition of mercury but this was assigned to direct interactions of the molecular species with either Hg(0) or mercury salts formed in situ through redox reaction with the catalyst or the photosensitizer.38 Finally, the same system was subjected to CS2 poisoning. This reagent is known to poison Rh nanoparticles used for catalytic cyclohexene hydrogenation with less than 0.02 equiv. CS2 per rhodium atom. Instead 2 equiv. CS2 are required to decrease the photocatalytic activity of the Ir/Rh molecular system by 90% and more than 10 equiv. are needed to completely inhibit the reaction. This suggested a direct inactivation of the molecular Rh complex through substitution of bipy ligands by CS2.
 Fig. 1  Mercury (left) and CS2 (right) poisoning tests on light-driven H2 evolution catalyzed by [Rh(dtbbpy)3](PF6)3 (dtbbpy = 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′bipyridine) in the presence of a cyclometalated Ir-photosensitizer and triethylamine as a sacrificial electron donor in THF–H2O.36 Left: Hg(0) poisoning test showing untreated (black trace); pretreated with Hg for 1 h then filtered (red trace), or treated with Hg with efficient stirring during illumination (blue trace); right: end-point results (24 h) for quantitative poisoning CS2 poisoning test concerning the same system. Adapted from ref. 36. 
Similar conclusions were drawn by Sakai and colleagues on distinct systems with various rhodium(II) dimers quadruply bridged by carboxylate ligands such as [Rh2(μ-OAc)4(H2O)2] as the H2-evolving catalyst and methylviologen as the electron relay.35 In this case, the mercury test could not be used since Hg(0) causes a rapid decomposition of the Rh(II) dimers. In operando analysis of the photolyzed solutions by dynamic light scattering measurements, allowing the detection of nanoparticles with diameters larger than ca. 1 nm, failed to demonstrate the presence of any nanoparticle.
These results are in marked contrast with the recent data from Wang and colleagues on similar systems but containing rhodium(II) dimers with only two carboxylate bridges and bidentate non-bridging phen (phenanthroline) or bipy ligands [Rh2(μ-OAc)2(bipy)2(OAc)2] and [Rh2(μ-OAc)2(phen)2(OAc)2].39 However, the reaction conditions are distinct from those employed by Sakai et al.35 since a mixture of water and organic solvent was used here instead of aqueous acetate buffer, the photosensitizer was Ir-based instead of Ru-based and no electron relay was introduced. Under these conditions, long lag phases (1 to 2 h) were observed and formation of Rh colloids was obvious from the evolution of the UV-visible spectrum with a significant baseline increase upon irradiation. Whether these colloids are the active catalytic species or not is not completely clear since the catalytic H2 evolution is correlated with the formation of an intermediate characterized by a visible absorption at 575 nm that builds up only after the formation of the colloids has completed. A comparison of these two studies at least demonstrates that the formation of nanoparticles is controlled by the reaction conditions. The solvent may have a strong influence, but the use of methylviologen which keeps the redox potential of the solution more positive than −500 mV vs. NHE may be key to avoid the formation of colloids under the conditions used by Sakai et al.35
Thus, although Rh colloids are known to act as H2-evolving catalysts and are sometimes formed under the photolysis conditions, they do not seem to be involved as the active catalysts in light-driven H2 evolution involving molecular Rh-catalysts.
Palladium. 
The situation appears much more contrasted in the case of systems with palladium-based H2-evolving active sites. Two supramolecular assemblies (Fig. 2) have been developed by the groups of Rau et al.40 and Hammarström et al.41 They both contain a {Ru(bipy)2}-based photosensitive moiety but differ in terms of the structure of the diimine ligand coordinating the Pd center. In their study, Rau and colleagues excluded the formation of palladium colloids under photolysis conditions40 on the basis that no photohydrogenation of cyclohexene could be observed, a reaction known to be catalyzed by colloidal palladium.42 The other supramolecular Ru–Pd system has a completely distinct behavior.41 Hammarström and colleagues were able to demonstrate that Pd colloids were formed at the end of the induction time which in this specific case was in the range of only a few minutes. At this stage, the particles were less than 5 nm in diameter from TEM analysis of solutions cast on copper grids. During the following H2 evolution phase, the size of the particles increased to 30–50 nm. The formation of Pd colloids was also confirmed by XPS spectroscopy. The high degree of similarity between the two systems, both regarding molecular structure and assay conditions, thus provides a good illustration how hard it is to differentiate between a homogeneous molecular photocatalyst and a heterogeneous system in reality.
 Fig. 2  Structures of the supramolecular H2-evolving photocatalytic Ru–Pd systems designed by Rau (left)40 and Hammarström (right).41 
Platinum. 
Photocatalytic systems containing molecular Pt catalysts have been the subject of intense studies owing to the outstanding catalytic properties of colloidal platinum for H2 evolution and their use from the 80’s in light-driven systems.43–45 From the 90’s a number of molecular complexes of Pt have been described as substitutes for Pt colloids, with major contributions from the group of Sakai in Japan.46–48 Generally, the systems consist of [Ru(bipy)3]2+ as the photosensitizer, a molecular Pt-based catalyst (Fig. 3) and methyl viologen (MV2+) as the electron relay. Photolysis is carried out in aqueous buffers with EDTA as the sacrificial electron donor. Except for those containing [Pt(NH3)4]2+, all the systems proved active for light-driven H2 evolution.46 Under these conditions, formation of platinum colloids by reduction of the Pt complex has been demonstrated in some cases only. As a reference system, [PtCl4]2− always form colloids under photolysis conditions, consistent with the observation of a long induction period (Fig. 4) during which the PtII salt is reduced by MV˙+ to form the colloid.46 Such a lag phase is not observed with other molecular complexes (Fig. 3) such as the bridged amidinate Pt dimer [{Pt(NH3)2}2(μ-MeC(O)NH)2]2+ (Fig. 3 and 4). Neutral diaminodichloro Pt(II) complexes such as [Pt(NH3)2Cl2] or [Pt(en)Cl2] retain their molecular structure in the presence of reduced methyl-viologen,49 but form colloids in the presence of H2 (1 atm). This is evidenced by the increase in the baseline in the UV-visible spectra due to light scattering.50 At lower H2 concentration (at least up to 500 ppm), these complexes appear to be stable. It can thus be concluded that the true catalysts remain molecular in nature when these complexes are used in photocatalytic H2 evolution experiments provided the media are continuously flushed with an inert gas such as N2 or Ar. Other complexes such as [{Pt(NH3)2}2(μ-MeC(O)NH)2]2+, the terpyridine complex [Pt(terpy)Cl]+ or bipyridine–Pt moieties (as an independent complex or within a supramolecular assembly) proved stable in the dark in the presence of MV˙+ or H2.49,50 This was demonstrated both kinetically and through XPS analysis of freeze-dried samples of the reaction mixture after the photocatalytic reaction or through UV-visible measurements showing the absence of light scattering. Finally, it has been shown that [Pt(terpy)Cl]+ or [Pt(terpy)(CC–Ph)]+ is stable under irradiation conditions.38,51
 Fig. 3  Structures of some molecular Pt complexes used as catalysts or pre-catalysts for H2 evolution in light-driven or thermal assays. 
 Fig. 4  Photochemical H2 production mediated by (a) the bridged amidinate Pt dimer [{Pt(NH3)2}2(μ-MeC(O)NH)] (2 μmol) and (b) K2PtCl4 (4 μmol) from pH 5.0 aqueous acetate buffer solution (10 mL) containing EDTA (30 mM), [Ru(bipy)3]2+ (0.04 mM) and methylviologen (2 mM). 1 mL H2 corresponds to ∼40 μmol. Note the very different H2 evolution rates obtained for the two systems (reprinted from ref. 46). 
A very distinct behavior was observed by Eisenberg and colleagues in the case of similar systems based on the [Pt(terpy)Cl]+ catalyst but studied in CH3CN/H2O mixtures, with triethanolamine as the sacrificial electron donor and [Pt(terpy)(CC–Ph)]+ as the photosensitizer.52,53 Under these conditions, the molecular systems are very sensitive to Hg(0) poisoning, which could indicate the formation of Pt nanoparticles. The addition of Hg(0) in this case increased the lag phase and delayed H2 evolution without completely suppressing catalysis. Here again, direct inactivation of the photosensitizer by Hg(0) cannot be excluded, making definite conclusions impossible. Of particular interest is the observation that Pt particles with sizes of ∼2–3 nm are formed when TiO2 particles (Degussa P25, ∼25 nm on edge) are introduced into the system, either in place of methyl viologen or directly as the photosensitizer (direct band-gap UV irradiation). This transformation is also observed if the molecular catalysts are grafted onto TiO2 through carboxylate anchors prior to irradiation. In this case, it is tempting to conclude that the presence of a conductive solid support promotes the formation and deposition of Pt nanoparticles. This is another illustration of the dependence of the homogeneous/heterogeneous frontier upon reaction conditions, in the case of noble-metal catalysts.


Non-noble metals. 
More recently, with the notion that future technologies should depend on non-noble metals in order to generate systems based on cheap and abundant materials, the field moved towards the preparation and characterization of molecular photocatalytic systems with the catalytic moiety based on Co, Ni or Fe, i.e. earth-abundant first-row transition metal complexes.29,31,54,55 Most of these systems still contain a Ru, Ir, Pt or Re-based metal–organic photosensitizer even if more and more systems are developed that use an organic light-harvesting moiety, either a porphyrin56–58 or a xanthene derivative.58–66 Catalytic moieties include cobaloxime,29,51,53,62,65,67–70 cobalt diimine–dioxime,71–73 cobalt dithiolene74,75 and cobalt polypyridine complexes,64,76,77 nickel complexes with diphosphine,66 mercaptopyridine78 or mercaptoethanolate60 ligands and di/tri-nuclear iron carbonyl complexes as biomimics of the active site of FeFe-hydrogenases.79,80 Some of these catalysts are shown in Fig. 5 and 6. Here also, it is important to evaluate whether the catalyst retains its molecular structure during photocatalytic turnover or if it is transformed into active metallic particles. Compared to the above-mentioned noble metal-based systems, only a few studies addressing this issue are available in the literature. We briefly discuss below only these specific studies.
 Fig. 5  Structure of molecular H2-evolving cobalt catalysts discussed in the review. dmg = dimethylglyoxime; dpg = diphenylglyoxime; (DO)(DOH) = diimine–dioxime. 
 Fig. 6  Structure of selected molecular H2-evolving nickel and iron catalysts. 
Mercury poisoning tests have been performed on systems based on cobaloxime53,70,81 and tris-mercaptopyridine nickel complexes.78 They proved negative in all cases. Mercury forms amalgams with Co82 and Ni25 but in the absence of any positive control, demonstrating that Hg(0) actually poisons Ni or Co nanoclusters in organic media, these conclusions should be taken with care. Nevertheless, the kinetics of light-driven H2 evolution do not present any lag phase in general and can even be sustained in the presence of PPh3 as an additional ligand.73 Linear or quadratic dependencies of the H2 evolution rate with the concentration of Co catalyst are obtained depending on the system under study, which also demonstrates some mechanistic specificity difficult to rationalize on the basis of a degradative transformation of the molecular catalyst into nanoclusters.68,83 In one case DLS measurements have revealed the absence of cobalt colloids over a size range from 0.5 nm to 1 μm.83 To the best of our knowledge, the formation of iron colloids in systems containing iron carbonyl complexes has not been specifically addressed. We note that Fe powder proved inactive as a catalyst under these conditions.80 On the other hand, iron and nickel nanoparticles have been successfully used as active catalysts for H2 evolution from aqueous solutions, in combination with 9-mesityl-10-methylacridinium as the photosensitizer and NADH as the electron donor.84,85

2.3 Electrocatalytic H2 evolution
Because they necessarily require the use of an electrode, electrochemical tests are intrinsically heterogeneous. A distinction can be made between electro-assisted catalysis, where the only role of the electrode is to provide electrons to the molecular catalyst in the bulk, and electrocatalysis where the electrode material itself catalyzes the reaction through specific interactions with the substrate. A third situation can be found when the molecular catalyst is covalently grafted on the electrode surface. In the following, the term electrocatalysis will be used for all three situations.
In this section, we specifically consider electrocatalytic systems based on non-noble metals. A large number of systems12,84 have been reported in the literature including bio-inspired dinuclear mimics of the active sites of FeFe and NiFe hydrogenases,86–96 macrocyclic88 and pincer97,98 nickel complexes, macrocyclic iron complexes99,100 and a variety of cobalt compounds.29
In most studies, the molecular catalysts developed for H2 evolution are assayed in the bulk in the presence of a glassy carbon or a mercury electrode. Most of the catalysts studied so far deactivate after a few tens of turnovers when assayed in bulk electrolysis experiments and this was assigned to a degradation process forming a catalytically incompetent species or material. In some cases, the molecular catalyst has been characterized after a few turnovers and the integrity of its molecular nature confirmed.90 Such demonstrations should be taken with care since only the molecules at the immediate vicinity of the electrode are active during a bulk electrolysis experiment and they can achieve a high number of turnovers, either in the initial or in a transformed form, while the large majority of the catalyst molecules, in the bulk, i.e. outside the diffusion layer, do not cycle and remain in the original state.101
The question whether these molecular electro-catalysts transform into heterogeneous catalytic materials has not been deeply addressed until quite recently. A widespread control experiment (called ‘rinse’ test) consists of running a second electrolysis experiment using the same electrode under the same conditions but in the absence of the molecular catalyst in solution. If electrocatalysis resumes at a similar rate, this indicates some coating of the electrode with an active solid-state material. Alternatively, the observation of an electrocatalytic activity on a Hg-pool electrode is a clear indication that metal particles are not formed, since they would be likely to be inactivated through adsorption or amalgam formation. For example, cobaloxime and cobalt diimine–dioxime complexes (Fig. 5) have been the subject of a large number of studies, with a concomitant input from our group29,102–104 and that of Peters et al. in 2005.105,106 These complexes have initially been studied in non-aqueous media (acetonitrile and DMF) in the presence of proton sources. These complexes proved to be active for H2 evolution at the surface of both glassy carbon and Hg-pool electrodes which indicates that the active species is a molecular complex in the bulk and allows discarding the formation of colloids in these cases.102,103,105,106 The structurally related cobalt clathrochelate [Co(dmg)3(BF)2]+ (Fig. 5), reported in 2008 to be active for H2 evolution,107 also achieves several tens of turnovers when assayed in CH3CN on a Hg-pool in the presence of weak proton sources such as p-cyanoanilium.108 Under such homogeneous conditions, all these complexes were found to decompose and form inactive species after about 100 turnovers, as shown by the decline in the catalytic current observed during bulk electrolysis experiments.
The situation appears to be different when harsher acidic conditions are used. When assayed in acetonitrile and in the presence of a strong acid such as HClO4, cobalt clathrochelates only achieve a few turnovers and the faradaic yield reported for H2 evolution during a bulk evolution on an Hg-pool electrode was limited to 10–25%.107 A new and advanced analysis of the cyclic voltammetry measurements has been provided by Savéant’s group that raises serious doubts regarding whether the molecular complex under study is a true H2 evolution catalyst.109 Actually the formation of metallic cobalt particles at the surface of glassy carbon electrodes has been evidenced.109 This formation was proposed to derive from a reductive hydrogenolysis of the N–O bonds of the ligand, inducing Co release.
Similarly Peters and Berben found that the electrochemical reduction of the cobaloxime [Co(dmgBF2)2(CH3CN)2] at glassy carbon electrodes in acetonitrile resulted in modified electrode surfaces when large concentrations of tosic acid were used.110 These modified electrodes proved active for catalyzing H2 evolution from aqueous solutions over a wide range of pH. As similar conditions are used in both studies (i.e. reductive conditions and large excess of a strong acid), it can be deduced that cobalt nanoparticles are also formed at the surface of the electrode in the experiment described by Peters and Berben.110
A similar situation occurs under aqueous conditions. We recently found that electro-reductive transformation of molecular cobalt complexes, for example the cobaloxime [Co(dmgBF2)2(H2O)2] or the diimine–dioxime cobalt complex [Co(DO)(DOH)pnCl2] ((DOH)(DOH)pn = N2,N2′-propanediylbis(2,3-butandione 2-imine 3-oxime, Fig. 5) into a solid deposit occurs when an aqueous phosphate buffer is used as the electrolyte.111 In this case the hydrolysis of the complex proceeds even at neutral pH and a nano-particulate electrocatalytic material, H2–CoCat, is electrochemically deposited as revealed by the coloration of the transparent conducting oxide (FTO or ITO) electrodes and confirmed by SEM measurements (Fig. 7). Small nanoparticles with average diameter of 10 nm are initially formed. Upon prolonged deposition time or when reduction is carried out at a more negative potential, a film of ∼2 μm thickness made from larger particles (100 nm) is obtained. On the basis of advanced spectroscopic measurements (XPS, EDX, EXAFS and XANES) we could show that H2-CoCat consists of metallic cobalt coated with a cobalt-oxo/hydroxo-phosphate layer in contact with the electrolyte. H2–CoCat catalyses H2 evolution from neutral aqueous buffer at modest overpotentials (onset potential for H2 evolution is −50 mV vs. RHE) and proves significantly more active than bulk Co metal or than Co coatings deposited from NH4Cl and LiClO4 solutions.112–114
 Fig. 7  SEM images of electrodes modified by electrolysis at (a) −0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 1 h (ITO, 0.1 C cm−2geometric) and (b) −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 3 h (FTO, 6.5 C cm−2geometric) vs. RHE in aqueous phosphate buffer (KPi, 0.5 M, pH 7) containing Co(DO)(DOH)pnCl2 (0.5 mM).111 
These results naturally question whether it is relevant to develop such molecular complexes with nicely designed organic ligands if at the end reductive degradation and metal deposition occurs at any pH in an aqueous environment. (It is well known that such molecular complexes are not stable under both alkaline and acidic conditions and the above results show that reductive decomposition occurs even at neutral pH.) Interestingly, such complexes can be stabilized through covalent attachment to surfaces of solid materials as recently shown in our laboratory. For example, a diimine–dioxime cobalt catalyst can be grafted at the surface of an electrode made of carbon nanotubes (Fig. 8) to yield a very active electrocatalytic cathode material, mediating H2 generation with a turnover number of 55.000 TON in 7 h from pure aqueous solutions (acetate buffer pH 4.5) at relatively low overpotentials (onset potential for H2 evolution is −350 mV vs. RHE).115 When assayed in aqueous phosphate buffer (pH 7), no H2 evolution activity could be detected, probably because the grafted molecular catalysts require a more acidic environment for cycling. This observation allows us to exclude any reductive transformation of the grafted molecular complex into the nanoparticulate H2–CoCat material that would spontaneously form under these conditions if the molecular complex was free in solution.111 Scanning electron microscopy was used to exclude the formation of any particle at the surface of carbon nanotubes and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy confirmed the preservation of the electronic structure of the grafted molecular complex after extensive catalytic turnover. This material is thus remarkably stable, allowing extensive cycling without degradation, which contrasts with the above-mentioned limited stability of the molecular catalyst under bulk electrolysis conditions. This clearly indicates that grafting provides a largely increased protection of these cobalt catalysts against modification and allows preserving their molecular structure. Though no detailed “post-mortem” analysis has been reported yet for cobaloxime or diimine–dioxime catalysts, a recent report on related diimine–dipyridine metal complexes116 showed that reductive processes at the metal site may generate transient carbon-based α-imino radical species that can undergo reductive homocoupling yielding dimer complexes with new metal coordination spheres likely not suitable for catalysis. Our hypothesis is that once grafted on electrode materials the molecular complexes are isolated and cannot react in such a bimolecular manner. We believe that this is a key for the enhanced stability observed upon surface attachment as compared to homogeneous situations. Other examples have been reported by our group with DuBois’ nickel bisdiphosphine catalysts. Once immobilized on carbon nanotubes, they can turn over more than 100.000 times without both a loss of activity and the formation of heterogeneous active metal species.117,118
 Fig. 8  Schematic structure of the material obtained after covalent grafting of a diimine–dioxime cobalt catalyst on multi-wall carbon nanotubes. A single wall nanotube is shown for clarity.115 
This again indicates that no generalization is possible regarding whether electrocatalysis is homogeneous or heterogeneous and that each situation requests a specific and systematic analysis since the stability and the convertibility of the molecular complexes into particles tightly depend on the assay conditions (pH, solvent, electrode,…).
3. Oxidative processes and water oxidation
Metal oxides (MOx), in particular noble metal oxides (RuO2 or IrO2)119–122 represent the most active water-oxidation catalysts (WOCs) so far with overpotential requirements not exceeding 150–200 mV under the best conditions.123 Manganese and cobalt oxides have gained renewed interest in the last few years as they also prove to display interesting catalytic properties especially under more neutral pH conditions. On the other hand, homogeneous molecular water oxidation catalysts (WOCs), based on noble (Ir, Ru,…) and non-noble (Co, Mn, Fe, Cu,…) metal ions, have recently attracted attention because their properties can be readily tuned, their catalytic mechanism can be studied in solution and finally ligand modifications allow for a controlled coupling to photosensitizers or electrodes.124–127 The problem is that such complexes are in general prone to decompose into insoluble metal oxides or hydroxides because the highly oxidizing conditions required for oxygen evolution can cause ligand oxidation and degradation followed by hydrolysis of released metal ions. Since these oxides are well known as robust and highly active WOCs, there is always an ambiguity regarding whether catalysis is achieved by the soluble molecular complex itself (homogeneous catalysis) or instead whether this complex is a precursor for an heterogeneous oxide material which is the true catalytic species (heterogeneous catalysis). Here again, a number of experimental approaches (physical and spectroscopic measurements, kinetic studies, comparison of catalyst activity with that of free metal ions and oxides) can be used to make this distinction. However, one should be aware that it is not always easy to conclude from these experimental probes as the catalyst is often very dilute and a small fraction of decomposed species, undetectable, may be enough to account for the observed catalytic activity.
In fact, the careful and systematic experimental examination of this issue is a quite recent concern and indeed this has not been the case all the time. This is particularly true with the mononuclear and polynuclear Ru-based molecular complexes, a class of compounds that has been extensively studied, developed and optimized as WOCs,126,128–130 even though they still do not compete with the more robust and active heterogeneous Ru oxide materials. Quite surprisingly most of these complexes are claimed to be stable under the highly oxidizing conditions of the water oxidation reaction and the contribution of derived Ru oxides to catalysis generally excluded. However, with only very few exceptions (see for example ref. 131), the experimental support for such a conclusion is largely incomplete. More recently novel systems based on copper,132 iron,133,134 cobalt, iridium and manganese have been reported as WOCs. In the following we discuss the studies which have paid careful attention to the question of the nature of the true catalyst: homogeneous or heterogeneous.
3.1 Cobalt compounds
The problem with Co complexes resides in the fact that, once they release CoII or CoIII ions in solution, conversion to cobalt oxides (CoOx) is likely to occur. Since the latter are efficient WOCs, the catalytic reaction observed in solution may in fact be due to solid particles of CoOx.
Seminal papers on water oxidation catalysed by CoII salts appeared in the 70’s and 80’s.135,136 In the following we will discuss water oxidation catalysis by cobalt compounds both under electrochemical conditions, generally in aqueous solutions using ITO, FTO or glassy carbon electrodes, and in the context of light-driven systems, including [Ru(bipy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer and peroxodisulfate (S2O82−) as an electron acceptor.

Cobalt ions as WOC precursors in electrochemical assays. 
There is a vast literature concerning the use of cobalt oxide/hydroxide materials as electrode coatings catalyzing water oxidation. Various methods of preparation from soluble CoII salts have been described resulting in distinct stoichiometries.29
Oxidation of CoaqII was reinvestigated by Nocera and Kanan in 2008.137 Controlled potential electrolysis of CoII salts in pH 7 phosphate buffer at 1.3 V vs. NHE results in the deposition of a dark precipitate on the electrode from which bubbles of O2 were observed to evolve.137,138 This precipitation occurs at the surface of different conducting materials (ITO, FTO, glassy carbon,…). The deposited material was carefully characterized by a variety of techniques: X-ray diffraction, EXAFS, Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS).139,140 This led to identify it as an amorphous cobalt oxide/hydroxide CoOx solid material.
This material was shown to be catalytically active for the electrooxidation of water (phosphate buffer) in the absence of CoaqII ions in solution. It is one of the rare metal oxides for which activity at neutral pH has been demonstrated. Formation of the catalytic film results from oxidation of CoII to CoIII which, as expected, precipitates on the surface of the electrode in the presence of phosphate. Further oxidation generates CoIV-oxo species in the oxide which then react with water to produce O2 and CoII.141 It has been suggested that phosphate ions play a major role in this process both as proton acceptors and for their ability to continuously reintegrate solubilized CoII ions into the film during catalysis through precipitation of CoIII ions.141–143
Besides finding a simple and mild method to prepare an efficient electroactive material which proved useful for a number of subsequent applications, Nocera’s work provides an unambiguous demonstration that electrochemical oxidation of water catalyzed by CoaqII is in fact not catalyzed by the soluble ions, which thus are pre-catalysts, but instead by CoOx derived from these ions, under the strongly oxidizing conditions of the reaction. This study clearly provided a strong case for systematic investigation of the presence of solid oxide particles derived from soluble ions or molecular complexes.
A recent study established that the formation of CoOx from a solution of CoII ions in fact occurs in the whole 3–14 pH range.144 In contrast below pH 3, no visible anode deposit can be observed, pointing out the importance of defining the pH conditions when the homogeneous/heterogeneous catalysis issue is being considered. At acidic pH, the catalytic species then is CoaqII in solution.144 However in that case the homogeneous reaction proceeds via formation of H2O2 which subsequently undergoes disproportionation whereas the formation of CoOx at higher pHs exclusively leads to the 4-electron oxidation of water to O2.


CoII ions as WOC precursors in photochemical assays. 
Harriman and co-workers investigated a combination of various dispersed powders of metal oxides with [Ru(bipy)3]2+ as the photosensitizer and S2O82− as the electron acceptor for light-driven water oxidation in deaerated aqueous Na2SO4 solution (pH 5).145 The cobalt spinels NiCo2O4 and Co3O4 were found to be quite active catalysts under these conditions, Co3O4 ranking just below IrO2 and above RuO2. A similar system was recently reported by Frei’s group using silica particles containing Co3O4 clusters.146 Suspensions of this material in pH 5.8 aqueous solution were able to oxidize water to O2 upon visible light illumination, in the presence of [Ru(bipy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer and S2O82− as the electron acceptor. An 18% quantum efficiency was reported. Remarkable TOF values in the range of 1.000 s−1 per nanocluster were observed, about three orders of magnitude greater than those observed using micron-sized Co3O4 particles.
When CoaqII ions are used as catalysts for the photooxidation of water in the [Ru(bipy)3]2+/S2O82− system reported by Shafirovich in 1980,136 the catalytically active species are CoOx particles. However they have been less well characterized than the particles formed under electrochemical conditions.140 The evidence essentially comes from studies by Styring and Sakai in 2011 and 2012 using Dynamic Light Scattering and centrifugation experiments.147,148 The particles were found to have a wide size distribution but mostly larger than 200 nm in radius, so that centrifugation removes most of the cobalt. Smaller particles (50–100 nm) are likely to be also present in minor amounts even after centrifugation. Further studies should be carried out to better characterize the type of CoOx formed under such irradiation conditions.


Molecular Co complexes as WOCs. 
The increased interest for cobalt in the context of water oxidation catalysis has led to the investigation of a series of molecular homogeneous cobalt complexes, in general with careful attention to the possible contribution of heterogeneous catalysis, through the development of relevant methodologies.
Cobalt derivatives of polyoxometallates (Co–POM). 
Certainly the most famous controversy regarding the homogeneous/heterogeneous catalysis concerns the interesting cobalt polyoxometallate [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− comprising a {Co4} core stabilized by an oxidatively resistant polyoxotungstate ligand, studied by Hill (Fig. 9).149 This complex is a very active WOC using [Ru(bipy)3]3+ as a chemical oxidant or in a standard photochemical system.150 In the first study149 the authors were extremely careful at providing the best experimental evidence that catalysis was indeed homogeneous, namely that the molecular complex was stable and functional in solution and that the in situ formation of active CoOx particles from released CoII ions could unambiguously be excluded. This evidence was supported by not less than seven experimental probes. First no changes in the UV-Visible and 31P NMR spectra of the complex could be observed within a pH range of 3.5–9. Second, water oxidation reaction catalyzed by [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− could not be inhibited by bipyridine in contrast to that catalyzed by CoaqII and the dependence of the catalytic activity of the two systems on pH changes and aging differed markedly from each other. Third, analysis of the solution after reaction by 31P NMR and IR showed that the POM remained intact under the reaction conditions. Fourth, the POM recovered after a first catalytic run was found to display the same specific activity in a second assay. The last probe was the unmodified voltammetric behaviour of the complex after catalytic turnover. This work is a nice example of the type of study that should be systematically carried out when a given molecular Co complex is proposed as a new WOC. In this case clearly the inorganic polydentate ligand strongly stabilizes the cobalt core. As shown below the situation might be different in the case of Co complexes with purely organic ligands. The notion that POM-based Co complexes are resistant at least to the oxidative conditions of the photochemical system has been later confirmed with a second class of interesting WOCs in which the Co ions are chelated by polyoxomolybdates, studied by Sakai et al.148 In agreement with Hill’s experiments, analysis of reaction solutions by DLS measurement allowed us to rule out the formation of colloidal oxide particles. A recent study on [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− also confirmed the absence of colloidal oxides using photochemically generated [Ru(bipy)3]3+ as the oxidant but suggested that the active catalyst was a soluble molecular species deriving from [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− and not [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− itself.151
 Fig. 9  Structure of the cobalt polyoxotungstate [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10−. 
However, a report by Finke following Hill’s papers raised a serious doubt onto the above conclusions and suggested that the catalysis is in fact heterogeneous.152 It was clearly shown that upon application of an oxidizing potential in aqueous solution at pH 8 [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− decomposes into a film of CoOx deposited at the surface of the glassy carbon electrode. Remarkably, the film does not contain any tungsten atoms. This film has been carefully characterized by electrochemical, UV-Visible, SEM and EDX analysis and shown to display properties comparable to those of the material described by Nocera et al.137,140 Significantly, when the electrode is removed from the solution, rinsed with water and reanalyzed electrochemically in the absence of POM, the activity was maintained in both CV and controlled potential electrolysis experiments. It was thus proposed that this formation of CoOx results from leaching of CoII ions from [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− followed by their oxidative precipitation in the form of a CoOx material. This is supported by the fact that the amount of CoaqII ions in equilibrium with [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10− in solution can account for all the observed water oxidation catalytic activity.
At first sight, the discrepancy looks strong. However, the investigation carried out by Finke was made under the conditions of the electrochemical assay and not of the homogeneous assays using a chemical oxidant such as [Ru(bipy)3]3+ used by Hill. As previously stated in part 2, electrochemical assays are heterogeneous in nature and the electrode surface can serve as nucleating points for the formation of CoOx in spite of the strong chelating capacity of polydentate POMs. Thus, the conclusion given by Finke might not be applicable to all conditions since the same complexes seem to be stable enough to behave as homogeneous catalysts under photochemical oxidation for example, as shown by Hill and Sakai.148,150
{Co4O4} complexes. 
Following Hill’s observation, soluble molecular complexes containing a {Co4O4} core but lacking the inorganic oxidation-resistant POM ligand were recently studied.153,154 Under photochemical oxidation [Co4O4(Ac)4(py)4] for example was shown to behave as a good WOC.153 Whereas some decomposition with release of CoII ions (less than 5%) occurred during reaction, control experiments showed that this could not account for the observed catalytic activity and furthermore CoII- and {Co4O4}-dependent activities differed markedly in terms of kinetics and lag phases. Finally, a strong impact of subtle changes in the pyridine ligand, through the introduction of various substituents, on the activity was observed, with 4-methoxy-pyridine providing a complex with a remarkable activity (80% quantum efficiency, 140 TON).154 All these data were combined to conclude that these Co complexes behave as true catalysts and that the photochemical water oxidation reaction proceeds via homogeneous catalysis, with no significant contribution from CoOx particles.
Mononuclear Co complexes. 
The recent investigation of mononuclear molecular Co complexes was stimulated by the observation, notably with Ru and Ir complexes, that a polynuclear structure was not a condition for displaying a water oxidation catalytic activity.155 The complexes shown in Fig. 10 are indeed reported as good WOCs either under electrochemical156,157 or photochemical76,158 oxidation conditions. The pentapyridine cobalt complex [Co(Py5)(OH2)]2+ developed by Berlinguette was convincingly shown to be stable under electrochemical oxidation operating conditions and thus to behave as a true homogeneous WOC, with only minor contribution of CoOx if any.156,157 Indeed, (i) the complex was stable in solution (less than 2% release of CoII ions) as shown by mass spectrometry, elemental analysis and CV; (ii) no modification of the electrode could be detected by the eye at pH < 10, whereas deposition of a film was observed at pH > 10 (unfortunately, no direct electron microscopy analysis was provided); (iii) the electrochemical response of the complex was different from those of CoOx and CoII ions. In this case it was emphasized that the pentadentate nature of the ligand and the strength of the N–Co bond trans to the water binding site were critically important. The authors noted (however as unpublished results) that Co complexes bearing ligands with lower denticity displayed in contrast a clear propensity to form CoOx upon oxidation in aqueous solution.
 Fig. 10  Structures of molecular mononuclear Co complexes studied as water oxidation catalysts. 
A quaterpyridine cobalt complex (Fig. 10) was also shown to be the true WOC in a photochemical system.76 No colloidal particles could be observed using DLS measurements. Furthermore, mass spectrometry indicated that the complex was stable under irradiative operating conditions with less than 1% decomposition. Finally, no activity could be detected using CoaqII ions at a concentration corresponding to that 1% limit.
In contrast very recently Fukuzumi et al. found that [CoII(Me6tren)(OH2)]2+ and [CoIII(Cp*)(bipy)(OH2)]2+ (Fig. 10) behave as pre-catalysts under comparable photochemical conditions and transform into insoluble CoOx nanoparticles which are the true WOCs.158 In this study the authors were careful in using a combination of DLS experiments as well as TEM and XPS measurements to identify and characterize these particles. Furthermore, oxidation of the organic ligands during the reaction has been demonstrated by 1H NMR spectroscopy and CO2 evolution measurements and it has been established that this process preceded water oxidation catalysis. A remarkable correlation between the oxidative susceptibility of the ligand and the activity was noted: a fragile ligand facilitates formation of CoOx and thus leads to an increased activity. One of the most interesting contributions of this study is the finding that, even though CoOx particles are the catalysts, the organic ligands of the soluble Co-based pre-catalysts nevertheless play an important role in tuning both the size of the particles and their activity. Accordingly, thermogravimetry/differential thermal analysis experiments showed the presence of carbonaceous residues in the particles. These residues could possibly play a role in tuning the activity and in controlling the aggregation of particles, which is deleterious to activity as shown in the case of CoaqII ions. This observation is very important for the following reasons. First, it implies that an observed effect of ligand modifications on the activity is not a proof for homogeneous catalysis, as very often claimed.154 Second, it opens the door to a new class of WOCs, consisting of heterogeneous metal oxides derived from oxidation/heterogenization of coordination/organometallic complexes, thus different from purely inorganic metal oxides because of the incorporation of ligand-derived carbon material. Since the latter seems to affect the structure and the activity of the oxides the organic contribution of the pre-catalysts may be more important than previously anticipated. This situation parallels that observed with H2–CoCat in part 2 where phosphate anions from the electrolyte were incorporated within the solid state material resulting from the degradation of the molecular complex and tuned the activity of the resulting H2–CoCat coating.111
Another example of the contribution of an organic ligand to the structuration of CoOx particles was provided by Styring and co-workers.147 They observed that a weak complexing agent such as methylenediphosphonate allowed controlling the aggregation/precipitation of CoOx from an aqueous solution of CoII ions irradiated in the presence of [Ru(bipy)3]2+ and excess peroxodisulfate ions. Under these conditions a colloidal solution of small spherical particles (diameters 20–120 nm) is produced, together with larger particles that precipitate. The colloidal solution was shown to be catalytically active for water oxidation.
From these studies on Co-based WOC systems we conclude that no prediction can be made for a given complex regarding whether catalysis is homogeneous or heterogeneous. Obviously the strength of the interaction between the ligand and the cobalt ion is a key parameter since released CoIIaq ions are a source for CoOx. Some of the ligands discussed here indeed seem to provide enough stability and many complexes seem to be true homogeneous catalysts.

3.2 Iron and copper compounds
Two molecular iron WOCs recently appeared in the literature.133,134 Both of them contain a tetradentate amino ligand strongly chelating the iron center. The activity assay was based on the reaction with CeIV salts as chemical oxidizing agents and the studies clearly stated that no activity is displayed by simple iron salts or iron(III) oxide.134 No significant formation of nanoparticles could be detected through DLS measurements.133
The field also very recently extended to copper compounds with a report from Mayer:132 simple copper–bipyridine complexes were shown to act as soluble WOC in aqueous solution. Evidences for homogeneous catalysis include ‘rinse’ tests after extended electrolysis and kinetic analysis based on the dependence of the catalytic current with the concentration of the catalyst.
3.3 Iridium compounds
Another interesting example of molecular mononuclear or dinuclear metal complexes which have been carefully investigated with regard to whether they are true homogeneous catalysts or precursors of heterogeneous catalysts are Cp and Cp* iridium complexes developed by Crabtree et al. (Fig. 11).159,160 These complexes are highly active WOCs, both in chemical and electrochemical systems. Some complexes of that class, with additional bidentate ligands such as phenyl-pyridine or bipyridine, seemed to function homogeneously, even though it was not initially possible to fully exclude a contribution from precipitated iridium oxides.160 In contrast, the tri-aqua complex [Cp*Ir(OH2)3]2+ was shown to decompose into an amorphous blue layer of iridium oxide, which deposits on the electrode surface (deposition occurs on most electrode materials) during electrochemical oxidation and which behaves as an excellent and robust WOC, with low overpotential.161 During this investigation Crabtree and Brudvig realized that they discovered a new, simple, reliable and very mild method to prepare a stable electrocatalytically active electrode for water oxidation, through the anodic deposition of an amorphous Ir oxide material when starting from organometallic precursors such as [Cp*Ir(OH2)3]2+. The process of deposition has been recently studied in detail with this precursor and it was found that the rate of deposition, the stability of the film as well as some CV characteristics of the deposited film, reflecting differences in terms of redox processes and behaviour of the surface catalyst layers, were dependent on whether the precursor complex contained Cp or Cp*.162 It was also shown that the deposited material contains some carbon species arising from the oxidation of the Cp ligand. Furthermore, the CV characteristics were different from those of Ir oxides obtained from anodic deposition of non-organometallic precursors. All those observations are reminiscent of the finding by Fukuzumi et al. that CoOx solid materials derived from differently coordinated molecular Co complexes do not display the same activities and properties again pointing to the organic part of the precursor as playing an important role in the nature of the deposited film.158
 Fig. 11  Structures of organometallic iridium complexes used as catalysts or pre-catalysts for water oxidation. 
Crabtree and Brudvig proposed a novel method to probe the homogeneity of WOCs.163 It is based on an electrochemical quartz crystal nanobalance (EQCN) to conduct piezoelectric gravimetry as water oxidation is taking place. If metal oxides deposition occurs at the surface of the electrode, a mass change is observed. On the contrary a constant mass is an indication for homogeneous catalysis. In a couple of papers this method has been applied to a variety of Ir complexes, shown in Fig. 11. It indeed confirmed the deposition of a solid material in the case of the tri-aqua complex [Cp*Ir(OH2)3]2+. With this method sensitive to the deposition of nanograms of solid material, these authors could unambiguously exclude deposition of any material from [Cp*Ir(pyr–CMe2O)(OH2)]+ (pyr–CMe2O = 2-(2′-pyridyl)-2-propanolate, Fig. 11) and thus conclude that [Cp*Ir(pyr–CMe2O)(OH2)]+ is a true homogeneous WOC. This technique thus provides a straightforward way to make the distinction between heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis. However one should be aware that it would not be able to distinguish between molecular complex and soluble colloidal Ir oxide nanoparticles, which indeed might also form under certain conditions and provide strong catalytic activity.
When the oxidation reaction is not carried out electrochemically, but instead using a chemical oxidant, Crabtree et al. now propose to use time-resolved dynamic light scattering as a powerful method to investigate the formation and growth dynamics of solid particles in solution.164 This technique has the great advantage of being directly applicable on catalysts in operando. They specifically applied this analysis to a variety of complexes with various bidentate ligands [Cp*Ir(LL)(OH2)]n+ (LL = bipy, n = 2; phenyl-pyridine or Pyr–CMe2O, n = 2; Fig. 11) in the presence of sodium periodate as the oxidant and compared it to the unstable complex [Cp*Ir(OH2)3]2+. From this study they concluded that whereas [Cp*Ir(OH2)3]2+ formed amorphous oxide nanoparticles, as anticipated, with lag phases displaying great variability depending on reactant concentrations, pH, solvents, salts, etc.…, no formation of particles could be observed with the other complexes. This suggests a stabilizing function of the bidentate ligand. It is important to note that this last study was carried out using sodium periodate as the electron acceptor, which is a smooth oxidant that limits oxidative degradation but only functions for WOCs with low overpotentials.165 Stronger oxidants such as CeIV salts may bias the system and favour the formation of oxide particles.166 From these two studies one can firmly conclude that this class of Ir complexes is likely to belong to true homogeneous oxidation catalysts, at least in water at neutral pH both under electrochemical and chemical oxidation conditions. This is reminiscent of what we discussed above in the case of molecular Co complexes, namely that the extent of formation of active heterogeneous WOC may greatly depend on the strength of the complexation of the metal ion by the ligands.
3.4 Manganese compounds
Obviously, since it is the unique metal selected by Nature to carry out water oxidation and oxygen evolution in photosynthesis, manganese has been a hot topic for the last 30 years regarding the design of synthetic WOCs. On the one hand, manganese oxides have been very early discovered as good WOCs and later extensively studied in such an application.145,167 We note that phase pure MnO2 is not a water-oxidation catalyst while other Mn-oxides are. Interestingly, it was recently shown that addition of calcium ions, also present in the active site of Photosystem II, improves the activity of Mn oxides significantly.168,169
On the other hand there are still important controversies regarding the reality of water oxidation reactions by chemical oxidants catalyzed by homogeneous dinuclear manganese complexes.167 This field was initiated in 1999 when Brudvig and Crabtree reported a catalytic O2-evolution activity with the prototypic [(H2O)(terpy)Mn(μ-O)2Mn(terpy)(H2O)]3+ (terpy = terpyridine) complex (Fig. 12).170 Several following reports also showed O2-evolution catalysis by different dinuclear Mn complexes.171–173 The drawback of these studies resides in the fact that the oxidants used, tBuOOH or oxone HSO5−, contain oxygen atoms, some of which are used in the reaction so that the oxygen atoms of the O2 molecule formed in the reaction are not derived exclusively from water. Thus such reactions do not represent water oxidation catalysis in a true sense. For this reason, such oxidants should be avoided. Studies of WOCs should instead use Ce(IV) salts or [Ru(bipy)3]3+. In fact it seems that catalysis of water oxidation by such oxidants using homogeneous dinuclear Mn complexes has so far not been achieved.
 Fig. 12  Molecular Mn compounds used as catalysts or pre-catalysts for water oxidation. 
More recently, tetranuclear molecular Mn complexes have been investigated as more relevant models for the oxygen evolving site of PSII. The first steps in this direction were made by the preparation and characterization of complexes containing {Mn4O4} and {Mn3CaO4} cores.174–176 Some of the very few complexes characterized as catalysts or pre-catalysts for water oxidation are shown in Fig. 12.
The first tetranuclear complex reported to be catalytically active is the synthetic [Mn4O4(O2PPh2)6] cubane-like complex, bearing six diphenylphosphinate ligands (Fig. 12), shown to release an O2 molecule upon gas phase photoexcitation.177 This property was exploited to use this cluster as a photocatalyst in an electrochemical system in which the cluster was embedded within a Nafion membrane coated on a glassy carbon electrode. Visible light irradiation of this electrode equilibrated at a potential of 1.2 V vs. NHE in aqueous solution resulted in the sustained generation of a photocurrent and production of oxygen gas and protons with more than 1.000 catalytic cycles achieved per Mn4 center.174,178 Then a mesoporous dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode was used instead of glassy carbon as the support of the Nafion-embedded cluster. The resulting assembly was coupled to a Pt cathode to form a photoelectrochemical cell which drives water decomposition using only visible light and no external bias.179 However the structure of the cluster embedded in Nafion and deposited on glassy carbon electrode was reanalyzed by Spiccia during electrochemical oxidation and catalytic cycling by in situ XAS (XANES and EXAFS). The spectra of the Nafion embedded cluster were found to be very different from that of the cubane recorded in solution and similar to those of mononuclear MnII compounds.180 Accordingly, NMR experiments demonstrated dissociation of the ligands from the complex. In addition, high resolution transmission electron microscopy measurement of the same electrode equilibrated at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl evidenced the presence of nanoparticles (1–2 nm diameter). EXAFS data for this oxidized material are consistent with the formation of a disordered Mn(III/IV)-oxide phase with similar connectivity to the layers of the birnessite structure. Finally, the water oxidation activity was found to be comparable to that obtained with other MnII compounds in Nafion. This study thus clearly demonstrates that the synthetic [Mn4O4(O2PPh2)6] cubane-like complex dissociates while in the Nafion polymer matrix into mononuclear MnII species which are then electro-oxidized into a disordered Mn oxide phase. Photoreduction of this oxide phase releases O2 while regenerating the MnII species. Mononuclear MnII species and the oxide phase are the two faces (reduced and oxidized, respectively) of the true catalyst during the observed light-driven water oxidation reaction. This provides another example of a homogeneous complex behaving not as a catalyst but as a precursor of oxide particles, the true heterogeneous catalysts. It also highlights the value of applying multiple techniques in analysis of the fate of the molecular catalysts during cycling.
[Mn4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+, with a linear {Mn4O5} core (Fig. 12), which can be produced simply from oxidation of [(H2O)(terpy)Mn(μ-O)2Mn(terpy)(H2O)]3+, is the first Mn tetramer reported to catalyse water oxidation by electrochemical means at low pH in water.176 Involvement of MnO2 has been ruled out on the basis that the observed electrocatalytic response at glassy carbon electrodes was different from that observed, under the same conditions, at MnO2-modified electrodes obtained in situ from anodic deposition of MnHPO4. However we find it difficult to conclude that catalysis is homogeneous in that case since no characterization of the electrode after catalysis is provided and the activity of Mn oxides has been recently reported to strongly depend on the deposition process.169 One should note that Deronzier et al. previously showed that [Mn4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ was not active for electro-catalyzed water oxidation in acetonitrile.181 The tetramer is also active using Ce(IV) as the oxidant but under these conditions MnO2 precipitates, and catalysis is likely to be heterogeneous.155
As indicated above, dinuclear Mn complexes such as [(H2O)(terpy)Mn(μ-O)2Mn(terpy)(H2O)]3+ are not active for water oxidation when Ce(IV) is used as the oxidant in homogeneous solutions, probably because they immediately decompose into inactive species, notably through extensive oxidation of the ligands as shown by CO2 formation.160,166 Surprisingly when these complexes are adsorbed on a variety of clay compounds (kaolin, montmorillonite) or mica and the resulting aqueous suspensions submitted to a large excess of Ce(IV) ions then a significant amount of O2 is produced, probably because of some protective effect of the clay surface.167,182–185 What is the active species in this system is currently a matter of debate. In fact, there are significant changes in the structures and the electronic properties of the manganese compounds. Initially it was suggested that the active materials could be manganese tetramers, formed upon dimerization at the surface, or even clusters with higher nuclearity, tightly interacting with the clay surface. Accordingly, as shown from diffuse reflectance UV-Visible spectroscopy a catalytically active tetranuclear species [Mn4IVO5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ forms when [(H2O)(terpy)MnIII(μ-O)2MnIV(terpy)(H2O)]3+ is adsorbed on kaolin clay at acidic pH.176 With the tetramer adsorbed on the surface of clays, the catalytic intermediates, such as Mn(III) species, seem to be stabilized and catalysis is proposed to cycle exclusively on the tetramer without formation of Mn oxides.155 The fact that substitutions of hydrogen atoms of terpy ligands of [(H2O)(terpy)Mn(μ-O)2Mn(terpy)(H2O)]3+ adsorbed on mica by a variety of electron withdrawing and donating groups had a strong effect on the water oxidation activity using Ce(IV) as the oxidant was used as an extra indication that the molecular derivatives were true catalysts.185 As discussed earlier this is not a good probe since the presence of ligand-derived carbon materials may potentially tune the structure and the activity of Mn oxides. It has also been recently shown that the coating of Mn oxide with amine-containing polymers significantly enhances the electrocatalytic properties of the oxide for water oxidation, through the stabilization of surface MnIII ions.186 In fact, very recently, the hypothesis that adsorption on clays or mica provides stabilization of the molecular species was challenged by a study aiming at characterizing such surfaces by a variety of techniques: XPS, FTIR, XRD, SEM and TEM. The results clearly showed that after a few minutes reaction the surface was covered with nanosized manganese oxide which is proposed to be the active catalyst.166 The large WOC activity of these Mn-modified surfaces may be due to a combined effect of the clay on the crystallinity of the Mn oxide coating, on the one hand, and of the ligand, or ligand-derived carbon compounds, on the morphology of the coating, on the other hand.
In conclusion, even though more investigations are requested, it appears that in general molecular Mn complexes are very prone to decompose into Mn oxides under the very oxidizing conditions required for water oxidation.
4. Conclusion
The design of molecular multi-electron catalysts is an exploding field and has led to the discovery of a variety of new active systems in the recent years. The above analysis clearly validates this approach with most of the catalysts developed for hydrogen evolution retaining their molecular structure upon catalytic turnover. The situation is different for water oxidation catalysts, as shown in the case of Mn complexes for which catalysis is very often heterogeneous. However, in all cases one should keep in mind that transformation of a given molecular catalyst into solid-state compounds very much depend on the reaction conditions. In particular strongly acidic/alkaline or reducing/oxidizing conditions favor the decomposition of coordinated ligands, degradation of the organic molecules and eventually precipitation of metal-based particles. In the case of water oxidation catalysis, CO2 evolution is becoming a systematic assay for analyzing whether the ligand preserves its integrity or not. Similarly, the use of aqueous conditions is often detrimental to the integrity of molecular catalysts. As a consequence:
- it is important to investigate a large range of experimental conditions for each catalytic reaction under study. Catalysis can be homogeneous in one set of conditions and heterogeneous for another set, for the same molecular complex. Furthermore, even if the molecular compound is transformed into a solid-state or colloidal catalyst, one should consider that the ligands initially present in the precursor may influence the formation of the final catalyst and/or remain in the final solid compound, at least under a degraded form. This could allow for a fine tuning of the structure and the activity of the solid-state catalyst.
- the stability of molecular compounds can be enhanced through interactions with surfaces, either through covalent attachment or simple adsorption. Such a stabilizing effect is sometimes only partial, with the active species retaining only some of the structural features of the precursor but can lead to a spectacular enhancement of the catalytic activity.
- the characterization of the catalytic process, homogeneous or heterogeneous, requires a complete set of experimental assays to be carried out. These firstly include kinetic analysis and standard chemical tests such as mercury poisoning for reductive processes and the monitoring of CO2 evolution for water oxidation catalysis. Then, it is crucial to carefully analyse the active material, before, during and after catalysis, by a variety of spectroscopic methods, various microscopies (TEM, SEM,…) and Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS). However, each of these tests has its intrinsic limitations and definitive conclusions can be drawn only when altogether they generate positive results.
Full characterization of the catalytically active species is the only way to further for a rational optimization of the systems under investigation.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge S. Bernhard and E. D. Cline for providing data for the construction of Fig. 1 as well as M. Chavarot-Kerlidou for careful reading of the manuscript.
References

Energy for a Sustainable World From the Oil Age to a Sun-Powered Future, ed. N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2010 Search PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3193–3222 RSC .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 21–36 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Quadrelli, G. Centi, J.-L. Duplan and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1194–1215 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS .
In this review, highly energetic processes such as high temperature solar thermal water splitting or UV-excited semi-conductor-based photocatalysis will not be considered.
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Morris, G. J. Meyer and E. Fujita, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1983–1994 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Windle and R. N. Perutz, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2562–2570 Search PubMed .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
M. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef .
J. M. Saveant, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2348–2378 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1518–1535 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902–5918 RSC .
J. A. Widegren and R. G. Finke, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 198, 317–341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin and R. G. Finke, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 4891–4910 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Hagen, J. A. Widegren, P. M. Maitlis and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4423–4432 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Weddle, J. D. Aiken and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 5653–5666 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bayram, J. C. Linehan, J. L. Fulton, J. A. S. Roberts, N. K. Szymczak, T. D. Smurthwaite, S. Ozkar, M. Balasubramanian and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18889–18902 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Widegren, M. A. Bennett and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10301–10310 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bayram, J. C. Linehan, J. L. Fulton, J. A. S. Roberts, N. K. Szymczak, T. D. Smurthwaite, S. Ozkar, M. Balasubramanian and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18889–18902 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Finney and R. G. Finke, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2006, 359, 2879–2887 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schwartz, Acc. Chem. Res., 1985, 18, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gumiński, J. Mater. Sci., 1989, 24, 3285–3288 Search PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides, M. Hackett, R. L. Brainard, J. P. P. M. Lavalleye, A. F. Sowinski, A. N. Izumi, S. S. Moore, D. W. Brown and E. M. Staudt, Organometallics, 1985, 4, 1819–1830 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Jaska and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9776–9785 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Hornstein, J. D. Aiken and R. G. Finke, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 1625–1638 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rau, D. Walther and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2007, 915–919 RSC .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef .
S. Losse, J. G. Vos and S. Rau, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2492–2504 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Andreiadis, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Photochem. Photobiol., 2011, 87, 946–964 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elvington, J. Brown, S. M. Arachchige and K. J. Brewer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10644–10645 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Arachchige, R. Shaw, T. A. White, V. Shenoy, H. M. Tsui and K. J. Brewer, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 514–518 Search PubMed .
T. A. White, B. N. Whitaker and K. J. Brewer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15332–15334 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanaka, S. Masaoka, K. Yamauchi, M. Annaka and K. Sakai, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 11218–11226 RSC .
E. D. Cline, S. E. Adamson and S. Bernhard, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10378–10388 CrossRef CAS .
E. Amouyal and P. Koffi, J. Photochem., 1985, 29, 227–242 CrossRef CAS .
R. Okazaki, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6127–6133 RSC .
J. Xie, C. Li, Q. Zhou, W. Wang, Y. Hou, B. Zhang and X. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6376–6384 Search PubMed .
S. Rau, B. Schafer, D. Gleich, E. Anders, M. Rudolph, M. Friedrich, H. Gorls, W. Henry and J. G. Vos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6215–6218 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lei, M. Hedlund, R. Lomoth, H. Rensmo, O. Johansson and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 26–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. van Laren and C. J. Elsevier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 3715–3717 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moradpour, E. Amouyal, P. Keller and H. Kagan, New J. Chem., 1978, 2, 547–549 Search PubMed .
J. M. Lehn and J. P. Sauvage, New J. Chem., 1977, 1, 449–451 Search PubMed .
K. Kalyanasundaram, J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1978, 61, 2720–2730 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakai and H. Ozawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2753–2766 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakai and K. Matsumoto, J. Mol. Catal., 1990, 62, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ozawa, M. A. Haga and K. Sakai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4926–4927 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamauchi, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8404–8406 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamauchi, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 12447–12449 RSC .
P. W. Du, K. Knowles and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12576–12577 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, J. Schneider, F. Li, W. Zhao, U. Patel, F. N. Castellano and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5056–5058 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. b. Goeb, Z. Ji, N. A. Pogulaichenko and F. N. Castellano, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 705–707 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Du and R. Eisenberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6012–6021 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Na, M. Gorlov and L. C. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6458–6467 RSC .
X. Q. Li, M. Wang, S. P. Zhang, J. X. Pan, Y. Na, J. H. Liu, B. Åkermark and L. C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 8198–8202 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Song, L. X. Wang, M. Y. Tang, C. G. Li, H. B. Song and Q. M. Hu, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 3834–3841 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, C. Li, X. Li, J. Dong and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8806–8809 RSC .
X. Q. Li, M. Wang, L. Chen, X. N. Wang, J. F. Dong and L. C. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 913–919 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Hong, J. Zheng, Z. Huang, J. Zhou and R. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20680–20683 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. McCormick, Z. J. Han, D. J. Weinberg, W. W. Brennessel, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 10660–10666 CrossRef .
T. M. McCormick, B. D. Calitree, A. Orchard, N. D. Kraut, F. V. Bright, M. R. Detty and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15480–15483 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lazarides, T. McCormick, P. W. Du, G. G. Luo, B. Lindley and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9192–9194 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Dong, M. Wang, P. Zhang, S. Q. Yang, J. Y. Liu, X. Q. Li and L. C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15089–15096 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, J. Dong, X. Li, F. Wang, L. Wu and L. Sun, J. Phys.Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15868–15874 CrossRef CAS .
R. Eisenberg, M. P. McLaughlin, T. M. McCormick and P. L. Holland, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7989–7991 RSC .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564–567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, A. Pereira and M. Fontecave, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5567–5569 RSC .
C. Li, M. Wang, J. X. Pan, P. Zhang, R. Zhang and L. C. Sun, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2814–2819 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Du, J. Schneider, G. G. Luo, W. W. Brennessel and R. Eisenberg, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4952–4962 CrossRef CAS .
B. Probst, M. Guttentag, A. Rodenberg, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3404–3412 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guttentag, A. Rodenberg, R. Kopelent, B. Probst, C. Buchwalder, M. Brandstatter, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 59–64 Search PubMed .
P. Zhang, P.-A. Jacques, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, M. Wang, L. Sun, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 2115–2120 Search PubMed .
W. R. McNamara, Z. Han, P. J. Alperin, W. W. Brennessel, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15368–15371 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. McNamara, Z. Han, C.-J. Yin, W. W. Brennessel, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15594–15599 Search PubMed .
C.-F. Leung, S.-M. Ng, C.-C. Ko, W.-L. Man, J. Wu, L. Chen and T.-C. Lau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7903–7907 RSC .
J. I. Goldsmith, W. R. Hudson, M. S. Lowry, T. H. Anderson and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7502–7510 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, W. R. McNamara, M.-S. Eum, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1667–1670 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lomoth and S. Ott, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9952–9959 RSC .
F. Gartner, B. Sundararaju, A. E. Surkus, A. Boddien, B. Loges, H. Junge, P. H. Dixneuf and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9962–9965 CrossRef .
B. Probst, A. Rodenberg, M. Guttentag, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6453–6460 CrossRef CAS .
P. Paklepa, J. Woroniecki and P. K. Wrona, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 498, 181–191 Search PubMed .
B. Probst, C. Kolano, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1836–1843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Miyahigashi, H. Kotani, K. Ohkubo and S. Fukuzumi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6111–6118 RSC .
H. Kotani, R. Hanazaki, K. Ohkubo, Y. Yamada and S. Fukuzumi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2777–2785 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Capon, F. Gloaguen, F. Y. Petillon, P. Schollhammer and J. Talarmin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 1476–1494 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tard and C. J. Pickett, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2245–2274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Canaguier, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Dalton Trans., 2008, 315–325 RSC .
M. Razavet, V. Artero, C. Cavazza, Y. Oudart, C. Lebrun, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and M. Fontecave, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2805–2807 RSC .
S. Canaguier, L. Vaccaro, V. Artero, R. Ostermann, J. Pécaut, M. J. Field and M. Fontecave, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9350–9365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Canaguier, M. Field, Y. Oudart, J. Pécaut, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5876–5878 RSC .
S. Canaguier, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 1094–1099 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fourmond, S. Canaguier, B. Golly, M. J. Field, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2417–2427 RSC .
V. Fourmond, S. Canaguier, B. Golly, M. J. Field, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2417–2427 RSC .
B. E. Barton, C. M. Whaley, T. B. Rauchfuss and D. L. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6942–6943 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 62–72 RSC .
O. R. Luca, S. J. Konezny, J. D. Blakemore, D. M. Colosi, S. Saha, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista and R. H. Crabtree, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1149–1152 RSC .
O. R. Luca, J. D. Blakemore, S. J. Konezny, J. M. Praetorius, T. J. Schmeier, G. B. Hunsinger, V. S. Batista, G. W. Brudvig, N. Hazari and R. H. Crabtree, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 8704–8709 Search PubMed .
M. J. Rose, H. B. Gray and J. R. Winkler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8310–8313 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bhugun, D. Lexa and J. M. Saveant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 3982–3983 CrossRef .
C. Costentin, S. Drouet, M. Robert and J.-M. Savéant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11235–11242 CrossRef CAS .
C. Baffert, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 1817–1824 CrossRef .
M. Razavet, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4786–4795 CrossRef CAS .
P.-A. Jacques, V. Artero, J. Pécaut and M. Fontecave, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20627–20632 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and J. C. Peters, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8988–8998 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Hu, B. M. Cossairt, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and J. C. Peters, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4723–4725 RSC .
O. Pantani, S. Naskar, R. Guillot, P. Millet, E. Anxolabéhère-Mallart and A. Aukauloo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9948–9950 CrossRef CAS .

          P.-A. Jacques, J. Fize, M. Fontecaveand V. Artero, unpublished results.
E. Anxolabéhère-Mallart, C. Costentin, M. Fournier, S. Nowak, M. Robert and J. M. Savéant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6104–6107 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Berben and J. C. Peters, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 398–400 RSC .
S. Cobo, J. Heidkamp, P.-A. Jacques, J. Fize, V. Fourmond, L. Guetaz, B. Jousselme, V. Ivanova, H. Dau, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 Search PubMed .
C. Q. Cui, S. P. Jiang and A. C. C. Tseung, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 3418–3423 Search PubMed .
A. B. Soto, E. M. Arce, M. PalomarPardave and I. Gonzalez, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 2647–2655 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Andreiadis, P.-A. Jacques, P. D. Tran, A. Leyris, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, B. Jousselme, M. Matheron, J. Pécaut, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Chem, 2012 DOI:10.1038/NCHEM.1481 .
E. B. Hulley, P. T. Wolczanski and E. B. Lobkovsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18058–18061 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Metaye, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, A. Le Goff, J. Heidkamp, B. Jousselme, N. Guillet, S. Palacin, H. Dau, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1371–1374 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS .

          M. R. Tarasevich and B. N. Efremov, Electrodes of Conductive Metal Oxides, ed. S. Trasatti, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1980, ch. 5 and references therein Search PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS .
Nickel oxide is classically the basis for active anodes used for alkaline electrolysis with similar overpotentials.
R. Brimblecombe, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9374–9384 RSC .
X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2842–2852 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 727–747 RSC .
L. Li, L. L. Duan, Y. H. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307–7309 RSC .
S. Romain, L. Vigara and A. Llobet, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1944–1953 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Duan, L. P. Tong, Y. H. Xu and L. C. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3296–3313 RSC .
S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 182–183 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Barnett, K. I. Goldberg and J. M. Mayer, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 498–502 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Fillol, Z. Codola, I. Garcia-Bosch, L. Gomez, J. J. Pla and M. Costas, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 807–813 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Ellis, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10990–10991 CrossRef CAS .
V. Y. Shafirovich and V. V. Strelets, New J. Chem., 1978, 2, 199–201 Search PubMed .
V. Y. Shafirovich, N. K. Khannanov and V. V. Strelets, New J. Chem., 1980, 4, 81–84 Search PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Surendranath, M. Dinca and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2615–2620 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724–761 Search PubMed .
M. W. Kanan, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 109–114 RSC .
Y. Surendranath, M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16501–16509 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Lutterman, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3838–3839 CrossRef CAS .
A similar repair mechanism of cobalt oxide films in the presence of phosphate ions has been noticed in 1950.   S. E. S El. Wakkad and A. Hickling, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1950, 46, 820 Search PubMed .
J. B. Gerken, J. G. McAlpin, J. Y. C. Chen, M. L. Rigsby, W. H. Casey, R. D. Britt and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14431–14442 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, I. J. Pickering, J. M. Thomas and P. A. Christensen, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2795–2806 RSC .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1841–1844 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shevchenko, M. F. Anderlund, A. Thapper and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1284–1287 RSC .
S. Tanaka, M. Annaka and K. Sakai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1653–1655 RSC .
Q. S. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, Z. Luo, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, Q. Yin, D. Wu, Y. Hou, Y. Ding, J. Song, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2068–2071 CrossRef CAS .
M. Natali, S. Berardi, A. Sartorel, M. Bonchio, S. Campagna and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8808–8810 RSC .
J. J. Stracke and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14872–14875 CAS .
N. S. McCool, D. M. Robinson, J. E. Sheats and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11446–11449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berardi, G. La Ganga, M. Natali, I. Bazzan, F. Puntoriero, A. Sartorel, F. Scandola, S. Campagna and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11104–11107 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. H. Hetterscheid and J. N. H. Reek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9740–9747 Search PubMed .
D. J. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy, J. Borau-Garcia and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4249–4251 RSC .
D. J. Wasylenko, R. D. Palmer, E. Schott and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2107–2109 RSC .
D. Hong, J. Jung, J. Park, Y. Yamada, T. Suenobu, Y.-M. Lee, W. Nam and S. Fukuzumi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7606–7616 RSC .
J. F. Hull, D. Balcells, J. D. Blakemore, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8730–8731 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, D. Balcells, J. F. Hull, G. W. Olack, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16017–16029 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, G. W. Olack, C. D. Incarvito, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 94–98 RSC .
J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, M. N. Kushner-Lenhoff, A. M. Winter, F. D’Souza, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 7749–7763 Search PubMed .
N. D. Schley, J. D. Blakemore, N. K. Subbaiyan, C. D. Incarvito, F. D’Souza, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10473–10481 CrossRef CAS .
U. Hintermair, S. M. Hashmi, M. Elimelech and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9785–9795 Search PubMed .
A. R. Parent, T. P. Brewster, W. De Wolf, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6147–6152 CrossRef CAS .
H. Junge, N. Marquet, A. Kammer, S. Denurra, M. Bauer, S. Wohlrab, F. Gärtner, M.-M. Pohl, A. Spannenberg, S. Gladiali and M. Beller, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 12749–12758 Search PubMed .
M. Wiechen, H.-M. Berends and P. Kurz, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 21–31 RSC .
M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233–2237 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zaharieva, M. M. Najafpour, M. Wiechen, M. Haumann, P. Kurz and H. Dau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2400–2408 RSC .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524–1527 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Poulsen, A. Rompel and C. J. McKenzie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6916–6920 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Seidler-Egdal, A. Nielsen, A. D. Bond, M. J. Bjerrum and C. J. McKenzie, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3849–3858 RSC .
S. Nayak, H. P. Nayek, S. Dehnen, A. K. Powell and J. Reedijk, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 2699–2702 RSC .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335–7338 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kanady, E. Y. Tsui, M. W. Day and T. Agapie, Science, 2011, 333, 733–736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Gao, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 4043–4050 Search PubMed .
W. Ruettinger, M. Yagi, K. Wolf, S. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10353–10357 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, D. R. J. Kolling, A. M. Bond, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7269–7279 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, A. Koo, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2892–2894 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecombe, L.-Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 461–466 CAS .
C. Baffert, S. Romain, A. Richardot, J. C. Lepretre, B. Lefebvre, A. Deronzier and M. N. Collomb, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13694–13704 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi and K. Narita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8084–8085 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kurz, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6103–6108 RSC .
M. Yagi, M. Toda, S. Yamada and H. Yamazaki, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8594–8596 RSC .
H. Yamazaki, S. Igarashi, T. Nagata and M. Yagi, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 1530–1539 CrossRef .
T. Takashima, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18153–18156 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Vincent Artero
	Vincent Artero is a graduate of the Ecole Normale Supérieure, rue d’Ulm. He obtained his PhD in 2000 from the University Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 6). His doctoral work under the supervision of Prof. A. Proust dealt with organometallic derivatives of polyoxometalates. After a postdoctoral stay in Aachen with Prof. U. Kölle, he joined in 2001 the Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals in Grenoble where he obtained a position in the Life Science Division of the CEA. His current research interests are in the structural and functional modelisation of hydrogenases and the design of artificial systems for the photo- and electro-production of hydrogen.

Marc Fontecave
	Marc Fontecave is a member of the French Academy of Science and Professor at the Collège de France in Paris since 2008, where he holds the chair of “Chemistry of Biological Processes”. He spent 20 years as Professor in the University Joseph Fourier in Grenoble, after a PhD at the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris and postdoctoral research at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm. His research group studies the structural and functional properties of complex biological redox systems, mostly implying metal centers, and related bioinspired chemical complexes.

 	Fig. 1  Mercury (left) and CS2 (right) poisoning tests on light-driven H2 evolution catalyzed by [Rh(dtbbpy)3](PF6)3 (dtbbpy = 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′bipyridine) in the presence of a cyclometalated Ir-photosensitizer and triethylamine as a sacrificial electron donor in THF–H2O.36 Left: Hg(0) poisoning test showing untreated (black trace); pretreated with Hg for 1 h then filtered (red trace), or treated with Hg with efficient stirring during illumination (blue trace); right: end-point results (24 h) for quantitative poisoning CS2 poisoning test concerning the same system. Adapted from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of the supramolecular H2-evolving photocatalytic Ru–Pd systems designed by Rau (left)40 and Hammarström (right).41	 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of some molecular Pt complexes used as catalysts or pre-catalysts for H2 evolution in light-driven or thermal assays.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photochemical H2 production mediated by (a) the bridged amidinate Pt dimer [{Pt(NH3)2}2(μ-MeC(O)NH)] (2 μmol) and (b) K2PtCl4 (4 μmol) from pH 5.0 aqueous acetate buffer solution (10 mL) containing EDTA (30 mM), [Ru(bipy)3]2+ (0.04 mM) and methylviologen (2 mM). 1 mL H2 corresponds to ∼40 μmol. Note the very different H2 evolution rates obtained for the two systems (reprinted from ref. 46).	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of molecular H2-evolving cobalt catalysts discussed in the review. dmg = dimethylglyoxime; dpg = diphenylglyoxime; (DO)(DOH) = diimine–dioxime.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of selected molecular H2-evolving nickel and iron catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of electrodes modified by electrolysis at (a) −0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 1 h (ITO, 0.1 C cm−2geometric) and (b) −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 3 h (FTO, 6.5 C cm−2geometric) vs. RHE in aqueous phosphate buffer (KPi, 0.5 M, pH 7) containing Co(DO)(DOH)pnCl2 (0.5 mM).111	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic structure of the material obtained after covalent grafting of a diimine–dioxime cobalt catalyst on multi-wall carbon nanotubes. A single wall nanotube is shown for clarity.115	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of the cobalt polyoxotungstate [Co4(H2O)2{α-PW9O34}2]10−.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structures of molecular mononuclear Co complexes studied as water oxidation catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structures of organometallic iridium complexes used as catalysts or pre-catalysts for water oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular Mn compounds used as catalysts or pre-catalysts for water oxidation.	 
Footnote
† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
