Polymer –metal- oxide hybrid solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA11998J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11998J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10574-10591Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPolymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells

        
          
            Shao-Sian 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Chun-Wei 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617 Taiwan. E-mail: chunwei@ntu.edu.tw
Received 
      21st May 2013
    , Accepted 9th July 2013First published on 9th July 2013AbstractPolymer solar cells have great potential for offering a cost-effective approach for converting solar energy into electricity compared to traditional inorganic counterparts. Besides the most intensively studied materials for polymer solar cells consisting of conducting polymer and fullerene derivative hybrids, polymer–inorganic nanocrystal (NC) hybrid solar cell devices represent promising alternatives by taking advantage of the relatively high electron mobility, good physical and chemical stability and various morphologies of inorganic NCs. This paper presents a review of the current status and development of polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells based on metal oxide NCs by focusing the discussion on TiO2 and ZnO. These metal oxide NC materials are promising acceptor candidates because they are environmentally friendly and cheap to be synthesized by using wet chemical methods with a wide range of morphologies, enabling full compatibility with the solution-processable fabrication of polymer solar cells. Substantial progress has been achieved recently in the power conversion efficiencies of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells through the control of nanoscale polymer–inorganic hybrid morphologies and the improved interfaces between polymers and inorganic nanocrystals. We also reviewed the recently developed state-of-the-art analytical techniques introduced to reveal the nanoscale morphological organization of polymers and NCs in polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells, which provides the understanding of the interplay between controlling nanoscale morphologies of polymer–metal-oxide NC hybrids and photocarrier dynamics and the corresponding device performance. Finally, the main challenges in the development of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells consisting of both bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) and nanostructured hybrid device architectures are identified, and strategies for improving the device performances are also discussed.Shao-Sian LiDr. Shao-Sian Li obtained his B.S. degree in materials science at National Chiao-Tung University, Taiwan in 2004, and received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from National Taiwan University, Taiwan in 2006 and 2010. He is currently carrying out the post-doctoral research in Prof. Chun-Wei Chen's group of Nano-Materials and Devices Lab in National Taiwan University. He has engaged in research on the correlation between morphology, structure and charge carrier dynamic properties in polymer-based solar cells via development of various electrical and optical transient techniques. His current research interests also include the study of electrical and optical properties of novel 2-dimensional materials.Chun-Wei ChenProf. Chun-Wei Chen received his B.S. degree in electrical engineering, National Taiwan University (NTU), Taiwan (1993) and M. Phil degree from Cavendish laboratory, Department of Physics (1995), and Ph.D. degree from Engineering department (1998), both from Cambridge University, U.K. He joined the faculty of Department of Materials Science and Engineering, NTU in 2002, where he is currently a Professor. His major research interests include the development of next-generation energy materials based on nanomaterials and devices, such as polymer solar cells and photochemical cells. He also has extensive research activities on graphene related research topics. He is a recipient of Outstanding Researcher Award from National Science Council, Taiwan (2011) and of Y. Z. Hsu Scientific Paper Award (2013).
Introduction
Organic photovoltaics (OPVs), which are based on small molecules or conjugated polymers, have attracted substantial research interest for offering a cost-effective approach for converting solar energy into electricity compared to conventional inorganic counterparts such as Si or GaAs,1–6 benefiting from the possibility of solution processing, patterning, and roll-to-roll manufacturing.2,7 Because of the high optical absorption coefficients of organic semiconductors, only films that are a few hundred nanometers thick are usually required in OPVs, which provide promising potential to be applied in various customer products because they are considerably more versatile with the features of being thin, flexible, lightweight, and economical, compared to traditional solar panels.8,9 Substantial progress has been made in improving the photo-to-electron conversion efficiency of OPVs, both in academic and industrial studies in the last decade.2,10–18 A basic requirement of a photovoltaic material is that it must generate free charge carriers produced by photoexcitation. Subsequently, these carriers are transported through the device to the electrodes without recombining with oppositely charged carriers or traps, and are collected by two opposite electrodes. Because of the low dielectric constants of organic materials, the dominant photogenerated species in most conjugated polymers are neutrally bound electron–hole pairs (excitons). These neutral excitons can be dissociated from the Coulomb attraction by offering an energetically favorable pathway for electrons from the polymer (donor) to transfer onto an electron-accepting material (acceptor). Because the diffusion length of excitons in a semiconducting polymer is usually shorter than 20 nm,19 a polymer solar cell with a high photocurrent quantum efficiency typically requires exciton generation that is close to the donor–acceptor interface. Accordingly, the electron acceptor must be intermixed with the polymer at a nanometer-length scale to achieve efficient charge separation. The most commonly used device structure is the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell, which consists of an intimate donor–acceptor interpenetration morphology in the photoactive layer for creating a large number of interfaces, resulting in a high quantum yield of exciton dissociation, and these phase-separated domains should be optimized to ensure efficient dissociation of photogenerated excitons and continuous pathways for transporting charge carriers to electrodes.20 The most intensively studied materials for BHJ polymer solar cells are poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and the fullerene derivative phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blends with power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of 4–5%.3,21 Recent advances have involved achieving high photovoltaic efficiencies over 10% to incorporate new small band-gap semiconducting polymers,16,22,23 which are close to the requirement for entering the business market.24,25
An alternative type of acceptor in polymer solar cells is based on inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs), taking advantage of their relatively high electron mobility and good physical and chemical stability.24,26–30 In addition, the morphology of inorganic NCs can be varied from those of nanoparticles (NPs),31–33 nanorods (NRs)34,35 and tetrapods,36,37 depending on the various synthesis techniques, which provide different BHJ morphologies in polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells, compared to polymer–fullerene devices. To date, various inorganic NCs such as CdS, CdSe, CdTe, ZnO, SnO2, TiO2, Si, PbS, and PbSe have been used as electron acceptors.35,36,38–44 Although thus far the highest power conversion efficiencies in polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells have been achieved with II–VI NCs,36 this paper focuses on the use of polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells based on metal oxide NCs such as TiO2 and ZnO. These metal oxide NC materials are promising acceptor candidates because they are environmentally friendly and low-cost. They can be synthesized using wet chemical methods with a wide range of morphologies, enabling full compatibility with the solution-processable fabrication of polymer solar cells.
There are two common ways for preparing polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. One is to blend dispersed metal oxide NCs with the polymer to form bulk BHJs,45,46 similar to those in the most popular polymer–fullerene BHJ solar cells; the other method is to infiltrate the polymer into rigidly connected metal oxide nanostructures directly grown on substrates. For polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells based on a BHJ structure, blending dispersed NCs (a few nanometers in diameter) within polymers results in a large number of donor–acceptor interface areas for charge separation.49 The precarious control of the BHJ morphology of two intermixed components for forming distinct electron- and hole-transport paths (the so-called bi-continuous phase) is the main challenge in improving the device performance. By contrast, well-connected transport paths can be formed in the semiconductor layer of a hybrid solar cell based on metal oxide nanostructures, the main challenge of this type of solar cell is the infiltration of the polymer into the free space of metal oxide nanostructures.50 Here, we define the polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells with these two different kinds of morphologies as the polymer–metal-oxide BHJ hybrid solar cells and nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells as shown in Fig. 1(a).47,48 The performances of both types of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells strongly depend on the optimized NC morphologies mixed with the polymer (Fig. 1(b)). In addition, because of the strong incompatibility between inorganic NCs and polymers, it becomes more challenging in obtaining an optimized morphology for achieving high power conversion efficiency in polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells, compared to conventional polymer–fullerene BHJ solar cells. Because photocurrent generation is a multistep process in OPVs, which involves charge separation, charge carrier recombination and transport, understanding the interplay between controlling the nanoscale morphologies of polymer–metal-oxide NC hybrids and photocarrier dynamics is crucial for improving the corresponding device performances (Fig. 1(b)). This paper presents a review of the current status and development of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells based on both BHJ and nanostructured hybrids by focusing the discussion on TiO2 and ZnO nanocrystals. The main challenges are identified, and strategies for improving the device performances are also discussed.
 Fig. 1  (a) Different configurations of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. The left panel shows the BHJ device architecture and the right panel shows the nanostructured hybrid device architecture. (b) Schematic representation of the correlation between morphology, carrier dynamics and power conversion efficiency of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. 
Polymer–metal-oxide BHJ hybrid solar cells
In typical polymer-based BHJ solar cells, it is concluded that the device performance strongly depends on the optimized phase-separated donor–acceptor morphology of the BHJ, which ensures efficient dissociation of photogenerated excitons and continuous pathways for transporting charge carriers to electrodes. Substantial progress in the control of nanoscale BHJ morphologies in polymer–fullerene systems for improving the power conversion efficiencies has been made and reported, such as for thermal,3 solvent,51 and electrical annealing,52 or the inclusion of additives.53 These processes have been proven to be beneficial for improving the photovoltaic performance by forming a nanomorphology containing vertically phase-segregated donor–acceptor regions and continuous transport channels for both types of charge carriers toward top and bottom electrodes, and also for providing a sufficient interface area for efficient charge separation.
In polymer–NC hybrid photovoltaic solar cells, the issue of obtaining an optimal morphology becomes challenging because of the strong incompatibility between the polymer and inorganic NCs. Huynh et al. reported a breakthrough in 2002 by demonstrating efficient hybrid solar cells based on P3HT and CdSe NRs with a power conversion efficiency of up to 1.7% under global AM 1.5 simulated illumination.1 Control of the blend morphology through processing and solvent choice or the ligand exchange at the NC surface is important in influencing phase intermixing, and hence the device function. In addition, replacing the NPs or NRs with 3D NC structures further improves the electron percolations and power conversion efficiencies up to 3.2% for the blends of CdSe tetrapods and a low band-gap polymer of PCPDTBT.36 The CdSe NCs act as good electron acceptors when combined with conjugated polymers, and also contribute to light harvesting as absorbers. Numerous studies have been published on hybrid solar cells based on conjugated polymers and CdSe NCs.1,24,31,34,36,37,54–56 For the polymer–metal-oxide NC BHJ solar cells, despite the advantage of avoiding the use of toxic component precursors such as Cd, metal oxide NCs such as TiO2 and ZnO usually have large band gaps (>3 eV) that prevent absorption in a useful spectral range for harvesting solar emission. Thus, metal oxide NCs act only as acceptors for charge separation and transport in polymer–metal-oxide BHJ solar cells and photocurrents generated in this type of photovoltaic system are typically lower than their polymer–CdSe hybrid BHJ counterpart. Therefore, the optimal polymer–NC ratios in polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells are usually lower compared to those in polymer–CdSe hybrid BHJ systems. For example, an optimally performing P3HT–TiO2 BHJ solar cell with a power conversion of 2.2%, as reported by Chen's group, and a P3HT–ZnO BHJ solar cell with a power conversion of 2.0%, as reported by Jassen's group, both show a substantially lower metal oxide NC volume fraction of approximately 20% with respect to that of approximately 60 vol% for CdSe NCs.24,35,44 Therefore, the optimal organic–inorganic BHJ morphologies in polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells are very different from those of the well-established polymer–CdSe hybrid BHJ counterparts.
Many key factors govern the morphologies and photocarrier dynamics of polymer–metal-oxide NC BHJ solar cells. First, dispersing inorganic nanocrystals within organic conjugated polymers to avoid aggregation is a challenge in organic–inorganic hybrids. Another critical issue is that the charge transport through the nanocrystalline phase is highly sensitive to the morphology and the connectivity of that phase, which strongly depend on the size, anisotropy, and concentration of NCs. Interfacial engineering between the polymer and metal oxide NCs is another critical issue regarding device performance. Because of the recently developed state-of-the-art analytical techniques introduced to reveal the nanoscale morphological organization of polymers and NCs in polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells, the first part of this paper will also review this insight gained through combined experimental and model-based analyses to enhance the understanding of the interplay between controlling nanoscale morphologies of polymer–metal-oxide NC hybrids and photocarrier dynamics and the corresponding device performance.
Nanocrystal dispersion on device performance
In typical BHJ solar cells, obtaining an optimized bicontinuous morphology consisting of large donor–acceptor interfaces for charge separation and connected pathways for carrier transport is critical. Typically, the surface of as-synthesized metal oxide NCs is capped with surfactants such as O.A. or TOPO because these surface ligands might assist in the dispersion of hydrophilic NCs in common organic solvents used to dissolve conjugated polymers.57 However, these surface ligands usually contain insulating long alkyl chains, which act as a barrier for charge transport and charge transfer.58 Removal of insulating ligands on NC surfaces is usually required to achieve high device performance.59 However, once the capped ligands on an NC surface are removed, the NCs tend to aggregate, and cannot be dispersed uniformly within a conducting polymer, which largely suppresses the photovoltaic performance by bad film-forming properties. Control of the blend morphology through processing, annealing, and solvent choice is important in affecting the phase intermixing, and hence the device performance.
Bouclé et al. employed thermal annealing at 120 °C under an inert atmosphere to improve the morphology of P3HT–TiO2 NR BHJ hybrid solar cells.58 Annealing typically improves the polymer crystallinity, resulting in higher charge mobilities in a polymer–fullerene system, whereas the thermal treatment seems to mainly affect the charge separation through an improved P3HT–TiO2 nanocrystal interaction at the interface. Annealing increased the charge separation yield in the P3HT–TiO2 BHJ system, but the increased power conversion efficiency was not as significant as that in a polymer–fullerene system. In contrast, controlling the polymer–metal-oxide NC hybrid morphology through choosing appropriate solvents seems more effective in improving the device performance. Kwong et al. found that employing a low vapor pressure solvent such as xylene in a P3HT–TiO2 hybrid blend can effectively improve the mixing of the TiO2 NPs and P3HT. The P3HT chains were more extended in the film spin-coated from xylene, and led to better mixing with TiO2 NPs. This resulted in a morphology with numerous domains and interfaces for efficient exciton separation. The power conversion efficiency was largely improved from 0.03% when using chloroform to 0.42% when using xylene.33 Chuang et al. reported a method for controlling the dispersion of TiO2 NCs within the P3HT matrix in a hybrid by using a mixed solvent method.60 The P3HT–TiO2 NC hybrid was dispersed in a solvent mixture of chloroform (CF), dichlorobenzene (DCB), and pyridine. CF and DCB are good solvents for P3HT, whereas pyridine is a poor solvent. As shown in the atomic force microscope (AFM) morphology in Fig. 2(a) and (b), the morphology of the P3HT film spun from the mixed solvent has distinct features consisting of a fibrous crystalline structure approximately several hundred nanometers in length, whereas the surface morphology spun from the pristine CF solvent is extremely smooth. The low boiling point and high volatility of CF, which usually results in a fast solvent evaporation rate during the film-forming process, shows an almost featureless film morphology. In contrast, DCB in the mixed solvent usually prolongs the solvent-drying process, and the presence of pyridine induces the P3HT polymer chain to form a fiber-like crystalline structure and enhances its π–π stacking, resulting in a distinct vibronic transition feature in the absorption spectrum. The presence of pyridine in the mixed solvent induces P3HT crystallization, and also facilitates the dispersion of TiO2 NCs in the hybrid solution. The TiO2 NCs tend to aggregate in CF (Fig. 2(c)), but can be dispersed easily in pyridine. This led to a morphology with well-distributed TiO2 NRs embedded in highly crystalline polymer domains as shown in Fig. 2(d), beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge transfer in BHJ solar cells. By using this method, an improved power conversion efficiency of approximately 1% can be obtained with a device based on P3HT–TiO2 NR BHJ solar cells.
 Fig. 2  (a) AFM surface morphology of P3HT films spun from a single solvent of CF and (b) from mixed solvents. (c) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image shows aggregated TiO2 NCs spun from CF and (d) dispersed TiO2 NCs spun from mixed solvents containing pyridine in P3HT–TiO2 NC hybrid films. (e) Cross-section TEM image of in situ-grown ZnO NCs embedded in a P3HT matrix and (f) shows its optimized current–voltage characteristics with a PCE of 2.0%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society) and ref. 44 (Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group). 
Another method of realizing a hybrid nanoscale inorganic NC and polymer BHJ morphology is the use of in situ generation of an inorganic semiconductor inside the organic material. In this process, a well-soluble organometallic precursor is deposited from the solution with a semiconducting polymer. During and after this deposition, the precursor is converted into an inorganic network inside the polymer film by reacting with moisture from the surrounding atmosphere. Beek et al. deposited the photo-active layer by spin-coating a blend of diethylzinc and poly(2-methoxy-5-{3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy}-p-phenylenevinylene) (MDMO-PPV) from a mixture of chlorobenzene, toluene, and tetrahydrofuran onto a PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(sodium styrenesulfonate)) modified ITO electrode. During spin-coating, diethylzinc was exposed to humidity, causing hydrolysis and the formation of Zn(OH)2. Only moderate thermal annealing at 100 °C was required for the condensation reaction to complete and to form an interpenetrating network of ZnO inside the polymer matrix. This provided 1.1% efficient photovoltaic cells by using diethylzinc as a ZnO precursor and MDMO-PPV as the semiconducting polymer.32 However, the presence of highly reactive diethylzinc was believed to degrade the ZnO–MDMO-PPV hybrid device by involving in a chemical reaction with the trans-vinyl bond in the PPV backbone and converting into a non-conjugated species. Therefore, a polymer that does not contain trans-vinyl bond such as P3HT was employed with diethylzinc, and resulted in an improved photovoltaic performance with a PCE of 1.4%.61 This kind of hybrid device has recently been optimized by improving the nanomorphology and the performance to produce an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.75 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 5.2 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.52, yielding an efficiency of 2.0% as shown in Fig. 2(e) and (f).44
Huang et al. recently demonstrated vertical phase segregation in P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid solar cells by introducing the fluorinated small molecule 2,6-(2,3,5,6-ditetrafluorobenzonitrile)-4,40-dihexyl-4H-cyclopenta-[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene (FBN-CPDT) into the hybrid blend.62 The fluorinated small molecule, which has low surface energy and formed a complex with TiO2 NRs, induced the TiO2 NRs to migrate upward during the film-drying process.62,63 This created a TiO2-rich region near the cathode and a P3HT-rich region near the anode, as shown in the cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) image in Fig. 3, and facilitated electron and hole transport to the corresponding electrode. The power conversion efficiency was notably increased from 0.22% to 1.1% with the FBN-CPDT additive.
 Fig. 3  The SEM and schematic images of a P3HT–TiO2 hybrid film with 1 wt% FBN-CPDT additive, showing the distribution of P3HT and TiO2 in the active layer with the fluorinated molecules. Reproduced from ref. 62. 
Nanocrystal size and shape on device performance
The size and shape of an NC is another critical factor in determining the optimal morphology of polymer–metal-oxide BHJ solar cells. Li et al. demonstrated the optimal device performance for both P3HT–TiO2 NP and NR hybrid thin films by using TiO2 NCs with a characteristic size of approximately 5 nm for NPs and approximately 4 nm in diameter and roughly 20 nm in length for NRs,49 as shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b). Ligand exchange treatment by pyridine on both TiO2 NPs and NRs was used to remove the original OA surfactant on the as-synthesized surface of the TiO2 NPs and NRs. Fig. 4(c) shows the current–voltage characteristics of photovoltaic devices under a simulated AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2). The device based on the P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid thin film exhibits better-performance with a Jsc of 3.10 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.69 V, and an FF of 0.62, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (η) of 1.33%, compared to the P3HT–TiO2 NP hybrid device, which had a Jsc of 1.65 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.60 V, and an FF of 0.42, yielding a η of 0.42%. This result indicates that the nanocrystal shape can largely affect the device performance, and the relatively high FF (0.62) of the P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid device suggests that a favorable BHJ morphology in P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrids may exist for efficient carrier transport or collection. Understanding how the organization of these differently shaped NCs within the polymer affects the corresponding photocarrier dynamics and the photovoltaic performance is addressed in more detail in the following section.
 Fig. 4  High-resolution TEM image of TiO2 (a) NPs and (b) NRs. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of P3HT–TiO2 NP and NR hybrid BHJ solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 (Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). 
Interface modification on improved device performance
Because the surface of as-synthesized metal oxide NCs is usually capped with insulating surfactants such as O.A. or TOPO, which act as a barrier for charge transport and charge transfer,58,59 an interface modification between the polymer and NCs is another strategy for improving the device performance of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. Bouclé et al. replaced a TOPO molecule with amphiphilic ruthenium dye (Z907) on an inorganic NC surface in a P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid solar cell.58 The charge separation efficiency at the heterojunction of the hybrid material was found to be improved, and was associated with a three-fold increase in PCE. However, intrinsic charge trapping, poor interparticle connectivity, and the geometric trapping of TiO2 NCs may cause limited photocurrent generation, resulting in a poor PCE of only 0.07% after the ligand exchange. Lin et al. reported a ligand-exchange method that can be used to improve the device performance of P3HT–TiO2 NR BHJ hybrid solar cells by removing the insulating surface ligand (O.A.) on a TiO2 NR surface through pyridine (PYR) treatment.59 The device performance can be enhanced significantly from 0.38% to 1.14% by removing the insulating surfactant on the TiO2 nanorod surface (Fig. 5(b)). Afterward, the same group demonstrated an interface modification between P3HT and TiO2 NRs by attaching effective interfacial molecules on the TiO2 NR surface,35 which improved the compatibility between the polymer and TiO2 NRs, and also influenced the charge transfer efficiency at interfaces between the polymer and TiO2 NRs, where the π-conjugated structures in the interfacial molecules can interact with the thiophene rings of P3HT. They replaced the original O.A. with more effective interfacial organic molecules such as anthracene-9-carboxylic acid (ACA), tetracarboxy phthalocyanine copper(II) (CuPc-dye), and cis-bis(4,4-dicarboxy-2,2-bipyridine) dithiocyanato ruthenium(II) (N3-dye) as schematically represented in Fig. 5(a). Through interface modification, the device performance of P3HT–TiO2 nanorod BHJ solar cells was substantially improved. All of the devices had FFs from 0.62 to 0.65, which is relatively high for polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells (Fig. 5(c)). The solar cell that comprised of TiO2 nanorods modified using the N3-dye molecule demonstrated the best device performance with a Jsc of 4.33 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.78 V, and an FF of 0.65, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 2.20%. It is worth noting that the amount of dye adsorbed on the TiO2 NRs was estimated to be approximately 10−11 to 10−12 mol cm−2, which is considerably less than that commonly used in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) (usually in the order of 10−7 mol cm−2).64 The negligible optical density of the interface layers of these molecules in relation to that of P3HT indicates that these ligand molecules modify the interface rather than the harvest light, as is evident from the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra.35 The interfacial molecules at the interfaces of P3HT–TiO2 nanorod hybrids have two major roles in improving the device performance: (1) improving the compatibility between the polymer and TiO2 NCs, and (2) preventing back-recombination which can be seen from the energy band alignment in the active layer (Fig. 5(d)). Fig. 5(e) shows the charge recombination rate constant krecversus the illumination intensity under open-circuit conditions measured using transient open-circuit voltage decay (TOCVD) measurements. The recombination rates krec follow the order PYR > ACA > CuPc > N3 modified samples at all light intensities, showing good consistency with the photovoltaic performance. The reduced recombination rate may lead to increased electron and hole concentrations at the interfaces, raising the difference between the quasi-Fermi levels of electrons and holes, and accounting for the observed increase in Voc after interface modifications. Therefore, through interface modifications on the NC surface, the device performance can be significantly improved because of the enhanced charge separation, improved compatibility, and large suppression of back-recombination. Numerous studies have used other interface modifiers to improve the polymer–metal-oxide BHJ hybrid solar cell performance, such as oligo-3HT-Br-COOH (PCE = 1.19%),65 oligomer PZFDPP (copolymerized 4,5-diaza-9,9′-spirobifluorene with diketopyrrolopyrrole) (PCE = 1.2%),66 and the combination of TBP (4-tert-butylpyridine) and W4 molecules (2-cyano-3-(5-(7-(thiophen-2-yl)-benzothiadiazol-4-yl) thiophen-2-yl) acrylic acid) (PCE = 1.36%)67 for TiO2 NCs, and the BQ surfactant (2-(2-ethylhexyl)-1,3-dioxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzo[de]isoquinoline-6,7-dicarboxylic acid) (PCE = 1.23%),68 the HTph-S liquid crystal (4-(5-(1,2-dithiolan-3-yl)pentanoate)-40-(hexyloxy)-terphenyl) (PCE = 1.23%),69p-methoxybenzoic acid (PCE = 1.52%),70 and the PCBA molecule (fullerene carboxylic acid) (PCE = 1.2%)71 for ZnO NCs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the ligand exchange process. Insulating oleic acid was removed by pyridine or replaced by interfacial molecules such as ACA, CuPc dye or N3 dye. (b) and (c) show the current–voltage characteristics of the P3HT–TiO2 NR BHJ solar cell with various surface ligands. (d) and (e) show the energy band alignment and carrier recombination rate of the devices in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society) and ref. 59 (Copyright 2008 The American Institute of Physics). 
Another strategy for improving the compatibility between a polymer and inorganic NCs is to modify the polymer by end-group functionalization. Oosterhout et al. reported a polymer–ZnO hybrid solar cell based on a hydrophilic polymer P3HT-E, poly[(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)-co-(3-(2-acetoxyethyl)thiophene-2,5-diyl)], and the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 6(a).72 It is a polythiophene derivative with ester-functionalized side chains, and is more hydrophilic and more compatible with the ZnO polar surface than P3HT. The ZnO NCs were directly synthesized in a P3HT-E matrix from a precursor during the spin-coating process, and the film surface was substantially smoother than that of the P3HT–ZnO hybrid because of better miscibility of P3HT-E and ZnO. The use of P3HT-E leads to a considerably finer phase separation (Fig. 6(b)), as well as an improved charge generation efficiency (from 32% to 90%) and a suppressed exciton quenching efficiency at the electrode (from 32% to 6%). This method can be used to yield a significant improvement of the solar cell performance only in thin ZnO–P3HT-E active layers (approximately 50 nm). For thicker cells, the reduced hole mobility and reduced percolation of ZnO pathways hinder charge carrier collection, limiting the power conversion efficiency. Lin et al. used a series of functionalized P3HT copolymers of poly(3-hexylthiophene-b-ethylene glycol) (P3HT-b-PEG) to improve the efficiency of P3HT–TiO2 NR BHJ solar cells.73 The short PEG segments in P3HT-b-PEG serve as hydrogen bond acceptors. A strong preferential H-bonding interaction between TiO2 NRs and the PEG chain circumvented the aggregation of TiO2 nanorods, resulting in a homogeneous dispersion of NCs within the P3HT matrix to form an interpenetrating network (Fig. 6(c) and (d)). The hybrid device consisting of 10 wt% PEG and N3-dye TiO2 NRs exhibits an optimal power conversion efficiency of 1.71%, which is approximately 50% higher than that of using the conventional P3HT homopolymer. Nevertheless, although PEG can facilitate the dispersion of NCs in polymers, the hybrid device using the P3HT-b-PEG copolymer shows a relatively low FF of approximately 0.4 because of a less efficient charge transport.
 Fig. 6  (a) Chemical structure of P3HT-E. (b) The TEM morphology image of the P3HT-E–ZnO NCs hybrid film. (c) Schematic illustration of the P3HT-b-PEG–TiO2 NR hybrid and (d) its corresponding TEM morphology. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh) and ref. 73 (Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
State-of-the-art analytical tools for BHJ solar cells
For BHJ solar cells, the nanoscale phase distribution of the donor–acceptor blend determines the photocarrier dynamics of charge separation, transport, and recombination, and the corresponding device performance. Therefore, understanding the exact 3D features of the embedded donor and acceptor materials is of vital importance. Recently, 3D electron tomography has become an ideal tool for gaining insight into the nanoscale organization of BHJ polymer solar cells, providing critical morphological parameters for improving the device performance.44,49,74–77 Therefore, charge extraction pathways and the volume fractions of the donor and acceptor phase can be completely visualized. Loos et al. demonstrated for the first time how to directly observe favorable P3HT–PCBM BHJ morphologies suggested by the previous experimental evidence with a nanometer resolution via electron tomography and identified critical morphology parameters associated with improved P3HT–PCBM BHJ solar cells.75,76 Oosterhout et al. demonstrated the visualization of P3HT–ZnO NC BHJ 3D nanoscale morphologies through transmission electron microscope (TEM) tomography analyses, as shown in Fig. 7(a)–(c).44 By statistically analyzing the 3D morphology of the hybrid film, information about the spherical contact distance and the percolation pathway can be extracted, showing a consistent correlation between the device performance and the nanoscale morphology. The result was further modeled by solving the exciton-diffusion equation, based on the 3D morphology obtained from the electron tomography data. They concluded that the relatively poor performance of thin P3HT–ZnO solar cells is correlated with an inefficient charge generation because of a coarse phase separation (Fig. 7(a)). For thicker P3HT–ZnO photoactive layers, charge generation is substantially more efficient because of a considerably more favorable phase separation (Fig. 7(b)).
 Fig. 7  (a–c) TEM tomography images of the in situ-grown ZnO NCs and P3HT blending film. (a) was recorded from a device with a poor performance and (b) was from an optimized device with a favorable phase separation. (c) shows the ZnO NC distribution along the thickness direction in the (b) sample. (d and e) STEM HAADF tomography images of P3HT–TiO2 NPs and NR hybrid films respectively. The insets also show the 3D distribution of TiO2 NPs or NRs along the thickness direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44 (Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group) and ref. 49 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). 
Li et al. reported employing electron tomography based on STEM-HAADF (scanning transmission electron microscope-high angle annular dark field) imaging to probe the 3D morphological organization of P3HT–TiO2 hybrid BHJs with different NC shapes, as shown in Fig. 7(d) and (e), including NPs and NRs.49 The advantage of using STEM-HAADF imaging is that it is ultimately an amplitude contrast (sensitive to atomic numbers only), and is robust to electro-optical focusing conditions, unlike TEM, in which the focus-dependent phase/diffraction contrasts inherent to TEM imaging are susceptible to possible artifact creations in associated 3D reconstructed volumes.74,75,78,79 They revealed different 3D morphological orientations of TiO2 NPs and NRs in P3HT–TiO2 BHJ hybrid solar cells. The TiO2 NPs are found to be more evenly distributed in P3HT, whereas a large-scale phase separation containing TiO2-rich clusters separated by P3HT domains was observed in P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid films. These 3D BHJ morphologies clearly show that elongated and anisotropic TiO2 nanorods in P3HT can significantly reduce the probability of the interparticle hopping transport of electrons by providing better connectivity with respect to the TiO2 NPs, in addition to having a tendency to form a large-scale donor–acceptor phase-separated morphology. The anisotropic TiO2 NRs are clearly shown to have had a preferred orientation angled toward the plane of the film and formed a connective network compared to the TiO2 NPs, which are isotropic without any preferred orientation. The 3D structures of these blends were further correlated with the analysis of the photocarrier dynamics, including charge separation, transport, and recombination. They concluded that, despite more efficient exciton dissociation in the P3HT–TiO2 NP hybrid than in the P3HT–TiO2 NR counterpart because of higher intermixing, the establishment of an optimal morphology comprising an elongated and anisotropic TiO2 NR within the P3HT enables a more efficient and balanced transport of both electrons and holes, and a prolonged recombination lifetime during transport. This explains the result of a relatively large FF (>0.60) of the device based on P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid BHJs.35,59,67
In addition to visualizing the 3D NC morphological organization in polymer–inorganic NC hybrids, understanding how a conjugated polymer behaves within polymer–inorganic BHJ systems is also important for obtaining complete morphological information. Lin et al. recently reported the investigation of the nanoscale morphological orientation of a polymer in P3HT–TiO2 NP and NR BHJs by employing grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements using a synchrotron X-ray beam.80 Because of the influence of NC dimensionality and organization, the polymer chains in P3HT–TiO2 NP and NR BHJs showed different morphological orientations in directions parallel and perpendicular to the substrate surface. Fig. 8(a) shows the 2D GIXRD images for films consisting of pristine P3HT, P3HT–TiO2 NP, and P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrids, respectively. The qx corresponds to the in-plane direction of the substrate, and qz is the out-of-plane direction normal to the substrate surface. The (100) peak intensity in the out-of-plane (qz) direction for the P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid is substantially lower than that for the P3HT–TiO2 NP counterpart. In contrast, the trend of the (100) diffraction intensity in the in-plane (qx) direction (inset of Fig. 8(b)) is different, where the P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrid sample shows a stronger peak intensity. This result indicates that elongated and anisotropic TiO2 NRs in P3HT, which have preferred orientations angled toward the plane of the film, promote the formation of increased vertical stacking of P3HT crystallites, as illustrated in the lower panel in Fig. 8(c), providing a more effective hole transport that is perpendicular to the substrate. Similar observations have been reported in previous studies of the enhanced vertical chain alignment of P3HT infiltrated into ordered nanostructures using straight nanopores of anodic alumina81 or nanostructured hybrid solar cells, which are addressed in a later section. Conversely, isotropic TiO2 NPs, with no preferred orientation in P3HT, have a greater tendency of inducing polymer chains to form lamella stacking (top panel in Fig. 8(c)), which is favorable for hole transport along the direction parallel to the substrate.
 Fig. 8  (a) 2D GIXRD images of the pristine P3HT film, P3HT–TiO2 NP and P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrids. 1D plots of XRD patterns are shown in the (b) out-of-plane (qz) and in-plane (qx) (as shown in the inset of (b)) directions. Black, red, and blue curves represent the pristine P3HT film, P3HT–TiO2 NP, and P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrids, respectively. (c) Illustrations of the lamellar stacking and vertical stacking of P3HT crystallites with respect to the substrate surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80 (Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
Recently, Lee et al. presented a theoretical investigation on morphological organizations of both the polymer and NCs in P3HT–TiO2 NP or P3HT–TiO2 NR blends based on a multiscale coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) simulation technique.82 They reported that the one-dimensional (1D) anisotropic NCs of TiO2 NRs can be used to effectively enhance the degree of crystallinity of P3HT because of the preferential polymer chain alignment along the axial dimension of the NRs, thereby promoting hole transport. In addition, the elongated NRs significantly reduce the probability of electron hopping, and maintain a high specific interfacial area for efficient exciton dissociation. Regardless of the NC shape, both P3HT–TiO2 NP and P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrids exhibit a maximum specific interfacial area at a blending ratio of 1:1 (wt%), showing excellent consistency with the experimental data. The simulated 3D morphologies are shown in Fig. 9(a)–(c). The criteria for obtaining optimal blending ratios in polymer–inorganic hybrid cells are to have the highest specific interfacial area to maximize exciton dissociation and the most similar donor–acceptor percolation probabilities to balance the electron–hole transport, which is also consistent with the experimental results of photocarrier dynamics studies. This result presents the possibility of the nanoscale morphology control of polymer–inorganic NC BHJ hybrid blends through fine-tuning the NC shapes from a theoretical perspective.
 Fig. 9  CGMD simulated 3D morphologies of P3HT–TiO2 NP (upper panel) and NR (lower panel) BHJ hybrid films with a blending ratio of 1:1; P3HT chains and nanocrystals are colored in red and blue, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 82. 
Therefore, by revealing the exact 3D features of the embedded donor and acceptor materials through the state-of-the-art combined experimental and model-based analytical techniques, the interplay between the morphology and the photocarrier dynamics and the key parameters for further improving the device performance of polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells can be obtained. Table 1 lists the selected performance parameters of polymer–metal-oxide NC BHJ solar cells reported in the previous studies.
Table 1 Selected performance parameters of polymer–metal-oxide NC BHJ hybrid solar cellsa




Donor–acceptor
NC shape and size (nm)
Ligand
Oxide content
Solvent

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.





a Abbreviations: NC = nanocyrstal, Pyr. = pyridine, DCM = dichloromethane, CF = chloroform, CB = chlorobenzene, and DCB = dichlorobenzene.
b Inverted type structure.
c Under 0.7 sun.





P3HT–TiO2
Particle 20–40
None
60 wt%
Xylene
0.44
2.76
36
0.42

33



P3HT–TiO2
Particle 5
Pyr.
50 wt%
Pyr. + DCM + CF + CB
0.6
1.65
42
0.42

49



P3HT–TiO2
Rod 5 × 20
N3 dye
50 wt%
Pyr. + CF + DCM
0.78
4.33
65
2.2

35



P3HT–TiO2
Rod 4–5 × 20–40
Oleic acid
50 wt%
Pyr. + CF + DCM
0.65
1.67
35
0.38

59



P3HT–TiO2
Rod 4–5 × 35
Oligo-PZFDPP
53 wt%
Pyr. + CF + CB + DCB
0.62
3.8
52
1.2b

66



P3HT–TiO2
Rod 4 × 20
Pyr.
50 wt%
Pyr. + DCM + CF + CB
0.69
3.1
62
1.33

49



P3HT-b-PEG–TiO2
Rod 3–4 × 20–30
N3 dye
50 wt%
Pyr. + CF + CB
0.79
5.56
39
1.71

73



P3HT–ZnO
Particle
PCBA
67 wt%
CB
0.47
5.39
48
1.2

71



P3HT–ZnO
Network
None
20 vol%

In situ growth
0.75
5.2
52
2

44



MDMO-PPV–ZnO
Network
None
15 vol%

In situ growth
1.14
2.3
42
1.1

32



MEH-PPV–ZnO
Particle 5
MBA
76 wt%
CB
0.88
3.45
50
1.52

70



MDMO-PPV–ZnO
Particle 5
None
67 wt%
CB + methanol
0.81
2.4
59
1.6c

83





Nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells
Despite promising power conversion efficiencies obtained in polymer–metal-oxide BHJ solar cells, properly balancing photogeneration and the charge carrier transport remains a challenge in controlling the morphology of polymer–inorganic NC blends. By contrast, nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer hybrid solar cells, which consist of well-connected transport paths in the active layer, offer a rigid morphology of inorganic NCs formed prior to polymer deposition. Nanostructured metal oxides have been studied as photovoltaic materials for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) since 1980s, when the first observations of efficient photoinduced charge injection from dyes into TiO2 were reported.84 Nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells, in which metal oxides are sensitized by conjugated polymers rather than by chemically adsorbed dye monolayers, garnered interest in the last decade. Some early studies first proposed mesoporous TiO2 films with pores smaller than 10 nm (Fig. 10(a)) to fabricate nanostructured TiO2–polymer hybrid solar cells using a structure-directing block copolymer, and the corresponding devices show a maximum EQE of 10%.47 Polymer–metal-oxide hybrid devices consisting of such a TiO2 porous network were further optimized by inserting a PEDOT:PSS layer between the polymer and the metal electrode, yielding an improved power conversion efficiency of 0.4%,48 or by incorporating the MEH-PPV polymer to obtain an improved performance of 0.71% as well as a maximum EQE value of 34%.85 A ZnO porous nanostructure using spin-coating from solutions containing ZnO NCs was recently applied into a nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer hybrid solar cell (Fig. 10(b)).86 Starting from colloidal ZnO NCs, porous ZnO electrodes of suitable porosity can be controlled from the initial ZnO formulation and choice of the organic ligand. A power conversion of 0.35% was reported for the porous ZnO–P3HT hybrid solar cell. However, although the use of porous metal oxide layers is a promising approach for fabricating polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells, the overall device performance has still been lower compared to that for polymer–metal-oxide BHJs. To improve the power conversion efficiency of nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer solar cells, the main factors limiting the device performances must be overcome. They are (1) the incomplete infiltration of a polymer into the free space of metal oxide nanostructures, which are influenced by several factors such as the pore size, shape, and depth or molecular weight of the polymer; (2) the number of interfaces is limited by the relatively large dimensions of metal oxide nanostructures compared to that in the polymer–metal-oxide BHJs; (3) an overly small effective volume of the polymer lies within an exciton diffusion length of the interface; and (4) interface modification between the polymer and nanostructured metal oxide. Several strategies are thus addressed in the following sections to improve the performance of nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells.
 Fig. 10  Various types of metal oxide nanostructures being used as acceptors in nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. (a) Mesoporous TiO2, (b) porous ZnO, (c) ZnO nanofiber array, (d) ZnO nanorod array, (e) ZnO nanofibrous network and (f) ZnO nanosheet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 (Copyright 2003 The American Institute of Physics), ref. 86 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society), ref. 88 (Copyright 2006 Elsevier Science), ref. 93 (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh), ref. 95 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society) and ref. 96 (Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh). 
Strategy to enhance the effective polymer–metal-oxide interface area
In a general opinion, vertically aligned metal oxide NR,87 nanofiber,88 or nanotube89 arrays with dimensions of the order of the exciton diffusion length of the polymer donor are believed to be the ideal case of nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer hybrid solar cells. Hybrid nanostructured solar cells using P3HT and vertically aligned ZnO nanorods prepared using sol–gel methods were proposed by several groups.87,90 These nanorod ZnO–P3HT devices show substantially higher photocurrent generation than planar devices. Lee et al. reported a quantitative estimation of a factor of enhancement of approximately 2.7 in the short-circuit current of the hybrid device, which was obtained using a vertically aligned 180 nm ZnO NR array, and was in agreement with the increase of the surface area compared to a bilayer device.91 Olson et al. first demonstrated the ITO/ZnO nanofiber/P3HT/Ag photovoltaic device by using a low-temperature solution-based growth technique (Fig. 10(c)). The P3HT–ZnO nanorod hybrid device exhibited a Voc of 440 mV, a Jsc of 2.2 mA cm−2, an FF of 0.56, and a power conversion efficiency of 0.53%.88 Several possible reasons limit the device performance of this type of solar cell. The spacing between the ZnO nanofibers (approximately 100 nm) is substantially larger than the typical exciton diffusion length in P3HT (approximately 10 nm), resulting in inefficient charge separation. In addition, the power conversion efficiency of this device configuration suffers from a reduced Voc because of the large band offset between the electron donor and acceptor materials92 or the presence of mid-gap states on the surface of the ZnO that pins the Fermi level.88 To increase Voc in such a device, substitution of magnesium into a zinc oxide acceptor (Zn1−xMgxO) may reduce the band offset and result in a substantial increase in the Voc. It had been demonstrated that for a planar (P3HT)–Zn1−xMgxO hybrid solar cell device, the Voc was raised from 500 mV to values in excess of 900 mV as x was increased from 0 to 0.35, with an optimal power conversion efficiency of 0.5% obtained at x = 0.25, beyond which the efficiency decreases because of the increased series resistance in the device.92 In order to improve the infiltration of P3HT into the spaces between ZnO nanorods, Baeten et al. employed post-thermal annealing of as-prepared devices for different timescales (1 min and 15 min) at the melting temperature of P3HT (225 °C).93 By using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) depth profile analysis, they found a deep infiltration of the polymer into the nanorod array in the as-prepared state, and significantly improved the device performance by post-annealing at the melting temperature of the polymer for a well-defined time (1 min), resulting in an improved P3HT crystallinity and a full infiltration of the polymer into ZnO nanorod arrays (Fig. 10(d)). Annealing also provided the polymer more time to arrange between the nanorods, rendering the ZnO–P3HT interface more intimate, thereby reducing geminate recombination.93 Combined with the control of leakage currents by means of appropriate blocking layers for electrons and holes, a Voc of 0.543 V, a Jsc of 2.67 mA cm−2, an FF of 53%, and a power conversion efficiency of 0.76% were obtained, representing the optimal-performing P3HT–ZnO NR hybrid solar cell. The hole blocking layer (HBL) was provided by the seed layer, which was required for the synthesis of the ZnO NRs, and the electron blocking layer (EBL) was formed by the remaining polymer layer on top of the NR array. Dag et al. used ab initio calculations to examine the atomic structure of the P3HT–ZnO interface (non-polar ZnO (100) surface) and the effect of electronic coupling between both materials.94 Their results showed strong electronic coupling between the P3HT chain and the ZnO surface in the conduction band states. In addition, they found that P3HT dimer stacking occurs perpendicularly to the nanorod direction, which reduces charge carrier mobility in this direction. The simulated result is similar to the experimental observation of the enhanced vertical chain alignment and increased hole mobility of P3HT infiltrated into ordered nanostructures and using straight nanopores.81
Other nanostructured metal oxide morphologies have also been proposed to fabricate polymer hybrid solar cells. Wu et al. reported a nanostructured hybrid photovoltaic device based on P3HT and an ordered electrospun ZnO nanofibrous network, in which the diameters of the ZnO nanofibers were controlled within 30–150 nm (Fig. 10(e)). The device exhibits an optimal power conversion efficiency of 0.51%.95 Sung et al. recently demonstrated a ZnO nanostructure with the morphology of a nanosheet as an electron acceptor and a transport channel in the P3HT–ZnO nanostructure hybrid solar cell (Fig. 10(f)).96 The ZnO nanosheet structure, which has similar characteristics to the ZnO NR array, such as a vertical feature and a single-crystalline structure, was found to possess an appropriate amount of free space to facilitate P3HT infiltration, resulting in superior interface properties with efficient charge separation and decreased charge recombination in the hybrid. An efficiency of 0.88% was achieved in the ZnO nanosheet–P3HT hybrid solar cell. Compared with the ZnO NR array, the ZnO nanosheet framework also exhibits a slightly larger absorption edge and fast electron transport properties because of the high nonpolar surface-to-volume ratio.96,97 Another strategy for improving the device performance of nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells is to increase the effective areas of organic–inorganic interfaces. Lin et al. incorporated small TiO2 NRs approximately 5 nm in diameter and 20–30 nm in length with a vertically grown ZnO NR array approximately 50 nm in diameter and 180 nm in length. A substantial improvement in the short-circuit current by a factor of seven was observed because of the enhanced charge separation efficiency.50 Liao et al. recently proposed a 3D architecture for a rutile TiO2 nanodendrite array–P3HT hybrid solar cell with the TiO2 length approximately 1.5 μm (please refer to Fig. 13).98 The device performance of the TiO2 nanodendrite array–P3HT hybrid solar cell was enhanced by 20%, compared to that of the TiO2 NR array–P3HT hybrid solar cell with the same thickness, as a result of increased effective organic–inorganic surface areas.
Interface modification of polymer–metal-oxide nanostructures
In addition to optimizing the metal oxide nanostructure morphology, the surface modification of metal oxide nanocrystal films is also an efficient strategy for improving the device performance. As discussed in the previous section, interfacial modification plays an important role in forming an optimum morphology for the device performance of the polymer–metal-oxide BHJ hybrid solar cell by improving the compatibility between the polymer and inorganic NCs. Although the morphology of the inorganic NCs is formed prior to the polymer deposition in the nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer hybrid solar cell, interface modification also has significant effects on enhancing the device performance. Ravirajan et al. demonstrated the incorporation of molecular interlayers for improving the performance of P3HT–ZnO NR array heterojunctions.87 Surface modification with a ruthenium dye (Z907) showed an improved power conversion efficiency of 0.2% by a factor of four compared to untreated P3HT–ZnO NR array devices, where the recombination kinetics of the ZnO NR array/Z907/P3HT device was found to be slowed by the interface modifier. Lin et al. demonstrated the influence of using interface modification with an organic molecule of mercurochrome on a ZnO NR array surface to improve the device performance.99 By probing the carrier dynamics at P3HT–ZnO interfaces, the interfacial molecule was found to assist the charge separation and suppression of back recombination at the interfaces, which accounts for the observed enhanced Jsc and Voc in photovoltaic performance. In addition, molecular interface modifiers (IM) can impart a dipole at the donor–acceptor interface and offset the interface energy after attachment, which may block or mediate the forward charge transfer or reduce back charge recombination.100 Consequently, the energy offset at the TiO2–polymer interface, and thus the Voc of devices, can be tuned by using the interface modifiers with various dipoles (Fig. 11(a)). By systematically investigating the effect of interfacial dipoles on the performance of bilayer TiO2–P3HT hybrid solar cells, Goh et al. concluded that the Jsc in these devices is enhanced when the IMs with strong dipoles point toward TiO2. Utilizing the IMs, the power conversion efficiencies of the planar TiO2–P3HT devices were raised from 0.34% to 0.6%.100
 Fig. 11  (a) Effect of interface modifiers on the energy offset and Voc in nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. (b) Dye-regeneration and electron-mediating mechanisms of the dye interface modifier in nanostructured polymer–dye–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100 (Copyright 2009 The American Institute of Physics) and ref. 102 (Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh). 
In the above mentioned results, a negligible optical density of the interfacial modification layer compared to that of P3HT was observed in these nanostructured metal-oxide–IM–polymer hybrid solar cells. Therefore, the enhanced device performance mainly results from improved organic–inorganic interfaces, and not from an increased light harvesting of interfacial molecules. Nevertheless, dye molecules used for interface modification may also act as an additional photon absorber for further enhancing the light harvesting and photocurrent generation of charge carriers in nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer hybrid solar cells. The new concept of nanostructured metal-oxide–dye–polymer hybrid devices consists of the mixed specific features of both polymer hybrid solar cells and solid-state DSSCs. The conventional solid-state DSSC architecture combines metal oxide nanostructures and molecular dyes with an organic hole-transporting material such as spiro-OMeTAD, whereas the new device structure replaces the typical hole transporting layer of spiro-OMeTAD (mobility of 10−5 to 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) with P3HT (mobility of 10−3 to 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1), which exhibits a higher hole mobility and strong light absorption.101 In this type of nanostructured polymer–dye–metal-oxide hybrid solar cell, both the polymer and dye molecules may contribute to light harvesting to enhance the photocurrent. To increase the effective surface area for the adsorption of dye molecules for light harvesting, a nanostructured metal oxide layer with a thickness of a few micrometers is usually used in the nanostructured polymer–dye–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells, which has a thickness greater than that of the conventional nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer hybrid solar cell which is 100–300 nm thick. The interfacial energetic band alignment is another important issue for obtaining an optimal device performance when adding dye molecules at the polymer–inorganic interfaces. If the dye molecule possesses a lower lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level than the conjugated polymer, the electron transport is barrier-free from the LUMO level of the polymer to the conduction band (CB) of the inorganic nanostructure. The dye molecules at the organic–inorganic interface perform as an electronic mediator to improve the electron injection efficiency. In this case, both the dye and polymer contribute to the photocurrent of the dye-modified hybrid solar cell.102 Conversely, when the dye possesses a lower highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level compared to the conjugated polymer, the polymer mainly functions as the hole transporter to regenerate the oxidized dye. The mechanisms of electron mediation and dye regeneration in a polymer–dye–metal-oxide hybrid solar cell are schematically shown in Fig. 11(b). An appropriate design in the dye molecular energy levels with respect to the polymer and metal oxide is thus crucial for improving the device performance. Several groups have reported the use of different organic dye molecules to modify the surface of metal oxide nanostructures and enhance the light-harvesting efficiency. Zhu et al. showed an efficient hybrid solar cell based on P3HT and mesoporous TiO2 films (1.8 μm), in which a metal-free organic dye (D102) and a ruthenium dye (N719) were employed to modify the mesoporous TiO2 surface.102 They found that the incorporation of bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amine lithium salt (Li(CF3SO2)2N) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) to treat the dye-modified mesoporous TiO2 film prior to the deposition of the P3HT layer showed a remarkable effect on improving the device performance. Such a treatment resulted in a 60-fold enhancement in efficiency for D102-based devices, and a high efficiency of 2.63% was achieved under simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination. In contrast, almost no enhancement was obtained using lithium salt and TBP treatment for N719-based devices. They found that the Li-salt treatment could change the absorption spectra and energy levels of the interfacial D102 molecules, as shown in Fig. 12(a), which is beneficial to the device performance. As shown in Fig. 12(b) for device D, which exhibited the optimal device performance, both HOMO (5.32 eV) and LUMO (3.38 eV) energy levels of D102 after Li salt treatment are at least 0.20 eV lower than those of P3HT, which are favorable for both dye-regenerating and electron-mediating mechanisms. Yu et al. employed another method for designing a class of conjugated cyanoacrylic acids with different HOMO and LUMO levels to modify the interface between P3HT and nanoporous TiO2.103 By incorporating a strong electron-withdrawing –CN moiety adjacent to the –COOH anchoring group to produce a molecular dipole pointing away from the TiO2 surface (Fig. 12(c)), both Voc and Jsc can be increased simultaneously. Moreover, the LUMO of IMs can be fine-tuned by elongating the conjugation length or adopting a donor–acceptor structure, which systematically changes the EQEs of the devices. The LUMO levels of the IMs were found to decisively determine the dissociation efficiency of P3HT excitons. They showed an optimally performing device with a Voc of 0.8 V, a Jsc of 6.79 mA cm2, and an FF of 52.81%, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 2.87% based on the P3HT–WL-4–TiO2 device structure (Fig. 12(d)). Liao et al. demonstrated a P3HT–dye–TiO2 NR array hybrid solar cell consisting of 3D rutile TiO2 nanodendrite (ND) arrays developed from TiO2 NR arrays, as shown in Fig. 13. Benefiting from the enhanced interface area, a significant enhancement of charge separation was observed, and a notable efficiency of 3.12% was obtained in the D149-modified TiO2 ND array–P3HT hybrid solar cell.98 In addition, layered disulfide based absorbers such as MoS2 and WS2 were recently employed to modify the porous TiO2 surface in hybrid polymer solar cells. Disulfide nanoflakes assisted the charge transfer from P3HT to TiO2, and also contributed photocurrent by absorbing photons corresponding to their optical band gaps. The PCE of this kind of solar cell was 1.7% for using MoS2 and 2.6% for using WS2 nanoflakes.104,105
 Fig. 12  (a) Li-salt treatment changed the energy levels of the interfacial D102 molecules. (b) shows the corresponding EQE spectra of these devices. Device D exhibited the optimal performance with Li-salt and TBP treatment. (c) Chemical structures of various conjugated cyanoacrylic acids. (d) shows the corresponding current–voltage characteristics of P3HT–porous TiO2 nanostructure hybrid solar cells using different conjugated cyanoacrylic acids as interface modifiers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 and 103 (Copyright 2009, 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh). 
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM top and cross-sectional images of the TiO2 ND array and the illustration of the P3HT–TiO2 ND array hybrid solar cell. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of nanostructured P3HT–TiO2 hybrid solar cells consisting of a D149-modified NR array (650 nm), D149-modified NR array (1.5 μm) and D149-modified ND array (1.5 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 98 (Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
Although both the polymer and dye molecules may contribute to light harvesting to enhance photocurrent in this type of nanostructured polymer–dye–metal-oxide hybrid solar cell, a large overlap in the absorption spectra of the polymer and dye molecules may reduce the total effect of light harvesting. Another strategy toward achieving a higher efficiency of polymer–dye–metal-oxide nanostructure hybrid solar cells is to incorporate low band-gap organic dye molecules or polymers for efficiently harvesting visible to NIR solar radiation. Mor et al. reported a nanostructured inorganic–organic hybrid solar cell, as shown in Fig. 14(a), where electron-transporting TiO2 nanotube arrays, sensitized with an unsymmetrical squaraine dye (SQ-1) that absorbs in the red and NIR portion of the solar spectrum, are combined with hole-transporting and visible light-absorbing regioregular P3HT.106 The absorption bands of the SQ-1 dye and P3HT complement each other, making the two materials appropriate for an extended spectrum solar cell, in which the dye molecules are anchored to the nanotube walls and the P3HT is within the nanotubes (Fig. 14(b)). Consequently, the TiO2 nanotube array–P3HT hybrid solar cell modified with the organic SQ-1 dye layer exhibits a significant enhancement of the power conversion efficiency, from 0.34% (no organic dye) to 3.8% and a Voc of 0.6 V, a Jsc of 11 mA cm2, and an FF of 0.58. The EQE presented in Fig. 14(c) was over 60% in the visible solar spectrum and extended to the NIR region because of the photocurrent contribution from the SQ-1 dye molecules. Grancini et al. recently demonstrated a hybrid polymer solar cell by incorporating a low band-gap polymer PCPDTBT (poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b0]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadia-zole)]) to porous TiO2 nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 14(d) and (e).107 By co-functionalizing the TiO2 surface with the electron acceptor and an organic dye sensitizer, the panchromatic spectral photoresponse can be achieved in the visible to NIR region, causing the EQE spectrum to extend to 900 nm, with the device delivering over 30% EQE from the light absorbed in the NIR region by the low band gap polymer PCPDTBT (Fig. 14(f)).
 Fig. 14  (a) Representation of the nanostructured P3HT–SQ-1 dye–TiO2 nanotube array hybrid solar cell. (b) Absorption spectra of the P3HT–TiO2 and SQ-1–TiO2 hybrid. (c) EQE spectra of the corresponding devices, where visible and NIR portions were contributed by P3HT and SQ-1 dye respectively. (d) Energy band alignment of the C60-modified mesoporous TiO2 and low band gap polymer PCPDTBT hybrid solar cell. The corresponding absorption spectra are shown in (e). (f) Panchromatic spectral photoresponse with EQE spectra extended to 900 nm, which were contributed by the low band gap polymer PCPDTBT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 (Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society) and ref. 107 (Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh). 
Another type of organic–inorganic hybrid solar cell was recently demonstrated by Grätzel and coworkers, who employed the extremely thin Sb2S3 inorganic absorber between mesoporous TiO2 and the P3HT hole-conductor, yielding a power conversion efficiency of over 5%.108 Intimate contact and good band alignment at the interface between Sb2S3 and P3HT were found in this inorganic–organic hybrid solar cell with a device structure of porous TiO2–Sb2S3–P3HT–Au. However, they also indicated that most of the photocurrent is delivered by the Sb2S3 absorber layer and is not from the P3HT, which is evident from a dip in the spectral response in the region where P3HT absorbs most strongly.107,108 The P3HT polymer thus mainly acts as an efficient hole-transporting layer only to assist the charge injection from the Sb2S3 sensitizer. Another study of an inorganic–organic hybrid solar cell is based on a solid-state DSSC containing the sensitizer of a zinc phthalocyanine dye (TT1) and P3HT, in which the P3HT polymer acts as both the hole transporter and the energy relay dye (ERD) to increase absorption in solid-state DSSCs.109,110 A highly efficient Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET) occurs from P3HT to the sensitizer of TT1, improving the spectral response of solid-state DSSC devices. Although these types of solar cells may not be categorized as conventional polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells, the role of the polymer is crucial for achieving high-performance power conversion efficiencies. Table 2 lists the selected performance parameters of nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells reported in the literature.
Table 2 Selected performance parameters of nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide NC hybrid solar cells




Donor–acceptor
Nanostructure
Interface modification

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.





a PCE was improved to 1.02% with VOx as a buffer layer.





P3HT–TiO2
Porous film
D102 dye + TBP + Li+
0.83
5.19
61
2.63

102



P3HT–TiO2
Porous film
TBP + WL-4 molecule
0.8
6.79
52
2.86

103



P3HT–TiO2
Porous film
YD2 dye
0.51
12.1
50
3.13

111



P3HT–TiO2
Dendrite array (1.5um)
D149 dye
0.63
8.12
61
3.12

98



P3HT–TiO2
Rod array (650 nm)
TBP + D149 dye
0.59
5.18
59
1.83

112



P3HT–TiO2
Tube array
TBP + SQ-1 dye
0.6
11
58
3.8

106



PCPDTBT–TiO2
Porous film
D131dye + C60 + Li+
0.4
8
40
1.4

107



P3HT–ZnO
Fiber array
None
0.44
2.2
56
0.53

88



P3HT–ZnO
Fiber network
None
0.49
2.15
38
0.51

95



P3HT–ZnO
Rod array
Sq dye
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.82a

113



P3HT–ZnO
Sheet
None
0.39
2.07
51
0.88

96



P3HT–ZnO–TiO2
ZnO rod array + TiO2 nanorod as branch
Mercurochrome dye
0.46
2.45
46
0.52

99





Conclusion and perspectives
Polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells have attracted growing interest over the last decade because of the advantages of ease of fabrication from solution processes, non-toxicity, and low costs. Because of a wide range of morphologies of metal oxide NCs, the device structures can be varied from a similar device structure to polymer–fullerene solar cells, where dispersed metal oxide NCs are blended with a polymer to form BHJs, to a device structure similar to a solid-state DSSC, by infiltrating the polymer into rigidly connected metal oxide nanostructures modified with organic dye molecules. Although power conversion efficiencies of the best hybrid photovoltaic devices are still low compared to the best polymer–fullerene structures, the device performance has been significantly improved through understanding the correlation between organic–inorganic morphologies and photocarrier dynamics, and controlling the organic–inorganic interfaces and the synthesis of new materials. For the polymer–metal-oxide BHJ solar cell, the strategy used to achieve an optimal BHJ morphology is one that allows both efficient charge separation and efficient charge transport. The limiting factor in this type of device is the relatively low short-circuit current compared to that in polymer–fullerene hybrid solar cells because of smaller total interface areas at donor–acceptor interfaces due to larger sizes of NCs. This can be accomplished by tuning the morphology of the metal oxide NCs from isotropic spheres to 1D-oriented nanorods, 3D tetrapads, or 3D hyperbranches such as CdSe NCs. However, an optimal polymer thickness and polymer:NC ratios should be considered to obtain efficient charge separation and transport because metal oxide NCs do not contribute to light harvesting. For nanostructured metal-oxide–polymer hybrid solar cells, the design and synthesis of new dye molecules and polymers with appropriate energy levels and good carrier mobility (for polymers) is an effective strategy for improving the device performance. Specifically, the absorption bands of dye molecules and polymers can complement each other to make the two materials appropriate for a tandem-type nanostructured metal-oxide–dye–polymer solar cell with an extended light-harvesting spectrum. A new trend in this field is the integration of the advantages of both polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells and solid-state DSSCs into a mixed concept of a device structure. For example, the recent breakthrough of inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells, with the device architecture comprising a bicontinuous three-dimensional nanocomposite of mesoporous TiO2, with CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite as the light harvester, as well as a polymeric hole conductor (Fig. 15), has yielded a power conversion efficiency of 12%.114
 Fig. 15  (a) The SEM cross-sectional image and (b) schematic of the device architecture of the inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cell containing 3D TiO2–CH3NH3PbI3 nanocomposites and a polymer conductor as a hole transporting material (HTM). CH3NH3PbI3 is a perovskite light absorber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114 (Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group). 
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge that their work is supported by National Science Council, Taiwan (Project NSC 100-2119-M-002-020- and NSC 100-2628-M-002-013-MY3)
Notes and references
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 44–48 CrossRef .
S. Uchida, J. Xue, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4218–4220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5757–5759 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1266–1273 CAS .
F. C. Krebs, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, M. Wadstrøm and M. S. Pedersen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512–525 CAS .

          K. Miyake, Y. Uetani, T. Seike, T. Kato, K. Oya, K. Yoshimura and T. Ohnishi, in Sumitomo Kagaku R&D Report,  2010, vol. 1, pp. 1–6 Search PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835–16847 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16144–16145 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S. T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Chu, J. Lu, S. Beaupré, Y. Zhang, J.-R. m. Pouliot, S. Wakim, J. Zhou, M. Leclerc, Z. Li and J. Ding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4250–4253 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. C. Stuart, S. C. Price, S. Liu and W. You, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 3051–3054 CrossRef .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch and C.-S. Ha, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
NREL, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv.
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao and G. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Eck and M. Krüger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1851–1864 CAS .
C. Lungenschmied, G. Dennler, H. Neugebauer, S. N. Sariciftci, M. Glatthaar, T. Meyer and A. Meyer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Helgesen, R. Søndergaard and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 36–60 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
E. Holder, N. Tessler and A. L. Rogach, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1064–1078 RSC .
B. R. Saunders and M. L. Turner, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 138, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skompska, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Eck, C. Veit, B. Zimmermann, F. Rauscher, P. Niyamakom, S. Yilmaz, I. Dumsch, S. Allard and U. Scherf, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Beek, L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and R. A. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Kwong, A. B. Djurišić, P. C. Chui, K. W. Cheng and W. K. Chan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 384, 372–375 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu and G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1628–1631 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Lin, T.-H. Chu, S.-S. Li, C.-H. Chuang, C.-H. Chang, W.-F. Su, C.-P. Chang, M.-W. Chu and C.-W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3644–3649 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 239–242 CrossRef .
B. Sun, H. J. Snaith, A. S. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Jiang, D. Qin and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9538–9542 CAS .
S. Kumar and T. Nann, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1990–1994 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cui, J. Xu, T. Zhu, G. Paradee, S. Ashok and M. Gerhold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183111–183113 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Liu, Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 449–452 CrossRef .
S. Günes, K. P. Fritz, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Kumar and G. D. Scholes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 420–423 CrossRef .
N. Kudo, Y. Shimazaki, H. Ohkita, M. Ohoka and S. Ito, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1243–1247 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
J. Boucle, S. Chyla, M. S. Shaffer, J. R. Durrant, D. D. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 622–633 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kwong, W. Choy, A. Djurišić, P. Chui, K. Cheng and W. Chan, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1156 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380–3382 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, S. A. Haque, J. R. Durrant, D. D. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 609–618 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Li, C. P. Chang, C. C. Lin, Y. Y. Lin, C. H. Chang, J. R. Yang, M. W. Chu and C. W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11614–11620 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Chen, T.-H. Chu, W.-F. Su, C.-C. Lin, C.-H. Ku, J.-J. Wu and C.-H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4571 RSC .
G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Lin, Y.-Y. Lin, S.-S. Li, C.-C. Yu, C.-L. Huang, S.-H. Lee, C.-H. Du, J.-J. Lee, H.-L. Chen and C.-W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2134–2139 CAS .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619–3623 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C.-P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557–3560 RSC .
Y. Zhou, F. S. Riehle, Y. Yuan, H.-F. Schleiermacher, M. Niggemann, G. A. Urban and M. Krüger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013304 CrossRef .
P. D. Cozzoli, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14539–14548 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bouclé, S. Chyla, M. S. P. Shaffer, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 622–633 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Lin, T.-H. Chu, C.-W. Chen and W.-F. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053312 CrossRef .
C.-H. Chuang, Y.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Tseng, T.-H. Chu, C.-C. Lin, W.-F. Su and C.-W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18717–18724 CAS .
D. J. Moet, L. J. A. Koster, B. de Boer and P. W. Blom, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5856–5861 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Huang, G. C. Welch, G. C. Bazan, M. L. Chabinyc and W. F. Su, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7250–7252 RSC .
Q. Wei, T. Nishizawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2211–2216 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'regan and M. Grfitzeli, Nature, 1991, 353, 24 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Huang, J.-H. Hsu, Y.-C. Liao, W.-C. Yen, S.-S. Li, S.-T. Lin, C.-W. Chen and W.-F. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4450–4456 RSC .
H.-C. Liao, C.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Ho, M.-H. Jao, C.-M. Tsai, C.-M. Chuang, J.-J. Shyue, Y.-F. Chen and W.-F. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10589–10596 RSC .
J. F. Lin, G. Y. Tu, C. C. Ho, C. Y. Chang, W. C. Yen, S. H. Hsu, Y. F. Chen and W. F. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1009–1016 CAS .
I. Park, Y. Lim, S. Noh, D. Lee, M. Meister, J. J. Amsden, F. Laquai, C. Lee and D. Y. Yoon, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 424–428 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, W. Chen, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2757–2762 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shao, F. Liu, G. Fang, B. Zhang, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 641–647 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, L. Chen, Y. Chen, F. Li and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3486–3491 CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, L. J. A. Koster, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos, O. Stenzel, R. Thiedmann, V. Schmidt, B. Campo, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutzen, D. Vanderzande, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Q. Wei, G. Qian, L. Yao and J. J. Watkins, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 8665–8673 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hindson, Z. Saghi, J. C. Hernandez-Garrido, P. A. Midgley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
J. Loos, E. Sourty, K. Lu, G. de With and S. v. Bavel, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2581–2586 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van-Bavel, E. Sourty and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507–513 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3217–3234 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lu, E. Sourty, R. Guerra, G. Bar and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1444–1448 CrossRef CAS .
M.-W. Chu, S. Liou, C.-P. Chang, F.-S. Choa and C. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 196101 CrossRef .
C.-C. Lin, P.-H. Ho, C.-L. Huang, C.-H. Du, C.-C. Yu, H.-L. Chen, Y.-C. Yeh, S.-S. Li, C.-K. Lee, C.-W. Pao, C.-P. Chang, M.-W. Chu and C.-W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25081–25088 CAS .
K. M. Coakley, B. S. Srinivasan, J. M. Ziebarth, C. Goh, Y. Liu and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1927–1932 CrossRef CAS .
C.-K. Lee, C.-W. Pao and C.-W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 307–315 CAS .
W. J. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1009–1013 CrossRef CAS .
N. Vlachopoulos, P. Liska, J. Augustynski and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 1216–1220 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Oey, A. Djurišić, M. Xie, Y. Leung, K. Man, W. Chan, A. Pandey, J.-M. Nunzi and P. Chui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 023507 CrossRef .
J. Bouclé, H. J. Snaith and N. C. Greenham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3664–3674 Search PubMed .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiró, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7635–7639 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, J. Piris, R. T. Collins, S. E. Shaheen and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 26–29 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tepavcevic, S. B. Darling, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and S. J. Sibener, Small, 2009, 5, 1776–1783 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16670–16678 CAS .
Y.-J. Lee, M. T. Lloyd, D. C. Olson, R. K. Grubbs, P. Lu, R. J. Davis, J. A. Voigt and J. W. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15778–15782 CAS .
D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, M. S. White, W. J. Mitchell, M. F. A. M. vanHest, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Baeten, B. Conings, H. G. Boyen, J. D'Haen, A. Hardy, M. D'Olieslaeger, J. V. Manca and M. K. Van Bael, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2802–2805 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dag and L.-W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4185–4190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Q. Tai and F. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6197–6200 CAS .
Y.-H. Sung, W.-P. Liao, D.-W. Chen, C.-T. Wu, G.-J. Chang and J.-J. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Chen, K.-H. Chen, C.-H. Shen, A. Ganguly, L.-C. Chen, J.-J. Wu, H.-I. Wen and W.-F. Pong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 241905 CrossRef .
W.-P. Liao, S.-C. Hsu, W.-H. Lin and J.-J. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15938–15945 CAS .
Y.-Y. Lin, Y.-Y. Lee, L. Chang, J.-J. Wu and C.-W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063308 CrossRef .
C. Goh, S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 114503 CrossRef .
D. Poplavskyy and J. Nelson, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhu, C.-Y. Jiang, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 994–1000 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, T.-L. Shen, W.-H. Weng, Y.-C. Huang, C.-I. Huang, W.-F. Su, S.-P. Rwei, K.-C. Ho and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shanmugam, T. Bansal, C. A. Durcan and B. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 153901 CrossRef .
M. Shanmugam, C. A. Durcan, R. Jacobs-Gedrim and B. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, S. Kim, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar, J. Basham and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4250–4257 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, R. S. Santosh Kumar, A. Abrusci, H.-L. Yip, C.-Z. Li, A.-K. Y. Jen, G. Lanzani and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2160–2166 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Chang, J. H. Rhee, S. H. Im, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2609–2612 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, H. C. Leventis, S. A. Haque, T. Torres, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 596–599 CrossRef CAS .
N. Humphry-Baker, K. Driscoll, A. Rao, T. Torres, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 634–639 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Moon, E. Baranoff, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C.-Y. Yeh, E. W.-G. Diau, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8244–8246 CAS .
S.-C. Hsu, W.-P. Liao, W.-H. Lin and J.-J. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25721–25726 CAS .
P. Ruankham, L. Macaraig, T. Sagawa, H. Nakazumi and S. Yoshikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23809–23816 CAS .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C. S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Shao-Sian Li	Dr. Shao-Sian Li obtained his B.S. degree in materials science at National Chiao-Tung University, Taiwan in 2004, and received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from National Taiwan University, Taiwan in 2006 and 2010. He is currently carrying out the post-doctoral research in Prof. Chun-Wei Chen's group of Nano-Materials and Devices Lab in National Taiwan University. He has engaged in research on the correlation between morphology, structure and charge carrier dynamic properties in polymer-based solar cells via development of various electrical and optical transient techniques. His current research interests also include the study of electrical and optical properties of novel 2-dimensional materials.
Chun-Wei Chen	Prof. Chun-Wei Chen received his B.S. degree in electrical engineering, National Taiwan University (NTU), Taiwan (1993) and M. Phil degree from Cavendish laboratory, Department of Physics (1995), and Ph.D. degree from Engineering department (1998), both from Cambridge University, U.K. He joined the faculty of Department of Materials Science and Engineering, NTU in 2002, where he is currently a Professor. His major research interests include the development of next-generation energy materials based on nanomaterials and devices, such as polymer solar cells and photochemical cells. He also has extensive research activities on graphene related research topics. He is a recipient of Outstanding Researcher Award from National Science Council, Taiwan (2011) and of Y. Z. Hsu Scientific Paper Award (2013).

 	Fig. 1  (a) Different configurations of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. The left panel shows the BHJ device architecture and the right panel shows the nanostructured hybrid device architecture. (b) Schematic representation of the correlation between morphology, carrier dynamics and power conversion efficiency of polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) AFM surface morphology of P3HT films spun from a single solvent of CF and (b) from mixed solvents. (c) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image shows aggregated TiO2 NCs spun from CF and (d) dispersed TiO2 NCs spun from mixed solvents containing pyridine in P3HT–TiO2 NC hybrid films. (e) Cross-section TEM image of in situ-grown ZnO NCs embedded in a P3HT matrix and (f) shows its optimized current–voltage characteristics with a PCE of 2.0%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society) and ref. 44 (Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 3  The SEM and schematic images of a P3HT–TiO2 hybrid film with 1 wt% FBN-CPDT additive, showing the distribution of P3HT and TiO2 in the active layer with the fluorinated molecules. Reproduced from ref. 62.	 

 	Fig. 4  High-resolution TEM image of TiO2 (a) NPs and (b) NRs. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of P3HT–TiO2 NP and NR hybrid BHJ solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 (Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the ligand exchange process. Insulating oleic acid was removed by pyridine or replaced by interfacial molecules such as ACA, CuPc dye or N3 dye. (b) and (c) show the current–voltage characteristics of the P3HT–TiO2 NR BHJ solar cell with various surface ligands. (d) and (e) show the energy band alignment and carrier recombination rate of the devices in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society) and ref. 59 (Copyright 2008 The American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Chemical structure of P3HT-E. (b) The TEM morphology image of the P3HT-E–ZnO NCs hybrid film. (c) Schematic illustration of the P3HT-b-PEG–TiO2 NR hybrid and (d) its corresponding TEM morphology. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh) and ref. 73 (Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) TEM tomography images of the in situ-grown ZnO NCs and P3HT blending film. (a) was recorded from a device with a poor performance and (b) was from an optimized device with a favorable phase separation. (c) shows the ZnO NC distribution along the thickness direction in the (b) sample. (d and e) STEM HAADF tomography images of P3HT–TiO2 NPs and NR hybrid films respectively. The insets also show the 3D distribution of TiO2 NPs or NRs along the thickness direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44 (Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group) and ref. 49 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) 2D GIXRD images of the pristine P3HT film, P3HT–TiO2 NP and P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrids. 1D plots of XRD patterns are shown in the (b) out-of-plane (qz) and in-plane (qx) (as shown in the inset of (b)) directions. Black, red, and blue curves represent the pristine P3HT film, P3HT–TiO2 NP, and P3HT–TiO2 NR hybrids, respectively. (c) Illustrations of the lamellar stacking and vertical stacking of P3HT crystallites with respect to the substrate surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80 (Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  CGMD simulated 3D morphologies of P3HT–TiO2 NP (upper panel) and NR (lower panel) BHJ hybrid films with a blending ratio of 1:1; P3HT chains and nanocrystals are colored in red and blue, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 82.	 


P3HT–TiO2	Particle 20–40	None	60 wt%	Xylene	0.44	2.76	36	0.42	
33

P3HT–TiO2	Particle 5	Pyr.	50 wt%	Pyr. + DCM + CF + CB	0.6	1.65	42	0.42	
49

P3HT–TiO2	Rod 5 × 20	N3 dye	50 wt%	Pyr. + CF + DCM	0.78	4.33	65	2.2	
35

P3HT–TiO2	Rod 4–5 × 20–40	Oleic acid	50 wt%	Pyr. + CF + DCM	0.65	1.67	35	0.38	
59

P3HT–TiO2	Rod 4–5 × 35	Oligo-PZFDPP	53 wt%	Pyr. + CF + CB + DCB	0.62	3.8	52	1.2b	
66

P3HT–TiO2	Rod 4 × 20	Pyr.	50 wt%	Pyr. + DCM + CF + CB	0.69	3.1	62	1.33	
49

P3HT-b-PEG–TiO2	Rod 3–4 × 20–30	N3 dye	50 wt%	Pyr. + CF + CB	0.79	5.56	39	1.71	
73

P3HT–ZnO	Particle	PCBA	67 wt%	CB	0.47	5.39	48	1.2	
71

P3HT–ZnO	Network	None	20 vol%	
In situ growth	0.75	5.2	52	2	
44

MDMO-PPV–ZnO	Network	None	15 vol%	
In situ growth	1.14	2.3	42	1.1	
32

MEH-PPV–ZnO	Particle 5	MBA	76 wt%	CB	0.88	3.45	50	1.52	
70

MDMO-PPV–ZnO	Particle 5	None	67 wt%	CB + methanol	0.81	2.4	59	1.6c	
83


 	Fig. 10  Various types of metal oxide nanostructures being used as acceptors in nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. (a) Mesoporous TiO2, (b) porous ZnO, (c) ZnO nanofiber array, (d) ZnO nanorod array, (e) ZnO nanofibrous network and (f) ZnO nanosheet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 (Copyright 2003 The American Institute of Physics), ref. 86 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society), ref. 88 (Copyright 2006 Elsevier Science), ref. 93 (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh), ref. 95 (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society) and ref. 96 (Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Effect of interface modifiers on the energy offset and Voc in nanostructured polymer–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. (b) Dye-regeneration and electron-mediating mechanisms of the dye interface modifier in nanostructured polymer–dye–metal-oxide hybrid solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100 (Copyright 2009 The American Institute of Physics) and ref. 102 (Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Li-salt treatment changed the energy levels of the interfacial D102 molecules. (b) shows the corresponding EQE spectra of these devices. Device D exhibited the optimal performance with Li-salt and TBP treatment. (c) Chemical structures of various conjugated cyanoacrylic acids. (d) shows the corresponding current–voltage characteristics of P3HT–porous TiO2 nanostructure hybrid solar cells using different conjugated cyanoacrylic acids as interface modifiers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 and 103 (Copyright 2009, 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM top and cross-sectional images of the TiO2 ND array and the illustration of the P3HT–TiO2 ND array hybrid solar cell. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of nanostructured P3HT–TiO2 hybrid solar cells consisting of a D149-modified NR array (650 nm), D149-modified NR array (1.5 μm) and D149-modified ND array (1.5 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 98 (Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Representation of the nanostructured P3HT–SQ-1 dye–TiO2 nanotube array hybrid solar cell. (b) Absorption spectra of the P3HT–TiO2 and SQ-1–TiO2 hybrid. (c) EQE spectra of the corresponding devices, where visible and NIR portions were contributed by P3HT and SQ-1 dye respectively. (d) Energy band alignment of the C60-modified mesoporous TiO2 and low band gap polymer PCPDTBT hybrid solar cell. The corresponding absorption spectra are shown in (e). (f) Panchromatic spectral photoresponse with EQE spectra extended to 900 nm, which were contributed by the low band gap polymer PCPDTBT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 (Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society) and ref. 107 (Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh).	 


P3HT–TiO2	Porous film	D102 dye + TBP + Li+	0.83	5.19	61	2.63	
102

P3HT–TiO2	Porous film	TBP + WL-4 molecule	0.8	6.79	52	2.86	
103

P3HT–TiO2	Porous film	YD2 dye	0.51	12.1	50	3.13	
111

P3HT–TiO2	Dendrite array (1.5um)	D149 dye	0.63	8.12	61	3.12	
98

P3HT–TiO2	Rod array (650 nm)	TBP + D149 dye	0.59	5.18	59	1.83	
112

P3HT–TiO2	Tube array	TBP + SQ-1 dye	0.6	11	58	3.8	
106

PCPDTBT–TiO2	Porous film	D131dye + C60 + Li+	0.4	8	40	1.4	
107

P3HT–ZnO	Fiber array	None	0.44	2.2	56	0.53	
88

P3HT–ZnO	Fiber network	None	0.49	2.15	38	0.51	
95

P3HT–ZnO	Rod array	Sq dye	N/A	N/A	N/A	0.82a	
113

P3HT–ZnO	Sheet	None	0.39	2.07	51	0.88	
96

P3HT–ZnO–TiO2	ZnO rod array + TiO2 nanorod as branch	Mercurochrome dye	0.46	2.45	46	0.52	
99


 	Fig. 15  (a) The SEM cross-sectional image and (b) schematic of the device architecture of the inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cell containing 3D TiO2–CH3NH3PbI3 nanocomposites and a polymer conductor as a hole transporting material (HTM). CH3NH3PbI3 is a perovskite light absorber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114 (Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
