Underlying physics and chemistry of ferroic-photocatalysis: a critical review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA05294F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA05294F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 22977-22991Underlying physics and chemistry of ferroic-photocatalysis: a critical review

        
          
            Muzaffar Ahmad 
            Boda
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ray L. 
            Withers
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yun 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jinhua 
            Ye
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Zhiguo 
            Yi
          
          
        
      *ad
aState Key Laboratory of High-Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, China. E-mail: zhiguo@mail.sic.ac.cn
bResearch School of Chemistry, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. E-mail: Ray.Withers@anu.edu.au; yun.liu@anu.edu.au
cInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: Jinhua.YE@nims.go.jp
dCenter of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      2nd July 2022
    , Accepted 27th September 2022First published on 31st October 2022AbstractPhotocatalysis involving ferroic materials (hereafter ferroic-photocatalysis for simplicity) is emerging as an effective strategy to counter the recombination loss of photogenerated charge carriers. The built-in electric field, or exotic polarization profile, associated with domain walls (DWs) in ferroic-photocatalysts can inherently separate and drift the photogenerated electrons and holes to desired oxidation and reduction sites, and drive efficiently the photocatalytic reactions. Despite some initial exciting reports, only limited attempts have been made towards understanding the underlying physico-chemistry of ferroic-photocatalysis. Herein, we provide a fundamental overview of ferro-photocatalysis with emphasis on recent progress in the field. Specifically, we aim to bridge ferroelectric physics and photocatalytic chemistry by introducing the built-in electric field, anomalous photovoltaic effect, polar nano regions and surface active sites. Our objective is to stress the importance of the underlying dynamics at play in ferroic-photocatalysis and discuss the possibility of advancing this cross-disciplinary field.Muzaffar Ahmad BodaMuzaffar Ahmad Boda obtained his Ph.D. from the National Institute of Technology Srinagar India in 2018, and then worked as a CSIR Research Associate in the same institute until 2019. Since then he has been pursuing his Postdoc studies at the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has received several fellowships and awards, including Postdoc International Exchange in 2019, Foreign Young Talent in 2021, and National Natural Science Foundation of China-International Young Scientist in 2022. His current research focus is Photostriction and Photocatalytic study of Ferroelectric and Ferroelastic materials.Ray L. WithersRay Withers obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Melbourne followed by postdocs at the Universities of Toronto and Bristol. He arrived at the Australian National University in 1986 and has been Professor of Materials Chemistry there since 2004. He is currently an Emeritus Professor and the Fellow of Australian Academy of Sciences. He is an internationally renowned scientist in X-ray crystallography with a strong focus on electron diffraction and its application in compositionally and/or displacive flexible materials. He has solved many complex local structures of various materials.Yun LiuYun Liu received her Ph.D. in 1997 from the Xi'an Jiaotong University. She then worked at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan (1998–2001) as an AIST and STA fellow. She joined the Australian National University, Australia in 2001 and was promoted to a full professor in 2015. She has been awarded the Australian Research Council (ARC) fellowships of the Queen Elisabeth II (2006–2010), Future (2011–2015) and now Georgina Sweet Australian Laureate (2021). Her research focuses on the multiscale relation of the chemistry, structure and properties of various functional materials and materials design for practical applications.Jinhua YeJinhua Ye received her Ph.D. from the University of Tokyo in 1990. She is presently a Principal Investigator at the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), and a Professor of the Joint Doctoral Program at Hokkaido University, Japan. Her current research interests focus on the research and development of photofunctional materials and their applications in the fields of environmental remediation and new energy production.Zhiguo YiZhiguo Yi is a full professor and principal investigator of the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. He then worked at the National Institute for Materials Science of Japan, the Australian National University, and the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter until 2017. His current research interests focus mainly on the photophysics and photochemistry of functional materials, especially those involving ferroelectrics and photocatalysis.
1. Introduction
To address the increasing energy, environment and climate crisis, scientists have been seeking safe, green and renewable energy sources as alternative sustainable solutions.1,2 Among which, photocatalysis has undoubtedly proven to be a promising approach to tackle these issues.3–8 However, the poor transport mechanism of photogenerated charge carriers always remained the limiting factor to achieve higher efficiency; most of the photogenerated electrons and holes recombine before they reach the surface of the catalyst to initiate redox reactions.9,10 Although, strategies such as hetero-structural and functionalization designs can decrease its impact, but the efficiency still remains much lower than required for commercial utility.11 Therefore, to control the recombination of charge carriers for a significant outcome, photocatalysts exhibiting an intrinsic control over the dynamics of photogenerated charge carriers need to be designed and developed.
Generally, heterogeneous photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 1a) involve: (I) generation and separation of photoinduced electrons and holes, (II) transfer of electrons and holes to surface active sites and (III) redox reactions at the surface to generate free radicals to initiate the photocatalytic reaction. However, in step II, most e−–h+ pairs suffer recombination while transferring from the bulk to surface, leaving behind only the long-lived charge carriers to initiate the redox reaction.12 To promote charge transfer and photocatalytic efficiency, step II is required to reconfigure by designing highly efficient photocatalysts that enable an intrinsic control to promote the bulk charge separation whilst facilitating the high density of oxidation and reduction centres on the surface.13–15
 Fig. 1  Fundamental processes of photocatalysis. (a) The generation, separation, migration, recombination and reactions of photoinduced carriers in conventional photocatalysts. (b) Built-in electric field favours fast separation, transportation and reactions of photo-generated carriers in ferroic-photocatalysts. (c) Publications and citations of ferroic-photocatalysts is obtained from web of science on 05-02-2022 by searching the keywords photocatalysis and ferroics (ferroelectrics and ferroelastics). 
Ferroic materials, including ferroelectrics and ferroelastics, have emerged as effective candidates to largely overcome the recombination issues due to the built-in electric field associated with the domain walls (DWs) that facilitate the vectorial transfer of photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. 1b).15–22 The potential difference arising from the polarization component perpendicular to the domain wall (DW) inherently separates and drifts photogenerated charge carriers to catalytic sites.23 In addition, the polarization affects the thermodynamic stability of surface stoichiometries and geometries, and leads to the creation and migration of charged and atomic defects, which further facilitates the adsorption of reactants and desorption of products while altering both the binding energies and the availability of spatially separated binding sites.24–26 The polarity switching at DWs can increase the selectivity of target products by avoiding the reverse reaction of the products.22 Therefore, it is DWs and associated polarity which impart superior photocatalytic importance to ferroic materials over conventional photocatalysts, not only in the transfer dynamics of photogenerated charge carriers but also in facilitating the desired surface chemistry. Undoubtedly, most ferroic materials are wide band gap semiconductors, adopting band gap engineering strategies such as Z-scheme, S-scheme, etc., in analogy to conventional photocatalysis, driving photocatalytic reactions under visible light.
While publications involving ferroic-photocatalysis have grown quickly in the past several years (Fig. 1c), few have systematically explored the underlying photophysics and photochemistry. The main objective of this review is therefore to encourage more in-depth investigations into this emerging cross-disciplinary field by providing a fundamental overview of ferroic-photocatalysis from a physics perspective and with an emphasis on recent progress (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the physico-chemistry of ferroic photocatalysis and its applications. 
2. Domain walls
Emerging out of breaking-symmetry, domain patterns endow ferroic materials with fascinating physics and chemistry.16,27 The specific order parameter (spontaneous polarization in ferroelectrics and spontaneous strain in ferroelastics) gives rise to polarity similar to Ising walls (Fig. 3a and c) in non-polar ferroelastic materials and a non-trivial exotic polarization profile varying between Ising, Bloch and Néel wall natures (Fig. 3c–f) in the otherwise insulating ferroelectric materials,28 which can induce the potential steps of 0.01–0.2 eV across DWs.29–32 However, before discussing their role in the transfer dynamics of charge carriers, it is important to consider the possible DW configurations in ferroic materials. Based on the polarization orientation of two adjacent domains, the possible DW configurations that differ in bound charge compensation involve: straight head-to-tail (H–T), head-to-head (H–H) and tail-to-tail (T–T) configurations.33–36 The H–T configuration (Fig. 3g) that forms neutral domain walls (NDWs) by compensating perfectly the bound charges are responsible in the formation of a space charge layer similar to that of a p–n junction.35 On the other hand, T–T (holding negative bound charge) (Fig. 3h) and H–H (holding positive bound charge) (Fig. 3i) configurations in which electrostatic compatibility deviates from neutral orientation (div P ≠ 0; P is polarization component normal to DW) constitutes the charged domain walls (CDWs),35,36 which are only partially screened by electrons, holes or mobile ions, provided by dopants or structural defects.
 Fig. 3  Mechanisms leading to polar DWs. (a) Schematic of an elementary DW with a single order parameter, Q, and tanh profile. (b) Sketch of a ferroelastic wall, with a discontinuity (or gradient) in spontaneous strain. (c) Ferroelectric elementary Ising wall. (d) Phase transition in a DW with the emergence of an additional instability, which may be a polarization component P. (e) Ferroelectric Bloch wall, where the polarization rotates in the plane of the wall. (f) Ferroelectric Néel wall.28 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature Limited. (g) Sketches of the uncharged 71° and (h) 109° H–T DW configurations. The crystallographic directions and DW planes are given in the pseudocubic reference. (i) Sketches of the charged 109° T–T and H–H DWs. (j) LPFM image showing the distribution of polar domains in the film. The film shows a typical pattern of 71° domains with four possible crystallographic variants. (k) VPFM signal of the same area. An out-of-plane signal is observed at the merging points between differently oriented domain stripes. The poled area (used as a reference for sample alignment) is marked in (k) and (l) by the black dashed line. (m) Magnified view of the area marked in the white box in (k). The arrows give the in-plane component of polarization. The configuration of the polar domains gives rise to regions where 109° T–T and H–H domain walls are observed. These DWs show a high conductance state compared to the low conductivity of H–T DWs.34 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Unlike conventional interfaces, DWs are completely a new type of functional junctionless-interface, which have the potential to revolutionize photovoltaic based applications.36 However, progress in this field is one-to-one correlated with advanced spatially resolved characterization methods, which are primarily important to study and tune their physical and chemical properties at the nanoscale. So far, the microstructures and atomic structures of DWs are investigated by a combination of piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM), in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and an aberration-corrected atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM).34 Conductive atomic force microscopy (cAFM) is used to study their electron transport behavior; photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM) and low energy electron microscopy (LEEM) are also getting explored to further widen the accessibility of their electrostatic potentials and mapping transport phenomena with nanoscale spatial resolution.34 Furthermore, the ferroelectric contrast enables the possibility of combining scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with other complementary techniques, such as scanning probe microscopy (SPM), TEM, atom probe tomography (APT) and, focused ion beam (FIB), to open new pathways for the investigation of complex physics associated with DWs.37 In order to get more insight about the structure and conductance of CDWs, a detailed experimental illustration of CDWs will be of great significance. Therefore, this has been exemplified here with a recent study: imaging and quantification of CDWs,34 in which BiFeO3 films have been investigated by PFM in the lateral (LPFM) (Fig. 3j) and vertical (VPFM) (Fig. 3k) directions, showing the typical contrast of DWs along different directions. The pattern that appear on the surface as stripes and are parallel to the main directions of the cubic substrate displays the typical contrast of 71° DWs. However, this configuration leads to weakly charged DWs, as variation of the polarization vector of this pattern occurs with respect to {101} or {011} planes, which gives rise only to H–T configurations. The strongly charged H–H and T–T DWs are confirmed by the strong out-of-plane polarization component, which can be seen in the VPFM signal shown in Fig. 3l. Fig. 3m shows the magnified view of the region marked by white boxes in Fig. 3k and l, which highlights 109° H–H (marked by green line) and T–T (marked by blue lines) DWs.34
NDWs as well as CDWs stabilize differently in different ferroic materials.20 For example, 90° and 180° CDWs stabilize in tetragonal BaTiO3, 71° and 109° DWs in lower symmetry rhombohedral Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) whereas BiFeO3 involves 180°, 71° and 109° DWs in rhombohedral symmetry and 90° DW in its orthorhombic symmetry state.38,39 Each DW configuration contributes uniquely to the intriguing photovoltaic properties of ferroic materials. The formation of 180° DWs reduces the depolarization energy and being symmetric does not play apparently any role in the open circuit photovoltage; thus they are being considered to be photovoltaically inactive.40,41 Non-180° DWs including 71° and 109° walls are subject to a release of interior strain in crystals.41,42
In analogy to the significance of polar facets in photocatalysis, DWs facilitate the efficient transfer mechanism of photogenerated charge carriers to the surface and at the same time influences the local surface potential and surface free energy.43–46 In addition, controlling polarization switching in DWs via external electric field stimuli in ferroelectric materials and stress in ferroelastic materials, ferroic materials can be explored as a bi-functional electrode for both oxidation and reduction reactions (discussed in the surface active sites and application section below).
3. Built-in electric field
The driving force associated with DW polarity that drives separation, inhibits the recombination and transfers the photogenerated electrons and holes from the bulk of the material to surface active sites constitute the built-in electric field. It plays the underlying role to impart the photocatalytic significance of ferroic photocatalysts over conventional ones. During transfer of photogenerated charge carriers, energetically unstable charges in ferroelectric materials that are bound to DWs compensate through internal and/or external screening (Fig. 4a). External screening facilitates adsorption of molecules whilst internal screening that causes redistribution/depletion of charge carriers results in band bending near the surface.47 The direction of bending depends on the polarity of the surface bound charges. For the surface with negative polarity, electrons are depleted from the surface and give rise to a depletion layer with upward band bending which restricts the movement of electrons, but drives the movement of holes towards the surface.48,49 For the surface with positive polarity, electrons are accumulated on the surface and give rise to an accumulation layer with downward band bending (Fig. 4b).50–52 Similarly, the presence of domain boundaries in ferroelastic materials like BiVO4 and WO3 signifies their importance in photocatalysis, despite being centrosymmetric in the bulk.53–55 In complex domain patterns their polarity almost cancels out; however a small bias/flexoelectric effect can induce a local polar nature. On a rough ferroelastic surface, local surface steps break the macroscopic inversion symmetry and on nucleation the surface produces a net polarization density despite the bulk continues to remain strictly non-polar.56 Their polarization can be confirmed through a comparative analysis of polarized images and second harmonic (SH) generation signals. The contrast in the 2D image (obtained from a 1D scan along the sample depth) at the boundaries in the SH wave distribution (Fig. 4c) and the bright region in the 3D image of the SH wave distribution (Fig. 4d) from a small area (50 × 50 μm2) of BiVO4 sample reveals the presence of domains only at the boundaries of BiVO4.57 The bright lines almost parallel to the y-axis, coinciding with the ferroelastic domain boundaries, represents the area with SH activity. In BiVO4, the intensity of the SH signal is about 10−8 times weaker than that of normal ferroelectrics, which produce SH signals even from the bulk.58 So, ferroelastic materials locally behave like a weak ferroelectric material and generate local polarization associated with the built-in electric field, which inhibits recombination and promotes charge separation.59 The diffusion length of charge carriers in the representative members of both types of materials provides a clear overview of their significance for photocatalysis. The widely reported photocatalytic activity of ferroelastic BiVO4 is attributed to its higher carrier diffusion length of ∼90 nm, despite its lower carrier mobility.60 Similarly, the efficient photocatalytic performance of BaTiO3 in its ferroelectric state (tetragonal) is due to its long lived transient absorption signal, with t50% = 0.12 s, corresponding to a carrier diffusion length of ∼mm compared to its non-ferroelectric state (cubic) with t50% = 100 μs → diffusion length ∼ μm.61 This abrupt rise in the carrier diffusion length is attributed to the intrinsic properties (discussed in the incoming section) emerging due to the built-in electric field associated with the DWs.
 Fig. 4  Effect of polarization; (a, b) schematic of internal polarization and screening mechanisms (a) and, (b) free carrier reorganization on the band structure and photo excited carriers.47 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. (c, d) Second harmonic (SH) generation images of BiVO4; (c) 2D image with 0.2 μm scanning steps, stronger SH intensity is detected from the area with a brighter color, the SH-active areas appear as straight lines that correspond to the direction of the ferroelastic domain boundary and, (d) the constructed 3D image of SH wave distributions; SH activity remains inside the sample. The color bar corresponds to the magnitude of SH intensity.57 Copyright © 2020, American Institute of Physics. 
4. Anomalous photovoltaic effect
In conventional photovoltaics, the maximum open circuit photovoltage (Voc) a semiconductor can produce is equal to their band gap. It was first calculated by William Shockley and Hans J. Queisser and is known after their name as the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit. However, it must be noted that it is only applicable to single pn junction devices, for multi-junction photovoltaic systems, the output voltage can exceed the band gap.22,30,41 In the case of ferroelectric or ferroelastic materials, each DW acts like a single pn junction and the series of DWs that exist within these materials acts like a multi-junction.19,62 The photovoltage generated at each junction adds up and results in overall Voc that exceeds the band gap by many orders of magnitude (Voc ⋙…> Eg). This generation of the above band gap photo voltage is known as the anomalous photovoltaic effect (APVE).
Upon illumination, the electrostatic potential difference across DWs (Fig. 5a) drives the photogenerated electrons and holes towards the opposite sides of the DWs (Fig. 5b), thereby increases further the existing potential difference across DWs.62 The internal quantum efficiency for an individual DW can approach as high as 10% for band gap photons.41 While satisfying the Landau, Lifshitz and Kittel scaling law (the LLK law), the photovoltage of the order of mV range generated at each DW adds up and results in an overall voltage that exceeds the band gap by many orders of magnitude.22,62,63 The additional control of applying an electric field of suitable amplitude (e.g., ∼200 kV cm−1 for BiFeO3) across a given ferroic sample for a short time (100 ms for BiFeO3) results in a rotation of no photovoltaic response DW⊥ configuration to DW‖, showing the APVE (Fig. 5c).30,64,65 Similarly, ferroelastic materials e.g. BiVO4, satisfying Fridkin's model of APVE, generate a photovoltage of ∼40 V, exceeding the band gap (∼2.43 eV) by ∼20 times. However in ferroelastic materials, the APVE is associated with the flexoelectric coupling achieved through a sensitively tuned strain-induced local polarization mechanism (Fig. 5d and e). While having the directional dependence of applied stress (Fig. 5f) like the electric field dependence in ferroelectrics, the photovoltage follows a sine function relationship with the directional angle of the electrode rotation (Fig. 5g).19 Compared to ferroelectric materials that exhibit bulk asymmetry, the APVE in ferroelastic materials emerges from the local domain boundaries, associated with similar potential steps as ferroelectric materials (Fig. 5h and i).66
 Fig. 5  Anomalous photovoltaic effect. (a and b) Schematic of four domains and three DWs in an ordered array of 71° DWs; (a) band diagram showing the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) across these domains and DWs in the dark (note that there is no net voltage across the sample in the dark), section (i) illustrates a photon hitting the bulk of a domain and section (ii) a photon hitting at a DW and, (b) detailed picture of the build-up of photo excited charges at a DW. (c) PFM images of the as-grown (top panel), 200 V poled (middle panel), and 2200 V poled (bottom panel) device structures. The arrows indicate the in-plane projection of the polarization and the net polarization direction for the entire device structure.62 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. (d, e) Schematic diagram illustrating the flexoelectric coupling via a strain-induced local polarization mechanism in BiVO4; (d) unstrained BiVO4 has a centrosymmetry, and the net dipole moment of the unit cell is zero and, (e) nonuniform distortion; for example, the lattices close to the domain boundaries make BiVO4 lose centrosymmetry and thus induce a net dipole moment in the deformed unit cell. (f) Schematic illustration of the electrode geometries (0.785 mm2 circular electrode area and 5.0 mm electrode spacing) used for the photovoltaic measurements. (g) Electrode rotation angle dependence of Voc for a BiVO4 ceramic treated with unidirectional polishing. The angle θ is counted anticlockwise from 0° (the 0 → 1 in (f)) to 360°.19 Copyright © 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (h) Back scattering electron image of the three-tier domain structure in a single grain. (i) Schematic of the domain structure. The bold solid blue lines indicate the primary DWs. The thinner orange lines indicate the secondary DW. The tertiary domains are marked by thin solid blue lines within a secondary domain.66 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Furthermore, DWs can be erased, moved or even created on demand. Thus, allowing us to design a photo-electrode which exhibits the desired configuration and APVE that can provide a desired electromotive force for efficient separation and drift of the photogenerated electrons and holes towards reduction and oxidation sites in a given photocatalytic reaction.
5. Polar nano regions and surface active sites
The exotic polarization profiles associated with DWs (1–10 nm width) as discussed above demonstrate the importance of ferroic materials in photocatalysis. The photogenerated electrons experience a force towards the walls with positive polarity thereby facilitating a reduction reaction; however, holes moving towards the negative walls facilitate the oxidation reaction.67 Thus, ferroic materials inherently offer a bi-functional photo-electrode in the form of DWs.20 Their engineering with state of the art microscopy has further expanded the possibility of harnessing the potential of DWs.55 With the additional control of polarization switching, DWs offer multiple possibilities: (I) facilitates the adsorption of reactants and desorption of products by switching the polarity, (II) prepares the surface for another cycle of reaction and, (III) increases the selectivity of target products.67 So, the underlying reason of ferroic materials for gaining attention towards photocatalysis is actually associated with the polarity of DWs. In response to the built-in electric field and APVE associated with DWs, the evolution of domains under illumination leads to the creation and migration of charged and atomic defects, which facilitate the adsorption of reactants and desorption of products while altering both the binding energies as well as the availability of binding sites.26 The ensemble of light sensitive reactive atoms, ions, crystal facets, defects, steps or kinks at the surface of a catalyst that facilitates Sabatier's principle as well as raising the selectivity of the product, constitutes the surface active sites.26,68,69 In particular, defects play a vital role in photocatalytic behaviour of a given material; the difference in the electron distribution around the defect site not only modulates the local hydrophilic and hydrophobic nature but also the electronic structure of the catalyst.70,71 Also, defects act as reactive sites for adsorbates (Fig. 6a) and serve as hosts for co-catalyst atoms, thereby boosting light energy conversion by inducing local surface plasmonic resonance (LSPR) effects (Fig. 6b).15 Similarly, polar facets play the role of surface-active sites; the high value of the polar/non-polar faceted ratio in ZnO nanosheets than ZnO nanorods (Fig. 6c) outperforms in the photocatalytic oxidation of small molecular hydrocarbons (Fig. 6d).72 Likewise, the nanostep structures in NaTaO3 that arises on account of the synergistic effect of oxygen vacancies and La doping leads to an increase in reaction sites and on mounting NiO co-catalyst particles, the reaction centres get separated for oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions. The highly dispersed ultrafine NiO particles at the edges reduce water to H2 while the grooves in the nanostep structure provide catalytic active sites for O2 formation (Fig. 6e), which consequently results in an efficient apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 56% at 270 nm.73
 Fig. 6  Polarization driven surface active sites. (a) Rich defective surfaces favour surface reactions. (b) Decorated metallic nanostructures may act as both a co-catalyst and a light-harvesting medium.15 (c and d) Schematic diagram; (c) comparison of polar facets in ZnO nanosheets and nanorods and, (d) methane C–H and ethylene CC bond polarization as well as the activation of the surface-adsorbed oxygen molecule over polar and nonpolar crystal planes of ZnO nanostructures.72 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Scanning electron microscope image of NaTaO3:La(2%) and schematic mechanism of highly efficient photocatalytic water splitting over NiO/NaTaO3:La photocatalysts, in the inset.73 Copyright © 2003, American Chemical Society. (f and g) Surface topography after; (f) Ag+ reduction and (g) Mn2+ oxidation. The images have been taken in the same area. The vertical scale is 80 nm and 150 nm for (f) and (g), respectively. ‘O’ indicates a domain that promotes oxidation and ‘R’ indicates a domain that promotes reduction.55 Copyright 2016, Royal society of Chemistry. (h) Breaking of the oxygen tetrahedral cages upon molecular binding and exposure of Cr 3d states at the surface of negatively poled CrO2–PbTiO3 without NO; the atoms are Cr (pink), O (red), Pb (gray), and Ti (blue). (i) Real space electron redistribution shows covalent bond formation upon NO adsorption on the surface Cr atom for positively poled CrO2–PbTiO3. Blue iso-surfaces show regions in space that are depopulated by electrons, and red iso-surfaces show the regions that get populated by electrons when NO binds to the surface Cr. The state becoming occupied is a bonding combination of the NO SOMO (π symmetry) and the surface Cr 3dxz and Cr 3dyz orbitals.76 Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Bi-functional photochemical reactivity directed by the domain structure facilitates the photocathodic and photoanodic reactions along a given plane of the photocatalyst. Analogous to a series of short circuited photoelectrochemical cells, the reductive deposition of Ag+ (Fig. 6f) and the oxidative deposition of Mn2+ (Fig. 6g) over the surface of BiVO4 occurs in a domain selective fashion.57,74 The patterns which are reactive (unreactive) for reduction are unreactive (reactive) for the oxidation reaction. Similarly, the Ag and Pb deposits over TiO2 coated BaTiO3 follow the domain patterns of the underlying substrates. Likewise, the BaTiO3 domains promote the same half reaction in reactivity as well as in selectivity with or without the TiO2 film. The charge carriers producing the reaction patterns are mostly transported from the BaTiO3; the addition of a TiO2 film merely prevents the photo-degradation of the BaTiO3 surface. In this case the TiO2 film thickness surpasses the optimal value, it imparts a negative effect over the photochemical reactivity and selectivity of the BaTiO3 surface.75 In another example, an epitaxial monolayer of CrO2 on the thermodynamically stable (001) PbO terminated surface of PbTiO3 drives switchable catalytic activity between the strong adsorption of reactants (NO) in positive polarization and weak desorption of products (N2, O2) in negative polarization.76 The switchable activity primarily arises due to geometrical differences. In negative polarization, the active electronic states on the surface predominantly on the Cr5+ ions are enclosed in distorted tetrahedral oxygen cages. Therefore, to bind an adsorbate, these cages must break to expose Cr5+ ions for covalent binding (Fig. 6h). However, to break each cage, it costs a high penalty of 0.8 eV arising from the larger ionic radii of Cr5+, local symmetry reduction and non-degenerate electronic configuration of a single 3d electron in Cr5+. As a result, the adsorbates are not likely to fit inside the stable O2− tetrahedral cage, and thus destabilizes the molecular binding. In contrast, the electrons in positive polarization occupy the hybrid bonding state of the singly occupied molecular orbital (SOMO) of NO and the dxz, dyz orbitals of Cr. The zero overlap of the dxy and d3z2−r2 orbitals with the SOMO of NO enables the transfer of electrons from dxy and d3z2−r2 to the lower-energy bonding combination of Cr dxz + dyz and NO SOMO, leading to a surface with strong adsorption (Fig. 6i).76 Another exciting feature associated with polarization photocatalysis is that once the surface gets saturated with the product molecules, like oxygen in the case of NO dissociation, the polarization switching destabilizes O and forms O2 which has weak binding energy thereby desorbing easily and returning the surface to the pristine state, to start the next cycle of reaction. In addition, this kind of system gives rise to very small binding energies for SO2 molecules in one polarization state; switching the polarization will lead to desorption of such poisonous molecules.77–79 Hence, the desired degree of adsorption and desorption can be achieved by simply switching the polarization direction of ferroic photocatalysts.
Besides the possibility of desired surface terminations, the deposition of transition metal oxides such as TiO2, CdS, and CrO2 modifies the band gap and mitigates the large difference in work function between the ferroic substrate and co-catalysts. With this result, a smooth pathway is facilitated to carry out reduction and oxidation reactions under the collective influence of the smooth interface and the ferroic dipolar field associated with DWs (Fig. 7a).80
 Fig. 7  DW polarity based photocatalytic reactions. (a) Schematic of the band alignment of a single ferroelectric domain PbTiO3 single crystal with anatase TiO2 islands growing on the positively poled surface after selective deposition of co-catalyst Pt; D: electron donor, A: electron acceptor.80 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. (b–e) Schematic of the BWO/SRO heterostructure for the water splitting mechanism; (b and d) T–T CDWs as a photoanode, (c and e) H–H CDWs as a photocathode.81 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Mechanism of the decolorization of MB dye by internal and external screening due to the built-in electric field.95 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. 
6. Applications
To overview the significance of ferroic-photocatalysis over conventional photocatalysis, the operational mechanism of representative photocatalytic reactions using ferroic photocatalysts is introduced. It is obvious that each of the photocatalytic reactions has its own thermodynamic demands; our motive is to introduce the significance of ferroic materials in facilitating the following reactions.
6.1. Water splitting
In response to the built-in electric field and surface active sites, DWs offer bi-functional activity for photoelectrochemical water splitting. The negative polarity in T–T CDWs with upward band bending at the CDWs/electrolyte interface promotes the transfer of holes to the surface to enable the oxidation of water (Fig. 7b and d), whereas the positive polarity in H–H CDWs with downward band bending facilitates the transfer of electrons to the surface to promote the reduction of water (Fig. 7c and e).81,82 Note that the built-in electric field induced by the bound charges in CDWs causes an extra band bending at the DW/interface, and thus separates and drifts further the light generated charge carriers to the surface to promote the splitting of water to H2 and O2. Moreover, the activity for water splitting with ferroic materials can be further increased by the following various strategies: decorating the ferroic surface with noble metal particles e.g., Au/BiFeO3, which shows better charge transfer characteristics than bare BiFeO3, modulates an extra optical absorption within the visible light region created by the LSPR excitation of Au crystals to capture more photons in the resulting Au/BiFeO3 heterostructure.83 Next, poling the ferroelectric materials modulates their polarization strength by aligning (ferroelectric switching) the domain pattern, and therefore considering the demonstration given in built-in electric field Section 3, it leads to a significant enhancement in separation of photogenerated charge carriers and in their transfer dynamics to the surface. Due to ferroelectric switching, the BiFeO3 film shows approximately 8000% change in the photocurrent density and a 0.330 V shift in the onset potential. Likewise, on poling the BaTiO3/BaTiO3−x/CdS photoanode, it shows an increase in photocurrent density from 100 μA cm−2 to 200 μA cm−2.84 The corresponding significance of ferroic water splitting in reference to the conventional water splitting reaction can be observed from the high hydrogen evolution rate (HER) or oxygen evolution rate (OER). For instance, an epitaxial layer of CdS deposited on a PbTiO3 surface over a thermodynamically stable (001) terminated PbO surface produces H2 at a HER rate of 483 μmol h−1 g−1, approximately 9.7 fold that of CdS.85 Similarly, the visible light active P-doped g-C3N4/polyaniline/BaTiO3 system produces H2 with a HER of 602 μmol h−1 g−1 (AQY of 4.16% at 420 nm), about 21 times higher than that of g-C3N4.86 Moreover, facets as introduced in polar nano region Section 6 play a critical role in the efficiency of ferroelectric materials for water splitting. For example, Bi3TiNbO9 nanosheets having large number of (001) facets outperform in the generation of H2 with a HER of 342.6 μmol h−1 g−1 compared to 90.1 μmol h−1 g−1 with sheets having fewer polar facets.87
6.2. Degradation of pollutants
Degradation reactions are usually expressed in terms of a rate constant (k). The higher the value of k, the higher will be the efficiency of the degradation reaction.88 In ferroic materials, the built-in field, APVE and high density of surface active sites synergistically facilitate the higher value of k. For instance, BaTiO3 in its ferroelectric state adsorbs 4.81% Rhodamine B (RhB) molecules with k = 0.087 min−1, compared to only 0.97% adsorption with k = 0.0096 min−1 in its non-ferroelectric state.89 Likewise, Ag doped PbTiO3 nanoparticles show k = 0.01819 min−1,90 BiVO4 nanoparticles show k = 0.00388 min−1,91 and BiFeO3 nanoparticles show k = 0.0144 min−1 compared to P25 showing only k = 0.00251 min−1 in the degradation of methylene blue (MB).92,93 The corresponding difference arises from the systematic polarization effect associated with DWs. In positive polarity (H–H CDWs) with downward band bending, the electrons while carrying out reduction at C+ produce ˙O2− from O2, whereas in negative polarity (T–T CDWs) with upward band bending the holes carrying oxidation at C− produce ˙OH− from OH− or H2O.94 Being highly energetic and unstable, these free radicals dissociate hazardous pollutant molecules by breaking the bonding of colour chromophores in methylene blue (MB), Congo red (CR) or methyl violet (MV), and converting them into harmless products. For example, the cationic dye MB bearing the surface functional groups N+ and NH+, generates a tightly bound Stern layer on the C− domain in BaTiO3 to compensate for the depolarizing field (Fig. 7f) via external screening as described in the built-in electric field section.95 In this case the dye is anionic like CR, the functional group S− generates a stern layer at the C+ domain.47 And the additional control of polarity switching in both cases leads to the desorption of products, and refreshes the ferroic surface for another cycle of adsorption.95
6.3. Reduction of carbon dioxide
Reduction of CO2 to useful chemicals and fuels is a bi-functional strategy of decreasing the increasing greenhouse gas emissions and producing energy carriers.96 However, choosing an appropriate route for such chemical conversion is the key factor for providing the tangible negative emissions. Considering CO2 emission cut of 10 Gt, set by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences to happen by mid-century in the set roadmap of decarbonization, dry reforming of methane (DRM) which involves the conversion of CO2 to syngas (H2 + CO, which can be converted into liquid fuels) becomes a promising route to tackle excess CO2 emission without disturbing the current infrastructure.97 However, DRM being an extremely endothermic reaction requires tremendous energy input from fossil fuels which again leads to the emission of greenhouse gases. In the last couple of years, few studies have accomplished the reaction by integrating DRM with photocatalysis, but as these studies have been carried out at low temperatures using low power intensity solar irradiation, the yield of syngas is typically very low.98,99 Interestingly, in the recent development, the photo-thermo-chemical DRM (PTC-DRM) approach has resulted in a significant boost in DRM activity by integrating solar energy and thermal energy in the same reactor.100,101 Under this setup, the thermal energy required to initiate thermal reactions and the low-wavelength photons required to initiate photocatalytic reactions are provided simultaneously, which makes PTC-DRM a potentially viable and competitive technique for converting greenhouse gases to fuels at a large scale. Nevertheless, high-performance photo-thermally active catalysts are still a primary requirement for large yields, and while designing a catalyst there is always a challenge of surface science and real life conditions, as any refinement procedures attempted alter the nature of the active site composition and geometry.97 Another obstacle that limits the PTC-DRM performance is the rapid recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. However, considering ferroic photocatalysis, surface active sites get modulated (as discussed in Sections 3 and 5) and recombination is suppressed owing to polarization associated with DWs (as discussed in Sections 2 and 3), therefore offering an edge over traditional catalysts to attain a control over both the obstacles. Moreover, through the PTC-DRM approach, the DRM reaction at 30 suns irradiation requires a temperature of 600 °C while using the MgO/Pt/Zn–CeO2 catalyst,102 and in some cases requires an even lower temperature (e.g., 200 °C with Rh/SrTiO3 catalyst) to activate thermo-catalytic reactions,103,104 which interestingly is lower than the Curie temperature (Tc) of ferroic materials like BiFeO3 with Tc ∼ 825 °C.105 So, there is no fear of losing the ferroic characteristics of such candidates while using them for the DRM reaction with the PTC-DRM technique.
To initiate the photo reduction of CO2, the adsorption and activation of CO2 molecules in abundance are the key and primary requirements.106 And, using ferroic materials, highly dense surface active sites, emerging out of the DW effect, facilitate significant adsorption of CO2 molecules, and on mounting desired epitaxial transition metal oxide layers over a thermodynamically stable polar terminated ferroic surface (as discussed in Section 5) facilitates the activation of the adsorbed CO2 molecules. Next, in the state of positive polarization (H–H CDWs), the transfer of a photogenerated electron to the surface transforms an inert CO2 molecule (ΔG0f = −394.4 kJ mol−1) into an activated CO2˙− bidentate radical. At this stage, the electron coupled proton mechanism can convert it to HCOO−˙, and then with the addition of H+ (generated from solvation or bond breaking effect) can lead to the formation of HCOOH.107 However, on setting the thermodynamic parameters and the desired setup reaction limits, the activated CO2˙− can be selectively converted to CO, CH4, CH3OH, HCOOH or HCHO.108 In conventional photocatalysts, the major obstacle for this reaction arises from the competitive reaction of photoreduction of H+ to H2. However, in ferroic-photocatalysts, polarity switching in DWs to positive polarization can largely prevent the loss of electrons and H+ in the formation of H2.109,110 Overall, the collective influence of the aforementioned characteristics of ferroic materials leads to significant results in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to useful chemicals or fuels. For example; BiFeO3–ZnO shows prominent ∼21% photocatalytic reduction of CO2 compared to well known traditional photocatalysts like CuPc/TiO2 and CuPc/ZnO showing only 15% CO2 conversion under similar conditions of 4 h visible light irradiation; BaTiO3–Fe2O3 shows 22% in visible light irradiation for only 60 minutes.111–114 The nanosheets of SrBi4Ti4O15 with the strongest ferroelectricity outperform most reported photocatalysts by showing high photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity for CH4 evolution at a rate of 19.8 μmol h−1 g−1.110 Likewise, Ag2CrO4/Ag/BiFeO3@RGO generates 180 μmol g−1 of CH4 in 8 h of visible light irradiation and under alkali activation, it shows 260 μmol g−1 which is ∼60 times higher than that of bare BiFeO3.115 The BiVO4/Bi4Ti3O12 heterojunction generates 16.6 μmol g−1 h−1 of CH3OH and 13.29 μmol g−1 h−1 of CO, which are 12.39 and 5.68 times higher than that of pure BiVO4, and 9.88 and 2.80 times higher than that of pure Bi4Ti3O12.116 Furthermore, electrically poled SrBi2Nb2O9 while showing a CH4 evolution rate of 25.91 μmol g−1 h−1 with an AQE of 1.96% at 365 nm exceeds most current state-of-the-art photocatalysts.117
6.4. Oxidation of small hydrocarbon molecules
The C–H bond energy of small hydrocarbon molecules follows: C3H8 (413 kJ mol−1) ∼ C2H6 (412 kJ mol−1) < CH4 (∼440 kJ mol−1).118 The high stability (high C–H bond energy) and unique inertness makes its oxidation an extremely difficult task (often labelled a Holy Grail). This is why thermo-catalytic processes operating at a very high temperature are still the main industrial route of CH4 conversion to liquid fuels and other important chemicals. However, this method has multiple drawbacks, like high energy consumption, high reaction temperatures and, catalyst poisoning.119 In contrast, considering an environmental benign photocatalytic approach, an optimal concentration of the radical species ˙OH and h+, produced by photo-excitation, can activate C–H bond and extract its H atom to generate a methyl radical (˙CH3). And then depending upon the reaction conditions and the type of photocatalyst, the resulting ˙CH3 can be self-coupled to produce C2H6 and H2via non-oxidative coupling of methane (NOCM), or can react with O2, H2O and CO2 to generate CH3OH, H2 and CO. However, it must be noted that ˙OH being a strong oxidant can further oxidize the target product. Therefore, it is necessary to optimize the availability of ˙OH or replace it with mild oxidants such as H2O or NO, or perform the reaction in an aqueous solution for the high selectivity of the target product.120 Although, photocatalytic oxidation of methane is also attracting wide interest, there still remains the issue of the low percentage of the final product and poor selectivity, primarily arising due to high recombination of photogenerated charge carriers and no control over the reaction kinetics to stop the reaction once the target products are formed.120 However, considering ferroic-photocatalysts both the limiting factors can be largely resolved owing to their intrinsic characteristics discussed in Section 3 to Section 6. Following the illustration of surface active sites as discussed in Section 5, the suitable ferrophotocatalyst under negative polarization ensures the desired concentration of reactive oxygen species on the surface to activate and oxidize CH4 to CH3OH. And, on switching to positive polarization, it plays a dual role: (I) inhibits further oxidation of the target product and (II) replenishes the oxygen reservoir by reducing the reactive oxygen species for the next cycle of oxidation. However, in a negatively poled surface, the oxygen molecules that are supposed to oxidize CH4 to CH3OH (1.1 eV barrier per oxygen) may find the other favourable pathway by pairing-up with their neighbouring oxygen atoms to form O2 (only barrier of 0.4 eV per association event) and leaves the surface.96 In that case, the barrier for direct O2 formation can be increased by depositing the monolayers of transition metal oxides over the ferroelectric surface, in which one can still switch the surface between the oxidizing and reducing modes as already discussed in Section 5.26,76 Moreover, following the PTC-DRM process (as discussed in Section 6.1) may increase further the potential of ferroic materials to convert high potent greenhouse gas CH4 along with CO2 to high-quality liquid fuels.
Compared to traditional metal-oxide based photocatalysts like TiO2 showing a mere productivity of 4.8 mmol g−1 h−1 for CH3OH,121 ferroic photocatalysts show higher efficiency in the photocatalytic oxidation of methane. For example; Bi2WO6 shows a selectivity of 27.6% and productivity 17.5 μmol g−1 h−1 for CH3OH; BiVO4 shows a selectivity of 50.0% and productivity of 21.0% for CH3OH.122,123 However, the polar faceted BiVO4 photocatalyst shows a high selectivity of 85.0% and large productivity of 111.9 μmol g−1 h−1 for CH3OH due to the role of polar facets in the efficient transport mechanism of photo generated charge carriers as described in Section 5.124 Recently, we also found a similar observation of the facet dependent photocatalytic oxidation of CH4 over ZnO nanostructures; ZnO nanosheets with a large number of polar facets have shown a rate constant ten times higher than that of ZnO nanorods having a small polar facets.72 Furthermore using ZnO as a base material, our group has investigated heterojunctions Ag/ZnO and CuO/ZnO,125 in which Ag/ZnO has shown the best performance by showing 100% removal of 100 ppm CH4 at a 25 ml min−1 flow rate.15 It is noteworthy to mention that ZnO is a representative piezoelectric material which exhibits an unusual asymmetrical polar structure with a large spontaneous polarization of 0.047 C m−2 along the [0001] direction.72,126,127 Conclusively, polar-materials either ferroelectric, ferroelastic and even piezoelectrics have a polarization edge over traditional photocatalysts, which plays a critical role in suppressing the recombination rate and facilitating the modified surface chemistry, to deliver higher efficiency for any photocatalytic reaction, provided the thermodynamics of a given reaction is met.
7. Summary and outlook
Ferroic-photocatalysts open a new opportunity to simultaneously tackle environmental pollution as well as the energy crisis. In this review, we have summarized how the underlying domain structure in ferroic materials plays a significant role to overcome limitations facing conventional photocatalysis. The potential steps and the resulting built-in electric field associated with DWs are able to impart intrinsic control over the dynamics of photogenerated carries. The additional bias of the APVE further accelerates the separation and steers the photogenerated charge carriers towards the surface. Benefiting from the collective influence of the built-in electric field and the APVE, the rich domain pattern leads to abundant surface active sites which facilitates the Sabatier's principle. Under the additional control of polarization switching at DWs due to the external stimuli of the electric field or stress, ferroic materials exhibit a bi-functional activity of oxidation and reduction in photocatalytic reactions.
As discussed above, the underlying importance of ferroic materials for photocatalysis lies in the polarization effect associated with DWs. Exploring strategies to strengthen the magnitude of this effect can have a significant impact on their photocatalytic capabilities. On adopting a composition design strategy to produce a morphotrophic phase boundary (MPB) system, polarization anisotropy in orientation as well as in amplitude almost vanishes at DWs (Fig. 8a).128 The decreasing DW energy at the cost of vanishing anisotropy increases the DW thickness anomalously. With this result, a synergistic enhancement in the field strength associated with the DWs can be achieved. As such, a composition-based MPB approach is expected to contribute a significant advancement to the photocatalysis field.
 Fig. 8  DW engineering. (a) The change of anisotropy coefficient α12 with composition. As α12 → 0, when the composition approaches MPB from both rhombohedral (R) and tetragonal (T) sides, the DW thickness increases anomalously.128 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) NOx direct decomposition and CO oxidation on CrO2–PTO via a catalytic cycle driven by dynamically and periodically controlling the ferroelectric PTO polarization.76 Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Intra-band gap defect states between the conduction band (top semicircle) and the valence band (bottom semicircle). Usually, intra-band gap states are caused by defects, but they may also be intrinsic to the pristine DW.28 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature Limited. (d) Domain patterns from a 2 μm × 1 μm region of BiNbO4 (BNO)–O2 (top) and BNO–N2 (bottom) thin films poled with ±15 V tip bias. (e) Polarization hysteresis in BNO films, suggesting defect-induced ferroelectric properties in the BNO–N2 sample; the measurements were performed at a frequency of 20 kHz.129 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Intrinsic different electronic band structures of the DW leading to a reduction in the bandgap.28 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature Limited. 
Engineering a suitable combination of ferroelectric/piezoelectric/ferroelastic/metal oxide or sulphide interfaces with respect to the thermodynamic demand of a given photocatalytic reaction could be of great significance. The hybrid effect is expected to induce a synergistic impact in the band gap as well as in the recombination dynamics of photogenerated charge carriers. Moreover, mimicking the crystal facet engineering and polarization switching in ferrophotocatalysts is likely to be of great significance in selective target based oxidation (e.g. CH4 oxidation) or reduction reactions (e.g. CO2 reduction). Furthermore, selection of suitable metal oxide/sulphide films to deposit over the polar terminated surface of a ferroic substrate as in Fig. 8b76 is expected to induce a desired surface chemistry towards a given photocatalytic reaction. Overall, such selective surface terminations can be of great significance in target selective reactions.
Polarization, emerging from breaking (local/bulk) symmetry, is a key factor differentiating photocatalysis from ferroic-photocatalysis. Therefore, strengthening the polarization effect to its optimal value besides understanding the factors involved in tuning polarization switching will be of great importance. Systematic experimental evidence suggests that on-demand polarization control can be achieved by creating spatially located, point defects (defect engineering). The defects control the thermodynamic stability of polarization, acting as pinning sites for DW motion besides serving as nucleation sites for polarization switching. With an appropriate understanding of the process and nature of the defects, defect-polarization coupling could be explored as a knob to manipulate polarization switching characteristics. Evidence from conductive and piezoresponse force microscopy suggests that the presence of extrinsic defects (Fig. 8c) at DWs (a favoured location) leads to a significant increase in DW conductivity besides a reduction in the band gap.27 Moreover, extending defect engineering to centrosymmetric materials as reported for BiNbO4 (Fig. 8d and e) will allow the induction of the built-in field for conventional photocatalysts.129 Adopting this strategy for different non-ferroic mono or heterostructured photocatalysts may not only lead to the desired photocatalytic efficiency but can also produce visible light active photocatalysts.
Strain engineering via defect pinning, substrate clamping, applying inhomogeneous electric or elastic field, changes NDWs to CDWs, which results the reduction in the band gap by 20–40% due to generation of spontaneous strain gradients near the DWs (Fig. 8f). Therefore, an optimal engineering of strain gradient at ferroelastic DWs through flexo-electro coupling can induce a significant strength of polarization besides a band gap reduction to visible light. The selective engineering of Sr vacancies in SrTiO3 plays a critical role in inducing a phase transition from its centrosymmetric (cubic) to non-centrosymmetric (tetragonal) phase, resulting in the inversion symmetry breaking necessary for the switchable electric polarization.130 Likewise, mechanical resonances due to ac-field excitation induce polar DWs in non-polar CaTiO3.44 Overall, achieving non-centrosymmetry and CDWs in non-ferroelectric photocatalytic materials through flexo-electro coupling (strain based polarization) will be of great significance in the new era of photocatalysis.
Author contributions
M. A. Boda prepared the manuscript under the guidance of Z. Yi. R. L. Withers, Y. Liu, J. Ye and Z. Yi co-edited the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
None declared.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52250410356 and 51872311), Frontier Science Key Project of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. QYZDB-SSW-JSC027), Foreign Young Talents Program of Ministry of Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China (Grant No. QN2022055004L) and Foreign Expert Program of Shanghai Municipal Commission of Science and Technology (Grant No. 22WZ2500200). Y. Liu acknowledges the Australian Research Council (ARC) funding support in the forms of the Discover Project (DP200100159) and ARC Australian Laureate Fellowship Program (FL210100017).
References
J. Chesshire, Nature, 1977, 269, 269 CrossRef .
P. Sheehan, E. Cheng, A. English and F. Sun, Nat. Clim. Change, 2014, 4, 306–309 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Richards, D. Hudry, D. Busko, A. Turshatov and I. A. Howard, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 9165–9195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mai, D. Chen, Y. Tachibana, H. Suzuki, R. Abe and R. A. Caruso, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 13692–13729 RSC .
M. Cybularczyk-Cecotka, J. Szczepanik and M. Giedyk, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 872–886 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu and D. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700841 CrossRef .
T. Takata, J. Jiang, Y. Sakata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, V. Nandal, K. Seki, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2020, 581, 411–414 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. Tao, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, C. Li and R. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3561–3608 RSC .
Q. Wang, C. Pornrungroj, S. Linley and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 13–24 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Y. Li, X. Pan, D. Cortie, X. Huang and Z. Yi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12273 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dai, Y. Yu, Y. Chen, H. Huang, C. Lu, J. Kou, Y. Zhao and Z. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1970105 CrossRef .
H. Li, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
H. Simons, A. B. Haugen, A. C. Jakobsen, S. Schmidt, F. Stohr, M. Majkut, C. Detlefs, J. E. Daniels, D. Damjanovic and H. F. Poulsen, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 814–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Zhang, P. Long, T. Lu, H. Zeng, Y. Liu, R. L. Withers, Y. Li and Z. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801619 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bednyakov, T. Sluka, A. K. Tagantsev, D. Damjanovic and N. Setter, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15819 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Inoue, S. Ishikawa, R. Imura, Y. Kitanaka, T. Oguchi, Y. Noguchi and M. Miyayama, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yang, Y. L. Huang, Q. He and Y. H. Chu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 066801 CrossRef .
L. Z. Tan, F. Zheng, S. M. Young, F. Wang, S. Liu and A. M. Rappe, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 16026 CrossRef .
A. M. Kolpak, I. Grinberg and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 166101 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Khan, M. A. Nadeem and H. Idriss, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2016, 71, 1–31 CrossRef CAS .
K. Garrity, A. Kakekhani and A. Kolpak, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 045401 CrossRef .
L. Li, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 24–42 RSC .
G. F. Nataf, M. Guennou, J. M. Gregg, D. Meier, J. Hlinka, E. K. H. Salje and J. Kreisel, Nat. Rev. Phys., 2020, 2, 634–648 CrossRef CAS .
G. Catalan, A. Lubk, A. H. G. Vlooswijk, E. Snoeck, C. Magen, A. Janssens, G. Rispens, G. Rijnders, D. H. A. Blank and B. Noheda, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 963–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meier, N. Valanoor, Q. Zhang and D. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 129, 230401 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lubk, S. Gemming and N. A. Spaldin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 104110 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, S. A. Dregia and Y. Wang, Acta Mater., 2017, 127, 438–449 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Kalinin, D. A. Bonnell, T. Alvarez, X. Lei, Z. Hu, J. H. Ferris, Q. Zhang and S. Dunn, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 589–593 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campanini, E. Gradauskaite, M. Trassin, D. Yi, P. Yu, R. Ramesh, R. Erni and M. D. Rossell, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9186–9193 RSC .
P. S. Bednyakov, B. I. Sturman, T. Sluka, A. K. Tagantsev and P. V. Yudin, npj Comput. Mater., 2018, 4, 65 CrossRef .
H. Matsuo, Y. Kitanaka, R. Inoue, Y. Noguchi, M. Miyayama, T. Kiguchi and T. J. Konno, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 214111 CrossRef .
K. A. Hunnestad, E. D. Roede, A. T. J. van Helvoort and D. Meier, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 191102 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Little, Phys. Rev., 1955, 98, 978–984 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zavaliche, P. Shafer and R. Ramesh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 252902 CrossRef .
S. Korbel and S. Sanvito, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 102, 081304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seidel, D. Fu, S.-Y. Yang, E. Alarcon-Llado, J. Wu, R. Ramesh and J. W. Ager, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 126805 CrossRef .
E. G. Fesenko, V. G. Gavrilyatchenko and A. F. Semenchev, Ferroelectrics, 1989, 100, 195–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Giocondi and G. S. Rohrer, Top. Catal., 2008, 49, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Nataf, M. Guennou, J. Kreisel, P. Hicher, R. Haumont, O. Aktas, E. K. H. Salje, L. Tortech, C. Mathieu, D. Martinotti and N. Barrett, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1, 074410 CrossRef .
S. Cherifi-Hertel, C. Voulot, U. Acevedo-Salas, Y. Zhang, O. Cregut, K. D. Dorkenoo and R. Hertel, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 129, 081101 CrossRef CAS .
K. Garrity, A. M. Kolpak, S. Ismail-Beigi and E. I. Altman, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2969–2973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, J. Briscoe and S. Dunn, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4215–4223 CrossRef CAS .
C. Paillard, X. Bai, I. C. Infante, M. Guennou, G. Geneste, M. Alexe, J. Kreisel and B. Dkhil, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5153–5168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, H. Huang, L. Guo, Y. Zhang and T. Ma, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 10164–10176 CrossRef .
N. Dinh Tung Luan, L. D. Vuong, T. Van Chuong and N. Truong Tho, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2014, 2014, 1–8 CrossRef .
H. Kanda, N. Shibayama, A. J. Huckaba, Y. Lee, S. Paek, N. Klipfel, C. Roldan-Carmona, V. I. E. Queloz, G. Grancini, Y. Zhang, M. Abuhelaiqa, K. T. Cho, M. Li, M. D. Mensi, S. Kinge and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1222–1230 RSC .
H. Huang, S. Tu, X. Du and Y. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 509, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mascello, N. A. Spaldin, A. Narayan and Q. N. Meier, Phys. Rev. Res., 2020, 2, 033460 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Yu and L. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 534–549 CrossRef CAS .
R. Munprom, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2951–2959 RSC .
G. F. Nataf and M. Guennou, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2020, 32, 183001 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yokota, N. Hasegawa, M. Glazer, E. K. H. Salje and Y. Uesu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 232901 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hill, M. C. Weber, J. Lehmann, T. Leinen, M. Fiebig, J. Kreisel and M. Guennou, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 081108 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dai, Y. Chen, S. M. Hao, H. Huang, J. Kou, C. Lu, Z. Lin and Z. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7407–7416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, T. J. Savenije, M. M. May, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2752–2757 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Lu, Z. K. Xu, H. Chen, C. L. Mak, K. H. Wong, K. F. Li and K. W. Cheah, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 064103 CrossRef .
S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C. H. Yang, M.
D. Rossell, P. Yu, Y.-H. Chu, J. F. Scott, J. W. Ager, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 143–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nadupalli, J. Kreisel and T. Granzow, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 9199 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Seidel, L. W. Martin, Q. He, Q. Zhan, Y. H. Chu, A. Rother, M. E. Hawkridge, P. Maksymovych, P. Yu, M. Gajek, N. Balke, S. V. Kalinin, S. Gemming, F. Wang, G. Catalan, J. F. Scott, N. A. Spaldin, J. Orenstein and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 229–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhatnagar, A. Roy Chaudhuri, Y. Heon Kim, D. Hesse and M. Alexe, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2835 CrossRef .
A. S. Pisat, G. S. Rohrer and P. A. Salvador, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8261–8266 RSC .
A. S. Pisat, G. S. Rohrer and P. A. Salvador, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2017, 32, 103001 CrossRef .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Foo, Y. Li, K. Lebedev, T. Chen, S. Day, C. Tang and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gerosa, F. Gygi, M. Govoni and G. Galli, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1122–1127 CrossRef CAS .
D. Maarisetty and S. S. Baral, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18560–18604 RSC .
Z. Li, M. A. Boda, X. Pan and Z. Yi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19042–19049 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3089 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Burbure, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5823–5830 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Burbure, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5831–5837 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kakekhani and S. Ismail-Beigi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4537–4545 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, H. Wang, F. Liang, S. Werth, T. Schiestel and J. Caro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2983–2986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tofan, D. Klvana and J. Kirchnerova, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 223, 275–286 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Qi, Z. Chen, L. Jiang, R. Wang and K. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13743–13751 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. Ma, L.-C. Yin, G. Wan, H. Zhu, C. Zhen, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. Tan and H.-M. Cheng, Joule, 2018, 2, 1095–1107 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ullah, M. Pei, J. Wu, Y. Tian, Z. Gu, Q. Zhang, C. Song, Y. Yang, M. Ahmad, J. Zeb, F. Qayyum, Y. Liu, X. An, L. Gu, X. Wang and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4149–4154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, F. Li, D. Benetti, R. Nechache, Q. Wei, X. Qi and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105626 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Huang, W. S. Chang, C. N. Van, H.-J. Liu, K.-A. Tsai, J.-W. Chen, H.-H. Kuo, W.-Y. Tzeng, Y.-C. Chen, C.-L. Wu, C.-W. Luo, Y.-J. Hsu and Y.-H. Chu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15795–15801 RSC .
J. Song, T. L. Kim, J. Lee, S. Y. Cho, J. Cha, S. Y. Jeong, H. An, W. S. Kim, Y.-S. Jung, J. Park, G. Y. Jung, D.-Y. Kim, J. Y. Jo, S. D. Bu, H. W. Jang and S. Lee, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 642–655 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, K. Wang, Y. Wang, B. Wang, L. Zhang, F. Gao, Y. Zhao, W. Feng, S. Zhang and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 322–329 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Xia, K. Wei, X. Ding, S. Dong, X. Jiao and D. Chen, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 6753–6764 RSC .
X. Yin, X. Li, H. Liu, W. Gu, W. Zou, L. Zhu, Z. Fu and Y. Lu, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 489–497 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, M. Chen, T. Xiong, C. Zhou, X. Li, D. Huang, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4135–4165 RSC .
T. Sakthivel, G. Venugopal, A. Durairaj, S. Vasanthkumar and X. Huang, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 72, 18–30 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abirami, T. S. Senthil, S. Kalpana, L. Kungumadevi and M. Kang, Mater. Lett., 2020, 279, 128507 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Kamble and Y.-C. Ling, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 12993 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Neshin, R. S. Khoshnood and D. S. Khoshnoud, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2021, 134, 951–970 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and Z. Ma, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 88, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, X. Wang, C. Li, Y. Sui, Y. Han, Z. Lv, B. Song and P. Xu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 108883–108887 RSC .
P. Senthilkumar, D. A. Jency, T. Kavinkumar, D. Dhayanithi, S. Dhanuskodi, M. Umadevi, S. Manivannan, N. V. Giridharan, V. Thiagarajan, M. Sriramkumar and K. Jothivenkatachalam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12032–12043 CAS .
J. Y. Y. Loh, N. P. Kherani and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 466–473 CrossRef .
Y. Song, E. Ozdemir, S. Ramesh, A. Adishev, S. Subramanian, A. Harale, M. Albuali, B. A. Fadhel, A. Jamal, D. Moon, S. H. Choi and C. T. Yavuz, Science, 2020, 367, 777–781 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tahir, M. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 419, 875–885 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, B. Tahir and N. S. Amin, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 63, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, W. Wei, L. Chang, P. Cheng and Y. H. Hu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 494–497 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Song, W. Zhou, X. Meng and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16781–16784 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, X. Xiang, Z. Du, E. Sarnello, T. Li and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shoji, X. Peng, A. Yamaguchi, R. Watanabe, C. Fukuhara, Y. Cho, T. Yamamoto, S. Matsumura, M.-W. Yu, S. Ishii, T. Fujita, H. Abe and M. Miyauchi, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 148–153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Wang and J. Tang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2022, 7, 617–632 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rojac, M. Makarovic, J. Walker, H. Ursic, D. Damjanovic and T. Kos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 042904 CrossRef .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, G. Reid, H. Wang and P. Hu, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 147, 030901 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Yin, B. Wen, S. Bandaru, M. Krack, M. Lau and L.-M. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
S. Tu, Y. Zhang, A. H. Reshak, S. Auluck, L. Ye, X. Han, T. Ma and H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 840–850 CrossRef CAS .
E. Karamian and S. Sharifnia, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2018, 238–239, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yazdanpour and S. Sharifnia, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 118, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yarahmadi and S. Sharifnia, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 107, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Zangeneh, S. Sharifnia and E. Karamian, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 27, 5912–5921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, G. Sharma, Mu. Naushad, T. Ahamad, R. C. Veses and F. J. Stadler, Chem. Eng., 2019, 370, 148–165 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Gao, J. Shen, X. Pu, Z. Zhang, H. Lin and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118876 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, H. Huang, A. H. Reshak, S. Auluck, L. Liu, T. Ma and Y. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119709 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuliati and H. Yoshida, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1592 RSC .
A. Kakekhani and S. Ismail-Beigi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 19676–19695 RSC .
Z. Li, Z. Yi, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000596 CrossRef CAS .
N. Feng, H. Lin, H. Song, L. Yang, D. Tang, F. Deng and J. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Murcia-Lopez, K. Villa, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3013–3019 CrossRef CAS .
S. Murcia-Lopez, K. Villa, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7249–7252 RSC .
W. Zhu, M. Shen, G. Fan, A. Yang, J. R. Meyer, Y. Ou, B. Yin, J. Fortner, M. Foston, Z. Li, Z. Zou and B. Sadtler, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6683–6691 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Pan and Z. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 469–475 RSC .
L. Meng, Z. Chen, Z. Ma, S. He, Y. Hou, H.-H. Li, R. Yuan, X.-H. Huang, X. Wang, X. Wang and J. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 294–298 RSC .
B. Zhang, Z. Wang, B. Huang, X. Zhang, X. Qin, H. Li, Y. Dai and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6613–6620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, X. Hu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Ke, D. Wang, L. Zhong and X. Ren, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2243–2250 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mai, T. Lu, Q. Sun, J. Langley, N. Cox, F. Kremer, T. Duong, K. Catchpole, H. Chen, Z. Yi, T. J. Frankcombe and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13182–13191 RSC .
K. T. Kang, H. I. Seo, O. Kwon, K. Lee, J.-S. Bae, M.-W. Chu, S. C. Chae, Y. Kim and W. S. Choi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 499, 143930 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Muzaffar Ahmad Boda	Muzaffar Ahmad Boda obtained his Ph.D. from the National Institute of Technology Srinagar India in 2018, and then worked as a CSIR Research Associate in the same institute until 2019. Since then he has been pursuing his Postdoc studies at the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has received several fellowships and awards, including Postdoc International Exchange in 2019, Foreign Young Talent in 2021, and National Natural Science Foundation of China-International Young Scientist in 2022. His current research focus is Photostriction and Photocatalytic study of Ferroelectric and Ferroelastic materials.
Ray L. Withers	Ray Withers obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Melbourne followed by postdocs at the Universities of Toronto and Bristol. He arrived at the Australian National University in 1986 and has been Professor of Materials Chemistry there since 2004. He is currently an Emeritus Professor and the Fellow of Australian Academy of Sciences. He is an internationally renowned scientist in X-ray crystallography with a strong focus on electron diffraction and its application in compositionally and/or displacive flexible materials. He has solved many complex local structures of various materials.
Yun Liu	Yun Liu received her Ph.D. in 1997 from the Xi'an Jiaotong University. She then worked at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan (1998–2001) as an AIST and STA fellow. She joined the Australian National University, Australia in 2001 and was promoted to a full professor in 2015. She has been awarded the Australian Research Council (ARC) fellowships of the Queen Elisabeth II (2006–2010), Future (2011–2015) and now Georgina Sweet Australian Laureate (2021). Her research focuses on the multiscale relation of the chemistry, structure and properties of various functional materials and materials design for practical applications.
Jinhua Ye	Jinhua Ye received her Ph.D. from the University of Tokyo in 1990. She is presently a Principal Investigator at the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), and a Professor of the Joint Doctoral Program at Hokkaido University, Japan. Her current research interests focus on the research and development of photofunctional materials and their applications in the fields of environmental remediation and new energy production.
Zhiguo Yi	Zhiguo Yi is a full professor and principal investigator of the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. He then worked at the National Institute for Materials Science of Japan, the Australian National University, and the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter until 2017. His current research interests focus mainly on the photophysics and photochemistry of functional materials, especially those involving ferroelectrics and photocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Fundamental processes of photocatalysis. (a) The generation, separation, migration, recombination and reactions of photoinduced carriers in conventional photocatalysts. (b) Built-in electric field favours fast separation, transportation and reactions of photo-generated carriers in ferroic-photocatalysts. (c) Publications and citations of ferroic-photocatalysts is obtained from web of science on 05-02-2022 by searching the keywords photocatalysis and ferroics (ferroelectrics and ferroelastics).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the physico-chemistry of ferroic photocatalysis and its applications.	 

 	Fig. 3  Mechanisms leading to polar DWs. (a) Schematic of an elementary DW with a single order parameter, Q, and tanh profile. (b) Sketch of a ferroelastic wall, with a discontinuity (or gradient) in spontaneous strain. (c) Ferroelectric elementary Ising wall. (d) Phase transition in a DW with the emergence of an additional instability, which may be a polarization component P. (e) Ferroelectric Bloch wall, where the polarization rotates in the plane of the wall. (f) Ferroelectric Néel wall.28 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature Limited. (g) Sketches of the uncharged 71° and (h) 109° H–T DW configurations. The crystallographic directions and DW planes are given in the pseudocubic reference. (i) Sketches of the charged 109° T–T and H–H DWs. (j) LPFM image showing the distribution of polar domains in the film. The film shows a typical pattern of 71° domains with four possible crystallographic variants. (k) VPFM signal of the same area. An out-of-plane signal is observed at the merging points between differently oriented domain stripes. The poled area (used as a reference for sample alignment) is marked in (k) and (l) by the black dashed line. (m) Magnified view of the area marked in the white box in (k). The arrows give the in-plane component of polarization. The configuration of the polar domains gives rise to regions where 109° T–T and H–H domain walls are observed. These DWs show a high conductance state compared to the low conductivity of H–T DWs.34 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Effect of polarization; (a, b) schematic of internal polarization and screening mechanisms (a) and, (b) free carrier reorganization on the band structure and photo excited carriers.47 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. (c, d) Second harmonic (SH) generation images of BiVO4; (c) 2D image with 0.2 μm scanning steps, stronger SH intensity is detected from the area with a brighter color, the SH-active areas appear as straight lines that correspond to the direction of the ferroelastic domain boundary and, (d) the constructed 3D image of SH wave distributions; SH activity remains inside the sample. The color bar corresponds to the magnitude of SH intensity.57 Copyright © 2020, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 5  Anomalous photovoltaic effect. (a and b) Schematic of four domains and three DWs in an ordered array of 71° DWs; (a) band diagram showing the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) across these domains and DWs in the dark (note that there is no net voltage across the sample in the dark), section (i) illustrates a photon hitting the bulk of a domain and section (ii) a photon hitting at a DW and, (b) detailed picture of the build-up of photo excited charges at a DW. (c) PFM images of the as-grown (top panel), 200 V poled (middle panel), and 2200 V poled (bottom panel) device structures. The arrows indicate the in-plane projection of the polarization and the net polarization direction for the entire device structure.62 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. (d, e) Schematic diagram illustrating the flexoelectric coupling via a strain-induced local polarization mechanism in BiVO4; (d) unstrained BiVO4 has a centrosymmetry, and the net dipole moment of the unit cell is zero and, (e) nonuniform distortion; for example, the lattices close to the domain boundaries make BiVO4 lose centrosymmetry and thus induce a net dipole moment in the deformed unit cell. (f) Schematic illustration of the electrode geometries (0.785 mm2 circular electrode area and 5.0 mm electrode spacing) used for the photovoltaic measurements. (g) Electrode rotation angle dependence of Voc for a BiVO4 ceramic treated with unidirectional polishing. The angle θ is counted anticlockwise from 0° (the 0 → 1 in (f)) to 360°.19 Copyright © 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (h) Back scattering electron image of the three-tier domain structure in a single grain. (i) Schematic of the domain structure. The bold solid blue lines indicate the primary DWs. The thinner orange lines indicate the secondary DW. The tertiary domains are marked by thin solid blue lines within a secondary domain.66 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Polarization driven surface active sites. (a) Rich defective surfaces favour surface reactions. (b) Decorated metallic nanostructures may act as both a co-catalyst and a light-harvesting medium.15 (c and d) Schematic diagram; (c) comparison of polar facets in ZnO nanosheets and nanorods and, (d) methane C–H and ethylene CC bond polarization as well as the activation of the surface-adsorbed oxygen molecule over polar and nonpolar crystal planes of ZnO nanostructures.72 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Scanning electron microscope image of NaTaO3:La(2%) and schematic mechanism of highly efficient photocatalytic water splitting over NiO/NaTaO3:La photocatalysts, in the inset.73 Copyright © 2003, American Chemical Society. (f and g) Surface topography after; (f) Ag+ reduction and (g) Mn2+ oxidation. The images have been taken in the same area. The vertical scale is 80 nm and 150 nm for (f) and (g), respectively. ‘O’ indicates a domain that promotes oxidation and ‘R’ indicates a domain that promotes reduction.55 Copyright 2016, Royal society of Chemistry. (h) Breaking of the oxygen tetrahedral cages upon molecular binding and exposure of Cr 3d states at the surface of negatively poled CrO2–PbTiO3 without NO; the atoms are Cr (pink), O (red), Pb (gray), and Ti (blue). (i) Real space electron redistribution shows covalent bond formation upon NO adsorption on the surface Cr atom for positively poled CrO2–PbTiO3. Blue iso-surfaces show regions in space that are depopulated by electrons, and red iso-surfaces show the regions that get populated by electrons when NO binds to the surface Cr. The state becoming occupied is a bonding combination of the NO SOMO (π symmetry) and the surface Cr 3dxz and Cr 3dyz orbitals.76 Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  DW polarity based photocatalytic reactions. (a) Schematic of the band alignment of a single ferroelectric domain PbTiO3 single crystal with anatase TiO2 islands growing on the positively poled surface after selective deposition of co-catalyst Pt; D: electron donor, A: electron acceptor.80 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. (b–e) Schematic of the BWO/SRO heterostructure for the water splitting mechanism; (b and d) T–T CDWs as a photoanode, (c and e) H–H CDWs as a photocathode.81 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Mechanism of the decolorization of MB dye by internal and external screening due to the built-in electric field.95 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  DW engineering. (a) The change of anisotropy coefficient α12 with composition. As α12 → 0, when the composition approaches MPB from both rhombohedral (R) and tetragonal (T) sides, the DW thickness increases anomalously.128 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) NOx direct decomposition and CO oxidation on CrO2–PTO via a catalytic cycle driven by dynamically and periodically controlling the ferroelectric PTO polarization.76 Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Intra-band gap defect states between the conduction band (top semicircle) and the valence band (bottom semicircle). Usually, intra-band gap states are caused by defects, but they may also be intrinsic to the pristine DW.28 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature Limited. (d) Domain patterns from a 2 μm × 1 μm region of BiNbO4 (BNO)–O2 (top) and BNO–N2 (bottom) thin films poled with ±15 V tip bias. (e) Polarization hysteresis in BNO films, suggesting defect-induced ferroelectric properties in the BNO–N2 sample; the measurements were performed at a frequency of 20 kHz.129 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Intrinsic different electronic band structures of the DW leading to a reduction in the bandgap.28 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature Limited.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
