The effect of the gas–solid contacting pattern in a high-temperature thermochemical energy storage on the performance of a concentrated solar power pl ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE03204K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE03204K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1375-1389The effect of the gas–solid contacting pattern in a high-temperature thermochemical energy storage on the performance of a concentrated solar power plant†

        
          
            S. 
            Ströhle
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Haselbacher
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Z. R. 
            Jovanovic
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            A. 
            Steinfeld
          
        
      b
aSolar Technology Laboratory, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland
bDepartment of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail: haselbac@ethz.ch
Received 
      19th October 2015
    , Accepted 25th January 2016First published on 26th January 2016AbstractThis work investigates how the gas–solid contacting pattern in a thermochemical energy storage system charged and discharged by air as the heat-transfer fluid influences (1) the integration of the storage into a concentrated solar power plant and (2) the performance of the power plant. The investigation uses 6Mn2O3 ↔ 4Mn3O4 + O2 as the model reaction taking place in packed- and fluidized-bed reactors simulated based on idealized contacting patterns and empirical reduction/oxidation rate laws. Considering computed heat-transfer fluid outflow temperatures and the operating requirements by the power block and the solar field, the preferred integration into the power plant is identified to be parallel for the packed bed and serial for the fluidized bed. A more detailed comparison of these two plant configurations shows that a parallel integration of a well-designed storage system is advantageous due to the increased power block inlet temperatures and the absence of limitations on the attainable duration of discharging. Furthermore, combining thermochemical and sensible energy storage systems in one storage unit is beneficial for the parallel integration of a batch-type storage system because it merges increased volumetric and gravimetric storage densities provided by the thermochemical section with reduced outflow temperatures during charging provided by a low-cost sensible section.

Broader context
Concentrated solar power (CSP) plants with integrated thermal energy storage (TES) are considered to be a promising option for the cost-effective electricity generation and dispatchability because they allow the temporal decoupling of electricity generation and solar insolation. In spite of their projected potential for high energy storage densities, thermochemical energy storage (TCS) concepts have not been explored as extensively as sensible and latent TES concepts. Current research on TCS is mainly focused on the development and improvement of TCS materials and their testing in reactor concepts that are, however, often selected haphazardly. This article discusses the consequences of the gas–solid contacting pattern in a TCS reactor on the outflow temperature of the heat-transfer fluid (HTF). The consequences are rooted in the particle size of the TCS material and ultimately drive the decision whether the TCS should be integrated into the CSP plant in a serial or parallel configuration. The findings presented in this article are expected to serve as guidelines for the future development of TCS concepts that enable an efficient and flexible operation of CSP plants.

1. Introduction
There are two basic ways in which a thermal energy storage (TES) system can be integrated into a concentrated solar power (CSP) plant. The first and common way is the parallel configuration shown in Fig. 1, in which the mass flow leaving the solar field is split into a portion flowing through the storage heat exchanger (HX) and the remainder flowing through the power-block HX. The second is the serial configuration shown in Fig. 2 where the entire flow‡ of the heat-transfer fluid (HTF) leaving the solar field is passed first through the storage and then through power-block HXs. The latter configuration is preferred when the temperature of the HTF leaving the storage during charging exceeds the maximum allowable working temperature at the inlet of the solar field but is high enough to drive the power block efficiently.
 Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of a parallel configuration of the TES and the power block during (a) charging and (b) discharging. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic depiction of a serial configuration of the TES and the power block during (a) charging and (b) discharging. 
TES systems can be classified as sensible heat, latent heat, or thermochemical storage (TCS) systems.1 In a TCS system, the heat is looped via reversible chemical reactions: it is stored as the enthalpy of the endothermic reaction and recovered as sensible heat through the exothermic recombination of the reactants.
A TCS system may be driven by either homogeneous or heterogeneous reactions involving gases, liquids, and solids.2,3 We restrict our attention to heterogeneous gas–solid reaction systems because the gas that is released during the endothermic reaction can be separated easily. Furthermore, the reaction temperatures of several of the gas–solid reactions considered for TCS are in the 500–1000 °C range that is suitable for central receiver CSP plants and for power cycles that are more efficient than conventional Rankine cycles (e.g., supercritical CO2 or combined cycles).4,5
Compared to sensible or latent TES, TCS has several advantages. First, it offers the potential for increased volumetric and gravimetric storage densities.1 Second, if the recombination of the reactants can be prevented while cooling the TCS materials from the reaction to the ambient temperature, the energy stored as the enthalpy of the chemical reaction can be preserved at ambient temperature; this can be achieved with generally high overall efficiency governed only by the losses of recuperating the sensible heat stored in the TCS material. Third, the discharging can be performed at almost constant temperature, which allows the power block to operate at high efficiency.
Research on high-temperature TCS systems is at an early stage. It focuses mostly on identifying suitable materials and reactions6–9 that are probed in laboratory-scale packed10–12 and fluidized-bed reactors.12,13 However, before TCS can be considered a solution for commercial-scale CSP plants, further research and development is required to specifically address the following areas: (1) long-term thermo-mechanical stability and chemical cyclability of the solid reactants, (2) selection and design of appropriate TCS reactors, and (3) integration of TCS reactors into CSP plants. This article focuses on the second and third items and restricts attention to gas–solid reactors that are charged and discharged by contacting the solid reactants with a gas that acts as both HTF and carrier of the gaseous reactant.
As TCS essentially represents a gas–solid chemical reactor operating in an unsteady-state regime, the appropriate selection and design of a specific TCS configuration should stem from the principles that have been well established by reaction-engineering practice.14,15 According to those principles, the particle size distribution of the TCS material affects not only the gas–solid reaction kinetics but also imposes a specific reactor type. Sub-millimeter particles with a broad size distribution are generally handled in fluidized-bed reactors because packed beds comprising such particles suffer from excessive gas channeling induced by large pressure gradients.11 Conversely, larger, uniformly-sized granules or pellets (>2 mm) are generally suitable for packed-bed reactors as fluidized beds tend to spout for such granules or pellets, which is undesirable for physical and chemical operations.15
The two reactor types, fluidized and packed beds, feature different contacting patterns that, in turn, lead to different spatial and temporal temperature distributions of gas and solids. Namely, due to good mixing the temperature of the solids in a fluidized bed can be considered to be spatially uniform so that the gas leaves the bed at the temperature of the solids.15 Conversely, in a packed bed the solids do not mix and thus their temperature varies with both time and space. The difference in the spatial temperature distributions of the solid phase in these two reactor types is reflected by the difference in the temporal outflow temperatures of the HTF, which ultimately imposes whether the TCS should be integrated into the CSP plant in a serial or parallel configuration.
The objectives of this work are to determine (1) how the contacting pattern in a TCS reactor, i.e., the reactor type, imposes the optimal TCS integration into a CSP plant, and (2) how a specific combination of TCS reactor type and CSP plant integration affects the overall performance of the plant.
These objectives have been accomplished by following the bottom-up approach illustrated in Fig. 3. Namely, we start from thermochemistry by choosing the Mn2O3–Mn3O4 redox cycle7,8 as the model reaction system with air acting as both HTF and carrier of the gaseous reactant/product (O2). We assume that the temperature provided by the HTF leaving the solar field is sufficiently high to drive the endothermic reaction during charging, whereas the exothermic reverse reaction during discharging takes place at temperatures that are sufficiently high to drive the power block. Then we assume that the solid reactants are available as either small particles (diameter of dp = 100 μm) or granules (dp > 2 mm) that are used in either a fluidized- or a packed-bed TCS batch reactor, respectively. The reactors are modeled based on empirical reduction/oxidation rate laws adjusted for the intra-particle diffusion in the granules and assuming two idealized contacting patterns: (1) an axially-dispersed plug flow of gas through stationary solids for the packed bed and (2) a plug flow of gas through a well mixed batch of solids for the fluidized bed such that the gas leaves the bed at the temperature of the solids. These reactor models are then used to compute the air outflow temperatures as a function of time during charging and discharging of the storage system. Based on these computed temperatures and the requirements of both the power block and the solar field, the preferred integration of either reactor type into the CSP plant is selected between parallel and serial. The selected CSP plant configurations are then compared based on the gravimetric and volumetric energy storage densities of the solids in the TCS, the HTF temperature at the inlet of the power block, and the flexibility in adjusting the electricity production by the power block. Finally, the findings are generalized to other reaction systems and reactor types with continuous feed of the energy storage material.
 Fig. 3  Bottom-up approach used to evaluate the implications of the gas–solid contacting pattern in a TCS on the performance of a CSP plant with integrated TCS. 
2. TCS reactor simulations
2.1. General assumptions
The simulations of the packed- and fluidized-bed reactors are performed for the same composition and temperatures of air flowing into the reactors. To set these values, we make the following assumptions:
(1) The solar field, power block, and storage are operated with separate HTFs and coupled through ideal piping and heat exchangers.§ As already stated, the HTF in the TCS is air. The other HTFs do not need to be specified for the purpose of this study.
(2) Air is circulated between the TCS and the HX in a closed loop. Therefore, air passes through the TCS multiple times, which implies that the inlet O2 content varies with time due to the redox reactions. We assume that the total amount of recirculating air provides a sufficient reservoir of oxygen to ensure that the redox reactions do not affect the composition of the air appreciably. Therefore, we consider the composition of the air entering the TCS to be constant.
(3) When there is sufficient solar irradiation, the HTF flowing through the solar field is heated to a temperature of TSF,out = 1273 K, achievable in concentrating solar tower systems. The heated HTF flows through a heat exchanger, where heat is transferred to the air that flows through the TCS. Because of the ideal piping and heat exchangers, during charging the air temperature at the inlet of the TCS is Tf,c,in = TSF,out (see Fig. 1(a) and 2(a)). Note that the subscript f is generally used to refer to the fluid phase in the TCS.
(4) It is beyond the scope of this work to specify the details of the power block. We assume that the working fluid of the power block is cooled to an outlet temperature TPB,out that is above the ambient temperature. The corresponding enthalpy is recovered through ideal heat exchangers and directed to the TCS inlet during discharging (see Fig. 1(b) and 2(b)). For the simulations, we assume Tf,d,in = TPB,out = 373 K, which could correspond to a Rankine cycle without internal heat recovery, in which temperatures of TPB,out ≤ 373 K are expected (depending on the condensation pressure of the steam).
Furthermore, the inherent temporal variations in solar irradiation are neglected thus the air temperatures at the inlet of the TCS and the mass fluxes during charging and discharging (ṁf,c,in/Abed and ṁf,d,in/Abed, respectively) can be considered constant. Note that we consider the HTF mass flux as the pertinent design parameter instead of the HTF flow rate. As a result, the cross-sectional areas of the reactors and the total mass of the TCS material in the reactors do not need to be specified. The advantage of this approach is that our findings are decoupled from a specific storage capacity or power level. The charging and discharging durations are τc = 6 h and τd = 6 h, respectively, which are typical values for a general assessment of thermal storage in a CSP plant.16 The heat losses through the storage walls are ignored. Therefore, the duration of the idle states between charging and discharging is immaterial and ignored in the simulations. Since we are interested in the quasi-steady-state behavior of the storage, the simulations are repeated until the final conditions after a complete charging–discharging cycle are identical to the initial conditions of that cycle. For the packed bed, the results were considered to be in a quasi-steady state after cycle 35, when the maximum local temperature difference between the final states of two subsequent cycles was less than 0.01 K in the gas phase.
The properties of manganese oxide and air, as well as the approximate kinetics model, are described in the ESI.† The pressure of air at the outlet of the storage is ptot,out = 1 bar.
2.2. Packed bed

2.2.1. Model. 
The simulations were carried out using a validated transient one-dimensional heat- and mass-transfer model of a tubular packed-bed reactor.17 Air is represented as a continuous phase by solving mass and energy conservation equations in the axial direction of the reactor. As a result of ignoring radial non-uniformities within the reactor, the model does not capture the effect of increased HTF velocities due to gas bypassing near the reactor wall induced by the higher local bed void fraction. These effects have been found to be negligible for the flow of Newtonian fluids through packed beds having a tank-to-particle diameter ratio D/dp > 30.18 Therefore, the applicability of our model is restricted to beds with a high tank-to-particle diameter ratio typically encountered in industrial-scale TES systems where the tank diameter is of the order of tens of meters while the particle diameter is of the order of millimeters to centimeters. Due to the pressure drop in the bed and oxygen consumption/release through the reaction, the total pressure and the oxygen partial pressure are non-uniform along the axial coordinate. The solid reactants are modeled as discrete spherical granules, in which the mass and energy conservation equations are solved in the radial direction to account for potential intraparticle heat- and mass-transfer resistances. The temperature, partial pressure of oxygen, and reaction rates are evaluated locally in each cell of a granule. The gas and solid phases are coupled through appropriate interphase heat- and mass-transfer correlations that account for resistances at the gas–solid interface. The parameters that are specific to the simulation of the packed bed are listed in Table 1. The HTF mass fluxes during charging and discharging were chosen to ensure (1) moderate pressure drop through the packed bed TCS and (2) maintaining Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in during charging and reasonably high Tf,d,out during discharging. Note that the HTF mass flux is slightly higher during discharging than during charging, which supports the stabilization of the HTF outflow temperature at Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in.
Table 1 Parameters specific to the packed bed simulation. See the ESI for further information about the material properties




Parameter
Value




Bed length

L
bed = 1.5 m


Bed void fraction

ε
bed = 0.35


Granule diameter

d
p = 5 mm


Granule internal porosity

ε
p = 0.5


HTF mass flux during charging

ṁ
f,c,in/Abed = 0.05 kg m−2 s−1


HTF mass flux during discharging

ṁ
f,d,in/Abed = 0.06 kg m−2 s−1




As in sensible-heat thermocline storage systems,19,20 the direction of the air flow is reversed between charging and discharging to maintain an axial gradient in the temperature of the solids throughout the entire cycle. Therefore, the bed temperature remains close to the charging temperature at the axial location z = 0 and close to the discharging temperature at z = Lbed.
The gas and granule phases were discretized with 150 and 8 cells, respectively, and the time step was 1 s. The solution was confirmed to be independent of the number of cells and the time step.


2.2.2. Results. 
The axial profiles of the air temperature at various times during the charging and discharging are shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively. At the beginning of charging, the granules near the reactor inlet are heated by the inflowing air with Tf,c,in = 1273 K. Once the granules exceed the equilibrium temperature of Teq,amb = 1094 K,¶ the endothermic reduction is initiated. At temperatures close to equilibrium, however, the reduction rates are too slow to consume all of the heat that is transferred from the air, and the granules are further heated. Once the equilibrium temperature is exceeded by about 100 K, the reduction becomes fast enough to stabilize the granule temperature, resulting in a plateau of the temperature front slightly below 1200 K as can be seen in Fig. 4(a). After being fully reduced, the granules are heated to Tf,c,in. The reaction zone and the temperature front move downstream because of the continuous supply of the gaseous reactant and thermal energy. The operating conditions were chosen to ensure that the granules near the reactor exit are not heated appreciably so that the air leaves the reactor at a nearly constant temperature of Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in = 373 K. This particular criterion will be revisited in Section 3 from the standpoint of exergy losses imposed by the integration of the packed bed TCS into the CSP plant.
 Fig. 4  Air temperature in the packed bed as a function of the axial position during (a) charging and (b) discharging. Note that the reactor is operated under quasi-steady-state conditions, i.e., the temperature profiles at t = 0 h in (a) and at t = 12 h in (b) are identical. 
For discharging, the direction of the air flow and hence the motion of the temperature front is reversed. Upon initiating the discharge, the granules near the reactor outlet are at Tf,c,in and thus the air leaves the TCS at this temperature. With increasing time, the outflow temperature of air decreases as the granules near the outlet are cooled by the air flow. Once the temperature of the reduced granules decreases below the equilibrium temperature, the exothermic oxidation is initiated. The resulting energy release leads to a stabilization of the temperature of the granules and therefore of the air outflow temperature (see t = 10 h in Fig. 4(b)).
As shown by Fig. 4, most of the packed bed does not exceed the equilibrium temperature and therefore does not react. In fact, only about 14% of the storage material reacts during a charging/discharging cycle. The corresponding solid conversion during charging and discharging is shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), respectively, where Xs = 0 and Xs = 1 correspond to fully oxidized and fully reduced manganese oxide, respectively. Comparing the solid conversions at t = 6 h and t = 8 h in Fig. 5(b) reveals that the reduction still proceeds during the beginning of the discharging phase. The reason is that the granules in z < 0.28 m have not yet been cooled below the equilibrium temperature (see Fig. 4). Note that Fig. 5 only shows the part of the bed that reacts. The remainder of the bed acts as a sensible-heat storage section and cools the air to Tf,d,in during charging.
 Fig. 5  Solid conversion in the packed bed, plotted along the reactor axis during (a) charging and (b) discharging. Xs = 0 and Xs = 1 correspond to fully oxidized and fully reduced manganese oxide, respectively. Note that for this figure, which shows only the part of the bed that reacts, the simulations were repeated with 400 cells in the fluid phase to obtain smoother axial profiles. 
It should be noted that the above-mentioned 14% limit in the chemical conversion is not a general result. This value could possibly be increased through optimization of the operating conditions, TCS material properties and morphology, and reactor configurations resulting in more thermal energy stored during charging. However, it should also be noted that it is not possible to design a packed bed reactor that allows for the complete chemical conversion while maintaining Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in because the temperature front shown in Fig. 4 cannot be discontinuous. Further information about the choices of the reactor length and the granule diameter and their impact on the results can be found in the ESI.†

2.3. Fluidized bed

2.3.1. Model. 
We assume that (1) the manganese oxide particles have a diameter of dp = 100 μm, (2) the solid phase is well mixed, (3) the air flow approaches plug flow conditions (so that axial mixing of air and the air bypassing the bed through rising bubbles can be neglected), and (4) the total pressure and the oxygen partial pressure in the bed are constant (both temporally and spatially) at ptot = 1 bar and pO2 = 0.21 bar, respectively.|| The assumptions imply that (1) gradients in the particles can be ignored, (2) the temperature and the reaction rate in the solid phase can be taken to be spatially uniform, and (3) the interphase heat transfer is strong enough to ensure that the air reaches the particle temperature before leaving the bed.15,19
Based on these assumptions, an energy balance for a fluidized bed can be formulated that includes a source term for the energy released/consumed during the exothermic/endothermic reactions. Further details about the model are provided in the ESI.†
The energy that is stored in the particles during a charging period is determined by the chemical conversion and the temperature difference of the particles between the final states of charging and discharging, ΔTs = Ts,c,end − Ts,d,end. In principle, more heat could be stored per mass of TCS material by increasing ΔTs. However, this would also lead to a larger temporal variation in the air outflow temperature, which is undesirable for the equipment located downstream of the storage. Therefore, the particles are cycled between Ts,d,end = 1075 K and Ts,c,end = 1200 K in the following simulation, which allows nearly complete conversion (Xs,c,end − Xs,d,end ≈ 0.95) and results in moderate variations in the air outflow temperature. The parameters that are specific to the simulation of the fluidized bed are listed in Table 2. Note that the mass fluxes were obtained iteratively such that τd = τc = 6 h while cycling between Ts,d,end and Ts,c,end. The solutions were found to be independent of the time step of 1 s.
Table 2 Parameters specific to the fluidized bed simulation. See the ESI for further information about the material properties




Parameter
Value




Bed length

L
bed = 0.4 m


Bed void fraction

ε
bed = 0.45


Particle diameter

d
p = 100 μm


Particle internal porosity

ε
p = 0.5


HTF mass flux during charging

ṁ
f,c,in/Abed = 6.35× 10−2 kg m−2 s−1


HTF mass flux during discharging

ṁ
f,d,in/Abed = 9.48× 10−3 kg m−2 s−1






2.3.2. Results. 
The temperature of the particles is shown in Fig. 6, indicated by the red line. During charging, air enters the bed at Tf,c,in = 1273 K and initially heats the particles. When Tred ≈ 1180 K is reached at t ≈ 1.5 h, the reaction is sufficiently fast so that the energy consumed by the reduction is approximately equal to the heat that is transferred from the air, leading to the stabilization of the bed temperature. During the following two hours, the bed temperature does not change significantly, and energy is stored in the particles through the reaction. The reaction kinetics slow down as the reduction approaches completion. Therefore, not all of the heat transferred from the air to the solids is consumed by the reduction and the bed temperature increases again.
 Fig. 6  The temperature of the fluidized bed during a charging/discharging cycle. The red line indicates the calculated transient temperature profile of the particles. The blue line indicates an approximation of the bed temperature for further analysis. The dotted line indicates the theoretical equilibrium temperature at an ambient oxygen partial pressure. 
The air inlet temperature during discharging is Tf,d,in = 373 K. Once the temperature of the particles drops below the equilibrium temperature, oxidation is initiated, resulting in the stabilization of the bed temperature at Tox ≈ 1090 K. After full oxidation (t = 12 h), the discharging is interrupted to avoid further extraction of sensible heat, which would lead to a continuing drop in the air outflow temperature. An important observation from Fig. 6 is that the temperature of the particles and thus the temperature of the air leaving the reactor are inherently high during the charging step. This finding is consistent with prior work.21–23

2.4. Comparison of packed and fluidized beds

2.4.1. Pressure drop. 
The pressure drop in the packed bed, estimated using Ergun's equation,24 is found to be 1.5–5.5 mbar. The mechanical work required for pumping the HTF through the bed during a charging/discharging cycle amounts to ∼0.2% of energy stored during charging. The pressure drop in the fluidized bed is 52–55 mbar according to Δp = Lbedg(1 − εbed)(ρparticle − ρf), where g is the gravity and ρ is the density. Pumping the HTF through the bed during a charging/discharging cycle requires mechanical work amounting to ∼17% of the energy stored during charging. This implies that for the considered set of parameters used to simulate the two reactor types the pumping losses are considerably lower for the packed bed reactor.


2.4.2. HTF outflow temperature. 
The importance of the HTF outflow temperature was explained in the Introduction. The air outflow temperatures for the packed and fluidized beds are plotted as a function of time in Fig. 7. Because of the flow reversal, the air temperature at the outlet of the packed bed (red lines) is recorded at z = Lbed during charging and at z = 0 during discharging, see Fig. 4. Fig. 7 shows that the axial temperature gradient in the packed bed allows Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in, whereas the spatially uniform temperature of the solids in the fluidized bed couples Tf,c,out with the reduction temperature Tred ≫ Tf,d,in. Furthermore, it can be seen that during most of the discharge, the air outflow temperature of the packed bed is higher than that of the fluidized bed.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of air temperatures as a function of time at the inlet of the packed and fluidized beds (black lines), the outlet of the packed bed (red lines), and the outlet of the fluidized bed (blue line) during a charging–discharging cycle. 

3. TCS integration strategies
The parallel and serial configurations depicted in Fig. 1 and 2 must satisfy several constraints for efficient operation. During discharging, the constraints are identical for the parallel and serial configurations: the storage should provide heat at temperatures that are sufficiently high to run the power block, i.e., Tf,d,out = TPB,in. For the remainder of this paper, we assume that this constraint is fulfilled. During charging, however, the constraints are not identical. In the serial configuration, Tf,c,out must be high enough to drive the power block. In the parallel configuration, we require Tf,c,out ≈ TPB,out to reduce exergy losses due to mixing. These constraints, and the results presented in Section 2.4.2 on the air outflow temperatures during charging, can now be seen to dictate how packed and fluidized bed reactors should be integrated into a CSP plant.
For a packed bed TCS, the chosen operating conditions allow for Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in = TPB,out, thus the streams from the TCS and power-block HXs can be merged with low exergy losses. Accordingly, a parallel configuration is chosen for the packed bed. Conversely, for a fluidized bed, Tf,c,out is coupled to the reduction temperature and therefore Tf,c,out ≈ Tred ≫ TPB,out. A parallel configuration would therefore lead to large exergy losses due to mixing. Accordingly, a serial configuration is chosen for the fluidized bed. This reasoning is valid for alternative reaction systems and HTFs other than air if the following conditions are met:
(1) The exothermic reaction during discharging takes place at temperatures that are high enough to drive the power block, i.e., Tox ≫ TPB,out.
(2) Assuming equal gas reactant pressures, the endothermic reaction takes place at higher temperatures than the exothermic reaction, i.e., Tred > Tox.
(3) The fluidized bed is well mixed and free from significant heat losses, so that the HTF leaves the reactor with Tf,c,out ≈ Tred during charging.
4. Discussion
4.1. Assessment of CSP plant configurations
Having determined suitable CSP plant configurations for packed and fluidized bed TCS reactors in Section 3, we now turn our attention to the assessment of these configurations using several criteria. This evaluation corresponds to the last step of the bottom-up approach depicted in Fig. 3. We do not include the frequently used efficiency of the gas/solid heat exchange during charging,19 usually defined as ηh = (Tf,c,in − Tf,c,out)/(Tf,c,in − Tf,d,in), in our evaluation because it is not a generally applicable characterization of the performance of TCS reactors in CSP plants. This is easily seen because for a packed bed Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in leads to ηh → 1, whereas for a fluidized bed in a serial configuration Tf,c,out = TPB,in ≫ TPB,out = Tf,d,in, resulting in ηh ≪ 1. However, TPB,in ≫ TPB,out is required for an efficient operation of the power block and hence the above efficiency definition is inadequate for a serial configuration.

4.1.1. Energy storage density. 
The volume-averaged gravimetric energy storage density ẽtot relates the energy that is stored in a TCS reactor during one charging period to the mass of the storage material in the bed. The higher ẽtot, the less material is required to reach a given storage capacity and the lower the storage material costs. ẽtot is given by the volume average of the sum of the chemically stored energy per unit mass echem, which is dependent on the degree of solid conversion, and the sensible heat per unit mass esens, which is determined by the temperature difference to which the solids are subjected. The energy that can be theoretically stored in 1 kg of Mn2O3 between 373 K and 1273 K is plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 8. It can be seen that echem amounts to only 21.7% of the total stored energy per unit mass.
 Fig. 8  Specific energy storage density of manganese oxide at temperatures between Tf,d,in = 373 K and Tf,c,in = 1273 K. Ts,c,end and Ts,d,end correspond to the temperatures of the fluidized bed at the end of charging and discharging, respectively, according to the results presented in Section 2.3. Note that in this figure it is assumed that the reaction takes place at the theoretical equilibrium temperature corresponding to the partial pressure of oxygen under atmospheric conditions (Teq,amb = 1094 K), which is not the case under real conditions due to the finite reaction kinetics. 
For the fluidized bed, we assume cycling between 1075 K and 1200 K, as indicated in Fig. 8. By taking into account the change in conversion of Xs,c,end − Xs,d,end ≈ 0.95, the gravimetric energy storage density is ẽtot = 0.300 MJ kgMn2O3−1.
In the packed bed, the temperature, the chemical conversion of the solids, and hence the sensible and chemically stored energy are spatially non-uniform. The energy per unit mass that is transferred to the solids during a charging period under quasi-steady-state conditions is shown in Fig. 9. The gravimetric energy storage density in the packed bed is found to be ẽtot = 0.334 MJ kgMn2O3−1.
 Fig. 9  Local gravimetric energy storage density in the packed bed, calculated from the difference in the energy content of the manganese oxide particles between the charged and discharged states as presented in Section 2.2. 
The contributions of sensible and chemically stored energy in the packed and fluidized beds are compared in Table 3. It is seen that about 63% of the total energy is stored chemically in the fluidized bed. By contrast, the chemically stored energy accounts for only about 9% of the total stored energy in the packed bed because only about 14% of the storage material reacted. Nevertheless, the gravimetric energy storage density of the packed bed is approximately 11% higher than that of the fluidized bed because of the much larger proportion of sensible heat. Thus it is important to account for the contribution of the sensible heat when comparing reactor types. It should be emphasized that these results are valid only for this specific case study because they are dependent on the reaction system and the operating conditions.
Table 3 Contribution of sensible (esens) and chemically stored energies (echem) to the gravimetric energy storage densities (ẽtot) in the packed- and fluidized beds




 

e
sens [MJ kgMn2O3−1]

e
chem [MJ kgMn2O3−1]

ẽ
tot [MJ kgMn2O3−1]




Packed bed
0.304 (91%)
0.030 (9%)
0.334


Fluidized bed
0.111 (37%)
0.189 (63%)
0.300




One should note that the difference between the storage densities of the two reactor types becomes more significant when they are compared based on their volumetric energy storage densities. By using the bed void fractions specified in Tables 1 and 2, the volumetric energy storage density of the packed bed becomes 32% higher than that of the fluidized bed. Accounting for the additional transport disengaging zone in the freeboard and one or more cyclones, both of which are necessary to mitigate the carryover of solids from the fluidized bed,15 increases this factor further.


4.1.2. HTF temperature at the power-block inlet. 
As long as the operating temperature of the power block is not exceeded, higher temperatures at the inlet of the power block are desirable because they may offer at least one of the following advantages: (1) the HX coupling the HTF from the solar field with the working fluid of the power block becomes more compact, (2) the heat-to-electricity conversion efficiency of a given power cycle can potentially be increased according to Carnot's principle, and/or (3) a different power block operating at higher temperatures and thereby increased efficiencies can be applied (e.g., combining a Rankine cycle with a gas turbine).25–27 In the parallel configuration, thermal energy is transferred directly from the solar field to the power block during charging (see Fig. 1(a)) and therefore TPB,in = TSF,out = 1273 K. Conversely, in a serial configuration, some of the thermal energy is transferred to the TCS before entering the power block (see Fig. 2(a)), therefore TPB,in = Tf,c,out < Tf,c,in = TSF,out (see blue line for charging in Fig. 7). Therefore, TPB,in is generally higher during charging for a parallel configuration than for a serial configuration. Note that in this study, the packed bed in a parallel configuration also leads to higher values of TPB,in during most of the discharging phase as can be seen from the outflow temperatures during discharging in Fig. 7.


4.1.3. Flexibility in adjusting electricity production. 
A CSP plant with TES has the advantage that the electricity production can be adjusted.1 In the following, we assess the ability of the parallel and serial configurations in terms of (1) running the power block at the desired power level independent of the fluctuations in solar irradiation during daytime and (2) extending the electricity production during evening/night hours.
4.1.3.1. Parallel configuration. 
In a parallel configuration, fluctuations in solar irradiation are usually compensated by adjusting ṁSF to ensure that TSF,out remains constant.1 Since ṁSF is split after the solar field, the mass flow rate ṁPB and thus the heat transferred to the power block HX can be adjusted independently. Therefore, the parallel configuration provides the flexibility either to keep ṁPB constant throughout the day to provide base load electricity or to adjust ṁPB to match temporal fluctuations in the electricity demand. The mass flow supplied to the storage, ṁTCS = ṁSF − ṁPB, includes the fluctuations in solar irradiation. If the HTF passing through the storage HX can be cooled to an outflow temperature close to TPB,out irrespective of the fluctuating mass flow rate, ṁTCS and ṁPB can be merged with low exergy losses and directed to the solar field with TSF,in ≈ TPB,out. In summary, the parallel configuration allows the HTF temperatures at the inlet and the outlet of the solar field to be kept constant by adjusting the mass flows ṁSF, ṁTCS, and ṁPB throughout the day in response to fluctuations in solar irradiation and demand for electricity production.
Ignoring seasonal variations in solar irradiation for simplicity, the thermal energy that needs to be transferred to the storage during daytime is determined by the electric power output and the thermal efficiency of the power block as well as the number of hours by which the electricity production is to be extended by discharging the storage. To charge the storage while generating electric power at the same rate as without the storage requires a larger ṁSF and therefore the solar field must be enlarged when incorporating storage. To reach the desired number of discharging hours, the sizes of the solar field and the storage and the corresponding mass flow rates ṁSF and ṁTCS can be adjusted such that sufficient thermal energy is transferred to the storage during daytime.
4.1.3.2. Serial configuration. 
The flexibility with which the CSP plant can be operated is restricted because during daytime the same mass flow ṁSF passes through the solar field, the storage HX, and the power-block HX. This means that ṁSF can be adjusted to compensate for either (1) fluctuations in solar irradiation to maintain constant TSF,out (and therefore constant Tf,c,in) or (2) the transient nature of Tf,c,out (see Fig. 7) to maintain a constant thermal input to the power block, but not both. If ṁSF is adjusted to compensate for the former, the resulting variations in ṁSF would cause fluctuations in the thermal input to the power block. If, on the other hand, ṁSF is adjusted to compensate for the latter, fluctuations in solar irradiation would result in fluctuations in TSF,out (and therefore in Tf,c,in). Depending on the amplitude and the frequency of the fluctuations in Tf,c,in, their effect on Tf,c,out may be suppressed by the thermal inertia of the fluidized solids. The fluidized-bed TCS would therefore act like a thermal buffer. However, adjusting ṁSF to maintain a constant thermal input to the power block is constrained by the requirement that it must be large enough to prevent TSF,out from exceeding the maximum allowable working temperature. Therefore, it appears to be inherently more challenging to stabilize the thermal input to the power block during daytime for a serial configuration than for a parallel configuration.
An additional challenge facing the serial configuration is a restriction on the rate at which heat can be supplied to the TCS during charging. This restriction arises because it is not possible to increase TCS,c, the thermal input to the TCS, by increasing ṁTCS without affecting PB,c, the thermal input to the power block. Assuming a constant HTF heat capacity cp, the ratio TCS,c/PB,c is given by (1)Because the storage is assumed to be free of losses, under cyclic operation we have τcTCS,c = τdTCS,d. Assuming further a constant Tf,c,out and that the power block is operated with equal power during the discharging and charging periods, i.e., PB,d = TCS,d = PB,c, the ratio of the discharging and charging durations becomes (2)Note that in principle Tf,c,out is a function of TSF,out. By increasing TSF,out, more heat is transferred from air to the solid reactants and the bed temperature stabilizes at higher values where the reduction kinetics are faster and the energy absorption larger. However, our experiments indicated that at temperatures above Tf,c,out = 1180 K the reduction kinetics are very sensitive to temperature variations, see the ESI.† For this reason, if TSF,out is increased, a small increase in the bed temperature due to the transfer of sensible heat would increase the rate of heat uptake due to the reduction significantly. As a result, the bed temperature will increase by a few Kelvins only. Therefore, we assume that Tf,c,out is independent of TSF,out in the following, and plot eqn (2) in Fig. 10 for Tf,c,out = 1180 K (see Fig. 6) and TPB,out = 373 K and 575 K.
 Fig. 10  Approximation of the attainable ratio of discharging to charging durations τd/τc in a serial configuration of the TCS and power block, assuming that Tf,c,out = 1180 K. 

Fig. 10 shows that if the TCS is charged for six hours, for example, and the HTF temperatures at the outlets of the solar field and the power block are TSF,out = 1273 K and TPB,out = 373 K, respectively, the storage can be discharged for about 40 min only. Eqn (2) indicates that the discharge duration can be increased by increasing TPB,out and/or TSF,out. However, TPB,out is determined by the power block and cannot be increased without lowering its efficiency. An increase in TSF,out is possible subject to temperature limits of the solar field and the HTF. Furthermore, it should be noted that the increased exergy that results from a higher TSF,out cannot be exploited in a serial configuration. Since TPB,in is still coupled to the reduction/oxidation temperature of the TCS material, the heat-to-electricity efficiency of the power block would basically remain unaffected by the increase in TSF,out. Therefore, we conclude that the serial configuration is not well suited to extending the electricity production by several hours.

4.2. Generalization of the findings
The findings of Section 4.1 suggest that the parallel configuration of the TCS and the power block is superior to the serial configuration because of the following advantages:
(1) The HTF temperature at the inlet of the power block is inherently higher during daytime. If suitable power cycles are used, this translates into higher heat-to-electricity efficiencies.
(2) During daytime, the thermal input to the power block can be adjusted according to the prevailing electricity demand through the appropriate regulation of ṁPB and ṁTCS = ṁSF − ṁPB.
(3) The discharging duration can be increased to a desired value by increasing the sizes of the solar field and the TCS and increasing ṁSF and ṁTCS accordingly.

4.2.1. Alternative reaction systems. 
In Section 4.1, the two CSP plant configurations were compared for TCS reactors operating with manganese oxide as the reaction system. This raises the question whether the findings are specific to the chosen reaction system. The following argument demonstrates that the findings are generally valid. Consider again the serial configuration and focus attention on the temperature difference ΔTf = Tf,c,in − Tf,c,out = TSF,out − TPB,in. This difference can be varied by choosing different reaction systems because Tf,c,out ≈ Tred and/or by adjusting TSF,out. In the limit of ΔTf → 0, the highest possible TPB,in is attained and the heat-to-electricity efficiency of the power block during daytime is equal to that of the parallel configuration. However, ΔTf → 0 also implies that no heat is transferred to the TCS and thus τd = 0. To reach a desired τd, larger ΔTf is required, which reduces TPB,in = TSF,out − ΔTf and thus lowers the heat-to-electricity efficiencies during daytime.** Therefore, the conclusion is that the parallel configuration is superior to the serial configuration irrespective of the reaction system.


4.2.2. Alternative reactor concepts. 
So far, we have followed the bottom-up approach depicted in Fig. 3 and established that the parallel configuration with a packed-bed reactor is superior to the serial configuration with a fluidized-bed reactor. This superiority rests partially on the existence of an axial temperature gradient in the packed bed that guarantees Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in = TPB,out, see Fig. 7. Now we invert our approach, see Fig. 11, and evaluate qualitatively other reactor concepts with the property Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in = TPB,out that would therefore be suitable for the parallel configuration. The evaluation is restricted to reactors with direct heat transfer between the HTF and the solid reactants. However, the above-mentioned requirements for the HTF temperatures are also applicable to reactors with indirect heat transfer. Therefore, the adaptation of this study to reactors with indirect heat transfer is assumed to be straightforward.
 Fig. 11  Translation of the bottom-up approach into a top-down approach using the previously obtained findings. 
4.2.2.1. Implications for batch reactors. 
In Section 2.2, it was demonstrated that only a small section of the packed bed reacts. The non-reacting solids nevertheless serve an important purpose because they cool the HTF from the reduction temperature to Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in. To reduce the costs, the non-reacting solids could be replaced by an inert storage material, leading to a combined thermochemical/sensible TES based on packed beds, see Fig. 12(a), where “R” indicates the high-temperature reaction zone and “C” denotes the cooling zone. Alternatively, to increase the storage capacity, the non-reacting solids could be replaced by a cascade of additional chemical reactants and/or phase change materials operating at lower temperatures.28,29 Through an appropriate choice of the materials and the operating conditions, the HTF outflow temperature could be maintained at Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in.
 Fig. 12  Overview of potential reactor concepts for high-temperature TCS in a parallel configuration, illustrated for the charging period. The colored arrows indicate the flow direction of the HTF, whereas the black arrows indicate the direction of movement of the solids in the continuous reactors. The locations of the high-temperature reaction and cooling zones are indicated with “R” and “C”, respectively. Note that the inert storage material in the batch reactors may be replaced with a cascaded thermochemical storage system or a cascaded latent-heat storage system to increase the gravimetric energy storage density. 
As stated in the Introduction, packed beds are only appropriate if the reactants can be formed into mechanically stable granules or pellets with dp > O(1) mm. If this is not possible, at least two reactor concepts are available for exploiting fine reactive powders. First, an inert structure such as a honeycomb30 or a packed bed of inert granules could be coated with the powder and then used in the high-temperature reaction zone as illustrated in Fig. 12(b). Second, the solid reactant could be handled in a fluidized bed as shown in Fig. 12(c). Both of these reactor concepts should still be combined with a cooling zone as described above to maintain Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in. However, it should be mentioned that compared to their counterparts comprising only reactive materials, packed bed concepts exploiting coated inert materials lead to a lower amount of reactive material per reactor volume. Yet, if the performance of the reactive coatings is not compromised by their mechanical integrity and sintering at high operating temperatures, they do offer the potential benefit of faster kinetics due to decreased intra-particle diffusion resistance.
4.2.2.2. Implications for continuous reactors. 
During charging of a continuous TCS reactor, solids are transferred from a “cold” storage vessel to the reactor, where they absorb heat from the HTF and react, and are then directed to a “hot” storage vessel. For discharging, this process is reversed. This appears to imply that the total volume of the two storage vessels must be twice the volume of a batch reactor for a given amount of storage material, leading to increased material and construction costs. However, the apparent increase in volume may be at least partially offset by the possibility of an increased gravimetric energy storage density compared to a batch reactor. An increased gravimetric energy storage density is possible if the portion of the solids that is cycled between Tf,d,in and Tf,c,in and fully reduced/oxidized during charging/discharging is larger than in a batch reactor. For example, Fig. 8 indicates that the gravimetric energy storage density of manganese oxide that is cycled between Tf,d,in = 373 K and Tf,c,in = 1273 K and fully reduced/oxidized is 0.927 MJ kgMn2O3−1. The packed-bed reactor, however, reaches only a peak gravimetric energy storage density of 0.825 MJ kgMn2O3−1 and an average gravimetric energy storage density of 0.334 MJ kgMn2O3−1 as can be seen from Fig. 9 and Table 3, respectively.
For parallel configurations with continuous TCS reactors, the requirement that Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in = TPB,out still applies. The HTF must therefore contact the solids in a counter-current flow pattern to establish a high-temperature reaction zone and a cooling section. For granules or pellets, a counter-current moving bed is suitable,15 see Fig. 12(d), as the mechanical forces imposed on the solids remain moderate. When dealing with small powders, a multistage fluidized bed, see Fig. 12(f), is an appropriate reactor concept, as long as the two phases move in opposite directions. Rotary kilns, see Fig. 12(e), could be attractive since they can handle a wide range of particle sizes (from powders to large granules) while counter-current plug flow can be approached.15 For all these reactor concepts, the feasibility of transporting the hot solids, the mechanical stresses imposed on the solids, and the ability to maintain the desired outflow temperatures of both fluid and solid phases need to be studied in future work.

5. Conclusions
The findings of the case study using 6Mn2O3 ↔ 4Mn3O4 + O2 as the model reaction taking place in packed- and fluidized-bed TCS reactors simulated based on idealized contacting patterns and empirical reduction/oxidation rate laws can be summarized as follows.
(1) The contacting pattern in a batch TCS reactor imposes how the TCS should be integrated with the power block into a CSP plant. In a packed-bed reactor, the axial temperature gradient in the solid phase allows the HTF to be cooled during charging to an outflow temperature Tf,c,out that is approximately equal to the HTF temperature at the outlet of the power block, TPB,out. Therefore, the HTF streams leaving the TCS and the power block can be merged with small exergy losses implying a parallel integration of the TCS and the power block as the preferred CSP plant configuration. Conversely, in a fluidized-bed batch reactor where (1) the temperature of the solid phase is essentially uniform spatially due to well-mixed solids and (2) the gas–solid heat transfer is very fast, the HTF leaves the bed at the temperature of the solids. Therefore, in a fluidized bed Tf,c,out is set by the temperature at which the endothermic reduction takes place. Since this temperature is generally much higher than the temperature of the HTF leaving the power block (Tf,c,out ≫ TPB,out), merging the two HTF streams would lead to significant exergy losses. Instead, the high-temperature HTF leaving the TCS during charging is passed directly to the power block, implying a serial integration of the TCS and the power block as the preferred CSP plant configuration.
(2) The contacting pattern in a TCS batch reactor influences the gravimetric energy storage density of the TCS, as well as the relative contributions of stored sensible heat and reaction enthalpy. In a packed-bed TCS in parallel configuration, only a fraction of the reactants is converted (∼14% in our study), whereas the majority of the energy is stored as sensible heat (91%). By contrast, all solids in the fluidized bed react simultaneously, such that the majority of the energy is stored chemically (63%). Nevertheless, the overall gravimetric energy storage density in a packed bed can still be higher than in a fluidized bed (+11%), emphasizing the importance of including the specific heat of TCS materials as an important design parameter of a TCS reactor concept. The advantage of the packed bed is even more evident when the volumetric energy storage densities are compared due to the higher void fraction in the fluidized bed as well as the need for cyclones and extra transport disengaging zone in the freeboard to mitigate solid carryover.
(3) A parallel configuration is generally superior to a serial configuration. During charging in a parallel configuration, the HTF enters the power block at the temperature given by the HTF leaving the solar field (TPB,in = TSF,out), and thus at the maximum possible temperature in a given CSP plant. The charging rate of the TCS (TCS,c) can be set independently of the rate at which heat is transferred to the power block (PB,c) by an appropriate adjustment of the corresponding HTF mass flow rates. Thus, it can be ensured that sufficient heat is transferred to the TCS during charging to reach the desired duration τd of subsequent discharging. Conversely, in a serial configuration, the HTF transfers heat to the TCS before entering the power block. As a result, TPB,in is given by Tf,c,out and therefore lower than TSF,out. Furthermore, if TSF,out and TPB,out are given by the corresponding CSP plant components, Tf,c,out becomes the only parameter that allows the relative TCS charging rate TCS,c/PB,c and thus the attainable τd to be adjusted. This generally leads to a trade-off in serial configurations. A decrease in Tf,c,out, achieved by changing the reactor type, operating conditions, and/or the reaction system, leads to an increase in the attainable duration of discharging; however, it also reduces TPB,in, thereby potentially lowering the thermal-to-electricity efficiency of the power block. A parallel configuration is not subject to this trade-off.
(4) According to the chosen assessment criteria, a TCS reactor should be designed such that it can be integrated with the power block in a parallel configuration. Furthermore, to minimize exergy losses, Tf,c,out should be kept close to TPB,out. Since the reduction usually takes place at temperatures that are significantly higher than TPB,out, the high-temperature reaction zone should be combined with a cooling zone, in which the HTF is cooled from the reduction temperature down to Tf,c,out ≈ TPB,out.
(5) Although a packed bed TCS is suitable for a parallel configuration, it converts only a fraction of the reactants (∼14% in our study). The non-reacting portion of the reactants could thus be replaced by low-cost inert materials, leading to a combined thermochemical-sensible energy storage consisting of a high-temperature reaction TCS zone and a sensible-heat storage as the cooling section. Alternatively, the cooling section could consist of reactants and/or latent-heat storage materials operating at lower temperatures leading to a cascaded storage with increased energy storage capacity.28,29
(6) The use of packed-bed reactors for TCS is contingent on the availability of the solid reactants in the form of large, uniformly-sized granules or pellets that are mechanically stable and that have sufficiently fast, cycle-independent kinetics. If this is not possible and the reactant material is available only as submillimeter-sized powder, two alternatives for the high-temperature reaction zone may be considered: (1) an inert structure such as a honeycomb30 or a packed bed of inert granules coated with the reactive powder, and (2) a fluidized bed. Either of these TCS concepts should be combined in series with a sensible-heat storage, a cascaded TCS, and/or a cascaded latent-heat storage serving as the downstream cooling zone to maintain Tf,c,out ≈ Tf,d,in.
(7) Compared to TCS batch reactors, continuous reactors with counter-current flow patterns of the HTF and solid reactants have the potential to increase the gravimetric energy storage density if the majority of the solid reactants can be cycled between TPB,out and TSF,out while reaching full chemical conversion. Granules and powders could be treated in moving beds and multistaged fluidized beds, respectively. Rotary kilns may also be attractive since they can handle a wider range of particle sizes. Further studies are required to demonstrate the feasibility of transporting the hot solids, the resistance of the solids to mechanical stresses, and the feasibility of maintaining the desired outflow temperatures of both fluid and solid phases.
Nomenclature
Latin symbols


A
bed
Cross-sectional area of the reaction bed, m2

c
p
Specific heat capacity of the HTF, J kg−1 K−1

d
p
Diameter of particle or granule, m

e
chem
Chemically stored energy per unit mass, J kg−1

e
sens
Sensible heat per unit mass, J kg−1

ẽ
tot
Volume-averaged gravimetric energy storage density, J kg−1

g
Gravity, m s−2

L
bed
Length of the reaction bed, m

ṁ
Mass flow rate of the HTF, kg s−1

p
O2
Oxygen partial pressure in the HTF, Pa

p
tot
Total pressure of the HTF, Pa


Thermal power, W

T
Temperature, K

T
eq
Theoretical equilibrium temperature of redox reaction, K

T
eq,amb
Theoretical equilibrium temperature at ambient O2 pressure, K

T
ox
Approximation for oxidation temperature (1090 K), K

T
red
Approximation for reduction temperature (1180 K), K

t
Time, s

X
s
Solid conversion (0 for oxidized and 1 for reduced material), —

z
Axial reactor coordinate, m

Greek symbols

ΔTfTemperature drop of HTF in TCS (ΔTf = Tf,c,in − Tf,c,out), K
ΔTsTemperature swing of solids in TCS (ΔTs = Ts,c,end − Ts,d,end), K

ε
bed
Bed void fraction, —

ε
p
Internal porosity of particle or granule, —

ρ
Density, kg m−3

τ
Duration of a charging or discharging period, s

η
h
Efficiency of gas/solid heat exchange during charging, —

Subscripts

cCharging
dDischarging
endFinal state (after charging or after discharging)
fFluid (gas) phase in the TCS
inInlet
outOutlet
PBPower block
sSolid phase in the TCS
SFSolar field
TCSThermochemical storage

Abbreviations

CSPConcentrated solar power
HTFHeat-transfer fluid
HXHeat exchanger
TCSThermochemical storage
TESThermal-energy storage

Acknowledgements
Financial support by the EU 7th Framework Programme under grant agreement no. 282889 (Project TCSPower, http://www.tcs-power.eu) is gratefully acknowledged. We thank our TCSPower project partners, in particular V. Danov, F. Reissner, and M. Kautz from Siemens AG, J. Soupart from Erachem-Comilog sprl, M. Linder from DLR, as well as M. Romero and J. Gonzalez-Aguilar from IMDEA Energy Institute. Furthermore, we thank A. Frei for his support during the collection of experimental data for the empirical reaction rate law, and the partners from IMDEA Energy Institute for providing the value of the experimentally measured thermal conductivity of manganese oxide powder.
References
S. Kuravi, J. Trahan, D. Y. Goswami, M. M. Rahman and E. K. Stefanakos, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2013, 39, 285–319 CrossRef .
G. Ervin, J. Solid State Chem., 1977, 22, 51–61 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lovegrove, A. Luzzi, I. Soldiani and H. Kreetz, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76, 331–337 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pardo, A. Deydier, Z. Anxionnaz-Minvielle, S. Rougé, M. Cabassud and P. Cognet, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 32, 591–610 CrossRef CAS .
M. Felderhoff, R. Urbanczyk and S. Peil, Green, 2013, 3, 113–123 CrossRef CAS .
General Atomics, Thermochemical Heat Storage for Concentrated Solar Power, Thermochemical System Reactor Design for Thermal Energy Storage, 2011, DOI: http://10.2172/1039304.
A. J. Carrillo, J. Moya, A. Bayón, P. Jana, V. A. de la Peña O'Shea, M. Romero, J. Gonzalez-Aguilar, D. P. Serrano, P. Pizarro and J. M. Coronado, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 123, 47–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Carrillo, D. P. Serrano, P. Pizarro and J. M. Coronado, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19435–19443 CAS .
F. Schaube, L. Koch, A. Wörner and H. Müller-Steinhagen, Thermochim. Acta, 2012, 538, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schaube, A. Kohzer, J. Schütz, A. Wörner and H. Müller-Steinhagen, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2013, 91, 856–864 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schmidt, C. Szczukowski, C. Roßkopf, M. Linder and A. Wörner, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2014, 62, 553–559 CrossRef CAS .
S. Álvarez De Miguel, J. Gonzalez-Aguilar and M. Romero, Energy Procedia, 2014, 49, 676–683 CrossRef .
P. Pardo, Z. Anxionnaz-Minvielle, S. Rougé, P. Cognet and M. Cabassud, Sol. Energy, 2014, 107, 605–616 CrossRef CAS .

          G. F. Froment, K. Bischoff and J. De Wilde, Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  1990 Search PubMed .

          D. Kunii and O. Levenspiel, Fluidization Engineering, Butterworth-Heineman, Boston, 2nd edn,  1991 Search PubMed .

          H. Price, ASME 2003 International Solar Energy Conference, Kohala Coast, Hawaii, USA,  2003, pp. 665–673 Search PubMed .
S. Ströhle, A. Haselbacher, Z. Jovanovic and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 117, 465–478 CrossRef .
Y. Cohen and A. B. Metzner, AIChE J., 1981, 27, 705–715 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Levenspiel, Engineering Flow and Heat Exchange, Springer, US, 3rd edn,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. Hänchen, S. Brückner and A. Steinfeld, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2011, 31, 1798–1806 CrossRef .
K. M. Wagialla, A. H. Fakeeha, S. S. E. H. Elnashaie and A. Y. Almaktary, Energy Sources, 1991, 13, 189–201 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Izquierdo-Barrientos, C. Sobrino and J. A. Almendros-Ibáñez, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 230, 573–583 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Sozen, J. R. Grace and K. L. Pinder, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1988, 27, 679–684 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ergun, Chem. Eng. Prog., 1952, 48, 89–94 CAS .
N. P. Siegel, Wiley Interdiscip.
Rev.: Energy Environ., 2012, 1, 119–131 CAS .
Z. Ma, G. Glatzmaier and M. Mehos, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2014, 136, 031014 CrossRef .
A. Henry and R. Prasher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1819–1828 CAS .

          C. Agrafiotis and R. Pitz-Paal, German Pat., DE 10 2013 211 249.1,  2013 Search PubMed .
T. Watanabe and A. Kanzawa, Heat Recovery Syst. CHP, 1995, 15, 641–653 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Energy Procedia, 2015, 69, 706–715 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The reaction model and material properties, the effect of the packed bed reactor length and granule size, and additional information related to the fluidized-bed model. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee03204k‡ It is assumed that the entire HTF passes through the HX of the TES, i.e., a partial bypassing of the HTF is not considered. The reason for this assumption will be explained in the Discussion.§ Note that the operation with separate HTFs keeps the study general. The operation with a single HTF could be attractive since the high-temperature HXs involving gas as at least one of the HTFs could be avoided. Using a single HTF (such as air) would impose the following: (1) the need for an air-based cycle in the power block (e.g., Brayton), (2) the need for particle filter(s) to prevent transport of solids from the TCS to the power block, and (3) higher operating pressures of the TCS which would shift the reaction equilibrium towards higher temperatures.¶ Note that in the packed-bed model, the equilibrium temperature is a function of time and space due to the time-dependent and spatially non-uniform partial pressure of oxygen. However, the resulting variations in the equilibrium temperature typically amount to only a few Kelvins. For simplicity, the equilibrium temperature shown in the figures is therefore evaluated at ambient oxygen pressure, i.e., Teq,amb = Teq(pO2,amb) = 1094 K.|| Note that the assumption of spatially uniform pO2 generally leads to an overestimation of the reaction rates during both charging and discharging. During reduction, pO2 would increase in the axial direction thus shifting the equilibrium to higher temperatures. During oxidation, pO2 would decrease and therefore the equilibrium would be shifted to lower temperatures. Therefore, this assumption is appropriate only in the cases when the rates of the O2 generation/consumption are small compared to the rate of change of O2 concentration due to convection.** For similar reasons, it is not useful to split the HTF in a serial configuration such that part of the HTF would bypass the TES HX during charging. The larger the fraction of the HTF that is bypassing the TES HX, the higher TPB,in, but the attainable duration of discharging decreases because less thermal energy is transferred to the TES during charging. Therefore, we assume that the entire HTF passes through the TES HX.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
Concentrated solar power (CSP) plants with integrated thermal energy storage (TES) are considered to be a promising option for the cost-effective electricity generation and dispatchability because they allow the temporal decoupling of electricity generation and solar insolation. In spite of their projected potential for high energy storage densities, thermochemical energy storage (TCS) concepts have not been explored as extensively as sensible and latent TES concepts. Current research on TCS is mainly focused on the development and improvement of TCS materials and their testing in reactor concepts that are, however, often selected haphazardly. This article discusses the consequences of the gas–solid contacting pattern in a TCS reactor on the outflow temperature of the heat-transfer fluid (HTF). The consequences are rooted in the particle size of the TCS material and ultimately drive the decision whether the TCS should be integrated into the CSP plant in a serial or parallel configuration. The findings presented in this article are expected to serve as guidelines for the future development of TCS concepts that enable an efficient and flexible operation of CSP plants.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of a parallel configuration of the TES and the power block during (a) charging and (b) discharging.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic depiction of a serial configuration of the TES and the power block during (a) charging and (b) discharging.	 

 	Fig. 3  Bottom-up approach used to evaluate the implications of the gas–solid contacting pattern in a TCS on the performance of a CSP plant with integrated TCS.	 

Bed length	
L
bed = 1.5 m
Bed void fraction	
ε
bed = 0.35
Granule diameter	
d
p = 5 mm
Granule internal porosity	
ε
p = 0.5
HTF mass flux during charging	
ṁ
f,c,in/Abed = 0.05 kg m−2 s−1
HTF mass flux during discharging	
ṁ
f,d,in/Abed = 0.06 kg m−2 s−1

 	Fig. 4  Air temperature in the packed bed as a function of the axial position during (a) charging and (b) discharging. Note that the reactor is operated under quasi-steady-state conditions, i.e., the temperature profiles at t = 0 h in (a) and at t = 12 h in (b) are identical.	 

 	Fig. 5  Solid conversion in the packed bed, plotted along the reactor axis during (a) charging and (b) discharging. Xs = 0 and Xs = 1 correspond to fully oxidized and fully reduced manganese oxide, respectively. Note that for this figure, which shows only the part of the bed that reacts, the simulations were repeated with 400 cells in the fluid phase to obtain smoother axial profiles.	 

Bed length	
L
bed = 0.4 m
Bed void fraction	
ε
bed = 0.45
Particle diameter	
d
p = 100 μm
Particle internal porosity	
ε
p = 0.5
HTF mass flux during charging	
ṁ
f,c,in/Abed = 6.35× 10−2 kg m−2 s−1
HTF mass flux during discharging	
ṁ
f,d,in/Abed = 9.48× 10−3 kg m−2 s−1

 	Fig. 6  The temperature of the fluidized bed during a charging/discharging cycle. The red line indicates the calculated transient temperature profile of the particles. The blue line indicates an approximation of the bed temperature for further analysis. The dotted line indicates the theoretical equilibrium temperature at an ambient oxygen partial pressure.	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of air temperatures as a function of time at the inlet of the packed and fluidized beds (black lines), the outlet of the packed bed (red lines), and the outlet of the fluidized bed (blue line) during a charging–discharging cycle.	 

 	Fig. 8  Specific energy storage density of manganese oxide at temperatures between Tf,d,in = 373 K and Tf,c,in = 1273 K. Ts,c,end and Ts,d,end correspond to the temperatures of the fluidized bed at the end of charging and discharging, respectively, according to the results presented in Section 2.3. Note that in this figure it is assumed that the reaction takes place at the theoretical equilibrium temperature corresponding to the partial pressure of oxygen under atmospheric conditions (Teq,amb = 1094 K), which is not the case under real conditions due to the finite reaction kinetics.	 

 	Fig. 9  Local gravimetric energy storage density in the packed bed, calculated from the difference in the energy content of the manganese oxide particles between the charged and discharged states as presented in Section 2.2.	 

Packed bed	0.304 (91%)	0.030 (9%)	0.334
Fluidized bed	0.111 (37%)	0.189 (63%)	0.300
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 10  Approximation of the attainable ratio of discharging to charging durations τd/τc in a serial configuration of the TCS and power block, assuming that Tf,c,out = 1180 K.	 

 	Fig. 11  Translation of the bottom-up approach into a top-down approach using the previously obtained findings.	 

 	Fig. 12  Overview of potential reactor concepts for high-temperature TCS in a parallel configuration, illustrated for the charging period. The colored arrows indicate the flow direction of the HTF, whereas the black arrows indicate the direction of movement of the solids in the continuous reactors. The locations of the high-temperature reaction and cooling zones are indicated with “R” and “C”, respectively. Note that the inert storage material in the batch reactors may be replaced with a cascaded thermochemical storage system or a cascaded latent-heat storage system to increase the gravimetric energy storage density.	 

A
bed
	Cross-sectional area of the reaction bed, m2

c
p
	Specific heat capacity of the HTF, J kg−1 K−1

d
p
	Diameter of particle or granule, m

e
chem
	Chemically stored energy per unit mass, J kg−1

e
sens
	Sensible heat per unit mass, J kg−1

ẽ
tot
	Volume-averaged gravimetric energy storage density, J kg−1

g
	Gravity, m s−2

L
bed
	Length of the reaction bed, m

ṁ
	Mass flow rate of the HTF, kg s−1

p
O2
	Oxygen partial pressure in the HTF, Pa

p
tot
	Total pressure of the HTF, Pa


	Thermal power, W

T
	Temperature, K

T
eq
	Theoretical equilibrium temperature of redox reaction, K

T
eq,amb
	Theoretical equilibrium temperature at ambient O2 pressure, K

T
ox
	Approximation for oxidation temperature (1090 K), K

T
red
	Approximation for reduction temperature (1180 K), K

t
	Time, s

X
s
	Solid conversion (0 for oxidized and 1 for reduced material), —

z
	Axial reactor coordinate, m
ΔTf	Temperature drop of HTF in TCS (ΔTf = Tf,c,in − Tf,c,out), K
ΔTs	Temperature swing of solids in TCS (ΔTs = Ts,c,end − Ts,d,end), K

ε
bed
	Bed void fraction, —

ε
p
	Internal porosity of particle or granule, —

ρ
	Density, kg m−3

τ
	Duration of a charging or discharging period, s

η
h
	Efficiency of gas/solid heat exchange during charging, —
c	Charging
d	Discharging
end	Final state (after charging or after discharging)
f	Fluid (gas) phase in the TCS
in	Inlet
out	Outlet
PB	Power block
s	Solid phase in the TCS
SF	Solar field
TCS	Thermochemical storage
CSP	Concentrated solar power
HTF	Heat-transfer fluid
HX	Heat exchanger
TCS	Thermochemical storage
TES	Thermal-energy storage
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The reaction model and material properties, the effect of the packed bed reactor length and granule size, and additional information related to the fluidized-bed model. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee03204k
‡ It is assumed that the entire HTF passes through the HX of the TES, i.e., a partial bypassing of the HTF is not considered. The reason for this assumption will be explained in the Discussion.
§ Note that the operation with separate HTFs keeps the study general. The operation with a single HTF could be attractive since the high-temperature HXs involving gas as at least one of the HTFs could be avoided. Using a single HTF (such as air) would impose the following: (1) the need for an air-based cycle in the power block (e.g., Brayton), (2) the need for particle filter(s) to prevent transport of solids from the TCS to the power block, and (3) higher operating pressures of the TCS which would shift the reaction equilibrium towards higher temperatures.
¶ Note that in the packed-bed model, the equilibrium temperature is a function of time and space due to the time-dependent and spatially non-uniform partial pressure of oxygen. However, the resulting variations in the equilibrium temperature typically amount to only a few Kelvins. For simplicity, the equilibrium temperature shown in the figures is therefore evaluated at ambient oxygen pressure, i.e., Teq,amb = Teq(pO2,amb) = 1094 K.
|| Note that the assumption of spatially uniform pO2 generally leads to an overestimation of the reaction rates during both charging and discharging. During reduction, pO2 would increase in the axial direction thus shifting the equilibrium to higher temperatures. During oxidation, pO2 would decrease and therefore the equilibrium would be shifted to lower temperatures. Therefore, this assumption is appropriate only in the cases when the rates of the O2 generation/consumption are small compared to the rate of change of O2 concentration due to convection.
** For similar reasons, it is not useful to split the HTF in a serial configuration such that part of the HTF would bypass the TES HX during charging. The larger the fraction of the HTF that is bypassing the TES HX, the higher TPB,in, but the attainable duration of discharging decreases because less thermal energy is transferred to the TES during charging. Therefore, we assume that the entire HTF passes through the TES HX.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
