Near-atomically flat, chemically homogeneous, electrically conductive optical metasurface   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR10436K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR10436K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9580-9586Near-atomically flat, chemically homogeneous, electrically conductive optical metasurface†

        
          
            Jong Uk 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Suwan 
            Jeon
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minsung 
            Heo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hwi-Min 
            Kim
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Reehyang 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nayoung 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yong-Hee 
            Lee
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jonghwa 
            Shin
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: qubit@kaist.ac.kr
bDepartment of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
Received 
      26th December 2018
    , Accepted 28th April 2019First published on 29th April 2019AbstractMetasurfaces, or two-dimensional arrays of subwavelength-scale structures, can exhibit extraordinary optical properties. However, typical metasurfaces have a bumpy surface morphology that may restrict their practical applications. Here, we propose and demonstrate an optical metasurface that is composed of a thin metallic film, with hidden dielectric structures underneath, and a metal back mirror layer. Exploiting the large difference between the Thomas–Fermi screening length for longitudinal electric fields and the skin depth for transverse electromagnetic fields, the near-atomically flat top surface of the proposed structure can appear homogeneous chemically and electrically but highly inhomogenous optically. The size and shape of the hidden dielectric structures as well as the thickness of the top metallic layer can be tailored to acquire desired optical properties. We performed both theoretical and experimental studies of the proposed metasurface, finding a good agreement between them. This work provides a new platform for ultra-flat optical devices, such as a wavelength selective electrode, diffusive back reflector, meta-lens, and plasmonically enhanced optical biosensors.
Introduction
An optical metasurface is a collection of sub-wavelength structures arranged in a two-dimensional array configuration. Metasurfaces can be used to modulate the amplitude, phase, and polarization states of light, despite their minute thicknesses much smaller than conventional optical components. Hence, many researchers are actively studying the use of metasurfaces to replace existing optical materials and devices in various applications, such as light absorbers, beam steering devices, flat lenses, color filters, and holograms.1–14 Typical metasurface designs, however, possess a corrugated or bumpy surface morphology, which may result in important issues when a metasurface is applied to actual optical devices. For example, for organic light emitting diodes and organic photovoltaics, a corrugated bottom electrode introduced to improve the emission or absorption efficiency may cause an electrical short-circuit with the upper transparent electrode through the thin organic layer.15–17 Similarly, a corrugated substrate utilized for better optical extraction efficiency for inorganic semiconductor devices may induce dislocations or defects during the epitaxial growth process, resulting in an overall decrease in efficiency.18,19 For photoenergy conversion devices, such as solar cells and photocatalytic devices, a bottom electrode composed of inhomogeneous materials may result in work-function imbalance with the active materials, again causing performance degradation.20–22 Hence, we require a new class of optical metasurface designs that achieve the desired optical functionalities without having the aforementioned problems associated with inhomogeneous or corrugated surfaces.
Here, we propose concealed optical metasurfaces (COMs) that are optically functional while being morphologically flat and homogeneous. Unlike conventional metasurfaces, the top layer of the proposed metasurfaces consists of a conductive film that is near-atomically flat, chemically homogeneous (top exposed layer is composed of a single element material), and electrically conductive. At the same time, COMs may possess interesting optical properties because of the hidden cavities underneath the thin conductive film. The spectral and spatial profiles of the amplitude and phase of the reflected light are controllable by tuning the size, period, shape, and the refractive index of the hidden dielectric structures and the top-most metallic layer thickness. As a result, the proposed metasurfaces can provide an alternative platform for achieving the functionalities of reflective electrodes, diffusive back reflectors, meta-lenses, and biosensors with an ultra-flat and homogenous morphology.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic diagram of the proposed COM. In principle, dielectric structures can have any type of shape, such as strips, cylinders, cuboids, and prisms. In this work, we choose cup-like, inverted conical frustum structures in a hexagonal array because of their isotropic polarization response and ease of fabrication. The COM was fabricated using the following steps. A continuous thin metallic layer was deposited by physical vapor deposition (PVD) on a bare Si substrate. On top of that layer, the dielectric structures were fabricated by conventional e-beam lithography, PVD, and lift-off techniques. Fig. 1(c) shows the tilted scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the fabricated dielectric structures. The thick metallic backing was also deposited by PVD. Finally, the fabricated structures were transferred to a glass substrate by using a template stripping method that is often utilized to obtain ultra-flat surfaces (for more details, see Methods and Fig. S1†).23 After stripping away the Si substrate, a near-atomically flat metal surface was exposed. Fig. 1(d) shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the fabricated COM.
 Fig. 1  (a–b) Schematic of the concealed optical metasurface (COM), which consists of a thin flat metallic layer, an array of dielectric structures, and a thick metallic backing. A part of the thin metallic layer in (a) is removed to show the structures underneath. (c) Tilted SEM image of dielectric structures before metal mirror deposition. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the fabricated COM sample. Hidden dielectric structures (darker gray color) are visible beneath the thin top metallic layer. 
The key physical principle in simultaneously achieving the seemingly contradictory properties of electric homogeneity and electromagnetic inhomogeneity lies in the exploitation of the difference of the Thomas–Fermi screening length predicted by the Lindhard theory and the electromagnetic wave penetration depth (skin depth).24 The screening length is less than a nanometer while the skin depth is on the order of 20 nm for plasmonic materials such as gold and silver. This difference in the length scale was previously utilized to maximize magnetic permeability in high-index metamaterials using metallic nanoparticles.25,26 Here, by choosing the top metal thickness to be between the two length scales, the inner dielectric structures are cloaked electrically, but they are clearly visible to electromagnetic waves.
The diverse and designable optical properties of the proposed structure can be understood in terms of a planar array of mutually isolated optical cavities that support multiple resonant modes inside each cavity. In this work, we choose the shape and size of the cavity to ensure only the fundamental resonance is prominently featured within the visible wavelength range for the clear demonstration of the concept. The current density profile (Fig. S2†) shows the dipolar nature of this fundamental mode. If desired, it is also possible to place more than one resonant mode in the visible band by increasing the size of the dielectric structures, which may be useful for applications such as broadband absorbers or color filters.27
The strength of coupling between the incident light and the COM is a very important factor that determines the optical response of the COM; this coupling can be controlled by the thickness of the top-most metallic layer because the continuous film acts as a tunneling barrier for photons. If the layer is much thicker than the skin depth of the metal (δ ∼ 26 nm for gold in the visible wavelength regime), then the optical cavities underneath are effectively isolated from the outside, and the COM is equivalent to a simple metallic mirror without any additional optical functionality. If the layer is too thin, then the cavities are too open to the outside, and the resonance effect becomes weaker via the reduced field localization and enhancement inside the cavities. To illustrate the dependence of the optical response of the COM on the coupling strength of the incident light and the COM, we adopted temporal coupled mode theory (CMT).28,29 The reflection coefficient of a single-resonance, one-port system derived from CMT is expressed as: (1)
In the above equation, γO is the damping rate by the ohmic loss of the cavity mode, γR is the damping rate corresponding to the radiation into the external wave, rB and θB are the background reflection amplitude and phase, respectively, ω is the frequency of the incident wave, and ω0 is the resonant frequency of the cavity mode. At the resonant frequency, ω = ω0, the reflection coefficient is determined by the two damping rates, γO and γR. When both damping rates are the same, γO = γR, known as the critical-coupling condition, the reflection decreases to zero, and perfect absorption is expected.28–30 If the top-most metallic layer is thinner (thicker) than this critical-coupling case, then γR increases (decreases) and the system enters into an over (under)-coupling regime; very different optical responses of the COM in each regime are expected, as will be demonstrated below.
The numerical analysis was conducted using the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method. Experimentally realizable materials and structural parameters were assumed for the simulations, with a top gold layer of a variable thickness, the dielectric structures with a height of 100 nm and a variable width in a hexagonal array with a period of 300 nm, and a thick silver backing layer. While we chose gold and silver as the top and bottom metals mainly due to the ease of fabrication, their good optical properties, and their popular use as electrodes, we note that other plasmonic materials such as aluminum can also be used. Also, the top metallic layer may have an additional thin coat of chrome, titanium, or other materials to promote adhesion or to match the work function of the active layers that will be deposited on the top side, depending on the application.
First, for the demonstration of the effect of varying coupling strengths, the top gold layer thickness, t, was varied from 4 to 60 nm, and the cup-like inverted conical frustum dielectric structures were chosen to have the following parameters: D1 = 220 nm, D2 = 125 nm, and nDiel = 2.4. The resulting fundamental resonant mode is located at the wavelength of approximately 650 nm. The electric permittivity of gold in the top metallic film can deviate from that of the bulk gold because of the surface and grain-boundary induced additional scatterings happening in thin films.31,32 Hence, the permittivity of the top metallic layer in the simulations was modified depending on the thickness of the film by using the Mayadas–Shatzkes theory and lossy Drude model.33–35Fig. 2(a) shows the simulated reflectance spectrum of the COM with the thickness of the top metal thickness varied as 4, 6, 8, 15, and 60 nm. The corresponding complex reflection coefficients were fitted to eqn (1) to retrieve γR and γO, both of which are plotted as a function of the film thickness in Fig. 2(b). The results indicate that the critical-coupling condition is achieved when the thickness of the top metal layer is approximately 8 nm. As the thickness of the top layer is decreased from this critical value, the ohmic loss from the metallic layer is decreased and the radiation loss is increased, entering the over-coupling regime (γR > γO). In contrast, the ohmic loss is increased and the radiation loss is decreased as the metal thickness is increased from 8 nm, resulting in the under-coupling regime (γR < γO). In both coupling conditions, the reflectance is increased at the resonant wavelength. Fig. 2(c) and (d) illustrate the electric field intensity profiles for two different top metallic layer thickness values. When the film thickness is 8 nm, strong field enhancement inside the cavity is observed. If the top metal is much thicker at 60 nm, then the coupling between the incident light and the COM becomes weaker, and the field enhancement is relatively small in comparison to that of the critically coupled case. Through these numerical studies, we confirm that the coupling strength and field enhancements are controlled by the thickness of the top-most metallic layer.
 Fig. 2  (a) Simulated reflectance spectra of the COM with the top-most metallic layer thickness changed from 4 to 60 nm. (b) Retrieved ohmic loss damping rate, γO, and radiation loss damping rate, γR. (c–d) Electric field intensity profile of the COM with the top metal thickness of (c) 8 nm (critical-coupling condition) and (d) 60 nm (under-coupling condition). 
Apart from the coupling strength control by the top metallic film thickness, the resonant wavelength of the COM can be manipulated by the size of the hidden dielectric structures. Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the simulated reflectance spectra of the COM for the top metal thicknesses of 4 nm and 15 nm, respectively. The top diameters of the dielectric structures were changed from 100 to 250 nm. The results clearly demonstrate that the fundamental resonant mode is shifted to longer wavelengths as the diameter is increased. This shift of the resonant wavelength also induces phase shifts of the reflected light, which may be utilized for phase-based spatial light modulation applications. Fig. 3(c) shows the phase of the reflected light as a function of the dielectric diameter at the wavelength of 600 nm. For the over-coupling case, almost the entire range of possible phase changes from zero to 2π is observed, which is in agreement with the results of a previous report showing that a large range of phase shift is expected in over- and critical coupling conditions.36 Based on phase modulation functionality of COM, we conducted beam steering simulations as a proof-of-concept demonstration. To cover full phase modulation from zero to 2π, COMs consist of a 4 nm thick Au layer, dielectric strip structures with a height of 100 nm and a pitch of 300 nm, and varying upper and lower dielectric widths of 100 to 250 nm and 30 to 180 nm, respectively. The dielectric widths were chosen such that each unit cell have a reflection phase of 2πm/M relative to a reference cell, where m = 0, 1, …, M − 1 and M is an integer. The corresponding beam steering angle is sin−1(λ0/MP), where λ0 is the free-space wavelength of light and P is the pitch. Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the schematic diagram and the electric field profile of COMs targeted at λ0 = 600 nm, made of a spatially repeating set of four different hidden dielectric strip structures whose width were chosen to impart four differential phase shifts of 0, π/2, π, and 3π/2, respectively. It clearly demonstrates that a normally incident beam is converted into an obliquely propagating beam with 30° angle with respect to the normal direction. Furthermore, the far-field scattering patterns of COMs designed for phase modulation levels of 4, 6 and 12 (Fig. 4(c)) illustrate that the reflected light wave propagates in the intended oblique angles of 9.6°, 19.5°, and 30°, with a good diffracted-to-specular power ratio ranging from 3.6:1 (9.6° case) to 6.1:1 (30° case). This demonstration suggests that a simple variation of lateral dimensions of the dielectric structure can result in interesting optical functionalities such as beam steering, diffusive scattering, focusing, and imaging. Note that the resonant properties of the COM can also be tuned by the change of the refractive index (1.8–2.8) or height (40–180 nm) of the dielectric region (illustrated in Fig. S3†).
 Fig. 3  Simulated reflectance spectra of the COM for various diameters of the dielectric frustum when the top metal layer thickness is (a) 4 nm and (b) 15 nm. The dielectric structures have a height of 100 nm and a periodicity of 300 nm. (c) Simulated phase for the over- and under-coupling conditions as a function of dielectric structure diameters. (d) Simulated reflectance spectra of the COM as a function of incident angle from 0 to 45°. 
 Fig. 4  Demonstration of the COM-based beam steering. (a) A schematic of an array of COMs made of four different hidden dielectric strip structures with a differential phase shift of π/2 with respect to one another. (b) An electric field profile of the array of COMs is shown with a normally incident plane wave source placed immediately above the COM. Fields above the source plane shows that most of the reflected wave is propagating in an oblique angle. (c) The far-field scattering patterns of the COMs designed for different steering angles and a homogeneous mirror are plotted. 
For previously reported geometrically flat optical surfaces (such as surface plasmon polariton films, some guided mode resonance-based devices, or distributed Bragg reflection multilayer structures), their optical properties designed with a specific target incident angle are not maintained at other incident angles and exhibit a strong spatial dispersion, which may be undesirable in real applications.37–39 However, the COM, as an array of mutually isolated cavities, is robust to the variations of the incident angle: Fig. 3(d) indicates that the fundamental resonant wavelength is almost constant as the incident angle is changed from 0 to 45°.
We measured the optical properties of fabricated COMs to verify the numerical findings above. Fig. 5(a) shows the measured reflectance spectra of the COM with varied top metallic film thicknesses of 10, 15 and 30 nm. The chosen structural parameters (D1 = 135 nm, D2 = 40 nm, H = 100 nm, ndiel = 2.4(TiO2)) with a period of 300 nm places the fundamental resonant mode in the visible spectrum. As predicted by CMT and the simulation results, the reflectance amplitude of resonant mode is gradually increased, and the resonance is slightly hypsochromic-shifted when the top metallic film thickness is increased from 10 to 30 nm. These results suggest that the coupling strength can be controlled by the top metallic layer thickness and that the system is in the under-coupling regime. It was previously reported that extremely thin continuous plasmonic films with thicknesses down to 3 nm can be reproducibly fabricated.40–42 We deposited 5 nm thick continuous Al thin films by our PVD system, and transmission electron microscope (TEM) image and the atomic force microscopy (AFM) results confirm that the thin film was continuously formed with root-mean-square roughness of 3.9 Å as shown in Fig. S4.† Thus, it would be possible to fabricate similar structures for the over-coupling regime as well.
 Fig. 5  (a) Measured reflectance spectra of fabricated COMs with the top metal thickness values of 10, 15, and 30 nm. (b) Measured reflectance spectra of fabricated COMs with the upper dielectric diameters, D1, of 135 and 220 nm are plotted with solid blue and green line, respectively. Dashed lines correspond to the simulation results. 
To demonstrate the resonant wavelength tunability via the geometrical parameters of the hidden dielectric structure, its diameter was changed while the top metallic film thickness, dielectric height, and periodicity were kept constant. Fig. 5(b) shows the experimental (solid line) and simulated (dashed line) reflectance spectra of COMs with the upper diameter, D1, of 135 and 220 nm, with the lower diameter, D2, of 40 nm and 125 nm, respectively. As the diameter increases, the measured reflectance spectra indicate that the fundamental resonant wavelength shifts to a longer wavelength, from 550 to 640 nm; this bathochromic shift of resonance is in good agreement with the simulation results. While use of gold for the top layer of the COM limits the resonant wavelength to green or longer wavelengths because of the interband transition of 5d electrons, other low-loss metals, such as aluminum, can be used to cover the entire visible spectrum.43,44 The optical response of the fabricated COM with 8 nm thick Al top layer exhibits the fundamental resonant mode at a wavelength of 460 nm (shown in Fig. S5†).
In addition to the optical properties, the COMs were tested for their mechanical flatness, chemical homogeneity, and electrical conductivity. Fig. 6(a) shows an image of a vertically sectioned COM taken by using TEM. A continuous top layer with a measured thickness of 15 nm is clearly visible as the bright region in Fig. 6(a). Laterally, the AFM image of the top layer, shown in Fig. 6(b), reveals that the root-mean-square roughness of the COM is 3 Å, which is only 1 Å higher than that of a bare gold film of the same thickness, deposited at the same time as the top layer of COM on the same substrate (Fig. S6†). These results confirm that the top surface of the COM is near-atomically flat and not significantly affected by the subsequent dielectric deposition and patterning.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of a vertically sectioned COM. The 15 nm-thick bright layer is the top metallic layer of COM. (b) AFM topography data of the fabricated COM with a scan size of 5 × 5 μm2 showing a root-mean-square roughness of 3 Å. (c) EDS elemental mapping of the vertically sectioned COM indicates that gold (yellow color) is localized to the top layer. The inset shows that Ti (green) and Ag (red) are mostly confined to the cavity region and the thick backing layer, respectively. (d–e) conductive AFM images and (f–g) Kelvin probe microscopy images of the fabricated COM (left panels) and a bare thin Au film (right panels) on the same substrate. 
To characterize the chemical homogeneity, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was performed, and the chemical composition of the vertically sectioned COM was analyzed. Fig. 6(c) shows a spatially resolved elemental mapping of the COM, with Au, Ti, and Ag represented by yellow, green, and red colors, respectively. The figure clearly shows that each sub-region of the COM possesses the intended material composition. Moreover, conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) was used to scan the electrical uniformity of COM and the bare Au film on the same substrate, as shown in Fig. 6(d) and (e). The results indicate that COM is electrically almost as uniform as the bare Au film. Furthermore, the surface potential results in Fig. 6(f) and (g) measured by Kelvin probe microscopy (KPM) indicate that the work function of the COM is not different from that of the bare metal film.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we proposed and characterized a new design of an optical metasurface with mutually isolated optical cavities. The proposed metasurface consists of a thin top metallic film and a hidden dielectric structure array immersed in a thick metallic layer. The fabricated metasurface exhibits a near-atomic level flatness, chemical homogeneity, and electrical uniformity; thus, the metasurface is nearly equivalent to typical thin metallic films in many aspects. Moreover, we demonstrated that the metasurface can exhibit interesting optical properties, with a large degree of freedom in modulating the amplitude and phase of reflected light. The coupling strength of the resonant modes to incident waves can be precisely controlled by the top metallic layer thickness, with the possibility of achieving the under-, critical-, and over-coupling regimes. Furthermore, the proposed structure can modulate the spectral and spatial profiles of the reflected light by varying the size, shape, and materials of the hidden dielectric structures. We believe that proposed metasurface design can provide a convenient platform for realizing chemically and morphologically uniform metasurfaces with interesting optical functionality.
Experiment
Fabrication of the concealed metasurface
A concealed optical metasurface (COM) was fabricated by the following procedure. A thin gold film was deposited on a bare silicon substrate by DC magnetron sputtering of a gold target (purity of 99.99%). The dielectric (TiO2) was deposited using an e-beam evaporator and patterned via e-beam lithography over an area of 80 × 80 μm2, followed by a lift-off process in warm acetone. Subsequently, a thick silver layer was deposited by DC magnetron sputtering of a silver target (purity of 99.99%). Finally, the fabricated sample was transferred to a glass substrate through the template stripping method with aid of an optical adhesive (NOA72, Norland).
Material characterization
The morphology of the COM was characterized by a field emission scanning electron microscope (S-4000, Hitachi High-Technologies Co.). The surface morphology, electrical conductivity and relative work function of the COM was measured by an atomic force microscope (Nanoscope V multimode 8, Bruker) with the corresponding modes. For transmission electron microscopy sample preparation, a focused ion beam instrument (Helios 450 F1, FEI) was used to prepare vertical sections of the COM. For imaging and elemental mapping of the prepared sections, a TEM (Titan double Cs corrected TEM, FEI) was employed.
Numerical simulation
The optical properties of COM were calculated using a commercially available finite-difference time-domain numerical analysis tool (Lumerical Inc.). A plane wave source propagating in the z-direction was used with periodic boundaries in the x- and y-directions and perfectly matched layers in the z-direction for the termination of the simulation domain. The domain was meshed at 1 nm resolution in metallic parts of the COM structure, with progressively larger meshes in the air region with the largest mesh size being 5 nm. The thickness-dependent complex electric permittivity of thin gold film was modelled based on a previous report,35 and the experimentally measured data from Johnson and Christy was used for bulk silver.45 Two- and three-dimensional monitors were used to collect the complex electric and magnetic field data for calculation of the reflectance spectra, field profiles, and current density profiles. For beam steering simulations, near-to-farfield transformation was used to calculate the far field scattering patterns and the lateral size of the sample was assumed to be 72 μm.
Optical measurements
The optical properties of the fabricated COM were characterized by a custom optical measurement system as shown in Fig. S7.† The white light from a xenon arc lamp (66902, Newport) was collimated and weakly focused to the sample region with a beam spot size of 40 μm. The reflected light was collected by a lens and measured by Femtowatt detector (APD120A2/M, Thorlabs). The measured optical signals were normalized with the signal from a silver-coated mirror (Thorlabs).
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. 2017R1A2B2005702, 2017M3C1A3013923, 2018M3D1A1058998, and 2013M3C1A3063598).
References
D. Lin, P. Fan, E. Hasman and M. L. Brongersma, Science, 2014, 345, 298–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Holloway, E. F. Kuester, J. A. Gordon, J. O'Hara, J. Booth and D. R. Smith, IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., 2012, 54, 10–35 Search PubMed .
N. Yu and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 139–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2013, 339, 1232009 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zheng, H. Mühlenbernd, M. Kenney, G. Li, T. Zentgraf and S. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 308–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, F. Zeuner, M. Weismann, B. Reineke, G. Li, V. K. Valev, K. W. Cheah, N. C. Panoiu, T. Zentgraf and S. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2992–2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Arbabi, Y. Horie, M. Bagheri and A. Faraon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 937–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Chen, A. Y. Zhu, V. Sanjeev, M. Khorasaninejad, Z. Shi, E. Lee and F. Capasso, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 130, 220–226 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lindfors, D. Dregely, M. Lippitz, N. Engheta, M. Totzeck and H. Giessen, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 286–292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yifat, M. Eitan, Z. Iluz, Y. Hanein, A. Boag and J. Scheuer, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2485–2490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Roberts, A. Pors, O. Albrektsen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qu, S. Ma, J. Hao, M. Qiu, X. Li, S. Xiao, Z. Miao, N. Dai, Q. He, S. Sun, Y. Zhang and L. Zhou, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 235503, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. T. Chen, A. J. Taylor and N. Yu, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2016, 79, 076401 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ding, Y. Yang, R. A. Deshpande and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 1129–1156 CAS .
X. Chen, W. Guo, L. Xie, C. Wei, J. Zhuang, W. Su and Z. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37048–37054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Ok, J. Kim, S. R. Park, Y. Kim, C. J. Lee, S. J. Hong, M. G. Kwak, N. Kim, C. J. Han and J. W. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-B. Kim, Y.-H. Tak, Y.-S. Han, K.-H. Baik, M.-H. Yoon and M.-H. Lee, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, L438–L440 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chiu, H. H. Yen, C. L. Chao, Z. Y. Li, P. Yu, H. C. Kuo, T. C. Lu, S. C. Wang, K. M. Lau and S. J. Cheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 81108 CrossRef .
J. Michel, J. Liu and L. C. Kimerling, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 527–534 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, D. S. You, K. Lim, S. Park, S. Jung, C. S. Kim, D. H. Kim, D. G. Kim, J. K. Kim, J. Park, Y. C. Kang, J. Heo, S. H. Jin, J. H. Park and J. W. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4177–4184 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Wood, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 46, 749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, O. Pluchery, L. Caillard, A.-F. Lamic-Humblot, S. Casale, Y. J. Chabal and M. Salmeron, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Cirac, D. R. Smith and S. Oh, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 107–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lindhard, Mat. Fys. Medd. K. Dan. Vidensk. Selsk., 1954, 28, 1 Search PubMed .
K. Chung, R. Kim, T. Chang and J. Shin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 21114 CrossRef .
R. Kim, K. Chung, J. Y. Kim, Y. Nam, S. H. K. Park and J. Shin, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 1188–1195 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, M. Kim, T. Chang, A. Baucour, S. Jeon, N. Kim, H.-J. Choi, H. Lee and J. Shin, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 27403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Suh, Z. Wang and S. Fan, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2004, 40, 1511–1518 CAS .
Z. Ruan and S. Fan, Phys. Rev. A, 2012, 85, 43828 CrossRef .
L. Verslegers, Z. Yu, P. B. Catrysse and S. Fan, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2010, 27, 1947–1956 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qian, Y. Xiao, D. Lepage, L. Chen and Z. Liu, Nanophotonics, 2015, 4, 413–418 CAS .
K. P. Chen, V. P. Drachev, J. D. Borneman, A. V. Kildishev and V. M. Shalaev, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 916–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Mayadas, M. Shatzkes and J. F. Janak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1969, 14, 345–347 CrossRef .
M. A. Ordal, L. L. Long, R. J. Bell, S. E. Bell, R. R. Bell, R. W. Alexander and C. A. Ward, Appl. Opt., 1983, 22, 1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Yakubovsky, A. V. Arsenin, Y. V. Stebunov, D. Y. Fedyanin and V. S. Volkov, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 326–333 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yoon, K. H. Seol, S. H. Song and R. Magnusson, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 25702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Byrnes, M. Khorasaninejad and F. Capasso, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 18399–18407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
W. H. Southwell, Appl. Opt., 1999, 38, 5464–5467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kossoy, V. Merk, D. Simakov, K. Leosson, S. Kéna-Cohen and S. A. Maier, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shim, K. S. Yoon, J. S. Moodera and J. P. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 212509 CrossRef .
H. Qian, Y. Xiao and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, L. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Brown, S. Mukherjee, N. S. King, H. O. Everitt, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6000–6004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Goh, Y. Zheng, S. J. Tan, L. Zhang, K. Kumar, C. W. Qiu and J. K. W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1972, 6, 4370–4379 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr10436kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–b) Schematic of the concealed optical metasurface (COM), which consists of a thin flat metallic layer, an array of dielectric structures, and a thick metallic backing. A part of the thin metallic layer in (a) is removed to show the structures underneath. (c) Tilted SEM image of dielectric structures before metal mirror deposition. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the fabricated COM sample. Hidden dielectric structures (darker gray color) are visible beneath the thin top metallic layer.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Simulated reflectance spectra of the COM with the top-most metallic layer thickness changed from 4 to 60 nm. (b) Retrieved ohmic loss damping rate, γO, and radiation loss damping rate, γR. (c–d) Electric field intensity profile of the COM with the top metal thickness of (c) 8 nm (critical-coupling condition) and (d) 60 nm (under-coupling condition).	 

 	Fig. 3  Simulated reflectance spectra of the COM for various diameters of the dielectric frustum when the top metal layer thickness is (a) 4 nm and (b) 15 nm. The dielectric structures have a height of 100 nm and a periodicity of 300 nm. (c) Simulated phase for the over- and under-coupling conditions as a function of dielectric structure diameters. (d) Simulated reflectance spectra of the COM as a function of incident angle from 0 to 45°.	 

 	Fig. 4  Demonstration of the COM-based beam steering. (a) A schematic of an array of COMs made of four different hidden dielectric strip structures with a differential phase shift of π/2 with respect to one another. (b) An electric field profile of the array of COMs is shown with a normally incident plane wave source placed immediately above the COM. Fields above the source plane shows that most of the reflected wave is propagating in an oblique angle. (c) The far-field scattering patterns of the COMs designed for different steering angles and a homogeneous mirror are plotted.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Measured reflectance spectra of fabricated COMs with the top metal thickness values of 10, 15, and 30 nm. (b) Measured reflectance spectra of fabricated COMs with the upper dielectric diameters, D1, of 135 and 220 nm are plotted with solid blue and green line, respectively. Dashed lines correspond to the simulation results.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of a vertically sectioned COM. The 15 nm-thick bright layer is the top metallic layer of COM. (b) AFM topography data of the fabricated COM with a scan size of 5 × 5 μm2 showing a root-mean-square roughness of 3 Å. (c) EDS elemental mapping of the vertically sectioned COM indicates that gold (yellow color) is localized to the top layer. The inset shows that Ti (green) and Ag (red) are mostly confined to the cavity region and the thick backing layer, respectively. (d–e) conductive AFM images and (f–g) Kelvin probe microscopy images of the fabricated COM (left panels) and a bare thin Au film (right panels) on the same substrate.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr10436k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
