Solution-processable, crystalline material for quantitative singlet fission   - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7MH00303J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7MH00303J
(Communication)
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 915-923Solution-processable, crystalline material for quantitative singlet fission†

        
          
            Ryan D. 
            Pensack
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Grieco
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Geoffrey E. 
            Purdum
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Samuel M. 
            Mazza
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Andrew J. 
            Tilley
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Evgeny E. 
            Ostroumov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dwight S. 
            Seferos
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Yueh-Lin 
            Loo
          
        
      cf, 
      
        
          
            John B. 
            Asbury
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            John E. 
            Anthony
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Gregory D. 
            Scholes
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. E-mail: gscholes@princeton.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA
cDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
dDepartment of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40506, USA. E-mail: anthony@uky.edu
eDepartment of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H6, Canada
fAndlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
Received 
      8th May 2017
    , Accepted 3rd August 2017First published on 10th August 2017AbstractAmorphous nanoparticles of the singlet fission chromophore 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS-Pn) are fully crystallized through co-precipitation with a chemical additive. Time-resolved measurements indicate that singlet fission in the crystalline nanoparticles is quantitative, or lossless, whereas losses are evident in the amorphous nanoparticles as a result of frustrated triplet pair separation. Because triplet pairs form rapidly and separate slowly in amorphous material, mixed-phase samples are unable to compensate for these losses.

Conceptual insights
Singlet fission holds the promise of boosting solar cell efficiencies beyond the theoretical Shockley–Queisser limit by facilitating the generation of two charge carrier pairs per absorbed photon, instead of the usual one; however, many challenges remain to be addressed before the process can be implemented in practice. One such challenge is that any excitation energy not multiplied over the course of singlet fission seriously undermines its practical significance. While solution-processable chromophores provide a clear path toward low-cost high-efficiency solar cells, there has been some debate regarding the ideal solid-state order of the singlet fission sensitizer layer, i.e., whether an amorphous or crystalline phase is preferred. Using the exemplar solution-processable singlet fission chromophore 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS-Pn), we show that excitation multiplication is quantitative, or lossless, in its crystalline form, whereas losses are incurred over the course of singlet fission when the material is amorphous. While the initial step of singlet fission is quantitative in both phases, appreciable losses are apparent in amorphous material prior to triplet pair separation. Our results suggest that solution-processable, crystalline material should be targeted for quantitative triplet yields in singlet fission.

Singlet exciton fission is a fascinating and complex photophysical process that occurs in select conjugated organic materials.1,2 It can be distilled down to the following generally accepted kinetic model: S1 + S0 ⇄ 1(TT) ⇄ T1 + T1(1)that describes the spin-allowed conversion of a parent singlet exciton into an overall singlet, correlated triplet pair intermediate, followed by decoherence of the correlated triplet pair into two independent triplet excitons.1,3,4 It has additionally been shown that triplet pair separation is a critical step in singlet fission that governs the dissociation of nascent triplet pairs into a spatially separated form.4–8 S1 + S0 → [1(TT) ⇄ 1(T⋯T)] ⇄ T1 + T1(2)Because excitations are multiplied over the course of singlet fission, the process has great practical relevance. For example, singlet fission can (in principle) boost the maximum efficiency of solar cells by values exceeding 30%.9 This efficiency gain, however, assumes overall quantitative singlet-to-triplet conversion (i.e., 200%). Crystalline solids of tetracene, pentacene and their derivatives are exemplary materials in this regard; based on their exceptionally rapid fission, their overall singlet-to-triplet conversion efficiencies have been assumed to be 200%.6,10–12 Because any loss severely hinders device relevance, singlet-to-triplet conversion must be quantitative, or lossless, for the process to be useful.
To be practical, singlet fission must also be inexpensive to implement. Singlet fission is especially advantageous in this regard because conjugated organic materials (upon which the process is based) can be made highly soluble through chemical functionalization,13 making them amenable to low-cost, solution processing. A solution-processed layer of a singlet fission sensitizer that funnels excitation energy to an inorganic semiconductor can circumvent engineering challenges14–16 (and prohibitive cost) associated with other advanced solar technologies, such as tandem cells,17 that function in a similar manner to more efficiently harvest the solar spectrum. Demonstrating the real potential of this approach, two breakthrough reports showed that triplet excitation energy resulting from singlet fission in thin films of crystalline tetracene and pentacene could be efficiently transferred to an adjacent inorganic semiconductor layer where both charge separation and light emission are facile.16,18 Thus, a singlet fission sensitizer layer in combination with a conventional photovoltaic material represents a promising path toward advanced solar power devices and the cost of such devices can be reduced substantially through the incorporation of materials amenable to solution processing.
Although solution processing is inherently low cost, it can result in material with either amorphous or crystalline order or a mixed-phase solid with varying morphologies.19 It has been shown that solid-state order and morphology can have a profound influence on singlet fission dynamics.19–22 Amorphous material of several acene derivatives, for example, has been observed to exhibit less than quantitative singlet-to-triplet conversion.19,20,22 Morphology can also influence singlet fission dynamics,21 because singlet excitons can sample different molecular-level packing arrangements during their lifetime.20,21 As singlet fission sensitizer layers begin to be applied in devices,23–26 and especially when incorporating solution-processable molecules,24,26 it is therefore necessary to know the efficiency of the singlet-to-triplet conversion in amorphous and crystalline material and, in the case where one is less efficient than the other, to determine if energy migration occurs between them in mixed-phase solids.
In this work, we study the excited-state dynamics of the prototypical singlet fission chromophore 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS-Pn) assembled into nanoparticles with different solid-state order and morphologies. We show how to prepare both amorphous and crystalline nanoparticles of TIPS-Pn. We find that although in both cases the initial fission is rapid and triplet pairs form quantitatively, appreciable losses occur in the amorphous nanoparticles prior to their separation. On the other hand, triplet pair separation is quantitative in the crystalline nanoparticles resulting in overall highly efficient singlet-to-triplet conversion. We also show that parent singlet excitons do not migrate between amorphous and crystalline domains in mixed-phase solids, i.e., nanoparticles and films, indicating that losses in amorphous domains will not be alleviated by energy migration to crystalline material. These results suggest to target solution-processable chromophores that form crystalline material for quantitative triplet yields in singlet fission.
In order to investigate the singlet fission dynamics of amorphous and crystalline TIPS-Pn, we first developed a straightforward procedure to prepare these materials in nanoparticle form. Nanoparticles are a convenient medium to study singlet fission dynamics6,8,27 particularly because optical artifacts, especially those associated with oriented crystalline material,28 can be avoided. In brief, molecular nanoparticles are prepared via a flash precipitation process where a relatively concentrated solution of the compound dissolved in a “good” solvent (i.e., tetrahydrofuran) is rapidly injected into a “bad” solvent (i.e., water). In prior work, we showed how chemical structure sensitively impacts molecular-level packing and chromophore coupling in nanoparticles of a series of pentacene derivatives.6 Specifically, we found that chromophores comprising nanoparticles of several molecules of the series converted from a weakly-coupled form (type I) to a strongly-coupled form (type II), whereas chromophores comprising nanoparticles of another grouping of molecules remained in a type-I form indefinitely, with TIPS-Pn falling within this latter grouping. Tayebjee et al. recently found, in contrast, that it was not possible to prepare neat type-I nanoparticles of TIPS-Pn, but rather consistently observed some type-I to type-II conversion over the course of their preparation.29 However, the preparation conditions that led to the conversion in that work were unclear, only partial conversion was achieved (over a period of several months), and the solid-state order of the type-I and type-II nanoparticles was not confirmed.
As chemical additives are well-known to impact molecular-level packing and microstructure in organic electronics,30–32 we hypothesized that we could achieve type-I to type-II conversion by co-precipitating a chemical additive along with the TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. In fact, chemical additives introduced through syringe transfer have been shown to sensitively impact the structure and performance of organic electronic devices.33 In order to test this hypothesis, and in an effort to unify the two conflicting reports noted above,6,29 we prepared TIPS-Pn nanoparticles using a syringe with and without a silicone-based lubricant as a chemical additive (Fig. 1a). Using the syringe without the additive resulted in neat type-I nanoparticles, as previously reported.6 In contrast, type-I to type-II conversion could be initiated by using the syringe containing the additive. In order to achieve complete conversion, we found it necessary to introduce a large amount of the additive to the injection solution, to decrease the temperature of the injection solution, and to maintain the nanoparticle suspension at a low temperature (see Section S2 of the ESI† for complete details). The kinetics under these conditions were rapid, with complete conversion occurring over the course of several tens of minutes (Section S3, ESI†), and with the diameter of the nanoparticles increasing from ca. 70 to 80 nm with the type-I to type-II conversion (Section S4, ESI†). Proton NMR analysis indicated that large oligomers of an alkyl siloxane polymer are the primary component of the lubricant. Curiously, however, it was not possible to reproduce the preparation using either silicone oil or polydimethylsiloxanes as chemical additives (Section S5, ESI†), suggesting that either a different alkyl siloxane polymer or a minority component of the lubricant is responsible for initiating the type-I to type-II conversion. Irrespective of the exact chemical identity of the additive,34 considering that syringe transfer is a common method to deposit solutions of organic semiconductors, these results should serve as a cautionary note for researchers working with high-purity organic semiconductors, as chemical additives introduced through syringe transfer can impact the structure of thin films35 in a manner similar to the impact on nanoparticles shown here.
 Fig. 1  Amorphous and crystalline nanoparticles of TIPS-pentacene. (a) Picture of the two syringes and two different batches of TIPS-pentacene nanoparticles. (b and c) Steady-state absorption spectra of type-I and type-II nanoparticles of TIPS-pentacene compared with that of amorphous and crystalline films, respectively. 
We subsequently proceeded to confirm the solid-state order of the nanoparticles. We first compared their absorption spectra to that of amorphous and crystalline material (Fig. 1b and c). Specifically, we prepared amorphous and crystalline films of TIPS-Pn,19 and verified their solid-state order via X-ray diffraction (Section S7, ESI†). The absorption spectra of the neat type-I and type-II nanoparticles are nearly identical to that of the amorphous and crystalline films, respectively. Although not a direct proof of solid-state order, these data are compelling, especially given that all known crystalline polymorphs of TIPS-Pn have distinctive absorption spectra36 that, compared with amorphous material, display broader vibronic features and a significantly redshifted vibronic origin band as a result of strong intermolecular electronic coupling (i.e., excitonic effects). Time-resolved optical polarization measurements further support this interpretation; whereas the neat type-I nanoparticles rapidly lose polarization memory, the type-II nanoparticles retain their polarization memory indicating the absence and presence of long-range order, respectively.6 We therefore are led to conclude that the neat type-I nanoparticles are amorphous and that the neat type-II nanoparticles are crystalline,37,38 and hereafter refer to them as such.
Having successfully prepared amorphous and crystalline nanoparticles of TIPS-Pn, we next proceed to assay their overall singlet-to-triplet conversion efficiencies. We first consider the efficiency in the crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles, where serious losses have been implicated.29Fig. 2a shows the transient visible absorption of the crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles, which exhibits very little change with time. At the longest time delay measured (i.e., ca. 1 ns), we find that the transient spectrum of the nanoparticles is nearly identical to that obtained from a crystalline film (Section S8, ESI†). Because fission is known to occur in crystalline films with a time constant of ca. 100 fs,12,19,39 these results indicate that singlet fission is the primary decay pathway in the crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. To verify that parent singlet excitons are not decaying via other pathways, such as into singlet exciton traps as has been suggested in prior work,29 we additionally performed measurements in the near-infrared where parent singlet and triplet features are more clearly differentiated (Section S9, ESI†). While features attributable to parent singlet excitons are observed in the region of pulse overlap, these features are not present at longer time delays clearly evidencing that parent singlet excitons do not decay into singlet exciton traps; rather, singlet fission is the primary decay pathway. Further confirming this interpretation, we successfully modelled these data globally according to a three-component kinetic scheme that describes singlet fission in solids of pentacene derivatives (see e.g., ref. 8 and Section S10, ESI†); we find that the time constant for the first step of singlet fission is ca. 100 fs, consistent with that measured in crystalline films of TIPS-Pn.12,19,39 Using this time constant and making a simple kinetic argument,40 we estimate that effectively every parent singlet exciton is converted into a triplet pair in the initial step of singlet fission (Section S11, ESI†), in agreement with the general consensus that singlet fission in crystalline TIPS-Pn is highly efficient.12,19,39,41 We conclude that singlet fission is the primary decay pathway in the crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles, and that the initial conversion of parent singlet excitons to triplet pairs is quantitative, i.e., there are no losses.
 Fig. 2  Transient visible absorption of amorphous and crystalline nanoparticles of TIPS-Pn. (a and b) Surface plot of transient visible absorption of crystalline and amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. The experiments were performed with incident pump wavelengths of 700 and 645 nm and incident pump fluences of 5 and 60 μJ cm−2 for the crystalline and amorphous nanoparticles, respectively. The scale bar is indicated beside each plot. (c and d) Selected transient spectra for crystalline and amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. Spectra time delays are indicated in the legend. (e and f) Selected transient kinetics for crystalline and amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. For the crystalline nanoparticles, the kinetics of the triplet photoinduced absorption and ground-state bleach features were taken as the average over the spectral range 510 to 539 nm and 698 to 703 nm, respectively. These data have been normalized over the time range from 100 to 1000 ps. For the amorphous nanoparticles, these kinetics were taken as the average over the spectral range 490 to 560 nm and 630 to 690 nm, respectively, and have been normalized over the time range from 5 to 20 ps. A fit from a global analysis overlays these transient absorption data. 
For singlet fission to be useful in practice, triplet pairs must be long lived and survive additional steps in singlet fission, such as triplet pair separation.3,4,6,8Fig. 2e plots the kinetics of the triplet induced absorption (T1 → Tn) and ground-state bleach (S0 → S1) features appearing in the transient absorption of the crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles (Fig. 2a and c). The kinetics evolve considerably over the course of the first few picoseconds. This evolution corresponds to changes in the transient spectra that have been associated with triplet pair separation,6,8 or more specifically, triplet energy transfer between the triplet pair and an adjacent molecule in its ground electronic state.4,8 The time constant for triplet pair separation in crystalline TIPS-Pn was determined to be ca. 5 ps (Section S10, ESI†); thereafter, the kinetics are essentially constant. Although the triplet induced absorption is not necessarily a quantitative assay of the overall conversion efficiency, the ground-state bleach quantifies the depletion of the population in the ground state; therefore, its recovery reports on the population that has returned to the ground state. In the context of singlet fission, this means losses. Fig. 2e shows that out to a 1 ns time delay the overall conversion in the crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles is essentially lossless;42 that is, both triplet pair formation and separation are quantitative.
In amorphous solids of TIPS-Pn, it is generally accepted that singlet fission is the primary decay pathway,6,19,29 and it has additionally been suggested that singlet fission is highly efficient.6,29 Singlet fission is evident in the amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles by comparing the early- and long-time transient spectra (Fig. 2b) with that of isolated-molecule singlet and triplet excitations, respectively (Section S13, ESI†). Singlet fission is the origin of these spectral features, because the appearance of triplet features on these timescales cannot be explained by other singlet-to-triplet conversion processes, such as intersystem crossing, which in solution is relatively slow (i.e., 10s of ns).43 Using the initial rate of fission (1/1.2) ps−1 identified in this work, whose value compares well with that reported previously,6 we estimate that the conversion of parent singlet excitons into triplet pairs in the amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles is quantitative (Section S14, ESI†). Very modest changes do occur in the early- and intermediate-time delay transient spectra in the vicinity of the ground-state bleach at ca. 650 nm on this timescale (Fig. 2d). However, given that these changes occur as the triplet photoinduced grows in (Fig. 2d and f), we attribute this decay to the loss of overlapping stimulated emission—the correlated triplet pair formed in solids of pentacene derivatives is non-emissive.44 Critically, we find that both the triplet induced absorption and ground-state bleach are constant for a period of time thereafter. All of the observations above are consistent with an initially quantitative conversion of parent singlet excitons into triplet pairs in the amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles.
In contrast to the crystalline nanoparticles, the amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles exhibit appreciable losses at longer time delays (Fig. 2b, d and f). Using the ground-state bleach to assay subsequent steps of the conversion, we see that, at a time delay of 1 ns, the bleach has decayed to ca. 70% its original value. A five-component kinetic scheme used to model the transient absorption of amorphous pentacene derivative nanoparticles describes the data well; the model accounts for singlet fission at dimer sites where local structural differences result in two triplet pair populations with drastically different lifetimes,45 and additionally accounts for the spatial separation of long-lived triplet pairs.8 The resultant fits46 overlay the data in Fig. 2f and a more detailed analysis and discussion is presented in Section S16 (ESI†). The results highlight appreciable losses arising from a population that decays much faster than the timescale of triplet pair separation in the amorphous nanoparticles. In other words, we find that singlet fission is no longer quantitative in the amorphous nanoparticles of TIPS-Pn; for each photogenerated parent singlet exciton, just 1.4 triplets will be generated. Identical losses are observed in amorphous films, indicating that the nanoparticle environment is not responsible for this trend (Section S17, ESI†); rather, the trend results from the statistical distribution of packing arrangements adopted in amorphous material of this compound.45 In sum, appreciable losses occur prior to triplet pair separation in the amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles, reducing the overall triplet yield.
Having determined that the overall conversion is quantitative in crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles, and that appreciable losses occur in the amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles, we now consider the possibility that these losses could be compensated for by the migration of excitation energy between amorphous and crystalline domains.47 In order to undertake this study, we developed a procedure to control the morphology and vary the amount of amorphous and crystalline material within the nanoparticles (Fig. 3a). As identified above, several parameters of the sample preparation, including the amount of additive and the injection and suspension storage temperatures, influenced the extent to which the initially amorphous material became crystalline. We leveraged these handles to prepare nanoparticle suspensions of mixed composition (Section S19, ESI†). Section S20 (ESI†) explains why, as a result of their formation by rapid precipitation, it is more likely the nanoparticle suspensions constitute a distribution of mixed-phase nanoparticles rather than a simple mixture of pure-phase nanoparticles that are either amorphous or crystalline. To quantify the amount of amorphous and crystalline material in the TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions, we used the extinction spectra of neat amorphous and crystalline material as basis spectra (Section S21, ESI†). According to this analysis, we determine that the TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions labelled as samples B, C, and D in Fig. 3a comprise 20%, 50%, and 99% crystalline material, respectively. Thus, the mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions contain an appreciable fraction of both amorphous and crystalline material, such that exciton migration between them might be possible.
 Fig. 3  Pure- and mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions of TIPS-Pn. (a) Steady-state absorption spectra of the neat and mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions. The spectrum of the pump used in the transient absorption experiments is shown in grey and is scaled for clarity. (b) Kinetics of the parent singlet near-infrared photoinduced absorption appearing in the neat and mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions. The measurements were performed at a pump wavelength of 645 nm and incident pump fluence of ca. 260 μJ cm−2. The data were normalized to the maximum amplitude occurring near the time origin of the measurement. Dashed lines indicate decays of the mixed-phase samples predicted as described in the main text. The inset shows normalized transient near-infrared spectra of parent singlet excitons in neat amorphous material (orange) and triplet excitations in neat amorphous and crystalline material (grey and black, respectively). (c) Transient near-infrared absorption spectra of the neat and mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions obtained at 1 ns time delay. The data were normalized to the amplitude of the transient spectrum at a wavelength of 980 nm, which corresponds to the peak of the origin band of triplet excitations in amorphous material. 
We first considered the possibility that parent singlet excitons might migrate between amorphous and crystalline material prior to singlet fission. Parent singlet excitons are known to migrate within amorphous material on a picosecond timescale,6,20,48 funneling, for example, excitation energy to singlet fission dimer sites.20 Because crystalline material is lower in energy, resonant energy transfer between amorphous and crystalline material is downhill and so it is possible that parent singlet excitons could be funneled to crystalline material where the overall singlet-to-triplet conversion is higher. For the mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions (Fig. 3a), the probability of such energy migration should be quite high given the relatively even weighting of amorphous and crystalline chromophores, specifically amounting to ca. 4:1 and 1:1 in samples B and C, respectively. However, such energy migration must kinetically outcompete singlet fission within amorphous domains.
In order to carry out this study, we performed transient absorption measurements on the mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions by selectively exciting amorphous material. The samples were excited at 645 nm (Fig. 3a) and, due to the different extinction that amorphous and crystalline material have at this wavelength, this led to the selective excitation of 95% and 80% amorphous relative to crystalline material in samples B and C, respectively. To probe whether or not singlet excitons were migrating between amorphous and crystalline domains, we monitored the kinetics of the parent singlet population in the near-infrared (Fig. 3b). The near-infrared is particularly advantageous for this purpose8 because the parent singlet feature does not overlap with the triplet induced absorption of either amorphous or crystalline material (inset to Fig. 3b). The idea of the experiment is as follows: if parent singlet excitons migrate between amorphous and crystalline domains, we should observe the decay of the parent singlet induced absorption accelerate substantially as the composition tends toward more crystalline material. (Note that it is not possible for energy to migrate between nanoparticles on the timescale of these measurements. See, e.g., Section S22 (ESI†).) More specifically, we should observe the decay in the mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions converge to that of crystalline material faster than that predicted by an appropriately weighted sum of the decays in neat crystalline and amorphous material, which reflects the limit where parent singlet excitons do not migrate between amorphous and crystalline domains. We found that, in the mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions with increased loading of crystalline material, the decay of the parent singlet photoinduced absorption does not accelerate substantially relative to the predicted decay (Fig. 3b). We rule out the possibility that extensive phase-separation in the mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions could account for these observations as identical observations were made on films with mixed morphologies (Section S23, ESI†). These results suggest that singlet fission within amorphous domains kinetically outcompetes the migration of singlet excitation energy between amorphous and crystalline domains in both nanoparticles and films of TIPS-Pn with mixed morphology.49 Thus, the present work shows that, in mixed morphology solids of this compound, it will be difficult to recover high overall conversion efficiencies through energy migration to crystalline domains where triplet yields are quantitative.
We additionally performed measurements to determine if triplet excitation energy migrates between amorphous and crystalline domains before the losses in the amorphous domains occur. As identified above, the triplet photoinduced absorption features appearing in the transient spectra of the mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions on the picosecond timescale arise from a weighted sum of triplet pairs generated in both amorphous and crystalline domains. Having photogenerated triplet pairs independently in each domain, we are able to consider the following possible scenarios: (i) if we see a combination of amorphous and crystalline triplet features, and that combination does not evolve further, we can rule out the migration of triplet excitation energy between amorphous and crystalline domains, or (ii) if we see a combination of amorphous and crystalline features and the spectra evolve to only crystalline triplet features, we can confirm the migration of triplet excitation energy to crystalline domains. In Fig. 3c, we show that a substantial amount of amorphous triplet features are present in the long-time transient spectra of the mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions (samples B and C) indicating that triplet excitation energy does not migrate to crystalline domains.50 Although a large flux of triplet excitation energy migrating from amorphous to crystalline domains has been shown to occur at very long timescales (i.e., 10 s to 100 s of ns),19 it is not possible to resolve these dynamics in the present measurement window. These results indicate that the timescale of triplet exciton migration between amorphous and crystalline material is much longer than the timescale associated with the decay of triplet pairs within amorphous material; therefore, the losses identified in amorphous material will not be relieved by the migration of excitation energy from amorphous to crystalline domains.
In summary, we identified an appreciable loss pathway limiting the overall singlet-to-triplet conversion efficiency in amorphous solids of the prototypical singlet fission chromophore TIPS-Pn. We showed how to crystallize nanoparticles of TIPS-Pn through a co-precipitation procedure that includes a chemical additive and found that, in its crystalline form, both triplet pair formation and separation are lossless. In the case of the mixed-phase nanoparticles, we observed no evidence for excitation migration between amorphous and crystalline domains. This means that, in amorphous regions, both the initial fission step and subsequent triplet pair decay are too rapid for these losses to be compensated for by intermixing amorphous and crystalline material. While there are other potential means of circumventing issues associated with amorphous material, such as through the use of covalently-tethered molecular dimers,22 which have provided key insights into fundamental singlet fission dynamics,22,51–57 controlling the packing of molecular dimers in the solid state and efficiently separating the triplet pair from one dimer to the next are critical issues in these materials that remain to be addressed. The present work highlights solution-processable crystalline material as a promising target for quantitative singlet fission.
Author contributions
R. D. P. conceived the project and designed experiments with input from all co-authors. R. D. P. prepared the nanoparticle samples, performed the spectroscopy, and analyzed the data, with additional support from C. G., A. J. T., and E. E. O., C. G. and G. E. P. prepared films; G. E. P. performed structural characterization. S. M. performed materials chemistry work. R. D. P. wrote the manuscript with input from all co-authors. D. S. S., Y. L. L., J. B. A., J. E. A. and G. D. S. directed the research.
Acknowledgements
G. D. S., Y. L. L., R. D. P., and G. E. P. acknowledge funding from the Princeton Center for Complex Materials, a MRSEC supported by NSF Grant DMR 1420541. Portions of this work were conducted at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS), which is supported by the NSF and NIH/NIGMS via NSF award DMR-1332208. J. E. A. and S. M. M. thank the National Science Foundation for support from Grant DMR 1627428. C. G. and J. B. A. are grateful for support from the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the US Department of Energy through Grant DESC0008120. D. S. S. gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada. The authors would additionally like to thank B. Prud'homme for advice in the early stages of this project, B. Wilson for assistance with dynamic light scattering measurements, I. Pelczer for performing nuclear-magnetic resonance spectroscopy measurements, and J. Manion for bringing to our attention the work of Reynolds and co-workers.
Notes and references
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2013, 64, 361–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Piland, J. J. Burdett, R. J. Dillon and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2312–2319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 12699–12705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Burdett and C. J. Bardeen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8597–8607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Pensack, A. J. Tilley, S. R. Parkin, T. S. Lee, M. M. Payne, D. Gao, A. A. Jahnke, D. G. Oblinsky, P.-F. Li, J. E. Anthony, D. S. Seferos and G. D. Scholes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6790–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wakasa, M. Kaise, T. Yago, R. Katoh, Y. Wakikawa and T. Ikoma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25840–25844 CAS .
R. D. Pensack, E. E. Ostroumov, A. J. Tilley, S. Mazza, C. Grieco, K. J. Thorley, J. B. Asbury, D. S. Seferos, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 2370–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 74510 CrossRef .
J. J. Burdett, A. M. Müller, D. Gosztola and C. J. Bardeen, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 144506 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, J. Clark, R. S. S. Kumar, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11830–11833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Yost, J. Lee, M. W. B. Wilson, T. Wu, D. P. McMahon, R. R. Parkhurst, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, A. Rao, K. Johnson, M. Y. Sfeir, M. G. Bawendi, T. M. Swager, R. H. Friend, M. A. Baldo and T. Van Voorhis, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 492–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 5028–5048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Dexter, J. Lumin., 1979, 18, 779–784 CrossRef .
B. Ehrler, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1053–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tabachnyk, B. Ehrler, S. Gélinas, M. L. Böhm, B. J. Walker, K. P. Musselman, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and A. Rao, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1033–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. A. Green, Third Generation Photovoltaics: Advanced Solar Energy Conversion, Springer,  2006 Search PubMed .
N. J. Thompson, M. W. B. Wilson, D. N. Congreve, P. R. Brown, J. M. Scherer, T. S. Bischof, M. Wu, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. V. Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1039–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Grieco, G. S. Doucette, R. D. Pensack, M. M. Payne, A. Rimshaw, G. D. Scholes, J. E. Anthony and J. B. Asbury, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16069–16080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Roberts, R. E. McAnally, J. N. Mastron, D. H. Webber, M. T. Whited, R. L. Brutchey, M. E. Thompson and S. E. Bradforth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6388–6400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Piland and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1841–1846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Korovina, S. Das, Z. Nett, X. Feng, J. Joy, R. Haiges, A. I. Krylov, S. E. Bradforth and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 617–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Congreve, J. Lee, N. J. Thompson, E. Hontz, S. R. Yost, P. D. Reusswig, M. E. Bahlke, S. Reineke, T. V. Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2013, 340, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, M. J. Bruzek, N. J. Thompson, M. Y. Sfeir, J. E. Anthony and M. A. Baldo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1445–1448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Schrauben, Y. Zhao, C. Mercado, P. I. Dron, J. L. Ryerson, J. Michl, K. Zhu and J. C. Johnson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2286–2293 CAS .
L. Yang, M. Tabachnyk, S. L. Bayliss, M. L. Böhm, K. Broch, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and B. Ehrler, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 354–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Mastron, S. T. Roberts, R. E. McAnally, M. E. Thompson and S. E. Bradforth, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 15519–15526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Marciniak, I. Pugliesi, B. Nickel and S. Lochbrunner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 235318 CrossRef .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, K. N. Schwarz, R. W. MacQueen, M. Dvořák, A. W. C. Lam, K. P. Ghiggino, D. R. McCamey, T. W. Schmidt and G. J. Conibeer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 157–165 CAS .
C. V. Hoven, X.-D. Dang, R. C. Coffin, J. Peet, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E63–E66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lou, J. M. Szarko, T. Xu, L. Yu, T. J. Marks and L. X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20661–20663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Treat, J. A. N. Malik, O. Reid, L. Yu, C. G. Shuttle, G. Rumbles, C. J. Hawker, M. L. Chabinyc, P. Smith and N. Stingelin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 628–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Graham, J. Mei, R. Stalder, J. W. Shim, H. Cheun, F. Steffy, F. So, B. Kippelen and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1210–1215 CAS .
While we were unable to track down the chemical origin of the type-I to type-II conversion, it should be noted that we observed a similar effect when injecting the concentrated TIPS-pentacene/THF solution into a solution of polyvinyl alcohol in water. See e.g. Section S6 (ESI†).
Again, as an explicit example of this, see e.g.ref. 33 where chemical additives introduced through syringe transfer were shown to influence the structure and performance of organic photovoltaic thin films.
Y. Diao, K. M. Lenn, W.-Y. Lee, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, J. Xu, Y. Mao, Y. Kim, J. A. Reinspach, S. Park, A. Aspuru-Guzik, G. Xue, P. Clancy, Z. Bao and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17046–17057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
It should be noted that the crystalline form of TIPS-pentacene investigated in the present work is that adopting the molecular-level packing and long-range order of the equilibrium crystal structure. See example:   J. E. Anthony, J. S. Brooks, D. L. Eaton and S. R. Parkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
We were unfortunately unable to obtain X-ray diffractograms of the nanoparticles, which would represent a direct confirmation of their solid-state order and enable a quantitative evaluation of the crystal grain size of the crystalline nanoparticles. However, we have presented a substantial body of evidence indicating that the nanoparticles are amorphous and crystalline. We further speculate that the crystalline nanoparticles, on the basis of how they are prepared and crystallized, are polycrystalline in nature rather than single crystalline.
A. J. Musser, M. Liebel, C. Schnedermann, T. Wende, T. B. Kehoe, A. Rao and P. Kukura, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 352–357 CrossRef CAS .

          N. J. Turro, J. C. Scaiano and V. Ramamurthy, Modern Molecular Photochemistry of Organic Molecules, University Science Books, Sausalito, CA,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. Ramanan, A. L. Smeigh, J. E. Anthony, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 386–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
The 2% loss reported in Fig. 2e likely results from a small amount of bimolecular triplet–triplet annihilation, which at fluences of this level becomes apparent on a nanosecond timescale (see e.g. Section S12, ESI†). Similar bimolecular annihilation has been observed in low-fluence transient absorption measurements of crystalline solids of unsubstituted pentacene. See for example:   A. D. Poletayev, J. Clark, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, Y. Makino, S. Hotta and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 919 CrossRef CAS PubMed  . These authors also reported negligible bimolecular annihilation (i.e., ≪4%) at one-sun illumination in a single-crystal pentacene-based device, a promising result highlighting the real potential of singlet fission in device applications.
B. J. Walker, A. J. Musser, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
We have carefully considered and ruled out alternative, parallel decay pathways such as charge carrier formation and photodimerization that could additionally contribute to the observed loss of stimulated emission. See e.g. Section S15 (ESI†).

          R. D. Pensack, et al., 2017, in preparation.
To capture the triplet pair separation step, the fits were applied to the data over an extended time range out to ca. 7 ns.
The neat crystalline TIPS-Pn nanoparticles are susceptible to substantial triplet–triplet annihilation on the pico- and nanosecond timescale, which complicates an assay of the overall yield in this sample. See e.g. Section S12 (ESI†). This effect is likely to become further exacerbated as crystalline domains become smaller in mixed-phase nanoparticles with lower crystalline content. As such, rather than assay the overall yield to determine if losses in amorphous domains could be overcome in mixed-phase nanoparticles, we chose to probe individual elementary processes capable of overcoming these losses, such as singlet and triplet excitation migration from amorphous to crystalline domains, that were not susceptible to bimolecular annihilation. See e.g. Section S18 (ESI†).
K. M. Gaab and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4619–4626 CrossRef CAS .
While the exact length scale needed to favor energy migration from amorphous to crystalline domains over singlet fission within amorphous regions could be determined by undertaking a rigorous structural characterization of the mixed-phase solids and/or by developing a detailed microscopic theoretical description of the energy migration dynamics within the amorphous phase, we consider this beyond the scope of the present work.
In Section S24 (ESI†), we report the complete time evolution of the transient near-infrared absorption of the neat and mixed-phase TIPS-pentacene nanoparticles following excitation at a wavelength of 645 nm and incident pump fluence of ca. 260 μJ cm−2.
J. Zirzlmeier, D. Lehnherr, P. B. Coto, E. T. Chernick, R. Casillas, B. S. Basel, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski and D. M. Guldi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5325–5330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. T. Trinh, B. Choi, J. Xia, E. J. Taffet, J. Z. Low, J. R. Miller, X. Roy, X.-Y. Zhu, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8965–8972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lukman, A. J. Musser, K. Chen, S. Athanasopoulos, C. K. Yong, Z. Zeng, Q. Ye, C. Chi, J. M. Hodgkiss, J. Wu, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5452–5461 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3373–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zirzlmeier, R. Casillas, R. Reddy, P. B. Coto, D. Lehnherr, E. T. Chernick, I. Papadopoulos, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski and D. M. Guldi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10113–10123 RSC .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, K. Appavoo, M. L. Steigerwald, L. M. Campos and M. Y. Sfeir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7289–7297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, L. M. Campos, M. Y. Sfeir and D. R. McCamey, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods, additional data, data analysis, and discussion. See DOI: 10.1039/c7mh00303jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Conceptual insights
Singlet fission holds the promise of boosting solar cell efficiencies beyond the theoretical Shockley–Queisser limit by facilitating the generation of two charge carrier pairs per absorbed photon, instead of the usual one; however, many challenges remain to be addressed before the process can be implemented in practice. One such challenge is that any excitation energy not multiplied over the course of singlet fission seriously undermines its practical significance. While solution-processable chromophores provide a clear path toward low-cost high-efficiency solar cells, there has been some debate regarding the ideal solid-state order of the singlet fission sensitizer layer, i.e., whether an amorphous or crystalline phase is preferred. Using the exemplar solution-processable singlet fission chromophore 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS-Pn), we show that excitation multiplication is quantitative, or lossless, in its crystalline form, whereas losses are incurred over the course of singlet fission when the material is amorphous. While the initial step of singlet fission is quantitative in both phases, appreciable losses are apparent in amorphous material prior to triplet pair separation. Our results suggest that solution-processable, crystalline material should be targeted for quantitative triplet yields in singlet fission.

S1 + S0 ⇄ 1(TT) ⇄ T1 + T1	(1)
S1 + S0 → [1(TT) ⇄ 1(T⋯T)] ⇄ T1 + T1	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Amorphous and crystalline nanoparticles of TIPS-pentacene. (a) Picture of the two syringes and two different batches of TIPS-pentacene nanoparticles. (b and c) Steady-state absorption spectra of type-I and type-II nanoparticles of TIPS-pentacene compared with that of amorphous and crystalline films, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Transient visible absorption of amorphous and crystalline nanoparticles of TIPS-Pn. (a and b) Surface plot of transient visible absorption of crystalline and amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. The experiments were performed with incident pump wavelengths of 700 and 645 nm and incident pump fluences of 5 and 60 μJ cm−2 for the crystalline and amorphous nanoparticles, respectively. The scale bar is indicated beside each plot. (c and d) Selected transient spectra for crystalline and amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. Spectra time delays are indicated in the legend. (e and f) Selected transient kinetics for crystalline and amorphous TIPS-Pn nanoparticles. For the crystalline nanoparticles, the kinetics of the triplet photoinduced absorption and ground-state bleach features were taken as the average over the spectral range 510 to 539 nm and 698 to 703 nm, respectively. These data have been normalized over the time range from 100 to 1000 ps. For the amorphous nanoparticles, these kinetics were taken as the average over the spectral range 490 to 560 nm and 630 to 690 nm, respectively, and have been normalized over the time range from 5 to 20 ps. A fit from a global analysis overlays these transient absorption data.	 

 	Fig. 3  Pure- and mixed-phase nanoparticle suspensions of TIPS-Pn. (a) Steady-state absorption spectra of the neat and mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions. The spectrum of the pump used in the transient absorption experiments is shown in grey and is scaled for clarity. (b) Kinetics of the parent singlet near-infrared photoinduced absorption appearing in the neat and mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions. The measurements were performed at a pump wavelength of 645 nm and incident pump fluence of ca. 260 μJ cm−2. The data were normalized to the maximum amplitude occurring near the time origin of the measurement. Dashed lines indicate decays of the mixed-phase samples predicted as described in the main text. The inset shows normalized transient near-infrared spectra of parent singlet excitons in neat amorphous material (orange) and triplet excitations in neat amorphous and crystalline material (grey and black, respectively). (c) Transient near-infrared absorption spectra of the neat and mixed-phase TIPS-Pn nanoparticle suspensions obtained at 1 ns time delay. The data were normalized to the amplitude of the transient spectrum at a wavelength of 980 nm, which corresponds to the peak of the origin band of triplet excitations in amorphous material.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods, additional data, data analysis, and discussion. See DOI: 10.1039/c7mh00303j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
