An overview of carbon materials for flexible electrochemical capacitors  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR02157B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR02157B
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8799-8820Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAn overview of carbon materials for flexible electrochemical capacitors
Yongmin He†
, 
Wanjun Chen†
, 
Caitian Gao†
, 
Jinyuan Zhou

*, 
Xiaodong Li

 and 
Erqing Xie

*
Department of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. E-mail: xieeq@lzu.edu.cn; zhoujy@lzu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 931 8912554;   Tel: +86 931 8912616
Received 
30th April 2013
, Accepted 16th July 2013First published on 25th July 2013AbstractUnder the background of the quick development of lightweight, flexible, and wearable electronic devices in our society, a flexible and highly efficient energy management strategy is needed for their counterpart energy-storage systems. Among them, flexible electrochemical capacitors (ECs) have been considered as one of the most promising candidates because of their significant advantages in power and energy densities, and unique properties of being flexible, lightweight, low-cost, and environmentally friendly compared with current energy storage devices. In a common EC, carbon materials play an irreplaceable and principal role in its energy-storage performance. Up till now, most progress towards flexible ECs technologies has mostly benefited from the continuous development of carbon materials. As a result, in view of the dual remarkable highlights of ECs and carbon materials, a summary of recent research progress on carbon-based flexible EC electrode materials is presented in this review, including carbon fiber (CF, consisting of carbon microfiber-CMF and carbon nanofiber-CNF) networks, carbon nanotube (CNT) and graphene coatings, CNT and/or graphene papers (or films), and freestanding three-dimensional (3D) flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures. Furthermore, some promising carbon materials for great potential applications in flexible ECs are introduced. Finally, the trends and challenges in the development of carbon-based electrode materials for flexible ECs and their smart applications are analyzed.Yongmin HeYongmin He received his BS degree in physics from China West Normal University in 2009. Now, he is a PhD student under the supervision of Professor Erqing Xie in condensed matter physics at Lanzhou University. His current research interests are focusing on “smart” flexible ECs by integrating some of the factors such as ultralight, ultrathin, transparent, stretchable, and even compression-tolerant properties.Wanjun ChenWanjun Chen received his BS degree in Physics from the School of Physical Science and Technology at Lanzhou University in 2009. Now, he is pursuing his PhD degree in condensed matter physics under the supervision of Professor Erqing Xie at Lanzhou University. His research interests mainly focus on design and synthesis of advanced carbon materials and their composites for energy storage and conversion devices.Caitian GaoCaitian Gao received her BS degree in physics from Lanzhou University in 2010. Now, she is a PhD student under the supervision of Professor Erqing Xie in condensed matter physics at Lanzhou University. Her research focused on ZnO and SnO2 nanomaterials synthesis and their applications in electrochemical devices, such as dye-sensitize solar cells, electrochemical capacitors and self-powered UV-photodetectors.Jinyuan ZhouJinyuan Zhou received his PhD degree in condensed state physics from Lanzhou University in 2010, then joined Lanzhou University as a lecturer. From 2010 to 2012, he worked at Nanyang Technological University of Singapore as a postdoctoral fellow. His research interests include silicon carbide based optoelectronic nanomaterials, carbon nanotube based sensors, carbon nanotube intramolecular junctions, and carbon nanotube fibers & their applications in energy and information.Xiaodong LiXiaodong Li received his BS degree in the School of Nuclear Science and Technology at Lanzhou University, China in 2008. He received his PhD (2013) in condensed matter physics from Lanzhou University. Currently, he is a research assistant at the Si Chuan Research Center of New Materials. His research interests include nanomaterials for dye-sensitized solar cells, self-powered UV-photodetectors, electrochemical capacitors and lithium ion batteries.Erqing XieErqing Xie is a professor at Lanzhou University of China since 2001. He received his PhD degree in condensed state physics from Lanzhou University, in 1995, then joined Lanzhou University as a lecturer. His research interests are in the fields of superhard films and their applications (such as DLC, SiC, SiCN, BN, and C3N4); key materials and thin-film technology for solar applications, and thin-film technology in optoelectronics, functional nanomaterials and their applications; current research mainly concludes dye-sensitized solar cells, supercapacitor electrode materials, semiconductor oxide-based gas sensor, UV photodetectors, and photocatalytic technology.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, energy production still mainly relys on the combustion of fossil fuels, and this is imposing a more-and-more adverse effect on the world’s ecological and economic activities. In order to reverse this situation, intense worldwide research has been focused on developing more sustainable energy conversion/storage and their counterpart technologies.1 Recently, an increasing market demand for versatile flexible and deformable energy storage devices has arisen due to their potential applications in wearable and portable electronic products, such as rollup displays, electronic paper, and wearable systems for personal multi-media.2–5 Taking mobile phones as example, after the Philips company first designed a novel concept of a “Fluid” smartphone with an ultra-thin main body and high flexibility,6 it was reported that flexible phones with an OLED display have been applied in mass production by the Samsung company,7 as shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, flexible and deformable energy storage devices are highly desirable in these electronics and are expected to play a more-and-more important role in the near future modern lives.
 Fig. 1  Philips “fluid” smartphone concept and Samsung flexible OLED display phones. 
Among various emerging flexible energy storage technologies, electrochemical capacitors (ECs) (also called supercapacitors) have attracted much attention and become one of the most promising candidate energy sources due to high specific power density (>10000 W kg−1), fast charge–discharge processes (within a second), long cycle life (>105), and low maintenance cost.8–11 Depending on their energy storage mechanisms as well as electrode materials used, ECs can be divided into three categories: (i) electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), in which the capacitance arises from a build-up field of electrostatic charges gathering at the interface between the electrode surface and the electrolyte (non-Faradaic charge storage). Thus, the surface area of the electrodes is a crucial factor for the capacitor. As a result, porous carbon materials with a large specific surface area (SSA) and mechanical properties have been frequently employed in flexible electrode materials,12–14 such as activated carbon (AC),15 xerogels,16 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),17 carbon fibers (CFs, including carbon microfibers-CMFs and carbon nanofibers-CNFs),18 graphene,19 mesoporous carbon,20 and carbide-derived carbon.21 It is demonstrated that the EDLCs can deliver rather high power densities, charge–discharge rates, and excellent cycling stabilities owing to a fast physical reversible adsorption/disadsorption of ions from the electrolyte onto the two porous electrodes (without any chemical reactions). However, their energy densities (typically ∼5 W h kg−1) are often greatly limited by the electroactive surface area and the pore size distribution of carbon electrode materials. Thus, to increase the energy densities, the second type of ECs come into being: (ii) pseudo-capacitors based on a Faradic process, which involves fast and reversible redox reactions between the electrolyte and electroactive materials on the electrodes' surface.10 The most widely explored electroactive materials include transition metal oxides (TMOs) or hydroxides such as RuO2, Fe3O4, NiO, MnO2, Co3O4, and Ni(OH)2,22–25 conducting redox polymers (CRPs) such as polyaniline (PANI), polyurethane (PU), polypyrrole, and polythiophene,26 and other materials possessing oxygen/nitrogen surface functional groups.14 Compared to EDLCs, pseudo-capacitors can achieve much higher pseudo-capacitance and energy densities. However, for TMOs, their poor electrical conductivities (restricting fast electron transport) and intrinsic rigidity usually result in a low power density and poor flexibility. As for CRPs, their easily damaged structure during the redox process usually lead to a low cycling stability. Hence, to resolve these problems, the third group of ECs have been developed: (iii) hybrid capacitors, which join the above two mechanisms into a ECs.8 Hybrid ECs can achieve higher energy and power densities with good cycling stabilities by utilizing both Faradaic and non-Faradaic processes to store charges. At the same time, in order to fabricate flexible ECs, carbon-based materials with high electrical conductivity and large SSA are frequently adopted as the backbone materials to support those electroactive materials.
Typically, a flexible EC includes a bendable plastic outer package, positive/negative electrodes (symmetric and asymmetric),10,27 electrolyte (liquid and solid electrolytes),14,28,29 and separators, as shown in the bottom of Fig. 2. Among them, the electrodes, the key part to a flexible EC, are generally made from freestanding carbon materials. These freestanding carbon materials usually possess high conductivities and excellent flexibilities, and can serve as both the electrodes and the current collectors. Compared to the conventional ECs (top of Fig. 2), the flexible ECs have been simplified with no need for independent current collectors, conductive additives and binders for connecting electroactive powder materials. Thus, this type of flexible ECs should show two strategic advantages: (1) device structures: soft plastic (such as polythene bags, ethylene/vinyl acetatecopolymers, polyethylene terephthalate, polydimethylsiloxane, and Teflon films) have been widely used as the package, and the freestanding carbon materials directly serve as both the electrodes and the current collectors. Thus, compared to the conventional ECs, these simplified ECs are flexible, thin and lightweight, leading to significant overall weight and space savings to widen their practical applications. (2) Electrode materials: for conventional ECs, the electrode material are pulverous, and need first to be mixed with some binding additives to prepare a paste. Then, the prepared paste can be coated on a current collector to form their counterpart electrodes.30 Thus, this process should inevitably result in the following complications: (i) obstructed sites of the electroactive materials formed when mixed with binder and other additives; (ii) long-range electron-conducting pathways in the carbon component disrupted by the ad hoc mixture of powder components; and (iii) poorly interconnected void volume (so called “dead volume”) in the electrodes, frustrating the infiltration of electrolyte into the electrodes. Meanwhile, for flexible ECs the electrodes can be prepared simply using the freestanding flexible carbon scaffolds with post-loaded electroactive materials. Remarkably, this type of EC is device-ready, and able to control the pore–solid architecture via the choice of carbon substrate and maintain uninterrupted electron-conducting pathways throughout the macroscopic carbon scaffold. Consequently, they can obtain remarkable electrochemical performance.30
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of (a) the typical components of conventional supercapacitors and (b) carbon-based flexible ECs. 
In this context, carbon materials in a flexible EC can work with multiple functions: (1) they can serve as both a conductive path for electron transport and a good flexible backbone due to their high electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical properties. This is the basis of the electrodes of flexible ECs. (2) their controlled porous structure can not only contribute to a high capacitance of the composites but also provide multiple pathways of ion transport for full electrolyte accessibility. Furthermore, the easy processability of carbon materials can also benefit the building or designing of hybrid composites31 or three-dimensional (3D) micro-/microscope architectures32–34 to achieve ultrahigh electrochemical performances. On the basis of the intriguing features above, it is believed that carbon materials can play an irreplaceable role in flexible ECs. Up to now, progress towards ECs technologies has mostly benefited from the continuous development of carbon materials, and a number of recent reviews have presented nice works on EC electrodes based on carbon materials with different varieties (such as ACs, CNTs,17,35 graphene,19,23,36–42 and templated carbons),12–14,43 different structures (from zero-dimensional to 3D),32,44,45 and hybrid composites.10,22,23 However, few reviews have focused on flexible ECs.46 At the same time, due to the growing interest aroused by lightweight, flexible, and wearable electronics to meet emerging smart applications, there should be a large demand for the development of new, flexible, lightweight, low-cost, and environmentally friendly energy storage devices. Moreover, in view of both the important role of ECs in the flexible energy storage field and the remarkable advantages of carbon materials, particular attention is now being fixed on carbon-based flexible ECs. Therefore, in this review, we will provide a comprehensive summary of the state-of-the-art research activities that have focused on carbon-based flexible ECs electrodes, including CMF and CNF networks, CNT and graphene coatings, CNT and/or graphene papers (or films), and freestanding 3D flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures, as shown in Fig. 3. Also, some promising carbon materials with great potential applications in flexible ECs will be also described. Finally, we will conclude this review with some perspectives and outlooks.
 Fig. 3  An overview of carbon-based flexible EC electrode materials. The underlying materials include graphene, CNTs, CMFs, CNFs, and others. The reported carbon-based flexible electrodes mainly consist of CMF and CNF networks, CNT and graphene coatings, CNT and/or graphene papers (or films), and freestanding 3D flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures. 
2 CF-based electrodes for flexible ECs
CFs can be generally divided into CMFs and CNFs according to their diameter. Among them, CMFs have been realized by large-scale industrial production by spinning various carbon-based polymers into microfibers (5–10 μm in diameter). Because of their notable features, such as a high strength-to-weight ratio and high resistance against heat and corrosion, CMFs have become a promising material for a wide range of applications in present society, such as aircraft, the space industry, and sports. On the other hands, due to their excellent mechanical strength and high conductivities, CMFs have also been frequently employed in simplified, lightweight and flexible ECs.12 Particularly, CMFs can be woven into various forms such as cloths and papers. These fabric CMFs are outstanding substrates for flexible ECs, and usually combine with pseudocapacitive materials (i.e. CRPs and TMOs) to enhance the energy density of the ECs.47–58 For example, Chen et al.53 have applied MnO2 nanosheet/carbon cloth as electrodes for highly flexible ECs, in which MnO2 nanosheets were deposited on porous carbon cloths via an anodic electrodeposition technique. The flexible ECs manifested high electrochemical performances, high specific capacitance (425 F g−1) and excellent stability (only 6% loss after 3000 cycles). However, in most cases, a relatively low SSA of CMFs often leads to a dense electroactive material layer, which reduces the performance of flexible ECs due to the limited reaction kinetics for the charge transfer and ion diffusion. To alleviate this drawback and to enhance the electrochemical performance, two suggested solutions have attracted much attention: (1) minimizing the CFs' diameter from micrometers to nanometers by electrospinning or other methods. In view of size effect, CNF networks would provide a larger SSA and a nanoporous structure. (2) Building a nanoporous conductive architecture on the surface of carbon cloths or papers. These nanoporous conductive architectures can work as both a secondary current collector and an electrode, simultaneously enlarging the surface area and providing both nanoporous channels for low-resistant ion diffusion and nano-sized skeletons for fast electron transfer.
2.1 CNF network based flexible electrodes
A considerable number of researchers have prepared CNFs by the electrospinning technique, which is a low-cost and simple method to fabricate nanomaterials for large-scale applications.59–64 Electrospun CNFs usually show good conductivities and high aspect ratios (diameters ranging from a few hundreds of nanometers and lengths reaching hundreds of meters). As a result, the freestanding electrospun CNF networks can not only serve as a high-SSA and conductive supporter for electroactive materials, such as MnO2,65–67 and PANI,68,69 but also provide interconnected nanopores for quick ionic diffusion throughout the electrodes. For instance, Kang et al.65 applied electrospun CNF networks as a MnO2-loading scaffold for high-performance and flexible ECs. They grew vertical MnO2 nanorods on CNFs by an in situ redox reaction. Such CNF networks exhibit high conductivities of 1–10 S cm−1 and improved SSAs of ∼20–40 m2 g−1, which ensure a high specific capacitance of 559 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 in 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte solution. Moreover, the ECs show excellent stability, retaining 94% of their initial capacitance after 1500 cycles. The universality of the electrospinning technique facilitates many improved designs of flexible electrodes, such as embedding electroactive materials in CNF networks by co-electrospinning their mixed precursors. This design of embedding electroactive materials into CNFs possesses at least two advantages: (1) the well-dispersed electroactive materials embedded in CNF networks can provide numerous electroactive sites for efficient Faradaic redox reactions; (2) the conductive CNF networks build up an express path for ultrafast electron transport. The most representative work has been reported by Zhang et al.70 They have fabricated a hybrid structure of CNFs incorporating Co3O4 hollow nanoparticles by directly electrospinning the mixture precursor solution, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. Due to the Kirkendall effect, the Co nanoparticles turn into Co3O4 hollow nanoparticles during the transformation. Moreover, transmission electron microscope (TEM) results indicate that the Co3O4 hollow nanoparticles are well dispersed on the surface of CNFs (Fig. 4b). This novel structure can be directly integrated as binder-free electrodes for high-performance flexible ECs. Impressively, the specific capacitance increases remarkably with the increase of Co3O4 loading (Fig. 4c). When the Co3O4 mass loading reached up to 35.9 wt%, the flexible ECs deliver a higher specific capacitance of 552 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 compared with other similar ECs (270 F g−1 at 15.6 wt% and 325 F g−1 at 21.7 wt%). Moreover, these flexible ECs show an excellent cycling stability, only 1% loss of the specific capacitance after 2000 cycles (Fig. 4d). Based on this routine, many other composite materials such as CNFs/graphene nanosheets (GNS)71 and CNFs/CNTs have also been successfully fabricated for the flexible ECs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the hollow Co3O4 NPs-CNFs by electrospining. (b) TEM image of a single Co3O4 NPs-CNF. (c) Specific capacitance of Co3O4-CNFs1 (15.6 wt% Co3O4), Co3O4-CNFs2 (21.7 wt%) and Co3O4-CNFs3 (35.9 wt%) film electrodes as a function of current density. (d) Cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the Co3O4-CNFs3 film electrode at a current density of 4 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Besides the electrospinning technique, the template-directed hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) method has also attracted much attention during recent years.72–75 It has been demonstrated that the as-prepared CNFs have a more controllable diameter and better mechanical integrity compared with the electrospun ones. More importantly, these prepared CNFs usually possess a highly functionalized surface, which can make electroactive materials easily grow on the fibrous networks by controllable chemical methods. Zhang et al.75 have synthesized two kinds of one-dimensional hierarchical hybrid nanostructures (NiCo2O4 nanorods and ultrathin nanosheets) on this type of CNF network. They found that the resulting hybrid CNF@NiCo2O4 nanosheet electrodes exhibit high capacitances of 902 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 and excellent cycling stabilities of 3.6% loss after 2400 cycles, which are much better than those of CNF@NiCo2O4 nanorod electrodes. These different electrochemical performances could be derived from the following two structural aspects: One is the electroactive materials. The porous and ultrathin NiCo2O4 nanosheets can deliver a large SSA (142.6 m2 g−1) and facilitate the transportation of electrolyte ions and electrons. Another is the CNF networks. The interconnected CNF backbone is beneficial for electron collection and electrolyte penetration. However, due to the existence of an amorphous carbon layer formed on the surface of CNFs for both electrospinning and HTC methods, the mechanical strength and conductivities of the CNF networks have been greatly depressed, and should be further improved before used as freestanding electrodes for flexible ECs in future practical applications.
2.2 Secondary nanoporous structure based flexible electrodes
In order to enhance further the electrochemical performances for CMF-based flexible ECs, the ordered arrays of 1D nanostructured materials have been frequently synthesized on CMF cloths or papers by “bottom-up” growth technique. Those ordered arrays can work as a secondary nanoporous current collector and a counterpart electrode in the flexible ECs.44,76 In this case, the electroactive materials are subsequently coated on those nanostructures to form coaxial nanocomposites or core–shell hybrid nanostructures. Generally, these hybrid structures show several remarkable advantages: (1) high SSA of the ordered arrays coating with a thin electroactive material layer, enabling a fast, reversible faradic reaction and providing a short ion diffusion path; (2) hierarchical structure of 1D nanostructures directly connected with CFs, providing a direct pathway for efficient electron transport, (3) high void volume between the 1D nanomaterials, leaving a large number of channels for the effective transport of electrolyte. The most representative 1D nanostructure is CNT arrays (CNTAs), which possess high conductivities and porous structures. This structure has been considered as one of the most excellent electroactive-supportive scaffolds. Feng et al.77 have reported CMF-based CNTA/MnO2 composites with a porous structure. The CNTAs on CFs were grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and the thin MnO2 coating on the CNTAs was deposited by electrochemical deposition, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 5a. Fig. 5b is the corresponding scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the structure with the MnO2 deposition time of 20 min. The results show that the specific capacitance of those composites reaches 740 F g−1 at the scan rate of 2 mV s−1 with a mass loading of 0.34 mg cm−2. This value is much better than those of the stainless steel/MnO2 and CF/MnO2 composites, as shown in Fig. 5c. Furthermore, the specific capacitance remains at 326 F g−1 even with a large mass loading of 4.09 mg cm−2 (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrations of 3D porous CFs-CNTAs/MnO2 with aligned ion diffusion channels and (b) corresponding SEM image of CFs-CNTAs/MnO2 with a deposition time of 20 min. (c) Specific capacitances of CFs-CNTAs/MnO2, CFs/MnO2 and stainless steel/MnO2 composite electrodes at various scan rates. (d) Specific capacitances as a function of scan rate for the CFs-CNTAs/MnO2 with various mass loading of MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2012, Elsevier Ltd. 
Besides CNTAs, other nanowire arrays have also been successfully fabricated on CMFs. Recently, Bao et al.78 have prepared a hybrid nanoarchitecture by coating MnO2 films (several nanometers thick) onto highly conductive Zn2SnO4 (ZTO) nanowire arrays (102–103 S cm−1). The crystalline ZTO nanowires which were pre-grown radially on CMFs can serve uniquely as highly conductive cores and support the redox-active MnO2. Thus, this hybrid structure enables full utilization of MnO2 and facilitates fast electronic and ionic transport through the electrode, accordingly showing an excellent electrochemical performance. The results indicate that the maximum specific capacitance of MnO2/ZTO/CMF hybrid composites is 621.6 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, which is much larger than that of MnO2/CMF composites (only 46.6 F g−1). In addition, their specific energy and power densities can reach 36.8 W h kg−1 and 32 kW kg−1 at a current density of 40 A g−1, respectively. Moreover, this type of MnO2/ZTO/CMF hybrid structure also shows an excellent long-term cycling stability, only 1.2% loss of its initial specific capacitance after 1000 cycles.
Similarly, TMO or nitride nanowire arrays such as TiO2,57 ZnO,79 WO3,80,81 WO3−x (ref. 82) and TiN83 have also been widely employed as a secondary current collectors and electrodes for flexible ECs. It was found that the higher conductivities of the nanowire can provide better electron transfer in the nanowire arrays, accordingly leading to further enhancement of the electrochemical performances. For example, Tong et al.84 have studied the electrochemical performances of all-solid-state flexible asymmetric ECs with hydrogen-treated TiO2 (H-TiO2) as the secondary electrode. The schematic diagrams of the growth processes for H-TiO2@MnO2 and H-TiO2@C on carbon cloth substrates are shown in Fig. 6a. The MnO2 layer was coated conformably the on H-TiO2 nanowires' surface. Fig. 6b is the corresponding TEM image and the insets are the magnified TEM image and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. Fig. 6c indicates that the H-TiO2@MnO2 electrodes show an enhanced conductivity, and yield a higher specific capacitance of 449.6 F g−1 than those of MnO2 electrodes (325.8 F g−1) or TiO2@MnO2 electrodes (359.7 F g−1) at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Furthermore, the flexible asymmetric ECs with H-TiO2@MnO2 and H-TiO2@C electrodes show a high specific capacitance of 139.6 F g−1, and the maximum energy density can reach 59 W h kg−1 with a power density as high as 45 kW kg−1. These excellent performances can be attributed to the enhanced conductivity from the branching structures. These structures can provide a large interfacial area between the electrodes and electrolytes for charge transport, and a shortened diffusion path for intercalation/de-intercalation of the active species. Further motivated by this idea, an hydrogenated ZnO core–shell structure has also been designed for high-performance flexible ECs.85
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the growth processes for H-TiO2@MnO2 and H-TiO2@C core–shell NWs on a carbon cloth substrate. (b) TEM image of H-TiO2@MnO2 NW and insets are the magnified TEM image and SAED pattern of the H-TiO2@MnO2 NW. (c) Specific capacitances of MnO2, TiO2@MnO2, H-TiO2@MnO2 electrodes calculated from CV curves as a function of scan rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Additionally, other kinds of nanoporous structures such as nanowalls (e.g. CoAl48) and nanoparticles49 have also been fabricated on CMF networks as secondary current collectors and electrodes for flexible ECs. The results indicate that these types of composite electrodes can also allow fast electron transport, a large active surface area for the deposition of electroactive materials, and full accessibility for the electrolyte into the electrodes, which ensure the excellent electrochemical performances of the ECs. Therefore, based on the results and analysis above, it is an effective strategy towards high energy and power density for flexible ECs to build nanoporous conductive architectures (such as nanowire/tube arrays, nanoparticles, nanowalls, etc.) on carbon cloths, papers and even on CNF textiles as secondary current collectors and electrodes.
3 CNTs and graphene based electrodes for flexible ECs
Among various carbon materials, CNTs and graphene are the two of the most intensively explored carbon allotropes in materials science, and also been evaluated as the electrode materials with most potential in flexible ECs due to their exceptional characteristics including high electrical conductivities (104 S cm−1) superior mechanical properties (elastic moduli in the order of 1 TPa), good electrochemical stabilities, and large SSAs. Currently, electrodes based on these two well-known carbon allotropes have become a hot topic for high-performance flexible ECs. In this section, we will focus on three aspects of the use of CNTs and graphene: substrate supported CNT–graphene coatings; freestanding CNT–graphene papers; and freestanding 3D flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures.
3.1 Substrate supported CNT–graphene coatings for electrodes
To realize large scale and low-cost production of flexible ECs, there is an urgent need for the exploration of simple and controllable fabrication processes for flexible electrodes. Recently, the solution-based coating method has attracted much attention due to its simple and fast fabrication process. This method shows two incomparable advantages: (1) any flexible substrates are suitable, such as common papers, sponges, and textiles; (2) a uniform and stable coating of CNT–graphene can be easily obtained. Thus, these imply that solution-based coating of CNTs–graphene materials would greatly promote the development of flexible ECs toward large scale, low-cost productions.
Among those flexible substrates, common office paper is one of the most low-cost substrates. Based on this point, office papers have the potential to be employed in various applications including energy storage systems, especially for flexible ECs. Generally, those papers are flexible but nonconductive. In order to enhance their conductivities, CNTs and graphene have been used as conductive additions to office paper by dip-coating or brush coating methods. In view of this idea, Woong Kim's group has fabricated a type of all-solid-state flexible EC.86–88 Moreover, they further explored bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) papers as a substrate.89 The BNC papers have a high mechanical strength, large SSA and good chemical stabilities due to their high purity, good crystallinity, and nano-sized composition (cellulose fibers, 20–100 nm). After a CNT layer was deposited onto the BNC paper via a vacuum filtering process, the resulting papers were greatly flexible with a thickness of ∼10 μm. As expected, the assembled all-solid-state flexible ECs using those treated papers show excellent electrochemical performances. Their specific capacitances are 46.9 F g−1 and 42 F g−1 at scan rates of 100 and 500 mV s−1, respectively. Moreover, this kind of flexible EC also shows excellent retention, less than 0.5% loss of capacitance over 5000 cycles of charge–discharge at a high current density of 10 A g−1.
Compared to planar flexible structures, sponge- and textile-based flexible structures coated with CNTs, have shown greater advantages in electrochemical performance due to their large SSA and porous structures.90,91 Cui's group has applied porous sponges as substrates for CNT coatings as shown in Fig. 7.92 The sponges have a hierarchical macroporous structure and show good accessibility and compatibility with aqueous solutions (Fig. 7a). Thus, CNTs can be uniformly coated on the sponges by a dipping process. After MnO2 deposition, the structure of the composites still remains highly porous (Fig. 7b), which will ensure the assembled flexible ECs’ high electrochemical performance. The specific capacitance of MnO2/CNT/sponge electrodes (MnO2 deposition time of 5 min) is 1230 F g−1 which is almost 8 times higher than that of MnO2–Pt based flexible ECs (Fig. 7c). Moreover, the MnO2–CNT-sponge ECs show a high cycling stability, only 4% loss of the initial capacitance after 10000 cycles (Fig. 7d). However, the applications of CNTs in the coated electrodes of flexible ECs are greatly limited by their relatively high preparation cost resulting from the CVD. On the other hand, hydrophilic treatment of CNTs for the preparation of homogeneous CNT suspensions is inevitable during the coating process. This additional treatment will accordingly hinder their applications in flexible ECs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication process of MnO2–CNT–sponge supercapacitors. (b) SEM image of porous MnO2 on CNT–sponge, inset shows a TEM image of MnO2 with highly porous structure. (c) Cyclic voltammogram of MnO2 on Pt vs. MnO2 on CNT–sponge at 50 mV s−1 after 5 min deposition of MnO2. (d) Capacity retention vs. cycle number for CNT–sponge device up to 100000 cycles at a high scan rate of 10 V s−1 and 40 min MnO2–CNT–sponge supercapacitors under 10000 cycles at a specific current of 5 A g−1, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, graphene materials have emerged as a unique class of carbon materials with substantial potential in the energy conversion and storage fields due to their rather low-cost and high-output fabrication process via a solution based exfoliation technique. Up till now, graphene and its derivatives have been demonstrated to be the most suitable and versatile materials for flexible ECs. Yan et al.93 have fabricated GNS/carbon cloths for flexible ECs by a simple brush-coating technique. The resultant ECs showed the specific capacitance of 81.7 F g−1 in a two electrode system using an aqueous electrolyte. This value is the highest one that has been reported for GNS-based ECs. In order to enhance the flexibilities of the prepared graphene-based ECs, Cheng et al.94 have developed a type of graphene–cellulose composite paper as electrode for ECs by filtering a GNS suspension using filter papers. It was found that the assembled flexible ECs show an excellent capacitor behavior, even at a high scan rate of 200 mV s−1. In addition the ECs show high flexibilities, maintaining good electrochemical properties throughout bending tests.
To improve further the electrochemical performances of poorly conductive pseudocapacitive materials such as MnO2, a more conductive coating layer was frequently introduced into the as-prepared electrodes. Generally, this treatment can bring in some strong advantages: (1) increase the conductivities of the whole electrodes, and further enhance their electrochemical performances; (2) boost the mechanical properties for flexible applications; (3) bond pseudocapacitive materials firmly to the substrates.95,96 For instance, Yu and co-workers96 developed a graphene/MnO2 (GM) nanostructure coated with CNTs or CRP by a “conductive wrapping” method, as shown schematically in Fig. 8a and b. Fig. 8c and d present typical SEM images of single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) interconnected with graphene/MnO2 (GMC) and graphene/MnO2/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (GMP) composites, respectively. From the comparison of CV curves for GM, GMC and GMP (Fig. 8e), the specific capacitance of GMP reaches 380 F g−1, which is 45% higher than that of the electrode without wrapping GM. Here, it is important to point out that this hybrid GMP-based textile electrode exhibits a significantly enhanced capacitive performance, as shown in the summary plot of specific capacitance versus current density (Fig. 8f). On the basis of the intriguing features above, the flexible porous structures coated with one or more CNTs or graphene layers, would achieve a great improvement for flexible ECs, and also show a great potential for low-cost and high-performance flexible energy storage applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration showing conductive wrapping of graphene/MnO2 (GM) to introduce an additional electron transport path. (b) The schematic of wrapping of graphene/MnO2 with CNTs (GMC) and conducting polymers (GMP). (c) The corresponding SEM images of GMC and GMP. (c) Comparison of CVs for GM-(black), GMC-(red), GMP-(blue) based electrodes at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (d) Summary plots of specific capacitance values for these three electrodes at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Freestanding CNT–graphene papers for electrodes
In most cases, the electroactive materials are powdery, therefore requiring additional binders and substrates to fabricate electrodes for conventional ECs. However, the introduction of binders and substrates usually results in poor flexibility of the electrodes, much waste of weight and space in devices, and even low energy and power densities. Therefore, it is necessary to develop binder-free and substrate-free electrodes for the flexible ECs. Recently, CNTs and graphene have been two common materials used to fabricate freestanding and conductive paper-like electrodes. In this section, the freestanding and flexible electrodes based on CNT, graphene, and CNT–graphene papers (or films) are reviewed.
3.2.1 CNT papers. Besides the painting method,97,98 CNT papers have been mostly fabricated by filtrating the functionalized CNTs grown from CVD. The obtained CNT papers can be used directly as freestanding and flexible electrodes. However, these CNT papers consist of pure CNTs and their bundles, usually possess a low SSA. Thus, the assembled ECs by those papers inevitably suffer low specific capacitances and energy densities.In order to improve the SSA of CNT papers, AC powders,99 and granulated CNTs100 were incorporated into the flexible CNT papers. For example, Qian et al.100 etched the pristine double-walled CNTs/triple-walled CNTs composites under a CO2 atmosphere at 200–900 °C, and then incorporated them into CNT paper to enlarge the SSA and package densities. After incorporation, the SSA of the CNT papers increases from 670 to 871 m2 g−1, the absolute volume of the pores (1.7–300 nm) within the samples from 1.43 to 1.66 ml g−1, and the average pore size from 8.72 to 9.12 nm. The specific capacitance reaches its maximum value of 267.6 F g−1 for the electrodes with a CNT loading of 5 wt%. These results indicate that the etched tubes still have sufficient channels, allowing the quick transport of electrolyte ions.
On the other hand, to enhance further the electrochemical performances of the ECs, electroactive materials such as TMOs101–104 and CRPs105–108 have also been incorporated into CNT papers. More recently, it was reported that TMO nanostructures (such as MnO2 nanowires101 and MnOx nanoparticles102) were deposited on CNT papers by electrodeposition. In this case, the conductivities of the nanosized manganese oxides were improved by the entangled CNTs. Zhou et al. reported a CNT-paper based asymmetric EC using MnO2 nanowire/SWCNT and In2O3 nanowire/SWCNT hybrid electrodes as the positive and negative electrodes,103 respectively. This hybrid nanostructured asymmetric EC exhibits a much higher energy density (25.5 W h kg−1) and power density (50.3 kW kg−1) than those of the SWCNT based symmetric ECs. Moreover, this assembled EC has successfully lit up a green LED after being charged. Apart from TMOs, CRPs (especially PANI) are another kind of electroactive materials with excellent mechanical and electrochemical properties, and the CNT/PANI based ECs have been reported.105–108 Chen et al.105 deposited PANI on the filtrated SWCNT films using electrochemical polymerization, the resulting electrode and the assembled EC exhibit high flexibility and transparency, and a specific capacitance of 55.0 F g−1 was achieved at a current density of 2.6 A g−1. Zhou et al.108 also fabricated CNT/PANI based symmetric EC, and obtained a high energy density of 131 W h kg−1 and a power density of 62.5 kW kg−1.
To offset the poor conductivity and intrinsic rigidity of TMOs, some TMOs with high aspect ratio and flexibility, such as V2O5 nanowires109–112 and CuO nanobelts (NBs),113 have been prepared and directly mixed with CNTs to fabricate binder-free papers, accordingly enhancing the flexibilities and electrochemical performances of flexible ECs. Lu et al.109–111 have explored V2O5/CNT composites with interpenetrating V2O5/CNT networks. As shown in Fig. 9, the interpenetrating structure leads to the formation of interconnected pore channels which are filled by the electrolyte, thus ensuring facile ion transport and providing access of the electrolyte to the redox-active material.111 The surface-area normalized specific capacitance for V2O5 in the composites was calculated to be approximately 380 μF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1, which is substantially higher than that of the pure V2O5 electrode (205 μF cm−2). Furthermore, the Ragone plots demonstrate that the sodium-ion asymmetric EC in an organic electrolyte exhibits excellent energy and power densities, which can be comparable to those of lithium-ion devices. In addition to V2O5, CuO NBs113 have also been employed in CuO-NB/CNT composite electrodes by mixing the CuO NBs with CNTs and then coating the mixture on Cu foils. Their maximum specific capacitance of 150 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 was obtained, with only 10% loss of the specific capacitance after 1000 charge–discharge, which is lower than 41% for pure CuO electrodes and 18% for CuO/carbon black (CB) electrodes. It is worth noting that the development of other TMOs with flexible nanostructures such as nanowires, nanoribbons or nanosheets could also be required for the flexible ECs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a nanocomposite consisting of interpenetrating networks of V2O5 nanowires and CNTs, intimate contacts between the V2O5 nanowires and CNTs facilitating charge transport, and Na+ intercalation within the V2O5 layer structure. (b) SEM image of a V2O5/CNTs nanocomposite demonstrating V2O5 nanowire networks penetrating within the CNTs; the inset presents a digital photograph of such a flexible nanocomposite film. (c) Surface-area normalized capacitance for V2O5/CNTs and pure V2O5 at different sweep rates. (d) Ragone plots of Na-ion and Li-ion asymmetric supercapacitors made from a V2O5/CNTs nanocomposite anode and an AC cathode, a symmetric supercapacitor made from the same AC, and various supercapacitor devices recently developed. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 

3.2.2 Graphene papers. Similar to CNT papers, the filtrated graphene papers can also be used directly as freestanding and flexible EC electrodes.114,115 Moreover, graphene papers have attracted more attention in the research of flexible electrodes116–122 due to their facile fabrication, low cost, large-scale production, and superior flexibility compared to CNT papers. Generally, the filtrated graphene papers are composed of GNS. However, during the filtration of graphene papers, the GNS are seriously agglomerated and re-stacked due to their interplanar π–π interaction and the van der Waals' forces between them. This agglomeration and re-stacking of GNS will inevitably result in a low SSA and a limited diffusion of the electrolyte ions in graphene paper, and accordingly affect their electrochemical performances. Therefore, in order to solve these problems, porous graphene papers have been fabricated by introducing pores123–128 or spacers129–132 into them to increase SSA and promote transport efficiencies of the electrolyte ions.
Introducing pores or spacers. Su et al. have prepared a macroporous ‘bubble’ graphene film using a template-directed assembly method,123 as shown in Fig. 10. Firstly, the graphene oxide (GO) hydrosol was mixed with a monodisperse polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) spheres suspension. Subsequently, GO/PMMA composites were fabricated by vacuum filtration. After being calcinated at 800 °C, the composites turned into MGF with 3D macroporous bubbles. The as-prepared MGF exhibits a SSA of 128.2 m2 g−1. In addition, the CV profiles of MGF continue to approach a rectangular shape with scan rates increasing from 3 to 1000 mV s−1, while that of the compacted graphene film (CGF) is very narrow. Furthermore, the capacitance has high rate retention (67.9%) at 1000 mV s−1. These superior performances can be predicatively attributed to the 3D macroporous structures in the MGF electrode. Similarly, Huh et al. have fabricated interconnected embossed macroporous graphene films (e-MGF) using polystyrene spheres as template, and subsequently deposited a layer of MnO2 to construct MnO2/e-CMF composite electrodes.124 In those electrodes, the formed micron-scaled pores are well interconnected, and can facilitate efficient ionic diffusion. An assembled asymmetric EC (MnO2/e-MGF//e-MGF) shows a maximum energy density of 44 W h kg−1 (with a power density of 11.2 kW kg−1) and a power density of 25 kW kg−1 (with energy density of 39.1 W h kg−1), which are much higher than those of CGF based asymmetric EC (MnO2/CGF//CGF, with a maximum energy density of ∼3 W h kg−1 and a power density of ∼1 kW kg−1). However, due to the macro-scale pores in the films, this type of electrode shows poor flexibility.
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of MGF. (b) Digital image and (c) TEM image of as-prepared MGF. (d) CV curves of MGF and CGF at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (e) The rate retention of MGF and CGF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Alternatively, inspired by the hierarchical materials found in nature, non-template methods based on bio-inspired effects have been developed to prepare porous graphene papers.125–127 Taking Chen et al.'s work as an example,126 the freestanding GO films were first fabricated by vacuum filtration, then were put into an autoclave to react with the additive hydrazine monohydrate. After being heated at 90 °C for 10 h, flexible reduced GO (rGO) foams were finally obtained. The obtained graphene foams are composed of open porous networks with pore sizes ranging from sub-micrometer to several micrometers. The specific capacitance of the resulting rGO foam based symmetric EC is about 110 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, which is much larger than that of EC using compacted rGO films (17 F g−1) as electrodes. This large improvement should be attributed to the porous structure formed during the heating procedure. In addition, the flexible graphene papers with folded structures were also reported using a frozen and mechanical press technique,128 and the obtained graphene papers show much higher performances compared to graphene papers fabricated by flow-directed assembly method.
Apart from creating pores, another strategy is to introduce nanostructured materials into GNSs to serve as spacers, such as CB,129 CNFs,130 and CNTs.131,132 These additions can prevent the agglomeration of GNSs, enlarge the SSA, and facilitate electrolyte diffusion. Lian et al. reported flexible pillared graphene paper electrodes using CB nanoparticles as the additive. The GNSs maintains a flat morphology, while randomly crumpled structures and CB nanoparticles were dispersed on their surface, effectively preventing self-stacking of GNSs, and accordingly enlarging SSA after filtration.129 This structure can greatly promote the diffusion efficiencies of electrolyte ions. The specific capacitance of these pillared graphene paper electrodes is 138 and 83.2 F g−1 (at 10 mV s−1) in aqueous and organic electrolytes at room temperature, respectively. In addition, the EC also shows a good stability with only 3.85% and 4.35% loss of the specific capacitance after 2000 cycles, respectively. At the extremely high scan rate of 500 mV s−1 in the aqueous electrolyte, the capacitance is almost 7–8 times larger than that of the original graphene paper, showing an only 8% capacitance drop with the increasing scan rates. Furthermore, Shao et al.130 selected cellulose nanofiber as a nano-spacer in rGO to obtain a flexible hybrid aerogel, Feng et al.131 fabricated free-standing graphene–CNT composite films via acetylene-assisted thermolysis of organocobalt functionalized GNSs, and Dou et al.132 prepared a flexible GNS/multi-walled CNT (MWCNT) composite film with MWCNTs uniformly sandwiched between GNS. In those electrodes, the CNFs and CNTs can not only serve as the spacers and the conducting bridge, but also reinforce the flexibility and electrochemical properties of the graphene papers.
Introducing electroactive materials. In order to greatly enhance the capacitance and energy density for graphene paper based flexible ECs, it is necessary to introduce electroactive materials into graphene papers. Usually, the active materials, such as PANI,133,134 polypyrrole (PPy),135 PU,136 Co3O4,137 are directly deposited on the ready-made graphene papers. In this case, the graphene papers only serve as a flexible substrate for current collectors. For example, Yuan et al.137 have prepared the flexible Co3O4/rGO/CNTs papers via a hydrothermal method using rGO/CNTs films as substrate. Although electroactive materials directly loaded on the filtrated graphene papers, to some extent, can improve the electrochemical performance, the compacted Co3O4 and GNS result in a difficulty for electrolyte diffusion, and accordingly lead to mediocre electrochemical performances of the flexible ECs. Simultaneously, the rigid property of dense Co3O4 layers reduces the flexibility of the composite electrodes. So, to abbreviate these problems, another attractive method was proposed, i.e., to incorporate active materials into the space of the GNSs. In these fabricated active-material/graphene composite papers, a synergistic effect arising from both graphene and active materials can be obtained. On one hand, the active materials can act as both capacitive agents and spacers between GNS; on the other hand, the GNS can also serve as an ideal conductive support for growing or assembling very small nanoparticles with well-defined structures.As for CRP additives, flexible graphene/PANI composite films with PANI nanofibers sandwiched between graphene layers have been reported.138,139 More recently, Yu et al.140 have fabricated rGO-hollow PPy (rGO–PPy-h) nanoarchitectures, in which hollow PPy spheres were inserted between rGO layers to form a sandwich composite. Due to the synergistic effects between rGO and PPy-h, the rGO–PPy-h composite exhibits much higher specific capacitance (500.5 F g−1) than those of pure rGO (93.1F g−1) and PPy-h (186.8 F g−1) after 5000 cycle tests at a large charge–discharge current density of 5 A g−1. Moreover, PPy-h and rGO–PPy-h show a gradual increase rather than a decrease of capacitance with cycling, which is attributed to the unique architectures of hollow PPy spheres. Further works should be carried out in future to fabricate flexible electrodes with similar architectures.
Furthermore, TMOs, such as MnO2, V2O5, RuO2, and Mn3O4, have also been reported to be incorporated into GNS as spacers and capacitive materials.141–144 The flexible MnO2 nanoparticles/graphene composite papers and V2O5 nanowires/graphene composite papers have been similarly fabricated by inserting the TMO nanostructures into GNS,141,142 showing promoted electrochemical performances. In order to achieve a further high energy density, asymmetric flexible ECs based on graphene composite papers have been designed.143,144 For example, Duan et al.144 fabricated an asymmetric EC using Mn3O4/graphene (MOG) composite paper as the positive electrode and CNTs/graphene (CNTG) composite paper as the negative electrode, as shown in Fig. 11. The positive and negative electrodes were fabricated by filtrating their corresponding mixted solutions. The SEM results indicate the realization of the incorporation of active materials into GNS. The CV curves indicate that the constructed asymmetric ECs can be cycled reversibly with a cell voltage up to 1.8 V. Moreover, from the Ragone plots, it can be found that the asymmetric EC (CNTG//MOG) possesses an energy density of 32.7 W h kg−1, which is much higher than that of the symmetric ECs (10.5 W h kg−1 for CNTG//CNTG, 7.1 W h kg−1 for MOG//MOG). Furthermore, after two asymmetric ECs were connected in series, a green LED was successfully lit up.
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process for flexible all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitors based on polymer gel electrolytes and free-standing CNTG and MG paper electrodes. (b) and (c) are the cross-section SEM images of CNTG and MG paper electrodes, respectively. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of the assembled cell at different voltages of 1.0 (1), 1.2 (2), 1.4 (3), 1.6 (4), and 1.8 (5) V. (e) Ragone plots of CNTG//MG (1), CNTG//CNTG (2), and MG//MG (3). (f) Photographs of the asymmetric supercapacitor at normal, bending, and twisting states (from top to bottom). (g) A green LED lit by two asymmetric supercapacitors of CNTG//MG connected in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 

3.2.3 Advanced joint graphene and CNT composite papers. Generally, paper-like composite electrodes can be prepared by directly growing electroactive nanostructured materials on CNTs or GNSs. However, when a large mass loading of electroactive materials was employed, these composite structures often show limited electrochemical performance. This mainly results from the dense structure of the electroactive materials and the disruption of carbon–carbon conductive networks by the electroactive materials. On the other hand, the flexibilities of those composite papers/films are also greatly reduced owing to the weak contact between nanostructures within the electrodes. Recently, an advanced joint composite structure has been proposed. In this structure, multiple conductive and mechanical “bridges” are introduced to connect each component within the flexible electrodes. This structure also shows a synergistic effect from CNTs and graphene components in improvement of the flexible EC's performance. Herein, the electroactive-material/CNT/graphene based advanced joint composites are discussed.Liu et al.145 reported a composite film consisting of MnO2 coated graphene and pure CNTs, as shown in Fig. 12. In the electrodes without CNTs, the electrons have to pass through an insulating MnO2 layers coated on graphene; while the introduction of the interconnected CNTs into the composite films can provide a rapid electron transport path for those electrons. The resultant flexible electrodes allow outstanding mechanical properties (tensile strength of 48 MPa), highly active material loading (71 wt% MnO2), areal density (8.80 mg cm−2), and high specific capacitance (372 F g−1) with excellent rate capability. Additionally, to improve further the electrochemical performances and to satisfy practical applications, an asymmetric cell has also been reported in their recent work, in which the negative electrode was replaced by a AC/CNT composite film.146
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabricated flexible and conductive film using graphene/MnO2/CNTs. (b) TEM image of the interconnected structure formed by the graphene/MnO2 composite (red arrows) and CNTs (white arrows), the inserted images highlight their close interaction (top) and the flexibility of the electrode (bottom). (c) Comparison of the specific capacitance of MnO2 measured at increasing scan rates for the flexible film and the graphene/MnO2 electrodes fabricated at similar areal densities around 2 mg cm−2. (d) Schematic illustration of the roll-up process to make a full cell using the flexible film. (e) Digital image of the actual compact full cell, the inset is the cross-sectional image. (f) Specific capacitance (based on both electrodes) at different current densities and the Ragone plot for the fabricated cell (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 145, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the joint structures above, other advanced joint architectures made of active materials coated with CNTs and pure graphene can also exhibit excellent electrochemical performances. Zang et al.147 prepared MnO2 coated CNTs composites by microwave heating, and the prepared composites were subsequently deposited on a flexible graphite sheet by electrophoretic deposition. Lu et al.148 prepared the MnO2 coated CNTs by growing the MnO2 nanoflakes on CNTs through a direct redox reaction between CNTs and KMnO4 solution, and then incorporated them into graphene papers by filtrating their mixed suspension. Moreover, Dou et al.149 have fabricated a composite film made of PPy coated CNTs and GNS. The PPy/CNT composites were synthesized by an in situ polymerization technique, then the PPy/CNT ammonia solution was added into a GNS dispersion under sonication, and finally the mixture was filtrated into a film. More recently, to prevent the shedding of MnO2 during operation, Chen et al.150 have developed a graphene-patched CNT/MnO2 composite paper. Using an electrochemical galvanostatic deposition processes, the MnO2 was coated on the filtrated CNT paper, followed by soaking the CNTs/MnO2 composite paper onto the reduced graphene solution. In those composites made up of active-material coated CNTs and pure graphene, the CNTs act as the conducting channels and the mechanical backbone, while the graphene serve as the electron collector, accordingly promoting the flexibility of the composites. Additionally, although some advanced joint composites have not yet been fabricated into papers, here it is necessary to point them out because of their attractive design and promising applications in high-performance flexible ECs. For instance, Alshareef et al.151,152 have produced composites made of SnO2 or MnO2 coated CNTs, and pure GNS, and then coated them on carbon fabric for flexible EC applications.
The published work above suggests that the advanced joint structures can usually provide a better overall performance than that of simple graphene and CNTs based composites. Those improved performance should be attributed to the rational design of advanced joint structures by using fully each component in the composites. So, it is believed that these kinds of composite electrodes will be widely used in energy storage and conversion devices, especially flexible energy source devices.

3.3 Freestanding 3D flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures for electrodes
During recent years, 2D self-supporting macroscopic papers (or films) assembled by carbon nanomaterials have attracted tremendous interest in this hot research field. More recently, to improve further the performance of the flexible ECs, more-and-more researchers have been aware of the importance of a new type of freestanding carbon-based 3D macroscopic architectures such as aerogels, foams, frameworks and sponges. These freestanding 3D macrostructures, consisting of micro-, meso- and even macroporous networks, can provide high SSA, light weight, and fast ion/electron transport due to the combination of 3D porous hierarchical structures with excellent intrinsic properties of carbon materials. The introduced 3D flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures into ECs can also serve as flexible electrodes as well as the current collectors, which is quite different from the 3D carbon powder nanostructures described in the above sections.153 In view of these unique characteristics, the recent progress on CNT/graphene 3D macroscopic architectures has been frequently reviewed.33,34 Here, giving particular consideration to their conductive and mechanical properties, we will mainly focus on freestanding 3D flexible macroscopic architectures based on CNTs, graphene and both of them for applications or potential applications in the flexible ECs.
3.3.1 CNTs-based freestanding 3D macroscopic architectures. CNT-based 3D macroscopic architectures have been widely fabricated in various forms, such as solution-processed aerogels, vertically aligned CNTAs, and CNT sponges, in which the alignment, density, and porosity of CNTs can be tailored.33 Among those forms, solution-processed aerogels can be easily obtained by the gelation of CNTs in suspension with the aid of gelators or cross-linkers. However, the applications of these CNTs-based freestanding aerogels for flexible ECs are still in their infancy because of their main deficiencies in their conductivities and mechanical strength resulting from the weak conjunctions between CNTs or their bundles. As for ultra-long vertical CNTAs produced by CVD, they usually exhibit a high conductivity, high porosity and super-compressibility. However, it is still challenging to apply the thick CNT films to the flexible ECs without supporters owing to their rather poor flexibilities in the lateral direction.154–156 Recently, CNT sponges have also been frequently studied and fabricated using a CVD method with 1,2-dicyclobenzene as the carbon source and ferrocene as the catalyst precursor. The prepared CNT sponges usually are a monolithic bulk of randomly (e.g. non-aligned) interconnected CNTs.157–159 Interestingly, Wu et al. have realized the control of the bulk densities of the resulting sponges (from 5.8 to 25.5 mg cm−3) by varying the injection rate of the carbon source.157 This type of CNT sponges can not only present a high SSA (300 to 400 m2 g−1) and a high porosity (>99%), but also exhibit a structural flexibility, which can be rarely observed from other high-porosity materials such as aerogels and aligned CNTAs. Moreover, the results indicate that those CNT sponges show high absorption capacities for a wide range of solvents and oils, i.e., they can absorb or remove different types of oil from water biphasic systems for environmental applications. This feature means that this type of CNT sponge will have wide environmental applications. Furthermore, in more recent works, it is shown that CNT sponges can be also used as excellent flexible electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.160,161 Up to now, although few studies on flexible ECs have been reported, it is believed that this kind of CNT sponge materials will have great potential applications for flexible ECs.
3.3.2 Graphene-based freestanding 3D macroscopic architectures. 3D graphene macroscopic architectures have also attracted intensive attention because of their distinct advantages including higher yields, easier functionalization, and more tunable properties compared to those of CNTs.32–34 In most cases, these graphene macroscopic architectures were fabricated by chemically modified graphene (CMG)162 (including GO and rGO) through self-assembled or templated assembly methods.34 Many results indicate that those graphene architectures possess a well-defined 3D porous structure and a remarkably high SSA, which would allow them to be used as the electrode materials for high-performance ECs. However, the resulting ECs show poor conductivities and mechanical properties due to both the defects within CMG and the weak contact between CMGs, accordingly reducing their EC performances.More recently, some improvements to their conductivities and mechanical properties have been conducted by strengthening interactions between CMGs, such as carbon sp2 cross-linking,163 the reduction of GO with L-ascorbic acid,164 functionalization–lyophilization–microwave treatments,165 and edge-to-edge assembly.166 For instance, Zhang et al. prepared a robust and chemically active GO aerogel by assembling 2D GO sheets edge-to-edge into uniform 3D hydrogel networks, followed by supercritical fluid drying treatments.166 This design is different from the other reported self-assembly of graphene aerogels (GAs) based on partially overlapping graphene basal planes.34 In this design, both La3+ and protonated amino groups have a strong electrostatic interaction with carboxyl groups at the edge of GO sheets, which guarantees the connection of the edges of one GO sheet to another to form a type of uniform hydrogel network. The resulting chemically cross-linked 3D GO aerogels exhibit a large SSA (up to 850 m2 g−1), outstanding mechanical performances (Young's modulus: up to 20 MPa, yield strength: 1 MPa, and specific energy adsorption: 45 J g−1), and superhigh chemical activities (toward some reducing gases such as H2S, HI, and SO2), suggesting that these aerogels are superior to other previously reported 3D frameworks (e.g. GAs). Up till now, although some of them have not yet been applied to flexible ECs, this design will become a main strategy to improve the electronic conductivities and mechanical properties of 3D graphene macroscopic architectures for their further application in flexible ECs.
Besides, doped CMGs167–169 or/and compacted structures produced by physical pressing of CMGs128 have provided another strategy for the preparation of flexible and conductive 3D graphene architectures as electrode materials. For example, Feng et al.169 reported a simplified device prototype of high-performance flexible all-solid-state ECs based on 3D nitrogen and boron co-doped monolithic GAs, in which the as-prepared GAs show 3D interconnected frameworks with a SSA of up to 249.0 m2 g−1 and a macroporous architecture. It is found that this designed structure is favorable for ion diffusion and electron transport in bulk electrodes. Moreover, the synergistic effects of B and N co-doping in the carbon networks can also facilitate electron transfer between neighboring carbon atoms, and thus doubly enhance their electrochemical performances. As a consequence, the resulting flexible ECs can not only possess a minimized device thickness, but also show a higher specific capacitance (∼62 F g−1), better rate capability, and enhanced energy density (∼8.65 W h kg−1) or power density (∼1600 W kg−1) compared to undoped (5.9 W h kg−1), nitrogen doped (7.2 W h kg−1), boron doped (7.7 W h kg−1) GAs, and layer-structured graphene paper (4.1 W h kg−1).
Although CMGs can be readily produced in large quantities with no need for specific equipment, their applications have met limitations due to relatively poor conductivity in some cases. Recently, the synthesis of 3D graphene networks using Ni foams with template-directed CVD were developed.170,171 So far, CVD is one of the most frequently used methods to produce graphene with high conductivity comparable to that of pristine graphene. The good quality of the CVD-grown graphene can facilitate a fast electron transport between the active materials and current collectors in the devices. The resulting 3D graphene monolithic structures often show a very high conductivity and a mechanical robustness, which is mainly attributed to the nature of the prepared graphene materials and the seamless 3D network in the graphene monolith. Moreover, the excellent electrical conductivity of the 3D graphene architectures obtained by CVD also makes them suitable as electrodes for different applications, such as direct methanol fuel cells,172 microbial fuel cells,173 and ECs,174–178 even lithium-ion batteries.179,180 More recently, in order to fabricate ultralight and ultrathin flexible ECs, we employed pressed Ni foam as a 3D sacrificial template for the CVD growth of freestanding flexible 3D graphene networks, subsequently loaded with MnO2 by electrodeposition as the electrodes of the flexible ECs.178 The resultant lightweight (0.75 mg cm−2) and ultrathin (<200 μm) 3D graphene structures show a very high conductivity (55 S cm−1), excellent flexibility, and a large SSA of 392 m2 g−1 (Fig. 13a and b). It was also found that the 3D graphene networks can become an ideal support for active materials, realizing a large MnO2 mass loading of 9.8 mg cm−2 (∼92.9% of the mass of the entire electrodes). Accordingly, the assembled ECs show a high area capacitance of 1.42 F cm−2 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, and their maximum specific capacitance can reach 130 F g−1 (calculated for the entire electrode). In addition, the assembled symmetrical ECs (of weight less than 10 mg and thickness ∼0.8 mm) show remarkable flexibilities and excellent electrochemical performances, as shown in Fig. 13c and d. Thus, in the view of the simple and low-cost assembly, it can be forecast that this type of flexible and lightweight EC will be widely used in the future, in applications such as energy supply systems for small flying devices, adhesive tape-like ECs, wearable ECs, and so on.
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of 3D graphene networks after removal of Ni foam. Inset shows high-magnification SEM image. (b) Electrical-resistance variation of 3D graphene networks vs. the different bending angles. Inset shows the digital photographs of different bending shapes. (c) Schematic of the structure of our flexible supercapacitors consisting of two symmetrical graphene/MnO2 composite electrodes, a polymer separator and two PET membranes. The two digital photographs show the flexible supercapacitors when bended; (d) CVs of the flexible supercapacitors at different scan rates. Inset shows the CVs of the flexible supercapacitors with bending angles of 0° and 90° at a fixed scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
To avoid the re-stacking of GNSs, a simple all-solid-state approach has been also applied for the preparation of flexible 3D graphene open networks.181,182 In recent work, Kaner et al.181 presented a strategy for the production of 3D graphene-based ECs through a simple “LightScribe” pattern technology to avoid the re-stacking of GNSs, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 14a–d. First, a thin film of graphite oxide dispersed in the water was drop-cast onto a flexible substrate, then irradiated with an infrared laser inside an inexpensive commercially available LightScribe CD/DVD optical drive. After the color of the films changed from golden brown to black, this indicates that the graphite oxide has been reduced to laser-scribed graphene (LSG). Analysis of cross sections of the film with scanning electron microscopy showed that the initially stacked graphite oxide sheets were converted into well-exfoliated LSG sheets through laser irradiation (Fig. 14e). The resulting LSG 3D architectures, were mechanically robust with only a ∼1% change in the electrical resistance of the film after 1000 bending cycles, showed high electrical conductivity (1738 S m−1) and SSA (1520 m2 g−1), and thus can be used directly as EC electrodes without the need for binders or current collectors (Fig. 14f). Moreover, it was found that bending of the LSG based EC (LSG-EC) had almost no influence on its performance indicating the excellent flexible properties of the device (Fig. 14g). The LSG-EC can exhibit energy densities of up to 1.36 mW h cm−3, which is approximately twice that of the AC-EC. Additionally, the LSG-EC can deliver a power density of ∼20 W cm−3, which is 20 times higher than that of the AC-EC and three-orders of magnitude higher than that of the 500 mA h thin-film lithium battery, as shown in Fig. 14h.
 Fig. 14  (a–d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. (e) The GO film changes from a golden-brown color to black as it reduced to laser-scribed graphene. The low-power infrared laser changes the stacked GO sheets immediately into well-exfoliated few-layered LSG film, as shown in the cross-sectional SEM images. (f) A symmetric EC is constructed from two identical LSG electrodes, ion-porous separator, and electrolyte. (g) Bending the device has almost no effect on its performance, as seen in these CVs collected at a scan rate of 1000 mV s−1. Inset shows a digital photograph showing the flexibility of the device. (h) Energy and power densities of LSG-ECs compared with commercially available AC-EC, aluminum electrolytic capacitors, and a lithium thin-film battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright 2012, AAAS. 

3.3.3 CNT/graphene hybrid freestanding 3D macroscopic architectures. Besides either CNTs or graphene as separate freestanding 3D macroscopic architectures, the combination of CNTs and graphene also shows great potential in high-performance flexible ECs because of the synergic effect of the 2D graphene sheets and 1D CNTs.33,183 In a new work, Gao et al.184 developed a template-free, synergistic assembly strategy for the scalable fabrication of ultralight robust aerogels by freeze-drying aqueous solutions of CNTs and giant GO sheets, followed with further chemical reduction of the giant GO sheets into graphene with hydrazine vapor. These all-carbon aerogels with a monolith 3D framework are constructed with giant GNSs and CNTs ribs. In this design, it was proposed that the the giant size of the constituent GNSs can make giant graphene flakes and build an ultralight and macroporous framework. Moreover, CNT coatings can also reinforce the elasticities and conductivities of the co-organized aerogels due to the cooperative effect between graphene and CNTs. As a result, the as-prepared aerogels exhibit excellent properties, such as outstanding temperature-invariant elasticity, high SSA (272 m2 g−1), ultralow density (ρ ≥ 0.16 mg cm−3), good electrical conductivity (0.6 S cm−1), excellent thermal stability, and extremely high absorption capacities for organic liquids and phase-change materials.Another straightforward approach to synergistically integrate CNTs with graphene is to grow a CNTs forest or array on 3D graphene architecture directly.185,186 Chen et al. have developed 3D graphene–CNT hybrid foams by two-step CVD under atmospheric pressure. In the hybrid structure, the CNT forest was directly grown on the as-prepared graphene on an Ni foam.185 After removal of the original Ni foam, the resulting freestanding graphene–CNTs hybrids exhibit excellent electrochemical performance for sensing applications. Moreover, the good connection between graphene and CNTs promise a robust mechanical electrode. Thus, it is suggested that the above flexible 3D graphene–CNTs macroscopic architectures will provide a design-rich strategy for high-performance electrodes of the flexible ECs.
Additionally, besides CNTs- and/or graphene-based 3D flexible macroscopic architectures, anodic aluminum oxide templates have also been used to prepare 3D flexible carbon macroscopic architectures. Jung et al. have demonstrated the design and fabrication of flexible and transparent ECs using a highly nanostructured carbon thin film, which was deposited within the porous templates by CVD.187 These carbon films consist of periodic arrays with interconnected carbon nanocups (CNCs), which have few-layer graphitic structures. The prepared hybrids possess high SSAs, and uniform nanopores, and can be used as flexible and transparent electrodes for ECs. Fig. 15a–c schematically illuminates the fabrication process of a branched CNC based ECs. The resulting CNC films can enable an excellent conformal filling of polymer electrolyte, maximize the active electrochemical surface area, and accordingly lead to high power and energy densities (19 mW cm−3 and 47 mW h cm−3). It is worth mentioning that these CNC based ECs also exhibit a highly mechanical flexibility and optical transparency. For instance, ECs wrapped helically around a glass tube can also show excellent performances during power delivery (Fig. 15d). Inspiringly, a long life cycle stability with loss of 16% of the initial capacitance can be maintained after 10000 cycles even under mechanical stress (45° bending), as shown in Fig. 15e. Here, it is believed that this novel design of mechanically flexible and optically transparent ECs will have many applications in the future.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematics of the fabrication process of a branched CNC based supercapacitor. First the CNC films are transferred to PDMS and released by dissolving the AAO template. Then the gel-electrolyte (as electrolyte-separator) is sandwiched between two CNC electrodes (as electrode-current collector) of 12 mm thickness and this solidifies after evaporation of water. Optical pictures demonstrating the (b) transparent and (c) flexible nature of CNCs supercapacitor devices. (d) The CNC capacitor films (3 cm by 1.5 cm and 3.5 cm by 0.5 cm) helically wrapped around two differently sized glass tubes (1.6 cm and 0.5 cm diameter) show excellent performance during power delivery. (e) Normalized capacitance as a function of cycle-number (10000) and w/wo mechanical deformation (45° bending). Reproduced with permission from ref. 187, Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 

4 Conclusions and outlooks
In this review, we have summarized the recent progresses on carbon materials for flexible ECs, mainly including CMF and CNF networks, CNT and graphene coatings, CNT and/or graphene papers (or films), and freestanding 3D flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures. As a candidate electrode material, these carbon materials are highly conductive and flexible, and they can serve as the electrodes as well as the current collectors in the EC systems. These advantages enable the flexible ECs to be lightweight, thinner, and easier to manufacture than the conventional ECs, and a comparison is listed in Table 1. However, each type of carbon-based electrode materials has advantages and disadvantages for the applications of flexible ECs. For example, CMF-based woven/spun networks and CNTs/graphene-based coatings have the advantages of low-cost and large-scale production of flexible ECs, while they lack the interconnected nanoporous structures and a large SSA for the high-performance flexible electrodes. As for 2D graphene- or CNT-stacked papers, they usually possess a mechanical robustness and high conductivity, but it is suggested to improve their electrolyte–electrode accessibility for flexible ECs. As for 3D graphene- or/and CNT-based macroscopic architectures, their structural interconnectivities provide a well-defined 3D porous structure and a remarkably high SSA, while their low conductivities and poor flexibilities are the main two deficiencies for their real application in flexible ECs. To abbreviate those disadvantages, some efficient methods have been presented, such as building secondary nanoporous structures on CMF networks, introducing 3D substrates, inserting pores or spacers into papers, and strengthening the cross-linking of nanoscale units in 3D macroscopic architectures. Furthermore, a combination of carbon-based architectures with pseudo-capacitive materials (such as TMOs and CRPs) has been designed and can lead to a significantly enhanced capacitance and energy density of flexible ECs due to the synergistic effect of the carbon materials’ infrastructure and the active components.
Table 1 Comparison of the properties, such as synthesis methods, cost, specific surface area (SSA), conductivities and the corresponding developments of different carbon-based electrodes




Carbon electrode
Synthesis methods
Cost
SSA
Conductivity
Developments




CMF networks
Industrial spinning
Low
Low
High
Building secondary nanoporous structures on their surface


CNF networks
Electrospinning/HTC
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Enhancing their mechanical strength and conductivities


CNT or graphene coatings
Dipping/brushing
Ultra-low
Low
Low
Wrapping more conductive layers or coatings on large SSA substrates


CNT or/and graphene papers
Vacuum filtration
Low
Low
Moderate
Introducing pores or spacers into the papers


3D macroscopic graphene or/and CNT architectures
Self-assembled/templated assembly methods
Moderate
High
Low
Strengthening the cross-linking of nanoscale graphene or CNT units


3D macroscopic CNT sponges and graphene foams
CVD catalytic growth/LightScribe patterning technology
High
High
High
Exploring other low-cost methods in the future




Recently, a strong interest has been raised in lightweight, flexible, and wearable electronics to meet the emerging applications such as high-performance sportswear, wearable displays, new classes of portable power supply, embedded health monitoring, and so on. All these electronic applications require lightweight flexible power conversion and storage devices. Thus, they will further stimulate the research and development of high-performance flexible ECs. As for pseudo-capacitive materials, both their robust mechanical properties and structural stability should be considered to improve the performance of the flexible ECs under mechanical deformation and long cycle life. For example, the key limitations of TMOs are their poor conductivities and intrinsic rigidity. Although this poor conductivity can be remedied by attachment to large SSA and conductive carbon substrates, their intrinsic rigidity is still a severe problem, especially when applied to a large mass loading. Thus, the development of flexible TMOs nanostructures such as nanowires, nanoribbons and nanosheets, will be needed. Although CRPs exhibit a great potential for flexible ECs due to their good conductivities and remarkable flexibilities, they usually suffer from the swelling and shrinking of the structures during the charge–discharge processes. Thus, it is an important task for flexible ECs to improve the cycling stability of CRPs.
As for carbon materials, 3D carbon-based macroscopic architectures have become a new hot topic as electrode materials for high-performance ECs. These macroscopic architectures show an interconnected structure, which can not only create porous channels favorable for shortening the diffusion length from the external electrolyte to the interior surface, but also possess conductive skeletons for facilitating the transport of electrons in the bulk electrodes. However, their application in flexible ECs is still in its infancy. The reported work suggests that the main deficiencies of 3D graphene- or/and CNTs-based architectures as the electrode materials for flexible ECs are their low conductivities and poor flexibilities from the weak contact between the graphene or/and CNT nanoscale units. Thus, to strengthen the cross-linking of nanoscale units in 3D architectures will be a great challenge for their applications in flexible ECs. Moreover, 3D carbon-based macroscopic architectures usually possess micro-sized skeletons and pores, also leading to limited efficiencies of mass transport and charge storage due to a lack of nano-sized 3D structures. Thus, a combination of graphene-based 3D macroscopic architectures with secondary 3D nanostructured structures will be a new trend for high-performance flexible ECs. In view of the fabrications and designs of this kind of 3D flexible hierarchical structures, three aspects should be considered: (i) how to join tightly micro-sized and nano-sized 3D structures for repeated bending deformations and fast electron transfer; (ii) how to design nano-sized 3D structures with interconnected nanopores for ion transfer as well as strong mechanical strength for keeping structure during bending operations; and (iii) how to load well-dispersed active materials on the whole nano-sized 3D structures to achieve good pseudocapacitive behavior. These aspects will be rather greater challenges. On the other hand, the synergistic effect and an optimization between multiple components in hybrid electrodes should also be considered in the future design and synthesis of 2D/3D carbon-based electrode materials in order to enhance further the energy density of ECs, as well as the power densities and cycling stabilities.
Finally, as for real practical applications, flexible ECs are expected to complement or replace traditional batteries in certain applications. They have also shown great potential for various flexible electronics as we introduced above. To widen their applications in our modern society, much emphasis will be placed on designing “smart” flexible ECs by integrating some of the factors such as ultralight, ultrathin, transparent, stretchable, and even compression-tolerant properties. For example, lightweight flexible ECs might be applied in small flying devices, transparent flexible ECs for displays, touch-screens and solar cells,187 and compressible ECs with tolerance to harsh conditions such as mechanical concussion and compression.188 On the other hand, due to a rapid development of miniaturized electronic devices, further reducing the size of energy storage device will be another trend, and compact and small-size flexible ECs will be needed. Thus, the reported fibers ECs47,189 and micro-ECs190,191 will attract more-and-more attention in the future. Additionally, the operation safety and “green chemistry” in flexible ECs should also be considered for practical applications.
In conclusion, the state-of-the-art research activities on carbon based flexible ECs have been reviewed comprehensively. The results show that carbon materials play an irreplaceable and principal role in flexible ECs due to their intriguing features such as large SSA, interconnected pore structures, high electrical conductivities, and robust mechanical properties. Among those carbon materials, CNTs and graphene are rising stars for flexible electrode materials and there is still a lot of room for future development in this field. Future work will be expected to demonstrate further flexible ECs as one of the most powerful and highly efficient energy and power storage devices to meet the specific needs of future lightweight, flexible, and wearable electronics.
AcknowledgementsThis work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 61176058 and no. 51202100).
Notes and referenceshttp://www.mpoweruk.com/performance.htm.A. Nathan, A. Ahnood, M. T. Cole, L. Sungsik, Y. Suzuki, P. Hiralal, F. Bonaccorso, T. Hasan, L. Garcia-Gancedo, A. Dyadyusha, S. Haque, P. Andrew, S. Hofmann, J. Moultrie, C. Daping, A. J. Flewitt, A. C. Ferrari, M. J. Kelly, J. Robertson, G. Amaratunga and W. I. Milne, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1486 CrossRef .M. C. LeMieux and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 585 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu and Y. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 163 CrossRef CAS .S. Park, G. Wang, B. Cho, Y. Kim, S. Song, Y. Ji, M.-H. Yoon and T. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 438 CrossRef CAS .http://wordlesstech.com/2011/12/06/philips-fluid-smartphone/.http://www.eteknix.com/samsungs-flexible-oled-technology-delayed/.P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, H. Feng, X. Wu, L. Wang, A. Zhang, T. Xia, H. Dong, X. Li and L. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4889 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhao, B. M. Sanchez, P. J. Dobson and P. S. Grant, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 839 RSC .B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific, Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Plenum, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11 CrossRef CAS .M. Inagaki, H. Konno and O. Tanaike, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7880 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520 RSC .E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937 CrossRef CAS .S. T. Mayer, R. W. Pekala and J. L. Kaschmitter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 446 CrossRef CAS .G. Lota, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1592 CAS .X. Y. Tao, X. B. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. P. Cheng, F. Liu, J. H. Luo, Z. Q. Luo and H. J. Geise, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1425 CrossRef CAS .C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388 CAS .S. Yoon, J. Lee, T. Hyeon and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2507 CrossRef CAS .J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72 RSC .Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107 CrossRef CAS .W. Deng, X. Ji, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1171 RSC .C. D. Lokhande, D. P. Dubal and O.-S. Joo, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 255 CrossRef .G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1 CrossRef CAS .P. C. Chen, G. Z. Shen, Y. Shi, H. T. Chen and C. W. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4403 CrossRef CAS .N. A. Choudhury, S. Sampath and A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55 CAS .X. Yang, F. Zhang, L. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3353 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Sassin, C. N. Chervin, D. R. Rolison and J. W. Long, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1062 CrossRef CAS .A. L. M. Reddy, S. R. Gowda, M. M. Shaijumon and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5045 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3112 RSC .S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794 RSC .C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549 RSC .C. Tan, K. Tan, Y. Ong, A. Mohamed, S. Zein and S. Tan, in Environmental Chemistry for a Sustainable World, ed. E. Lichtfouse, J. Schwarzbauer and D. Robert, Springer, Netherlands,  2012, ch. 1, p. 3 Search PubMed .B. Luo, S. Liu and L. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113 CAS .H.-J. Choi, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534 CrossRef CAS .J. Chen, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1244 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983 RSC .N. G. Sahoo, Y. Pan, L. Li and S. H. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4203 CrossRef CAS .Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23710 RSC .R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1384 RSC .A.-H. Lu, G.-P. Hao, Q. Sun, X.-Q. Zhang and W.-C. Li, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 1107 CrossRef CAS .S. Shi, C. Xu, C. Yang, J. Li, H. Du, B. Li and F. Kang, Particuology, 2013, 11, 371 CrossRef .X. Xiao, T. Li, P. Yang, Y. Gao, H. Jin, W. Ni, W. Zhan, X. Zhang, Y. Cao, J. Zhong, L. Gong, W.-C. Yen, W. Mai, J. Chen, K. Huo, Y.-L. Chueh, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9200 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhao, Z. Lu, M. Shao, D. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1045 RSC .L. Yuan, X.-H. Lu, X. Xiao, T. Zhai, J. Dai, F. Zhang, B. Hu, X. Wang, L. Gong, J. Chen, C. Hu, Y. Tong, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 656 CrossRef CAS .Y.-Y. Horng, Y.-C. Lu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-C. Chen, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4418 CrossRef CAS .K. Wang, P. Zhao, X. Zhou, H. Wu and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16373 RSC .B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005 CrossRef CAS .Y.-C. Chen, Y.-K. Hsu, Y.-G. Lin, Y.-K. Lin, Y.-Y. Horng, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7124 CrossRef CAS .S. Wang, B. Pei, X. Zhao and R. A. W. Dryfe, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 530 CrossRef CAS .C.-T. Hsieh, W.-Y. Chen and Y.-S. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5294 CrossRef CAS .L.-J. Bian, F. Luan, S.-S. Liu and X.-X. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 64, 17 CrossRef CAS .H. Zheng, T. Zhai, M. Yu, S. Xie, C. Liang, W. Zhao, S. C. I. Wang, Z. Zhang and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 225 RSC .K.-H. Ye, Z.-Q. Liu, C.-W. Xu, N. Li, Y.-B. Chen and Y.-Z. Su, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2013, 30, 1 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, C. Gao, J. Wang, B. Lu, W. Chen, J. Song, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Pan and E. Xie, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 244 CrossRef CAS .C. Gao, X. Li, B. Lu, L. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Teng, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Pan and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3475 RSC .X. Li, C. Gao, H. Duan, B. Lu, Y. Wang, L. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Pan and E. Xie, Small, 2013, 9, 2005 CrossRef CAS .B. Lu, Z. Zhang, Z. Bao, X. Li, Y. Liu, C. Zhu, H. Duan, Y. Xie, Y. Wang and E. Xie, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1939 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, C. Gao, H. Duan, B. Lu, X. Pan and E. Xie, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 640 CrossRef CAS .J. Fu, J. Zhang, Y. Peng, J. Zhao, G. Tan, N. J. Mellors, E. Xie and W. Han, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3932 RSC .J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9240 CrossRef CAS .J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 86 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhi, A. Manivannan, F. Meng and N. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 345 CrossRef CAS .X. Yan, Z. Tai, J. Chen and Q. Xue, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 212 RSC .J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16943 RSC .F. Zhang, C. Yuan, J. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zhang and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201203844 .Z. Tai, X. Yan, J. Lang and Q. Xue, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 373 CrossRef CAS .H. W. Liang, L. Wang, P. Y. Chen, H. T. Lin, L. F. Chen, D. He and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4691 CrossRef CAS .H.-S. Qian, S.-H. Yu, L.-B. Luo, J.-Y. Gong, L.-F. Fei and X.-M. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2102 CrossRef CAS .H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan, L. F. Chen, Z. Zhu, W. J. Zhang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5101 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3 DOI:10.1038/srep01470 .H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2664 CrossRef CAS .P. Lv, P. Zhang, Y. Feng, Y. Li and W. Feng, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 515 CrossRef CAS .L. Bao, J. Zang and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1215 CrossRef CAS .Y.-B. He, G.-R. Li, Z.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Su and Y.-X. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1288 CAS .X. Zhang, L. Gong, K. Liu, Y. Cao, X. Xiao, W. Sun, X. Hu, Y. Gao, J. Chen, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5292 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, X. Lu, Y. Shen, J. Han, L. Yuan, L. Gong, Z. Xu, X. Bai, M. Wei, Y. Tong, Y. Gao, J. Chen, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5804 RSC .X. Lu, T. Zhai, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, L. Yuan, B. Hu, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. Tong and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 938 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, S. Xie, Y. Ling, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5376 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, S. Xie, Y. Ling, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 267 CrossRef CAS .P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu, T. Li, H. Jin, P. Liu, J. Zhou, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2617 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Kang, H. Chung and W. Kim, Synth. Met., 2013, 166, 40 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Kang, H. Chung, C.-H. Han and W. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 289501 CrossRef .Y. J. Kang, B. Kim, H. Chung and W. Kim, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2510 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Kang, S.-J. Chun, S.-S. Lee, B.-Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Chung, S.-Y. Lee and W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6400 CrossRef CAS .L. Hu, M. Pasta, F. L. Mantia, L. Cui, S. Jeong, H. D. Deshazer, J. W. Choi, S. M. Han and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 708 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, L. Hu, M. Vosgueritchian, H. Wang, X. Xie, J. R. McDonough, X. Cui, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2905 CrossRef CAS .W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi, L. Hu, X. Xie, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5165 CrossRef CAS .W.-w. Liu, X.-b. Yan, J.-w. Lang, C. Peng and Q.-j. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17245 RSC .Z. Weng, Y. Su, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, J. Du and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 917 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hou, Y. Cheng, T. Hobson and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2727 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, L. Hu, N. Liu, H. Wang, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yang, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4438 CrossRef CAS .Q. Liu, M. H. Nayfeh and S.-T. Yau, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7480 CrossRef CAS .M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872 CrossRef CAS .G. Xu, C. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Huang, M. Zhao, J. Nie, X. Wang and F. Wei, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 870 CrossRef CAS .C. Zheng, W. Qian, C. Cui, Q. Zhang, Y. Jin, M. Zhao, P. Tan and F. Wei, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5167 CrossRef CAS .S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, S.-Y. Chew, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1724 CrossRef CAS .J.-H. Kim, K. H. Lee, L. J. Overzet and G. S. Lee, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2611 CrossRef CAS .P.-C. Chen, G. Shen, Y. Shi, H. Chen and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4403 CrossRef CAS .P.-C. Chen, G. Shen, S. Sukcharoenchoke and C. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043113 CrossRef .J. Ge, G. Cheng and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3084 RSC .C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025 CrossRef CAS .C. Meng, C. Liu and S. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 186 CrossRef CAS .Z. Niu, P. Luan, Q. Shao, H. Dong, J. Li, J. Chen, D. Zhao, L. Cai, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8726 CAS .Z. Chen, Y. Qin, D. Weng, Q. Xiao, Y. Peng, X. Wang, H. Li, F. Wei and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3420 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, J. Wen, Y. Zhang, M. Shen, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 791 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, X. Jia, Q. Xiao, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4319 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Perera, B. Patel, N. Nijem, K. Roodenko, O. Seitz, J. P. Ferraris, Y. J. Chabal and K. J. Balkus, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 936 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Zhu, D. J. Kharistal, W. Zhao, B. S. Lalia, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2013 CrossRef CAS .A. Yu, I. Roes, A. Davies and Z. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 253105 CrossRef .B. G. Choi, J. Hong, W. H. Hong, P. T. Hammond and H. Park, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7205 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856 CrossRef CAS .O. C. Compton, D. A. Dikin, K. W. Putz, L. C. Brinson and S. T. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 892 CrossRef CAS .R. Liao, Z. Tang, T. Lin and B. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2174 CAS .X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8739 CrossRef CAS .C.-M. Chen, Q. Zhang, C.-H. Huang, X.-C. Zhao, B.-S. Zhang, Q.-Q. Kong, M.-Z. Wang, Y.-G. Yang, R. Cai and D. Sheng Su, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7149 RSC .B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833 CrossRef CAS .Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144 CrossRef CAS .S. Yin, Z. Niu and X. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 2458 CrossRef CAS .F. Liu, S. Song, D. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1089 CrossRef CAS .G. Wang, X. Sun, F. Lu, H. Sun, M. Yu, W. Jiang, C. Liu and J. Lian, Small, 2012, 8, 452 CrossRef CAS .K. Gao, Z. Shao, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Peng, W. Wang and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 63 CAS .Q. Su, Y. Liang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8279 RSC .X. Lu, H. Dou, B. Gao, C. Yuan, S. Yang, L. Hao, L. Shen and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5115 CrossRef CAS .D.-W. Wang, F. Li, J. Zhao, W. Ren, Z.-G. Chen, J. Tan, Z.-S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745 CrossRef CAS .X. Yan, J. Chen, J. Yang, Q. Xue and P. Miele, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2521 CAS .A. Davies, P. Audette, B. Farrow, F. Hassan, Z. Chen, J.-Y. Choi and A. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17612 CAS .Z. Tai, X. Yan and Q. Xue, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 350 CrossRef CAS .C. Yuan, L. Yang, L. Hou, J. Li, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, L. Shen, X. Lu, S. Xiong and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2560 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963 CrossRef CAS .S. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Li, S. Yang and J. Wang, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 369 RSC .J. Zhang, Y. Yu, L. Liu and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3052 RSC .Z. Li, Y. Mi, X. Liu, S. Liu, S. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14706 RSC .S. D. Perera, A. D. Liyanage, N. Nijem, J. P. Ferraris, Y. J. Chabal and K. J. Balkus Jr, J. Power Sources, 2013, 230, 130 CrossRef CAS .B. G. Choi, S.-J. Chang, H.-W. Kang, C. P. Park, H. J. Kim, W. H. Hong, S. Lee and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4983 RSC .H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 7020 CAS .Y. Cheng, S. Lu, H. Zhang, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4206 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, S. Lu, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1067 RSC .J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Zang, G. Xin, Y. Yuan and X. Qu, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5196 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lei, F. Shi and L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1058 CAS .X. Lu, H. Dou, C. Yuan, S. Yang, L. Hao, F. Zhang, L. Shen, L. Zhang and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 197, 319 CrossRef CAS .Y. Jin, H. Chen, M. Chen, N. Liu and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3408 CAS .R. B. Rakhi and H. N. Alshareef, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8858 CrossRef CAS .R. B. Rakhi, W. Chen, D. Cha and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 381 CrossRef CAS .H. Jiang, P. S. Lee and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 41 CAS .R. Andrews, D. Jacques, A. M. Rao, F. Derbyshire, D. Qian, X. Fan, E. C. Dickey and J. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 303, 467 CrossRef CAS .A. Cao, P. L. Dickrell, W. G. Sawyer, M. N. Ghasemi-Nejhad and P. M. Ajayan, Science, 2005, 310, 1307 CrossRef CAS .M. Xu, D. N. Futaba, M. Yumura and K. Hata, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5837 CrossRef CAS .X. Gui, J. Wei, K. Wang, A. Cao, H. Zhu, Y. Jia, Q. Shu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 617 CrossRef CAS .X. Gui, A. Cao, J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, L. Fan, K. Wang, H. Zhu and D. Wu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2320 CrossRef CAS .X. Gui, H. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Jia, L. Liu, Z. Li, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, Z. Tang, D. Wu and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4276 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, H. Zhu, Y.-C. Chen, Y. Shang, A. Cao, L. Hu and G. W. Rubloff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7948 CrossRef CAS .L. Hu, H. Wu, Y. Gao, A. Cao, H. Li, J. McDough, X. Xie, M. Zhou and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 523 CrossRef CAS .J. Luo, J. Kim and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013 DOI:10.1021/ar300180n .M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, Z. Sui, B. Xu, S. Yue, Y. Luo, W. Zhan and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6494 RSC .H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219 CrossRef CAS .H. Huang, P. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Lu and W. Zhan, Small, 2013, 9, 1397 CrossRef CAS .P. Chen, J.-J. Yang, S.-S. Li, Z. Wang, T.-Y. Xiao, Y.-H. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 249 CrossRef CAS .E. Paek, A. J. Pak, K. E. Kweon and G. S. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5610 CAS .Z.-S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424 CrossRef CAS .M. T. Pettes, H. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2959 CrossRef CAS .Y.-C. Yong, X.-C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394 CrossRef CAS .T. Maiyalagan, X. Dong, P. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5286 RSC .X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163 CrossRef CAS .X. Dong, Y. Cao, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4364 RSC .X. Dong, X. Wang, J. Wang, H. Song, X. Li, L. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, C. M. Li and P. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4865 CrossRef CAS .X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206 CrossRef CAS .Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174 CrossRef CAS .H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446 CrossRef CAS .N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360 CrossRef CAS .M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326 CrossRef CAS .V. Strong, S. Dubin, M. F. El-Kady, A. Lech, Y. Wang, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1395 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Lee, D. H. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1338 CrossRef CAS .H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554 CrossRef CAS .X. Dong, Y. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17044 RSC .W. Wang, S. Guo, M. Penchev, I. Ruiz, K. N. Bozhilov, D. Yan, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 294 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. Jung, M. B. Karimi, M. G. Hahm, P. M. Ajayan and Y. J. Jung, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 773 Search PubMed .Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591 CrossRef CAS .Y. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326 CrossRef CAS .M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef .W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496 CrossRef CAS .
Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Yongmin He	Yongmin He received his BS degree in physics from China West Normal University in 2009. Now, he is a PhD student under the supervision of Professor Erqing Xie in condensed matter physics at Lanzhou University. His current research interests are focusing on “smart” flexible ECs by integrating some of the factors such as ultralight, ultrathin, transparent, stretchable, and even compression-tolerant properties.
Wanjun Chen	Wanjun Chen received his BS degree in Physics from the School of Physical Science and Technology at Lanzhou University in 2009. Now, he is pursuing his PhD degree in condensed matter physics under the supervision of Professor Erqing Xie at Lanzhou University. His research interests mainly focus on design and synthesis of advanced carbon materials and their composites for energy storage and conversion devices.
Caitian Gao	Caitian Gao received her BS degree in physics from Lanzhou University in 2010. Now, she is a PhD student under the supervision of Professor Erqing Xie in condensed matter physics at Lanzhou University. Her research focused on ZnO and SnO2 nanomaterials synthesis and their applications in electrochemical devices, such as dye-sensitize solar cells, electrochemical capacitors and self-powered UV-photodetectors.
Jinyuan Zhou	Jinyuan Zhou received his PhD degree in condensed state physics from Lanzhou University in 2010, then joined Lanzhou University as a lecturer. From 2010 to 2012, he worked at Nanyang Technological University of Singapore as a postdoctoral fellow. His research interests include silicon carbide based optoelectronic nanomaterials, carbon nanotube based sensors, carbon nanotube intramolecular junctions, and carbon nanotube fibers & their applications in energy and information.
Xiaodong Li	Xiaodong Li received his BS degree in the School of Nuclear Science and Technology at Lanzhou University, China in 2008. He received his PhD (2013) in condensed matter physics from Lanzhou University. Currently, he is a research assistant at the Si Chuan Research Center of New Materials. His research interests include nanomaterials for dye-sensitized solar cells, self-powered UV-photodetectors, electrochemical capacitors and lithium ion batteries.
Erqing Xie	Erqing Xie is a professor at Lanzhou University of China since 2001. He received his PhD degree in condensed state physics from Lanzhou University, in 1995, then joined Lanzhou University as a lecturer. His research interests are in the fields of superhard films and their applications (such as DLC, SiC, SiCN, BN, and C3N4); key materials and thin-film technology for solar applications, and thin-film technology in optoelectronics, functional nanomaterials and their applications; current research mainly concludes dye-sensitized solar cells, supercapacitor electrode materials, semiconductor oxide-based gas sensor, UV photodetectors, and photocatalytic technology.

 	Fig. 1  Philips “fluid” smartphone concept and Samsung flexible OLED display phones.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of (a) the typical components of conventional supercapacitors and (b) carbon-based flexible ECs.	 

 	Fig. 3  An overview of carbon-based flexible EC electrode materials. The underlying materials include graphene, CNTs, CMFs, CNFs, and others. The reported carbon-based flexible electrodes mainly consist of CMF and CNF networks, CNT and graphene coatings, CNT and/or graphene papers (or films), and freestanding 3D flexible carbon-based macroscopic architectures.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the hollow Co3O4 NPs-CNFs by electrospining. (b) TEM image of a single Co3O4 NPs-CNF. (c) Specific capacitance of Co3O4-CNFs1 (15.6 wt% Co3O4), Co3O4-CNFs2 (21.7 wt%) and Co3O4-CNFs3 (35.9 wt%) film electrodes as a function of current density. (d) Cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the Co3O4-CNFs3 film electrode at a current density of 4 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrations of 3D porous CFs-CNTAs/MnO2 with aligned ion diffusion channels and (b) corresponding SEM image of CFs-CNTAs/MnO2 with a deposition time of 20 min. (c) Specific capacitances of CFs-CNTAs/MnO2, CFs/MnO2 and stainless steel/MnO2 composite electrodes at various scan rates. (d) Specific capacitances as a function of scan rate for the CFs-CNTAs/MnO2 with various mass loading of MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2012, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the growth processes for H-TiO2@MnO2 and H-TiO2@C core–shell NWs on a carbon cloth substrate. (b) TEM image of H-TiO2@MnO2 NW and insets are the magnified TEM image and SAED pattern of the H-TiO2@MnO2 NW. (c) Specific capacitances of MnO2, TiO2@MnO2, H-TiO2@MnO2 electrodes calculated from CV curves as a function of scan rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication process of MnO2–CNT–sponge supercapacitors. (b) SEM image of porous MnO2 on CNT–sponge, inset shows a TEM image of MnO2 with highly porous structure. (c) Cyclic voltammogram of MnO2 on Pt vs. MnO2 on CNT–sponge at 50 mV s−1 after 5 min deposition of MnO2. (d) Capacity retention vs. cycle number for CNT–sponge device up to 100000 cycles at a high scan rate of 10 V s−1 and 40 min MnO2–CNT–sponge supercapacitors under 10000 cycles at a specific current of 5 A g−1, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration showing conductive wrapping of graphene/MnO2 (GM) to introduce an additional electron transport path. (b) The schematic of wrapping of graphene/MnO2 with CNTs (GMC) and conducting polymers (GMP). (c) The corresponding SEM images of GMC and GMP. (c) Comparison of CVs for GM-(black), GMC-(red), GMP-(blue) based electrodes at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (d) Summary plots of specific capacitance values for these three electrodes at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a nanocomposite consisting of interpenetrating networks of V2O5 nanowires and CNTs, intimate contacts between the V2O5 nanowires and CNTs facilitating charge transport, and Na+ intercalation within the V2O5 layer structure. (b) SEM image of a V2O5/CNTs nanocomposite demonstrating V2O5 nanowire networks penetrating within the CNTs; the inset presents a digital photograph of such a flexible nanocomposite film. (c) Surface-area normalized capacitance for V2O5/CNTs and pure V2O5 at different sweep rates. (d) Ragone plots of Na-ion and Li-ion asymmetric supercapacitors made from a V2O5/CNTs nanocomposite anode and an AC cathode, a symmetric supercapacitor made from the same AC, and various supercapacitor devices recently developed. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of MGF. (b) Digital image and (c) TEM image of as-prepared MGF. (d) CV curves of MGF and CGF at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (e) The rate retention of MGF and CGF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process for flexible all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitors based on polymer gel electrolytes and free-standing CNTG and MG paper electrodes. (b) and (c) are the cross-section SEM images of CNTG and MG paper electrodes, respectively. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of the assembled cell at different voltages of 1.0 (1), 1.2 (2), 1.4 (3), 1.6 (4), and 1.8 (5) V. (e) Ragone plots of CNTG//MG (1), CNTG//CNTG (2), and MG//MG (3). (f) Photographs of the asymmetric supercapacitor at normal, bending, and twisting states (from top to bottom). (g) A green LED lit by two asymmetric supercapacitors of CNTG//MG connected in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabricated flexible and conductive film using graphene/MnO2/CNTs. (b) TEM image of the interconnected structure formed by the graphene/MnO2 composite (red arrows) and CNTs (white arrows), the inserted images highlight their close interaction (top) and the flexibility of the electrode (bottom). (c) Comparison of the specific capacitance of MnO2 measured at increasing scan rates for the flexible film and the graphene/MnO2 electrodes fabricated at similar areal densities around 2 mg cm−2. (d) Schematic illustration of the roll-up process to make a full cell using the flexible film. (e) Digital image of the actual compact full cell, the inset is the cross-sectional image. (f) Specific capacitance (based on both electrodes) at different current densities and the Ragone plot for the fabricated cell (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 145, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of 3D graphene networks after removal of Ni foam. Inset shows high-magnification SEM image. (b) Electrical-resistance variation of 3D graphene networks vs. the different bending angles. Inset shows the digital photographs of different bending shapes. (c) Schematic of the structure of our flexible supercapacitors consisting of two symmetrical graphene/MnO2 composite electrodes, a polymer separator and two PET membranes. The two digital photographs show the flexible supercapacitors when bended; (d) CVs of the flexible supercapacitors at different scan rates. Inset shows the CVs of the flexible supercapacitors with bending angles of 0° and 90° at a fixed scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. (e) The GO film changes from a golden-brown color to black as it reduced to laser-scribed graphene. The low-power infrared laser changes the stacked GO sheets immediately into well-exfoliated few-layered LSG film, as shown in the cross-sectional SEM images. (f) A symmetric EC is constructed from two identical LSG electrodes, ion-porous separator, and electrolyte. (g) Bending the device has almost no effect on its performance, as seen in these CVs collected at a scan rate of 1000 mV s−1. Inset shows a digital photograph showing the flexibility of the device. (h) Energy and power densities of LSG-ECs compared with commercially available AC-EC, aluminum electrolytic capacitors, and a lithium thin-film battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright 2012, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematics of the fabrication process of a branched CNC based supercapacitor. First the CNC films are transferred to PDMS and released by dissolving the AAO template. Then the gel-electrolyte (as electrolyte-separator) is sandwiched between two CNC electrodes (as electrode-current collector) of 12 mm thickness and this solidifies after evaporation of water. Optical pictures demonstrating the (b) transparent and (c) flexible nature of CNCs supercapacitor devices. (d) The CNC capacitor films (3 cm by 1.5 cm and 3.5 cm by 0.5 cm) helically wrapped around two differently sized glass tubes (1.6 cm and 0.5 cm diameter) show excellent performance during power delivery. (e) Normalized capacitance as a function of cycle-number (10000) and w/wo mechanical deformation (45° bending). Reproduced with permission from ref. 187, Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Ltd.	 

CMF networks	Industrial spinning	Low	Low	High	Building secondary nanoporous structures on their surface
CNF networks	Electrospinning/HTC	Moderate	Moderate	Moderate	Enhancing their mechanical strength and conductivities
CNT or graphene coatings	Dipping/brushing	Ultra-low	Low	Low	Wrapping more conductive layers or coatings on large SSA substrates
CNT or/and graphene papers	Vacuum filtration	Low	Low	Moderate	Introducing pores or spacers into the papers
3D macroscopic graphene or/and CNT architectures	Self-assembled/templated assembly methods	Moderate	High	Low	Strengthening the cross-linking of nanoscale graphene or CNT units
3D macroscopic CNT sponges and graphene foams	CVD catalytic growth/LightScribe patterning technology	High	High	High	Exploring other low-cost methods in the future
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
