Recent progress in ‘water-in-salt’ and ‘water-in-salt’-hybrid-electrolyte-based high voltage rechargeable batteries  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE01313G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01313G
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1619-1654Recent progress in ‘water-in-salt’ and ‘water-in-salt’-hybrid-electrolyte-based high voltage rechargeable batteries

        
          
            Pranav 
            Kulkarni
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Debasis 
            Ghosh
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            R. Geetha 
            Balakrishna
          
          
        
      *
      Centre for Nano & Material Sciences, JAIN University, Jain Global Campus, Bangalore 562112, India. E-mail: g.debasis@jainuniversity.ac.in; debasisghosh88@gmail.com; br.geetha@jainuniversity.ac.in
Received 
      3rd September 2020
    , Accepted 29th January 2021First published on 30th January 2021AbstractMeeting the increasing global energy demand has pushed the energy storage research towards developing energy dense and safer electrochemical energy storage devices following sustainable and economic approach. In this regard, past few years have witnessed a rising interest in aqueous electrolyte-based energy storage systems. However, the narrow voltage window of the aqueous electrolyte (1.23 V) limits the choice of electrodes as well as the energy density of traditional aqueous batteries. To overcome this challenge, there is a quest to improve the energy density of aqueous electrolytes by extending the electrochemical stability window. In this regard, a major breakthrough was recorded by switching from conventional ‘salt-in-water’ to ‘water-in-salt’ electrolyte. In “water-in-salt” (WiS) electrolytes, dissolved salts far outnumber water molecules (salt/solvent ratio > 1) by volume or weight. Unlike the conventional aqueous electrolyte (∼1.0 m), in the ‘water-in-salt’ (WiS) system, the interionic interaction becomes dominant over the solvent–ion interaction and the solvation sheath of the metal-ion charge carrier is dominated by contact ion pairs. Such systems with a suitable anion in the contact ion pair could form stable solid electrolyte interfaces at the anode and the reduced water activity expands the electrochemical stability window (ESW) to allow the coupling of a high voltage cathode with a low voltage anode to uplift the energy density. In addition, WiS as the electrolyte offers high safety, good ionic conductivity, high chemical compatibility, and thermal stability, which are crucial to compete with non-aqueous based electrolytes. In recent years, continuous research and development have found an application of this concept in ‘water-in-bisalt’, water-in-ionomer, hybrid aqueous/non-aqueous, and hydrate-melt electrolytes, pushing ESWs up to 4.1 V. In this review, we consolidate recent developments in aforementioned aqueous electrolytes with expanded ESWs for rechargeable batteries (metal-ion, metal–sulfur, and metal–air). The formulation of electrolytes, their physicochemical properties, and electrochemical performance in the different chemistries of batteries has been discussed. This review also addresses scientific and technical issues along with insights to boost the electrochemical performance of future aqueous electrolytes.Pranav KulkarniPranav Kulkarni completed his doctoral work in physics from JAIN University, Bangalore in 2020. His doctoral research was focused on the development and understanding of electrode materials for energy storage applications such as lithium and sodium-ion batteries. Currently, he is working as a Senior Research Associate at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University. His current research is focused on the electrode and electrolyte materials in aqueous metal ion batteries.Debasis GhoshDr. Debasis Ghosh (PhD, IIT Kharagpur, 2014) has been working on electrochemical energy storage for the last 10 years. Before joining as Assistant Professor at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, JAIN University, Bangalore in 2017, he was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow at KAIST in South Korea and at the University of Waterloo, Canada for a couple of years. The current research interest of his research group includes rechargeable batteries (metal-ion, metal–sulfur, metal–air), supercapacitors, and designing multifunctional electrocatalysts for OER/ORR/HER applications.R. Geetha BalakrishnaProf. Geetha Balakrishna, is presently the Director of Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, JAIN University. Her current research interest focuses on perovskites, oxide/sulphide nanocrystals, and colloidal quantum dots, which are active towards photons and hence applicable in solar cells, water purification/disinfection/desalination, and sensing technologies. She is a fellow member of many renowned scientific world bodies such as ACS, ANS, MRS, and Assoc of Haz Mater. She has been nominated as the regional coordinator of Global Materials Network (MRS body) from India and is the commission member of IUMRS. She holds many patents and has successfully completed many funded projects.
1. Introduction
Recent years have experienced a significant enhancement in renewable energy research to overcome the mounting crisis of clean and green energy.1–4 However, the intermittent nature of the renewable energy resources requires suitable storage devices to make the converted energy available on demand.5 In addition to the grid scale energy storage, the efforts towards reducing carbon emission by electrification in the automotive sector and the growing demand of personal portable electronics necessitates an efficient power source, which is safe, energy dense, and overall cost-efficient.6–9 Metal-ion batteries (Li and Na) have gained enormous attention and have been a great success in the last few decades.10,11 However, the issue of flammable organic electrolytes constraints further development in terms of operational safety. In this regard, non-flammability and environment-friendly aqueous-based electrolytes carry a great importance in terms of the safety of operation. The energy density of energy storage devices largely depends on the voltage provided by the assembled electrodes, i.e., the potential difference of redox reactions between the cathode and anode. On the other hand, the fabrication of a thermodynamically stable electrochemical cell requires the electrochemical potential of the anode and cathode to reside within the electrochemical stability window (ESW) of the electrolyte, i.e., the potential separation between electrolyte reduction and solvent oxidation.12 Thus, electrolytes with high ESWs are highly desired to fabricate high voltage energy storage devices.13,14
Ionic liquids and organic solvent-based electrolytes have been able to operate in a large potential window and are extensively being used in high voltage batteries and supercapacitors.15–19 However, the high price of traditional ionic liquid-based electrolytes accompanied by the low ionic mobility due to the high viscosity of such electrolytes put a significant barrier on their widespread use. The current state-of-the-art high energy density rechargeable batteries are mainly built with organic electrolytes due to their high conductivity, large voltage window, and chemical compatibility with the cell components.20–22 However, the high vapor pressure and flammability of the organic solvents impose severe safety hazards. Thus, the research thrust is to develop an alternative electrolyte, which is safe, cost efficient, has high ionic conductivity, good thermal and chemical stability, and wide ESW.
Aqueous electrolytes are safe, non-flammable, environment-friendly, and cost effective.23,24 Nevertheless, their use in commercial energy storage devices is restricted by the limited ESW of water, which is theoretically 1.23 V. Although the change in the electrolyte pH can modify the cathodic limit (2.213 V vs. Li at pH 14), it also causes a downshift in the anodic limit. The kinetic overpotential of H2 and O2 evolution can help to expand the ESW of dilute aqueous; however, the voltage limit remains at ∼1.5 V.25,26 Thus, most of the high voltage popular cathode–anode pairs in organic or ionic liquid electrolytes cannot be coupled in aqueous electrolytes. This limits the overall energy density. The expansion of the ESW of aqueous electrolytes is highly desired to fabricate high energy density and safer batteries. This can be done by restricting the water electrochemical activity in the electrolyte or by kinetically protecting the electrodes to push the OER and HER limit at the cathode and anode, respectively.
Unfortunately, unlike the organic electrolyte, where the kinetic stabilization of the anode is readily established by solvent degradation during initial cycling, such a kinetic protection of the anode cannot be realized in conventional aqueous electrolytes (salt-in-water electrolyte) since the degradation product of water (e.g., H2, O2, and OH−) cannot form any solid protective layer.
The use of hydrophobic additives in the electrolyte has been demonstrated to form a protective interphase via absorption by the electrodes. This protective interphase repels the water molecules and thus raises the resistance to electrolyte decomposition, resulting in a wider voltage window. For example, 1% VC (vinylene carbonate) or disodium propane-1,3-disulfonate (PDSS) in aqueous LiNO3, or sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in a mixture of Na2SO4 and ZnSO4 electrolyte has shown to absorb at the cathode and form a hydrophobic barrier to push the OER limit of the aqueous electrolyte.27–29
Suo et al.26 first demonstrated that robust kinetic protection via stable interphase formation at the anode in aqueous electrolyte can be established by switching from salt-in-water to water-in-salt system with a suitable salt anion. The ‘water-in-salt’ (WiS) is a class of ‘solvent-in-solute’ electrolyte, where the dissolved salt outnumbers the solvent molecules (water) both by volume and mass. From the solvation structure point of view, in a dilute electrolyte, the metal ion charge carrier mostly remains coordinated with the solvent molecules. The physical nature of such a electrolyte can be considered as a combination of free solvent molecules and the solvent separated ion pairs (SSIPs) of the metal salts. On the other hand, in a concentrated electrolyte, an increasing number of salt ions affects the coordination of the metal ion with the solvent molecule. On increasing the salt concentration (‘solvent-in-solute’ condition), the physical nature of the electrolyte is dominated by the contact ion pairs (CIP) or ionic aggregates of the cation and anion of the electrolyte salt with an extremely low content of free solvent molecules. The anion of the ion pair can degrade at the anode surface to form a solid electrolyte interface (SEI). The SEI layer is ionically conducting and electrically insulating. For the water-in-salt electrolyte (WiSE), the formation of a stable SEI pushes the onset potential of HER to a lower potential. On the other hand, a very less number of free water molecules also affects the electrolysis and requires a large overpotential, which ultimately leads to an extended ESW of > 3 V. The concept of WiSE has been further upgraded to other aqueous electrolytes with expanded ESW, such as water-in-bisalt electrolyte (WiBSE), water-in-ionomer, hybrid aqueous-non-aqueous electrolyte (HANE), and hydrate-melt electrolytes, thus pushing the ESWs up to 4.1 V.30–33
Recently, a couple of review articles34–37 and perspectives have been published on the concentrated aqueous electrolyte. For example, Borodin et al.34 highlighted the super-concentrated electrolytes, explaining the various properties such as ion transport properties, interfacial structure, and interfacial chemistry. Recently, Ruben-Simon Kühnel et al.35 came up with a perspective on the electrochemical stability of WiSE, where they highlighted the effect of the cut-off current density on the apparent electrochemical stability window of WiSEs and suggested a low cut-off current density to realize true ESW for the WiSEs. Very recently, Tingting Liang et al. discussed the physicochemical and electrochemical properties of the WiSEs and their significance in electrochemical energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors.38
Huaping Wang et al.39 have discussed the recent advances in designing high safety electrolytes and the strategies for metal anode protection. Chenxuan Xu et al.40 summarized various additive-containing electrolytes, polymer electrolytes, and solid-state electrolytes and their role in achieving high-performance metal-based batteries. Liu et al.36 published a review article on the voltage issue of aqueous rechargeable metal-ion batteries where they compared the voltage characteristics for different cathode/anode couple at midpoint voltage and plateau voltage. Subsequently, various strategies paving the way to high-voltage aqueous rechargeable metal ion batteries are summarized. However, the existing reviews/perspectives have mainly focused on the performance evaluation of the concentrated electrolytes in metal ion batteries. However, recently, these concentrated electrolytes have also been explored for other battery chemistries such as dual-ion batteries, metal–sulfur, or metal air batteries.
In this review, we consolidate the recent developments in the WiSE and modified WiSE (i.e., WiBSE, HANE, and hydrate-melt electrolytes) as high voltage electrolytes for rechargeable metal ion (both monovalent and multivalent), dual-ion, metal–sulfur, and metal–air batteries. The physicochemical characteristics of the concentrated aqueous electrolytes and the electrochemical performance with different pairs of cathodes/anodes have been discussed. The effect of different additives, salt, solvents, and their influence on the electrochemical performance of the WiSE is summarized (Fig. 1). This review also addresses the scientific and technical issues and suggests the promising research direction to boost the electrochemical performance of future aqueous electrolytes.
 Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications on concentrated aqueous electrolytes every year starting from 2016 till date (August, 2020). (b) Comparison of various physiochemical properties for various electrolyte systems. (c) Overview of different WiSE systems and their advantages/disadvantages. 
2. Water-in-salt electrolytes (WiSE) for monovalent metal ion batteries
2.1. WiSE for lithium-ion batteries
In 1994, Dahn and co-workers41 proposed the first aqueous lithium-ion battery employing VO2 anode and LiMn2O4 cathode in 5 m LiNO3 electrolyte with an average operating voltage of 1.5 V and an energy density of ∼55 W h kg−1. However, the Li+ extraction/insertion reaction in aqueous electrolyte is somewhat complicated than in organic electrolyte due to the possible side reaction of H2 or O2 evolution and the dissolution/side reaction of the electrode material with water or dissolved O2. These competitive reactions lead to low coulombic efficiency and poor cycle life. Also, the operation of most of the popular metal oxides cathodes such as LiMn2O4 or layer metal oxide LiCoO2, LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NCM), and Prussian blue analogs [MHCF, M = Ni, Fe, Cu, Mn] in aqueous electrolytes is pH sensitive. For example, at high pH, Li+ extraction competes with OER, whereas a lower pH may accompany proton insertion along with Li+ in the layered compounds. Although, while modifying the geometrical aspect of the electrodes, doping or forming suitable nanocomposites can enhance the discharge capacity and rate capability of the electrodes, the full utilization of the electrodes remains elusive due to the limited operational potential window, and overall, there remains a tradeoff relationship between the voltage and cycle stability.42,43 According to the Pourbaix diagram, the cathodic and anodic limit of the stability window of water in neutral pH is 2.63 V (vs. Li) and 3.86 V (vs. Li), respectively. The low operating voltage of the aqueous electrolyte allows only selected low voltage cathode and high voltage anode pair, which operates at a potential within or close to the ESW of water. The problem is even more severe while choosing suitable anode materials. Due to the electrocatalytic effect of certain materials towards electrolysis, such as TiO2 or MoxSy, the HER is even more pronounced. Only a few polyanionic materials such as LiTi2(PO4)3, TiP2O7 has been found to operate before the HER side reaction.44
Suo et al.26 first demonstrated that the anodic and cathodic limit of water decomposition can be increased by reducing the electrochemical activity of water by manipulating the Li ion solvation structure with a suitable anion (N(SO2CF3)2− or TFSI−). The first WiSE was demonstrated with an aqueous solution of lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) with a concentration > 5 m. From different spectral analysis, the solvation structures of the Li+ ion in the LiTFSI solution at different concentrations (1–21 m) of LiTFSI were analyzed. In dilute solution (<5 m), the primary solvation sheath of Li+ ion contains four water molecules with many loosely bound water molecules in the secondary solvation sheath; thus, the LiTFSI electrolyte can be considered as a solvent (water) separated ion pair. Such a system is susceptible towards hydrolysis easily beyond 2.63–3.86 V (vs. Li+). However, in 21 m LiTFSI solution, only 2.6 water molecules are present for each Li+ ion, which enable the TFSI− anion to form an intimate ion pair (∼82%) with the Li+ ion, with the formula Li2(TFSI)(H2O)x. The Li+ solvation sheath in salt-in-water solution and WiSE solution has been illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The high salt concentration forming intimate ion pair between the oppositely charged ions leads to two consequences: (i) because of the availability of only negligible free water molecules, the electrochemical activity of water is reduced such that the water molecules become resistant against oxidation at the cathode surface, and (ii) multiple Li+ coordination by the TFSI− anions stabilizes the transferred electron during reduction, which indeed elevates the reduction potential of TFSI in the ion aggregate at the anode surface. DFT calculations suggest that the contact ion pair becomes reductively unstable below 2.9 V (vs. Li+), which is higher than the reduction potential of water. Thus, the TFSI− ion in the Li2(TFSI)+ complex gets kinetically reduced before water (2.63 V vs. Li+) and forms a protective layer (LiF) on the anode. The detailed discussion on the SEI formation mechanism is included in Section 2.1.1.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration indicating the difference in the Li+ solvation sheath in (i) salt-in-water electrolyte and (ii) water-in-salt electrolyte; (b) electrochemical stability window of LiTFSI WiSE carried on non-active electrodes. Measurements were taken at different concentrations (molality) with cyclic voltammetry (CV) on stainless steel working electrodes between −1.8 V and 1.8 V versus Ag/AgCl at 10 mV s−1, wherein the potential was converted to Li/Li+ reference for convenience; (c) the electrochemical stability window of electrolytes at various LiTFSI concentrations as measured with CV on active (LiMn2O4 and Mo6S8) electrode surfaces at 0.1 mV s−1; (d) illustration of expanded electrochemical stability window for water-in-salt electrolytes together with the modulated redox couples of the LiMn2O4 cathode and the Mo6S8 anode caused by high salt concentration (reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
Because of this kinetic protection of the anode and reduced water activity, the onset potential of hydrogen evolution is pushed to 1.9 V (vs. Li) and the oxidation onset potential is pushed back to 4.9 V (vs. Li), leading to a 3.0 V electrochemical stability window (Fig. 2(b)). Fig. 2(d) illustrates the comparison of the expanded electrochemical stability window for WiSE with the traditional aqueous electrolytes. The expanded ESW of 21 m LiTFSI WiSE accompanying the high ionic conductivity (∼10 mS cm−1 at room temperature) allowed the coupling of several high voltage cathodes such as LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4, LiMn2O4, and LiFePO4 with low voltage anodes such as Mo6S8 and TiS2.8,45,46
Suo et al.26 investigated the LiMn2O4/Mo6S8 full cell in 21 m LiTFSI. The CV analysis on the active electrode surface (LiMn2O4 and Mo6S8) at different electrolyte concentration (5–21 m) is shown in Fig. 2(c). Two pair of redox peaks were observed for LiMn2O4 (4.09/4.17 V), whereas only a single lithiation/delithiation peak was observed (∼2.5 V) in the CV plot when 5 m LiTFSI electrolyte was used. Notably, increasing electrolyte concentration (>10 m LiTFSI) caused the appearance of a second lithiation/delithiation peak (∼2.3 V), indicating the full utilization of the anode. On the other hand, a peak shifting towards the positive potential on increasing the electrolyte concentration was observed for both the due to the change in the Li+ activity in the solution on changing the salt concentration according to Nernst equation. The LiMn2O4//Mo6S8 electrochemical couple in the full cell configuration employing WiSE showed an open circuit voltage (OCV) of 2.3 V and highly reversible charge storage over 1000 cycles at a high energy density of ∼78 W h kg−1.
In their subsequent work, Suo et al.8 replaced the LiMn2O4 cathode with LiFePO4 and the LiFePO4 cathode with the olivine structure coupled with cheval phase Mo6S8 anode in 21 m LITFSI WiSE showed a cell voltage of 1.5 V. The moderated cell voltage was due to the moderate lithiation/delithiation potential of LiFePO4 (∼3.5 V vs. Li, Fig. 3(a)). However, unlike traditional alkaline electrolytes, where LiFePO4 becomes unstable during charging in the presence of dissolved oxygen, WiSE provided much desired stability to the cathode. WiSE coupled in the LiFePO4//Mo6S8 cell enabled a high energy density of 47 W h kg−1 accompanied by excellent cycle stability with only 0.04% capacity loss per cycle over 1000 cycles and maintained high coulombic efficiency (CE) of 99% throughout. Notably, the restricted water count in WiSE allowed the full cell operation over a wide range of temperatures (−20 to 55 °C).8
 Fig. 3  (a) The ESW of 21 m LiTFSI WiSE at SS inert electrode at 10 mV s−1, with the 1st CV plot of the Mo6S8 anode and the LiFePO4 cathode overlaid at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate (reproduced with permission from ref. 8, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016). (b) The CV plot of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with different crystal structures in the WiSE. Inset: the ESW of 21 m LiTFSI WiSE on the SS current collector at 10 mV s−1 scan rate merged with the CV plots of the Mo6S8 anode and the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with different crystal structures at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate in the WiSE; Charge–discharge voltage profile of (c) Fdm LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with Li4Ti5O12 anode and Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and (d) Fdm LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Mo6S8 full cell in pH adjusted 21 m LiTFSI WiSE at 0.5C (reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Similarly, Sun et al.45 explored the same 21 m LiTFSI WiSE for the LiMn2O4/TiS2 full cell. TiS2 has a high theoretical capacity of 240 mA h g−1; however, the Li+ intercalation/de-intercalation potential lies below 2.6 V, which restricts its use in conventional aqueous electrolytes. As an anode material, TiS2 showed a reversible capacity of 160 mA h g−1 and in full cell configuration with the LiMn2O4 cathode, it showed a high discharge voltage of 1.70 V with an energy density of 78 W h kg−1.
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 is a well investigated high voltage cathode in organic electrolytes with the lithiation–delithiation plateau at about 4.6–4.8 V vs. Li+/Li. However, the high salt concentration in 21 m LiTFSI WiSE causes a positive potential shift in the lithiation/delithiation potential to 4.88/4.85 V and 4.96/4.90 V for the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode (Fig. 3(b)). Nevertheless, the second lithiation potential was beyond the anodic limit (4.9 V) of the LiTFSI WiSE, thus allowing only the partial achievement of its theoretical capacity. Wang et al.46 demonstrated that the anodic limit of 21 m LiTFSI WiSE can be further improved to 5.0 V by adjusting the solution pH to 5 using 0.1% (in volume) 1 m bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide [HN(SO2CF3)2]. The improved anodic limit enabled the Fdm LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode to charge upto 5.05 V to achieve a high discharge capacity of 125 mA h g−1 (Fig. 3(c)), which was close to the theoretical capacity of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4. A full cell fabricated with the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with the Mo6S8 anode in the pH adjusted WiSE exhibited an unusually high open circuit voltage of 3.0 V, leading to a high energy density of 126 W h kg−1. The charge–discharge profile is shown in Fig. 3(d).
As an alternative to LMO, LiCoO2 is one of the most investigated cathodes in non-aqueous LiBs.47,48 However, achieving the full potential of LiCoO2 requires it to be charged at a high cut off voltage, which causes severe side reactions with the electrolyte and structural destruction due to Co dissolution.49–53 Wang et al.52 showed that tris(trimethylsilyl)borate (TMSB) present as an additive (0.1 wt%) in WiSE (21 m LiTFSI) can stabilize the cathode by the formation of the cathode–electrolyte interface. On increasing the cell voltage, the TMSB additive is oxidized before both water and TFSI− to form boric acid and orthosilisic acid and is deposited on the cathode to form a stable cathode–electrolyte-interface. Although both boric acid and orthosilisic acid are soluble in water, they remain insoluble in WiSE due to the unavailability of free water molecules. The formation of the CEI could suppress the electrolyte oxidation and Co dissolution from the LiCoO2 cathode; thus, at a high cut off voltage, the CEI-protected LiCoO2 cathode delivered a high specific capacity of 170 mA h g−1, corresponding to 0.7 fraction of Li removed. When coupled with the Mo6S8 anode, a 2.5 V aqueous full cell LiCoO2/Mo6S8 was fabricated, which showed a high energy density of 120 W h kg−1 for 1000 cycles and excellent cycle stability with only 0.013% capacity loss per cycle.

2.1.1 SEI formation mechanism with TFSI-based WiSE. 
In dilute LiTFSI, the reduction potential of TFSI remains ∼1.4 V, which is much lower than the thermodynamic limit of the water decomposition potential. On the other hand, in 21 m LiTFSI, the reduced fraction of free water leads to the formation of large ionic clusters with intimate contact between oppositely charged ions. In 21 m LiTFSI, the highly aggregated ion aggregates can be represented as Li2(TFSI)+, where multiple Li+ coordination by the TFSI− anions elevates the reduction potential of TFSI to 2.9 V, which is a much higher potential than the thermodynamic limit of HER. Suo et al. proposed three competitive processes contributing towards the kinetic protection of the anode towards the HER. The irreversible reduction reaction during the formation of the SEI includes:54
(i) Water reduction at the anode, which is a parasitic process and does not contribute to SEI formation.
(ii) The electrochemical reduction of dissolved O2 and CO2 to form Li2O and Li2CO3, respectively. Both of them are soluble in water, thus quickly hydrolyze and dissolve in the dilute electrolyte; however, they are stable in WiSE due to the restricted free water count (15% in 21 m LiTFSI).O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2O, E0 = 2.91 VCO2 + ½O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → Li2CO3, E0 = 3.82 V
Chemical reaction:CO2 + Li2O → Li2CO3
(iii) Reduction of the salt anion (TFSI−) to form LiF by the preferential adsorption of CF3− groups of TFSI− anions at the anode surface and the subsequent reduction at a potential above 2.5 V vs. Li/Li+.
On the other hand, on the cathodic side, the extensively reduced water activity in the WiSE makes the electrolyte highly resistant against oxidation at the cathode surface.
In addition to the direct reduction process, Dubouis et al.55 demonstrated the role of water electrolysis during the initial cycles towards the reduction of TFSI− in 21 m LiTFSI WiSE. Under reductive conditions, water produces H2 gas and OH− ions. The produced OH− ion can precipitate on the anode surface to form LiOH. Solid LiOH and/or the OH− ions in the solution can both chemically react with TFSI− anions following a nucleophilic attack, resulting in the degradation of the CF3 groups to form sparingly water soluble LiF (0.04 mol L−1) at the anode surface.
However, on further decreasing the potential, the increasingly negatively polarized anode surface repels the salt anion and favors the adsorption of water molecules on the anode surface with the hydrogens pointing toward the surface. This triggers HER at the anode.56 Several attempts have been made to solve this issue by forming a stable interphase artificially or in situ with a suitably chosen additive52 or co-solvent.30,57


2.1.2 Li+ transportation mechanism in WiSE. 
The ion transport mechanism across electrolytes mainly follows the following two mechanisms: (i) the vehicular mechanism, where ions move together with the solvation sheath (as in most of the electrolytes with strong interaction between the cation and the anion); (ii) via structural ion movement through solvent molecule exchange (for electrolytes with mobile solvent molecules) or by ion hoping (mostly in solid electrolytes). The cation transport mechanism may be distinctive or a combination of the vehicular or structural diffusion mechanism and depends on several factors, such as cation–anion binding energy, salt aggregation, and viscosity of the electrolyte (Fig. 4(a)).34
 Fig. 4  (a) A summary of the parameters influencing the cation transport mechanism (reproduced with permission from ref. 34, Copyright © 2020, Elsevier). (b) Plot of the concentration dependence of the Li+ transference number (t+) for LiTFSI–H2O at 20 °C, along with LiPF6 in PC, EC:EMC (1:1 wt%) and LiTFSI–AN at 25 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society). (c) A 3D snapshot of an MD simulation box of the 21 m LiTFSI electrolyte, where the blue and red regions represent the bulk water channel and ion aggregate, respectively; (d) the movement of an Li+ ion (gray ball) in the bulk-like nanometric water channel (blue region) at four sequential times separated by 1.0 ps, clearly indicating its high mobility; (e) the movement of an Li+ ion (gray ball) within the ionic aggregate (red region) over the same time period (3 ps), showing only the fluctuation in the position, along with a small fraction of water molecules (blue) encapsulated within the ionic aggregate (reproduced with permission from ref. 61, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society). (f) A representative snapshot of the largest water and ionic aggregates in 20 m aqueous LiTFSI with the Li+ diffusion paths shown by black arrow (in the bulk-like water) and yellow arrow (in the ionic aggregates), and orange arrow, indicating Li+ before leaving the aggregate and exchanging with Li+ in the water-rich domain. (g) Variation of tunc+ and tc+ of Li+ as a function of the LiTFSI concentration (reproduced with permission from ref. 62, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society). 
Interestingly, although the LiTFSI-based WiSE has high viscosity due to the very high concentration of the dissolved salt, it offers fast ion transport with high Li+ transference number, which helps to achieve high capacity even at a high C rate. For example, 21 m LiTFSI has a high viscosity of 32 mPa s; however, it has a higher ionic conductivity (∼8 mS cm−1 at 25 °C), comparable to that of typical non-aqueous electrolytes. Recently, the structure and dynamics of super-concentrated WiSE have been studied by several groups employing MD simulation studies.54,58 Combining different electrochemical, scattering, spectral, and computational techniques, Borodin et al.59 showed that in 21 m LiTFSI, there remains an asymmetrical distribution of water and TFSI− around each Li+. They showed that primarily 40% of Li+ exists as SSIP with the formula Li+(H2O)4 and 25% of Li+ exists as Li+(TFSI)x− with no water molecules in its primary solvation sheath. Such disproportionation in the solvation behavior by H2O and TFSI creates an inhomogeneous local Li+ environment with two interpenetrating but dynamic nanodomain networks. The Li+(TFSI)x− domain bearing excessive negative charge comparatively restrains the anion migration, while the remaining 40% of the Li+(H2O)4 domains serve as a 3D percolating channel for fast Li+ transport with a transference number as high as 0.73 (at 30 °C) (Fig. 4(b)). This is much higher in comparison to highly concentrated LiTFSI in non-aqueous electrolytes. Infact, unlike the solvent exchange mechanism as the major contributor for ion transport, as speculated by Yim et al.,60 they reported Li+ vehicular mechanism as the major contributor towards the high transport number in WiSE.
Later, Lim et al.61 investigated the role of water in facilitating high ion transport in the 21 m LiTFSI WiSE system with the IR pump–probe study and MD simulation studies. Their study also revealed the coexistence of bulk-like water featuring H-bonding interaction in between 3–4 water molecules along with interfacial water, where water molecules remain tightly H-bonded with the TFSI− anions. It was demonstrated that the dissolved ions form a 3D network that is intertwined with the water hydrogen bonding networks. Theoretical studies suggest that the bulk water channel has an average diameter of 1.1 nm and acts like a conducting wire for ion transport, through which the hydrated Li+ ions move (Fig. 4(c)). On the other hand, interfacial water merely acts as a lubricant for surface wetting on the ion networks. A snapshot of the MD simulation study showed that Li+ transportation inside the bulk-like non-metric water is much faster than Li+ ion transport inside the ionic aggregate (Fig. 4(d)), where Li+ ions only showed fluctuation in their position at four sequential times separated by 1.0 ps (Fig. 4(e)).
Later, Yu et al.62 threw light on the transport mechanism of Li+ in the ionic aggregate (Fig. 4(f)). Unlike the dilute system, the ionic aggregate in the concentrated (20 m LiTFSI) electrolyte is highly asymmetric in nature. This is due to the relatively weak interaction between Li+ and TFSI− in water. In fact, the ionic aggregate is mainly dominated by the TFSI− anion and less number of cations. An analysis of the timescale for the dissociation of Li+ from the neighboring anion within the aggregate (i.e., association correlation factor) and the timescale for the Li+ ion to escape from the aggregate (residence correlation factor) suggested a hopping mechanism for Li+ ion transport within the aggregate. In this mechanism, both the ions diffuse together; however, the movement of Li+ is much faster than that of the anion.
Thus, the overall transport mechanism of Li+ in the concentrated TFSI-based WiSE can be considered as a combination of three different mechanism: (i) The hydrated Li+ ions travel through the nanometric bulk water channel and are the major contributor to the high transport number; (ii) within the anion-rich asymmetric ionic aggregate, Li+ transport follows the ion hoping mechanism; (iii) and finally, the exchange of Li+ from the ion aggregate with the water-solvated Li+ ion. The variation of the uncorrelated transference number (tunc+, which ignores the correlated motion of the ions) and correlated transference number (tc+, which considers the correlated motion of the ions) of Li+ as a function of the LiTFSI concentration was demonstrated. For an infinitely dilute solution, the ionic motion is entirely uncorrelated and the solution behaves as an ideal solution. However, increasing the salt concentration causes stronger electrostatic interaction among the ions, leading to considerable correlated motion. This leads to a decrease in the correlated transference number (tc+) and a deviation of tunc+ from the actual value. In fact, for 20 m LiTFSI, an increase in the salt concentration results in a moderate increase in tunc+ and a mild decrease in tc+ (Fig. 4(g)). The calculated tc+ for 20 m LiTFSI in water was obtained as 0.33, which was much higher as compared to that of 0.06 for the equimolar salt in tetraglyme. This is due to the much weaker cation–anion interaction in water than in tetraglyme and the unique heterogeneous nature of WiSE, where the number of anions in the bulk water network is very less and Li+ can move relatively freely.


2.1.3 Role of bi-salt on the electrochemical performance. 
Suo et al.32 demonstrated that the hydrated cation Li(H2O)2.6+ in 21 m LiTFSI solution could further dissolve un-hydrated Li+ ions with the counter anion having a similar fluorinated structure. This water-in-bisalt electrolyte (WiBSE) concept was demonstrated with 21 m LiTFSI and 7 m lithium trifluoromethane sulfonate (LiOTf). The WiBS system exhibited a liquidus temperature of 21.5° and a room temperature conductivity of 6.5 mS cm−1, which is comparable to that of 21 m LiTFSI WiSE. In the WiBS system, the Li+ cation to water molecule ratio increased from 0.38:1 (in 21 m LiTFSI) to 0.5:1, which could further deactivate the electrochemical activity of the water molecule and push the cathodic limit of electrolysis from 1.9 V (vs. Li/Li+ in 21 m LiTFSI) to 1.83 V (vs. Li/Li+), accompanied by a significantly diminished current density (Fig. 5(a)–(c)). However, the oxygen evolution potential remains the same at 4.9 V (vs. Li/Li+). To understand the influence of WiBSE on the electrochemical performance, they coupled the LiMn2O4 cathode with carbon-coated TiO2 as the anode. Notably, due to the electrocatalytic effect of TiO2 towards HER, the use of TiO2 as the anode in the aqueous electrolyte is restricted. However, the ultra-high concentration of Li+ in WiBSE combined with the electrocatalytically inactive carbon layer on the TiO2 anode pushed the lithiation potential from 1.8 V to 2.0 V. The LiMn2O4/(21 m LiTFSI–7 m LiOTf–H2O)/C–TiO2 assembly showed an average voltage of 2.10 V and a specific capacity of 48 mA h g−1, leading to a high energy density of 100 W h kg−1 (Fig. 5(d)). MD simulation study suggests that in the WiBS system, the addition of OTf− did not affect the Li+/TFSI aggregation; indeed, it modifies the Li+ solvation shell by displacing about 0.5 water molecules on an average. In addition, the fraction of free water molecules (uncoordinated to any Li+ ion) reduced to 0.11 from 0.15. Quantum chemical calculations suggest that in WiBSE, both the TFSI− and OTf− anions take part in the formation of the LiF SEI layer at the same rate. The improved SEI stability and further reduced water activity in WiBSE enabled high cycle stability for the LiMn2O4/C–TiO2 full cell in WiBSE with only 0.22% capacity loss per cycle over 100 cycles (Fig. 5(e)), accompanied by a high CE of 99% after 40 cycles.
 Fig. 5  (a) The electrochemical stability windows of WiBSE (21 m LiTFSI + 7 m LiOTf) and WiSE (21 m LiTFSI) electrolyte as measured on the inactive current collector (stainless steel grid) at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1, which is overlaid with the 1st CV traces collected on the active anode (C–TiO2) and cathode (LiMn2O4) materials at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1 in WiBSE. (b and c) The enlarged regions near the anodic and cathodic extremes of the electrochemical windows of WiBSE. (d) The first charge–discharge profiles of the electrochemical couples of LiMn2O4/C–TiO2 in WiSE (black) and WIBSE (blue). (e) The cycling stability for varying combinations of TiO2 anodes and electrolytes, showing better cycle stability of the C–TiO2 anode in WiBSE (reproduced with permission from ref. 32, Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Saboya et al.63 reported a WiBSE with a very high salt concentration containing 31.4 m LiTFSI and 7.9 m lithium propylsulfonate-butylsulfonate-dimethyl-amine (LiMM3411) salt corresponding to a mere 1.4 water molecules per Li+. It is believed that the bulkier non-fluorinated anion is mainly responsible for preventing salt crystallization even at this high concentration. The Li(TFSI)0.8(MM3411)0.2·1.4H2O WiBS exhibits a glass transition temperature of −58 °C and a room temperature conductivity of 0.33 mS cm−1. Using an SS working electrode, the WiBSE could provide a large ESW with an anodic oxidation limit as high as 5.1 V (vs. Li+/Li), which was higher than that of the previously reported 21 m LiTFSI–7 m LiOTf–H2O WiBS system.11 However, the HER limit at SS was slightly high at 2.2 V. Notably, with the Al working electrode, the HER limit could be pushed and the expanded ESW allows for low potential reactions such as aluminum–lithium alloying, which is otherwise impossible in the TFSI-based WiSE alone.
Chen et al.64 developed a super-high concentrated (63 m) aqueous electrolyte for high energy density lithium ion batteries. They introduced a new concept of introducing a non-Li co-salt (Me3EtN-TFSI) to alter the lithium solvation structure. The addition of Me3EtN-TFSI increased the solubility of LiTFSI by two-fold and increased the salt/water ratio from 0.37 (WiSE) to 1.13, which could suppress the water activity in the electrolyte. This water-in-hybrid-salt electrolyte showed an ionic conductivity of 0.91 mS cm−1 with a wide electrochemical stability window of 3.25 V. This unique 63 m electrolyte (42 m LiTFSI + 21 m Me3EtN·TFSI) offers an operating voltage of 2.5 V to support the successful operation of the LiMn2O4//Li4Ti5O12 full cell aqueous device, which showed a high energy density of 145 W h kg−1.
However, with the conventional WiSE or WiBSE, the parasitic effects of the free water molecule-forming clusters cannot be completely ignored. Yamada et al.31 reported a hydrated melt electrolyte comprising a eutectic mixture of two different suitably chosen Li salt anions, i.e., TFSI− and N(SO2C2F5)2− or BETI−. The eutectic mixture, Li(TFSI)0.7(BETI)0.3, showed the highest miscibility with water, forming a stable transparent liquid with a water to cation mole ratio of 2:1. Interestingly, the bulky structure of the anions could cause the isolation of the water molecules and thereby prevent the formation of water clusters in order to push the cathodic and anodic limit of water hydrolysis. In fact, in the Li(TFSI)0.7(BETI)0.3·2H2O hydrated melt, the weakly basic anions have a weak interaction with Li+ and the water molecules are mainly engaged in the Li+ hydration cells. Although the hydrated melt has a high viscosity (203 mPa at 30 °C), it showed super ionic behavior with a high ionic conductivity of 3 mS cm−1. The Li(TFSI)0.7(BETI)0.3·2H2O hydrate melt showed an extended anodic limit of water oxidation up to 5.05 V (at Pt) as a result of the lowered HOMO level of the water molecules due to Li+ hydration and an extended cathodic limit of HER down to 1.25 V (at Al) as a result of the passivation layer on the negative electrode. Thanks to the low cathodic limit of the hydrated melt electrolyte, low voltage commercial anode such as Li4Ti5O12 with a low reaction potential (1.55 V versus Li+/Li) could be cycled reversibly with a high capacity (175 mA h g−1). Also, the extremely wide ESW of 3.8 V (vs. Li/Li+) enabled the coupling of the Li4Ti5O12 anode with a high voltage cathode such as LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 or LiCoO2. Compared to the dilute electrolyte, the hydrated melt electrolyte permits reversible cell operation with the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode and enables a high charge cut off voltage for the LiCoO2 cathode. This hydrated melt driven high voltage (∼2.3–3.1 V) enabled an excellent energy density of >130 W h kg−1 in both the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li4Ti5O12 or LiCoO2/Li4Ti5O12 full cell.
Lukatskaya et al.65 proposed a cost-effective and environmentally benign WiBSE comprising potassium acetate (KOAc) and lithium-acetate (LiOAc) salt against the high cost and toxicity of fluorinated salt-based WiSE. The KOAc system alone could satisfy the WiS condition with a salt concentration of 27 m. However, in presence of LiOAc, a eutectic mixture could be formed with an LiOAc mole fraction of 0.2. The mixed acetate based WiBS system prepared by mixing 32 m KOAc with 8 m LiOAc corresponded to a water to cation ratio as low as 1.3. The Li0.2K0.8OAc·1.3H2O WiBS system showed a high conductivity of 5.3 mS cm−1 (at 25 °C) and liquid behavior at a temperature as low as −40 °C. The Li0.2K0.8OAc·1.3H2O WiBSE pushed the HER onset potential to as low as 1.5 V and 1.35 V (vs. Li+/Li) at the Ti and glassy carbon current collector, respectively (Fig. 6(a)). Employing the Ti current collector, the OER potential of the 40 m mixed acetate electrolyte could be pushed beyond 5 V (vs. Li/Li+) (Fig. 6(a)). This expanded ESW allowed the performance evaluation of the anode with lower intercalation potentials, such as Mo6S8, TiO2, and Li4Ti5O12, or the cathode with a high deintercalation potential such as LiFePO4 or LiMn2O4, all of which showed reversible redox peaks in the CV plots (Fig. 6(b)). Furthermore, the electrodes showed comparable electrochemical performance in terms of the specific capacity and rate capability to that of the conventional organic electrolyte. A 2.5 V full cell could be fabricated with the mixed acetate-based WiBSE, employing the C–TiO2 anode and the LiMn2O4 cathode, which showed a high specific capacity of 45 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 6  (a) The CV plots (0.2 mV s−1) of 40 m mixed acetate along with 27 m KOAc and 1 m KOAc at different electrodes: Pt at the top, Ti and glassy carbon at the bottom; (b) CV profile of Mo6S8, TiO2, and Li4Ti5O12, LiFePO4, or LiMn2O4 electrodes in the mixed acetate WiBSE (reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


2.1.4. WiS-gel polymer electrolyte. 
WiSE or WiBSE can be mixed with a suitable polymeric matrix or can be confined within a polymeric network to fabricate the WiS gel polymer electrolyte (GPE). Such an electrolyte system with a suitably designed polymer having functional groups capable of bonding water molecules of WiSE or WiBSE can further arrest the remaining free water molecules and expand the ESW of the electrolyte. Also, the WiS-gel polymer electrolyte could enable the fabrication of a flexible device, prevent electrolyte leaching, and allow safer cell operation over mechanical stress.
Langevin et al.66 developed a stable WiBS-based aqueous gel polymer electrolyte made via the UV-mediated polymerization of water-soluble acrylates (2-hydroxyethylacrylate (HEA)) in the presence of WiBS (21 m LiTFSI and 7 m LiOTF in H2O) with 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMPA) as the photoinitiator. Poly(ethylene glycol) and methyl ether acrylate (MPEGA) was used as the co-monomers along with HEA to modulate the polymer tack and flexibility, while poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate (PEGDA) was used as the cross-linker. The GPE composed of 75 wt% WIBS and 25% polymer showed the highest room temperature ionic conductivity of 0.6 mS cm−1. The polymer matrix having hydroxyl functional groups could immobilize the water molecules to further reduce the water activity and widened the ESW to 4.1 V (0.8–4.9 V vs. Li), which is much wider than the 3 V ESW of 28 m WiBSE. The expanded ESW allowed the use of the Li4Ti5O12 anode in the full cell with stable electrochemical performance over hundred cycles and high CE. However, the ionic conductivity and inclusion of the insulating polymer bears a tradeoff relationship, which restricts the power performance.
Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) is a widely investigated matrix to fabricate GPE due to its low cost, robustness, and flexibility in the form of a film, and has been mostly used as an electrolyte to fabricate flexible supercapacitors and rechargeable aqueous batteries.67–73 Yang et al.74 developed a WiS GPE by mixing 10 wt% polyvinyl alcohol in 25 m LiTFSI electrolyte in water at 95 °C. The WiS-GPE showed a wide ESW of 3.2 V (1.7–4.9 V vs. Li) and a room temperature conductivity of 9 mS cm−1, which is comparable to that of the 25 m LiTFSI WiSE. The WiS-GPE employed in a symmetric flexible LiVPO4F cell showed an output voltage of 2.4 V with a very high energy (141 W h kg−1), power density (20600 W kg−1), and unprecedented cycling stability (>4000 cycles). When subjected to harsh conditions such as bending and cutting, the cells did not fail but could still operate and maintain a stable cell performance in the ambient environment.
Dai et al.75 introduced a hydrogel-in-salt electrolyte (HiSE) constructed with polyacrylamide-chitosan-based hydrogel (PACH/SiO2) soaked with 10 M LiTFSI. The PACH/SiO2 hydrogel 3D network was synthesized by direct copolymerization with polyacrylamide (PAAm), as shown in Fig. 7(a). Chitosan (CS) and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) offers abundant hydroxyl and amino groups, which can bind the water molecules of WiSE. Notably, compared to WiSE of the same salt concentration (10 M), the HiSE could afford 5-fold improved ionic conductivity (51.3 mS cm−1) thanks to the 3D Li+ channels available inside the hydrogels and 0.6 V widened ESW (2.6 V) due to the further reduced water activity enabled by restricted water mobility by the polymer. An aqueous lithium-ion battery was fabricated using LiMn2O4 as the cathode and acetylene black as the anode to demonstrate the versatility of HiSE. A specific capacity of 110.7 mA h g−1 was achieved at a low current density of 0.1 A g−1 with stable capacity retention of 90.1% after 2000 cycles.
 Fig. 7  (a) Demonstration of the synthesis and structural architectures of HiSE. Color code: white, pink, grey, blue, red, green, and yellow balls stand for H, Li, C, N, O, F, and S atoms, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 75, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) CV plot of the LiTFSI–HFE gel-coated graphite anode in the WiBS-gel electrolyte in a three-electrode setup with Ag/AgCl reference electrode and active carbon counter electrode; the CV plot of the LiVPO4F cathode against the LiTFSI–HFE gel-coated Li metal reference electrode in the WiBS gel electrolyte. The CV test was carried out at 0.5 mV s−1 scan rate. (c) GCD profile of the LiTFSI–HFE gel = coated graphite anode in the WiBS-gel electrolyte at 0.1C in a three-electrode setup with the Ag/AgCl reference electrode and active carbon counter electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 56, Copyright (2017) Elsevier Inc.). 
However, the high cost of the TFSI− or OTF−-based electrolytes limits the practical utility of the electrolyte. He et al.33 developed a “water-in-ionomer”-type ionomeric aqueous gel electrolyte, which contained a relatively high fraction of water; however, it possesses properties similar to those of WiSE. The ionomeric aqueous gel electrolyte, which is non-fluorinated and non-toxic, is prepared by the lithiation of polyacrylic acid (LiPAA) and the gel containing 50% LiPAA exhibits excellent dimensional stability, high ionic conductivity of 6.5 mS cm−1 at 20 °C, high Li+ transference number of 0.77, and a wide ESW of 2.6 V. To validate the importance of the water-in-ionomer electrolytes, various full cells such as TiO2//LiMn2O4, TiO2//LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4, and LiTi2(PO4)3/LiMn2O4 were fabricated and tested. Among them, LiTi2(PO4)3/LiMn2O4 showed high energy density of 77 W h kg−1 with exceptional capacity retention over 100 cycles, whereas TiO2/LiMn2O4 delivered a high specific energy of 124 W h kg−1 with an average output voltage of 2.1 V. This result provides an opportunity to investigate the inexpensive and non-toxic fluorine-free electrolytes for high energy density aqueous metal-ion batteries.
Although the anodic stability limit (∼4.9 V) of a majority of WiSE or WiBSE can accommodate most of the high voltage cathodes, low cathodic stability allows only few anodes that operate at relatively high potential such as Mo6S8,8,26,46 Li4Ti5O12,30,31,64 anatase TiO2,32,65 or NaTi2(PO4)3.76–80 Yang et al.56 adopted an inhomogeneous additive approach to overcome the cathodic stability limit of WiSE, in which a translucent gel comprising highly-fluorinated ether (HFE) mixed with 0.5 M LiTFSI (LiTFSI–HFE gel) and 10 wt% polyethylene oxide was coated on the anode surface. This LiTFSI–HFE gel is highly hydrophobic and remains completely phase-separated from WiSE, thus minimizing the competitive water reduction on the electrode interface. During the initial lithiation process, the LiTFSI–HFE gel decomposes into solid Li–F and organic fluorinated hydrocarbon species forming SEI. Thus, the anode can be kept isolated throughout from the aqueous environment and allow the use of conventional low voltage anodes such as graphite or even lithium metal. The CV plot (Fig. 7(b)) of the LiTFSI–HFE gel pre-coated graphite anode (tested in three electrode setup with the Ag/AgCl reference electrode and active carbon counter electrode) in the WiBS-gel polymer electrolyte (21 m LiTFSI + 7 m LiOTF and 10 wt% PVA) showed sharp and symmetric cathodic/anodic peaks, indicating highly reversible Li+ intercalation with fast kinetics. The galvanostatic charge–discharge profile (Fig. 7(c)) showed the formation of lithiated graphite compound (LIC) at stage 1, as evidenced from the plateau at <0.20 V accompanied by a high specific capacity of 325 mA h g−1. A series of aqueous lithium-ion cells were fabricated using LiVPO4F/LiMn2O4 as the cathodes and graphite/lithium as the anode with a thin layer of the LiTFSI–HFE gel and gel-WiBS coated on the anode side. Employing a LiTFSI–HFE gel-precoated Li metal foil as the reference electrode, the CV analysis of the LiVPO4F cathode in gel-WiBS showed a stable delithiation potential of 4.20 V. With the LiTFSI–HFE gel precoated graphite anode coupled with the LiVPO4F cathode, a 4.0 V aqueous LiB was fabricated employing the WiBS-gel polymer electrolyte.
Thus, the use of WiSE, WiBSE, water-in-ionomer electrolyte, and hydrate melt electrolytes has significantly improved the ESW of the aqueous electrolyte and allowed the assembly of a high voltage cathode with a low voltage anode having stable cycling performance. Nevertheless, the ultrahigh salt concentration in WiSE or WiBSE tends to worsen the viscosity and ionic conductivity of the electrolyte. Moreover, since the salt concentration is near the saturation limit, a lowering of the operational temperature can severely affect the electrochemical performance due to salt precipitation. Furthermore, the fluorinated lithium salts are expensive and toxic. Although the mixed acetate-based salts are inexpensive, their inability of interphase formation and the high-water amount needed (>30%) to minimize the electrode/electrolyte contact resistance in the LiPAA gel-based water-in-ionomer electrolyte compromises the cycle stability and the ESW of the electrolyte, respectively.

2.2. Water-in-salt electrolytes for aqueous sodium ion batteries
Rechargeable sodium-ion batteries are another compelling alternative storage device as sodium is relatively abundant in nature and low cost. Despite the potential low cost of aqueous sodium ion batteries, the choice of electrode materials such as polyanionic compounds, layered oxides, and Prussian blue derivatives for aqueous electrolyte exhibits low energy density when compared to the Li-ion batteries. The cathodic and anodic limit of water decomposition vs. Na is ∼2.3 V and ∼3.6 V, respectively, which allows the assembly of only limited pairs of anodes and cathodes, thus limiting the practical implementation of aqueous SIBs.81–85
Suo et al.76 first demonstrated that stable Na+-conducting SEI can be formed from concentrated (9.26 m) sodium trifluoromethane sulfonate (NaOTf)-based electrolyte to push the cathodic and anodic limit of water decomposition to 1.7 V and 4.2 V, respectively. Theoretical study suggests that in dilute NaOTf (<5 m concentration), the Na+ solvation sheath contains at the most two layers (Fig. 8(a)) with six tightly bonded water molecule in the primary solvation shell and six relatively loosely bonded water molecules in the secondary shell. But at an increased salt concentration of >9 m, there are less H2O molecules available for the formation of the primary solvation sheath and the electrolyte can be viewed as a liquefied salt. Unlike LiTFSI, where a large concentration of salt (21 m) is required to form a stable SEI, for the NaOTf salt, only 9.26 m was found to satisfy the condition with ∼63% the salt species existing as contact ion pairs (CIP) or aggregates (AGG). The high ion aggregation and intimate Na–F contacts in AGG/CIP help in uplifting the salt reduction potential above that of the HER. Also, the lower energy penalty involved the formation of Na–F during salt reduction compared to that of the formation of Li–F from LiTFSI facilitates stable SEI formation even with this low salt concentration. 9.26 m NaOTf showed a wide ESW of 2.5 V (4.2 V–1.7 V vs. Na, Fig. 8(b)), which allowed the coupling of the Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell. Thanks to the kinetic protection provided by the stable SEI (composed of NaF) in the 9.26 m NaOTf, the Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell exhibited excellent cycling behavior (0.086% capacity loss per cycle) as compared to 2 m NaOTf (<0.18% capacity loss per cycle) and 1 m Na2SO4 (0.37% capacity loss per cycle) electrolyte (Fig. 8(c)).
 Fig. 8  (a) Computed solvation structure of Na+ in NaOTf-based salt-in-water and water-in-salt systems. (b) The CV curves (10 mV s−1 scan rate) measured on inert electrodes in 9.26 m NaOTf, which is overlaid with the first CV curve (0.1 mV s−1) of the Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2 cathode and the NaTi2(PO4)3 anode in 9.26 m NaOTf WiSE. (c) Cycle stability plot of the Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell in different electrolytes (reproduced with permission from ref. 76, Copyright © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) LSV plots of 35 m NaFSI on the SS current collector at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate, which is overlayed with the CV plots of the NaTi2(PO4)3 anode and the Na3(VOPO4)2F cathode at 0.05 mV s−1 scan rate (reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society). (e) ESW of the NaClO4 solution of different concentrations (1–17 m in water) measured by CV (1 mV s−1) on gold electrode vs. saturated calomel electrode, along with the magnified HER (left) and OER (right) region. (f) Cycle stability plot of the Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell in different electrolytes. TEM analysis of the NaTi2(PO4)3 anode after 20 GCD cycles in 1 m NaClO4. (g) Electrolyte, with no SEI layer, and in 17 m NaClO4 (h) with a uniform SEI protective layer (reproduced with permission from ref. 79, Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd). 
Zhang et al.80 studied the same WiSE (9.2 m NaOTf) in a symmetric Na-ion cell employing carbon-coated NASICON-type Na2VTi(PO4)3 as both the cathode and the anode. The full cell showed a stable specific capacity of 51 mA h g−1 (0.2C) with a good rate capability (24 mA h g−1 capacity at 20C) and excellent specific capacity by retaining 99% specific capacity after 1000 cycles with 100% CE. Notably, replacing the WiSE with concentrated NaClO4 (8 m) also showed comparable capacity at a low current; however, the rate capability and cycle stability was poor due to the inability of formation of any protective layer from the 8 m NaClO4 electrolyte.
Unlike LiTFSI, NaTFSI shows less solubility in water, with the maximum achievable concentration of 8 m, which shows a low ESW of only 1.8 V. However, sodium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (NaFSI) has high solubility in water thanks to the low lattice energy of NaFSI, small size and high charge density of FSI−, and the overall high hydration energy. Kühnel et al.77 demonstrated a 35 m NaFSI-based WiSE with a water to salt molar ratio < 2:1, which exhibits a wide ESW of 2.6 V (Fig. 8(d)). 35 m NaFSI exhibits a high conductivity of 8 mS cm−1 (at 20 °C), which is close to that of LiTFSI. This high ESW enabled the coupling of the high voltage Na3(VOPO4)2F cathode with a low voltage NaTi2(PO4)3 anode, with the sodiation/desodiation potential well inside the ESW limit (Fig. 8(d)). In the half cell, both the electrodes exhibited high reversibility, demonstrating the feasibility of fabricating >2 V aqueous SIB.
Recently, Lee et al.79 demonstrated a WiSE with a conventional low cost sodium salt, NaClO4 (17 m). Deconvoluted Raman spectra of the ClO4− stretching band suggested a significant change in the cation–anion coordination environment for 17 m NaClO4 (vs. 1 m NaClO4) with ∼42.9% SSIP, ∼57% CIP/AGG, and no free anion. The 17 m NaClO4 WiSE exhibits a wide electrochemical window up to 2.7 V (vs. Na+/Na), with 4.4 V and 2.7 V as the anodic and cathodic limit, respectively (Fig. 8(e)), and high conductivity of 108 mS cm−1 at 25 °C. The electrolyte performance was demonstrated in the Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell, which showed a decent discharge capacity of 45 mA h g−1 (at 0.2C, based on the total electrode weight), accompanied by an excellent rate capability with 34 mA h g−1 capacity retention at 10C. Notably, the Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/17 m NaClO4/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell showed much improved cycle stability (75% capacity retention over 200 cycle with 99% CE) as compared to that of 1 m NaClO4 and 9.26 m NaOTf WiSE (Fig. 8(f)). TEM analysis of the cycled NaTi2(PO4)3 anode (Fig. 8(h)) in 17 m NaClO4 confirmed the formation of a uniform SEI layer; however, no such kinetic protection was observed in yjr 1 m NaClO4 electrolyte (Fig. 8(g)). The SEI was mainly composed of Na2CO3 and NaOH, which are produced due to the reaction of sodium with dissolved oxygen and CO2 in the 17 m NaClO4 WiSE. Although Na2CO3 and NaOH are soluble in water, the restricted water count in WiSE makes the SEI stable and improves the cycle stability.

2.2.1 Role of the bi-salt on the electrochemical performance. 
Although 9.2 m NaOTf satisfies the WiSE with 63% CIP/AGG, a fraction of free water still exists, in which the SEI component (Na–F) exhibits moderate solubility. The free water molecule must be reduced in order to fabricate a highly stable cell. To overcome these issues, Jiang et al.86 demonstrated a WiBSE for SIB by introducing 22 m tetraethylammonium triflate (TEAOTf) with 9 m NaOTf, thus fabricating a highly concentrated (31 m) inert cation assisted water-in bisalt electrolyte (IC-WiBSE). The IC-WiBSE exhibited a wide ESW of 3.3 V (Fig. 9(a)) with Al and Ti as the negative and positive electrode current collectors, respectively. The relatively large size of TEA+ restricts its undesirable intercalation in the electrode, which is an added advantage of the IC-WiBS system over the mixed cation-based WiBSE, where the presence of the second cation often shows intercalation behavior and compromises the structural stability and electrochemical performance. The solvation shell analysis of the IC-WiBSE revealed that ∼55% Na+ exists as free ions, which mostly diffuse together with the water molecule, whereas ∼32% exists as CIP and 13% exists as AGG. The MD simulation study found nanoscale heterogeneity in the electrolyte structure with an interpenetrating network of transient Na+(H2O)n (n = 4, 5) nanodomains with fast Na+ transport pathway within the TEAOTF framework. Due to the large fraction of free Na+, the ion transportation mechanism mainly follows a vehicular mechanism, where the ion moves with its solvation cell, with the apparent transference number of 0.23 at 303 K. IC-WiBSE was employed in a full cell using NaTiOPO4 as the anode with the Na1.88Mn[Fe(CN)6]0.97·1.35H2O (or NaMnHCF) cathode, which showed an average voltage of 1.74 V, leading to high energy density of 71 W h kg−1. Notably, unlike the 9 m NaOTf WiSE system, where the dissolution of the transition metals of the NaMnHCF cathode inevitably causes a quick capacity decay, 31 m IC-WiBSE could effectively diminish the cathode dissolution due to the further reduced water content and exhibited excellent cycle stability with 97.9% capacity retention after 50 cycles (Fig. 9(b)). The digital images of the electrolyte from the cycle shell to compare the dissolution of the active materials in different electrolytes is shown in Fig. 9(c). The NaMnHCF/IC-WiBSE/NaTiOPO4 full cell exhibited a high average voltage of 1.74 V, leading to a high energy density of 71 W h kg−1, accompanied by excellent cycle stability with 90% (at 0.25C) and 76% capacity retention (1C) after 200 and 800 cycles, respectively.
 Fig. 9  (a) The ESW of the 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf electrolyte and IC-WiBSE (9 mol kg−1 NaOTF + 22 mol kg−1 TEAOTf) from the linear sweep voltammetric measurements performed in the three-electrode cell at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) Cycling performance of the NaMnHCF cathode in 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf and the IC-WiBSE. (c) The dissolution amount of the transition metal ions (Fe and Mn) after 50 cycles at 1C in 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf and 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf + 22 mol kg−1 TEAOTf electrolytes, respectively. The insets show the optical photographs of the cycled electrolytes. Both electrochemical tests are performed in the three-electrode cell with 4 mL aqueous electrolyte (reproduced with permission from ref. 86, Copyright © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Digital images of (25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI) after storage at room temperature for 6 months, exhibiting no salt crystallization, whereas the digital images of 21 m LiTFSI, 19.5 m LiTFSI + 8.3 m LiBETI (hydrate-melt), and 35 m NaFSI shows clear salt crystallization only after 2 weeks of storing at room temperature (22 °C). The cycle stability study of NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F full cells at 1C current in (e) 25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI and (f) 35 m NaFSI electrolyte. The insets are the selected charge–discharge profiles during cycling. (g) Micrographs of glass fiber separators extracted from the cycled cells in the 25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI and 35 m NaFSI electrolyte, where the latter shows the crystallization precipitation of the salt, causing quick capacity fading. (h) Cycle stability of the NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F full cells in 25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI electrolyte operated at 30°, 10°, and −10 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 87, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). 
Similar to the mixed cation-based WiBSE as proposed by Lukatskaya et al.65 for LIBs, as an alternative to toxic and expensive fluorinated electrolytes, Han et al.78 proposed a 40 m mixed acetate (32 m KOAc and 8 m NaOAc)-based WiBSE for SIBs. The 40 m WiBSE showed a wide ESW of 4.5 V, which allowed the use of the conventional Al current collector. A full cell was fabricated with the Na2MnFe(CN)6 cathode and the NaTi2(PO4)3/C anode, which showed a specific capacity of 32 mA h g−1 (0.2 A g−1 current).
One of the major hurdles that aqueous batteries face at harsh conditions such as low temperature is the crystallization that they undergo, which may cause battery failure. To avoid crystallization, Reber et al.87 developed an asymmetric anion-based electrolyte that can suppress crystallization in highly concentrated electrolytes and enable high-voltage operation even at low temperatures. In the hybrid electrolyte, they substituted a fraction of the 35 m NaFSI with sodium (fluorosulfonyl)(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (NaFTFSI) as the asymmetric anion source. The presence of asymmetric FTSI anions constrains the formation of a long-range order, thus showing partially strong super-cooling behavior, which can suppress the crystallization of the dissolved salts in concentrated electrolytes. A number of electrolytes such as 21 m LiTFSI, hydrate-melt (19.5 m LiTFSI + 8.3 m LiBETI), 25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI, and 35 m NaFSI were tested at various temperatures, which showed a liquidus temperature above 20 °C, resulting in partial crystallization when stored at room temperature, as seen in Fig. 9(d). Interestingly, when 25 m NaFSI with 10 m NaFTFSI was prepared as the electrolyte, it did not show any crystallization at the room temperature for a period of six months, which suggests that the presence of asymmetric FTFSI anions helps in effectively suppressing crystallization. This caused an improved cycle stability over the 35 m NaFSI electrolyte when used in a full cell with NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) as the anode and Na3(VOPO4)2F (NVPOF) as the cathode (Fig. 9(e) and (f)). Salt crystallization on the separator for the 35 m NaFSI electrolyte in the cycled cell is shown in Fig. 9(g). The asymmetric anion-based WiBSE also exhibited excellent electrochemical performance over a wide temperature range (−10 °C to 30 °C). Notably, the 2.0 V full cell (NVPOF/NTP) showed a maximum capacity of 83 mA h g−1, 81 mA h g−1, and 65 mA h g−1 (12th cycle) at different temperatures of 30, 10, and −10 °C, and retained the respective specific capacity of 72 mA h g−1, 61 mA h g−1, and 54 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, respectively (Fig. 9(h)). The cell could also be stably cycled over 500 cycles at −10 °C without any salt crystallization in the electrolyte.
Nevertheless, although the use of Na-ion-based WiSE and WiBSE improved the ESW of the electrolyte and the overall cycle life in the full cell, the energy density was still far from satisfactory, mostly due to the limited capacity and low output voltage of the electrodes. Also, similar to the ALiB, the high cost and toxicity of the fluorinated salt limit the commercial suitability of the system.

2.3. Water-in-salt electrolytes for rechargeable potassium-ion batteries
Rechargeable K-ion batteries (KIBs) offer few advantages over LIBs, such as high abundance, non-toxicity, and cost efficiency. Also, due to the much lower standard reduction potential (−2.71 V vs. SHE) than Li, the KIBs show better stability in aqueous environment. In addition, due to the smaller Stokes radius of solvated K+ in the liquid electrolyte, K+ intercalated electrodes may potentially offer superior rate capability. However, technology suffers from the limited availability of both the electrodes and electrolytes.88–92 Recently, employing WiSE has shown promising behavior in aqueous KIB chemistry.
Leonard and coworkers93 first demonstrated the 30 m KOAc-based WiS system as the electrolyte for rechargeable high voltage aqueous KIBs. The ultra-high concentration reduced the water activity and enabled a wide ESW of 3.2 V (−1.7 V to +1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl) with Al as the negative current collector and Ti as the positive current collector. On the other hand, using the same set of current collectors, the 10 m and 1 m KOAC electrolytes showed ESW of 2.4 V and 1.4 V, respectively. The widened ESW enabled the cycling of the KTi2(PO4)3 anode with reversible K+ storage, which otherwise operates only in non-aqueous electrolytes. Notably, the cell reversibility increased during the first few cycles, indicating the formation of a possible passivation layer at the anode. The KTi2(PO4)3 anode showed a specific capacity of 58 mA h g−1 and retained 69% of the capacity after 11000 cycles at 1 A g−1.
However, only a few cathode materials have been explored as aqueous KIB cathodes in acetate-based electrolytes. For example, Prussian blue analogues (PBA) as the cathode show outstanding electrochemical performance in neutral electrolytes because of their high stability in water and open framework structures.94–98 However, the acetate-based WiSE is alkaline in nature (for 30 m KOAc, pH = 10.9) and causes faster capacity decay for the PBA-based cathode due to the dissolution of Mn and Fe in alkaline WiSE. Very recently, Han et al.99 demonstrated that the dissolution of Mn and Fe in the acetate-based WiSE can be suppressed by gelifying with a small amount (2 wt%) of carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). CMC offers charged functional groups to interact with the free water molecules and thus restrain the movement of the water, further reducing its electrochemical activity. The gelified KOAc electrolyte had a high conductivity (22.3 mS cm−1) and reduced pH (9.5) compared to that of 20 m KOAc (pH = 10.4). This reduced pH and reduced water activity helps to prevent the dissolution of Mn and Fe in the electrolyte, thus improving the cycle stability and reversibility in charge storage. The electrolyte performance was demonstrated in K1.84Mn[Fe(CN)6]0.96·0.21H2O/activated carbon cell, which showed a high discharge capacity of 41 mA h g−1 after 400 consecutive cycles with CE as high as 99.3%.
Jiang and coworkers100 demonstrated that PBA electrodes can also be effectively cycled in 22 m KCF3SO3 WiSE thanks to the large ESW (∼3 V) and neutral pH. Also, 22 m KCF3SO3 WiSE has low viscosity (6.5 mPa s at 25 °C), high conductivity (76 mS cm−1 at 25 °C, 10 mS cm−1 at −20 °C), and more importantly, offers a wide operational temperature range (−20 to 60 °C). The electrochemical performance was evaluated in a full cell employing Mn-rich PBA (K1.85Fe0.33Mn0.67[Fe(CN)6]0.98·0.77H2O) cathode and an organic PTCDI (3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylicdiamide) anode, which exhibited an average voltage of 1.27 V. Unlike the dilute electrolyte, the 22 m KCF3SO3 not only allowed full battery operation above 2 V (at 0.1C) but also inhibits the dissolution of both the electrodes in the electrolytes to ensure a high energy density of 80 W h kg−1 accompanied by an excellent cycling stability with 73% capacity retention over 2000 cycles at 4C. Notably, on switching from 25 °C to a temperature as low as −20 °C, the full cell lost only ∼24% of its capacity.
The conductivity of xCF3SO3-based (x – Li, Na, and K) electrolytes was measured with respect to the concentration. Interestingly, the conductivity increased on increasing the concentration upto 5 m and then gradually decreased on further increasing the salt concentration; thus, there is an increasing conductivity trend on increasing the cation size.
Recently, Chen et al.101 demonstrated 30 m potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (KFSI)-based WiSE with s wide ESW of 3.97 V (−1.55 V to 2.42 V vs. Hg/Hg2Cl2), which is much wider than the ESW of 2.7 V (−0.83 V to 1.74 V vs. Hg/Hg2Cl2) for 1 m KFSI (Fig. 10(a)). The expanded cathodic limit enabled the reversible cycling of β-perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (β-PTCDA) anode. The CV plots shown in Fig. 10(b) showed three pairs of overlapping redox peaks (−0.89 V/−0.55 V, −0.34 V/−0.21 V, and −0.25/−0.08 V (vs. Hg/Hg2Cl2)) even after 20 cycles, indicating excellent reversibility. Notably, the potential of the first redox peak sits beyond the cathodic limit of 1 m KFSI; however, it sits well within the cathodic limit of 30 m KFSI. β-PTCDA showed a reversible 2-electron transfer process between the β-PTCDA and K2PTCDA to promote a discharge capacity as high as 145 mA h g−1 (0.2 A g−1) with a high average potential of 2.65 V (vs. K/K+). In addition, the reduced water activity significantly diminished the dissolution of the organic electrode in the electrolyte (Fig. 10(c)), enabling excellent cycle stability with 82% capacity retention after 500 cycles at 2 A g−1. When coupled with the potassium iron(II) hexacyanoferrate (KFHCF) cathode, the full cell delivered a capacity of 39 mA h g−1 at a low current density of 1.25C with 92% capacity retention even at a high current of 25C. Interestingly, almost 89% of the capacity was retained at the end of 1000 cycles at a high current density of 12.5C, which shows an exceptional cycling stability (Fig. 10(d)).
 Fig. 10  (a) Linear voltammetry curves recorded at 10 mV s−1 in 1, 10, and 30 m KFSI electrolyte. (b) CV profiles of β-PTCDA measured using a three-electrode battery at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) Study of the dissolution behavior of the β-PTCDA electrode as a function of the electrolyte concentration (1 m and 30 m KFSI) with digital images of the cycled separators soaked NaOH solution (2 mol L−1). A deeper color solution means more dissolved material in the separator membrane. (d) Cycling performance of AFKIB at 12.5C for 1000 cycles (reproduced with permission from ref. 101, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020). 
3. Water-in-salt electrolytes for multivalent metal ion batteries
Polyvalent metal-ion batteries offer higher volumetric energy density compared to monovalent metal ion batteries.102–104 However, the high charge density of the polyvalent cations results in slow diffusion due to the large cation–anion attractive forces and cation–cation repulsive force. This restricts the overall electrochemical performance. However, in aqueous electrolyte, the charge density of the hydrated cation is reduced due to the shielding effect of water, resulting in fast diffusion kinetics for polyvalent metal ions.
3.1 Water-in-salt electrolytes for Zn-ion battery
Recently, zinc ion aqueous battery has emerged as one of the most promising energy storage systems for grid scale energy storage thanks to the high theoretical capacity of zinc, high abundance, low toxicity, and low cost.105,106 Unlike alkali metal ion batteries, where the formation of a stable interphase is one of the most desired electrolyte property, metallic zinc shows stable electrochemical performance in aqueous electrolytes thanks to the −0.76 V standard reduction potential. The main challenge in aqueous zinc-ion batteries (AZIB) comes from the irreversible Zn plating/striping at the anode and the dissolution of the most established cathodes, such as vanadium or manganese-based oxides or Prussian blue analogues in the aqueous system.
In dilute aqueous electrolytes, the solvation structure of Zn2+ can be considered as Zn(H2O)62+, where six water molecules are strongly bonded to Zn2+ through the O atom. However, the cell performance in such an electrolyte is restricted by the severe irreversibility issue associated with reversible Zn plating/striping due to the high energy barrier for solvated Zn2+ to desolvate and deposit. Moreover, the (OH−) generated via water decomposition forms Zn(OH)2 and insoluble ZnO at the anode surface, causing electrolyte draining and dendrite formation. Thus, designing a highly reversible Zn anode requires arresting the electrochemical activity of free water molecules and altering the solvation structure of the charge carrier, which can promote energetically favorable desolvation and deposition of Zn2+ at the anode.
Wang and coworkers107 overcame the irreversibility of the Zn anode by developing a 21 m neutral WiBSE (pH = 7), comprising 1 m Zn(TFSI)2 and a high concentration of the supporting electrolyte (20 m LiTFSI). Various structural, spectroscopic, and MD simulation studies revealed that the high population of the TFSI anion altered the solvation structure of Zn2+ from Zn(H2O)6 to largely CIP, where the Zn2+ solvation sheath is occupied primarily by TFSI, with six coordinating oxygens all from TFSI. The CIP nature of the charge carrier enabled dendrite-free Zn plating/stripping with a high coulombic efficiency of 100% in a Zn‖Zn symmetric cell under galvanostatic conditions. Notably, the Zn anode showed a moderately smooth surface with no traces of ZnO, as shown by the X-ray diffraction profile. Importantly, the highly concentrated mixed cation electrolyte with expanded ESW allowed the fabrication of a Zn/LiMn2O4 hybrid cell, where LiMn2O4 undergoes reversible Li+ (de)intercalation, whereas Zn strips/plates reversibly at the Zn anode. The hybrid Zn–Li full cell could reach a high energy density of 70 W h kg−1 (based on the total weight of the electrodes and the electrolyte), accompanied by excellent cycle stability with 85% capacity retention after 4000 cycles at a CE of 99.9%.
The beneficial properties of the Zn and Li salt-based hybrid water-in-salt electrolytes were further explored against different cathodes to fabricate the Zn–Li hybrid metal ion batteries. Notably, most of the cathode materials explored for aqueous zinc ion batteries should also be able to host the Li+ ion, considering its similar size and lower charge density. For example, Hu et al.108 explored the 22 m hybrid water-in-salt electrolyte (21 m LiTFSI and 1 m Zn(CF3SO3)2) in Zn//V2O5 hybrid batteries. In the hybrid battery, the high salt concentration ensures the CIP formation to allow reversible Zn deposition dissolution at the anode and the presence of a high concentration of Li+ along with Zn2+ directs the discharging/charging process to be a co-(de)intercalation for both the Li+ and Zn2+ ions in the V2O5 cathode. This resulted in an increase in the discharge platform from 0.6 V to 1.0 V and a high discharge capacity of 238 mA h g−1 (at 50 mA g−1). Notably, the hybrid cell showed excellent cycle behavior with ∼80% of initial capacity retention after 2000 cycles (at 2 A g−1).
Zhao et al.109 fabricated an energy dense (183 W h kg−1, based on the total weight of both the electrodes) aqueous hybrid battery with the Zn anode and the LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4 cathode employing a similar mixed cation WIBSE (21 m of LiTFSI and 0.5 m of ZnSO4). The highly concentrated electrolyte arrested the water activity and the cell could be operated >1.8 V by combining the Zn dissolution/deposition at the anode and the Li+ insertion/extraction mechanism in the LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4 cathode. Notably, the full utilization of the cathode could be realized only in a certain pH range (4–5.5).
However, the charge storage mechanism of the vanadium-based AZIB cathode in conventional aqueous electrolytes is mostly governed by the cationic redox chemistry, with a limited average operating voltage (∼0.8 V). The capacity and the average operating voltage of AZIB can be significantly increased by unleashing the anion (oxygen) redox chemistry of vanadium-based cathode materials. The oxygen redox chemistry usually occurs at a high voltage of ∼2.0 V vs. Zn2+/Zn, which is above the OER limit (∼1.98 V) of the traditional 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 or Zn(Tr)2 electrolyte. Wan et al.110 demonstrated that the OER limit could be pushed to ∼2.6 V (Fig. 11(a)) by employing 21 M LiTFSI/1 M Zn(Tr)2 WiBSE. The WiBSE allowed a large operating potential window (0.8–2.1 V). The utility of the WiBSE in realizing oxygen redox chemistry was validated by the VOPO4 cathode. The WiBSE allowed reversible Zn2+ insertion/extraction within the voltage range of 0.8–1.8 V, followed by the redox reaction of lattice oxygen in VOPO4 within the voltage range of 1.8–2.1 V (Fig. 11(b) and (c)). Notably, the oxygen redox could deliver ∼27% additional capacity, accompanied by an improved average operating voltage to ∼1.56 V, which resulted in ∼36% increased energy density (217 W h kg−1). Furthermore, reduced water activity in the WiBSE could prevent Zn corrosion at the anode and VOPO4 dissolution in the electrolyte. Notably, expanding the operating potential (0.8–2.1 V) to extract the oxygen redox chemistry caused a significantly improved cycle stability with only 7% capacity loss over 1000 cycles, as compared to the 51% loss when the cell was cycled within a potential window of 0.8–1.8 V (Fig. 11(d)).
 Fig. 11  (a) CV curve of the Zn electrode in different electrolytes showing a shift in the OER potential in the WiSE. (b) CV plot of Zn//VOPO4 in 21 M LiTFSI/1 M Zn(Tr)2 WiBSE, showing a reversible redox peak for Zn2+ insertion/extraction and the oxygen redox reaction. (c) Charge/discharge curves of Zn/VOPO4 batteries at 0.05 A g−1 in 21 M LiTFSI/1 M Zn(Tr)2 WiBSE. (d) Cycle stability of the Zn/VOPO4 cell tested at different potential windows engaging (0.8–2.1 V)/without engaging (0.8–1.8 V) the oxygen redox chemistry (reproduced with permission from ref. 110, Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
However, the high cost and toxicity concerns of the fluorinated electrolyte defeat the goal of building a cost-effective and ecofriendly battery. To overcome these drawbacks, Zhang et al.111 introduced a highly concentrated 30 m ZnCl2-based WiSE, which exhibited a wide ESW of 2.3 V as compared to 1.6 V ESW for the 5 m solution (Fig. 12(a)). Femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy (FSRS) was employed to understand the molecular conformational states as a function of the salt concentration (5–30 m) (Fig. 12(b)). The FSRS study revealed the presence of [Zn(OH2)2Cl4]2− (287–295 cm−1) and Zn(H2O)62+ (391 cm−1) species at different concentrations (5–20 m). However, for 30 m ZnCl2, [ZnCl4]2− (245 cm−1) becomes the major form with a reduced concentration of [Zn(OH2)2Cl4]2− and [Zn(OH2)6]2+. Thus, the reduced water activity and incomplete hydration shell of Zn2+ in 30 m prevented the formation of Zn(OH)2 and ZnO parasite products at the Zn anode during charging, thus allowing highly reversible Zn2+ plating–stripping (CE ∼95.4%, vs. 73.2% in 5 m ZnCl2) in a Zn//Zn symmetrical shell (Fig. 12(c)). The utility of 30 m ZnCl2 was also explored in a Zn//Ca0.20V2O5·0.80H2O full cell by the same group.112 It was observed that the WiSE not only stabilized the anode but also caused an increase in the specific capacity and operational potential as compared to that of the dilute electrolyte. The reduced water activity in 30 m ZnCl2 WiSE pushed the OER onset potential and the cell cutoff potential could be elevated by 0.75 V in 30 m WiSE, as compared to the 1 m ZnCl2. On increasing the concentration of aqueous ZnCl2 electrolytes from 1 m to 30 m, the Zn//Ca0.20V2O5·0.80H2O cell showed an elevated Zn2+ insertion–extraction potential by 0.4 V due to the increased activity of the species containing Zn2+ in the concentrated solution (Fig. 12(d)). The full cell exhibited a remarkable increase in the discharge capacity from 296 mA h g−1 to 496 mA h g−1 (at 50 mA g−1 current) on switching from 1 m to 30 m ZnCl2 (Fig. 12(e)), and most importantly, a significantly improved cycle stability from 8.4% to 51.1% capacity retention over 100 cycles at 50 mA g−1 current.
 Fig. 12  (a) ESW of the ZnCl2 electrolyte at different concentrations. (b) Femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy of the ZnCl2 solution at different concentrations. (c) The plating/stripping of Zn in 30 m ZnCl2 in a Zn‖Zn symmetric cell at 0.2 mA cm−2 with a sweep duration of 10 minutes over 580 to 600 hours (reproduced with permission from ref. 111, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018). (d) CV curves from the 5th cycle with a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 and (e) the GCD plots of the Zn//Ca0.20V2O5·0.80H2O cell at different electrolyte concentrations (1 m to 30 m) (reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
However, the WiSE in AZIB has only been explored limitedly. The highly promising AZIB technology with improved Zn plating/stripping efficiency in the concentrated electrolyte and the behavior of the intercalated cathodes in such concentrated aqueous electrolytes is yet to be explored.
3.2 WiSE for other M2+ ion batteries (M = Ca, Mg)
The multivalent metal ion batteries (Mg-ion, Ca-ion, or Al-ion) mostly suffer from slow diffusion of the metal ions in the non-aqueous electrolyte due to their high charge density, resulting in strong cation–cation repulsion and strong cation–anion attraction.113–119 However, the charge density can be effectively shielded in the aqueous electrolyte due to the shielding effect of water molecules present in the solvation shell. However, the size of the solvated cation severely affects their intercalation properties and the overall electrochemical performance.
Lee et al.120 first studied the effect of concentrated aqueous electrolyte (8 mol dm−3 Ca(NO3)2) on the electrochemical performance of Ca-ion batteries. Compared to that of a dilute electrolyte [1 mol dm−3 Ca(NO3)2], increasing the salt concentration [8.37 mol dm−3] reduces the size of the solvated cation (Ca2+) due to the lack of sufficient free water molecules to form the second solvation shell. The reduced size of the hydrated Ca2+ in the concentrated electrolyte accelerates their diffusion inside the open tunnel structure of Prussian blue analogues (PBA), resulting in 13% improved capacity compared to that in the dilute electrolyte. Moreover, the reduced solvated cation size could provide structural stability to the intercalated PBA cathode. Also, the reduced water count in the electrolyte could minimize the active material dissolution in the electrolyte. This resulted in a significantly improved cycle stability of the PBA electrode in the concentrated electrolyte with 97% of the initial capacity retention after 150 cycles, as compared to only 58% capacity retention in the dilute electrolyte.
Wang et al.121 demonstrated a wide ESW of 2 V (1.7 to 3.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl, Fig. 13(a)), with 4 m Mg(TFSI)2 concentrated aqueous electrolyte, which is much higher than that of the conventional dilute 1 m MgSO4 electrolyte. The widened ESW enabled the fabrication of high voltage (1.9 V) aqueous Mg-ion battery constructed with Li3V2(PO4)3, an ideal Mg-ion host high voltage (3.6 V vs. Mg/Mg2+) cathode and a low voltage (∼1.7 V vs. Mg/Mg2+) non-diffusion-controlled polypyromellitic dianhydride (PPMDA) anode (Fig. 13(b)). Before use as a cathode, the Li3V2(PO4)3 or LVP electrode was first magnesiated (MgxLiV2(PO4)3) by initial charging (delithiation) and subsequent discharging (magnesiation) process in 4 m Mg(TFSI)2 electrolyte. The process is schematically shown in Fig. 13(c). A high magnesiation capacity of 118.7 mA h g−1 was obtained for the LVP electrode (in the three-electrode system) after 2nd discharge with a high specific capacity of 89.6 mA h g−1 retained after 1000 cycles. Notably, the LVP electrode showed excellent rate performance with a high capacity of 72.8 mA h g−1 retained even at a high charge discharge rate of 30C (Fig. 13(d)). On the other hand, the PPMDA@MWCNT electrode tested in the potential window of 1.7–2.5 V vs. Mg showed a high reversible capacity of 110 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1 or 1C) accompanied by a high-rate performance with 75.7% capacity retention at 20C (Fig. 13(e)) and excellent cycle stability with 87% specific capacity after 500 cycles. The LVP/4 m Mg(TFSI)2/PPMDA full cell exhibited an unprecedented high power density of 6400 W kg−1, accompanied by a high-capacity retention of 92% after 6000 cycles. The overwhelming performance is much superior to that of any non-aqueous electrolyte.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the proposed aqueous Mg-ion battery constructed with the PPMDA@MWCNT composite anode and magnesiated LVP cathode in 4 m Mg(TFSI)2 concentrated aqueous electrolyte; (b) the ESW of 4 m Mg(TFSI)2 and 1 m MgSO4 aqueous electrolytes measured with cyclic voltammetry (CV) at 10 mV s−1 scan rate on stainless steel working electrodes vs. Ag/AgCl. The Mg2+-intercalation potentials of various reported electrode materials along with the cathode and anode used in this work are marked in the graph. (c) The schematic of the working mechanism for the LVP cathode. (d) The charge–discharge profile of the LVP cathode measured at different C rates in a three-electrode setup. (e) The charge discharge profile of the PPMDA@MWCNT anode measured at different C rates in a three-electrode setup (reproduced with permission from ref. 121, Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society). 
3.3. Water-in-salt electrolytes for Al-ion batteries
Although Al-ion batteries offer cost-normalized highest theoretical capacity (8046 mA h cm−3 or 2980 mA h g−1) among all the other rechargeable battery systems, the technology suffers badly from the lack of suitable electrolytes, which can reversibly plate/strip the Al3+ ion at the anode.116,118 The low standard reduction potential of Al3+ (−1.68 V vs. SHE) also prevents the cell functioning from effectively in the aqueous electrolyte due to the unavoidable HER at the anode. Nevertheless, the large size and high charge density of Al3+ also makes the choice of the intercalation cathode limited. The Prussian blue analogs (PBA), which are best known for their open framework structure to host multivalent metal ions, show significant irreversible capacity loss as the Al-ion battery cathode in an aqueous electrolyte.95,98,122 The limitation comes from the narrow potential window of the conventional dilute aqueous electrolyte, which causes HER at the anode during discharging and oxygen evolution at the cathode at the end of charging, thus causing cathode dissolution.
Zhou et al.123 demonstrated that on replacing the conventional aqueous electrolyte with WiSE (5 m Al(CF3SO3)2), the HER limit at the anode can be pushed to allow reversible Al3+ deposition/stripping. In the dilute (1 m Al(OTf)3) electrolyte, the solvation structure of the Al3+ ion (Fig. 14(a)) consists of 6 water molecules arranged in both the primary and secondary solvation shell. However, in the 5 m WiSE, the lack of sufficient water molecules alters the cation solvation structure and ∼27.67% species exists as intimate ion pairs [(Al3+)x–(CF3SO3−)y–(H2O)m], 72.33% as loose ion pairs [Al3+(H2O)n–(CF3SO3−)3], and 0% as free anion [(CF3SO3−)z–(H2O)w]. Due to the restricted water activity, Al-WiSE showed a large ESW of 2.65 V (Fig. 14(b)) and allowed the coupling of the Al anode with the PBA cathode (K0.2Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.79·2.1H2O) with minimum cathode dissolution during cycling. The PBA cathode in the WiSE showed a high initial capacity of 116 mA h g−1 with good cycle stability and only 0.39% capacity loss per cycle (Fig. 14(c)). The high cycle stability could be attributed to reduced cathode dissolution in the WiSE. Restricted cathode dissolution in the WiSE as compared to dilute electrolytes [0.5 M Al2(SO4)3 or 1 M Al(NO)3] could be visually observed from the extracted electrolyte from the cycled cell using different electrolytes (Fig. 14(d)), where there was only a little color change of the WiSE before and after cycling.
 Fig. 14  (a) The schematic diagram of the solvation structure. (b) The linear sweep voltammetry of aqueous electrolytes on titanium mesh in the three-electrode system at 10 mV s−1 (Al-WiSE, 1 M Al(NO3)3 and 0.5 M Al2(SO4)3). (c) Cycling life of the FF-PBA cathode in Al-WiSE, 0.5 M Al2(SO4)3, and 0.5 m Al(OTF)3 electrolytes. (d) The cathode dissolution experiment. Al-WiSE, 1 M Al(NO3)3, and 0.5 M Al2(SO4)3 electrolytes are displayed from left to right orderly (reproduced with permission from ref. 123, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). 
4. Water-in-salt electrolytes for dual ion batteries
In contrast to the conventional rechargeable ‘rocking chair’ batteries using a single electroactive species (e.g., a metal-ion) as the charge carrier, rechargeable ‘dual ion batteries’ (DIB) reversibly incorporate electrolyte-born anions and cations within the cathode and the anode, respectively. The choice of electrodes having a large potential difference in ion intercalation, a supporting electrolyte with large ESW to accommodate the ion intercalation potential, and with sufficient concentration (since the electrolyte is the sole source of the charge carrier both cation and anion) is highly desired to fabricate high performance DIBs. Dual-graphite battery, employing graphite as both the cathode (anion host) and the anode (cation host) has been the most investigated DIB in non-aqueous electrolytes.124 On the other hand, metallic anode and graphitic carbon cathode are one of the most attractive pair for DIB, where the reversible deposition and stripping of the metal ion charge carrier at the anode and reversible insertion/deinsertion of the anion in the cathode is desirable to enable the maximum output of DIB. However, anion intercalation in graphitic carbon typically occurs at a potential ∼4.5 V, which is beyond the anodic stability limit of the conventional aqueous electrolyte.
Zhang et al.125 demonstrated the first aqueous DIB employing 21 m LiTFSI and 3 m ZnTfO2 hybrid water-in-salt electrolyte (HWiSE), where graphite was used as the cathode and metallic zinc as the anode. The high salt concentration and reduced water activity in the HWiSE not only promoted a highly reversible dendrite-free striping/plating of Zn2+ at the Zn electrode (Fig. 15(a)) but also showed a wide ESW with an extended anodic stability potential of 2.6 V vs. Zn (or 4.9 V vs. Li), which allowed reversible anion intercalation in the graphite cathode. In the HWiSE, the Zn/graphite DIB could be operated within a large potential window of 0.5–2.5 V (vs. Zn). The dQ/dV curve during the 2nd charge discharge showed three pairs of peaks, which are indicative of the three typical stages of reversible intercalation/deintercalation of the TFSI− and OTF− anions in graphite (Fig. 15(b)). Although the capacity of the Zn/graphite DIB was moderated, the higher operating potential of the DIB and overall high reversibility in the charge–discharge process (>95% CE over 600 cycles) employing HWiSE opened a promising path towards fabricating future low-cost DIBs.
 Fig. 15  (a) ESW of 21 m LiTFSI and 3 m ZnTfO2 HWiSE. (b) dQ/dV vs. voltage plot for the second charge discharge of the Zn//graphite DIB, indicating the three-step (de)intercalations of the anion in graphite. (c) Schematic of the working of Zn//graphite DIB employing 21 m LiTFSI and 3 m ZnTfO2 HWiSE (reproduced with permission from ref. 125, Copyright © 2019 Elsevier). (d) Illustration of the ESW for the AlCl3-based WiSE as compared to 1 M AlCl3. (e) The ex situ XRD analysis of the pristine, half charged, and fully charged graphite cathode showing the existence of AlCl4− and Al3+ intercalated ions indicating the DIB characteristic. (f) Schematic of the charge storage of the Al/AlCl3 WiSE/graphite based DIB (reproduced with permission from ref. 126, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019). (g) Schematic of the working principle of RDIB in 30 m ZnCl2 electrolyte. (h) CV plots of the ferrocene/C composite anode and the Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2 cathode in ZnCl2 electrolytes of different concentrations. (i) Variation of the cell voltage as a function of the electrolyte concentration for the Zn‖Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2 rocking chair battery, Zn metal//ferrocene nanocomposite DIB, and the RDIB (reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). 
Pan et al.126 demonstrated Al/graphite DIB by employing a low cost AlCl3-based WiSE, which showed an extended ESW of ∼4 V (Fig. 15(d)). In contrast to 1 m AlCl3 where HER occurs at ∼−1.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), WiSE pushed the HER to below −2.3 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), thus allowing reversible Al3+ deposition and stripping (∼−1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) at the anode. In the WiSE synthesized with AlCl3·6H2O:H2O (∼12 by mass), the interionic attractions become dominant over the solvent–ion interactions and the electrolyte exhibits both ionic liquid and aqueous electrolyte characteristics in the presence of Al3+, AlCl4−, and Al2Cl7−. The ex situ XRD analysis (Fig. 15(e)) of the graphite cathode showed the presence of five new peaks in the fully charged electrode corresponding to the presence of both the AlCl4− and Al3+ ions in the layered structure, leading to a DIB characteristic and the schematic of the charge storage of the Al/AlCl3 WiSE/graphite-based DIB is shown in Fig. 15(f). The DIB showed a high discharge capacity of 165 mA h g−1 (500 mA g−1) accompanied by a high CE exceeding 95% consistently even after 1000 cycles.
However, although the increasing salt concentration and reduced water activity is beneficial for improving the reversibility and cell life time of DIBs, it also decreases the cell voltage owing to the potential shift of cation/anion insertion. Xianyong Wu et al.127 flipped the sequence of the anion and cation uptake chemistries of the DIB by designing suitable cation-deficient cathode [Zn3(Fe(CN)6)] to host the cations and allowing the anode (carbon-coated ferrocene or Fc/C) to host the anion in 30 m ZnCl2 WiSE. The schematic of the working of reverse DIB (RDIB) in 30 m ZnCl2 electrolyte is shown in Fig. 15(g). The charge carriers for anion storage in 30 m ZnCl2 WiSE is the [ZnCl4]2− and [Zn(OH2)2Cl4]2− species. The ultrahigh salt concentration resulted in an increased activity of the cations and anions according to the Nernst equation, and elevated the cation insertion potential in the cation deficient cathode and reduced the anion insertion potential at the anode. Due to this potential shifting of the cation/anion insertions in opposite directions, the potential gap between the [Zn3(Fe(CN)6)] and Fc/C electrodes widens from 0.60 to 0.95 V on switching from 5 m to 30 m ZnCl2 WiSE, resulting in an improved average cell voltage by 0.35 V (Fig. 15(h)). This is in contrast to that of conventional DIBs and rocking chair batteries (RCBs), where increasing salt concentration causes a decrease in the cell voltage (Fig. 15(i)). For DIB (Zn metal//ferrocene nanocomposite), increasing the salt concentration causes a steady decrease in the cell voltage. This is due to the reduced potential of anion insertion in ferrocene and the elevated potential of Zn plating/stripping with increasing salt concentration. On the other hand, for the Zn‖Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2 RCB, only a little decrease in the voltage was observed on increasing the ZnCl2 electrolyte concentration. This is due to the fact that the cation is the only charge carrier in RCB, the cation solvation and de-solvation energy can be cancelled out, thus, not affecting the changing electrolyte concentration. The full cell RDIB showed an average cell potential of 0.9 V and a capacity of 30 mA h g−1 (at 1C) with a stable cycle life having 58% capacity retention over 1000 cycles (at 5C).
5. Water-in-salt electrolytes for metal–sulfur batteries
Rechargeable metal (ion)–sulfur batteries represent a highly promising electrochemical energy storage system in terms of their high energy density at a much lower cost compared to that of the state-of-the-art Li-ion batteries. Sulfur is inexpensive, naturally abundant, and has high theoretical capacity (1675 mA h g−1), which makes them one of the most attractive cathodes. The charge storage mechanism with the sulfur electrode involves a conversion reaction with the metal ion (S8 → Sn2− → Sn−x2−), which makes sulfur a universal cathode that can be theoretically coupled to a large number of metal anodes such as Li, Na, K, Mg, and Al. However, metal–sulfur batteries have several practical limitations in both the cathode and anode sides. For example, sulfur is insulating in nature, which requires a large quantity of conductive matrix, thus unavoidably increasing the dead mass of the electrode. Ether-based electrolytes are the most suited electrolytes in metal–sulfur batteries; however, the high solubility of metal polysulfides in the ether-based electrolyte causes severe parasitic reactions, such as the shuttling of the intermediate polysulfides and the reduction at the metallic anode. This reduction process forms a passivation layer at the anode. For the monovalent metal anode, such as Li and Na, this passivation layer helps is stabilizing the cell and is permeable; however, for multivalent metal anodes (Mg, Al, etc.), a real passivation layer is formed, which makes the charge–discharge process highly irreversible (Fig. 16(a)). Compared to the non-aqueous electrolyte, metal–sulfur batteries employing aqueous electrolytes are still illusive due to a number of factors such as high solubility/hydrolysis of metal sulfides in water and the limited ESW. However, the recent employment of WiSE with expanded ESW and restricted water activity has removed the certain limitations of metal–sulfur chemistry in aqueous electrolytes. In this discussion, we mainly focus on the rechargeable Li+ ion/sulfur and Al–S chemistry in WiBSE.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the working principle of metal–sulfur battery (reproduced with permission from ref. 131, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). (b) CV at 0.1 mV s−1 and (c) GCD profile (0.2C) of S-KB composite in WiBSE (red solid line) and non-aqueous electrolyte (black dashed line). (d) Digital images showing the negligible solubility of the short chain polysulfides and Li2S in WiBSE at different time intervals. (e) Estimated content ratios of element S8 (green), Li2S (blue), and LiPS at specific SOCs (reproduced with permission from ref. 129, Copyright (2017) National Academy of Sciences). 
Li–S batteries employing Li metal anode and sulfur cathode are the most investigated rechargeable metal sulfur battery systems. The charge storage mechanism of the Li–S battery employing the Li anode and the sulfur cathode follows a solid (S8)–liquid (Li2S8–Li2S2)–solid (Li2S) phase conversion, corresponding to a 16 e− transfer process, leading to a high theoretical energy density of 2600 W h kg−1.128 The Li–S battery constructed with aqueous electrolyte, sulfur cathode, and lithium metal anode is highly challenging considering the high solubility of lithium polysulfides (Li2Sx, x < 6) and Li2S in water, and causing the parasitic shuttling reaction, risk of exposure of lithium metal to water, and the parasitic HER. Yang et al.129 showed that the Li ion-sulfur chemistry can be successfully employed in the aqueous electrolyte by switching the electrode chemistry from the sulfur cathode to the sulfur anode, coupling with suitable Li+ hosts as the cathode, and a concentrated aqueous electrolyte (21 m LiTFSI and 7 m LiOTf WiBSE) with reduced water activity. The extreme high salt concentration could expand the ESW to allow the use of high voltage cathodes such as LiCoO2 or LiMn2O4. Moreover, the use of a highly concentrated fluorinated salt could form a stable dense SEI at the sulfur anode, thereby preventing the intermediate liquid polysulfides to come in direct contact with the liquid electrolyte. In situ Raman and mass spectroscopy also suggest that only a trace amount (<71 ppm) of liquid LiPSs diffuse into the bulk electrolyte. Fig. 16(d) visually demonstrates the negligible solubility of the lower order liquid polysulfides (Li2S4–Li2S2) and solid Li2S in the WiBSE, where clear phase separation was observed even after 24 h of mixing. Unlike the non-aqueous electrolyte, where elemental sulfur undergoes a two-step redox process, CV analysis indicates only a pair of redox peaks, indicating a single solid–liquid reaction in WiBSE (Fig. 16(b)). GCD analysis also supported this with a single charge discharge voltage plateau, unlike the two-voltage plateau in the non-aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 16(c)). Notably, the transformation of S8 (state of charge or SOC 0%) to Li2S (SOC 100%) in WiBSE follows an unprecedented fast kinetics. The XPS analysis conducted on the sulfur anode at different SOC revealed the evolution of the LiPS phase as Li2S6, Li2S4, and Li2S3 at the SOC of 25%, 50%, and 75%, respectively (Fig. 16(e)). Notably, the Li+ ion–sulfur chemistry in the sulfur–Ketjen black anode//WiBSE//LiMn2O4 full cell exhibited a high energy density of ∼135 W h kg−1, accompanied by good cycle stability with 78% capacity retention over 200 cycles (at 1C). The cycle stability could be further improved (14% loss over 1000 cycles at 1C) by introducing PVA to the WiBSE, which can arrest the trace amount of free water available in the WiBSE and further prevent the disproportionation reaction of lithium polysulfides caused from the crossover of water at the interface.
Hu et al.130 first demonstrated that suitably modified WiBSE can mitigate the slow kinetics and irreversibility in the charge discharge process in the Al–S battery. The Al–S battery constructed with the metallic Al anode and elemental sulfur/carbonized ZIF-67 composite cathode in WiBSE [1 m Al(OTf)3, 17 m LiTFSI with 0.02 M HCl] showed a high initial specific capacity of 1410 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 current and 420 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles, with CE as high as 97%. The individual role of the salts and HCl was determined from the control study. On the other hand, Al(OTf)3 provides the shuttling ion inside the electrochemical cell to facilitate reversible electrochemical reaction in both the electrodes; high concentration of LiTFSI (17 m) arrests the free water content and thereby prevents the hydrolysis of the AlSx intermediate at the cathode. Notably, the optimum concentration of HCl in WiBSE facilitates the reversible stripping/plating of Al at the anode by removing the passivation layer (mostly Al2O3) on the Al anode surface. On the other hand, a further increase in the LiTFSi (20 m) salt concentration could significantly reduce the AlSx dissolution in the electrolyte and also increases the viscosity of the electrolyte, thus resulting in poor capacity.
6. WiSE for metal–air batteries
Rechargeable Li–O2 represents the highest theoretical energy density among all the battery systems. However, practical realization is still elusive due to the absence of a suitable electrolyte to enable reversible conversion between O2 and Li2O2.132–135 All of the known organic electrolytes unavoidably react with the oxygen species in the Li–O2 battery system to form parasitic products, which cause poor reversibility and low cycle stability. Several research groups have demonstrated that trace amounts of water present in the electrolyte is helpful in reducing the charging and discharge overpotential of the Li–O2 battery136,137 and is helpful in stabilizing the organic electrolytes by interacting with the superoxide form during the charge–discharge process. In addition, water (content upto 4000 ppm) is the key to the formation of the characteristic toroidal structure, which boosts the discharge capacity.138 However, a large water content causes parasitic chemical reaction to form LiOH, which directly affects the cycle stability.139,140 Also, the O2 reduction products strongly interact with the water molecules to undergo disproportionation. Dong et al. showed that WiSE (21 m LiTFSI) with high salt concentration and restricted water activity can potentially minimize the parasitic chemical reaction and significantly boost the charge discharge reversibility and cycle stability of the Li–O2 battery when compared with conventional organic electrolytes, i.e., 0.1 M LiTFSI dissolved in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) or N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA).141
The utility of WiSE was demonstrated in a model Li–O2 battery, employing a Li+ intercalating anode (LiFePO4) with both the carbon and carbon-free (Ru/TiSi2) cathode, which demonstrated a reversible conversion between O2 and Li2O2. A high faradaic efficiency with ∼85% Li2O2 yield (by the iodometric titration technique) was obtained with the carbon cathode in the 21 m LiTFSI WiSE, which is higher than that of DME (79.4%) and DMA (79.1%), indicating that WiSE enables lesser by-product (H2O2, LiOH, or LiCO2H) formation during the charge–discharge process. Morphological analysis demonstrated the formation of toroidal Li2O2 in the discharge process (at a current of <0.2 A gcarbon−1), indicating a favorable solution-based mechanism prompted by the solvation effect of H2O. The proton from WiSE shows little reactivity with the Li2O2 formed during discharge, which minimizes the formation of the LiOH byproduct. The Li–O2 system with the carbon cathode in WiSE showed a high cycle stability over 70 cycles, which is much higher than that of the system with DME (16 cycles) and DMA (8 cycles). Notably, on replacing the carbon cathode with the carbon-free material, stable cell operation upto 300 cycles was obtained. The overall cell performance could be improved by replacing the intercalation-based pseudo-anode with a suitably protected Li metal anode in WiSE.
7. Hybrid aqueous/non-aqueous concentrated electrolytes
The presence of a suitable organic solvent as the cosolvent with water in the highly concentrated electrolyte can further stabilize the SEI since they can reductively decompose and deposit as a solid insoluble product on the anode surface.
Wang et al.30 designed a hybrid aqueous/non-aqueous electrolyte (HANE) by mixing WiSE (21 m LiTFSI in H2O) with 9.25 m LiTFSI in dimethyl carbonate (DMC). LiTFSI shows excellent solubility in both H2O and DMC, and the HANE is highly homogeneous in nature with no phase separation (Fig. 17(a)). In the HANE, the aqueous part provides the non-flammability and non-toxicity characteristics, whereas the non-aqueous part (DMC) provides the secondary ingredients to form a protective interface (Li2CO3) on the anode surface to further push the cathodic limitation of water splitting to ∼1 V. The MD simulation study suggests that the Li+ solvation structure in the HANE is dominated by the pronounced ionic network with TFSI−, H2O, and DMC, where Li+ mostly bridges two TFSI− anions with two solvents in the first coordination cell on an average (Fig. 17(b)). The SEI was composed of both LiF and Li2CO3, which is formed by the reductive decomposition of Li2TFSI (∼2.9 V vs. Li) and Li2+(DMC) (∼1.5 V vs. Li) in the HANE, respectively. The unique interface expanded the ESW of the HANE to ∼4.1 V vs. Li (5.1–1.0 V) (Fig. 17(d)). The concept was demonstrated by coupling the Li4Ti5O12 anode with the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode, which showed a voltage of 3.2 V and delivered a high energy density of 165 W h kg−1 for over 1000 cycles, as shown in Fig. 17(e).
 Fig. 17  (a) Immiscibility between H2O and DMC, and the homogeneous HANE-based on these two solvents in the presence of LiTFSI. (b) Representative liquid structure for the HANE. Colors: Li+, purple; O, red; C, gray; H, white; N, blue; S, yellow; F, green. (c) Schematic illustration of anode SEI formation in the HANE. (d) Electrochemical stability window of the HANE measured with the CV on the current collectors as well as active electrodes (LTO and LNMO). (e) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the LTO-LNMO full cell at 6C (reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright © 2018, Published by Elsevier Inc.). 
Later, Wrogemann et al.142 explored the same HANE to fabricate aqueous high voltage DIB by replacing the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with graphite. The graphite behaved as a stage two acceptor-type graphite intercalation cathode of the TFSI anion from the HANE. The graphite/HANE/LTO showed a high average voltage of 2.5 V. Although the cell exhibited only a moderate first cycle CE (62%) at very low current of 10 mA g−1, a significantly improved CE of 99% was achieved on increasing the operating current to 300 mA g−1 with a specific capacity of 27 mA h g−1. However, the capacity, CE, and cell voltage showed a tradeoff relationship. By replacing the LTO anode with LTP having a slightly higher lithiation potential, the graphite/HANE/LTP cell showed an improved capacity of 40 mA h g−1; however, the cell voltage was restricted to 1.5 V.
Very recently, Chen et al.57 introduced acetonitrile (AN) as the co-solvent along with water (15.3 m AN-WiSE), which not only promoted a highly stable interfacial chemistry but also enabled low temperature cell operation thanks to the low freezing point (−48 °C) and low viscosity of AN. Unlike WiSE or DMC-WiSE, which solidifies at 0 °C, AN-WiSE remains liquid even at −20 °C and maintained a considerable conductivity of 0.63 mS cm−1 at −20 °C. The addition of AN promotes the relative interaction between Li+ and H2O in the AN-WiSE, thereby further restricting the free water activity and decreasing the water population at the anode interface. In addition, it provides additional stability to the SEI with a uniform thin organic outer layer based on nitrile and sulfamide along with the LiF-rich inorganic inner layer. The stable interfacial chemistry expanded the ESW of the AN-WiSE upto 4.5 V and enabled stable cell operation with a low voltage LTO anode with a high voltage and high energy density cathode such as LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 or LiMn2O4 with excellent cycling stability, rate capability, and low-temperature performance. Notably, LMO/15.3 m LiTFSI in the AN-WiSE/LTO cell showed a considerably high specific capacity of 110 mA h g−1 after 120 cycles at 0 °C, accounting for only 5% capacity loss.
The HANE has also been explored for sodium ion batteries,143 where propylene carbonate (PC) has been explored as the co-solvent. The HANE containing 1:1 weight ratio of 7 m NaOTf in water with 8 m NaOTf in PC showed a wide ESW upto 2.8 V (−1.25 to 1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl on the SS current collector), which could successfully accommodate the Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode–NaTi2(PO4)3 anode pair with an output cell voltage of ∼1.2 V. Compared to the 9.26 m NaOTf WiSE, which showed a large irreversible capacity loss (21% CE at 0.2C), the inclusion of PC as the co-solvent stabilized the interfacial chemistry with an initial CE of 79% at 0.2C. The CE increased with increasing current and at 10C rate, the CE was 99.8% and remained unchanged for 100 cycles.
Very recently, Shang et al.144 introduced a new concept of ‘Ether-In-Water’ (EIW) by mixing tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME) as the non-aqueous phase with the concentrated LiTFSI aqueous solution. The EIW with 15 m LiTFSI showed a large ESW of 4.2 V (0.6–4.8 V vs. Li+/Li), which allowed 2.5 V LiMn2O4/Li4Ti5O12 full cell operation with a high energy density of 120 W h kg−1 for 500 cycles. The large ESW can be attributed to the EIW-driven stable electrode interface, where the decomposition of Li2+(TFSI−) and the oxidation of TEGDME forms a stable CEI, whereas the reduction of Li2+(TFSI−) and Li4+(TEGDME) forms a dense inorganic–organic mixture barrier on the anode surface. Various water-in-salt electrolytes and their properties and electrochemical performances in different aqueous metal-ion batteries are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of water-in-salt electrolytes and their electrochemical properties for aqueous metal-ion batteries




S. no.
Materials
Electrolyte
Electrochemical stability window
Working voltage
Energy density
Stability
Viscosity
Ionic conductivity (temp.)
Reference





Water-in-salt electrolytes for lithium-ion batteries



1
LiMn2O4/C–TiO2
21 mol kg−1 LiTFSI
3.1 V (SS mesh) (1.83 V to 4.9 V)
2.1 V
100 W h kg−1
40 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles
—
6.5 mS cm−1 (RT)

32



7 mol kg−1 LiOTf


2
LiMn2O4/C–TiO2
32 m KOAc
3.0 V (Ti)
2.5 V
—
90% capacity retention after 100 cycles
374 mPa s
5.3 mS cm−1 (25C)

65



8 m LiOAc


3
LiFePO4/Mo6S8
21 m LiTFSI
3.0 V (SS grid) (1.9 V to 4.9 V)
1.3 V
47 W h kg−1
Capacity fade of 0.04% per cycle
—
—

8



4
LiMn2O4/Mo6S8
21 m LITFSI
3.0 V (SS) (1.9 V to 4.9 V)
2.3 V
100 W h kg−1
68% capacity retention at 4.5C over 1000 cycles
—
∼10 mS cm−1

26



5
LiMn2O4/TiS2
21 m LiTFSI
3.0 V (SS) (1.8 V to 4.8 V)
1.7 V
78 W h kg−1
74% capacity retention at 1C over 50 cycles
—
—

45



6
LiMn2O4/Activated carbon
21 m polyacrylamide-chitosan-based WiSE
2.6 V (0 V to 2.6 V)
1.5 V
110 W h kg−1
90.1% of capacity retained after 2000 cycles
—
51.3 mS cm−1 (25C)

75



7
LiMn2O4/LiTi2(PO4)3
50 wt% LiPAA
2.6 V (2.22 V to 4.83 V vs. Li+/Li)
1.5 V
77 W h kg−1


—
6.5 mS cm−1 (20C)

33



LiMn2O4/TiO2
2.1 V
124 W h kg−1


8
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li4Ti5O12
14 M LiTFSI + DMC
4.1 V (1.0 V to 5.1 V vs. Ag+/AgCl)
3.2 V
165 W h kg−1
Capacity decay of 0.024% at 6C for 1000 cycles
—
3 mS cm−1 (25C)

30



9
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Mo6S8
21 mol kg−1 LiTFSI
3.0 V (1.9 V to 4.9 V vs. Li+/Li)
3.0 V
126 W h kg−1
—
—
—

46



10
LiCoO2/Li4Ti5O12
Li (TFSI)0.7(BETI)0.3·2H2O
3.8 V (1.25 V to 5.05 V)
2.7 V
130 W h kg−1
63% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 6.8C
203 mPa s
3 mS cm−1 (30C)

31



LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li4Ti5O12
3.1 V
160 W h kg−1
75% capacity retention after 200 cycles at 10C


11
LiMn2O4/Li4Ti5O12
42 m LiTFSI + 21 m Me3EtN·TFSI
3.25 V (SS) (1.75–5.0 V vs. Li+/Li)
2.5 V
145 W h kg−1
Capacity retention of 88% is maintained after 100 cycles at 1C
407 mPa s
0.91 mS cm−1 (30C)

64



12
LiVPO4F/LiVPO4F
25 m LiTFSI – 10 wt% PVA
3.2 V (GC) (1.7–4.9 V Li+/Li)
2.4 V
141 W h kg−1
87% of initial capacity retained after 4000 cycles at 20C
—
9 mS cm−1 (25 °C)

74



13
LiCoO2/Mo6S8
21 m LiTFSI – 0.1 wt% TMSB electrolyte
2.5 V
2.5 V
120 W h kg−1
Capacity decay rate of 0.013% per cycle was observed for 1000 cycle
—
—

52



14
Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4
15 m EIWE (LiTFSI in TEGDME)
4.2 V (0.6 to 4.8 V vs. Li/Li+)
2.5 V
120 W h kg−1
CE of 99.75% after > 500 cycles
—
0.63 mS cm−1 at 25 °C

144



15
Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4
2 m LiTFSI–94% PEG–6% H2O
3.2 V (1.3 to 4.5 V vs. Li/Li+)
2.25 V
110 W h kg−1
68% retention after 300 cycles
—
0.8 mS cm−1 at 25 °C

145



16
Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4
15.3 mol LiTFSI in 1 kg mixture of water:AN (1:1 by molar)
4.5 V (0.7 to 5.2 V vs. Li/Li+)
2.3 V
109 W h kg−1
98% capacity retention after 300 cycles
—
1.34 mS cm−1 at 0 °C

57



Li4Ti5O12//LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2
2.14 V
173 W h kg−1
91% capacity retention after 300 cycles
5.99 mS cm−1 at 60 °C


17
TiO2/NMC811
40/20 m LiTFSI/EMImTFSI
—
1.95 V
121 W h kg−1
80% of its initial capacity after 290 cycles
—
1.2 mS cm−1 at 25 °C

146



Li4Ti5O12/NMC811
1.9 V
150 W h kg−1
80% of their initial capacity after 154 cycles






Water-in-salt electrolytes for sodium-ion batteries



14
Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2/NaTi2(PO4)3
9.26 m NaCF3SO3
2.5 V (SS) (1.7 to 4.2 V)
1.0 V
31 W h kg−1
Capacity retention of 92.7% after 1200 cycles
—
50 mS cm−1

76



15
NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F
35 m NaFSI
2.6 V (SS) (−1.15 to 1.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl)
—
—
—
—
90 mS cm−1

77



16
Na2MnFe(CN)6/NaTi2(PO4)3
32 m KAc and 8 m NaAc
4 V (Al) (−2.15 to + 2.0 vs. Ag/AgCl)
1.0 V
—
12 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.1 A g−1
—
12 mS cm−1

78



17
Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/NaTi2(PO4)3
17 m NaClO4
2.7 V (1.7 to 4.4)
2.0 V
36 W h kg−1
65 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 1C
—
108 mS cm−1 (25C)

79



18
Na2VTi(PO4)3//Na2VTi(PO4)3
9.2 m NaCF3SO3 (NaOTF)
1.6 V
1.2 V
—
25 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 20C
—
50 mS cm−1 (20C)

80



19
Na3V2(PO4)3/NaTi2(PO4)3
7 m NaOTf (water) and 8 m NaOTF (propylene carbonate)
2.8 V (−1.25 to 1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl)
1.2 V
45 W h kg−1
20 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at 10C
—
∼25 mS cm−1 (20 °C)

143



∼60 mS cm−1 (55 °C)


20
NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F
25 m NaFSI/10 m NaFTFSI
2.7 V
2.0 V
64 W h kg−1
77% capacity retention after 500 cycles at 1C
94.2 mPa s (20 °C)
11.8 mS cm−1 (30 °C)

87



21
NaMnHCF/NaTiOPO4
9 m NaOTF and 22 m TEAOTF
3.3 V (−1.7 to 1.6 vs. Ag/AgCl)
1.74 V
71 W h kg−1
90% retention after 200 cycles
28.3–29 mPa s (303 K)
8.8–9.7 mS cm−1

86







Water-in-salt electrolytes for zinc-ion batteries



22
Zn/LiMn2O4 hybrid battery
1 m Zn(TFSI)2 and 20 m LiTFSI


1.4 V
70 W h kg−1
85% capacity retention after 4000 cycles
—
—

107



23
Zn/LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4
21 m of LiTFSI and 0.5 m of ZnSO4
3.7 V (SS) (−0.8 to 2.9 vs. Zn)
1.8 V
183 W h kg−1
110 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at 0.3C
—
—

109



24
Zn/Ca0.20V2O5·0.80H2O
30 m ZnCl2
1.8 V (−0.6 to 1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl)
1.8 V
206 W h kg−1
70% capacity retention over 1000 cycles at 1.6 A g−1
—
12.7 mS cm−1

112



25
Zn/V2O5
21 m LiTFSI and 1 m Zn(CF3SO3)2
1.4 V (0.2 to 1.6 vs. Zn)
1.4 V
—
80% of capacity retained after 2000 cycles at 2 A g−1
—
—

108







Water-in-salt electrolytes for calcium-ion batteries



26
Copper hexacyanoferrate (CuHCF)
8 mol dm−3 Ca(NO3)2
1.1 V (−0.1 V to 1.0 V vs. SCE)
1.1 V
—
∼97% of the capacity was retained after 150 cycles
—
—

120







Water-in-salt electrolytes for magnesium-ion batteries



27
PPMDA@MWCNT/Li3V2(PO4)3
4 m Mg(TFSI)2
2 V (1.7 to 3.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl)
1.9 V
6400 W kg−1 (power density)
92% after 6000 cycles
—
—

121







Water-in-salt electrolytes for aluminum-ion batteries



28
FF-PBA K0.2Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.79·2.1H2O
5 m Al(CF3SO3)3
2.65 V (−1.0 V to 1.65 V vs. Ag/AgCl)
2.0 V
—
70 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles
17.7
∼26 mS cm−1

123







Water-in-salt electrolytes for sulfur batteries



29
S-KB/LiMn2O4
21 m LiTFSI and 7 m LiOTf WiBSE
2.5 V
1.8 V
135 W h kg−1
86% capacity retention after 1000 cycles
—
—

129



S-KB/HV-LiCoO2
2.24 V
195 W h kg−1
—


30
Al/S/C
1 m Al(OTf)3, 17 m LiTFSI, 0.02 M HCl
3.2 V (−0.3 to 2.9 V)
—
—
420 mA h g−1 is preserved after 30 cycles
—
—

130







Water-in-salt electrolytes for dual ion batteries



31
Zn/graphite
21 m LiTFSI and 3 m ZnTfO2
2.6 V
1.7 V
—
24 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles
—
∼7 mS cm−1 (20 °C)

125



32
Al/graphite
AlCl3·6H2O
4.0 V
1.4 V
220 W h kg−1
99% of capacity retention after 1000 cycles
—
—

126



33
Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2/Fc/C
30 m ZnCl2
—
0.95 V
∼28.5 W h kg−1
60% of capacity retention after 1000 cycles
—
—

127





8. Conclusion
8.1 Summary of the development trend of high voltage aqueous batteries
In summary, rechargeable batteries employing environmentally benign aqueous electrolytes represent highly promising alternative energy storage systems capable of providing high energy/power density with utmost safety. However, the limited choice of high-capacity electrodes and above all, the limited ESW of aqueous electrolytes further limits the output voltage, selection of electrodes, and severely affects the output energy density. Thus, the success of aqueous batteries lies in controlling three major factors: (i) expansion of the ESW of the aqueous electrolyte by controlling the overpotential for water electrolysis to support high voltage cathode and low voltage anode pair, (ii) protection of the electrodes via ion conducting artificial hydrophobic interphase to prevent water absorption at the electrodes or the dissolution of the electrodes in the aqueous electrolyte, and (iii) designing suitable high capacity electrode materials stable in aqueous electrolytes.
The ultra-high salt concentration in WiSE drives the metal ion charge carrier to be in the form of the contact ion pair with the salt anion, just like a molten salt. Such systems with suitable anions in the contact ion pair can be reduced before the thermodynamic limit of water reduction to form a protective layer (SEI) on the anode and push the HER limit towards lower potential. On the other hand, the water activity in such an electrolyte is restricted such that it requires high overpotential for their oxidation at the cathode. Thus, the electrochemical stability window of the electrolyte is not limited by the water decomposition potential limit, and more often, they can provide a high ESW of 2.0–4.0 V. Although they have high viscosity, they possess comparable ionic conductivity to that of organic electrolytes. In WiSE, the SEI is mainly composed of the degraded product from the salt anion rather than the solvent; also, it restricts the structural dissolution of the electrodes in the electrolyte, which is a major issue in aqueous batteries. The leftover free water activity of the WiSE can be further arrested by modification with a second salt of a suitable anion (WiBSE) or by housing the concentrated electrolyte inside the suitably designed polymeric host with abundant functional groups such as hydroxyl or amine. The formulation of a gel polymer electrolyte of the concentrated salt thus not only provides extended ESW but also prevents electrolyte leaking and enables flexibility of the devices. Apart from the WiSE or WiBSE system, some other innovative electrolyte systems such as water-in-ionomer electrolyte, hydrate melt electrolytes, hybrid aqueous–nonaqueous electrolyte, and molecular crowding electrolytes have radically improved the working potential window of the aqueous electrolyte to support full cell assembly of the high voltage cathode with low voltage anode and stable cycling performance via stabilizing the electrodes.
The expanded ESW enables the assembly of high voltage cathodes with low voltage anodes for Li/Na ion batteries. It also enables the use of graphite as an intercalation-based cathode and allows the fabrication of a high voltage dual-ion battery with the electrolyte-borne ions. Apart from the benefits such as the expanded ESW and forming stable SEI in Li/Na-ion batteries, the WiSE and hybrid WiSE systems also facilitate reversible Zn stripping/plating at the Zn metal anode. The reduced water content prevents the dissolution of Prussian blue analogue electrodes in the aqueous electrolyte, which is one of the best-known intercalation-based electrodes for multivalent metal ion batteries. The reduced water count may also alter the solvated structure of the metal ion charge carrier, allowing facile intercalation inside the PBA electrode. Apart from the metal ion batteries, the WiSE allows reversible sulfur lithiation/delithiation with much faster kinetics to that of non-aqueous electrolytes, and since the aluminum/lithium polysulfides are insoluble in them, the parasitic hydrolysis/shuttling of the aluminum/lithium polysulfides can be essentially eliminated in the metal (Li/Al)–sulfur batteries. The unique features of WiSE in terms of the extreme low free water content show negligible reactivity towards Li2O2 or other oxygen species in the Li–air battery. Furthermore, a suitably designed WiSE with neutral pH can provide high reversibility towards the Zn anode, shows reduced reactivity towards atmospheric CO2, and stabilizes the air cathode, allowing the WiSE to be a promising electrolyte solution for metal–air batteries. The development trend of various rechargeable aqueous batteries with a particular focus on improving the cell voltage by employing WiSE and hybrid WiSE along with relevant technical details such as the electrode couple, nature of the electrolytes, and their advantages/disadvantages are summarized according to the publication year in Fig. 18 for Li-ion and Fig. 19 for batteries other than Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 18  Publication year-wise development trend for high voltage aqueous Li-ion batteries with the main focus on WiSE and WiS hybrid electrolytes along with the technical details such as the electrode couple, nature of electrolytes, and their key advantages/disadvantages. 
 Fig. 19  Publication year-wise development trend for high-voltage aqueous batteries other than Li-ion (Na, K, Al, Ca, Zn, and Mg-ion batteries) with the main focus on WiSE and WiS hybrid electrolytes along with technical details such as the electrode couple, nature of electrolytes, and their key advantages/disadvantages. 
8.2 Challenges and future scope
Nevertheless, the research based on WiSE and WiS hybrid electrolytes is still at its primary stage. The challenges and the promising future research directions towards developing realistic high voltage aqueous batteries are discussed below.
(i) A standard guideline is required to compare the data reported by different research groups. Particularly in the determination of ESW of different electrolytes by voltammetry, the choice of the cutoff current density may lead to a large difference in the reported data. Moreover, water splitting may be catalyzed by many factors including the nature of the current collector, nature of the electrodes with different crystallinity and facets, and pH of the electrolyte. In order to have realistic data, the cut off current density in the voltammetric determination of ESW using an inert electrode should be as low as possible and a fair comparison can only be done with a standard guideline on using the current collector, electrodes, and cutoff current density. Also, there should proper balancing of the cathode and anode loading, and the electrochemical performance should be evaluated with a very low practical electrolyte loading.
(ii) Although the WiS and WiS hybrid electrolytes show fascinating properties by forming a stable SEI and reducing the water activity, the high cost of the metal salts used in WiSE (MXn; X = FSI, TFSI, OTF, etc.) is the major barrier in their commercial adoption. Significant research efforts should be devoted towards reducing the electrolyte cost without sacrificing the unique properties of the SEI forming ability and extreme reduced water activity. The free water content and their activity can also be reduced with highly concentrated solutions of common cost-efficient alkali salts, such as metal acetate, perchlorate, sulfate, nitrate, or chloride. Salts such as perchlorate or mixed acetate-based WiSE have been successfully investigated for Na-ion batteries,78 whereas WiSE with 30 m ZnCl2 has shown reversible Zn plating and stripping process in AZIB.111,112 However, the cycle stability in such an electrolyte may be only limited due to the inability of such salts in SEI formation. The problem is more severe with Li and Na-ion batteries. In the authors' view, a combination of a fluorinated salt to form the SEI and non-fluorinated salts to reduce the free water content may be tried. Nevertheless, the structure of the aggregated ion pairs and the SEI formation mechanism in different WiSE is still not clearly understood. Thus, a clear understanding of the complicated solution structure and SEI formation mechanism via experimental spectroscopic techniques combined with theoretical simulations would further guide the choice of the salt, desired salt concentration, etc.
(iii) One promising way to cut the high cost of the electrolyte is to decrease the salt fraction and forming a localized high-concentration electrolyte by adding a suitable diluent. The diluent should be compatible with the aqueous system and should have properties such as sufficient inertness so as to not compromise on the ESW, less viscosity to decrease the viscosity of the concentrated WiSE, low volatility so as to not compromise on the inherent safety of the WiSE, and more importantly, poor coordination ability, which does not alter the local coordination structure of the WiSE. Another promising approach to cut the high cost of the electrolyte is to decrease the salt fraction by replacing a large fraction of water in the WiSE with suitable competing interphase forming co-solvents or additives. Carbonate as well as nitrile-based solvents have already shown promising results in functionalizing the interphase.30,57 Multiple additives have been employed in commercial dilute electrolytes; however, their characteristics and behavior in highly concentrated electrolytes may be quite different. Thus, there is a huge scope to explore various cost-effective homogeneous and heterogeneous additives. Their effect on ion transportation and contribution towards forming the interphase is worth investigating.
(iv) Another promising research direction towards fabricating such aqueous electrolytes with high ESW with lower salt concentration might be to engineer electrolytes with suitable water-soluble macromolecules/polymers, which can arrest the electrochemical activity of water by altering the hydrogen bonding in water. Poly(ethylene glycol), as the crowding agent, has already shown promising results in decreasing the salt concentration to 2 m, while exhibiting a stable ESW of 3.2 V.145 Thus, there is a huge opportunity to explore different water-soluble synthetic polymers or biopolymers having hydrophilic functional groups such as –OH, –SO3H, –NH2,–CONH–, and –CONH2, and Li-ion solvating ability for expanding the ESW of the electrolyte.
(v) On the other hand, the ultrahigh salt concentration in WiSE at room temperature causes salt crystallization at a lower temperature and adversely affects the conductivity, transport properties, and the overall results due to the poor cell performance. Initial work on water-in-ionic liquid electrolytes was carried out with an idea to improve the dynamic properties such as increasing the conductivity and decreasing the viscosity using water as an additive. Recent research has shown that the presence of imidazolium salt can significantly improve the solubility of LiTFSI from 21 m to 60 m in the water–EMIM–TFSI mixture without affecting the viscosity or conductivity much.146 The bulky ions of these ionic liquids help in lowering the viscosity of highly concentrated LiTFSI–water solutions. These two important parameters may help to overcome the drawbacks of the current WiSE. In another case, a non-flammable ionic liquid was used as a co-solvent to develop water-in-salt/ionic liquid (WiSIL) electrolytes for the lithium-ion capacitor, which provides a new research direction for the development of high-energy LICs.147 Thus, there is a huge scope to explore potential lithium salt-ionic liquid combinations by investigating the inter-component interactions, transport properties, and behavior at the interphase and the overall ESW. The idea can be further extended by replacing a fraction of water content in the WiSE with even more cost-effective quaternary ammonium salts or deep eutectic solvents.
(vi) However, in aqueous batteries, a significant irreversible capacity loss is inevitable during the initial cycles before the SEI can form. A high pre-coated anode with an artificial, hydrophobic SEI has been found to provide additional stability to the anode before the in situ SEI formation. Thus, a suitable combination of an interphase forming co-solvent, a thin layer of a hydrophobic artificial electrode coating, and mixed salts of fluorinated as well as non-fluorinated salts, and the use of hydrophilic molecular crowding can give the desired outcome of safe, energy dense, and cost-efficient rechargeable batteries.
(vii) Along with the better high voltage aqueous electrolyte development, significant research interest should also be devoted towards developing low cost and high capacity electrodes that are compatible with aqueous electrolytes. Recently, Wang and coauthors reported that the capacity of graphite as the cathode can significantly be improved by employing the unique conversion–intercalation chemistry of Li–X (X = Br, Cl) in graphite. A solid mixture of equimolar LiBr, LiCl salt, and graphite, i.e., (LiBr)0.5(LiCl)0.5 graphite, was used as a cathode, which followed a two-step conversion–intercalation mechanism during charging and discharging. During charging, the Br− ion is first oxidized to Br−0.05and is intercalated into graphite at a potential of 4–4.2 V vs. Li/Li+. Further charging to 4.5 V results in the conversion of Cl− to Cl−0.25 and intercalation into the Br−0.05 pre-intercalated cathode, forming a densely packed stage-I graphite intercalation compound C3.5[Br0.5Cl0.5]. Thanks to the extended ESW of WiBSE of 4.9 V, the (LiBr)0.5(LiCl)0.5 graphite could be successfully operated in the aqueous electrolyte with a high reversible capacity of 243 mA h g−1 at a high voltage of 4.2 V. By assembling the LiBr·H2O/LiCl·H2O/graphite cathode with an HFE–PEO-gel-protected graphite anode in WiBSE, a 4 V class ALiB with an energy density of 304 W h kg−1 (total mass of cathode, anode, and electrolyte) can be achieved. The breakthrough can further guide in the development of such high voltage and high-capacity aqueous cathodes employing the conversion–intercalation mechanism.148
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Jain University, Bangalore, India. D. G. thanks SERB DST, India (ECR/2018/001039) and DST-Technology Mission Division, India (Ref No. DST/TMD/HFC/2K18/124(G)) for the research grant.
References
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schmidt, A. Hawkes, A. Gambhir and I. Staffell, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17110 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Hong, K. Y. Park, H. Kim, S. W. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11788–11827 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, F. Han, X. Fan, H. Liu, K. Xu and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6639–6644 RSC .
L. Xia, L. Yu, D. Hu and G. Z. Chen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 584–618 RSC .
Y. Dong, Y. Feng, J. Deng, P. He and J. Ma, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 909–914 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, C. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Chao, P. He and J. Ma, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 43, 24–32 CrossRef .
P. Peljo and H. H. Girault, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2306–2309 RSC .
Z. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Q. Yang, X. Li, Z. Huang and C. Zhi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 180–232 RSC .
F. Wan, J. Zhu, S. Huang and Z. Niu, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 323–330 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe, M. L. Thomas, S. Zhang, K. Ueno, T. Yasuda and K. Dokko, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7190–7239 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kar, O. Tutusaus, D. R. MacFarlane and R. Mohtadi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 566–571 RSC .
S. Chen, K. Wen, J. Fan, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11631–11663 RSC .
T. Vogl, S. Menne, R.-S. Kühnel and A. Balducci, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8258–8265 RSC .
J. Tong, X. Xiao, X. Liang, N. von Solms, F. Huo, H. He and S. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 19216–19225 RSC .
G. A. Giffin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13378–13389 RSC .
T. Vogl, C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Secchiaroli, R. Marassi, S. Passerini and A. Balducci, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10472–10478 RSC .
A. M. Haregewoin, A. S. Wotango and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1955–1988 RSC .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. S. Wainwright, Science, 1994, 264, 1115–1118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pasta, C. D. Wessells, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1149 CrossRef .
J. Y. Luo, W. J. Cui, P. He and Y. Y. Xia, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 760–765 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Stojković, N. D. Cvjetićanin and S. V. Mentus, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 371–373 CrossRef .
K. Miyazaki, T. Shimada, S. Ito, Y. Yokoyama, T. Fukutsuka and T. Abe, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4979–4982 RSC .
Z. Hou, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhu, J. Liang and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 730–738 RSC .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, M. S. Ding, M. Gobet, J. Vatamanu, X. Fan, T. Gao, N. Eidson, Y. Liang, W. Sun, S. Greenbaum, K. Xu and C. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 927–937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, K. Usui, K. Sodeyama, S. Ko, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16129 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. Fan, C. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Ma, M. Schroeder, A. von Cresce, S. M. Russell, M. Armand, A. Angell, K. Xu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7136–7141 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, B. Yan, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, D. Bresser, J. Wang, R. Wang, X. Cao, Y. Su, H. Jia, C. P. Grey, H. Frielinghaus, D. G. Truhlar, M. Winter, J. Li and E. Paillard, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5320 CrossRef CAS .
O. Borodin, J. Self, K. A. Persson, C. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2020, 4, 69–100 CrossRef CAS .
R.-S. Kühnel, D. Reber and C. Battaglia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 070544 CrossRef .
T. Liu, X. Cheng, H. Yu, H. Zhu, N. Peng, R. Zheng, J. Zhang, M. Shui, Y. Cui and J. Shu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 68–91 CrossRef .
M. Li, C. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Xu and J. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(14), 6783–6819 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liang, R. Hou, Q. Dou, H. Zhang and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006749 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, R. Tan, Z. Yang, Y. Feng, X. Duan and J. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2000962 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Y. Yang, H. Wang, B. Xu, Y. Li, R. Tan, X. Duan, D. Wu, M. Zhuo and J. Ma, Chem.–Asian J., 2020, 15, 3584 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. S. Wainwright, Science, 1994, 264, 1115–1118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Ni and Z. X. Shen, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 20–41 CrossRef .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, F. Xie, C. Ye, H. Li, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba4098 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Luo and Y. Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3877–3884 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, L. Suo, F. Wang, N. Eidson, C. Yang, F. Han, Z. Ma, T. Gao, M. Zhu and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 82, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, L. Suo, Y. Liang, C. Yang, F. Han, T. Gao, W. Sun and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1600922 CrossRef .
Y. Lyu, X. Wu, K. Wang, Z. Feng, T. Cheng, Y. Liu, M. Wang, R. Chen, L. Xu, J. Zhou, Y. Lu and B. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2000982 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, B. Chen, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6505–6602 RSC .
Z. Chen and J. R. Dahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 1079–1090 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramanujapuram, D. Gordon, A. Magasinski, B. Ward, N. Nitta, C. Huang and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1841–1848 RSC .
R. Ruffo, F. La Mantia, C. Wessells, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 192, 289–292 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Lin, L. Suo, X. Fan, T. Gao, C. Yang, F. Han, Y. Qi, K. Xu and C. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3666–3673 RSC .
G. J. Wang, Q. T. Qu, B. Wang, Y. Shi, S. Tian, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1199–1203 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, D. Oh, Y. Lin, Z. Zhuo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, F. Wang, A. Kushima, Z. Wang, H. C. Kim, Y. Qi, W. Yang, F. Pan, J. Li, K. Xu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18670–18680 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dubouis, P. Lemaire, B. Mirvaux, E. Salager, M. Deschamps and A. Grimaud, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3491–3499 RSC .
C. Yang, J. Chen, T. Qing, X. Fan, W. Sun, A. von Cresce, M. S. Ding, O. Borodin, J. Vatamanu, M. A. Schroeder, N. Eidson, C. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2017, 1, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Vatamanu, L. Xing, O. Borodin, H. Chen, X. Guan, X. Liu, K. Xu and W. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902654 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, G. Tan, P. Shan, T. Liu, J. Hu, Y. Feng, L. Yang, M. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Lin, J. Lu, J. C. Neuefeind, Y. Ren, K. Amine, L.-W. Wang, K. Xu and F. Pan, Chem, 2018, 4, 2872–2882 CAS .
O. Borodin, L. Suo, M. Gobet, X. Ren, F. Wang, A. Faraone, J. Peng, M. Olguin, M. Schroeder, M. S. Ding, E. Gobrogge, A. von Wald Cresce, S. Munoz, J. A. Dura, S. Greenbaum, C. Wang and K. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10462–10471 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Yim, J. Tam, H. Soboleski and Y. Abu-Lebdeh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1002–A1011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lim, K. Park, H. Lee, J. Kim, K. Kwak and M. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15661–15667 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, L. A. Curtiss, R. E. Winans, Y. Zhang, T. Li and L. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Forero-Saboya, E. Hosseini-Bab-Anari, M. E. Abdelhamid, K. Moth-Poulsen and P. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4942–4946 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Zhang, Q. Li, J. Vatamanu, X. Ji, T. P. Pollard, C. Cui, S. Hou, J. Chen, C. Yang, L. Ma, M. S. Ding, M. Garaga, S. Greenbaum, H.-S. Lee, O. Borodin, K. Xu and C. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 968–974 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, J. I. Feldblyum, D. G. Mackanic, F. Lissel, D. L. Michels, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2876–2883 RSC .
S. A. Langevin, B. Tan, A. W. Freeman, J. C. Gagnon, C. M. Hoffman Jr, M. W. Logan, J. P. Maranchi and K. Gerasopoulos, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13085–13088 RSC .
Z. Liu, H. Li, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. Tang, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Z. Shi, J. Liu, Y. Huang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 164–173 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Gao and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6406–6433 RSC .
D. G. Mackanic, T. H. Chang, Z. Huang, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4466–4495 RSC .
W.-J. Song, S. Lee, G. Song and S. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 177–186 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, H. Li, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Ruan, L. Ma, Q. Yang, D. Wang and C. Zhi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804560 CrossRef .
G. Ma, M. Dong, K. Sun, E. Feng, H. Peng and Z. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4035–4041 RSC .
K. Sun, F. Ran, G. Zhao, Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng, M. Ma, X. Zheng, G. Ma and Z. Lei, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55225–55232 RSC .
C. Yang, X. Ji, X. Fan, T. Gao, L. Suo, F. Wang, W. Sun, J. Chen, L. Chen, F. Han, L. Miao, K. Xu, K. Gerasopoulos and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701972 CrossRef .
L. Dai, O. Arcelus, L. Sun, H. Wang, J. Carrasco, H. Zhang, W. Zhang and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24800–24806 RSC .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, Y. Wang, X. Rong, W. Sun, X. Fan, S. Xu, M. A. Schroeder, A. V. Cresce, F. Wang, C. Yang, Y.-S. Hu, K. Xu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701189 CrossRef .
R.-S. Kühnel, D. Reber and C. Battaglia, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2005–2006 CrossRef .
J. Han, H. Zhang, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3704–3707 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lee, S. J. Kim, D. Chang, J. Kim, S. Moon, K. Oh, K.-Y. Park, W. M. Seong, H. Park, G. Kwon, B. Lee and K. Kang, Mater. Today, 2019, 29, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Jeong, B. Qin, D. Vieira Carvalho, D. Buchholz and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1382–1389 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palomares, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez, M. H. Han and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2312–2337 RSC .
J. Y. Hwang, S. T. Myung and Y. K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
H. Che, S. Chen, Y. Xie, H. Wang, K. Amine, X.-Z. Liao and Z.-F. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1075–1101 RSC .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 RSC .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18013 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, L. Liu, J. Yue, Q. Zhang, A. Zhou, O. Borodin, L. Suo, H. Li, L. Chen, K. Xu and Y. S. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1904427 CrossRef .
D. Reber, R.-S. Kühnel and C. Battaglia, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou, P. Xiong, J. Zhao, J. Hu, Z. Liu and Y. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 26495–26506 RSC .
R. Rajagopalan, Y. Tang, X. Ji, C. Jia and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909486 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Xu, S.-Y. Duan, Y.-G. Sun, D.-S. Bin, X.-S. Tao, D. Zhang, Y. Liu, A.-M. Cao and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4334–4352 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Guo, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav7412 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hosaka, K. Kubota, A. S. Hameed and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6358–6466 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Leonard, Z. Wei, G. Chen, F. Du and X. Ji, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 373–374 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, Q. Li, T. Wang, H. Zhang and G. Wu, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 358–368 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Han, X. Wang, N. Bahlawane, H. Pan, M. Yan and Y. Jiang, iScience, 2018, 3, 110–133 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC .
J. Nai and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1706825 CrossRef .
J. Qian, C. Wu, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702619 CrossRef .
J. Han, A. Mariani, H. Zhang, M. Zarrabeitia, X. Gao, D. V. Carvalho, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 196–205 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, Y. Lu, C. Zhao, L. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Shen, J. Zhao, X. Yu, H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Wei, G. Chen, X. Yang, C. Wang and F. Du, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 128–131 RSC .
A. Ponrouch, J. Bitenc, R. Dominko, N. Lindahl, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacin, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 253–262 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, H. Dong, D. Aurbach and Y. Yao, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 646–656 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, H. Wang, C. Jiang and Y. Tang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 566–586 CrossRef .
G. Fang, J. Zhou, A. Pan and S. Liang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2480–2501 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, J. Guo, C. Xia, W. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 135, 58–84 CrossRef .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543–549 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, M. Yan, T. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Wei, J. Li, L. Zhou, Z. Li, L. Chen and L. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42717–42722 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Peng, S. Dong, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 69, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, D. Liu, C. Wang, L. Song, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7062–7067 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. X. Jiang, C. Fang and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097–14099 RSC .
L. Zhang, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, H. Jiang, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, Q. Guo, W. Wang, S. Han, L. Wang and X. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902653 CrossRef .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724–727 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mohtadi and F. Mizuno, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 1291–1311 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao-Karger, M. E. Gil Bardaji, O. Fuhr and M. Fichtner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10815–10820 RSC .
S. K. Das, S. Mahapatra and H. Lahan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6347–6367 RSC .
R. J. Gummow, G. Vamvounis, M. B. Kannan and Y. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801702 CrossRef .
M. C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D. Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 325–328 CrossRef .
A. Ponrouch, C. Frontera, F. Barde and M. R. Palacin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 169–172 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee and S.-K. Jeong, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45, 1447–1449 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Fan, T. Gao, W. Sun, Z. Ma, C. Yang, F. Han, K. Xu and C. Wang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1121–1128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, G. L. Pan, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 959–962 RSC .
A. Zhou, L. Jiang, J. Yue, Y. Tong, Q. Zhang, Z. Lin, B. Liu, C. Wu, L. Suo, Y. S. Hu, H. Li and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41356–41362 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Read, A. V. Cresce, M. H. Ervin and K. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 617–620 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Qin and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227594 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pan, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Y. H. Kwok, M. Wu, X. Zhao and D. Y. C. Leung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17420–17425 RSC .
X. Wu, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, A. Markir, J. Lu and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6338–6344 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, J. Liu, J.-Y. Hwang and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11582–11605 RSC .
C. Yang, L. Suo, O. Borodin, F. Wang, W. Sun, T. Gao, X. Fan, S. Hou, Z. Ma, K. Amine, K. Xu and C. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6197–6202 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, Y. Guo, H. Jin, H. Ji and L. J. Wan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2023–2026 RSC .
M. Salama, Rosy, R. Attias, R. Yemini, Y. Gofer, D. Aurbach and M. Noked, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(2), 436–446 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, B. M. Gallant, D. G. Kwabi, J. R. Harding, R. R. Mitchell, M. S. Whittingham and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 750–768 RSC .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19–29 CrossRef .
C. Shu, J. Wang, J. Long, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804587 CrossRef .
Y. G. Zhu, Q. Liu, Y. Rong, H. Chen, J. Yang, C. Jia, L. J. Yu, A. Karton, Y. Ren, X. Xu, S. Adams and Q. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, S. Wu, J. Yi, Y. Sun, S. Guo, S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4960–4964 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Aetukuri, B. D. McCloskey, J. M. Garcia, L. E. Krupp, V. Viswanathan and A. C. Luntz, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, X. Dong, S. Yuan, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
D. Geng, N. Ding, T. S. Hor, S. W. Chien, Z. Liu and Y. Zong, Chem.–Asian J., 2015, 10, 2182–2189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, J. Tang, F. Li, X. Liu, Y. Yamauchi, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3291–3298 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Wrogemann, S. Künne, A. Heckmann, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, V. Siozios, B. Yan, J. Li, M. Winter, K. Beltrop and T. Placke, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902709 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, B. Qin, J. Han and S. Passerini, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1769–1770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shang, N. Chen, Y. Li, S. Chen, J. Lai, Y. Huang, W. Qu, F. Wu and R. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2004017 CrossRef .
J. Xie, Z. Liang and Y. C. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1006–1011 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Becker, D. Reber, A. Aribia, C. Battaglia and R.-S. Kühnel, Hybrid Ionic Liquid/water-in-Salt Electrolytes Enable Stable Cycling of LTO/NMC811 Full Cells, ChemRxiv, Preprint,  DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.13106807.v1.
Q. Dou, Y. Wang, A. Wang, M. Ye, R. Hou, Y. Lu, L. Su, S. Shi, H. Zhang and X. Yan, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1812–1822 CrossRef .
C. Yang, J. Chen, X. Ji, T. P. Pollard, X. Lu, C. J. Sun, S. Hou, Q. Liu, C. Liu, T. Qing, Y. Wang, O. Borodin, Y. Ren, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nature, 2019, 569, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Pranav Kulkarni	Pranav Kulkarni completed his doctoral work in physics from JAIN University, Bangalore in 2020. His doctoral research was focused on the development and understanding of electrode materials for energy storage applications such as lithium and sodium-ion batteries. Currently, he is working as a Senior Research Associate at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University. His current research is focused on the electrode and electrolyte materials in aqueous metal ion batteries.
Debasis Ghosh	Dr. Debasis Ghosh (PhD, IIT Kharagpur, 2014) has been working on electrochemical energy storage for the last 10 years. Before joining as Assistant Professor at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, JAIN University, Bangalore in 2017, he was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow at KAIST in South Korea and at the University of Waterloo, Canada for a couple of years. The current research interest of his research group includes rechargeable batteries (metal-ion, metal–sulfur, metal–air), supercapacitors, and designing multifunctional electrocatalysts for OER/ORR/HER applications.
R. Geetha Balakrishna	Prof. Geetha Balakrishna, is presently the Director of Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, JAIN University. Her current research interest focuses on perovskites, oxide/sulphide nanocrystals, and colloidal quantum dots, which are active towards photons and hence applicable in solar cells, water purification/disinfection/desalination, and sensing technologies. She is a fellow member of many renowned scientific world bodies such as ACS, ANS, MRS, and Assoc of Haz Mater. She has been nominated as the regional coordinator of Global Materials Network (MRS body) from India and is the commission member of IUMRS. She holds many patents and has successfully completed many funded projects.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications on concentrated aqueous electrolytes every year starting from 2016 till date (August, 2020). (b) Comparison of various physiochemical properties for various electrolyte systems. (c) Overview of different WiSE systems and their advantages/disadvantages.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration indicating the difference in the Li+ solvation sheath in (i) salt-in-water electrolyte and (ii) water-in-salt electrolyte; (b) electrochemical stability window of LiTFSI WiSE carried on non-active electrodes. Measurements were taken at different concentrations (molality) with cyclic voltammetry (CV) on stainless steel working electrodes between −1.8 V and 1.8 V versus Ag/AgCl at 10 mV s−1, wherein the potential was converted to Li/Li+ reference for convenience; (c) the electrochemical stability window of electrolytes at various LiTFSI concentrations as measured with CV on active (LiMn2O4 and Mo6S8) electrode surfaces at 0.1 mV s−1; (d) illustration of expanded electrochemical stability window for water-in-salt electrolytes together with the modulated redox couples of the LiMn2O4 cathode and the Mo6S8 anode caused by high salt concentration (reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The ESW of 21 m LiTFSI WiSE at SS inert electrode at 10 mV s−1, with the 1st CV plot of the Mo6S8 anode and the LiFePO4 cathode overlaid at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate (reproduced with permission from ref. 8, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016). (b) The CV plot of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with different crystal structures in the WiSE. Inset: the ESW of 21 m LiTFSI WiSE on the SS current collector at 10 mV s−1 scan rate merged with the CV plots of the Mo6S8 anode and the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with different crystal structures at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate in the WiSE; Charge–discharge voltage profile of (c) Fdm LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode with Li4Ti5O12 anode and Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and (d) Fdm LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Mo6S8 full cell in pH adjusted 21 m LiTFSI WiSE at 0.5C (reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Copyright © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 
O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2O, E0 = 2.91 V
CO2 + ½O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → Li2CO3, E0 = 3.82 V
CO2 + Li2O → Li2CO3

 	Fig. 4  (a) A summary of the parameters influencing the cation transport mechanism (reproduced with permission from ref. 34, Copyright © 2020, Elsevier). (b) Plot of the concentration dependence of the Li+ transference number (t+) for LiTFSI–H2O at 20 °C, along with LiPF6 in PC, EC:EMC (1:1 wt%) and LiTFSI–AN at 25 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society). (c) A 3D snapshot of an MD simulation box of the 21 m LiTFSI electrolyte, where the blue and red regions represent the bulk water channel and ion aggregate, respectively; (d) the movement of an Li+ ion (gray ball) in the bulk-like nanometric water channel (blue region) at four sequential times separated by 1.0 ps, clearly indicating its high mobility; (e) the movement of an Li+ ion (gray ball) within the ionic aggregate (red region) over the same time period (3 ps), showing only the fluctuation in the position, along with a small fraction of water molecules (blue) encapsulated within the ionic aggregate (reproduced with permission from ref. 61, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society). (f) A representative snapshot of the largest water and ionic aggregates in 20 m aqueous LiTFSI with the Li+ diffusion paths shown by black arrow (in the bulk-like water) and yellow arrow (in the ionic aggregates), and orange arrow, indicating Li+ before leaving the aggregate and exchanging with Li+ in the water-rich domain. (g) Variation of tunc+ and tc+ of Li+ as a function of the LiTFSI concentration (reproduced with permission from ref. 62, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The electrochemical stability windows of WiBSE (21 m LiTFSI + 7 m LiOTf) and WiSE (21 m LiTFSI) electrolyte as measured on the inactive current collector (stainless steel grid) at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1, which is overlaid with the 1st CV traces collected on the active anode (C–TiO2) and cathode (LiMn2O4) materials at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1 in WiBSE. (b and c) The enlarged regions near the anodic and cathodic extremes of the electrochemical windows of WiBSE. (d) The first charge–discharge profiles of the electrochemical couples of LiMn2O4/C–TiO2 in WiSE (black) and WIBSE (blue). (e) The cycling stability for varying combinations of TiO2 anodes and electrolytes, showing better cycle stability of the C–TiO2 anode in WiBSE (reproduced with permission from ref. 32, Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The CV plots (0.2 mV s−1) of 40 m mixed acetate along with 27 m KOAc and 1 m KOAc at different electrodes: Pt at the top, Ti and glassy carbon at the bottom; (b) CV profile of Mo6S8, TiO2, and Li4Ti5O12, LiFePO4, or LiMn2O4 electrodes in the mixed acetate WiBSE (reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Demonstration of the synthesis and structural architectures of HiSE. Color code: white, pink, grey, blue, red, green, and yellow balls stand for H, Li, C, N, O, F, and S atoms, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 75, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) CV plot of the LiTFSI–HFE gel-coated graphite anode in the WiBS-gel electrolyte in a three-electrode setup with Ag/AgCl reference electrode and active carbon counter electrode; the CV plot of the LiVPO4F cathode against the LiTFSI–HFE gel-coated Li metal reference electrode in the WiBS gel electrolyte. The CV test was carried out at 0.5 mV s−1 scan rate. (c) GCD profile of the LiTFSI–HFE gel = coated graphite anode in the WiBS-gel electrolyte at 0.1C in a three-electrode setup with the Ag/AgCl reference electrode and active carbon counter electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 56, Copyright (2017) Elsevier Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Computed solvation structure of Na+ in NaOTf-based salt-in-water and water-in-salt systems. (b) The CV curves (10 mV s−1 scan rate) measured on inert electrodes in 9.26 m NaOTf, which is overlaid with the first CV curve (0.1 mV s−1) of the Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2 cathode and the NaTi2(PO4)3 anode in 9.26 m NaOTf WiSE. (c) Cycle stability plot of the Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell in different electrolytes (reproduced with permission from ref. 76, Copyright © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) LSV plots of 35 m NaFSI on the SS current collector at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate, which is overlayed with the CV plots of the NaTi2(PO4)3 anode and the Na3(VOPO4)2F cathode at 0.05 mV s−1 scan rate (reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society). (e) ESW of the NaClO4 solution of different concentrations (1–17 m in water) measured by CV (1 mV s−1) on gold electrode vs. saturated calomel electrode, along with the magnified HER (left) and OER (right) region. (f) Cycle stability plot of the Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell in different electrolytes. TEM analysis of the NaTi2(PO4)3 anode after 20 GCD cycles in 1 m NaClO4. (g) Electrolyte, with no SEI layer, and in 17 m NaClO4 (h) with a uniform SEI protective layer (reproduced with permission from ref. 79, Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The ESW of the 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf electrolyte and IC-WiBSE (9 mol kg−1 NaOTF + 22 mol kg−1 TEAOTf) from the linear sweep voltammetric measurements performed in the three-electrode cell at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) Cycling performance of the NaMnHCF cathode in 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf and the IC-WiBSE. (c) The dissolution amount of the transition metal ions (Fe and Mn) after 50 cycles at 1C in 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf and 9 mol kg−1 NaOTf + 22 mol kg−1 TEAOTf electrolytes, respectively. The insets show the optical photographs of the cycled electrolytes. Both electrochemical tests are performed in the three-electrode cell with 4 mL aqueous electrolyte (reproduced with permission from ref. 86, Copyright © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Digital images of (25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI) after storage at room temperature for 6 months, exhibiting no salt crystallization, whereas the digital images of 21 m LiTFSI, 19.5 m LiTFSI + 8.3 m LiBETI (hydrate-melt), and 35 m NaFSI shows clear salt crystallization only after 2 weeks of storing at room temperature (22 °C). The cycle stability study of NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F full cells at 1C current in (e) 25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI and (f) 35 m NaFSI electrolyte. The insets are the selected charge–discharge profiles during cycling. (g) Micrographs of glass fiber separators extracted from the cycled cells in the 25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI and 35 m NaFSI electrolyte, where the latter shows the crystallization precipitation of the salt, causing quick capacity fading. (h) Cycle stability of the NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F full cells in 25 m NaFSI + 10 m NaFTFSI electrolyte operated at 30°, 10°, and −10 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 87, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Linear voltammetry curves recorded at 10 mV s−1 in 1, 10, and 30 m KFSI electrolyte. (b) CV profiles of β-PTCDA measured using a three-electrode battery at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) Study of the dissolution behavior of the β-PTCDA electrode as a function of the electrolyte concentration (1 m and 30 m KFSI) with digital images of the cycled separators soaked NaOH solution (2 mol L−1). A deeper color solution means more dissolved material in the separator membrane. (d) Cycling performance of AFKIB at 12.5C for 1000 cycles (reproduced with permission from ref. 101, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CV curve of the Zn electrode in different electrolytes showing a shift in the OER potential in the WiSE. (b) CV plot of Zn//VOPO4 in 21 M LiTFSI/1 M Zn(Tr)2 WiBSE, showing a reversible redox peak for Zn2+ insertion/extraction and the oxygen redox reaction. (c) Charge/discharge curves of Zn/VOPO4 batteries at 0.05 A g−1 in 21 M LiTFSI/1 M Zn(Tr)2 WiBSE. (d) Cycle stability of the Zn/VOPO4 cell tested at different potential windows engaging (0.8–2.1 V)/without engaging (0.8–1.8 V) the oxygen redox chemistry (reproduced with permission from ref. 110, Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) ESW of the ZnCl2 electrolyte at different concentrations. (b) Femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy of the ZnCl2 solution at different concentrations. (c) The plating/stripping of Zn in 30 m ZnCl2 in a Zn‖Zn symmetric cell at 0.2 mA cm−2 with a sweep duration of 10 minutes over 580 to 600 hours (reproduced with permission from ref. 111, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018). (d) CV curves from the 5th cycle with a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 and (e) the GCD plots of the Zn//Ca0.20V2O5·0.80H2O cell at different electrolyte concentrations (1 m to 30 m) (reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the proposed aqueous Mg-ion battery constructed with the PPMDA@MWCNT composite anode and magnesiated LVP cathode in 4 m Mg(TFSI)2 concentrated aqueous electrolyte; (b) the ESW of 4 m Mg(TFSI)2 and 1 m MgSO4 aqueous electrolytes measured with cyclic voltammetry (CV) at 10 mV s−1 scan rate on stainless steel working electrodes vs. Ag/AgCl. The Mg2+-intercalation potentials of various reported electrode materials along with the cathode and anode used in this work are marked in the graph. (c) The schematic of the working mechanism for the LVP cathode. (d) The charge–discharge profile of the LVP cathode measured at different C rates in a three-electrode setup. (e) The charge discharge profile of the PPMDA@MWCNT anode measured at different C rates in a three-electrode setup (reproduced with permission from ref. 121, Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The schematic diagram of the solvation structure. (b) The linear sweep voltammetry of aqueous electrolytes on titanium mesh in the three-electrode system at 10 mV s−1 (Al-WiSE, 1 M Al(NO3)3 and 0.5 M Al2(SO4)3). (c) Cycling life of the FF-PBA cathode in Al-WiSE, 0.5 M Al2(SO4)3, and 0.5 m Al(OTF)3 electrolytes. (d) The cathode dissolution experiment. Al-WiSE, 1 M Al(NO3)3, and 0.5 M Al2(SO4)3 electrolytes are displayed from left to right orderly (reproduced with permission from ref. 123, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) ESW of 21 m LiTFSI and 3 m ZnTfO2 HWiSE. (b) dQ/dV vs. voltage plot for the second charge discharge of the Zn//graphite DIB, indicating the three-step (de)intercalations of the anion in graphite. (c) Schematic of the working of Zn//graphite DIB employing 21 m LiTFSI and 3 m ZnTfO2 HWiSE (reproduced with permission from ref. 125, Copyright © 2019 Elsevier). (d) Illustration of the ESW for the AlCl3-based WiSE as compared to 1 M AlCl3. (e) The ex situ XRD analysis of the pristine, half charged, and fully charged graphite cathode showing the existence of AlCl4− and Al3+ intercalated ions indicating the DIB characteristic. (f) Schematic of the charge storage of the Al/AlCl3 WiSE/graphite based DIB (reproduced with permission from ref. 126, Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019). (g) Schematic of the working principle of RDIB in 30 m ZnCl2 electrolyte. (h) CV plots of the ferrocene/C composite anode and the Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2 cathode in ZnCl2 electrolytes of different concentrations. (i) Variation of the cell voltage as a function of the electrolyte concentration for the Zn‖Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2 rocking chair battery, Zn metal//ferrocene nanocomposite DIB, and the RDIB (reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the working principle of metal–sulfur battery (reproduced with permission from ref. 131, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). (b) CV at 0.1 mV s−1 and (c) GCD profile (0.2C) of S-KB composite in WiBSE (red solid line) and non-aqueous electrolyte (black dashed line). (d) Digital images showing the negligible solubility of the short chain polysulfides and Li2S in WiBSE at different time intervals. (e) Estimated content ratios of element S8 (green), Li2S (blue), and LiPS at specific SOCs (reproduced with permission from ref. 129, Copyright (2017) National Academy of Sciences).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Immiscibility between H2O and DMC, and the homogeneous HANE-based on these two solvents in the presence of LiTFSI. (b) Representative liquid structure for the HANE. Colors: Li+, purple; O, red; C, gray; H, white; N, blue; S, yellow; F, green. (c) Schematic illustration of anode SEI formation in the HANE. (d) Electrochemical stability window of the HANE measured with the CV on the current collectors as well as active electrodes (LTO and LNMO). (e) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the LTO-LNMO full cell at 6C (reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright © 2018, Published by Elsevier Inc.).	 


Water-in-salt electrolytes for lithium-ion batteries

1	LiMn2O4/C–TiO2	21 mol kg−1 LiTFSI	3.1 V (SS mesh) (1.83 V to 4.9 V)	2.1 V	100 W h kg−1	40 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	—	6.5 mS cm−1 (RT)	
32

7 mol kg−1 LiOTf
2	LiMn2O4/C–TiO2	32 m KOAc	3.0 V (Ti)	2.5 V	—	90% capacity retention after 100 cycles	374 mPa s	5.3 mS cm−1 (25C)	
65

8 m LiOAc
3	LiFePO4/Mo6S8	21 m LiTFSI	3.0 V (SS grid) (1.9 V to 4.9 V)	1.3 V	47 W h kg−1	Capacity fade of 0.04% per cycle	—	—	
8

4	LiMn2O4/Mo6S8	21 m LITFSI	3.0 V (SS) (1.9 V to 4.9 V)	2.3 V	100 W h kg−1	68% capacity retention at 4.5C over 1000 cycles	—	∼10 mS cm−1	
26

5	LiMn2O4/TiS2	21 m LiTFSI	3.0 V (SS) (1.8 V to 4.8 V)	1.7 V	78 W h kg−1	74% capacity retention at 1C over 50 cycles	—	—	
45

6	LiMn2O4/Activated carbon	21 m polyacrylamide-chitosan-based WiSE	2.6 V (0 V to 2.6 V)	1.5 V	110 W h kg−1	90.1% of capacity retained after 2000 cycles	—	51.3 mS cm−1 (25C)	
75

7	LiMn2O4/LiTi2(PO4)3	50 wt% LiPAA	2.6 V (2.22 V to 4.83 V vs. Li+/Li)	1.5 V	77 W h kg−1	
	—	6.5 mS cm−1 (20C)	
33

LiMn2O4/TiO2	2.1 V	124 W h kg−1
8	LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li4Ti5O12	14 M LiTFSI + DMC	4.1 V (1.0 V to 5.1 V vs. Ag+/AgCl)	3.2 V	165 W h kg−1	Capacity decay of 0.024% at 6C for 1000 cycles	—	3 mS cm−1 (25C)	
30

9	LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Mo6S8	21 mol kg−1 LiTFSI	3.0 V (1.9 V to 4.9 V vs. Li+/Li)	3.0 V	126 W h kg−1	—	—	—	
46

10	LiCoO2/Li4Ti5O12	Li (TFSI)0.7(BETI)0.3·2H2O	3.8 V (1.25 V to 5.05 V)	2.7 V	130 W h kg−1	63% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 6.8C	203 mPa s	3 mS cm−1 (30C)	
31

LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li4Ti5O12	3.1 V	160 W h kg−1	75% capacity retention after 200 cycles at 10C
11	LiMn2O4/Li4Ti5O12	42 m LiTFSI + 21 m Me3EtN·TFSI	3.25 V (SS) (1.75–5.0 V vs. Li+/Li)	2.5 V	145 W h kg−1	Capacity retention of 88% is maintained after 100 cycles at 1C	407 mPa s	0.91 mS cm−1 (30C)	
64

12	LiVPO4F/LiVPO4F	25 m LiTFSI – 10 wt% PVA	3.2 V (GC) (1.7–4.9 V Li+/Li)	2.4 V	141 W h kg−1	87% of initial capacity retained after 4000 cycles at 20C	—	9 mS cm−1 (25 °C)	
74

13	LiCoO2/Mo6S8	21 m LiTFSI – 0.1 wt% TMSB electrolyte	2.5 V	2.5 V	120 W h kg−1	Capacity decay rate of 0.013% per cycle was observed for 1000 cycle	—	—	
52

14	Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4	15 m EIWE (LiTFSI in TEGDME)	4.2 V (0.6 to 4.8 V vs. Li/Li+)	2.5 V	120 W h kg−1	CE of 99.75% after > 500 cycles	—	0.63 mS cm−1 at 25 °C	
144

15	Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4	2 m LiTFSI–94% PEG–6% H2O	3.2 V (1.3 to 4.5 V vs. Li/Li+)	2.25 V	110 W h kg−1	68% retention after 300 cycles	—	0.8 mS cm−1 at 25 °C	
145

16	Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4	15.3 mol LiTFSI in 1 kg mixture of water:AN (1:1 by molar)	4.5 V (0.7 to 5.2 V vs. Li/Li+)	2.3 V	109 W h kg−1	98% capacity retention after 300 cycles	—	1.34 mS cm−1 at 0 °C	
57

Li4Ti5O12//LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2	2.14 V	173 W h kg−1	91% capacity retention after 300 cycles	5.99 mS cm−1 at 60 °C
17	TiO2/NMC811	40/20 m LiTFSI/EMImTFSI	—	1.95 V	121 W h kg−1	80% of its initial capacity after 290 cycles	—	1.2 mS cm−1 at 25 °C	
146

Li4Ti5O12/NMC811	1.9 V	150 W h kg−1	80% of their initial capacity after 154 cycles


Water-in-salt electrolytes for sodium-ion batteries

14	Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2/NaTi2(PO4)3	9.26 m NaCF3SO3	2.5 V (SS) (1.7 to 4.2 V)	1.0 V	31 W h kg−1	Capacity retention of 92.7% after 1200 cycles	—	50 mS cm−1	
76

15	NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F	35 m NaFSI	2.6 V (SS) (−1.15 to 1.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	—	—	—	—	90 mS cm−1	
77

16	Na2MnFe(CN)6/NaTi2(PO4)3	32 m KAc and 8 m NaAc	4 V (Al) (−2.15 to + 2.0 vs. Ag/AgCl)	1.0 V	—	12 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.1 A g−1	—	12 mS cm−1	
78

17	Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/NaTi2(PO4)3	17 m NaClO4	2.7 V (1.7 to 4.4)	2.0 V	36 W h kg−1	65 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 1C	—	108 mS cm−1 (25C)	
79

18	Na2VTi(PO4)3//Na2VTi(PO4)3	9.2 m NaCF3SO3 (NaOTF)	1.6 V	1.2 V	—	25 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 20C	—	50 mS cm−1 (20C)	
80

19	Na3V2(PO4)3/NaTi2(PO4)3	7 m NaOTf (water) and 8 m NaOTF (propylene carbonate)	2.8 V (−1.25 to 1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	1.2 V	45 W h kg−1	20 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at 10C	—	∼25 mS cm−1 (20 °C)	
143

∼60 mS cm−1 (55 °C)
20	NaTi2(PO4)3/Na3(VOPO4)2F	25 m NaFSI/10 m NaFTFSI	2.7 V	2.0 V	64 W h kg−1	77% capacity retention after 500 cycles at 1C	94.2 mPa s (20 °C)	11.8 mS cm−1 (30 °C)	
87

21	NaMnHCF/NaTiOPO4	9 m NaOTF and 22 m TEAOTF	3.3 V (−1.7 to 1.6 vs. Ag/AgCl)	1.74 V	71 W h kg−1	90% retention after 200 cycles	28.3–29 mPa s (303 K)	8.8–9.7 mS cm−1	
86



Water-in-salt electrolytes for zinc-ion batteries

22	Zn/LiMn2O4 hybrid battery	1 m Zn(TFSI)2 and 20 m LiTFSI	
	1.4 V	70 W h kg−1	85% capacity retention after 4000 cycles	—	—	
107

23	Zn/LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4	21 m of LiTFSI and 0.5 m of ZnSO4	3.7 V (SS) (−0.8 to 2.9 vs. Zn)	1.8 V	183 W h kg−1	110 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at 0.3C	—	—	
109

24	Zn/Ca0.20V2O5·0.80H2O	30 m ZnCl2	1.8 V (−0.6 to 1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	1.8 V	206 W h kg−1	70% capacity retention over 1000 cycles at 1.6 A g−1	—	12.7 mS cm−1	
112

25	Zn/V2O5	21 m LiTFSI and 1 m Zn(CF3SO3)2	1.4 V (0.2 to 1.6 vs. Zn)	1.4 V	—	80% of capacity retained after 2000 cycles at 2 A g−1	—	—	
108



Water-in-salt electrolytes for calcium-ion batteries

26	Copper hexacyanoferrate (CuHCF)	8 mol dm−3 Ca(NO3)2	1.1 V (−0.1 V to 1.0 V vs. SCE)	1.1 V	—	∼97% of the capacity was retained after 150 cycles	—	—	
120



Water-in-salt electrolytes for magnesium-ion batteries

27	PPMDA@MWCNT/Li3V2(PO4)3	4 m Mg(TFSI)2	2 V (1.7 to 3.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	1.9 V	6400 W kg−1 (power density)	92% after 6000 cycles	—	—	
121



Water-in-salt electrolytes for aluminum-ion batteries

28	FF-PBA K0.2Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.79·2.1H2O	5 m Al(CF3SO3)3	2.65 V (−1.0 V to 1.65 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	2.0 V	—	70 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	17.7	∼26 mS cm−1	
123



Water-in-salt electrolytes for sulfur batteries

29	S-KB/LiMn2O4	21 m LiTFSI and 7 m LiOTf WiBSE	2.5 V	1.8 V	135 W h kg−1	86% capacity retention after 1000 cycles	—	—	
129

S-KB/HV-LiCoO2	2.24 V	195 W h kg−1	—
30	Al/S/C	1 m Al(OTf)3, 17 m LiTFSI, 0.02 M HCl	3.2 V (−0.3 to 2.9 V)	—	—	420 mA h g−1 is preserved after 30 cycles	—	—	
130



Water-in-salt electrolytes for dual ion batteries

31	Zn/graphite	21 m LiTFSI and 3 m ZnTfO2	2.6 V	1.7 V	—	24 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles	—	∼7 mS cm−1 (20 °C)	
125

32	Al/graphite	AlCl3·6H2O	4.0 V	1.4 V	220 W h kg−1	99% of capacity retention after 1000 cycles	—	—	
126

33	Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2/Fc/C	30 m ZnCl2	—	0.95 V	∼28.5 W h kg−1	60% of capacity retention after 1000 cycles	—	—	
127


 	Fig. 18  Publication year-wise development trend for high voltage aqueous Li-ion batteries with the main focus on WiSE and WiS hybrid electrolytes along with the technical details such as the electrode couple, nature of electrolytes, and their key advantages/disadvantages.	 

 	Fig. 19  Publication year-wise development trend for high-voltage aqueous batteries other than Li-ion (Na, K, Al, Ca, Zn, and Mg-ion batteries) with the main focus on WiSE and WiS hybrid electrolytes along with technical details such as the electrode couple, nature of electrolytes, and their key advantages/disadvantages.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
