Tailoring surface wetting states for ultrafast solar-driven water evaporation   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE00399A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE00399A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2087-2095Tailoring surface wetting states for ultrafast solar-driven water evaporation†

        
          
            Youhong 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Zhao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zihao 
            Jiao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xingyi 
            Zhou
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Guihua 
            Yu
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Science and Engineering Program and Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, TX 78712, USA. E-mail: ghyu@austin.utexas.edu
bState Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China
Received 
      7th February 2020
    , Accepted 5th March 2020First published on 17th March 2020AbstractSolar-driven interfacial evaporation has significant potential to improve the energy utilization efficiency and provides a means for sustainable seawater desalination and water purification technologies. Although rational design of evaporative materials and surfaces is essential to the interfacial solar water vaporization process, tailoring the surface wettability states of solar evaporators to accelerate the vapor generation rate remains unexplored. Here we demonstrate hydrophilic hydrogel evaporators with hydrophobic island-shaped patches, capable of achieving a record evaporation rate of ∼4.0 kg m−2 h−1 with 93% efficiency under 1 sun irradiation (1 kW m−2). This exceptional high rate results from both wetting regions, which function synergistically. The increased thickness of the water layer in the hydrophilic region leads to the rapid escape of water molecules, while relatively long contact lines promise considerable water evaporation from the hydrophobic region, further contributing to this process. Molecular dynamics simulations provide a consistent outcome on a molecular basis, in which an inhomogeneous surface wetting property could modulate the escape behavior of water molecules to speed the evaporation. Under natural sunlight, a 3D printed portable solar water purification jug using this hydrogel evaporator delivers purified water far above the EPA drinking water standards, highlighting its potential for water purification.

Broader context
Billions of people lacking access to clean water cannot be overstated. Providing fresh water universally in a sustainable and affordable manner for both developing and industrialized communities is a severe challenge. Thermal and membrane-based technologies have been developed to increase water supplies via desalination of seawater and recycling of wastewater; however, the requirements of considerable energy consumption, significant infrastructure, and long working time have raised a barrier for rural places or emergency response to a water shortage. Solar-driven interfacial evaporation is one of the most promising approaches to enable household production of distilled water at high efficiency. The currently reported solar-driven water purification systems are limited by a low vapor generation rate under natural solar flux, saline fouling, and unsatisfactory quality of collected water. This work demonstrates a hydrogel evaporator with inhomogeneous surface wettability, which achieves an ultrahigh evaporation rate of ∼4.0 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun by exploiting the synergistic contributions from both wetting regions. The proposed hydrogel evaporator simultaneously cleans itself to avoid salt fouling during the evaporation process and delivers drinkable water above WHO and EPA standards.

Introduction
Nearly three billion people are living in areas of high water stress.1 Seawater desalination and brackish water purification are promising approaches for this inevitably growing need. Thermal-based desalination, such as multi-effect distillation, is a well-established solution to produce high-purity water by repeatedly evaporating and condensing seawater on a large scale.2 Another process, reverse osmosis membrane-based technology, eclipses thermal-based technologies, using much less energy.3,4 Even so, limitations exist since membranes are prone to biofouling and involve attentive, professional maintenance.3 Recently, desalination via solar vapor generation has become an active, but remains an underdeveloped, field of research.5,6 Compared with traditional technologies, solar vapor generation requires much lower electricity consumption and less complex infrastructure since the only energy input is solar light.6 In addition, solar vapor generation is environmentally-friendly because no waste gases nor undesired chemical by-products are emitted.
A significant volume of work has been devoted to optimizing solar vapor generation under 1 sun because natural sunlight is too diffuse to satisfy the energy required for fast water evaporation without the use of expensive optical concentrators. For instance, nanoparticles with plasmonic heating effects are adopted to boost the solar-to-thermal conversion efficiency.7–9 Functional materials10–15 and bioinspired structures16–19 have been designed to localize heat at the evaporation surface, reducing the energy loss to the environment. In addition, photovoltaic devices have been coupled with solar vapor generation systems to realize an enhanced water evaporation rate using electric heating materials.20 The simultaneously generated electricity by solar cells provides an additional energy source to heat the water; yet, sustainable cells with low-cost materials and simple components should be taken into consideration for better integration.21–23 Recently, an important step toward highly efficient solar vapor generation using hydrogels has been achieved under one sun.24 It has been demonstrated that hydrogels are capable of very efficient solar water evaporation by tuning the interaction between polymer networks and water molecules.25,26
In a hydrogel solar evaporator system, the surface of hydrated polymer chains becomes the evaporation surface, which could be further tailored to accelerate the water evaporation process. In previous work, physical modification of the topography of hydrogels was explored via liquid–liquid interface-guided gelation, forming dimpled surfaces to achieve a higher heat flux.27 Another reported strategy on surface modifications of solar evaporators was to add a hydrophobic layer to advance the anti-fouling function and thus to improve the durability.28–30 Several simulations in the literature have proposed that surface wettability could also have a substantial impact on the evaporation rate.31–33 However, the potential to accelerate solar vapor generation by tuning the surface wettability states of solar evaporators remains unexplored. Such a study is of great significance for both fundamental aspects of water evaporation behaviours and practical applications in solar-driven water purification technologies.
Here, we investigate the chemical tuning of the surface wetting states of hydrogel-based evaporators for greatly enhanced solar vapor generation. The as-prepared hydrogels have a partially trichloro(octadecyl)silane (OTS) modified surface, on which the island-shaped patches are hydrophobic, while the remainder of the surface is hydrophilic (Fig. 1a). A large portion of water is confined in the hydrophilic region to increase the thickness of the water film; therefore, the influence of the hydrogel surface on the outmost water molecules is reduced to achieve accelerated evaporation (Fig. 1b). Additionally, many water molecules that diffuse across the water contact lines to the hydrophobic region contribute to efficient evaporation as well. Meanwhile, the porous hydrogel network promotes rapid water transport to replenish the top evaporation surface adequately (Fig. 1c and Fig. S1, ESI†). By controlling the surface coverage of hydrophobic islands, both wetting regions contribute to the water evaporation process to achieve an ultrahigh rate of ∼4.0 kg m−2 h−1 with 93% efficiency under one sun irradiation (1 kW m−2). Consistent with the experimental results, MD simulations provide the molecular basis for how non-uniform wetting surfaces could modulate the escape behaviour of water molecules, thereby speeding the evaporation process. Furthermore, a 3D printed portable solar water purification jug based on this hydrogel evaporator exhibits an average yield of 2.1 L m−2 h−1 of purified water under natural sunlight, revealing its potential for emergency first-aid applications.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of patchy-surface hydrogels (PSHs) for enhanced solar-driven evaporation. (a) Interfacial heating-based evaporation in which the hydrogel is located on the top surface of non-purified water where the heat can be localized on the air–hydrogel interface. (b) Evaporation of water can be accelerated by PSHs. A large portion of water is confined in the hydrophilic region (cyan) with an increased water thickness (green) to reduce the influence of the hydrogel surface on the outmost water molecules for faster escaping. In addition, a considerable amount of water molecules diffuse across the water contact lines and evaporate from the hydrophobic region (yellow). (c) Under one sun, the hydrogel polymeric network with the solar absorber inside can in situ harvest solar energy to heat the water at the evaporation surface, and its three-dimensional interconnected porous structure can refurnish non-purified water upward rapidly. 
Results and discussion
Fabrication and characterization of PSH
The patchy-surface hydrogel (PSH) was prepared by the gelation of polymer networks with solar absorbing nanoparticles first (Fig. S2, ESI†). The morphologies and physicochemical properties of the hydrogel could be tuned by the ratios of the polymer to the cross-linker or solar absorber.34 Then, only one side of the hydrogel surface was in contact with trichloro(octadecyl)silane (OTS) solution for a predetermined time and temperature to yield covalent Si–O–Si bonds attached to the underlying PVA hydrogel substrate.35 It should be noted that the surface coverage of OTS is dependent on the recipe of the solution-based chemical modification process (see Experimental for details). An optical microscope was first employed to characterize the surface of each PSH. Fig. 2a shows a uniform green colour of a pure PVA thin film under white light illumination. After OTS modification, a distinct colour appears, as shown in the red-light regions (Fig. 2b–d). This colour difference results from thin film interference, which indicates an increase in the thickness of the PVA film.36 The coverages of OTS at the modified hydrogel surfaces are calculated to be 0%, ∼30%, ∼60%, and ∼90% using Image J, which are denoted as PSH 0, PSH 30, PSH 60, and PSH 90, respectively. Under higher magnification, PSH 30 showed OTS-modified surfaces also in nanosized island shapes (Fig. S3, ESI†). 2D colour contour maps taken from optical profilometer and height profiles of the PSHs evaluated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) showed consistent outmost surface profiles with optical images at both the micro- (Fig. S4, ESI†) and nanoscale (Fig. S5, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Surface characterization of PSHs. (a–h) Optical images and evaporation state contact angles of PSHs with (a and e) 0%, (b and f) 30%, (c and g) 60%, and (d and h) 90% OTS covered surfaces. Scale bar: 20 μm. (i–k) XPS results for PSHs from 0% to 90% OTS coverage: (i) Si 2p spectra, (j) O 1s spectra, and (k) Si/O ratios. 
The corresponding overall water contact angles (WCAs) were measured to be 0.0 ± 0.0°, 90.0 ± 4.8°, 125.5 ± 2.3°, and 130.7 ± 1.8° (Fig. 2e–h), respectively, showing an increasing hydrophobic trend from PSH 0 to PSH 90, which further confirms the successful OTS surface modification of the PSHs. It should be noted here that the water contact angles of the PSHs were measured in their swollen state, which is also known as their evaporation state. Typically, an OTS modified surface would become superhydrophobic (≥150°).37 However, there are two reasons for the contact angle of each PSH to be less than 150°. First, surfaces of PSHs are partially modified.38 Second, since freeze-dried samples are used in the OTS modification step, defects are created by the reswelling of hydrogels in water.25 Instead of blocking the water pathway, these defects are favourable for PSHs to facilitate water evaporation.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to analyse the hydrogel surface before and after OTS modification. The binding energy at 102.5 eV is assigned to Si 2p of OTS,39,40 suggesting the presence of OTS on the surfaces of PSH 30, 60, and 90 (Fig. 2i). In addition, an increase in the intensity of Si 2p manifests an increasing coverage of OTS at the hydrogel surface with prolonged soaking time. As shown in Fig. 2j, the peak at 532.8 eV can be attributed to O 1s of the PVA polymer,41 and the intensity of this peak decreases from PSH 0 to 90 because the OTS modification adlayer increases the attenuation of electrons from the PVA layer.42 Hence, an increase in the Si/O ratio from PSH 0 to 90 is observed from nearly 0 to 0.5 (Fig. 2k), which confirms the successful modification of OTS with different surface coverages.35 Compressive stress–strain tests show that the OTS modification only had an impact on the surface instead of the original polymeric network (Fig. S6, ESI†). Such an observation indicates that different hydrophobic surface coverages would be the main factor for the solar-driven evaporation behaviour of each PSH, as discussed in the following.
Solar vapor generation under one sun
The solar absorption properties of the PSHs were evaluated using ultraviolet-vis (UV-vis) near-infrared (NIR) spectra. PSH 30 presented excellent broadband absorption (≥98%) weighted by a standard solar spectrum of air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) (Fig. S7a, ESI†). It has the lowest reflectance (≤2%) compared to the reflectance of the other PSHs over the 400 to 2100 nm wavelength range (Fig. S7b, ESI†). Such low reflectance of PSH 30 could be attributed to the highest surface roughness ∼20.8 ± 5.9 nm (Table S2, ESI†),43,44 indicating its ability to capture the incident solar light efficiently. Upon exposure to 1 sun irradiation, the temperatures of the evaporation surface of each PSH and the underneath bulk water over time were traced to study their photothermal behaviour (Fig. 3a). All PSHs presented a good heat localization effect as the surface temperature was instantly increased by solar heating and gradually reached steady state equilibrium temperatures after 40 min, while the temperature of the bulk water remained ∼22 to 23 °C. PSH 30 showed the lowest steady-state equilibrium temperature ∼32 °C due to the cooling effect caused by the highest evaporation rate. A photograph of the solar vapor generation setup and infrared images of PSH 30 during the vapor generation process under 1 sun (exposure times of 0 min, 10 min, and 60 min) are shown in Fig. 3b, verifying that the thermal energy was confined at the evaporation surface instead of being lost to the bulk water underneath.
 Fig. 3  Performance of solar-driven evaporation and desalination. (a) The temperatures tracked at both the evaporation surface and bulk water under 1 sun irradiation. (b) The photograph of the setup for the solar-driven vapor generation test using PSH 30 and the corresponding infrared images showing the temperature distribution with an irradiation time of 0 min, 10 min, and 60 min. The scale bar is 1 cm. (c) The mass change of water during one sun solar vapor generation. (d) The evaporation rate of the PSH and corresponding energy efficiency under 1 sun. (e) The duration test of PSH 30 for 60 continuous hours of solar desalination. The inset is the mass change of water during the 1st hour and 60th hour of PSH 30. 
The mass change of water using the PSH solar evaporator under 1 sun was tracked and is presented in Fig. 3c (see Experimental for details). PSH 30 showed the highest water evaporation rate, ∼4.0 kg m−2 h−1, compared to ∼3.6 kg m−2 h−1 for PSH 0, ∼3.3 kg m−2 h−1 for PSH 60 and 3.0 kg m−2 h−1 for PSH 90, which are all significantly higher than the control sample, blank water without a solar absorber. The corresponding energy efficiency (η) for solar–vapor conversion can be calculated by:10 η = ṁEequ/CoptP0(1)where ṁ is the mass flux after reaching the steady state condition, Eequ is the equivalent vaporization enthalpy of the water in the PSHs (Fig. S8, ESI†),25P0 is the solar irradiation power of 1 sun (1 kW m−2), and Copt refers to the optical concentration on the absorber surface. PSH 30 achieved a high energy efficiency of ∼93% under one sun (Fig. 3d), indicating its potential as a solar evaporator under non-concentrated sunlight. Such high performance is mainly attributed to the patchy surface of the hydrogel. During the evaporation process, many water molecules are confined in the hydrophilic region with an increased water thickness to enhance the water vaporization due to the reduced interference of the solid surface on the outmost water molecules. Additionally, water molecules evaporate from the hydrophobic region due to diffusion out of the hydrophilic region across the elongated water contact lines (Fig. S3, ESI†).45–47 A series of long-term desalination tests under 1 sun irradiation were carried out and the evaporation rate was nearly constant over a 60 h continuous test (Fig. 3e). Featuring an anti-salt-fouling function (Fig. S9, ESI†), PSH 30 was capable of performing practical long-term solar desalination without pre-treatment of seawater nor cycling treatment of the hydrogel.
Molecular dynamics simulation of accelerated evaporation using PSH
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed to gain further physical insight into the evaporation process of water at the surface of the hydrogel (see Experimental for details). To better approach the experimental situation of the evaporation surface of the hydrogel, we constructed a sandwich-like model, in which water molecules are below the hydrogel surface (substrate) initially before evaporation starts (Fig. 4a). The simulation box has a size of 30 nm × 30 nm × 17 nm. Water molecules that pass through the simulated hydrogel substrate to reach a certain height level in the z-direction without bouncing back at the end of the simulation are considered successfully evaporated. Two solid ceilings are located at the bottom and top to prevent the water molecules from running into other periodic cells. The substrate consists of a hydrophilic outer ring (PVA, dark yellow) with four hydrophobic squares (OTS, orange) inside, simulating the patchy surface of the hydrogel evaporator. The wetting behaviours of water molecules on the PVA and OTS substrates are verified to match the experimental results (Fig. 2e and h). A thin layer of water film is formed on the PVA substrate, indicating its good hydrophilic wetting property (Fig. 4b). In contrast, the water molecules form a clear droplet after reaching equilibrium, indicating the hydrophobicity of the OTS substrate (Fig. 4c). The water evaporation process with the OTS coverage at 0%, 30%, 60%, and 90% is simulated to understand the surface-accelerated evaporation. During the evaporation state for a patchy surface, a large portion of water molecules is confined in the hydrophilic region, while water molecules also diffuse across the contact line (i.e., the boundary of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions) to the hydrophobic region to evaporate as usual (Fig. 4d). When the area of the OTS patch increases from 0% to 90%, the average thickness of the water film on the hydrophilic region increases, which leads to a decrease in the average total interaction energy, which is the energy barrier that prevents the evaporation of each water molecule (Fig. 4e). This decrease of the total interaction energy results from a slightly changed interaction energy between water molecules and a notably weakened water–surface interaction energy (Fig. S10, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  MD simulation of PSHs. (a) A sandwich-like model simulating the patchy surface of the hydrogel, in which water molecules are below the hydrogel surface (substrate) initially before evaporation starts. The hydrogel surface consists of four hydrophobic square patches (orange) and the rest is hydrophilic (dark yellow). (b) PVA model and its initial and equilibrium wetting states. (c) OTS model and its initial and equilibrium wetting states. (d) During the evaporation state, the initially spread-out water molecules are confined into the hydrophilic region (PVA). Meanwhile, a considerable number of water molecules also diffuse across the contact lines to the hydrophobic region (OTS) for evaporation. (e) The average thickness of the water film and total average interaction energy in the PVA region. Increasing the coverage of OTS from 0% to 90% results in an increase in the average thickness of the water film and a decrease in the average total interaction energy of the outmost water molecules in the PVA region, indicating a reduced energy barrier for evaporation of water molecules. (f) Number of evaporated water molecules with contributions from both the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions for different OTS surface coverages after the same evaporation duration time. 
Consistent with the experimental results, the water evaporation from the 30% OTS covered surface is the fastest compared to any other surfaces, which is attributed to the joint contributions from both the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions (Fig. 4f). In the hydrophilic region, the energy barrier for the outmost water molecule to escape is weakened as the OTS coverage increases, leading to faster evaporation of water molecules due to the formation of a thicker water film. In the hydrophobic region, the evaporation of the diffused water molecules mainly comes from the hydrophilic–hydrophobic contact lines in which the total length is increased with the growing OTS coverage (Fig. S11 and S12, ESI†). Therefore, the overall water evaporation rate is synergistically dependent on the thickness of the water film in the evaporation region, the area of the hydrophilic region, and the total length of the contact lines (Fig. S13, ESI†).45,46 For 30% OTS coverage, the confinement of a thicker water layer and the sizeable hydrophilic area result in rapid escape of water molecules from the hydrophilic region, while the relatively longer contact lines promise considerable water evaporation from the hydrophobic region, thus leading to the highest evaporation rate. Continuing to increase the OTS coverage leads to more water molecules evaporating from the hydrophobic region; however, the hydrophilic area dramatically decreased, which results in a lower evaporation rate (Fig. 4f). This MD simulation provides the molecular basis for how surface wettability could affect the evaporation behaviour of water molecules, thereby increasing the evaporation rate by 1.2 times compared to that of the uniform hydrophilic surface.
Outdoor solar desalination and water purification
A 3D printed portable solar purification prototype was deployed on the roof of the Engineering Teaching Centre (ETC) at The University of Texas at Austin, where sunny days have an average sunlight flux ∼0.75 kW m−2 (Fig. 5a). A PSH 30 sample was floated in the inner non-purified water container, and the evaporated vapor could condense both from the transparent glass condenser and the inner wall, which was cooled by the coolant (Fig. 5b). The purified water can be collected easily at the 10-degree tilted side. The solar purification jug is light and easy-to-carry for outdoor rescue (Fig. 5c and Fig. S14a, ESI†). The temperatures of the condenser, coolant, and hydrogel surface, solar intensity, and accumulated purified water yields were carefully traced to quantitatively show the running mode of the purification device from 10:00 to 16:00 (Fig. 5d and e). The average hourly yield of purified water is 2.1 L m−2 h−1. The surface temperature of the hydrogel reached 34 °C, which is higher than the indoor laboratory condition, indicating a lowered vapor generation rate with a lower evaporation cooling effect. This is due to the lower solar intensity in the natural environment and the gradually saturated internal humidity of the closed system, which hinders the evaporation of water.
 Fig. 5  Outdoor portable solar evaporator under natural sunlight using the PSH. (a) Overall schematic, (b) cross-section, and (c) photograph of a 3D printed portable solar-water purification device. The scale bar is 3 cm. (d) PSH surface, condenser, and coolant temperatures were traced over time on a sunny day from 10:00 to 16:00. (e) Purified water yield from seawater using PSH 30 under natural sun irradiation. (f) Measured concentrations of four primary ions in seawater and the as-purified water after desalination. (g) Water quality tests of Waller Creek before and after solar vapor generation using PSH 30. 
A real seawater sample with a salinity of 3.5 wt%, from the Gulf of Mexico, was used to demonstrate the solar desalination potential of the PSHs, and the quality of the collected water was evaluated by inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Fig. 5f). The concentrations of four primary ions (Na+, Mg2+, K+, and Ca2+) in the seawater were significantly reduced by ∼3 orders or above after one-step solar vapor generation. In addition to seawater, the PSHs can improve the water quality of Waller Creek in Austin, Texas, successfully by reducing the total chlorine, nitrite nitrogen, and copper, alkalinity, and hardness to nearly 0 ppm, balancing the pH, and removing harmful bacteria (Fig. 5g and Fig. S14b, ESI†). The total dissolved solids (TDS) and conductivity were significantly lowered even compared to the values of domestic tap water (Table S3 and Fig. S14c, ESI†). The above-tested water quality parameters well meet the drinking water standards of the World Health Organization (WHO) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),48,49 showing the effective decontamination ability of PSHs for water purification applications.
Conclusions
In summary, an accelerated solar-driven water vapor generation rate was achieved using patchy-surface hydrogel evaporators by rational modulation of their surface wettability. The hydrophilic region accommodates a water film with increased thickness to reduce the interaction between the outmost water molecules and the hydrogel surface, which enhances the evaporation flux. Meanwhile, a significant amount of water molecules diffusing from the hydrophobic region near the elongated water contact lines also contributes to ultra-efficient evaporation. MD simulations provide fundamental understanding of the escape behaviour of water molecules on the hydrogel surface with inhomogeneous wetting states at the molecular level. By controlling the surface coverage of hydrophobic islands, the PSH evaporators enable a record-high solar vapor generation rate of ∼4.0 kg m−2 h−1 with 93% overall efficiency under 1 sun irradiation. A 3D printed portable solar water purification prototype further demonstrates the highly efficient production of purified water from both seawater and creek water, implying its potential for a variety of desalination and water purification uses. Through the rational design of the size, shape, and density of the hydrophobic patterns, the strategy of patchy wetting surfaces could be applied to other advanced materials for energy–water–environment applications.
Experimental
Chemicals and materials
Chemicals including polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with an average molecular weight of 15000, hydrochloric acid (37%), glutaraldehyde (50 wt% aqueous solution), trichloro(octadecyl)silane (≥98%), Ti2O3 (100 mesh) particles and seawater were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. n-Heptane (99+%, extra dry) was purchased from Acros Organics. The Ti2O3 particles were ball milled. The rest of the materials were used without further purification.
Fabrication of patchy-surface hydrogels (PSHs)
15 mL PVA aqueous solution (7.5 wt%) and 140.63 μL glutaraldehyde were well mixed together through bath sonication (solution A). Then a 750 μL aqueous solution of dispersed Ti2O3 nanoparticles with a Ti2O3/PVA weight ratio of 4:30 and 750 μL HCl (3 wt%) were added to solution A and well mixed through vortex and bath sonication. Gelation was carried out for 90 min. The obtained gel was immersed in DI water overnight to obtain the pure hybrid hydrogel. To obtain a good monolith with a desired porous structure, the sample should be frozen in a regular freezer for at least 5 h before bringing into liquid nitrogen for 30 min. After the freeze-drying process, only one side of each sample surface was brought in contact with 0.3 wt% trichloro(octadecyl)silane (OTS) in n-heptane at a 65 °C hotplate temperature.42 The surface coverage is highly dependent on the dryness of the OTS/n-heptane solution, the purity of silane, the soaking time, temperature, the humidity of the environment, and airborne dust, which are all influential factors for OTS growth.50 High dryness and purity of n-heptane and silane are desired. Preheating the Isotemp hotplate should be done ahead of time to ensure a uniform temperature distribution within the solution. Then, the samples were submerged into 80 °C DI water overnight to get rid of non-reacted chemicals. Last, the fully swollen PSHs were washed with DI water in a bath sonicator.
Characterization
Optical microscope images were taken using an upright microscope (Nikon). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using a Kratos spectrometer (AXIS Ultra DLD). A Wyko NT 9100 optical profilometer was used to take the 2D surface topography images, measuring the corresponding surface roughness and area. The PSHs were hydrated when measured using the optical profilometer. AFM images were measured with a Park Scientific atomic force microscope. The reflectance was measured using a UV-vis-NIR spectrometer (Cary 5000) with an integrating sphere unit and an automated reflectance measurement unit, and the measurements were corrected by a baseline/blank correction with a dark correction. The concentration of ions was tracked by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Agilent 7500ce) with dilutions in 2% HNO3 to make the loaded ion concentration lower than 10 ppm. All measurements of contact angles under water were conducted using a KRUSS DSA100S at ambient temperature. The average value of at least three measurements performed at different positions on the same sample was adopted as the WCA. The compression tests were carried out using an Instron Series 5966 Model (USA) testing machine. The total chlorine, nitrite nitrogen, nitrate nitrogen, and copper, alkalinity, hardness alkalinity, hardness, pH, total dissolved solid (TDS), conductivity and bacterial tests were carried out with water testing kits and a digital TDS meter offered by Test Assured (USA). The main body chamber of the portable solar water purification prototype was printed using a Formlabs Form 2 SLA 3D printer using clear resin.
Measurement of solar vapor generation
The water evaporation performance experiments were conducted using a solar simulator (Solar Light Inc., 300 W Air Mass Solar Simulator Model) outputting simulated solar flux at 1000 W m−2 (1 sun). The solar flux was measured using a thermopile (Newport, 818SL) connected to a power meter (Newport, 1916-R). PSHs cylinders with diameters of both ca. 1 cm and ca. 3.5 cm and a thickness of ca. 1 cm were floated in pure water (or brine for desalination tests) with a solar flux of 1 sun. The mass of the water loss is measured by a lab balance with 0.1 μg resolution and calibrated to weights heavier than the total weight of the setup. All evaporation rates were measured after stabilization under one sun for 60 min.
MD simulation of the water evaporation of the PSHs
Model: initially, 12520 water molecules were in a rectangular unit, with dimension 28 nm × 28 nm × 0.4 nm, deposited 0.5 nm under the hydro-material surface. The hydro-materials, simulating different hydrogel surfaces, were seated from 0 nm along the z-axis. A carbon nanosheet was seated 11 nm along the z-axis to prevent evaporated water molecules re-entering into the bottom of the material surface. At the equilibrium stage, an acceleration region was applied from −0.5 nm to 0 nm under the surface with an upward force of 0.05 kcal × mol−1 Å−1 [force vector (0, 0, 1)]. This weak force in the acceleration region can drive the water molecules to well up to simulate the water absorption process. At the evaporation stage, an acceleration region was applied from 6 nm to 7.5 nm above the surface with an upward force of 1.0 kcal × mol−1 Å−1 [force vector (0, 0, 1)]. This force in the acceleration region can prevent the vaporized water molecules going back the surface to simulate the vacuum evaporation process. Parameters: MD simulations were performed in a 30 nm × 30 nm × 17 nm box (−5 nm to 12 nm along the z direction), with a time step of 2 fs.45 Full-atom models are used for OTS, PVA and PVA + OTS to ensure the precision of simulation (Table S1, ESI†).51 Considering the computational efficiency, the Si and Cl element in the original OTS were changed to C and H.52,53 The rigid TIP3P water model was used here.54 The intermolecular potential was expressed by the 12/6 Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential and the long-range part of the Coulombic interaction was computed by the particle–particle particle–mesh (PPPM) method. The NVE ensemble and Berendsen thermostat with a coupling constant of 20 fs were applied to the water molecules to keep the temperature at 300 K. The system was first equilibrated for 3 ns to allow the initial water molecules to make contact with the hydro-materials, the patchy surface of the hydrogel. After the equilibration, the evaporation process lasted for another 1 ns. The trajectories of the coordinates and velocity were collected per 20 ps. The water molecules whose coordinates lay between 6 nm and 12 nm above the material surface (evaporation space) were regarded as vaporized molecules and their number was calculated.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
G. Y. acknowledges the financial support from the Sloan Research Fellowship, Camille-Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award, and from the UT Energy Institute.
Notes and references
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mezher, H. Fath, Z. Abbas and A. Khaled, Desalination, 2011, 266, 263–273 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2006, 313, 1088–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Mariñas and A. M. Mayes, Nanoscience and Technology, Co-Published with Macmillan Publishers Ltd, UK,  2009, pp. 337–346 Search PubMed .
P. J. J. Alvarez, C. K. Chan, M. Elimelech, N. J. Halas and D. Villagran, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Zielinski, J. W. Choi, T. La Grange, M. Modestino, S. M. Hashemi, Y. Pu, S. Birkhold, J. A. Hubbell and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2159–2167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, G. Chen, F. Jiang, Z. Yang, X. Luo, Y. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, C. Wang, C. Jia, J. Wan, Y. Yao, A. Gong, B. Yang, Z. Yu, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704107 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, H. Lu, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907061 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cui, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Liang, Z. Cheng and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706805 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bella, L. Porcarelli, D. Mantione, C. Gerbaldi, C. Barolo, M. Grätzel and D. Mecerreyes, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 1485–1493 RSC .
L. Fagiolari and F. Bella, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3437–3472 RSC .
N. Xu, P. Zhu, Y. Sheng, L. Zhou, X. Li, H. Tan, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2020, 4, 347–358 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Z. Chen and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2530–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhao, Z. Yin, J. Zhao, X. Yin, N. Li, D. Yin, Y. Li, B. Lei, Y. Du and W. Que, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1143–1150 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. Yin and W. Que, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16196–16204 RSC .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Luzar and K. Leung, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 5836–5844 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma and P. G. Debenedetti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 4365–4370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Tu, R. Wan and H. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 13863–13867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, J. Bae, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7913–7919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and M. Lieberman, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 1159–1167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsuji and H. Kawaguchi, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8439–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Pan, M. Yang, L. Peng, S. Zong, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4803–4809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, D. Liao and H. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. McGovern, K. M. R. Kallury and M. Thompson, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 3607–3614 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Jeon, K. Finnie, K. Branshaw and R. G. Nuzzo, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 3382–3391 CrossRef CAS .
P. Louette, F. Bodino and J.-J. Pireaux, Surf. Sci. Spectra, 2005, 12, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, A. Wang, K. Y. S. Ng and G. Mao, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 2116–2122 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Bennett and J. O. Porteus, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1961, 51, 123–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, Y. Shi, R. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Jin and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28517–28524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wan, C. Wang, X. Lei, G. Zhou and H. Fang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 195901 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wan and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 8843–8847 RSC .
C. Diddens, H. Tan, P. Lv, M. Versluis, J. G. M. Kuerten, X. Zhang and D. Lohse, J. Fluid Mech., 2017, 823, 470–497 CrossRef CAS .
World Health Organization (WHO), Guidelines for drinking-water quality, 2011, https://www.unicef.org/cholera/Chapter_4_prevention/01_WHO_Guidelines_for_drinking_water_quality.pdf.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 2018 Edition of the Drinking Water Standards and Health Advisories Tables, https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-03/documents/dwtable2018.pdf.
K. Bierbaum, M. Grunze, A. A. Baski, L. F. Chi, W. Schrepp and H. Fuchs, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 2143–2150 CrossRef CAS .
F. Müller-Plathe and W. F. van Gunsteren, Polymer, 1997, 38, 2259–2268 CrossRef .
D. Gentili, M. Chinappi, G. Bolognesi, A. Giacomello and C. M. Casciola, Meccanica, 2013, 48, 1853–1861 CrossRef .

          M. Chinappi, D. Gentili, G. Bolognesi and C. M. Casciola, Presented in part at the Proceedings of the 2nd European Conference on Microfluidics, Toulouse, 2010.
W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J. D. Madura, R. W. Impey and M. L. Klein, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 926–935 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee00399aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
Billions of people lacking access to clean water cannot be overstated. Providing fresh water universally in a sustainable and affordable manner for both developing and industrialized communities is a severe challenge. Thermal and membrane-based technologies have been developed to increase water supplies via desalination of seawater and recycling of wastewater; however, the requirements of considerable energy consumption, significant infrastructure, and long working time have raised a barrier for rural places or emergency response to a water shortage. Solar-driven interfacial evaporation is one of the most promising approaches to enable household production of distilled water at high efficiency. The currently reported solar-driven water purification systems are limited by a low vapor generation rate under natural solar flux, saline fouling, and unsatisfactory quality of collected water. This work demonstrates a hydrogel evaporator with inhomogeneous surface wettability, which achieves an ultrahigh evaporation rate of ∼4.0 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun by exploiting the synergistic contributions from both wetting regions. The proposed hydrogel evaporator simultaneously cleans itself to avoid salt fouling during the evaporation process and delivers drinkable water above WHO and EPA standards.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of patchy-surface hydrogels (PSHs) for enhanced solar-driven evaporation. (a) Interfacial heating-based evaporation in which the hydrogel is located on the top surface of non-purified water where the heat can be localized on the air–hydrogel interface. (b) Evaporation of water can be accelerated by PSHs. A large portion of water is confined in the hydrophilic region (cyan) with an increased water thickness (green) to reduce the influence of the hydrogel surface on the outmost water molecules for faster escaping. In addition, a considerable amount of water molecules diffuse across the water contact lines and evaporate from the hydrophobic region (yellow). (c) Under one sun, the hydrogel polymeric network with the solar absorber inside can in situ harvest solar energy to heat the water at the evaporation surface, and its three-dimensional interconnected porous structure can refurnish non-purified water upward rapidly.	 

 	Fig. 2  Surface characterization of PSHs. (a–h) Optical images and evaporation state contact angles of PSHs with (a and e) 0%, (b and f) 30%, (c and g) 60%, and (d and h) 90% OTS covered surfaces. Scale bar: 20 μm. (i–k) XPS results for PSHs from 0% to 90% OTS coverage: (i) Si 2p spectra, (j) O 1s spectra, and (k) Si/O ratios.	 

 	Fig. 3  Performance of solar-driven evaporation and desalination. (a) The temperatures tracked at both the evaporation surface and bulk water under 1 sun irradiation. (b) The photograph of the setup for the solar-driven vapor generation test using PSH 30 and the corresponding infrared images showing the temperature distribution with an irradiation time of 0 min, 10 min, and 60 min. The scale bar is 1 cm. (c) The mass change of water during one sun solar vapor generation. (d) The evaporation rate of the PSH and corresponding energy efficiency under 1 sun. (e) The duration test of PSH 30 for 60 continuous hours of solar desalination. The inset is the mass change of water during the 1st hour and 60th hour of PSH 30.	 
η = ṁEequ/CoptP0	(1)

 	Fig. 4  MD simulation of PSHs. (a) A sandwich-like model simulating the patchy surface of the hydrogel, in which water molecules are below the hydrogel surface (substrate) initially before evaporation starts. The hydrogel surface consists of four hydrophobic square patches (orange) and the rest is hydrophilic (dark yellow). (b) PVA model and its initial and equilibrium wetting states. (c) OTS model and its initial and equilibrium wetting states. (d) During the evaporation state, the initially spread-out water molecules are confined into the hydrophilic region (PVA). Meanwhile, a considerable number of water molecules also diffuse across the contact lines to the hydrophobic region (OTS) for evaporation. (e) The average thickness of the water film and total average interaction energy in the PVA region. Increasing the coverage of OTS from 0% to 90% results in an increase in the average thickness of the water film and a decrease in the average total interaction energy of the outmost water molecules in the PVA region, indicating a reduced energy barrier for evaporation of water molecules. (f) Number of evaporated water molecules with contributions from both the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions for different OTS surface coverages after the same evaporation duration time.	 

 	Fig. 5  Outdoor portable solar evaporator under natural sunlight using the PSH. (a) Overall schematic, (b) cross-section, and (c) photograph of a 3D printed portable solar-water purification device. The scale bar is 3 cm. (d) PSH surface, condenser, and coolant temperatures were traced over time on a sunny day from 10:00 to 16:00. (e) Purified water yield from seawater using PSH 30 under natural sun irradiation. (f) Measured concentrations of four primary ions in seawater and the as-purified water after desalination. (g) Water quality tests of Waller Creek before and after solar vapor generation using PSH 30.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee00399a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
