 Hematite -based solar water splitting: challenges and opportunities  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01850G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01850G
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4862-4869Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Hematite-based solar water splitting: challenges and opportunities

        
          
            Yongjing 
            Lin†
, 
      
        
          
            Guangbi 
            Yuan†
, 
      
        
          
            Stafford 
            Sheehan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sa 
            Zhou
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dunwei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Merkert Chemistry Center, 2609 Beacon St, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA. E-mail: dunwei.wang@bc.edu;  Fax: +1 617-552-2705;   Tel: +1 617-552-3121
Received 
      30th May 2011
    , Accepted 27th June 2011First published on 29th July 2011AbstractAs the most commonly encountered form of iron oxide in nature, hematite is a semiconducting crystal with an almost ideal bandgap for solar water splitting. Compelled by this unique property and other advantages, including its abundance in the Earth's crust and its stability under harsh chemical conditions, researchers have studied hematite for several decades. In this perspective, we provide a concise overview of the challenges that have prevented us from actualizing the full potentials of this promising material. Particular attention is paid to the importance of efficient charge transport, the successful realization of which is expected to result in reduced charge recombination and increased quantum efficiencies. We also present a general strategy of forming heteronanostructures to help meet the charge transport challenge. The strategy is introduced within the context of two material platforms, webbed nanonets and vertically aligned transparent conductive nanotubes. Time-resolved photoconductivity measurements verify the hypothesis that the addition of conductive components indeed increases charge lifetimes. Because the heteronanostructure approach is highly versatile, it has the potential to address other issues of hematite as well and promises new opportunities for the development of efficient energy conversion using this inexpensive and stable material.Yongjing LinYongjing Lin earned his Bachelor of Science degree in Material Science and Engineering from University of Science and Technology of China in 2007. He joined the Chemistry Department at Boston College and currently is a PhD candidate in Professor Wang's group. He is studying metal oxides for solar water splitting.Guangbi YuanGuangbi Yuan is currently a PhD student in Prof. Dunwei Wang's group at Boston College. He received his B.S. degree from University of Science and Technology of China in 2006. His research focuses on the synthesis of one-dimensional nanostructures and their applications for photovoltaics, with a special emphasis on semiconducting photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical cells.Stafford SheehanStafford W. Sheehan recently completed his undergraduate work at Boston College, receiving a B.S. in chemistry in 2011. He has worked with Prof. Dunwei Wang as an undergraduate researcher since 2008 studying photoelectrochemical cells, heteronanostructure synthesis, and charge behavior in photoanode materials. He will begin his PhD studies in physical chemistry at Yale University in the fall.Sa ZhouSa Zhou received her Bachelor of Science degree from University of Science and Technology of China in 2007 and then joined professor Wang's lab at Boston College. Now she is a PhD candidate in the Chemistry Department. As the key inventor who discovered the nanonets, her research interest is the synthesis of metal silicide nanostructures and their applications for energy conversion and storage.Dunwei WangDunwei Wang received his education from the University of Science and Technology of China (B.S., 2000) and Stanford University (PhD, 2005). After a postdoctoral training at Caltech, he joined the faculty of Boston College in 2007. His current research focuses on discovering new materials for advanced energy conversion and storage applications. He is a recipient of Young Chemists Prize by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (2006), Faculty Early Career Development Award by the National Science Foundation (2011), and Catalyst Award by Massachusetts Clean Energy Center (2011).

Broader context

            Hydrogen is of high gravimetric energy density, can be obtained by decomposing water, produces water when burned, and is therefore an extremely appealing energy carrier with minimum negative environmental impact when generated using renewable energy sources, such as that from the sun. A good approach to do so is to use semiconductors as photoelectrodes. Unfortunately, the stringent requirements for the physical and chemical properties of photoelectrodes make it difficult to find materials that can perform solar water splitting efficiently and inexpensively, creating a lingering challenge that has lasted over four decades. This perspective examines the basic needs for this process and explains how a specific form of iron oxide, hematite, may be used to meet the challenge. Particular attention is paid to the charge transport issue, which is especially troublesome for hematite. A radically new idea of forming heterostructures on the nanoscale is proposed to eliminate our dependence on the intrinsic properties of materials. This idea is introduced within the context of two material platforms: webbed nanonets and vertically aligned nanotubes. Because the lack of suitable materials is a fundamental challenge faced by many energy-related researches, the heteronanostructure design may be applicable in other combinations as well, promising solutions to a broad range of applications.

Introduction
Solar water splitting is arguably one of the most important chemical reactions because its oxidation process produces oxygen, enabling the enormous diversity of minerals and life as we see today. The reduction end of the reaction can take different forms, and the simplest one leads to the production of hydrogen, which may be regarded as a potential clean energy carrier with high gravimetric energy densities.1,2 As water exhibits little absorption in the visible range, the region in which photons possess the necessary energy to break the O–H bond, the light-induced splitting must be assisted. In photosynthesis, the process is accomplished by light absorption using chlorophylls, followed by a series of intricate forward charge transfer steps and subsequent oxidation and reduction on separate sites.3
For the purpose of absorbing light to separate charges, semiconductors are an attractive alternative to the naturally occurring photosystems because of the existence of a gap in the energy bands of semiconducting materials.4–9 To understand the thermodynamic efficiency limit of the semiconductor-based water splitting process, one must consider two important constraints: the standard free energy changes of reaction (1), H2O → H2 + ½O2(1)237 kJ mol−1 (or 1.23 eV per electron), and the photon intensities at different wavelengths of the solar spectrum. On the basis of the well-established physics of photon-to-charge conversion within a semiconductor, the maximum efficiency of 30.7% can be achieved under standard pressure, temperature, and one-sun illumination conditions for a single-quantum, two-electron system with a bandgap of 1.6 eV (Fig. 1).10 For practical processes, an additional overpotential of approximately 0.4 eV at the counter electrode needs to be taken into account, yielding an efficiency of 16.8% at a bandgap requirement of 2.0 eV.11 The loss mechanisms, including unabsorbed low-energy photons in the solar spectrum, excess energy in the high-energy photons, entropy loss when excited electrons are transferred to form chemical bonds, and other photophysical processes within the semiconductor, are all fundamental and therefore cannot be avoided unless radically new physics is introduced (e.g., multiexciton generation).12 Within the framework of classical physics, a semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.0 eV is ideal for solar water splitting.13 It is this energetic consideration that makes hematite (α-Fe2O3) stand out as a candidate for solar water splitting. With a reported bandgap of 2.0–2.2 eV,14–16 it has the potential to offer conversion efficiencies ranging from 12.7–16.8%, the achievement of which would mark a major breakthrough in this field.‡17 Since the first report by Bard et al. in 1976,14 significant research has been conducted to study hematite for water splitting.18–21 Although impressive progress has been made, the best performing hematite-based devices still operate at efficiencies considerably lower than the theoretical limit, raising important questions about what the challenges are and whether hematite can be used for practical solar water splitting.
 Fig. 1  Thermodynamic efficiency limit of semiconductor-based solar water splitting. The cut-off wavelength for single-quantum systems is 775 nm. The dashed line and the associated values (in eV) mark the internal energy losses, which are often measured as the overpotentials in a photoelectrochemical system. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd [Nature] (ref. 10), copyright 1985. 
Challenges
A look at the energy levels of hematite when in contact with an aqueous solution should help us understand some limitations of hematite. As shown in Fig. 2, the conduction band edge is measured at 4.71 eV (vs. vacuum) or 0.21 V (vs.normal hydrogen electrode, NHE).22 The reported bandgap values vary with the synthetic and measurement methods and generally fall within the range of 2.0–2.2 eV. Depending on the concentrations of various species in the solution,23 most importantly [OH−] and [H+], different potentials are built-up on the surface of hematite, leading to band bendings of different magnitudes and directions. As will be discussed later, the degree of the band bending is of great importance to the water splitting performance.
 Fig. 2  Band edge positions of hematite in aqueous solutions of different pH when no external potential is applied. Two sets of values, one often used by physicists and one by electrochemists, are provided to describe the energy levels. The bandgap is set as 2.2 eV here. The band bending is caused by the adsorption of ions on the hematite surface. Its magnitude and direction depend on the pH of the solution and the external bias applied onto hematite. 
A key challenge is immediately obvious from Fig. 2—the significant mismatch of hematite's conduction and valence band edge positions and the energy levels of water reduction and oxidation. Unless a necessary reduction potential is provided at the counter electrode, hematite will not be able to complete full water splitting. In principle, this problem may be solved by forming multi-quantum systems.11,24 The following discussions will be focused on using hematite as a photoanode. For this application, information about hematite's energetics is critical. It is therefore important to note that a large number of literature reports, including some early reports by us, do not take into account the surface potential effect when describing hematite energetics. Particularly noteworthy is the flatband potential (Vfb) value, which describes the electronegativity of hematite. Because this value is often measured relative to a standard electrode potential and therefore is influenced by the surface potential, it is only meaningful under two conditions: (1) measured at point of zero zeta potential (PZZP), which is pH 8.6 for hematite; or (2) corrected by subtracting the known surface potentials, which are unavailable for most systems.22 Although these reported values still prove highly useful for comparing purposes, direct reference to them for fundamental understandings can produce misleading results. We therefore caution against this practice. Lastly, due to oxygen vacancies hematite is typically n-type, meaning that its electronegativity level is close to the conduction band edge and that hole transport is of greater concerns for our discussions.
Some other important limitations of hematite can be understood by examining the expression that describes the quantum efficiency of the photoelectrochemical process at a semiconductor–liquid interface,20 (2)where α is the light absorption coefficient at a given wavelength, W is the depletion width, LD is the Debye length, LK is the recombination distance, k is the recombination rate of charges within hematite, kε is the faradaic rate constant, and v0 is the degree of band bending. We see from this equation that good light absorption, long hole diffusion distance (hence long recombination distance), low charge recombination in the bulk, and fast charge transfer across the surface are desired for high quantum efficiencies. Unfortunately, the intrinsic properties of hematite satisfy none of these considerations.§ A logical move would be to try to modify various aspects of hematite properties selectively. For instance, adding impurities to hematite may alter its intrinsic conductivities. It has been shown that the addition of Ti,25–27Si,28,29 or Sn,30,31 among others, can increase the carrier density and improve the conductivity of hematite. This approach, however, depends a great deal on the detailed synthetic methods, and as a result, is progressing at a slow pace. Alternatively, it is also possible to increase the “impurity” concentration to such a level that the resulting material can be regarded as ternary, quaternary, or even more complex compounds.32 This method will result in a large number of different materials whose properties can vary from one to another dramatically. New methods, such as the combinatorial technique being developed by Lewis,33 Parkinson,32 and Bard34 separately, are needed to rapidly and reliably screen potential candidates.
In addition to changing compositions, innovations in the design of morphologies also show promise. For example, nanostructured hematite, like nanorods,35–37nanowires,31 or cauliflowers,29 may address the poor minority charge carrier diffusion issue. When arranged in a particular order, their anisotropic morphologies can be taken advantage of such that light is absorbed along the longitudinal direction (which can be hundreds of nanometres to microns long) and charges are separated along the transverse direction (which is typically in the nanometre range).38 As such, the numerator in eqn (2) will be close to unity and no longer depends on α.
Detailed considerations about various aspects of hematite properties and approaches to solve these issues have been frequently discussed, most recently by Grätzel et al. in a comprehensive manner.39 Whether based on pure hematite or hematite with impurities, or one of the compounds with nanoscale features, these approaches share one commonality: they typically rely on the same material to absorb light, transport charges, and perform chemical reactions. This means in order to achieve high efficiencies, one has to obtain all desired properties with a single material simultaneously, which remains a long shot because of a fundamentally important challenge in materials science—different aspects of material's intrinsic properties are correlated. It is extremely difficult to selectively change one without adversely altering the others.
Opportunities
Not to repeat what has been covered previously, we present here a strategy that may address the aforementioned fundamental challenge. The idea is to introduce additional material components that can help circumvent the limitations as set by hematite's properties. For example, we know that poor charge transport is an important reason for the fast recombination within hematite. A dedicated charge transport component can be added to reduce the accumulation of electrons, which presumably will increase the lifetime of holes and hence the quantum efficiencies.40,41 For another example, effective water oxidation catalysts can be added to hematite to increase the faradaic rate constant, which will likely lead to higher efficiencies.42–45 It is still important to keep the overall material morphology in the nanoscale because the charge diffusion distance within hematite, typically in the low nanometre range, is an important limiting factor. This strategy is unique in that it reduces the fundamental challenge of not being able to selectively alter certain aspects of material properties to rational design and synthesis of materials. It is versatile and advantageous because the latest developments in the field using parallel approaches (e.g., doping or catalyst development) can be readily taken advantage of and incorporated into the multi-component heterostructure design. A key distinguishing feature of this strategy is that the understandings and discoveries made in the study of hematite should be transferrable to other similar systems because the problems of low light absorption, poor charge transport, and slow charge transfer across the interface are not specific to hematite, but are shared by many oxide semiconductors. In this perspective, we focus on the charge transport issue and demonstrate two proof-of-concept structures, one built on TiSi2 nanonets and the other on transparent conductive oxide nanotubes. Using a contactless measurement technique, we show evidence that improved charge transport indeed reduces charge combination and thereby validates our hypothesis as described above.
Nanonet-based heteronanostructures
It has been reported that the charge diffusion distance within hematite can be as short as 2 nm.18 The best approach to ensure efficient charge collection is to keep the distance between a charge collector and the hematite/water interface equal to or less than the depletion region width, typically on the order of tens to low hundreds of nanometres depending on the doping level and the degree of band bending. It is also important to produce a high quality interface between the charge collector and hematite so that it does not trap charges appreciably. These requirements limit the synthetic methods that can be used to form heteronanostructures. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) stands out as a promising technique because it is capable of producing oxide films with atomic layer precision and is known to yield low defect-density interfaces. A number of ALD syntheses of hematite have been reported in the last few months, including those by us,41 Hamman et al.,46 and Elamet al.47 Systematic characterizations of the ALD-grown hematite in a water splitting configuration are also undertaken to fully understand how the thin films behave and whether they are different from hematite produced by other methods.
With the synthesis of hematite resolved, we sought to interface it with an interesting material, the TiSi2 nanonet, discovered in our lab.48–50 As a new morphology, the nanonet differs from meshed or aligned nanowires in many ways. The key uniqueness is found in its two-dimensionality within which the beams are seamlessly joined together. This feature makes the nanonet ideal for energy-related applications.9,51–53 We were also interested in interfacing hematite with the nanonet because our previous research showed that the nanonet improves the performance of TiO254 and WO3,55 respectively, when used for water splitting. The nanonet–hematite heteronanostructure is schematically shown in Fig. 3a.
 Fig. 3  Nanonet–hematite nanostructures and their performance for water splitting. (a) A schematic representation of the design. (b) The comparison of the photoelectrochemical performance between the nanostructure and planar hematite. (c) The external quantum efficiency comparison (measured at 1.53 V vs. RHE). Worth noting is that the hematite is without any intentional doping. Adapted from Lin et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011 (ref. 41). 
The photoelectrochemical performance of the resulting heteronanostructures was compared with that of planar films, and the difference was obvious, as shown in Fig. 3b and c. Similar to hematite films synthesized by other methods, an optimum thickness exists when the photocurrent is considered. The general trend is the following. Thicker films result in better light absorption while better charge collection is obtained on thinner films. For the ALD-grown hematite produced in our lab, we identified the optimized thickness as 25 nm. The corresponding photocurrent at 1.23 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE) was 0.41 mA cm−2, and that at 1.53 V (vs. RHE) was 0.78 mA cm−2. These values were significantly improved by the introduction of the nanonet to 1.6 and 2.7 mA cm−2, respectively. The incident photon-to-charge conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements verified the improvement (Fig. 3c). Careful examinations of the IPCE spectra of the nanostructures and the films suggest that the improvement is more pronounced in the long wavelength region, where hematite's absorption is particularly poor due to the indirect nature of its bandgap. Nevertheless, the existing data are not sufficiently accurate for us to draw a quantitative conclusion. More research is needed to understand this feature in greater detail.
According to our hypothesis, the effect of adding the nanonet to hematite is to increase the hole lifetime while maintaining sufficient light absorption, which can be characterized by time-resolved spectroscopic methods. For this, we employed a time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) technique.56 This method is essentially a pump-probe approach, where the excitation is obtained by an ultra-fast laser (CPA-2010 laser system, Clark MXR, Inc. Emission λ = 388 nm, second harmonic λ = 775 nm, in 100 fs pulses) or a Xenon flash lamp (Model 66016, Newport; full width at half-maximum, FWHM, 1.3 μs) and the probing is performed using a HP 8350B Sweep Oscillator coupled with a 83570A module operating at a frequency of 20 GHz and an output power of 10 mW. The reflected signal was measured with a zero bias Schottky detector (ACSP-2644, C15) connected to a Tektronix TDS 2022B digital oscilloscope. Once illuminated, charges within a semiconductor are excited, and their concentrations deviate from the value at the thermodynamic equilibrium. Several things could happen to the photogenerated charges: they can be used to perform chemical reactions (e.g., water splitting), they can simply recombine to produce heat, or they can be trapped at electronic defect sites for an extended period of time resulting in eventual recombination. Generally, how long the free charges can live in a material determines how good a photoelectrode can be because longer-lived charges are more likely to contribute to the chemical reactions. To probe the lifetime of charges, we can observe their transient behaviors after the illumination is removed. The decay profiles were fit with a single exponential function to determine the apparent time constants. Two types of samples, planar hematite and nanonet-based nanostructures, were tested under two conditions, with and without contacting water. Representative data are summarized in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Charge lifetime measurements of hematite. (a) The lifetime is increased significantly when the surface is in contact with a solution, from 0.6 μs to 1.4 μs for this sample. (b) and (c) The lifetimes of 25 nm hematite on the planar conductive substrate and on nanonet are nearly identical. (d) With the film thickness increased to 100 nm for better light absorption, the lifetime decreases to 1.3 μs due to increased bulk recombination. 
We first emphasize that the time constants are apparent charge lifetimes in hematite thin films (≤100 nm). The values are expected to differ from bulk materials and therefore do not represent the bulk recombination rates. Instead, they should be sensitive to the surface properties. Indeed, the charge lifetime for hematite in contact with H2O (1.4 μs) is more than twice that without H2O (0.6 μs). Two factors may contribute to this significant difference. First, the bands of hematite bend when in contact with H2O (Fig. 2), creating an internal field that facilitates charge separation, thereby increasing the charge lifetime. Second, the surface adsorbed species will act as charge trap centers to increase the charge lifetime. We believe the second factor plays a more important role.57 This understanding is consistent with the recent research of Durrant et al. using transient absorption spectroscopy to study the hematite/water interface, which points out that the long lifetime of holes is critical to the photoelectrochemical process.58
Next we compare different thicknesses of hematite. For ultra-thin films (e.g., ∼25 nm), the bending as shown in Fig. 2 is likely to extend to the entirety of the material, so that a long charge lifetime is expected; for relatively thick films, bands in portions of the film will remain flat and short charge lifetime will be observed. The measured lifetimes of 25 nm, 50 nm, 75 nm, and 100 nm thick planar films on fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) substrates are 2.5 μs, 2.2 μs, 1.8 μs, and 1.3 μs, respectively. The trend of monotonic decrease of lifetimes as the film thickness is increased suggests that bulk recombination plays an increasingly more important role for relatively thick hematite. It is also important to note that the nature of the hematite/substrate interface appears to affect the measured charge lifetime as well. For instance, the charge lifetime of 25 nm thick hematite on quartz (1.4 μs, Fig. 4a) is obviously shorter than hematite of the same thickness on FTO (2.5 μs, Fig. 4b). We suggest that the conductive nature of FTO may facilitate charge separation at the hematite/FTO interface. In addition, it is also possible that FTO affords a better lattice match with hematite, as reported by Le Formal et al.59 More research is needed to fully understand the reason for this difference.
Important to our hypothesis are the charge behaviors within the nanonet–hematite heteronanostructures. As shown in Fig. 4c, the measured charge lifetime is 2.4 μs, in good agreement with planar hematite of the same thickness (25 nm). This result is significant because it proves that hematite grown on FTO is identical to that grown on TiSi2 nanonets as far as charge behaviors are concerned. The conclusion forms the basis for our nanonet-based design principle. For the planar geometry, the competition between the charge lifetime (longer for thinner films) and the optical absorption (stronger for thicker films) represents one major dilemma that limits research in this field. Owing to the structural anisotropy of the nanonet, this problem is no longer a concern when using the nanonet-based nanostructures. Although nanostructures of similar dimensions (e.g., nanowires, nanorods, or cauliflowers) offer similar advantages, they do not address the charge collection challenge. For this reason, the heteronanostructure design is of great interest. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that the performance of the nanonet/hematite combination still trails behind that of the cauliflower-type nanostructures as reported by Grätzel et al.60 The lack of intentional doping in our hematite might be responsible for the differences. It is possible that for hematite without intentional doping, our measured performance is already close to the limit, which is set by the internal quantum efficiency as determined by hematite's capability of converting photons into charges. Our approach of using ALD to deposit hematite on highly conductive nanostructures, however, is highly amenable to doping, and the study on the effect of impurities is ongoing in our group. Although doping will likely reduce the depletion width within hematite, being able to produce films with sub-nanometre precision will allow us to limit the overall thickness of hematite less than the typical depletion width (a few tens of nanometres). With such a control, the collection of photogenerated charges remains efficient. It will be interesting to see what the true performance limit of hematite is when the nanonet is present.

          AZO
          nanotube/hematite heteronanostructures
To further explore the versatility and power of the heteronanostructure design, we next applied the same principle to form a structure containing transparent conductive nanotubes, which serve to replace the nanonets as charge transporters with the advantage of minimum or no competition in light absorption. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the fabrication flow used vertically aligned Si nanowires as a template,61,62 onto which aluminium doped zinc oxide (AZO) was coated by ALD;63 then the tips of the AZO-coated nanowires were mechanically removed to expose the Si core, which could be etched by the XeF2-based chemistry, creating the AZO nanotubes. The last step of the fabrication involved ALD growth of hematite to cover the AZO nanotubes in a conformal fashion.56 We choose AZO for this portion of study for the following reasons. First, as an emerging transparent conductive oxide, AZO contains only earth abundant elements and therefore can be potentially cheap.64 Second, the utilization of the AZO and hematite combination rules out the possibility of Ti or Si doping effect in the TiSi2/Fe2O3 combination. As such, it allows us to focus on the heteronanostructure design principle without being cofounded by the influence of potential doping effects.
 Fig. 5  Fabrication of hematite-coated transparent conductive nanotubes. (a) The process starts with vertically grown Si nanowires. (b) Aluminium-doped zinc oxide is coated onto Si nanowires by an ALD method. (c) The gaps between adjacent nanowires are filled with a polymer (SU-8). (d) The tips of the nanowires are then removed by mechanical polishing. (e) After removing the supporting polymer, a XeF2 etching is performed to remove the Si nanowire cores, creating the AZO nanotubes. (f) Hematite is finally deposited using ALD. (g) The resulting nanostructures are shown in this scanning electron micrograph, where the scale bar is 2 μm. A section of the tube is schematically shown in the magnified image at the bottom right, where the AZO serves as the charge transporter. 
We note that the ALD growth of AZO is still preliminary. The ratio of Al to Zn, the growth conditions, whether post-growth annealing is necessary, among other things, have yet to be optimized. For instance, we know that annealing of AZO in oxygen-rich environment reduces the oxygen vacancy densities and thereby reduces the conductivities. The post-growth annealing of hematite at 500 °C, which is necessary to crystallize the film, is therefore deleterious to the performance of AZO. Nonetheless, we regard this challenge as practical, not fundamental, and one that should be solvable. As shown in Fig. 6, the initial results are indeed highly encouraging. We highlight several significant points. First, the planar hematite film grown on AZO (also prepared by ALD on glass) exhibited performance close to that of a film grown on FTO (Fig. 3). Being able to replace FTO with AZO as a transparent conductive layer will have major implications in energy research. Second, the relatively high IPCE in the long wavelength region (λ = 450–600 nm) suggests that light absorption by the nanotube–hematite nanostructure is greatly improved. The relative efficiencies in this region are also better than those of TiSi2 nanonets-based nanostructures (Fig. 3c), implying that the absolute efficiencies can be potentially higher as well when the conductivity of AZO nanotubes is further improved. At this stage it is unclear whether the vertical arrangement or the transparent nature (TiSi2 nanonets do exhibit non-negligible absorption in this region to compete with hematite in harvesting sunlight) is responsible for the difference. Lastly, we note that AZO without the protection of hematite can be easily dissolved by basic or acidic solutions. That the hematite/AZO combination is stable during the PEC measurements in high pH solutions (pH 13.6) further proves ALD-grown hematite is of high quality without appreciable density of pinholes.
 Fig. 6  Performance of AZO-nanotube/hematite heteronanostructures. Note: the planar hematite is grown on AZO (as a comparison, the data shown in Fig. 3 are obtained on FTO substrates). Because AZO is not yet optimized, the performance is inferior to that on FTO. (a) The photocurrents for nanotube-based heteronanostructures are significantly higher than those for planar hematite films. (b) Obvious differences are also observed when the external quantum efficiencies are compared (measured at 1.53 V vs. RHE). Note the non-zero IPCE of the nanotubes near the band edge. It is presumably caused by the scattering effect, and more research is under way to fully understand this abnormality. 
Conclusions
Efficient energy conversion and storage often requires materials with a set of specific properties concerning their electronic, physical, and chemical natures. For practical energy applications, cost is also a hugely important concern. These requirements are so complex that more often than not we fail to find a candidate that can satisfy all the needs simultaneously for a given process. As a result, the lack of suitable materials has indeed become an important challenge in energy research. Using hematite as an example, we presented our perspectives on this challenge. Because its bandgap falls in the right range for solar water splitting processes, hematite has been popularly studied as a photoelectrode to convert solar energy into chemical energies. Focusing on the fundamental photophysical and photochemical processes, we provided a concise overview of the challenges hematite faces, and particularly emphasized the charge transport issue, which has received underwhelming attention previously. A strategy to solve this challenge by forming heteronanostructures was proposed. Because this strategy is based on the rational design and synthesis of materials, it has the potential to produce electrodes with a combination of properties that have not been exhibited simultaneously by single-component materials. In addition, the strategy is highly versatile and can incorporate the latest developments produced by parallel efforts such as doping hematite or forming various alloys. It is therefore complementary to other research efforts as well. Although this perspective focuses on hematite and on water splitting, the same concept should be applicable to other materials, such as TiO2 and WO3, and to other applications, such as dye-sensitized solar cells. We are confident that the rational design and synthesis of materials such as the strategy proposed here will play an increasingly more important role in energy research.
Acknowledgements
Our research is supported by Boston College and the National Science Foundation (DMR 1055762). We thank R. Liu, J. Xie, M. Mayer, Z. Simpson, and X. Liu for their technical assistance and insightful discussions. We also thank the anonymous referees for their constructive and detailed comments.
Notes and references
M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 376–384 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. McEvoy and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4455–4483 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, J. A. Villoria de la Mano, S. M. Al-Zahrani and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1865–1882 CAS .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, R. Liu, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 507, 209 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bolton, Sol. Energy, 1996, 57, 37–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. V. Pleskov, Solar Energy Conversion: A Photoelectrochemical Approach, Springer-Verlag, New York,  1990 Search PubMed .
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1024–1026 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Wilhelm, K. S. Yun, L. W. Ballenger and N. Hackerman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Leland and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 5076–5083 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and J. K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, K. D. Sieber and G. A. Somorjai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 252, 269–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027–2041 RSC .
A. Duret and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17184–17191 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Butler and D. S. Ginley, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 228–232 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Atkinson, A. M. Posner and J. P. Quirk, J. Phys. Chem., 1967, 71, 550–558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, M. Cornuz, F. Le Formal, J. H. Yum, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477–16488 CAS .
J. Brillet, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4155–4160 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y.-S. Hu, J. Lefton, S. Sharma, A. J. Forman and E. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1020–1028 CAS .
J. H. Kennedy, R. Shinar and J. P. Ziegler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2307–2309 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. Le Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Woodhouse and B. A. Parkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 197–210 RSC .
J. E. Katz, T. R. Gingrich, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 103–112 CAS .
J. S. Jang, J. Lee, H. Ye, F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6719–6724 CAS .
N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2456–2461 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lindgren, H. Wang, N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 231–243 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mao, G. Y. Han and J. H. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2247–2250 RSC .
H. G. Park and J. K. Holt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1028–1036 CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. L. Formal and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398–2401 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, J. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086–6087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 CAS .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759 CAS .
T. Hisatomi, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, J. Brillet, N. Tetreault, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 Search PubMed .
B. M. Klahr, A. B. F. Martinson and T. W. Hamann, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 461–468 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, M. J. DeVries, J. A. Libera, S. T. Christensen, J. T. Hupp, M. J. Pellin and J. W. Elam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4333–4339 CAS .
S. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Lin and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7681–7684 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Lin and D. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1023–1027 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, J. Xie and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4205–4210 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, X. H. Liu and D. W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 860–863 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, Y. J. Lin, S. Zhou, S. Sheehan and D. W. Wang, Energies (Basel, Switz.), 2010, 3, 285–300 CAS .
S. Zhou and D. W. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7014–7020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, X. Liu, S. Sheehan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2772–2773 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Y. Lin, L.-Y. Chou, S. W. Sheehan, W. He, F. Zhang, H. J. M. Hou and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 499–502 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Yuan, Y. Lin, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang,  2011, unpublished results.
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. Tang, M. Gratzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .
F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099–1107 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yuan, H. Zhao, X. Liu, Z. S. Hasanali, Y. Zou, A. Levine and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9680–9684 CAS .
G. Yuan, K. Aruda, S. Zhou, A. Levine, J. Xie and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2334–2338 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kong, M. K. Choi, H. K. Cho, J. H. Kim, S. Baek and J. H. Lee, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, K12–K14 CrossRef CAS .
P. Banerjee, W. J. Lee, K. R. Bae, S. B. Lee and G. W. Rubloff, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 043504 CrossRef .

Footnotes† These authors contributed equally to this work.‡ Although Turner et al. have reported the measurement of photoelectrochemical water splitting with a record efficiency of 12.4%, that result was obtained on a combination of efficient but expensive photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical systems and is therefore fundamentally different from the discussions here.§ We note that although hematite's absorption in the short wavelength region is good (∼10−5 cm−1), it drops rapidly near the band edge where the photons are most abundant in the solar spectrum, presenting a significant challenge.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Yongjing Lin	Yongjing Lin earned his Bachelor of Science degree in Material Science and Engineering from University of Science and Technology of China in 2007. He joined the Chemistry Department at Boston College and currently is a PhD candidate in Professor Wang's group. He is studying metal oxides for solar water splitting.
Guangbi Yuan	Guangbi Yuan is currently a PhD student in Prof. Dunwei Wang's group at Boston College. He received his B.S. degree from University of Science and Technology of China in 2006. His research focuses on the synthesis of one-dimensional nanostructures and their applications for photovoltaics, with a special emphasis on semiconducting photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical cells.
Stafford Sheehan	Stafford W. Sheehan recently completed his undergraduate work at Boston College, receiving a B.S. in chemistry in 2011. He has worked with Prof. Dunwei Wang as an undergraduate researcher since 2008 studying photoelectrochemical cells, heteronanostructure synthesis, and charge behavior in photoanode materials. He will begin his PhD studies in physical chemistry at Yale University in the fall.
Sa Zhou	Sa Zhou received her Bachelor of Science degree from University of Science and Technology of China in 2007 and then joined professor Wang's lab at Boston College. Now she is a PhD candidate in the Chemistry Department. As the key inventor who discovered the nanonets, her research interest is the synthesis of metal silicide nanostructures and their applications for energy conversion and storage.
Dunwei Wang	Dunwei Wang received his education from the University of Science and Technology of China (B.S., 2000) and Stanford University (PhD, 2005). After a postdoctoral training at Caltech, he joined the faculty of Boston College in 2007. His current research focuses on discovering new materials for advanced energy conversion and storage applications. He is a recipient of Young Chemists Prize by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (2006), Faculty Early Career Development Award by the National Science Foundation (2011), and Catalyst Award by Massachusetts Clean Energy Center (2011).

Broader context

            Hydrogen is of high gravimetric energy density, can be obtained by decomposing water, produces water when burned, and is therefore an extremely appealing energy carrier with minimum negative environmental impact when generated using renewable energy sources, such as that from the sun. A good approach to do so is to use semiconductors as photoelectrodes. Unfortunately, the stringent requirements for the physical and chemical properties of photoelectrodes make it difficult to find materials that can perform solar water splitting efficiently and inexpensively, creating a lingering challenge that has lasted over four decades. This perspective examines the basic needs for this process and explains how a specific form of iron oxide, hematite, may be used to meet the challenge. Particular attention is paid to the charge transport issue, which is especially troublesome for hematite. A radically new idea of forming heterostructures on the nanoscale is proposed to eliminate our dependence on the intrinsic properties of materials. This idea is introduced within the context of two material platforms: webbed nanonets and vertically aligned nanotubes. Because the lack of suitable materials is a fundamental challenge faced by many energy-related researches, the heteronanostructure design may be applicable in other combinations as well, promising solutions to a broad range of applications.

H2O → H2 + ½O2	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Thermodynamic efficiency limit of semiconductor-based solar water splitting. The cut-off wavelength for single-quantum systems is 775 nm. The dashed line and the associated values (in eV) mark the internal energy losses, which are often measured as the overpotentials in a photoelectrochemical system. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd [Nature] (ref. 10), copyright 1985.	 

 	Fig. 2  Band edge positions of hematite in aqueous solutions of different pH when no external potential is applied. Two sets of values, one often used by physicists and one by electrochemists, are provided to describe the energy levels. The bandgap is set as 2.2 eV here. The band bending is caused by the adsorption of ions on the hematite surface. Its magnitude and direction depend on the pH of the solution and the external bias applied onto hematite.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Nanonet–hematite nanostructures and their performance for water splitting. (a) A schematic representation of the design. (b) The comparison of the photoelectrochemical performance between the nanostructure and planar hematite. (c) The external quantum efficiency comparison (measured at 1.53 V vs. RHE). Worth noting is that the hematite is without any intentional doping. Adapted from Lin et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011 (ref. 41).	 

 	Fig. 4  Charge lifetime measurements of hematite. (a) The lifetime is increased significantly when the surface is in contact with a solution, from 0.6 μs to 1.4 μs for this sample. (b) and (c) The lifetimes of 25 nm hematite on the planar conductive substrate and on nanonet are nearly identical. (d) With the film thickness increased to 100 nm for better light absorption, the lifetime decreases to 1.3 μs due to increased bulk recombination.	 

 	Fig. 5  Fabrication of hematite-coated transparent conductive nanotubes. (a) The process starts with vertically grown Si nanowires. (b) Aluminium-doped zinc oxide is coated onto Si nanowires by an ALD method. (c) The gaps between adjacent nanowires are filled with a polymer (SU-8). (d) The tips of the nanowires are then removed by mechanical polishing. (e) After removing the supporting polymer, a XeF2 etching is performed to remove the Si nanowire cores, creating the AZO nanotubes. (f) Hematite is finally deposited using ALD. (g) The resulting nanostructures are shown in this scanning electron micrograph, where the scale bar is 2 μm. A section of the tube is schematically shown in the magnified image at the bottom right, where the AZO serves as the charge transporter.	 

 	Fig. 6  Performance of AZO-nanotube/hematite heteronanostructures. Note: the planar hematite is grown on AZO (as a comparison, the data shown in Fig. 3 are obtained on FTO substrates). Because AZO is not yet optimized, the performance is inferior to that on FTO. (a) The photocurrents for nanotube-based heteronanostructures are significantly higher than those for planar hematite films. (b) Obvious differences are also observed when the external quantum efficiencies are compared (measured at 1.53 V vs. RHE). Note the non-zero IPCE of the nanotubes near the band edge. It is presumably caused by the scattering effect, and more research is under way to fully understand this abnormality.	 
Footnotes
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ Although Turner et al. have reported the measurement of photoelectrochemical water splitting with a record efficiency of 12.4%, that result was obtained on a combination of efficient but expensive photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical systems and is therefore fundamentally different from the discussions here.
§ We note that although hematite's absorption in the short wavelength region is good (∼10−5 cm−1), it drops rapidly near the band edge where the photons are most abundant in the solar spectrum, presenting a significant challenge.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
