Phenothiazine and phenoxazine sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells – an investigative review of two complete dye classes   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC03207K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC03207K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 11974-11994Phenothiazine and phenoxazine sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells – an investigative review of two complete dye classes†

        
          
            Audun Formo 
            Buene
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            David Moe 
            Almenningen
          
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Høgskoleringen 7a, 7034 Trondheim, Norway. E-mail: audun.f.buene@ntnu.no
bDepartment of Chemistry, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Høgskoleringen 5, 7034 Trondheim, Norway
Received 
      9th July 2021
    , Accepted 14th August 2021First published on 16th August 2021AbstractPhenothiazine dyes have attracted significant attention as metal-free sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells since their introduction in 2007. Since then, over 430 phenothiazine dyes have been prepared and investigated. Despite the ever-increasing molecular variation, the overall improvement in the power conversion efficiency has been slow. In this review, we identify the traits of successful phenothiazine dyes and shed light on inherent molecular limitations. We include all phenothiazine dyes reported to date, and the big dataset is used to look for trends in photophysical, electrochemical and photovoltaic performance. The dataset used in this study is curated to contain only photovoltaic performance data that is validated using a novel credibility assessment. We compare the distinct sub-geometries of phenothiazine dyes, and investigate the effects of auxiliary donors, the use of π-spacers, DSSC electrolyte compatibility, N-alkyl vs. N-aryl substituents and mono- vs. multianchored vs. tethered dyes. Lastly, the phenothiazine dyes are compared to their closest dye analogue, the phenoxazines. Based on the findings in this review, we believe phenothiazine dyes are unlikely to be the main sensitizers of high-efficiency DSSCs in the future, due to low oxidation potentials, low extinction coefficients and inherent limitations restricting the further optimization of their photophysical properties.
Audun Formo Buene
Dr Audun Formo Buene obtained his PhD on dye-sensitized solar cells from the Department of Chemistry at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in 2019, including a research stay at EPFL in 2018 under the supervision of Professor Anders Hagfeldt. His research interests cover synthesis and characterization of phenothiazine dyes, aggregation suppression in triarylamine dyes, device fabrication and characterization, and the development of fluorine-free glide waxes for cross-country skis.
David Moe Almenningen
David Moe Almenningen is a PhD candidate at the Department of Chemistry at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology working on the synthesis and characterization of phenothiazine, triarylamine dyes, and design and development of novel dye chromophores for dye-sensitized solar cells.
Introduction
After 30 years of intense research, the beauty and versatility of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) continue to fascinate researchers. The ever-evolving number of discipline-spanning applications utilizing this technology is testament to its popularity. Recent developments in the field have led to photovoltaic devices of tuneable transparency either by employing near-infrared (NIR) absorbing dyes or photochromic dyes.1,2 Advancements such as these means DSSCs now can be employed in greenhouse windows, while the beautiful colours of conventional DSSCs makes these attractive as decorative building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV).3–5 The possibility to tailor the absorption properties to the light source or environment means DSSC devices are now powering an increasing amount of IoT devices and wearable consumer electronics, such as sensors, watches and headphones.6,7 The versatility and robustness of the DSSC architecture and components have no doubt contributed to the development of other closely related technologies such as photo-rechargeable batteries,8 solar fuel synthesis9 and photo redox catalysis.10,11
In the general field of dye-sensitized solar cells, there have been several notable achievements in recent years.12 Kakiage et al. published a co-sensitized carbazole-/triarylamine-based system delivering an impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.3% under 1 sun illumination.13 Recent advances in dye and electrolyte engineering have pushed the NREL certified DSSC record to 13%, and the efficiency of indoor DSSCs has reached 34.5% under 1000 lux, following several major improvements over the last years.14–17 An attractive aspect of the DSSC technology is the inherent low toxicity of its components and prospects of using recycled materials.18 In the pursuit of environmental friendliness and low toxicity, aqueous electrolytes and alternative device components have gained momentum in later years.19–21 The development of new dye molecules has always been central to DSSC research, and the search for capable metal-free dyes have become increasingly important in the recent years. The tunability of fully organic sensitizers is crucial when designing dyes for novel applications, e.g. dyes with energy levels that match the novel electrolytes, display photochromic behaviour, or dyes that exibit NIR-absorption. Among the metal-free chromophores used in DSSCs, phenothiazine was one of the first scaffolds, and with over 430 different dyes reported to date, still receives considerable attention in the dye community.
The first record of a phenothiazine-based compound was the successful synthesis and characterization of the dye and malaria drug now known as methylene blue. Reported by Heinrich Caro as part of a patent in 1877 (German Patent No. DE-18771866), phenothiazine has since been employed in an array of fields predominantly related to pharmaceuticals, synthetic dyes and organic electronic materials. The unsubstituted 10H-phenothiazine itself was first prepared in 1883 by A. Bernthsen.22
Phenothiazine is a heterocyclic compound comprising three six-membered rings, linked as a structural analogue of anthracene. The central ring accommodates the nitrogen and sulphur atoms, bridging the two outer benzene rings. The numbering of phenothiazine starts at the carbon atom adjacent to the nitrogen and continues around the outer ring, giving sulphur number 5 and nitrogen 10, see Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Structure and numbering of 10H-phenothiazine and 10H-phenoxazine. 
Owing to its structure, phenothiazine has a dihedral angle between the two benzene rings, usually reported being around 150°, depending on the substituent on the nitrogen atom.23,24 This is often referred to as a butterfly structure. The radical cation of phenothiazine is reported to be planar.25 In an electrochemical application where the phenothiazine dye is oxidized in cycles, a flapping motion is thus expected as the dyes alternate between a flat and a bent configuration. In dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) literature, this is commonly claimed to be beneficial as it prevents dye aggregation.26–29 Another consequence of the flapping motion not frequently mentioned is the reorganizational energy cost associated with this inversion.30–32 Energy estimates range from 0.1 eV33 to 0.3 eV34 for this motion. For DSSC, this has the implication of lowered injection efficiency, limiting the JSC and ultimately the PCE.
The low oxidation potential of phenothiazine means it has been much studied electrochemically and used in many electrochemical applications.35,36 For instance, in early DSSC research, phenothiazine was tethered to a ruthenium complex sensitizer.37 Due to the high local concentration and electron-donating abilities of phenothiazine, the overall result was rapid intramolecular charge transfer, locating the hole further away from the TiO2 surface increasing the VOC. Another application in DSSCs before being used as a chromophore itself was the use of 10H-phenothiazine in the electrolyte in conjunction with cobalt.38 As the early cobalt electrolytes were plagued by slow dye reduction and rapid recombination, phenothiazine was introduced as a co-mediator alongside Co(II), in an attempt to remedy this issue. The Co(II)/PTZ system outperformed both the Co(II)/Co(III) and the Co(II)/Fc systems. Phenothiazine has also been used in organic field-effect transistors, where polythiophene functionalized with phenothiazine–vinylene side chains has been reported as a promising system.39 Phenothiazine also features in polymers for OLEDs,40–42 small-molecules for sensory applications,43–45 and hydrogen production.46–48
From an organic synthesist's point of view, the phenothiazine scaffold is a forgiving scaffold to work with. The lone pair of nitrogen stabilizes arenium ions formed on position 3 and 7 during the useful electrophilic aromatic substitution. This allows for selective halogenation reactions, where tuning of reaction conditions can result in high yields of both mono- and dihalogenated phenothiazine intermediates following convenient and scalable purifications.49,50 These intermediates can further undergo an array of metal-catalysed coupling reactions, most commonly the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling. Owing to a plethora of coupling partners, this allows unlimited possible extensions to the phenothiazine scaffold. The facile and selective halogenation of phenothiazine derivatives is key for the high tunability of this class of sensitizers and is in the authors’ opinion one of the inherent strengths of 10H-phenothiazine.
Phenothiazine in DSSC history
In 2007, the first example of a phenothiazine-based dye for DSSC was reported by Haining Tian et al.51 as one of the early metal-free dyes scaffolds. The DSSC field had at that point gained great momentum, 16 years after the seminal paper by Brian O’Regan and Michael Grätzel.52 At the time, DSSC research efforts were aimed at developing new metal-complex dyes in addition to optimizing other key device components, such as the mesoporous semiconducting oxide and the electrolyte containing the redox shuttle. However, over time the focus was turned towards metal-free, fully organic dyes based on chromophores such as triarylamines,53–57 coumarins,58,59 carbazoles,60,61 indolines62,63 and phenothiazines.64–66 Compared to metal-complexed dyes, the metal-free dyes commonly display higher extinction coefficients and are also compatible with a wider range of organic reactions and purification procedures. Furthermore, metal-free dyes do not rely on costly, low abundance and often toxic precious metals. However, achieving the same wide light absorption properties can be challenging, and the number of synthetic steps and complexity of the dye synthesis are often also increased for the metal-free dyes.
The number of annual publications in the entire DSSC field has been declining since the peak in 2015, a trend commonly explained by the rapid increase in the perovskite solar cell (PSC) research activity since the introduction in 200967 with major advancements reported in 2012.68,69Fig. 2 shows the number of patents and research papers per year for phenothiazine-based DSSCs, as well as the development of the entire DSSC and PSC fields. A rise in patents in 2018 and research papers in 2019 could be signalling a resurgence of the phenothiazine dye class. Therefore, it is a matter of urgency to collect all the reports on these sensitizers for researchers to make well-illuminated decisions on the direction of the sensitizer class. For the phenothiazine dye class, two review papers were published in 2016 by Luo et al.70 and Huang et al.71 Both reviews cover largely the same dyes, describing the findings of the individual papers thoroughly. Two other review papers focus on the optoelectronic properties of phenothiazine-based molecules. In 2019, Al-Busaidi et al. includes 29 phenothiazine dyes72 and in 2020 Devadiga et al. covered 121 phenothiazine dyes.29 Recently, Al-Ghamdi et al. reviewed the synthetic strategies for phenothiazine and phenoxazine dyes.73 While all these reviews are thorough in the data collection and the description of the individual findings, they all lack the overview analysis of the entire dye class. The conclusions are mostly based on the most recent, and the highest performance accounts.
 Fig. 2  The number of publications per year containing the concepts dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and perovskite solar cells (PCS). The insert shows the number of papers and patents per year since 2007 containing the concepts of phenothiazine and dye-sensitized solar cells (numbers gathered using SciFinder). 
Recent advances in the reported photovoltaic performance of phenothiazine dyes in DSSCs have undoubtedly signalled the potential of this dye class to the wider DSSC field. One such advancement came in 2015 when Lin et al. published the dye EO3 and reported an astonishing power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.98% with an I−/I3− electrolyte, and equally-impressing 5.97% with an aqueous electrolyte.74 The next major advancement came in 2017 when Nagarajan et al. reported a PCE of 12.10% for Dye 2 using an even simpler I−/I3− electrolyte.75 Both dye structures are shown in Fig. 3. These papers are cited as major advancements of the phenothiazine dye class.29,76–78 Following the publication of the paper by Nagarajan et al. reporting Dye 2 with the ethynyl linked auxiliary donor moiety, an increasing number of structures with the same alkyne-linked design principles have been published.79–82
 Fig. 3  The first phenothiazine dye, T2-1 (5.50%), and the two influential dyes with high reported PCE values, EO3 (9.98%) and Dye 2 (12.1%). 
The success of any dye class is most crudely judged by its highest-performing dyes, and in a field where power conversion efficiency is the ultimate measure of quality and performance, reports with questionable performance claims can quickly be accepted as the state of the art. For the phenothiazine field, several reports of the most efficient dyes are overly optimistic about the performance of the devices fabricated with these dyes. Therefore, we have included a control calculation for the photovoltaic data in this work, so only credible data will be used for the conclusions. A description of the assessment method and thresholds is given in the section below called Data credibility assessment.
When looking into the development of the average efficiencies of phenothiazine dyes, we were surprised to find only a marginal improvement despite intense efforts through 14 years of research, over 150 research papers and several highly cited breakthroughs in device efficiency. This led us to formulate two hypotheses: (i) phenothiazine as a dye scaffold is inherently limited in some way, thus resisting further efficiency improvements. (ii) It is also possible that insufficient overview means the science could be progressing, but the communal learning is not, thus hampering overall development. While phenothiazine is not the most common dye motif in the DSSC field, it is one of the earlier scaffolds used in metal-free dyes for DSSC. As a steady stream of papers investigating phenothiazine dyes are published every year, we believe it is due time to investigate the entirety of the field and attempt to draw some conclusions following 14 years of research and over 430 published dyes.
Phenoxazine is the closest analogue of phenothiazine, only differing in position 5, where oxygen takes the place of sulphur. Dyes based on this scaffold were first introduced by Tian et al. in 2009.83 Forty different phenoxazine dye molecules have been published, with overall good performances in DSSC. The scarcity of these dyes is most likely linked to availability and cost of commercial building blocks for synthesis. While similar in structure to phenothiazines, the smaller size of oxygen vs. sulphur changes the neutral structure of the scaffold. This is likely to affect the molecular properties and DSSC performance. Hence, by including the complete class of phenoxazine DSSC dyes into this review, we hope to further illuminate the workings of both dye scaffolds.
DSSC operating principles and characterization
The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is a photoelectrochemical cell. A conventional n-type DSSC consists of three main components, see Fig. 4. (1) A working electrode commonly fabricated by a thin layer of mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticles deposited on a transparent glass slide coated with a conductive layer of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO). The TiO2 of the working electrode is sensitized with the dye, by immersion in a dye bath. (2) The material of choice for the counter electrode is commonly FTO glass. A layer of platinum is usually deposited on the surface to increase the catalytic activity. Alternatives, such as electropolymerization-deposition of organic semiconducting polymers such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), have increased in popularity with the introduction of novel electrolytes based on copper and cobalt.84 (3) While the external circuit connects the working and counter electrodes outside the cell, the task of shuttling the electrons back to the dye is performed by the electrolyte containing the redox shuttle species. The iodide–triiodide redox couple has been a favourite in the DSSC field since the very beginning.85 For phenothiazine dyes, only a handful of reports do not employ a variety of an I−/I3− electrolyte.61,86–90
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the working principles of a DSSC. 
Under DSSC operation, dye molecules are excited by incident sunlight, injecting an electron into the conduction band of the TiO2 before the electron completes the circuit as described above. While the current of the device is simply the rate of electrons passing through the external circuit, the voltage from the device is dictated by the difference between the Fermi level of the TiO2 and the redox potential of the redox shuttle.  
Correctly characterizing the performance of a DSSC should be of the highest priority. As comprehensive and fundamental work has been done to cover the entire topic thoroughly,91 only a short introduction to the most important techniques will be mentioned here. First, the pure dyes are commonly characterized by UV-vis spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy and the electrochemical properties are measured by cyclic voltammetry or other electrochemical techniques.
Current–voltage characteristics measurements under 1 Sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) is arguably the most important measurement for dye-sensitized solar cells, as the all-important power conversion efficiency value can be obtained. Often called J–V sweeps, it is performed by stepwise altering the potential across the device under illumination while measuring the current. When no external potential is applied, the current may flow unrestricted and this yields the short-circuit current density (JSC) value. Furthermore, as the external potential is increased, at a certain point the external potential is equal to the device potential and no current will flow. This point is called the open-circuit voltage, the VOC. The result from the J–V measurements is known as a J–V curve, and the JSC, VOC and fill factor (FF) may be obtained from this curve. The FF is a measure of ideality and is a number between 0 and 1, and is typically around 0.70. Under 1 Sun illumination, the power conversion efficiency of the device is:  
Another useful technique is incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE). Here, the devices are stepwise illuminated by monochromatic light with wavelengths spanning at least the part of the electromagnetic spectrum the dye is absorbing. The wavelength of incident illumination is changed stepwise and the JSC is measured for each step. The current value is converted to the number of electrons, which is compared to the flux of the monochromatic light at that wavelength, i.e. the number of photons. While the resulting efficiency spectrum does not give an overall efficiency value, it is still extremely useful. By integrating the IPCE spectrum over the 1 Sun AM 1.5G solar spectrum, an estimate for the short-circuit current density under full illumination can be calculated. Thus, an IPCE spectrum can be used as a control measurement to check the validity of the JSC value obtained from the J–V sweep.92 The JSC value is the most easily manipulated parameter in J–V sweeps, and thus the one that should be closest inspected when performing a control.
Method
Data collection and treatment
This review aims to look at the complete set of phenothiazine dyes and use the big dataset to learn about the strengths and weaknesses of these dyes with statistics as the main tool. Certain assumptions and limitations have been set to obtain the most reliable results. (i) Only dyes with the cyanoacrylic acid anchoring group have been included. As just a few accounts include phenothiazine dyes with other anchors, we do not consider this a large limitation of the data set.93–95 There are two possible configurations of the cyanoacrylic acid anchoring group, E and Z. Hong et al. investigated the difference and found the E isomer to be the predominant product in the Knoevenagel condensation, and fortunately the most efficient configuration in DSSCs.96 (ii) Only DSSC devices fabricated with I−/I3− electrolytes have been included. (iii) Dyes where the phenothiazine scaffold is an auxiliary moiety of another major chromophore or other structural variations of phenothiazine are reported separately as other phenothiazine dyes.26,97–112
Having set the limitations of the scope, a total of 154 papers were found to report original experimental photovoltaic data of phenothiazine sensitizers. Where photovoltaic performance values are duplicated in different papers for the same dyes, only one set of values has been included in the main dataset.
The following methodology was employed to process the available data. (i) All available photophysical (wavelength of maximum absorption in solution and on TiO2 film, extinction coefficient and emission peak wavelength), electrochemical (oxidation potential and bandgap) and photovoltaic properties (short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage, fill factor, PCE, IPCE maximum and IPCE onset) were collected. (ii) A control calculation of the PCE value was performed to eliminate typing errors in photovoltaic performance data collection. (iii) The dyes were divided according to geometry into the following groups, see Fig. 5: D–A dyes 1–17,51,93,108,113–137 D–D–A dyes 18–109,49,74,75,79,81,82,89,121,126,127,129–132,134,136–162 D–π–A dyes 110–170,51,65,66,115,123,133,135,144,149,152,159,163–196 D–D–π–A dyes 171–262,27,32,49,88,115,133,137,142,149,151,157,159,179,186,188,189,193,194,197–210 10H-phenothiazine dyes 263–274,93,183,211–217 multianchored 275–316,64,80,114,116,117,141,153,156,170,174,195,218–229 tethered dyes 317–344,124,125,165,172,187,201,202,218,220,230,231 other phenothiazine dyes 345–37226,97–112 and phenoxazine dyes 373–413.83,113,138,178,185,232–245 While both the multianchored and tethered dyes may have several anchoring groups, the anchoring groups of the multianchored dyes are connected through rigid bonds, while the tethers of the tethered dyes are flexible. (iv) The credibility of the photovoltaic performance was assessed by calculating the maximum attainable short-circuit current (JSC,max) based on the optical bandgaps E0-0 and from the IPCE onsets. If both calculated JSC,max values exceed the reported JSC value, the reference is excluded from the main dataset.
 Fig. 5  The five main geometries investigated in this review paper. Three more geometries are also included, namely multianchored, tethered and other phenothiazine dyes containing a wider array of geometries. Only dyes employing the cyanoacrylic anchor group are covered. 
In this review, auxiliary substituents extending from phenothiazine have been classified as auxiliary donors, and those bridging phenothiazine and the anchoring group as π-spacers, regardless of their electron donating ability. The introduction of additional electron acceptors and donors may give rise to endless combinations of geometries. Some have been reported for phenothiazine dyes, such as D–A–D–A,154 D–A–π–A,199,209 D–π–D–A,152 and D–A–A.192 The additional acceptor moiety of the general D–A–π–A structure was found to be useful for tuning of molecular properties and improving device stability.246,247 To properly investigate the distinctions between such geometries, one would need a strong sorting criterion for the degree of electron donation.
Data credibility assessment
The importance of reliable photovoltaic data cannot be emphasized strongly enough, so it is in the interest of the authors to filter the data to improve the quality of the data set. The more credible the data set, the higher accuracy can be obtained in the later stages of data comparison and observing the trends in the data. In addition to deliberate manipulation of photovoltaic data and calculation errors, other ways of inadvertently altering the photovoltaic data are possible. The intensity of the incident light may be altered, drift or fluctuate. Omitting the use of a shadow mask may also affect the photovoltaic performance significantly by allowing channelling of light or inaccuracies in the device area.91
Regardless of the motives or reasons behind erroneous data being reported, knowing you can trust the data is of utmost importance. In a review like this, it is the relationship between the molecular structures of the dyes and the photovoltaic performance which is all-important. Errors in the structure of the dyes are highly unlikely, but as the devices are fabricated by different scientists using different tools and materials, the performance characteristics are associated with higher inherent uncertainty. Consequently, minimizing this inaccuracy is of interest, and this has been done by looking at the short-circuit current densities (JSC). Establishing the maximum attainable JSC,max value from an optical material under a known illumination and spectral distribution is a useful way of assessing the credibility of reported photovoltaic performance parameters. A single incident photon may ultimately give rise to a maximum of one electron, which again may contribute to the short-circuit current density of the device if collected efficiently. Therefore, the number of available incident photons dictates the maximum attainable JSC value of any photovoltaic device. Accurate solar irradiance spectra data is available for free online (https://rredc.nrel.gov/solar//spectra/am1.5/). For the 1 Sun AM 1.5G spectrum, integrating the irradiance over the part of the solar spectrum relevant for solar cells yields a convenient graph, as shown in Fig. 6. Here, the absorption onset can be related to the maximum attainable JSC value. The optical bandgap is found from the absorption onset: E0–0 = 1240/λabs.onset. It is then a simple task of comparing the theoretical maximum values to the reported values for the devices. For silicon solar cells, with a typical bandgap of 1.1 eV,248 the maximum attainable JSC is approximately 44 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 6  Integration of the AM 1.5G solar spectrum with a total intensity of 100 mW cm−2. 
Arguably, the accuracy in measuring the absorption onsets is likely to be the least reliable variable of this analysis. Dissolved dyes display somewhat different absorption spectra depending on the solvent, and the absorption properties can vary further when anchored on a TiO2 film.49,188,222 In liquid electrolyte DSSC devices, the dyes are deposited on a TiO2 film while immersed in the solvent-based electrolyte. This solvent is most commonly acetonitrile, but other pure solvents and mixtures have also been reported from time to time.85,249 To get the most accurate estimate for the actual absorption onset of the dyes under DSSC operation conditions, we have based our calculations on the absorption onset of the IPCE spectra. Owing to the transmission properties of FTO glass, IPCE measurements rarely exceed 85%. As this method assumes an IPCE of 100% and the average maximum IPCE for the dataset is 70%, a sufficiently large margin has been added not to erroneously exclude valid measurements.
The reported short-circuit current density values have been compared to two calculated values. Method A: the reported bandgap (E0–0) or absorption onset in solution is used to calculate the JSC,max. Method B: the IPCE onset is used to calculate the JSC,max. If the reported value is found to exceed both calculated values, the dye properties reported in the particular paper will not be included in the statistical basis for this review. One may also include the maximum IPCE value in the calculation, or even integrate the entire IPCE curve of all the dyes to get an accurate estimate of the IPCE-based JSC. However, as the IPCE and J–V measurements are conceptually different measurements, errors in the IPCE intensity should also be expected. The IPCE onset, on the other hand, should not be affected by errors in intensity, and we believe this to be a more trustworthy measure for assessing the validity of photovoltaic efficiency claims across a wide range of scientific accounts.
Fourteen of the papers have individual dyes failing both methods A and B, and consequently all 39 dyes reported in these papers have been excluded from the statistical basis for this review paper.74,75,81,82,105,111,116,130,146–148,203,204,207 Among the top 17 highest PCE phenothiazine dyes, ten dyes have been removed. These include the dyes in the 2015 paper from Lin et al.74 and 2017 paper from Nagarajan et al.75 This is especially worrying as these papers report two of the most efficient dyes to date for the phenothiazine dye class.
Results and discussion
Development of phenothiazine dyes for DSSC
The average photovoltaic performance for phenothiazine dyes has barely developed since the first report by Tian et al. in 2007, as visualized by the red dataset in Fig. 7. In this period, the average PCE has increased from 5.15% to 5.44% in 2020. It should be noted that the best efficiencies have improved at a higher rate than the averages. Looking at the top 1/3 performing dyes from each year, the blue dataset in Fig. 7 shows an increase to 8.04% PCE, and the yellow dataset are the highest PCE reports from each year. In comparison, the NREL DSSC efficiency record has increased from 11.1%250 in 2006 to 13.0% in 2020. A portion of the development is likely attributed to general improvements in materials and fabrication techniques. However, to distinguish this from the overall development of the phenothiazine dyes is difficult. Fig. 7 further suggests that, from 2007 until 2015, the performance of phenothiazine dyes was increasing, and since then no reports of higher efficiency devices have been verified, and the average and top 1/3 graphs reflect this stagnating development. This observation further spurred our desire to answer the main questions motivating this review.
 Fig. 7  Phenothiazine dyes PCE values per year with standard error bars. Red data represent all reports, blue data represent the annual top 1/3 of reports and yellow the highest report per year, sorted by PCE. 
General considerations
The photophysical, electrochemical and photovoltaic performance from 431 reports of 372 dyes were gathered as the basis for this review study on the phenothiazine dye class. Following the above-described process for quality control of the reported data, 390 accounts of dye performance made up the final data set on which the findings of this review are based. The complete list of data can be found in the ESI,† while the averages are given in Table 1 below. All reports of phenoxazine DSSC dyes were also recorded, totalling 46 accounts of 40 unique dyes.
Table 1 Average values for the data gathered for the various geometries. It should be noted that a wide range of solvents, materials, reference electrodes and fabrication techniques have been used in the data sets which are the basis for these averages




Geometry
Count
Photophysical
Electrochemicala
Photovoltaic


ICT sol. (nm)
Ext. coeff. (M−1 cm−1)
ICT TiO2 (nm)
Emm. (nm)

E
OX (V vs. ref.)

E
0–0 (eV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF
PCE (%)
IPCE onset (nm)





a The electrochemical values are predominantly reported vs. NHE, but values relative to SHE and SCE have also been reported. This has not been accounted for and thus a certain uncertainty must be accepted for the electrochemical averages.





D–A
36
443
17 277
432
608
1.02
2.36
9.65
707
0.69
4.74
621


D–D–A
77
465
25 433
455
612
0.88
2.27
11.92
722
0.66
5.70
652


D–π–A
68
474
32953
473
600
0.86
2.24
10.34
670
0.68
4.73
671


D–D–π–A
93
463
22050
449
615
0.89
2.23
10.62
716
0.69
5.28
671


10H-PTZ
14
417
30483
454
573
0.95
2.59
7.18
669
0.67
3.27
580


Multi
47
469
37723
457
601
0.96
2.23
13.02
693
0.67
6.13
679


Tether
29
451
55863
441
579
0.92
2.20
11.24
669
0.67
5.01
670


Other
26
514
32412
435
648
1.05
2.10
13.13
711
0.69
6.51
688


Overall
390
465
29646
453
609
0.92
2.25
11.12
700
0.68
5.30
662




When reviewing a field like this, a range of notations and researcher-specific preferences, units and standards are encountered, likely a natural consequence of the variety of backgrounds for researchers in the DSSC field. This introduces some challenges, especially when reviewing the electrochemical properties of dye molecules, as there are so many different reference electrodes, internal standards and solvent systems. Furthermore, electrochemical data are also reported differently depending on the field of research, and for DSSC research all manners of electrochemical scales are being used. The standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) is the preferred reference electrode by IUPAC, but the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE), standard calomel electrode (SCE) and eV vs. vacuum are still in use. When trying to compare the electrochemical data across different notations, one immediately runs into difficulties. In the data collection stages of this review, any electrochemical data reported vs. SHE, NHE or SCE were left as is, while data reported vs. vacuum was converted to V vs. NHE with a correction factor of −4.44 eV corresponding to 0.0 V.251 The differences in the other standard electrodes are small and thus assumed to average out over the data set.
With regards to the photophysical properties, an inherent uncertainty is always associated with the comparison of dyes measured in different solvents. It is well known that the solvent has a profound effect on the photophysical properties of metal-free dyes.188 In contrast to the electrochemical data, correction factors are of little use when it comes to these properties and consequently, the data has to be used as reported in the original papers.
The same issue of uncertainty arises when looking into the photovoltaic properties of the dyes. Apart from works published from the same research groups, the photovoltaic performance is in general impossible to directly compare due to differences in fabrication methods and materials. Another important point to address is the sample size of individual studies. On average, only three dyes are investigated per paper in the field of phenothiazine dyes for DSSCs. Paired with the large variations from paper to paper in photovoltaic performance, it is a tough task navigating the field and looking for overall trends. Hence, albeit with a significant uncertainty due to differences in reporting data, the review of an entire class of dyes is the only meaningful way to look for the performance trends related to molecular traits in DSSC dyes.
Dye 4 – the most studied PTZ dye
The most studied phenothiazine dye is dye 4, a simple dye with no auxiliary donor, no π-spacer and an n-hexyl alkyl chain attached to the phenothiazine nitrogen atom. It differs from the very first phenothiazine dye, T2-1, by a two-carbon longer anti-aggregation alkyl chain. First reported by Kim et al.,123 this dye has been investigated in 13 separate papers.120,121,123–127,129–132,136,137 This dye serves as an excellent example of just how much variation is associated with data from the DSSC research field. The power conversion efficiency of this one dye ranges from 3.14% to 6.63%, as shown in a bar plot in Fig. 8(a). Part of the variation is related to different electrolyte compositions, leading to a spread in VOC, but the main contributor is the variation in JSC. This can again be rationalized by the non-similar materials and procedures available to, and skills of the researcher fabricating the devices.
 Fig. 8  Distributions of photovoltaic parameters for the 13 reports of dye 4. Includes one reference which is later excluded. 
As dye 4 demonstrates, basing scientific conclusions on findings from one paper compared to another has to be associated with considerable uncertainty in the DSSC field. This highlights the importance of proper experimental design in DSSC literature, and thus all comparisons of interest should be performed within each experimental study. This further underline the usefulness of reference sensitizers, to strengthen the link between the findings from different papers.
Photophysical properties
The overall average value of the absorption maxima (λmax) in solution was 465 nm, while the average on TiO2 films was 453 nm, suggesting the anchoring of phenothiazine dyes on TiO2 is generally associated with a blueshift in absorption maxima. Recently, Venkatraman et al. came to the same conclusion for a smaller set of phenothiazine dyes.252 However, Fig. 9(a) also suggests the shifting in absorption varies greatly depending on the geometry of the dyes. Bathochromic and hypsochromic shifts upon anchoring on TiO2 are generally associated with J- and H-aggregates, respectively.253 As the most notable exception to the general trend, the 10H-PTZ dyes display a significant redshift in absorption maxima of 37 nm upon anchoring on TiO2. A possible explanation of this phenomenon could be the fact that when the 10H-PTZ dyes are anchored on the metal oxide surface, due to the T-shape of the dyes, the phenothiazine moieties are still free to rotate and arrange linearly end-to-end, allowing J-aggregates to form. Meanwhile, for the other geometries, with the assumption of a perfect monomolecular dye layer, only H-aggregates may form on the TiO2 surface.
 Fig. 9  Violin plots of (a) ICT transition peak wavelength in solution and on TiO2 films, (b) the short-circuit current density distributions, (c) open-circuit voltage distributions and (d) the power conversion efficiency distributions of the various geometries (◊ indicates the median value and • gives the average value). 
The auxiliary donors of the D–D–A geometry redshifts the ICT maxima by 22 nm in solution and 23 nm on TiO2 films compared to the D–A geometry. However, when comparing dyes from the D–D–π–A to the D–π–A geometries, the trend is reversed. Interestingly, both auxiliary donors and π-spacers improve the photophysical properties when compared to D–A dyes. However, the D–D–π–A dyes (with both aux. donors and π-spacers) are not superior to the D–D–A or D–π–A dyes, suggesting the use of both molecular extensions is superfluous.
Tethered dyes display the highest extinction coefficients. However, this is to be expected as the dyes comprising this geometry consist of 2–3 individual dye molecules tethered to form one molecular unit, and the extinction coefficient is expected to scale proportionally with the number of chromophores present. The ICT maximum wavelength is not affected by tethering two or more units together.
Electrochemical properties
The average oxidation potential of phenothiazine dyes is 0.92 V vs. reference. The geometry D–π–A (0.86 V vs. ref.) has the lowest and D–A (1.02 V vs. ref.) the highest. A range of reference electrodes have been included in the average, but the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) is the most frequently used. Comparing the average Eox to the redox potential of the iodide/triiodide electrolyte (0.40 V vs. NHE)254 gives an average driving force for dye regeneration of 520 mV, which is more than enough.
The tuneable ligand-dependent redox potentials of copper electrolytes means a straight comparison is challenging, but redox potentials can at least range from 0.87 to 0.97 V vs. SHE for copper electrolytes with different ligands.255 This would give driving forces of 50 mV through to a negative driving force of −50 mV. Negative driving forces will not work, but even driving forces as low as 50 mV is too low for efficient regeneration, making copper electrolytes predominantly incompatible with phenothiazine dyes in DSSCs. The authors have not found any examples of phenothiazine-based DSSC with copper electrolytes in DSSC.
Cobalt electrolytes have less positive redox potentials compared to copper. One report of a range of ligand systems by Feldt et al. lists redox potentials from 0.43 to 0.85 V vs. NHE, and simultaneously identifying a driving force of 390 mV to be sufficient to achieve 80% IPCE.256 Assuming a similar driving force is necessary for phenothiazine dyes with Co electrolytes, only the complexes with the lowest oxidation potential will be compatible. Compared to the iodide/triiodide electrolyte, this will yield slightly elevated VOC and possibly higher PCE. A few accounts of cobalt electrolytes with phenothiazine-based dyes exist.61,86–90 However, due to the comparatively low rate of diffusion of cobalt electrolytes, thinner TiO2 films are needed, and extinction coefficients could become a limiting factor. Compared to state-of-art sensitizers such as Y123257 (49000 M−1 cm−1) and R7258 (85500 M−1 cm−1), the average extinction coefficient of phenothiazine dyes of 29600 M−1 cm−1 is not competitive.
Photovoltaic properties
The power conversion efficiency is an important measure for any photovoltaic technology. The development of the record efficiencies for each of the dye geometries investigated in this paper is shown in Fig. 10. It gives an overview of the timescales and performance development of the different geometries. The 10H-PTZ and tethered dyes are clearly separated from the development trajectories of the other geometries, and at the time of their introduction, phenoxazine dyes outperformed all phenothiazine geometries.
 Fig. 10  Efficiency chart for the phenothiazine dye geometries and phenoxazine dyes investigated in this work. 
When further looking at the photovoltaic performance distributions of the dye geometries in Fig. 9(b)–(d), a few observations are worth pointing out. Firstly, the 10H-PTZ geometry is a lot less efficient than the geometries anchoring through the 3- or 7-positions of the phenothiazine scaffold. This has also been proven in separate studies to be the case,93 and when 10H-PTZ dyes have been compared to the corresponding triphenylamine (TPA) dyes, the TPA dyes have come out on top.213,215,217 The data gathered here suggest that the reason for this behaviour is the low JSC, which is traced back to significantly lower wavelengths of maximum ICT absorption and optical bandgaps of these dyes. The sulphur bridge has been found to hold the phenothiazine moiety perpendicular to the π-linker, resulting in poor or no overlap between the HOMO localized on phenothiazine and the LUMO on the π-linker/acceptor side.215 The electron donating capability of the phenothiazine scaffold is dependent on the position of attachment, and the poor performance of 10H-PTZ dyes is a clear indication that positions 3 and 7 are superior to 10. Comparing the electron donor capability to other dye scaffolds is far from trivial, we do not wish to make claims the dataset cannot support. However, there are certainly other very capable alternative donor moieties, such as indoline,259,260 carbazole13 and triarylamine.261 Ndaleh et al. proposed the following order of donor strength based on λonset: carbazole < Hagfeldt donor < triarylamine < indoline.262 In a computational study, Divya et al. determined the donating strength of phenothiazine to be stronger than carbazole, pyrene and perylene, but lower than ullazine, triarylamine, indoline, julolidine and coumarine.78
Effect of auxiliary donors
Auxiliary donors, an additional donor moiety on the non-anchoring side of the phenothiazine scaffold, are responsible for modest improvements in the PCE. This is the case for the comparisons of both the D–A to D–D–A and D–π–A to D–D–π–A geometries. This is an interesting find, as the phenothiazine scaffold is bent and contains a partial conjugation break along the S–N axis. An explanation of this observation could be related to the inductive nature of the auxiliary donor moieties, which is increasing the electron density of the phenothiazine scaffold. In the papers where the effect of auxiliary donors has been measured directly against the equivalent non-auxiliary donor dye, the findings are in general agreement with the findings reported here.129,133,200,263,264 By looking at the average oxidation potentials of the D–A and D–D–A geometries, we observe the auxiliary donor lowers the oxidation potential. This suggests that auxiliary donors increase the electron density of the phenothiazine scaffold.265
To investigate the effect of different auxiliary donors, we have compared the donors from the top and bottom 10% performing dyes from the D–D–A geometry, see Fig. 11. In both groups, we find 5- and 6-membered aromatic rings, heterocycles and various anti-aggregation alkyl chains. For the top dyes, all auxiliary donors feature alkyl chains of six or more carbon atoms, while these chains only feature in half of the lowest-performing dyes. As the introduction of anti-aggregation moieties is expected to decrease recombination, this could explain the observed difference in VOC between the D–A and D–D–A geometries. The same reasoning can be applied to the auxiliary donors from the top and bottom 10% of the D–D–A dyes. The most efficient sensitizers feature a higher number of longer alkyl chains.
 Fig. 11  Top and bottom 10% performing auxiliary donors for the D–D–A dye geometry. 
Another striking difference in the two groups is found by comparing the average oxidation potentials. The top 10% performing dyes have oxidation potentials of 0.73 V vs. reference and the average of the lowest 10% was 1.03 V vs. reference. As these dyes do not have π-spacers, the only contributor to this observed difference must be the auxiliary donors. It is not apparent if the observed increase in electron density is caused by an inductive or resonance effect, but the result is a more stabilized radical cation and increased photovoltaic performance.
Effect of π-spacers
Another interesting observation is the effect that π-spacers have on the VOC of the devices. In the cases of D–A vs. D–π–A and D–D–A vs. D–D–π–A, a noticeable drop in the average VOC is observed. According to Table 1, the average loss in open-circuit voltage is 36 mV and 7 mV for the two comparisons, respectively. There are to date twelve reports in the literature where this phenomenon is possible to observe directly from the dyes studied.49,51,123,126,131,133,135,137,142,151,157,159 From these twelve papers, it is possible to extract 23 individual comparisons of dye pairs (with and without π-spacers). Apart from two exceptions (dyes SH-6135 and PTZ-3126) the dyes with π-spacers display significantly lowered VOC compared to the dyes without π-spacers. Fig. 12 shows the distributions as violin- and boxplots, with corresponding average VOC of 684 and 726 mV with and without π-spacers, respectively. The accompanying average power conversion efficiency values further highlight the disadvantage of the π-spacers, as these dyes have an average PCE of 4.82% while the non-π-spacer dyes have an average PCE of 5.35%.
 Fig. 12  Violin plots of the cases where direct comparisons of dyes with and without π-spacers are possible. Boxplots are overlaid with averages of 726 mV and 684 mV, respectively. 
The VOC observations are very clear, however few of the papers point out the phenomenon and only one paper, from our group, determined a shift in conduction band caused the shift in VOC.151 To explain this phenomenon, we start by determining the ICT transition in phenothiazine dyes is an n to π* transition,266 and it is natural to assign the origin of this transition to the electron lone pair on the phenothiazine scaffold, as this is usually the only lone pair in conjugation with the anchoring group. By comparing two simpler systems, the pKa of acetic acid is 4.75, while that of cyanoacetic acid is 2.45. This is due to the inductive effect from the nitrile group increasing the acidity of the carboxylic acid. Any electron-donating groups will, following the same reasoning, reduce the acidity of the carboxylic acid. When transferring this scenario to phenothiazine dyes, we have the nitrile group attached to the anchoring group providing a strong electron-withdrawing effect along with the carboxylic acid. The donor group, i.e. the 10H-nitrogen of phenothiazine, is providing the opposite effect through the conjugated system. As π-spacers are introduced between the donor and acceptor moieties, the distance is increased and the effect from the donor group is decreased. Consequently, a lowering of the pKa must be expected when introducing a π-spacer with the direct effect of the dye becoming a stronger acid. As increased protonation is known to lower the conduction band edge of the TiO2,267 we consider this a highly plausible explanation of the trends here highlighted for the VOC. Rühle and co-workers investigated a similar phenomenon observed for metal-complex dyes, basing the explanation on differences in the dipole moments of the dye complexes.268 We see no reason why this phenomenon should be exclusive to phenothiazine-based dyes, and we hope this discussion may give further insight into how to design dye molecules with a wide absorption while maintaining a high VOC. A possible solution is to approach dye structures incorporating donor moieties closer to the anchoring group, keeping the acidity of the anchoring group controlled.
The prevalence of sulphur-containing heterocycles used in π-spacers can also contribute to the lower VOC observed. Quantum calculations have revealed that thiophenes in π-spacers form sulphur–iodine complexes, and these are responsible for increasing iodine concentration near the surface of TiO2.269 This interaction increases in strength with increasing numbers of sulphur atoms in the π-spacer, and facilitates recombination, which lowers the VOC of the devices.91 This claim is supported experimentally where sulphur-rich sensitizers demonstrate inferior VOC compared to sensitizers with lower sulphur-content in I−/I3− electrolyte, but superior VOC in Co2+/Co3+ electrolyte.269
A similar direct comparison of the π-spacer effect is not possible for the multianchored dyes due to insufficient data, but two publications allow the comparison of one vs. two thiophene units in the π-spacers of the multianchored dyes.219,229 Here, the two findings conflict as to the effect of enlarged π-spacer on the VOC. However, the larger π-spacers generally give higher PCE values by a narrow margin.
Effect of N-aryl vs. N-alkyl substituents
The 10H-position of the phenothiazine scaffold is always substituted by either alkyl chains or an aromatic substituent. Of the dye reports in the geometries D–A, D–π–A, D–D–A, D–D–π–A and multianchored dyes, 58 featured N-aryl substituents, while 263 had N-alkyl substituents. The average photovoltaic parameters are for N-alkyl (JSC = 10.75 mA cm−2, VOC = 699 mV, PCE = 5.15%) and for N-aryl (JSC = 12.78 mA cm−2, VOC = 720 mV, PCE = 6.10%). The more common alkyl-substituted dyes are outperformed in every aspect by the aryl-substituted dyes, as it can be seen from the density plot in Fig. 13(a). The biggest difference is found for the JSC, resulting in a performance gap of nearly 1% PCE. The aryl-substituted dyes also deliver the superior λmax (473 nm vs. 463 nm), extinction coefficients (30100 M−1 cm−1vs. 26300 M−1 cm−1), IPCE onsets (672 nm vs. 660 nm) and average maximum IPCE value (75% vs. 70%). It should be emphasized the statistical basis for the former is stronger due to the highly uneven population sizes.
 Fig. 13  (a) Density plot of power conversion efficiency vs. N-substituent. (b) Power conversion efficiency vs. alkyl chain length. 
The effects highlighted for λmax, extinction coefficients and IPCE onsets all suggest the aryl dyes are the better light-harvesting molecules, resulting in higher JSC and average maximum IPCE values. The effect in VOC can be a result of the aryl moiety providing a more efficient blocking effect of the surface, reducing undesirable recombination of electrons in the TiO2 to oxidized electrolyte species. It could also be a result of the radical cation situated on the nitrogen atom is more stabilized by three aromatic substituents compared to two for alkyl-substituted dyes. As the earliest aryl-substituted dyes were reported in 2012, the overall development in DSSC fabrication materials and techniques may favour these dyes over the alkyl dyes that were introduced five years earlier. As the photophysical properties of the N-aryl dyes are also superior, we feel confident recommending the use of aryl over alkyl substituents.
The data from the N-alkyl dyes have been further extended to look at the effect of chain length, see Fig. 13(b). Six atoms in the longest chain is by far the most frequent with 172 occurrences. The most efficient dyes are also found employing chains of this length, and a noticeable drop in PCE is found for dyes with chains of eight carbons. The alkyl-substituted dyes vastly outnumber the aryl dyes. Many factors are likely contributing to this being the case. Firstly, alkyl chains are extremely common for the synthesis of dyes for DSSCs in general, used for their anti-aggregation properties. Choosing alkyl chains over aryl moieties may come down to avoiding undesirable stacking of aromatic units, which could increase the interactions between adjacent dye molecules. Consequently, many of the dyes here investigated employ alkyl-substituted phenyl substituents in the 10H-position on the phenothiazine scaffold. Secondly, the synthesis of the alkyl-based dyes is considerably less complex. Simple SN2 reactions of phenothiazines with inexpensive alkyl halides are usually sufficient to attach the anti-aggregation moiety in N-alkyl dyes. Meanwhile, for the N-aryl dyes the copper-catalysed Ullmann coupling, palladium-catalysed Buchwald coupling, or a reagent-limited electrophilic aromatic substitution are the most common methods for the introduction of the 10H-moiety.35,71,113,134
Multianchored dyes
The symmetric nature of the phenothiazine scaffold allows easy access to dyes with multiple anchoring groups, and numerous studies have investigated the photovoltaic effects of such dyes. From Table 1 it is clear the multianchored dyes are outperforming all the monoanchored dye geometries. Compared to the most efficient geometry of monoanchored dyes, multianchored dyes have 7.5% higher relative PCE values. Being comparable in every property apart from extinction coefficient, we attribute the higher JSC, and consequently PCE, to the increased extinction coefficient of the multianchored dyes.
To the best of our knowledge, the higher extinction coefficients of multianchored phenothiazine dyes have not been identified nor investigated before. Assuming there is a partial break in the electronic communication along the S–N axis of the dye in the ground state, the contribution from the donor side of the dye scaffold has to be restricted to some extent. Conversely, if this side of the scaffold is in conjugation with another anchoring group, the resulting dianchored molecule will contain two separate electronic systems, both originating from the phenothiazine nitrogen and both contributing to the ICT transition. This suggestion is supported by the fact that the multianchored dyes do not show vastly red-shifted absorption maxima or IPCE onsets compared to the monoanchored dyes. An unsymmetrical dianchored dye with two distinct ICT transitions can confirm this theory.
In the dataset we have been able to find six papers where meaningful direct comparisons of mono- and dianchored sensitizers could be extracted.114,117,170,174,195,229 In no cases were the monoanchoring dyes found to outperform the dianchoring analogues, which delivered on average 16% higher relative PCE values. While the multianchoring dyes are more efficient, they are also somewhat limited in terms of further modification. As the only reactive handle left on the scaffold is the nitrogen atom, all modification apart from tuning of π-spacers will have to be introduced at this position.
Tethered dyes
The dyes comprising the tethered dyes in this study all consist of separate dye chromophores containing donor and/or anchor groups tethered by flexible linkers. This approach has the desirable effect of significantly increasing the extinction coefficient. However, as the tethers are linking separate electronic systems, the increase in extinction coefficient is only a result of increasing the number of electronic systems per molecule, not improving the light-harvesting properties of the electronic systems. The increased extinction coefficient does not translate into improved JSC, and the efficiencies obtained with these dyes are comparable to the monoanchored geometries.
The use of tethers has previously been used to increase the local concentration of a reducing agent, increasing the rate of dye regeneration and moving the cation further away from the TiO2 surface.37 The authors have successfully used a tethered approach to control the molar ratio of triarylamine dyes and anti-aggregation additive (chenodeoxycholic acid).270 In our opinion, the use of tethers is a wonderful tool to ensure proximity and control the stoichiometric ratios of additives or co-sensitizers, but ineffective in increasing the light harvesting properties of DSSC dyes.
Molecular weight
Molecular weight is a good measure of the synthetic complexity of a dye molecule. The preparation of large molecules usually requires specialist coupling reagents and catalysts, especially when extending conjugated systems. Thus, it is useful to look at the correlation between the molecular weight and the power conversion efficiency of an entire dye class. From Fig. 14(a), the majority of the dyes are found in the molecular weight range of 350–1000 g mol−1, with corresponding PCE values of 2–8%. There were no examples of dyes heavier than 1600 g mol−1 with PCE over 7%. For the region 1000–1600 g mol−1, the majority are found below 5% PCE, but this is also the region where the most efficient dyes are located. Of these dyes, most fall in the categories of other dyes or multianchored dyes.
 Fig. 14  Density plots for the entire dataset of phenothiazine dyes for (a) PCE vs. molecular weight, (b) molecular weight vs. wavelength of maximum absorption, (c) PCE vs. wavelength of maximum absorption. The dashed orange lines in (a) and (c) are added by the authors to highlight the interpreted limitations. 
When looking at the highest performing dyes over the molecular weight range, the PCE increases with molecular weight until a sweet spot region around 700–1100 g mol−1 before the PCE again decreases. The dashed line in Fig. 14(a) has been added to roughly outline this behaviour. We interpret the decrease as an effect of aggregation or a reduction in dye loading. Larger molecules will have more potential sites for unfavourable molecular interactions with other dyes and require a larger surface area when anchored on TiO2, i.e. lowering the dye loading.
We expected as the molecular weight of the dyes increase, so will the size of the electronic system and consequently the wavelength of maximum absorption. Fig. 14(b) shows some dependence of the molecular weight on the wavelength of maximum absorption in the region of 350 nm to 525 nm. The lack of a clearer trend is attributed to the molecular moieties of the dyes not part of the electronic system. Expectedly, the wavelength of maximum absorption is related to the PCE, shown in Fig. 14(c). Another interesting feature from this plot is the very defined upper limit of power conversion efficiency as a function of wavelength of maximum absorption. The dashed line is added by the authors for clarity.
Phenoxazine dyes
Phenoxazine is the structurally closest analogue of phenothiazine, where the sulphur atom of the scaffold is replaced by an oxygen atom. The smaller size of the oxygen atom (0.6 Å vs. 1.0 Å atomic radii for sulphur)271 means the dihedral angle of phenoxazine is expected to be smaller. While no crystallographic data was found for phenoxazine, an early study on dipole moments by Cullinane and Rees concluded that if there was any folding of the scaffold, it had to be small.272 As the phenoxazine structure is less bent than that of phenothiazine, it is expected that it should have more red-shifted absorption and lower reorganizational energy upon excitation. The first phenoxazine dyes for DSSC were reported in 2009 by Tian et al.83 Since then, nineteen papers reporting 46 phenoxazine dyes were found in the literature when applying the same limitations used for the phenothiazine data set. The scarcity of these dyes is most likely due to the lower availability of low-cost starting materials. Table 2 lists the average values for all phenoxazine dyes and all phenothiazine dyes, excluding tethered and other dyes. As there is only one phenoxazine dye from the two categories, this gives the most accurate basis for comparing the two scaffolds.
Table 2 Average values for the phenothiazine dyes and phenoxazine dyes. Phenothiazine dyes from the multi tethered and other categories are not included




Scaffold
Photophysical
Electrochemicala
Photovoltaic


ICT sol. (nm)
Ext. coeff. (M−1 cm−1)
ICT TiO2 (nm)
Emm. (nm)

E
OX (V vs. ref.)

E
0–0 (eV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF
PCE (%)
IPCE onset (nm)





a Geometries D–A, D–D–A, D–π–A, D–D–π–A and multianchored dyes.





PTZa
465
26990
455
609
0.90
2.25
11.11
703
0.68
5.32
659


POX
486
25895
467
607
0.91
2.21
11.62
711
0.68
5.67
676




Our comparison shows the phenoxazine dyes are outperforming the phenothiazine dyes primarily in the absorption properties, with higher average wavelengths of maximum absorption in solution and on TiO2 films. Despite slightly lower extinction coefficients, the phenoxazine dyes deliver higher PCE, JSC and VOC. The average electrochemical properties for the two dye classes are remarkably similar. With comparable average oxidation potentials to phenothiazine, the phenoxazine dyes are also unlikely candidates with copper- and most of the cobalt-based electrolytes. Only two direct experimental comparisons between phenothiazine and phenoxazine dyes have been reported, by He et al.185 and Reddy et al.138 Both studies found phenoxazine dyes to outperform the phenothiazine analogues both photophysically and in DSSC devices. As significant differences can be seen in the statistical data and direct comparisons, it is reasonable to attribute the performance difference to the oxygen atom. As the wavelengths of maximum absorption are redshifted for the phenoxazine dyes, we interpret this as an increased orbital overlap caused by the smaller size of the oxygen atom giving a flatter scaffold structure. Another consequence of the flatter structure of the phenoxazine scaffold is the lower reorganizational energy required for the bending motion upon excitation. The result is a more efficient ICT process, which can be driven by lower energy illumination, utilizing a larger part of the solar spectrum compared to phenothiazine dyes.
Design concept evaluation and outlook
The fifteen most efficient phenothiazine dyes to date across all geometries are shown in Fig. 15. Dyes where phenothiazine is an auxiliary donor to another chromophore (other dyes) make up the top three places, and multianchoring dyes are heavily featured. Among the conventional monoanchoring dyes in the top 15, three dyes fall into the D–D–π–A dyes and the last represents the D–D–A dyes.
 Fig. 15  The 15 phenothiazine dyes with the highest reported PCE values passing the data credibility assessment. 
Considering the conventional monoanchoring geometries, the D–D–A geometry is superior to the others and the 10H-PTZ geometry is the least efficient by far. As D–D–A dyes outperform the D–π–A dyes, we conclude the performance enhancement from auxiliary donors is greater than that of π-spacers. This is a bold interpretation, as π-spacers are frequently attributed with the virtues of improving the absorption properties and increasing the efficiency of the devices.
Another repeatedly mentioned feature of phenothiazines is their claimed anti-aggregation properties, linked to the flapping motion of the scaffold. We have no evidence opposing this, but we do want to highlight the reorganizational energy cost associated with this motion. The required energy is subtracted from the exciton energy and is thus an inherent limitation for the phenothiazine scaffold, although we do not believe this phenomenon to be exclusive to phenothiazine dyes.
While reviewing the properties of phenothiazine dyes, we have presented several inherent limitations for the phenothiazine scaffold. The most prominent is the incompatibility of the oxidation potentials with novel electrolytes. This effectively excludes phenothiazines as a main scaffold for low-light and high-efficiency (>10% PCE) sensitizers. However, the strong electron donating abilities of this moiety can be a great asset if used as an auxiliary donor on other chromophores. Also, we firmly believe that phenothiazine in the future can play a role as main energy harvesters in other applications where the molecular properties of phenothiazine are favourable.
Conclusion
In this review, we have collected all photophysical, electrochemical and photovoltaic data from 372 phenothiazine dyes (431 reports) and 40 phenoxazine dyes (46 reports). The dyes were grouped according to their basic geometry, and the credibility of the photovoltaic data was assessed by comparing every dye report to the calculated theoretical maximum short-circuit current density expected for each dye. This resulted in the removal of 39 dye reports from the dataset.
Using the large dataset, we have looked for answers to questions asked by researchers in the field of phenothiazine dyes for DSSCs, such as the effect of π-spacers, auxiliary donors, the best overall dye geometry, alkyl vs. aryl substituents, anti-aggregation chain lengths and molecular weights. A brief summary of findings based on our review of the complete class of phenothiazine dyes is:
• The most efficient geometry is multianchored dyes.
• N-aryl substituents are more efficient than N-alkyl.
• The most efficient anti-aggregation chain length has six atoms in the longest chain.
• Auxiliary donors contribute more than π-spacers.
• Molecular weight ideally below 1000 g mol−1.
• Iodide/triiodide is the most suitable redox couple.
• Phenoxazine scaffold looks more promising than phenothiazine.
To accelerate the learning and improve the credibility and reliability of the photovoltaic data in the DSSC field, we encourage the following guidelines of best practice with regards to experimental design and reporting. (i) Include IPCE measurements and validate the photocurrent density based on the integration of said spectra. (ii) Base conclusions on photovoltaic data gathered within the study in question. For complex systems with many variables, a design of experiment (DoE) approach is encouraged. (iii) Include known and easily available reference sensitizers as benchmarks. Even though it is not required for the conclusion of the paper in question, it may still be of use to other researchers’ future comparisons.
Among the reports excluded from the data set were several previous record dyes. The consequence of removing these is a less optimistic, albeit more realistic view of phenothiazine compared to other dye scaffolds. We feel the honest research is brought back into the light, although phenothiazine as a chromophore may appear less attractive. The most efficient phenothiazine dye is currently YL4, a multianchored dye from Li et al. with an impressive PCE of 9.8%.219 Among the more common monoanchoring geometries, the most efficient dye is 6d from Wang et al. with a PCE of 8.9%.179 Phenothiazine, when used as an auxiliary donor in a ruthenium sensitizer, has reached a PCE of 10.4%, for the dye SCZ-1 reported by She et al.101
Many of the latest achievements in DSSC performance are related to increases in VOC by employing copper and cobalt electrolytes. We have here established that the oxidation potentials of phenothiazine dyes are generally not compatible with novel copper-based electrolytes, and the comparatively low extinction coefficients do not favour the slow diffusing cobalt-based electrolytes. The reorganizational energy cost associated with the butterfly flapping motion is a further inherent limitation for phenothiazine dyes.
There is great science being performed in the field of phenothiazine dyes, and we hope this review can be of aid to future researchers navigating this field. It is the opinion of the authors that, although the phenothiazine scaffold is easily modified and the dyes are stable and reliable, it is a tricky system to understand and difficult to improve. While phenoxazine appears to be a slightly more efficient scaffold, we believe the two heterocycles are so similar that they are likely to share weaknesses and limitations as well.
In summary, phenothiazine dyes appear to have significant limitations in terms of absorption, extinction coefficients and DSSC electrolyte compatibility. We do however see no reason why the donating powers of phenothiazine cannot be of great use as auxiliary donors in other chromophores. As the focus of the DSSC field is currently shifting towards powering applications for the internet of things in indoor ambient illumination, and exciting new research fields continuously spring up around DSSCs, we have no doubt phenothiazine in some shape or form will be part of this exciting development in the future.
Conflicts of interest
All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank professor Bård Helge Hoff and associate professor Odd Reidar Gautun for their excellent supervision and for encouraging the writing of this review.
Notes and references
W. Naim, V. Novelli, I. Nikolinakos, N. Barbero, I. Dzeba, F. Grifoni, Y. Ren, T. Alnasser, A. Velardo, R. Borrelli, S. Haacke, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel, C. Barolo and F. Sauvage, JACS Au, 2021, 1, 409–426 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huaulmé, V. M. Mwalukuku, D. Joly, J. Liotier, Y. Kervella, P. Maldivi, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, A. J. Riquelme, J. A. Anta and R. Demadrille, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 468–477 CrossRef .
J.-H. Kim and S.-H. Han, Sustainability, 2020, 12, 8961 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, S. Tak, J. Kim, Y. Jun, K. Kang and J. Park, Build. Environ., 2011, 46, 1899–1904 CrossRef .
D. Joly, L. Pelleja, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, T. Meyer, Y. Kervella, P. Maldivi, J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares and R. Demadrille, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2010–2018 RSC .
H. Michaels, I. Benesperi and M. Freitag, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 5002–5015 RSC .
V. Pecunia, L. G. Occhipinti and R. L. Z. Hoye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100698 CrossRef .
B.-M. Kim, M.-H. Lee, V. S. Dilimon, J. S. Kim, J. S. Nam, Y.-G. Cho, H. K. Noh, D.-H. Roh, T.-H. Kwon and H.-K. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1473–1480 RSC .
S. Yun, N. Vlachopoulos, A. Qurashi, S. Ahmad and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3705–3722 RSC .
N. A. Romero and D. A. Nicewicz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10075–10166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. McAtee, E. J. McClain and C. R. J. Stephenson, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 111–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kokkonen, P. Talebi, J. Zhou, S. Asgari, S. A. Soomro, F. Elsehrawy, J. Halme, S. Ahmad, A. Hagfeldt and S. G. Hashmi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10527–10545 RSC .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J.-I. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
D. Zhang, M. Stojanovic, Y. Ren, Y. Cao, F. T. Eickemeyer, E. Socie, N. Vlachopoulos, J.-E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1777 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, J. Teuscher, Y. Saygili, X. Zhang, F. Giordano, P. Liska, J. Hua, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-E. Moser, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Tingare, N. S. N. Vinh, H.-H. Chou, Y.-C. Liu, Y.-S. Long, T.-C. Wu, T.-C. Wei and C.-Y. Yeh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700032 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, Y. Liu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Joule, 2018, 2, 1108–1117 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schoden, M. Dotter, D. Knefelkamp, T. Blachowicz and E. Schwenzfeier Hellkamp, Energies, 2021, 14, 3741 CrossRef .
S. Galliano, F. Bella, M. Bonomo, F. Giordano, M. Grätzel, G. Viscardi, A. Hagfeldt, C. Gerbaldi and C. Barolo, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2000823 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. de Haro, E. Tatsi, L. Fagiolari, M. Bonomo, C. Barolo, S. Turri, F. Bella and G. Griffini, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 8550–8560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mariotti, M. Bonomo, L. Fagiolari, N. Barbero, C. Gerbaldi, F. Bella and C. Barolo, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 7168–7218 RSC .
A. Bernthsen, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1883, 16, 2896–2904 CrossRef .
J. McDowell, Acta Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 5–10 CrossRef .
Y. Aouine, A. Alami, A. El Hallaoui, A. Elachqar and H. Zouihri, Acta Crystallogr., 2010, 66, 2830–2835 Search PubMed .
D. Pan and D. L. Phillips, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 4737–4743 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wan, C. Jia, Y. Duan, L. Zhou, Y. Lin and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25140–25147 RSC .
W. Wu, J. Yang, J. Hua, J. Tang, L. Zhang, Y. Long and H. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1772–1779 RSC .
X. Qiu, R. Lu, H. Zhou, X. Zhang, T. Xu, X. Liu and Y. Zhao, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 7446–7449 CrossRef CAS .
D. Devadiga, M. Selvakumar, P. Shetty, M. Sridhar Santosh, R. S. Chandrabose and S. Karazhanov, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 6584–6643 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, C. Chen, L. Sun, H. Li, H. Chen, J. Su, H. Li, H. Li, L. Xu and M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9510–9516 RSC .
F. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Zhu, X. Liu, H. Liu, X. Li, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1145–1152 CrossRef CAS .
D. Unny, J. Sivanadanam, S. Mandal, I. S. Aidhen and K. Ramanujam, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, H845–H860 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshinori, T. Hiroaki and H. Keniti, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn, 1973, 46, 3359–3363 CrossRef .
J. Kulys, K. Krikstopaitis and A. Ziemys, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2000, 5, 333–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Franz, F. Rominger and T. J. J. Müller, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 1795–1802 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Lai, X. Kong, S. A. Jenekhe and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12631–12639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, T. A. Heimer, F. N. Castellano and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2591–2597 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cazzanti, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, C. M. Elliott and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9996–9997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, W. Wu, G. Sang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu and Y. Li, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 7231–7237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sailer, M. Nonnenmacher, T. Oeser and T. J. J. Müller, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 423–435 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sailer, A. W. Franz and T. J. J. Müller, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 2602–2614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Kim, J.-H. Eom, D. Mi, C.-H. Jung, J.-H. Lee, I.-N. Kang, J.-H. Kim and D.-H. Hwang, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1672–1676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hauck, J. Schönhaber, A. J. Zucchero, K. I. Hardcastle, T. J. J. Müller and U. H. F. Bunz, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 6714–6725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yue, J. Wang, J. Han, B. Wang and X. Song, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2849–2852 RSC .
J. Han, X. Liu, H. Xiong, J. Wang, B. Wang, X. Song and W. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 5134–5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gonuguntla, A. Tiwari, S. Madanaboina, G. Lingamallu and U. Pal, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 7508–7516 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe, H. Hagiwara, A. Iribe, Y. Ogata, K. Shiomi, A. Staykov, S. Ida, K. Tanaka and T. Ishihara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12952–12961 RSC .
N. Manfredi, B. Cecconi, V. Calabrese, A. Minotti, F. Peri, R. Ruffo, M. Monai, I. Romero-Ocana, T. Montini, P. Fornasiero and A. Abbotto, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6977–6980 RSC .
A. F. Buene, N. Uggerud, S. P. Economopoulos, O. R. Gautun and B. H. Hoff, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 151, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bejan, S. Shova, M.-D. Damaceanu, B. C. Simionescu and L. Marin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 3716–3730 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, X. Yang, R. Chen, Y. Pan, L. Li, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3741–3743 RSC .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
D. P. Hagberg, X. Jiang, E. Gabrielsson, M. Linder, T. Marinado, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7232–7238 RSC .
J. T. Lin, P.-C. Chen, Y.-S. Yen, Y.-C. Hsu, H.-H. Chou and M.-C. P. Yeh, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 97–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Velusamy, K. R. Justin Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y.-C. Hsu and K.-C. Ho, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 1899–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Edvinsson, T. Marinado, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2245–2247 RSC .
S. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, J. H. Yum, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, D. Di Censo, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16701–16707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hara, Z.-S. Wang, T. Sato, A. Furube, R. Katoh, H. Sugihara, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo and S. Suga, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15476–15482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Seo, H. M. Song, M. J. Lee, M. Pastore, C. Anselmi, F. De Angelis, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and H. K. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2011, 90, 304–310 CrossRef CAS .
N. Koumura, Z.-S. Wang, M. Miyashita, Y. Uemura, H. Sekiguchi, Y. Cui, A. Mori, S. Mori and K. Hara, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4829–4836 RSC .
M. Xu, D. Zhou, N. Cai, J. Liu, R. Li and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4735–4742 RSC .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218–12219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, H. Miura, S. Uchida, M. Takata, K. Sumioka, P. Liska, P. Comte, P. Péchy and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5194–5196 RSC .
M. J. Cho, S. S. Park, Y. S. Yang, J. H. Kim and D. H. Choi, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1754–1760 CrossRef CAS .
C. Teng, X. Yang, C. Yang, H. Tian, S. Li, X. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11305–11313 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, X. Yang, J. Cong, R. Chen, C. Teng, J. Liu, Y. Hao, L. Wang and L. Sun, Dyes Pigm., 2010, 84, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591–597 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Luo, Z.-Q. Wan and C.-Y. Jia, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2016, 27, 1304–1318 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Huang, H. Meier and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2404–2426 RSC .
I. J. Al-Busaidi, A. Haque, N. K. Al Rasbi and M. S. Khan, Synth. Met., 2019, 257, 116189 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. A. L. Ghamdi, H. A. A. L. Ghamdi, R. M. El-Shishtawy and A. M. Asiri, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 109638 CrossRef .
R. Y.-Y. Lin, F.-L. Wu, C.-T. Li, P.-Y. Chen, K.-C. Ho and J. T. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2503–2513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nagarajan, S. Kushwaha, R. Elumalai, S. Mandal, K. Ramanujam and D. Raghavachari, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10289–10300 RSC .
Z. Wang, L. Miu, H. Yao, M. Liang, S. Yan, J. Wang, T. Guo, L. Zhang, J. Chen and S. Xue, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 162, 126–135 CrossRef CAS .
T. Khamrang, M. Velusamy, M. Jaccob, M. Ramesh, M. Kathiresan and A. Kathiravan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6264–6273 RSC .
V. V. Divya and C. H. Suresh, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 7200–7209 RSC .
A. Slodek, D. Zych, S. Golba, S. Zimosz, P. Gnida and E. Schab-Balcerzak, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5830–5840 RSC .
C.-H. Siu, L. T. L. Lee, P.-Y. Ho, C.-L. Ho, T. Chen, S. Suramitr, S. Hannongbua, Z. Xie, M. Wei and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 332–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Duvva, Y. K. Eom, G. Reddy, K. S. Schanze and L. Giribabu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6758–6767 CrossRef CAS .
A. Slodek, D. Zych, G. Szafraniec-Gorol, P. Gnida, M. Vasylieva and E. Schab-Balcerzak, Materials, 2020, 13, 2292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, X. Yang, J. Cong, R. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Hao, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6288–6290 RSC .
Y. Saygili, M. Stojanovic, N. Flores-Díaz, S. M. Zakeeruddin, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Inorganics, 2019, 7, 30–98 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, M. Liang, Y. Tan, M. Wang, Z. Sun and S. Xue, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Seo, I. T. Choi and H. K. Kim, Org. Electron., 2015, 25, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. El-Shishtawy, J.-D. Decoppet, F. A. M. Al-Zahrani, Y. Cao, S. B. Khan, M. S. Al-Ghamdi, B. G. Alhogbi, A. M. Asiri, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 9045–9050 RSC .
M. P. Antony, T. Moehl, M. Wielopolski, J.-E. Moser, S. Nair, Y.-J. Yu, J.-H. Kim, K.-Y. Kay, Y.-S. Jung, K. B. Yoon, C. Graetzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3859–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, Y. Chen, L. Duan, Z. Sun, M. Liang and S. Xue, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45807–45817 RSC .
M. Pazoki, U. B. Cappel, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 672–709 RSC .
J. A. Christians, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 852–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Hart, C. B. KC, N. K. Subbaiyan, P. A. Karr and F. D’Souza, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5813–5820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zietz, E. Gabrielsson, V. Johansson, A. M. El-Zohry, L. Sun and L. Kloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2251–2255 RSC .
L. Zhang and J. M. Cole, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3427–3455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, H. Lai, Y. Liu, C. Yuan, Y. Li, P. Liu and Q. Fang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1069–1072 RSC .
P.-P. Dai, Y.-Z. Zhu, Q.-L. Liu, Y.-Q. Yan and J.-Y. Zheng, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 175, 108099 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Gangadhar, S. Gonuguntla, S. Madanaboina, N. Islavath, U. Pal and L. Giribabu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 392, 112408 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Jia, S.-S. Li, Z.-J. Peng, J. Zhao, B.-Q. Gong, M.-Y. Guan, H.-G. Zheng and F.-F. Xia, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 180, 108454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chandrasekharam, G. Rajkumar, C. S. Rao, T. Suresh and P. Y. Reddy, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 1469–1476 CrossRef CAS .
Z. She, Y. Cheng, L. Zhang, X. Li, D. Wu, Q. Guo, J. Lan, R. Wang and J. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27831–27837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, K. R. Justin Thomas, C.-T. Li and K.-C. Ho, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, H. Choi, S. Paek, J.-J. Kim, K. Song, M.-S. Kang and J. Ko, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 225, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wan, C. Jia, Y. Duan, J. Zhang, Y. Lin and Y. Shi, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 94, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, K. Cao, P. Xue, Y. Zhang, H. Zhou and R. Lu, Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 3626–3632 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wan, C. Jia, Y. Duan, L. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Lin and Y. Shi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4507–4514 RSC .
K. D. Seo, B. S. You, I. T. Choi, M. J. Ju, M. You, H. S. Kang and H. K. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2069–2073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-X. Dai, H.-L. Feng, W.-J. Chen, Y. Yang, L.-B. Nie, L. Wang, D.-B. Kuang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 122, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, L. Lu, Y.-Z. Zhu, H.-H. Gao and J.-Y. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9057–9065 RSC .
J. M. Park, C. Y. Jung, Y. Wang, H. D. Choi, S. J. Park, P. Ou, W.-D. Jang and J. Y. Jaung, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 170, 107568 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y.-Z. Zhu, S.-C. Zhang, H.-H. Gao, B. Pan and J.-Y. Zheng, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 139, 292–299 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Krishna, J. V. S. Krishna, S. P. Singh, L. Giribabu, L. Han, I. Bedja, R. K. Gupta and A. Islam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6464–6477 CrossRef CAS .
M.-D. Damaceanu, C.-P. Constantin, A.-E. Bejan, M. Mihaila, M. Kusko, C. Diaconu, I. Mihalache and R. Pascu, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 166, 15–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Park, Y. S. Won, Y. C. Choi and J. H. Kim, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3732–3736 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chen, Y.-T. Kuo and C.-J. Liang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 9783–9789 RSC .
A. Fabianczyk, P. Gnida, P. Chulkin, S. Kula, M. Filapek, A. Szlapa-Kula, H. Janeczek and E. Schab-Balcerzak, Sol. Energy, 2020, 220, 1109–1119 CrossRef .
S. Yellappa, W. A. Webre, H. B. Gobeze, A. Middleton, C. B. Kc and F. D'Souza, ChemPlusChem, 2017, 82, 896–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Wu, M.-H. Tsao, F.-L. Chen, S.-G. Su, C.-W. Chang, H.-P. Wang, Y.-C. Lin, W.-C. Ou-Yang and I.-W. Sun, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 329–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, S. Li, X. Wang and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6290–6293 RSC .
G. Marotta, M. A. Reddy, S. P. Singh, A. Islam, L. Han, F. De Angelis, M. Pastore and M. Chandrasekharam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9635–9647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wan, C. Jia, Y. Wang, J. Luo and X. Yao, Org. Electron., 2015, 27, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, J. Peng, Y. Hong, X. Fang, L. Wang and H. Meier, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 1610–1613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Kim, S.-M. Lee, M.-H. Seo, S.-E. Cho, W.-P. Hwang, S.-H. Park, Y.-K. Kim, J.-K. Lee and M.-R. Kim, Macromol. Res., 2012, 20, 128–137 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kim, M. J. Cho, Y. C. Choi, K.-S. Ahn, D. H. Choi, K. Kim and J. H. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 99, 986–994 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lee, R. K. Chitumalla, B. Y. Jang, J. Jang, S. Thogiti and J. H. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 133, 161–172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Z. Wan, C. Jia, Y. Wang, X. Wu and X. Yao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 364–374 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Chang, P.-T. Chou, Y.-Z. Lin, M. Watanabe, C.-J. Yang, T.-M. Chin and T. J. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21704–21712 RSC .
S. H. Kim, C. Sakong, J. B. Chang, B. Kim, M. J. Ko, D. H. Kim, K. S. Hong and J. P. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 97, 262–271 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Wang, J. Guo, H. Tang and J. Zhao, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 109, 96–104 CrossRef CAS .
S. Erten-Ela, Y. Ueno, T. Asaba and Y. Kubo, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 10367–10375 RSC .
Y.-D. Lin, B.-Y. Ke, Y. J. Chang, P.-T. Chou, K.-L. Liau, C.-Y. Liu and T. J. Chow, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16831–16842 RSC .
F. Han, Y. Wang, Z. Wan, C. Jia, J. Luo and X. Yao, Synth. Met., 2016, 221, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, F. Gou, J. Shi, H. Gao, C. Xu, Z. Zhu and H. Jing, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 106380–106386 RSC .
Z. Iqbal, W.-Q. Wu, D.-B. Kuang, L. Wang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 96, 722–731 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, H. W. Kim, C. Sakong, J. Namgoong, S. W. Park, M. J. Ko, C. H. Lee, W. I. Lee and J. P. Kim, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5784–5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hua, S. Chang, H. Wang, D. Huang, J. Zhao, T. Chen, W.-Y. Wong, W.-K. Wong and X. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Yang, Y. J. Chang, M. Watanabe, Y.-S. Hon and T. J. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4040–4049 RSC .
M. Anil Reddy, B. Vinayak, T. Suresh, S. Niveditha, K. Bhanuprakash, S. Prakash Singh, A. Islam, L. Han and M. Chandrasekharam, Synth. Met., 2014, 195, 208–216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Khamrang, A. Seetharaman, M. D. Kumar, M. Velusamy, M. Jaccob, M. Ramesh, M. Kathiresan and A. Kathiravan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 22241–22251 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nagarajan, A. C. D. R. Elumalai, S. Chandran and D. Raghavachari, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2021, 404, 112820 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kavery, S. Muruganantham, S. Prabhu, R. Renganathan, S. Y. Chin and M. M. R. Khan, Optik, 2020, 208, 164046 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Almenningen, H. E. Hansen, M. F. Vold, A. F. Buene, V. Venkatraman, S. Sunde, B. H. Hoff and O. R. Gautun, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 185, 108951 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hua, Z.-S. Huang, K. Cai, L. Wang, H. Tang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 302, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Yemene, V. Venkatraman, D. Moe Almenningen, H. B. Hoff and R. O. Gautun, Molecules, 2020, 25, 2349 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, J.-Y. Liao, Z. Chi, B. Xu, X. Zhang, D.-B. Kuang, Y. Zhang, S. Liu and J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7788–7797 RSC .
C. V. Kumar, D. Raptis, E. N. Koukaras, L. Sygellou and P. Lianos, Org. Electron., 2015, 25, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hua, L. T. Lin Lee, C. Zhang, J. Zhao, T. Chen, W.-Y. Wong, W.-K. Wong and X. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13848–13855 RSC .
Y. Hua, S. Chang, J. He, C. Zhang, J. Zhao, T. Chen, W.-Y. Wong, W.-K. Wong and X. Zhu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 6300–6308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Buene, E. E. Ose, A. G. Zakariassen, A. Hagfeldt and B. H. Hoff, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7581–7590 RSC .
M.-J. Kim, Y.-J. Yu, J.-H. Kim, Y.-S. Jung, K.-Y. Kay, S.-B. Ko, C.-R. Lee, I.-H. Jang, Y.-U. Kwon and N.-G. Park, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 95, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Buene, N. Boholm, A. Hagfeldt and B. H. Hoff, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 9403–9410 RSC .
C. Zhang, S. Wang and Y. Li, Sol. Energy, 2017, 157, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
U. Eiamprasert, J. Sudchanham, P. Surawatanawong, P. Pakawatpanurut and S. Kiatisevi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 352, 86–97 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagane, A. Ichake, I. Agrawal, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend, S. Ogale and P. P. Wadgaonkar, ChemPlusChem, 2017, 82, 280–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, C. Chen, J. Zhao, Q. Tan and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17452–17459 RSC .
C.-T. Li, F.-L. Wu, C.-J. Liang, K.-C. Ho and J. T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7586–7594 RSC .
M. Marszalek, S. Nagane, A. Ichake, R. Humphry-Baker, V. Paul, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 889–894 RSC .
X. Zhang, F. Gou, D. Zhao, J. Shi, H. Gao, Z. Zhu and H. Jing, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 484–491 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y.-Y. Lin, T.-M. Chuang, F.-L. Wu, P.-Y. Chen, T.-C. Chu, J.-S. Ni, M.-S. Fan, Y.-H. Lo, K.-C. Ho and J. T. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 105–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Iqbal, W.-Q. Wu, H. Zhang, P.-L. Hua, X. Fang, D.-B. Kuang, L. Wang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 99, 299–307 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J.-Y. Liao, Z. Chi, B. Xu, X. Zhang, D.-B. Kuang, Y. Zhang, S. Liu and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8994–9005 RSC .
Y. Hua, S. Chang, D. D. Huang, X. Zhou, X. J. Zhu, J. Z. Zhao, T. Chen, W. Y. Wong and W. K. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2146–2153 CrossRef CAS .
R. Su, L. Lyu, M. R. Elmorsy and A. El-Shafei, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 2797–2812 RSC .
Z.-S. Wu, X.-C. Song, Y.-D. Liu, J. Zhang, H.-S. Wang, Z.-J. Chen, S. Liu, Q. Weng, Z.-W. An and W.-J. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227776 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Huang, C. Cai, X.-F. Zang, Z. Iqbal, H. Zeng, D.-B. Kuang, L. Wang, H. Meier and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1333–1344 RSC .
M.-H. Tsao, T.-Y. Wu, H.-P. Wang, I. W. Sun, S.-G. Su, Y.-C. Lin and C.-W. Chang, Mater. Lett., 2010, 65, 583–586 CrossRef .
Y. J. Chang, P.-T. Chou, S.-Y. Lin, M. Watanabe, Z.-Q. Liu, J.-L. Lin, K.-Y. Chen, S.-S. Sun, C.-Y. Liu and T. J. Chow, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 572–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. Yang, M. Cheng, S. Li and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12936–12941 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marszalek, S. Nagane, A. Ichake, R. Humphry-Baker, V. Paul, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7921–7927 RSC .
Z. Iqbal, W.-Q. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Han, X. Fang, L. Wang, D.-B. Kuang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2662–2672 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duan, K. Fan, C. Zhong, W. Gao, X. Chen, T. Peng and J. Qin, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2014, 278, 39–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mao, X.-L. Zhang, X.-Q. Fang, G.-H. Wu, S.-Y. Dai, Q.-H. Song and X.-X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 965–976 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Ni, J.-H. You, W.-I. Hung, W.-S. Kao, H.-H. Chou and J. T. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22612–22621 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mao, X. Zhang, L. Cao, Y. Tong and G. Wu, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 117, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dessi, M. Calamante, A. Mordini, M. Peruzzini, A. Sinicropi, R. Basosi, F. Fabrizi de Biani, M. Taddei, D. Colonna, A. di Carlo, G. Reginato and L. Zani, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 32657–32668 RSC .
J.-S. Ni, W.-S. Kao, H.-J. Chou and J. T. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2932–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Wan, C. Jia and X. Yao, Synth. Met., 2016, 211, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
G. Koyyada, S. P. Singh, K. Bhanuprakash, L. Han, I. M. Bedja, R. K. Gupta, A. Islam and M. Chandrasekharam, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 458–468 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, X. Li, J. Lan, D. Wu, R. Wang and J. You, J. Org. Chem., 2018, 83, 8114–8126 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Z. Huang, T. Hua, C. Liao, H. Meier, H. Tang, L. Wang and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 165, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mao, X.-L. Zhang, X.-Q. Fang, G.-H. Wu, Y. Ding, X.-L. Liu, S.-Y. Dai and Q.-H. Song, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2079–2090 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Zang, Z.-S. Huang, H.-L. Wu, Z. Iqbal, L. Wang, H. Meier and D. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 455–464 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baheti, K. R. Justin Thomas, C.-T. Li, C.-P. Lee and K.-C. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2249–2262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Huang, H.-L. Feng, X.-F. Zang, Z. Iqbal, H. Zeng, D.-B. Kuang, L. Wang, H. Meier and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15365–15376 RSC .
J. He, H. Pei, H. Li, S. Zhang, S. Zhang, H. Tan and Z. Hu, Synth. Met., 2019, 247, 228–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Buene, A. Hagfeldt and B. H. Hoff, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 169, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, J. Shen, Y. Liu, T. Huang, Q. Zhang, J. Zhao and X. Zhao, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 149, 789–795 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Bodedla, K. R. J. Thomas, C.-T. Li and K.-C. Ho, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 53588–53601 RSC .
H.-H. Gao, X. Qian, W.-Y. Chang, S.-S. Wang, Y.-Z. Zhu and J.-Y. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, A. Midya, K. P. Loh, S. Adams, D. J. Blackwood, J. Wang, X. Zhang and Z. Chen, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 573–581 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bhim Raju, J. V. Vaghasiya, M. A. Afroz, S. S. Soni and P. K. Iyer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 28485–28491 RSC .
T. B. Raju, J. V. Vaghasiya, M. A. Afroz, S. S. Soni and P. K. Iyer, Org. Electron., 2016, 39, 371–379 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, X. Wang, L. Shao, H. Li, R. Yan and L. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, J. Zhao, C. Chen, Q. Tan, F. Zhang and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2322–2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Yang, H. D. Kim, J.-H. Ryu, K. K. Kim, S. S. Park, K.-S. Ahn and J. H. Kim, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 850–855 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Long, G. Wang, Y. Pei, B. Zhao and S. Tan, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 121, 118–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Jiao, Y. Ding, X. Fan, J. Song, B. Mi and Z. Gao, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 180, 108470 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, X. Sun, X. Li, H. Agren and Y. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21956–21965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Jia, Z.-J. Peng, Y.-C. Chen, C.-Y. Huang and M.-Y. Guan, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18702–18707 RSC .
A. F. Buene, M. Christensen and B. H. Hoff, Molecules, 2019, 24, 4485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liao, H. Zhang, J. Huang, G. Wu, X. Yin and Y. Hong, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 158, 240–248 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, D. Cao, H. Zhang, X. Yin, X. Liao, J. Huang, G. Wu, L. Li and Y. Hong, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1732–1741 CrossRef CAS .
M.-L. Han, Y.-Z. Zhu, S. Liu, Q.-L. Liu, D. Ye, B. Wang and J.-Y. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2018, 387, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Y. Lin, T. C. Chu, P. W. Chen, J. S. Ni, P. C. Shih, Y. C. Chen, K. C. Ho and J. T. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2221–2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-G. Chen, H.-L. Jia, X.-H. Ju and H.-G. Zheng, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 146, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Bae, K. D. Seo, W. S. Choi, J. Y. Hong and H. K. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 113, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
D. Muenmart, N. Prachumrak, R. Tarsang, S. Namungruk, S. Jungsuttiwong, T. Sudyoadsuk, P. Pattanasattayavong and V. Promarak, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38481–38493 RSC .
Z. Iqbal, W.-Q. Wu, Z.-S. Huang, L. Wang, D.-B. Kuang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 124, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Zhao, L. Wang, J. Tian and L. Sun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24377–24383 RSC .
X. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Li, H. Agren, W. Zhu, H. Tian and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15609–15612 RSC .
L. May, S. Daniel and T. J. J. Mueller, Org. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 329–339 RSC .
G. Zhou, N. Pschirer, J. C. Schöneboom, F. Eickemeyer, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1808–1815 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wan, C. Jia, L. Zhou, W. Huo, X. Yao and Y. Shi, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 95, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Capodilupo, E. Fabiano, L. De Marco, G. Ciccarella, G. Gigli, C. Martinelli and A. Cardone, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 3235–3245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Chiykowski, B. Lam, C. Du and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2367–2370 RSC .
V. A. Chiykowski, B. Lam, C. Du and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2547–2550 RSC .
A. Saini, K. R. J. Thomas, C.-T. Li and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 12392–12404 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Liao, X. Zang, H. Zhang, X. Yin, C. Yu, C. Ke and Y. Hong, Sol. Energy, 2020, 212, 220–230 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Li, Y.-L. Kuo, C. H. P. Kumar, P.-T. Huang and J. T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23225–23233 RSC .
H. S. Yang, Y. S. Yang, Y. S. Han, Y. C. Choi, D. K. Lee, K.-S. Ahn and J. H. Kim, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2011, 538, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jo, J. E. Nam, D.-H. Kim, H. Kim and J.-K. Kang, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 102, 285–292 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Bodedla, K. R. J. Thomas, M.-S. Fan and K.-C. Ho, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2564–2577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Nguyen, L. Q. Bao, S. Thogiti, R. Cheruku, K.-S. Ahn and J. H. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2017, 17, 3181–3187 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jo, J. E. Nam, H. Heo, D. H. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. K. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 995–1002 CrossRef CAS .
G.-W. Huang, C.-T. Li, Y.-C. Chen, R.-J. Jeng and S. A. Dai, Polymer, 2019, 179, 121673 CrossRef CAS .
X.-X. Dai, H.-L. Feng, Z.-S. Huang, M.-J. Wang, L. Wang, D.-B. Kuang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 114, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
W.-I. Hung, Y.-Y. Liao, T.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Ting, J.-S. Ni, W.-S. Kao, J. T. Lin, T.-C. Wei and Y.-S. Yen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2152–2155 RSC .
M. G. Murali, X. Wang, Q. Wang and S. Valiyaveettil, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 134, 375–381 CrossRef CAS .
W.-I. Hung, Y.-Y. Liao, C.-Y. Hsu, H.-H. Chou, T.-H. Lee, W.-S. Kao and J. T. Lin, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 357–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, J.-Y. Liao, J. Fu, D.-B. Kuang, H. Meier, C.-Y. Su and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 94, 481–489 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Zang, T.-L. Zhang, Z.-S. Huang, Z. Iqbal, D.-B. Kuang, L. Wang, H. Meier and D. Cao, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 104, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, S. B. Yuk, J. Choi, H. J. Kim, H. W. Kim, S. H. Kim, B. Kim, M. J. Ko and J. P. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 102, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Karlsson, X. Jiang, S. K. Eriksson, E. Gabrielsson, H. Rensmo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6415–6424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, I. Bora, X. Jiang, E. Gabrielsson, K. M. Karlsson, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12462–12472 RSC .
Y.-P. Hong, J.-Y. Liao, D.-R. Cao, X.-F. Zang, D.-B. Kuang, L.-Y. Wang, H. Meier and C.-Y. Su, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 8015–8021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shan, J. Tang, H. Lai, H. Tan, X. Liu, F. Yang and Q. Fang, Chin. J. Chem., 2012, 30, 1497–1503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Yang, J. Zhao and L. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15734–15743 RSC .
H. Tan, C. Pan, G. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zou, G. Yu and M. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2795–2801 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ramkumar and S. Anandan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21535–21543 RSC .
H. Tan, C. Pan, G. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, G. Yu and M. Zhang, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 101, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, J. Choi, J. W. Namgoong, S. H. Kim, K. C. Sun, S. H. Jeong, K. Yoo, M. J. Ko and J. P. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 104, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, Z. Iqbal, X. Yin and D. Cao, Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 6296–6302 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mao, Q.-S. Li, X.-L. Zhang, G.-H. Wu, C.-G. Dai, Y. Ding, S.-Y. Dai and Q.-H. Song, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 141, 148–160 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bae, S. J. Lim, J. Choi, S. B. Yuk, J. W. Namgoong, J. H. Ko, W. Lee and J. P. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 162, 905–915 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Li, X. Tian, D. Li, X. Lu, B. Xu, Y. Wu and K. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1974–1981 RSC .
Y. Wu and W. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2039–2058 RSC .
Y. Wu, W.-H. Zhu, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9307–9318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Saga, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 96–102 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan and G. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2136–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chiba, A. Islam, Y. Watanabe, R. Komiya, N. Koide and L. Han, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L638–L640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Pure Appl. Chem., 1986, 58, 955–966 CAS .
V. Venkatraman, A. E. Yemene and J. de Mello, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 16983 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang and J. M. Cole, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19541–19559 RSC .
S. C. Pradhan, A. Hagfeldt and S. Soman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22204–22214 RSC .
Y. Saygili, M. Söderberg, N. Pellet, F. Giordano, Y. Cao, A. B. Muñoz-García, S. M. Zakeeruddin, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Pavone, G. Boschloo, L. Kavan, J.-E. Moser, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. Freitag, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15087–15096 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Feldt, G. Wang, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21500–21507 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Xu, F. Giordano, M. Schreier, N. Pellet, Y. Hu, C. Yi, N. Robertson, J. Hua, S. M. Zakeeruddin, H. Tian and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10742–10745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, N. Flores-Díaz, D. Zhang, Y. Cao, J.-D. Decoppet, G. C. Fish, J.-E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004804 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Y. Wu, S. Wang, W. Li, X. Li, J. Chen, Z.-S. Wang and H. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 756–763 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, M. Marszalek, S. M. Zakeeruddin, Q. Zhang, H. Tian, M. Grätzel and W. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8261–8272 RSC .
E. Gabrielsson, H. Ellis, S. Feldt, H. Tian, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1647–1656 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. David Ndaleh, D. Nugegoda, J. Watson, H. Cheema and J. H. Delcamp, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 187, 109074 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Gao, X. Qian, W.-Y. Chang, S.-S. Wang, Y.-Z. Zhu and J.-Y. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Buene, E. E. Ose, A. G. Zakariassen, A. Hagfeldt and B. H. Hoff, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7581–7590 RSC .
F. Bureš, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 58826–58851 RSC .
C. Párkányi, C. Boniface, J. J. Aaron and M. Maafi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1993, 49, 1715–1725 CrossRef .
K.-j. Wu, K. Shen, Y. Yu and D.-L. Wang, Chin. J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 25, 733–738 CrossRef .
S. Rühle, M. Greenshtein, S. G. Chen, A. Merson, H. Pizem, C. S. Sukenik, D. Cahen and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18907–18913 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, D. Zhou and P. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1401–1406 RSC .
A. F. Buene, D. M. Almenningen, A. Hagfeldt, O. R. Gautun and B. H. Hoff, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900569 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Slater, J. Chem. Phys., 1964, 41, 3199–3204 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Cullinane and W. T. Rees, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1940, 35, 507–514 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc03207kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Audun Formo Buene
	Dr Audun Formo Buene obtained his PhD on dye-sensitized solar cells from the Department of Chemistry at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in 2019, including a research stay at EPFL in 2018 under the supervision of Professor Anders Hagfeldt. His research interests cover synthesis and characterization of phenothiazine dyes, aggregation suppression in triarylamine dyes, device fabrication and characterization, and the development of fluorine-free glide waxes for cross-country skis.

David Moe Almenningen
	David Moe Almenningen is a PhD candidate at the Department of Chemistry at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology working on the synthesis and characterization of phenothiazine, triarylamine dyes, and design and development of novel dye chromophores for dye-sensitized solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  Structure and numbering of 10H-phenothiazine and 10H-phenoxazine.	 

 	Fig. 2  The number of publications per year containing the concepts dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and perovskite solar cells (PCS). The insert shows the number of papers and patents per year since 2007 containing the concepts of phenothiazine and dye-sensitized solar cells (numbers gathered using SciFinder).	 

 	Fig. 3  The first phenothiazine dye, T2-1 (5.50%), and the two influential dyes with high reported PCE values, EO3 (9.98%) and Dye 2 (12.1%).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the working principles of a DSSC.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  The five main geometries investigated in this review paper. Three more geometries are also included, namely multianchored, tethered and other phenothiazine dyes containing a wider array of geometries. Only dyes employing the cyanoacrylic anchor group are covered.	 

 	Fig. 6  Integration of the AM 1.5G solar spectrum with a total intensity of 100 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 7  Phenothiazine dyes PCE values per year with standard error bars. Red data represent all reports, blue data represent the annual top 1/3 of reports and yellow the highest report per year, sorted by PCE.	 



D–A	36	443	17 277	432	608	1.02	2.36	9.65	707	0.69	4.74	621
D–D–A	77	465	25 433	455	612	0.88	2.27	11.92	722	0.66	5.70	652
D–π–A	68	474	32953	473	600	0.86	2.24	10.34	670	0.68	4.73	671
D–D–π–A	93	463	22050	449	615	0.89	2.23	10.62	716	0.69	5.28	671
10H-PTZ	14	417	30483	454	573	0.95	2.59	7.18	669	0.67	3.27	580
Multi	47	469	37723	457	601	0.96	2.23	13.02	693	0.67	6.13	679
Tether	29	451	55863	441	579	0.92	2.20	11.24	669	0.67	5.01	670
Other	26	514	32412	435	648	1.05	2.10	13.13	711	0.69	6.51	688
Overall	390	465	29646	453	609	0.92	2.25	11.12	700	0.68	5.30	662

 	Fig. 8  Distributions of photovoltaic parameters for the 13 reports of dye 4. Includes one reference which is later excluded.	 

 	Fig. 9  Violin plots of (a) ICT transition peak wavelength in solution and on TiO2 films, (b) the short-circuit current density distributions, (c) open-circuit voltage distributions and (d) the power conversion efficiency distributions of the various geometries (◊ indicates the median value and • gives the average value).	 

 	Fig. 10  Efficiency chart for the phenothiazine dye geometries and phenoxazine dyes investigated in this work.	 

 	Fig. 11  Top and bottom 10% performing auxiliary donors for the D–D–A dye geometry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Violin plots of the cases where direct comparisons of dyes with and without π-spacers are possible. Boxplots are overlaid with averages of 726 mV and 684 mV, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Density plot of power conversion efficiency vs. N-substituent. (b) Power conversion efficiency vs. alkyl chain length.	 

 	Fig. 14  Density plots for the entire dataset of phenothiazine dyes for (a) PCE vs. molecular weight, (b) molecular weight vs. wavelength of maximum absorption, (c) PCE vs. wavelength of maximum absorption. The dashed orange lines in (a) and (c) are added by the authors to highlight the interpreted limitations.	 



PTZa	465	26990	455	609	0.90	2.25	11.11	703	0.68	5.32	659
POX	486	25895	467	607	0.91	2.21	11.62	711	0.68	5.67	676

 	Fig. 15  The 15 phenothiazine dyes with the highest reported PCE values passing the data credibility assessment.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc03207k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
