Misconceptions in electronic energy transfer: bridging the gap between chemistry and physics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00002F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00002F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5234-5265Misconceptions in electronic energy transfer: bridging the gap between chemistry and physics

        
          
            Peter A. 
            Tanner
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Changkui 
            Duan
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Ka-Leung 
            Wong
          
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Hong Kong Baptist University, Waterloo Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong S.A.R., P. R. China. E-mail: peter.a.tanner@gmail.com
bMOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China
cDepartment of Physics, School of Physical Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China
Received 
      5th April 2018
    First published on 25th June 2018AbstractMany treatments of energy transfer (ET) phenomena in current literature employ incorrect arguments and formulae and are not quantitative enough. This is unfortunate because we witness important breakthroughs from ET experiments in nanoscience. This review aims to clarify basic principles by focusing upon Förster–Dexter electric dipole–electric dipole (ED–ED) ET. The roles of ET in upconversion, downconversion and the antenna effect are described and the clichés and simple formulae to be avoided in ET studies are highlighted with alternative treatments provided.
Peter A. Tanner
After two short spells in the chemical industry, Prof. Peter Tanner completed the Cert. Ed. Degree at the University of Birmingham. He has taught in secondary, further and higher education. He studied the PhD degree in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Colin Flint at London University (1980) and was awarded the DSc degree in 1996 by University of Surrey (where he previously studied the MSc in Spectroscopy course). He retired from City University of Hong Kong in 2011 after 22 years thereat and subsequently taught at The Education University of Hong Kong, Sun Yat-sen University, South China University of Technology and the University of Kyoto before joining the Chemistry Department of Hong Kong Baptist University in 2017 as a Visiting Professor. His research focuses upon environmental and analytical chemistry in addition to solid-state spectroscopy and energy transfer.
Lei Zhou
Lei Zhou was born in Ningxia, China. He earned his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from Sun Yat-sen University in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Hongbin Liang. Subsequently he worked as a postdoctoral researcher for two years in the field of materials chemistry together with Prof. Mingmei Wu at Sun Yat-sen University. In September 2018 he will join Prof. Xiaogang Liu at the National University of Singapore as a postdoctoral researcher. His research interests focus on the development of novel lanthanide-doped luminescent materials and energy transfer studies, for applications in new fields such as electronic paper, 3D printing artwork and 3D display. He has published 16 papers in international refereed journals.
Ka-Leung Wong
The research of Prof. Ka-Leung Wong (Gary) mainly focuses on lanthanide chemistry for spectroscopic studies, molecular imaging and cancer therapy. He completed the PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Wong at the University of Hong Kong in 2006 and was awarded a Royal Society post-doctoral fellowship with Professor Parker at Durham University in 2008. He joined the Department of Chemistry at Hong Kong Baptist University as a faculty member and was promoted to Professor in 2017 and Head of Department in February 2018. Prof. Wong has published more than 100 articles in peer reviewed journals. He serves as the main editor of Journal of Luminescence (Elsevier) and is a member of the international advisory board of ChemPlusChem (Wiley). He was also awarded an international prize, the 2015 European Rare Earth and Actinide Society (ERES) Junior Award. He is a co-founder of the spin-off company “New Life Medicine Technology Limited”.
Introduction and scope
Energy transfer (ET) should not be confused with electronic relaxation, where electronic energy is transformed into heat by nonradiative decay via vibrational channels of an excited state – such as in intersystem crossing or internal conversion. It consists of the nonradiative transfer of energy from an excited donor species D* to an acceptor A, which then becomes excited A* whilst D is not: i.e., D* + A → D + A* via a certain interaction mechanism. The scope of ET is very wide – encompassing luminescence sensitization and quenching, ranging from donor and acceptor species in phosphors, nanoparticles and quantum dots1 to proteins and biomolecules.2,3 Some examples are displayed with explanations in Fig. 1. The study of these phenomena has been pursued by different approaches and apparently different formalisms by coordination chemists, inorganic chemistry/materials scientists and physicists. The former researchers have often employed FRET Förster (or Fluorescence) Resonance Energy Transfer analysis based upon the intensities of spectral bands in order to locate the donor–acceptor distance; the latter have analyzed the decay kinetics of donor emission in order to elucidate the transfer mechanism. Moreover, chemists associate Förster theory with electric dipole–electric dipole (ED–ED) ET and Dexter theory with electron exchange. However, the two formalisms of Förster and Dexter for are in fact equivalent in the context of ED–ED ET, except for the differences explained here. Dexter expanded the D*–A interaction mechanism to other types, subsequently mentioned. The description of ‘resonance’ is actually a misnomer because the ET requires a spectral overlap of donor emission and acceptor absorption and this may involve the participation of vibrational modes.8
 Fig. 1  (a) Multiplexing of emission in three dimensions. The combination of x emission wavelengths (e.g., from different quantum dot sizes) with y emission decay times (e.g., from different Tb3+ donor to quantum dot acceptor distances) and z emission intensities (e.g., from microbeads doped with different concentrations of Tb3+–quantum dot hybrid nanoparticles) can offer zxy different distinct signals for multiplexed sensing or optical barcoding. This example of 5 colours, 3 decay times and 3 intensities leads to 14348907 different codes.2 (Reprinted with permission from N. Hildebrandt, K. D. Wagner and W. R. Algar, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 125. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V. Netherlands.) (b) (i) Design of a multilayered KSc2F7 nanorod comprising different Yb–X (X = Ho, Er, Tm) pairs separately incorporated in layers and thickness-tuneable pure KSc2F7 interlayers to manipulate cross-relaxation ET (as shown above) in one single nanorod. (ii) Shows the integrated luminescence intensity of KSc2F7 doped with Yb, Tm, Er, Ho (labelled Tm/Er/Ho) compared with the two nanorods illustrated in the figure. The effect of the KSc2F7 interlayer manipulates cross-relaxation ET (adapted from ref. 4). (c) Structures of (i) dimeric [Eu2(dpm)6] and (ii) monomeric [Eu(dpm)2(NO3)(tppo)2] complexes (dpm dipivaloylmethanate; tppo triphenylphosphine oxide). (iii) Qualitative energy level diagram of the intramolecular ET mechanism for these complexes. The ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) state is correlated with the chelating [in (i)] and chelate-bridging [in (ii)] coordination modes of the dpm ligand and the monomeric complex exhibits higher luminescence intensity because the state is at higher energy and has a reduced quenching effect.5 (Reproduced from Y. C. Miranda, L. L. A. L. Pereira, J. H. P. Barbosa, H. F. Brito, M. C. F. C. Felinto, O. L. Malta, W. M. Faustino and E. E. S. Teotonio, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 2015, 3019 with permission, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (d) Cell-permeable ytterbium complex showing reversible binding with Hg2+ by a carbodithiote claw in aqueous solution and in vitro by off–on rhodamine visible and Yb3+ NIR emission by ET from 4-(phenylethynyl)pyridine antenna. The trapping of Hg2+ produces a ring opening of the rhodamine-B unit and triggers emission.6 (Reproduced with permission from G. Bao, S. Zha, Z. Liu, C.-F. Chan, H. Li, P.-H. Chu, D. Jin, P. A. Tanner and K.-L. Wong, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 120, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (e) (i) Principle of X-ray activated scandium nanoparticles (ScNPs) acting as an X-ray transducer for photodynamic therapy (PDT) by 1O2 production. (ii) PDT mechanism. The ET from ScNPs to photosensitizer leads to singlet state excitation and then intersystem crossing to the long-lived triplet state which transfers energy to nearby oxygen molecules and generates 1O2 in most cases by pathway type II which can damage surrounding cells.7 (Reproduced from A. Kamkaew, F. Chen, Y. Zhan, R. L. Majewski and W. Cai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3918 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) 
The presence of ET between a donor and an acceptor manifests itself in a change of the emission decay and intensity of the donor which is characteristic of the type of ET (Fig. 2a). Also, the donor absorption bands appear in the excitation spectrum of the acceptor emission in most cases, Fig. 2b and c (except for example in the ET from the triplet state to a rare earth ion, see later). Such qualitative ET phenomena are widely disseminated in the literature. However, as Dutra et al.10 have pointed out that in 2015 less than 3% of published studies concerning lanthanide ions make use of theoretical tools. It is therefore necessary to review the available tools and point out simple, incorrect approaches that should not be employed. The major focus herein concerns rare earth ions and ED–ED transfer.
 Fig. 2  Changes in lifetime and emission spectrum of Ce3+ in the presence of Tb3+ due to ET. (a) The decay curve of Ce3+ emission for Ba0.94Ce0.025Tb0.005Na0.030CaBO3F (λex = 357 nm, λem = 400 nm) at 295 K fitted by a monoexponential function. The inset shows the shortening of the Ce3+ lifetime with increasing Tb3+ concentration: plotting of Ce3+ decay times, τD, against Tb3+ concentration ratio, x, for Ba0.95−2xCe0.025TbxNa0.025+xCaBO3F. (b) Energy level diagram showing a schematic of the Ce3+ → Tb3+ ET process. HS high spin, LS low spin. (c) The Ce3+ emission intensity decreases in the presence of Tb3+ and excitation into a Ce3+ absorption band also gives Tb3+ emission: (i) using 344 nm excitation, broad Ce3+ emission (shaded green) and Tb3+ emission (shaded blue) are observed; (ii), (iii) the excitation spectrum of Tb3+ emission at 544 nm exhibits Ce3+ absorption bands (shaded green) in addition to the host lattice absorption, using a conventional spectrometer (ii) and a synchrotron (iii) to probe the vacuum ultraviolet region. (Adapted from ref. 9.) 
Some early models were applied to explain luminescence quenching. The Perrin model (Appendix A, eqn (A1)) predicts that the donor lifetime is independent of the quencher concentration and that the quenching effect has a sharp sphere boundary. It does not occur outside this boundary. The Stern–Volmer model for intermolecular dynamic quenching (Appendix A, eqn (A3)) assumes that the donor–acceptor interaction is a constant, independent of donor–acceptor distance.
The strongest radiative transitions of lanthanide ions are ED allowed ones, such as 4f–5d. The word fluorescence is reserved for spin-allowed transitions (for example S0 → S1 in an organic molecule) and is not applicable for lanthanide ion transitions where spin is not a good quantum number and well-cited transitions such as Tb3+ 5D4 → 7F5 and Eu3+ 5D0 → 7F2 are not spin-allowed. The 4f orbital shown in Fig. 3 (4f0) has opposite phase above and below the nuclear node whereas the d orbital (5d1) has the same phase due to its centre of symmetry. Hence the 4f → 5d transition in an ion involves a redistribution of electronic charge giving a change in dipole moment. By contrast, the 4f1 → 4f−1 orbital transition involves a non-spherically-symmetric change in the electric quadrupole (EQ) moment, giving a difference in the shape of the electronic charge distribution without a change in electric dipole moment, and represents an EQ transition. A quadrupole moment relates to two dipoles aligned so that there is no net dipole moment. Selection rules involving the electron quantum numbers S (spin), L (orbital angular momentum) and J (total angular momentum) of lanthanide ions determine the type of transitions which are allowed.11 When the lanthanide ion is situated at a low symmetry site (for example, without a centre of symmetry) the d and f orbital wavefunctions can mix to a certain extent. The 4f–4f transition therefore acquires some 4f–5d character and becomes more intense as a “forced ED” transition. Some of these transitions vary enormously in intensity when the symmetry of the ion in a crystal (site symmetry) changes: for example, Eu3+ 5D0 → 7F2; Nd3+ 4I9/2 → 4G5/2, 2G7/2; Tb3+ 5D4 → 7F6 and Sm3+ 4G5/2 → 6H9/2, and are termed hypersensitive.
 Fig. 3  Simple illustration of ED (f → d) and EQ (f → f) transitions. The colours represent the phases (+ or −) of wavefunctions which are important for bonding properties. 
This review aims to provide an overview of ET theories and also to examine, analyze and reconcile the two different approaches employed by coordination chemists, inorganic/materials scientists and physicists. Moreover, some misconceptions have been perpetuated in the current literature through the use of simple equations and approximations. It is important to show why these approximations are incorrect so that more meaningful and accurate treatments of ET processes can be performed in future. We therefore focus upon the clarification of these misconceptions. In addition, we mention, but do not elucidate for reasons of space, some recent highlights in ET studies that the reader can refer to and be inspired.
Many reviews12–16 and books17–19 have described various aspects of ET. We largely restrict this review to multipolar ET between a donor (D) and an acceptor (A), with major focus upon ED–ED ET (Fig. 4a). The following topics are not included herein except for a brief mention in some cases: nonresonant ET requiring the assistance of phonons20–25 or localized excitations;26 ET by the Dexter exchange spin–spin mechanism,27 which involves Coulomb repulsion between overlapping donor and acceptor charge clouds and is not important for separations about >4 Å;28 ET by electron transfer;29,30 many-body ET31,32 and instrumentation.33
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic ED–ED resonant transfer between donor (Ce3+) and acceptor (Eu2+). The horizontal bars show linked processes. Notice that the donor and acceptor transitions are resonant in energy and that they are both ED allowed. The donor lifetime is monoexponential with lifetime τD: I(t) = I(0)exp[−(1/τD) − WET]t; (b) transfer from one donor to several acceptors at different distances: the donor decay is no longer characterized by a monoexponential lifetime: .18 Migration between donor ions leading to ET to acceptors (c) and to defect/trap sites (d). (Adapted from ref. 34 with permission, copyright University of Utrecht, 2015.) 
The structure of this review is as follows. First, the similarities and differences in treatment of ED–ED ET processes by Förster and Dexter are highlighted. The extension of transfer to multiple acceptors (Fig. 4b) and with migration between donor ions leading to transfer to acceptors (Fig. 4c) (or traps (Fig. 4d)) is then discussed. Selection rules for ET and the role of an organic antenna ligand in ET processes are then considered. The second part of the review focuses upon some misconceptions prevailing in current literature.
Donor lifetime
Optical excitation (in ∼10−15 s) of a molecule or ion (a donor) into an excited vibrational-electronic state results in relaxation (in ∼10−12 s) to lower vibrational levels until thermal equilibrium is established. The excited donor then becomes deactivated by radiative and/or nonradiative processes. The decay of optical emission from a donor diluted alone into a transparent solid in the absence of an acceptor is usually monoexponential with lifetime τD. There are slight variations in lifetime when scanning across an absorption line, due to microscopic strain broadening and the different distributions of ion concentrations surrounding the activator ion.35 The decay of Ce3+ in the charge-compensated Sr5(PO4)3Cl host is shown in Fig. 5a, together with the emission and excitation spectra. The fitting of the lifetime τD can be performed by exponential or linear fitting (Fig. 5b and c) with slightly different results (by 1.8% in the figure). However, the optimum fit should utilize the least number of parameters, as in Fig. 5c. Generally, the decay of luminescence from a chromophore may not be monoexponential due to the involvement of other processes so that other fitting equations are required.
 Fig. 5  (a) Ce3+ emission decay, showing excitation and emission spectra of Sr4.998Ce0.001Na0.001(PO4)3Cl (adapted from ref. 36). Fitting of Ce3+ emission intensity decay on a (b) linear ordinate (I = I0 + Aexp(−t/τD): τD = 24.31 ± 0.04 ns; Radj2 = 0.99906) and (c) logarithmic ordinate (ln(I) = lnA − t/τD: τD = 24.75 ± 0.07 ns; Radj2 = 0.98387) scale. It is advisable to use fewer parameters as in (c). Alternatively, I0 in (b) can be removed by baseline subtraction prior to fitting. (d) Emission decay of LaPO4 nanoparticles doped with 5% and 90% Tb3+ followed for five lifetimes. The emission decay deviates from monoexponential (τD = 2.71 ms, Radj2 = 0.9989) for isolated Tb3+ ions and migration between Tb3+ to traps occurs more at the higher dopant ion concentration and leads to a shorter lifetime (τD = 1.19 ms, Radj2 = 0.9916). (We thank Luo Yuxia for providing this data.) 
For emission from the same excited state (e.g.5D0 Eu3+) the lifetimes measured for transitions to different terminal electronic states (e.g.7F2 and 7F6) are the same when taking into account the change of refractive index with wavelength. However, in the case of vibrational progressions in emission, such as for the uranyl ion or from a triplet state, the spectral lines of the longer wavelength transitions are broadened because the lifetimes of the terminal vibrational states are shorter.
The donor lifetime is changed when the refractive index of the surrounding medium changes, according to an appropriate model, often approximated by the virtual cavity or the real cavity models (see, for example, ref. 37). The donor lifetime will become shorter and often non-monoexponential when the donor concentration is increased due to the effect of migration of excitation between donor ions (vide infra: Fig. 5d).
The radiative lifetime of a lanthanide ion is the reciprocal of the spontaneous emission transition probability (Einstein coefficient A (s−1)). It is also called the intrinsic or natural lifetime, although these terms may be confusing.38 It represents the scenario where nonradiative processes do not occur. The radiative lifetime of a lanthanide ion is different when it is situated in different materials because the intensity and structure of the emission spectrum differs since the environment of the lanthanide ion (partly depending also upon the refractive index of the medium in which the ion is situated) differs. It may be estimated experimentally for a particular host by extrapolation to zero concentration of the lifetime of the ion diluted in the transparent host at low temperature, or theoretically by calculation of the sum of electric dipole, magnetic dipole and vibronic transition probabilities. The radiative decay rate of Eu3+ has been partitioned into contributions from coordinated ligands.39
Förster–Dexter theory
Models of ET in numerous publications are based upon various assumptions and it is important to recognize their scope of application.
(1) Förster–Dexter theory27,40 applies to the weak interaction leading to ED nonradiative transitions providing the ET between two point dipoles: one of these representing the excited donor D* and the other one being the unexcited acceptor (A) or metastable excited state for the case of ET upconversion. The mechanism is the overlap between the near-zone electric dipole fields of D* and A.
(2) Förster envisaged one D* and one A separated by a distance much smaller than the radiation wavelength (i.e., at distance R in the range of ∼10–100 Å: near-field conditions). Dexter's model employed the direct ET for an atomic fraction xD of donor ions randomly arranged on crystal lattice sites together with the corresponding fraction xA of acceptor ions, at weak concentrations.
(3) In both Förster and Dexter Theories, the migration of excitation from one donor to another (from D* to D) and the participation of more than two ion pairwise transfers is not considered. The weak interaction leaves the individual spectra unchanged and it applies at distances much larger than the chromophore D (or A) radius.41
(4) Förster–Dexter theory can be applied to spectral bands that do not have a Lorentz shape.42 It implies the absence of vibronic coupling between the interacting donor and acceptor.
Förster theory has been employed by Chemists with the key use in the determination of donor–acceptor distances – the spectroscopic ruler43,44 – in biological systems, and this has been extended to the spatial extensions and geometrical characteristics of complex organic species and single molecules,45–50Fig. 6. By contrast, physicists and materials chemists employ the treatment given later by Dexter27 with the focus upon the ED–ED ET rate and mechanism between D* and A. Hence the subjects (distance or rate) of the equations given in the literature differ: in MKS or cgs units; as well as the use of energy, frequency, circular frequency, wavelength or energy; and in the presentation of the ”spectral overlap integral”. However, all of the equations (e.g., ref. 12, 17, 18, 27, 51 and 52) are consistent except for these exceptions.
 Fig. 6  (a) A single molecule FRET event starts when a molecule labeled by a donor (green)–acceptor (red) pair diffuses into a volume of large laser intensity near the focal point. The counts for detected photon emissions from the acceptor and donor are recorded until the molecule diffuses out of the focal volume (top right). During the donor excitation either a photon is emitted or energy is nonradiatively transferred to the acceptor and emitted with rates dependent upon the molecular conformation (lower right). (b) The FRET process is shown for donor–acceptor dyes Cy3 and Cy5.50 (Reproduced from with permission from B. Wallace and P. J. Atzberger, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0177122(1–22). Copyright 2017 Wallace, Atzberger.) 
(A) Förster did not consider the effect of the medium in which the particles are immersed.53–55
(B) In relation to a glass structure, Dexter envisaged a random orientation of donor and acceptor ions. By contrast, Förster took into account the orientations of the transition dipole moments of the molecules. In both cases, the final result can be applied to direct ET from one donor to a neighbouring acceptor.
(C) The donor lifetime is expressed differently: Förster theory uses τD whereas Dexter uses τDr.  Box 1. Comparison of calculation of R0 by Förster and Dexter equations. The figures a–l are referred to in the calculations below.We take as an example, the nonradiative ET from the 4-(phenylethynyl)pyridine moiety (4P) to a rhodamine B unit (Rh).6Förster method(i) Baseline correct the emission spectrum of the 4P donor: wavelength col(A), counts col(B).(ii) Measure the emission area by integration: 2.7479017 × 107 (fig. a).(iii) Divide the counts column (B) by this number, giving col(C), so that the area becomes 1.0000 in fig. b.(iv) Display the baseline corrected absorption spectrum of the Rh acceptor: wavelength col(D), molar absorptivity col(E) in Fig. c. col(D) wavelengths must match those of col(A) exactly along each row.(v) Multiply col(E) by col(C) and [col(A)]4 to give col(G): i.e., col(G) = col(E) × col(C) × [col(A)]4 × dλ, where dλ is the wavelength separation between the individual column values – in this case 1 nm. Sum up the values in col(G) (for example using Descriptive Statistics on Columns in Origin software) to give 6.9929 × 1013 M−1 cm−1 (nm)4: this value is the spectral overlap integral, . In fact, we have used summation, not integration because the graphs of emission and absorption are plotted on two different sets of ordinates. Notice that the plot of the spectral overlap integral does not look like that given in most of the literature. Here, col(G) has been plotted against wavelength (we can use col(A) or col(D) as the wavelength abscissa – they are the same) to get Fig. d.If, instead of multiplying each row value by λ4, we have taken λ4 outside the integral as a constant, average value (say, 520 nm) then the plot of col(E) × col(C) × dλ = col(F) looks smaller at longer wavelengths, Fig. e, but gives the spectral overlap value of Jλ = 6.7437 × 1013 M−1 cm−1 (nm)4, which differs from the above value by 3.6%.(vi) Using the value of Jλ = 6.9929 × 1013 M−1 cm−1 (nm)4, insertion into the formula:R0 = 0.02108[ϕDκ2n−4Jλ]1/6with κ2 = 2/3; n = 1.5; ϕD ∼ 1, gives R0 = 3.05 nm = 30.5 Å.Dexter method(i) Change the baseline-corrected emission spectrum into an ordinate scale of energy. I(E) = I(λ)λ2: col(Y) = col(B) × λ2. Change the abscissa into eV: col(X) = 1239.84/col(A). Plot Fig. f: the baseline is shown.(ii) Normalize the area by dividing col(Y) by 3.334 × 1010. col(Z) = col(Y)/3.334 × 1010. Plot col(Z) vs. col(X) as Fig. g.(iii) For the baseline corrected absorption spectrum, convert the ordinate to σ (col(N)) and the abscissa to eV (col(M)). σ = (ln10 × 1000/L) × ε; L = Avogadro number and σ is in cm2, Fig. h. ; so QA = 2.943 × 10−17 cm2 eV−1.(iv) Normalize the plot of σ and energy: col(P) = col(N)/2.943 × 10−17. Plot col(P) and col(M) in Fig. i.(v) Using the summation , as in the Förster Method, with matching energy, col(M), in each row of col(Z) and col(P):col(Q) = col(Z)[i] × col(P)[i] × −(col(M)[i + 1] − col(M)[i])/{col(M)[i]}4 = 0.00255, where the square brackets represent the rows, col(Q) is plotted vs. col(M) in Fig. j.  Taking κ2 = 2/3; n = 1.5; and  for comparison with Förster method.  R0 = 28.5 Å(vi) Using the Blasse approach,56 overlap the normalized emission (col(Z)) and absorption (col(P)) spectra on the energy scale col(M) (Fig. k) and measure overlap area in Fig. l. This overlap area, . Take an average value of E ∼ 2.519 eV.    R0 = 27.8 ÅThe results from the Förster and Dexter methods are similar: 28.5 Å and 30.5 Å, differing by 7% due to baseline errors. Taking the wavelength or energy as a constant and removing it from the integral gives a slightly lower answer in each case.
The inclusion of the effect of the surrounding medium and of the donor–acceptor orientation gives a combined Förster–Dexter equation for the ED–ED ET rate, WET (unit s−1) between an excited donor (D*) and an unexcited acceptor (A) to give D + A*:17,27,46 (1)The dependence of WET upon both the donor–acceptor separation, R, and the angular factor κ (see below) introduces a complication and the neglect of the local electric field correction leads to inaccuracy. The factor 9000 instead of 9, prevalent in the literature,18,52 applies to the Avogadro constant expressed in the unit mmol−1.17 The factor E−4 is often taken outside the integral and approximated as a constant,56 with E equal to the energy of maximum overlap of the donor emission and acceptor absorption. In the following (as in eqn (9)) we will take n−4 outside the integral, ignoring its dispersion and treating it as a constant. The term in parentheses is a correction since the electric field experienced by the chromophore () differs from the average electric field in the dielectric medium (, where  is the electric field amplitude of the radiation and ε is the optical dielectric constant of the medium. This relation comes from normalization of  and  in a given volume to one photon). The integral describes the spectral overlap between the donor emission and acceptor absorption, with both of these normalized to unity in eqn (1) (refer to Box 1 and Appendix B).
In Dexter's original paper27 and in subsequent literature, κ2 = 2/3, representing an orientation average. In eqn (1), the angular dependence of ET has been taken into account by explicitly including κ2. The kappa factor (Fig. 7) measures the donor–acceptor orientation with respect to one another, and with respect to their mutual displacement unit vector R:12,18 κ = (μD·μA) − 3(R·μD)(R·μA)(2)For the donor and acceptor, μ denotes a unit vector in the direction of the ED transition moment. The value of κ2 lies between 0 and 4 and it is a function of three independent angles, θT, θD, and θA: κ = cosθT − 3cosθDcosθA. Co-linear transition dipole moments (κ2 = 4) give maximum ET; parallel arrangements have κ2 = 1, and ET is not possible when the donor–acceptor dipoles are mutually perpendicular and to R (κ2 = 0) although an experimental method has been demonstrated to overcome this.57
 Fig. 7  Angles and vectors relevant to the calculation of the orientation factor, κ2. The vectors μD and μA are the donor and acceptor transition dipole moments and R is the centre to centre separation vector.46 (Reprinted with permission from T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle, Govindjee and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) 
In the literature, and in publications recalling Förster's theory,17,46 in eqn (1) is the norm. Förster's Theory predicts that the ET rate can be enhanced according to the local electric field experienced by the D–A pair. This is incorrect, as described below and in Appendix C, as recently demonstrated experimentally, Fig. 8.58 The form of the refractive index correction given by Dexter has been questioned by Knox and van Amerongen,59 Dow,8 and Mahem60 and was in fact modified in the publication of Fowler and Dexter.61 It is too complicated to be discussed herein, and in eqn (1), the correction  for the case of a point donor and acceptor in an isotropic dielectric is approximately given by the local field factor f = (n2 + 2)/3 for the virtual cavity model and 3n2/(1 + 2n2) for the real cavity model62–64 so that for n = 1.5, f4 ∼ 4.0 or 2.3 for these two models, respectively. The type of model that is applicable depends upon the emitting chromophore and the nature of the lattice in which it is situated. From Appendix C it is observed that (neglecting orientation dependence and quantum yield of donor): WET(Förster) = WET(Dexter) × f4(3)
 Fig. 8  Experiments to show that the nonradiative ET rate is independent of the photonic environment. (a) Ce3+ emission decay at 340 nm from LaPO4:Ce3+ (1%) nanocrystals dispersed in solvents of different refractive index, from 1.36 (methanol, red) to 1.51 (DMSO, purple). The decay is assumed to be purely radiative. (b) Emission decay curves for LaPO4:Ce3+(1%)Tb3+(20%) nanocrystals, where efficient ET from Ce3+ to Tb3+ is possible. (c) Dividing decay curves of (b) by those of (a) reveals the contribution of ET and shows that it is independent of the refractive index of the solvents used. (d) Emission spectra of LaPO4:Ce3+(1%)Tb3+(2%) nanocrystals normalized to the Ce3+ emission intensity (between 310 nm and 400 nm) in different solvents. The inset is a zoom of the 5D4 → 7F6 Tb3+ emission band showing a decrease in Tb3+ emission intensity with increasing refractive index of the solvent. (e) Plot of the intensity ratio of Tb3+ emission (470–630 nm) and Ce3+ emission (310–400 nm) as a function of solvent refractive index. There is a ∼19% increase from DMSO to methanol in agreement with the solid black line from calculation.58 (Reproduced from F. T. Rabouw, S. A. den Hartog, T. Senden and A. Meijerink, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3610 with permission. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.) 
In Dexter theory, WET = W0ET/n4, where W0ET is the ET rate when n = 1. On the other hand, in Förster theory, , which is weakly dependent on n = 1–2 for the virtual cavity model but WET decreases substantially for the real-cavity model.
The original Dexter equation is utilized in the literature so that the angular dependence of ET has been omitted and it was argued that18 this is because lanthanide ions are spherical. However, when in complex ions, the dipole moment changes of the (forced) ED transitions occur along fixed directions, according to the site symmetries of the donor and acceptor. To our knowledge, most analyses of ET processes of lanthanide ions have neglected the orientation factor and it would be interesting to re-examine some previous calculations by including the orientation dependence, as in eqn (1).
Using the Förster expression for WET, the donor emission intensity, ID, decay in the presence of the acceptor is given for ED–ED transfer by: ID(t) = ID(0)exp[−(1/τD + WET)t](4)or:65 ID(t) = ID(0)exp[(−1 − (R0/R)6)(t/τD)](5)and it is a monoexponential function. R0 is called the Förster distance, or other names as below. Notice that these equations relate to the presence of one donor and one acceptor only. The excitation is by a short pulse. The equation for switched-off steady-state excitation66 has also been given.67 In phosphors, many acceptors surround a donor ion. If the nearest neighbour is at 4 Å distance and the next-nearest neighbour is at 8 Å, then the ET rate to the more distant neighbour is (4/8)6 = 1/64 of that to the nearest neighbour by this mechanism.
A unified theory of ET based upon quantum electrodynamics provides the same result as above for near-field ET, but provides different expressions for intermediate (WET ∝ R−4) ET and far-field radiative (WET ∝ R−2) ET.12 Radiative ET between a donor and acceptor leaves the donor lifetime unchanged unless it is the same species as the acceptor. The donor lifetime is then dependent upon the optical geometry of the experiment68 and becomes non-monoexponential and wavelength dependent at high concentrations.69
If the lifetime remains monoexponential and decreases to the value τ in the presence of an acceptor (providing the acceptor does not lead to the introduction of other quenching centres), then the ET efficiency is approximately given by 1 − (τ/τD) (which is equal to 1 − (ID/ID0) provided that the number of photons absorbed per second by the donor is the same in the presence of the acceptor).70
However, when there are acceptors at different distances from the donor ion (vide infra), representing independent decay processes, the donor decay is expressed in terms of the donor specific decay law exp(−t/τD) and the acceptor determined function, and is no longer monoexponential.71 The average ET efficiency can be expressed as  (which is equal to the former expression only in the case of monoexponential decay).72 If the efficiency of ET is measured from the steady-state donor emission intensities, it is important to take into account any overlap in the donor and acceptor absorption spectra in the excitation wavelength region.70
The Förster equation is inaccurate when the donor–acceptor distance approaches the magnitude of the particle diameters. Kodaimati et al.73 changed the length of the cross-linking ligand between PbS quantum dots and found that the point dipole approximation underestimates the ET rates at distances shorter than 40 Å. A similar experiment using lanthanide ions instead of quantum dots would be interesting.
The Förster distance of energy transfer
The Förster distance of ET, R0, is the donor–acceptor distance where the ET rate is equal to the donor decay rate in the absence of the acceptor, 1/τD. The calculation of critical distance for ET, with R0 in nm, in materials using the experimentally-determined donor–acceptor spectral overlap integral has frequently employed the formula derived from the Förster equation (eqn (B1) and (B2)) (e.g., ref. 17, 18, 44, 74 and 75): (6) (7) R0 = 0.02108[ϕDκ2n−4Jλ]1/6(8)with  in units of M−1 cm−1 (nm)4 by using the original definition of equating τDWET = 1 (i.e., R0 is the Förster distance at which the rate of ET equals the sum of radiative and nonradiative rates for deactivation of the donor excited state in the absence of the acceptor). The choice of units of Jλ may be confusing (refer to Appendix B). L is the Avogadro constant. It is incorrect to replace 9 in (6), (7) by 900018 unless the units of L are explicitly stated as (millimole)−1. Note that λ is the wavelength in vacuum. This definition of R0 in eqn (6)–(8) is consistent with Dexter's paper27 (and eqn (9) below), taking into account appropriate units, except that (i) Dexter took κ2 = 2/3; (ii) Dexter took into account the local field factor, thereby multiplying the right hand side of eqn (6) by ; and (iii) the difference in definition of R0 using τ or τDr leads to the right hand side of Dexter's equation having ϕD omitted, compared with eqn (6).
The definition of R06 from Dexter's equation in ref. 56 and 76–80 has the typo of 0.63 × 1028. It assumes n4 = 6 (n ∼ 1.57), neglects the local field correction and puts κ2 = 2/3. The correct value of this constant is 6.033 × 1027. The more accurate equation is from eqn (1): (9)where R0 (called a range parameter in ref. 51) is in Å; E is in eV; QA, the absorption cross-section of the acceptor, is in cm2 eV and the integral (where the donor emission and acceptor absorption are both normalized to unity) in eV−1. In this expression, τDrWET = 1 (note the difference with τDWET = 1 above in eqn (6)).
In terms of the oscillator strength of the acceptor fA(ED): (10) (11)with energy E in eV, R06 in Å6, and each of the donor and acceptor spectra normalized to unity. Taking κ2 = 2/3, n = 1.5 and , the numerical constant in eqn (11) becomes 5.23 × 1011. This value is taken as 3 × 1012 throughout the literature so that the value of R0 is increased by 1.3. In the use of this formula, the oscillator strength is an order-of-magnitude estimate and it usually refers to the entire transition, rather than the part relating to the overlapping transition. For example, the 4f–5d oscillator strengths of Ce3+ and Eu2+ have been inserted as 0.0181 (Ce3+) and 0.0176,82,83 or 0.0284 (Eu2+).
The calculation of R0 for a specific case using the Dexter and Förster equations is illustrated in Box 1. The results (Förster method 28.5 Å and Dexter method 30.5 Å: 7% difference) differ because of baseline and integration errors and the values should be equal. The summation method should be employed because it is more accurate than taking E (or λ) as a constant outside the integral. Notice the different shapes of the so-called ‘overlap integrals’ in Fig. j and l.
The necessary inclusion of  for n = 1.5 in eqn (9), using the virtual cavity model, does affect the result. Taking the 6th root to get R0 makes this by a factor of 1.26. For example, 28.5 Å becomes the corrected value 22.6 Å. We are unaware of any case where this correction (21% in this case) has been applied.
The use of surface plasmon resonance in enhancing the magnitude of R0 has been investigated.85
Multipolar and other energy transfer mechanisms
A second difference of the approach taken by coordination chemists to that of solid-state materials chemists relates to the fact that the singlet–singlet transitions considered by the former group are strong (first-order ED allowed) whereas 4fN–4fN electronic transitions are ED forbidden to first order. However, ET from donor Ce3+ (4f05d1) or Eu2+ (4f65d1) ions which are in excited 5d states and transit to 4f states occurs by the ED mechanism. The selection rule for the mechanism of ET for the lanthanide acceptor ion from the 4fN ground state to an excited 4fN state can be forced ED or electric quadrupole (EQ). Hence, higher-order multipolar mechanisms can be operative for ET between lanthanide ions. Although radiative EQ transitions are ∼107–1010 times weaker than ED allowed ones, ET by the ED–EQ mechanism may be ∼10−2 times as strong as that by ED–ED, and this mechanism is important for ED-forbidden transitions [p. 450, ref. 51; ref. 86 and 87]. The equations for ED–EQ and EQ–EQ transfer have been given by Dexter:27 (12) (13)and the analysis of the predominant mechanism: ED–ED, ED–EQ or EQ–EQ, is often deduced by the D–A distance dependence of the ET (i.e., WET ∝ R−6, R−8, R−10, respectively). In view of the different distance dependences, transfer to a nearby acceptor may occur predominantly by EQ–ED or ED–EQ ET, whereas ED–ED transfer may be operative to a more distant neighbour.
The exchange interaction can occur at shorter contact between the donor–acceptor pair, resulting from the mutual charge repulsion (i.e., Coulombic interaction) of the electron clouds situated on the donor and acceptor ions.27,88,89 The equation for critical distance for ET is given in ref. 90. Also, a redox process can be operative between easily oxidized/reduced ions and the electron transfer process has been modelled by Marcus–Hush Theory,30 for example, between Ce3+ and Yb3+.29
Multiple acceptors
Chemists have employed a generalized Förster Theory for the intensity-time dependence of ED–ED ET for a random set of donors and acceptors.18,91 Clearly, the donor decay is not monoexponential, but is rather dependent upon different monoexponential functions, when transfer occurs to acceptors present at different distances.18 First, the donors close to acceptors decay fast. Then, the excited donors further away from acceptors begin to transfer energy. At very long times, the donors which are very far from acceptors will decay with their own characteristic lifetime. In the absence of ET between the donor ions themselves, Inokuti and Hirayama92 used a continuum approximation to relate the donor–acceptor distances in a random ensemble and calculate the average donor emission characteristics (Appendix D, eqn (D1): see, for example, its use.)93–95 This exaggerates the D–A decay rate at early times because it admits very small D–A separations with large ET rates.51 This approach may be used to determine the ET mechanism via the parameter s (i.e., s = 6 ED–ED; s = 8 ED–EQ; or s = 10 EQ–EQ) when lanthanide ions are randomly doped into glasses. Nakazawa and Shionoya86 utilized Inokuti and Hirayama theory using both emission intensities under continuous excitation and also emission decay measurements and found that the ED–EQ mechanism was dominant for the quenching of 5D0 → 7F2(Eu3+) and 5D4 → 7F5(Tb3+) emissions. Blumen and Manz have given a general exact expression for the decay of a donor in the presence of randomly distributed acceptors in a solid for arbitrary acceptor concentrations, to take into account the possibility of multiple site occupancy by acceptors.71 Rabouw et al.58 modified the master equation for donor decay71,96–99 for the case of ED–ED ET within a nanoparticle.
Other analyses have taken into account the distance dependence of ET rate from a donor by summing over the shells of acceptors in the crystal structure,100 (see eqn (D3): for examples, refer to ref. 66 and 101). The geometric factors have not been included. It has been shown that since transfer by the EQ mechanism is anisotropic for cubic systems, the inclusion of the angular dependence can lead a considerable change in the calculated ET rate.102–104
Migration
Migration concerns the ET between the same type of particle, such as from D* to D. The migration terminates either when D* emits a photon or when D* transfers its energy to a trap – which can be in the present context an acceptor giving rise to emission (Fig. 4c and d). Huber [ref. 20, chapter 3; and ref. 99] has treated mathematically the influence of traps upon the time development of emission of a donor ion under broadband excitation. The integrated emission intensity at time t is proportional to the number of excited donor ions, ND(t): ND(t) = N0Dexp(−kt)f(t)(14)where N0D is the number of excited donors when the source is turned off; k is the reciprocal of the donor lifetime in the absence of the acceptor (1/τD); and f(t) characterizes the loss associated with one-way transfer to traps (it is the fraction of excited donors if the excited state were to have an infinite lifetime). The problem is generally complex but exact calculation of f(t) is possible for two limiting cases: (i) no donor–donor transfer, i.e., no migration, Fig. 9a(i); (ii) (infinitely) rapid donor–donor transfer, Fig. 9a(iv). In the model, the donors and acceptors occupy random sites on a lattice, with each site having a probability of occupation cA by an acceptor ion and cD by a donor. Hence cD + cA ≤ 1, with the equality denoting a situation where all sites are occupied either by donors or acceptors. In addition, we make the assumption that there are no isolated donors (i.e., D–D transfer paths are available for all D).
 Fig. 9  (a) The time evolution of donor decay under various conditions illustrated by a schematic semilog plot of f(t) in eqn (14) against t. (i) Non-exponential decay for D–A transfer in the absence of D–D transfer, eqn (15); (ii) diffusion limited case: D–A transfer as in (i) together with weak D–D migration. The decay eventually becomes exponential; (iii) faster D–D migration but with the same D–A rate as in (i), (ii). The decay becomes monoexponential after a short time; (iv) very fast D–D migration. Excited donor ions sense an average acceptor environment. The decay is monoexponential, eqn (16). (Adapted from ref. 51, p. 458 and ref. 99). (b) Decay curves of the 3H4 →3H6 emission of Tm3+ under resonant excitation in [Lu1−xTmx]3Ga5O12 fitted by the Martín model for ED–ED transfer: x = 0.01 (i), 0.02 (ii), 0.03 (iii), 0.04 (iv) and 0.05 (v). (Adapted from ref. 111.) 
For case (i): (15)where (1 − cA) is the probability that site q in the lattice is unoccupied by an acceptor ion; site 0 is occupied by the donor and if site q is occupied by an acceptor it contributes a factor X0q to the total Xn overall donor–acceptor transfer rate. In the rapid transfer limit (case ii) the transfer between donors takes place so rapidly so that after the excitation pulse ceases all donors have an equal chance of being excited. The decay is monoexponential at all times since a donor can transfer to the nearest neighbour acceptor: (16)
The kinetics of the transfer process deviates from 1st order when the migration rate between donor ions falls between these two regimes, Fig. 9a(ii) and (iii). Huber has given formulae for the exponential rate at long times and the reader is referred to that work.99
The D–D migration has been formalized in two regimes: the diffusion model,105,106 when D–D transfer is much weaker than D–A transfer; and the hopping model107 when D–D transfer is much faster than D–A transfer.108 Diffusion represents a spreading out in all directions whereas the hopping model relates to a walk between D sites at random time intervals. The first model permits diffusion over distances smaller than the inter-ion separation whereas the second model permits migration over all distances between donor and acceptor ions. Assuming nearest-neighbour hopping, simple equations give the diffusion length, hopping time and number of steps in the migration process.109 The use has been made of a Monte Carlo model to simulate both the occurrence of D–D migration and D–A transfer by the ED–ED mechanism.34
The method of Yakota-Tanimoto105 (eqn (D4)) takes into account donor–donor migration for ED–ED ET and the analysis has been generalized by Martín et al.110 (eqn (D5)) for other types of interaction, illustrated in ref. 111 for a Tm3+-doped garnet system (Fig. 9b) and in ref. 112 for ET in K5Li2GdF10:Eu3+,Pr3+.
The temperature-dependence of ET rate has often been considered to arise from the change in spectral overlap between donor emission and acceptor absorption spectral bands. However, the temperature-dependence can arise from diffusion-limited ET, such as in LaPO4:Ce3+,Tb3+.70
Recently, attention has been drawn again to migration-assisted ET processes113,114 and interfacial ET.114,115 An intercalating chromophore has been utilized in the construction of a self-assembled DNA-based photonic wire capable of transporting excitation energy by migration over a distance of more than 20 nm.116 Migration is a loss-making process, not amplification, because in addition to D–D migration there is the possibility of donor to trap transfer. The role of Gd3+, rather than Y3+, is considerably more important both in ET and migration because Y3+ is transparent in the UV-visible region. The Gd3+ ion can act effectively as a 2-level system (6P7/2–8S7/2) and the upper excited state does not relax noticeably by multiphonon emission. The phenomenon of a “Gd3+ bridge” between a sensitizer and an activator in ET has been long known.117,118 Diffusion-limited Gd3+–Gd3+ migration occurs in Y3−xGdxAl5−yGayO12 (x, y = 1, 2, 3) and concentration quenching of Gd3+ emission occurs due to migration to impurities and/or defects.119 Migration and ET to Ce3+ in Gd3Ga3Al2O12:Ce3+ single crystal give an unwanted slow component of Ce3+ emission decay.119 It is well-known that surface sites of lanthanide ions differ from bulk crystal sites and impart line broadening to the spectra and shorten the decay lifetime.120 The effect of coating a Gd3+ shell of up to 2.5 nm upon luminescence properties has been studied for LaPO4:Yb3+/GdPO4 core–shell nanoparticles121 and it was found to minimize excitation transfer to traps and killer sites. The effects of the crystal structure and dimensionality upon migration rate have previously been studied122–124 and are now receiving attention again.125
Finally, the reader is directed to the works of Vasquez who has derived the (corrected) crystal model of ET processes in organized media in order to explain, by a statistical effect, the fast exponential decay in crystals with high concentrations of activator ions, as an alternative to the migration process.104,126
Selection rules for energy transfer
The theory for calculation of ET rates for processes between lanthanide ions using tensor operators and the electronic wavefunctions of the relevant states has been laid down by Kushida.87 Malta made revisions by including the shielding effects of the 5s and 5p orbitals as well as pointing out the necessary inclusion of the dynamic coupling model for the intensities of 4f–4f electronic transitions.127 The equations for ED–ED, ED–EQ and EQ–EQ ET probabilities are given in Appendix E. Some selection rules can be deduced from these equations (Table 1(i)). The ET rate also depends upon the energy mismatch between the donor and acceptor transitions.128
Table 1 Selection rules for ET processes of lanthanide ions (Ln = Ln2+, Ln3+) under Russell–Saunders coupling scheme: (i) ion–ion ET; (ii) ligand–ion ET. A parity change represents g–u or vice versa. The parity (even (g) or odd (u)) of a wavefunction describing the state is given by 4fN (N even = g; N odd = u); 5dN even, g; and 4fN5d1 given by the product of 4fN and 5d, where g × u = u, g × g = g and u × u = g. For example, 4f2 g; 4f7 u; 4f65d1 g. The parity change selection rule applies to systems where the rare earth ion is situated at a site with inversion symmetry but may be relaxed for noncentrosymmetric sites. The spin selection rule is ΔS = 0




Mechanism
Selection rule
Comments on ET rate
Example
Ref.




(i) Ln–Ln ET










ED
ΔJ = 0, 1

J = 0 to J = 0 excluded. Dominant for interconfigurational transitions, 4fN−15d1 ↔ 4fN. Involves parity change.
Ce3+ and Eu2+: 5d → 4f




Forced ED
6 ≥ ΔJ ≥ 0
Forbidden for J = 0 to J = 0 and J = 0 to/from J odd. Applies to 4f–4f transitions.
Eu3+: 5D0 → 7F2,4,6

87



EQ
ΔJ ≤ 2
Except for J = 0 → J = 0, 1; very weak for ΔJ > 2. Initial and final states are same parity.
Yb3+: 2F5/2–2F7/2

87



Exchange
|J − J′| = 0, 1

J′ = J = 0 excluded.
Eu3+: 5D1 → 5D0

129







(ii) Ligand–Ln ET










Dipole-2λ pole and dipole–dipole
|J − J′| < λ ≤ J + J′
The part of the selection rule for the ion with 2λ pole: J′ = J = 0 excluded; λ = 2, 4 or 6. The selection rule may be relaxed by J-mixing (for example, Eu3+ 7F2 mixing with 7F0).
Eu3+ transfer from 7F0 to 5D2, 5L6, 5G6, 5D4. 7F0 to 5D0,1 forbidden.

28, 127 and 130



Exchange
|J − J′| = 0, 1

J′ = J = 0 excluded.
ET involving Eu3+ 7F0–5D0 forbidden, but relaxed by J-mixing; Eu3+ 7F0–5D1




Generally, several mechanisms will contribute to ET87 but the dominant mechanism can sometimes be inferred for transfer between lanthanide ions from the J-selection rules since they are analogous to the optical selection rules. Interconfigurational nonradiative transitions between opposite parity configurations (such as 5d1–4f1 Ce3+; 4f65d1–4f7 Eu2+) occur predominantly by the ED mechanism. Hence ET between Ce3+ and Eu2+ occurs mainly by the ED–ED mechanism. For other Ln3+ it is not obvious whether 4fN–4fN nonradiative transitions occur by the (forced) ED or the EQ mechanism but the selection rules in Table 1(i) may be helpful. Notice that the spin selection rule is relaxed by spin–orbit interaction and it is assumed that J is a good quantum number.
Upconversion and downconversion
Upconversion from an ion comprises the emission of photons with higher energy (shorter wavelength) than the incident exciting radiation. An example showing upconversion from Yb3+ to Er3+ is shown in Fig. 10a. By contrast, quantum cutting (Fig. 10b) describes the process where two emitted photons are produced from one incident higher energy photon. The word downshifting refers to the process where the emitted photons are at lower energy than that of the exciting radiation. Strong broadband absorption may be used to populate lower energy lanthanide ion levels by ET, for example as in SnO2:Er3+133 and YVO4:Eu3+.90 The word ‘downconversion’ is now generally taken to have the same meaning as quantum cutting.134–136
 Fig. 10  (a) Energy level diagram and upconversion processes in IR-808 dye sensitized core–shell–shell nanoparticles (CSS) upon 808 nm excitation. The surface antenna dye first absorbs the 808 nm excitation radiation (12376 cm−1, shown not to scale, red arrow), and then emits broadband near IR photons. The Nd3+ and Yb3+ ions confined in the outer shell harvest these photons and after internal nonradiative relaxation, the Yb3+ 2F5/2 and Nd3+ 4F3/2 states are populated. The Yb3+ ions in the transition layer extract the excitation energy from these sensitizers, followed by energy migration over the Yb3+ sublattice, and finally ET to Er3+ ions embedded in the core zone. Red (4F9/2 → 4I15/2) and green (4S3/2 → 4I15/2) Er3+ emission results. The transition layer serves as a shield to prevent the undesired quenching effects between the activator (Er3+) and sensitizer (Nd3+). The Nd3+/Yb3+ coupled active-shell in combination with dye-sensitization on the surface can enlarge the absorptivity of the nanostructure and boost the up-conversion intensity of CSS nanoparticles upon 808 nm excitation. The inset depicts the nanoparticle structure.131 (Reproduced with permission from J. Xu, M. Sun, Y. Kuang, H. Bi, B. Liu, D. Yang, R. Lv, S. Gai, F. He and P. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1495. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Schematic representation of the cooperative and accretive quantum cutting pathways for ET from Tb3+ to Yb3+. The red arrows indicate excitation of Tb3+ into the 5D4 state. Downconversion then occurs from one Tb3+ to two Yb3+ ions (labelled Yb13+ and Yb23+). Two mechanisms are depicted by dotted lines and in both an opposite parity (e.g., 5d) virtual state is indicated. This state belongs to Yb3+ in the accretive mechanism and to Tb3+ in the cooperative mechanism. The resonance condition implies that the transition energy of Tb3+ balances the sum of the transition energies of Yb3+. The authors found that the cooperative mechanism was more important for Y0.99−xYbxTb0.01PO4 (x between 0.05 and 0.99). (Adapted from ref. 132.) 
Energy transfer processes play a major role in upconversion and downconversion and since there are many available reviews114,137–150 only a brief mention is made of the distinction of these processes herein with reference to ET. The greatest contributions to experiment and theory of upconversion processes have been made by Auzel146,151 and Güdel's148,152,153 groups. Besides second harmonic generation and two-photon spectroscopy, the mechanisms of ET upconversion (ETU), excited state absorption (ESA) and photon avalanche (PA) give emitted photons of higher energy than incident photons (Fig. 11). ESA is a one-ion process whereby a metastable (long-lived) excited state absorbs a further photon. By contrast, the other two processes involve more than one ion. Energy transfer upconversion (ETU) describes the interaction of neighbouring ions where one is de-excited and the other is further excited. The selection rules for ETU, involving nonradiative transitions between energy levels of neighbouring ions, are the same as in Table 1(i). The power dependence of emission intensity can indicate the number of photons involved in the upconversion process.152 The simplest ETU involves a cross-relaxation process between two ions (Fig. 11). In cross-relaxation processes, the dimensionality of the system is of less importance to the ET rate than the immediate nearest-neighbour environment of the donor ion155 and the presence of defects or killer sites can modify the ET kinetics.156 The processes ESA and ETU can be distinguished by recording the excitation spectrum of the emission from the luminescent state, where the presence of bands not only associated with the ground state absorption (GSA) indicates ESA. The ETU and ESA mechanisms can also be distinguished by their concentration dependences, since the luminescence intensity would vary quadratically (for the interaction between two ions) or is relatively independent of the concentration of the dopant luminescent ion in the host lattice, respectively. Another method to differentiate these two processes concerns the lifetime decay curve of the upconversion level. If the upconversion process is due to ESA of a single ion then the decay is monoexponential. However, if the upconversion is due to ETU between two ions, the population of the final (luminescent) state requires a cross relaxation between two intermediate states, so an initial rise may be detected if the intermediate level has a sufficiently long lifetime. The GSA/ESA and ETU processes are not exclusive95 and GSA/ESA upconversion can be enhanced by the co-participation of a cross-relaxation, as in the case of LiYF4:Nd3+.157 Looping mechanisms are not uncommon in upconversion processes.158 In PA, the nonresonant (very weak) ground state absorption leads to strong upconverted emission.159,160 The process is characterized by an incident power threshold of emission intensity, above which the emission intensity increases by orders of magnitude (see, for example ref. 161).
 Fig. 11  Schematic mechanisms of second harmonic generation (SHG), two-photon absorption (TPA), excited state absorption (ESA), photon avalanche (PA) and cross-relaxation ET upconversion (ETU). The red dotted arrows indicate emission. (Adapted from ref. 154.) 
The energy levels of lanthanide ions form a ladder series and the gaps between some of the higher levels closely match those between lower levels. Hence when ions are close together a quenching of emission from the higher level may occur since energy has been transferred to a neighbour. This is the case, for example, when ions are of the same species, for example, for Ho3+: 5G4(5G4(25719) + 5I8(0) → 5F3(20609) + 5I7(5118));1625S2(5S2(18365) + 5I8(0) → 5I4(13247) + 5I7(5118));163 and at room temperature 5F3(5F3(20420) + 5I8(0) + phonon → 5F5(15353) + 5I7(5118)),163 where the energies in parentheses are in cm−1; as well as for Tb3+: 5D3 (5D3 + 7F6 → 5D4 + 7F2 + phonon).164
A cross-relaxation between activator and sensitizer ions can often be unwanted, particularly in the quenching of luminescence, when S and A are the same, e.g., LaF3:Pr3+.165 In the case of Er3+ and Nd3+, the problem was removed by constructing core–shell–shell NaGdF4:Yb,Er@NaGdF4:Yb@NaNdF4:Yb upconversion nanoparticles, Fig. 10a.131 The ion Yb3+, with an absorption band at ∼970 nm, is a well-studied donor ion, often in conjunction with Ho3+ or Er3+ to produce green and red emissions, or together with Tm3+ for violet upconversion. These ions fulfil the necessity of two or more metastable states for the upconversion process to occur. The choice of host lattice is important to minimize unwanted nonradiative processes and the change from oxide or fluoride lattices to chloride, bromide or iodide hosts can often lead to new upconversion, cross-relaxation and luminescence processes. The ion Er3+ is one of the most popular upconversion systems, particularly in the NaYF4 host and when co-doped with Yb3+166–168 due to matching gaps between its energy levels and its efficient luminescence from many levels. By using an inert shell, highly efficient upconversion luminescence was realized in the activator fully doped nanostructure: NaErF4@NaYF4169 where surface defects of the core are removed. Generally, increasing the activator concentration produces greater absorption and faster migration, but luminescence quenching, in the absence of cross-relaxation and other (e.g., ref. 170) processes, also requires the presence of defect or killer sites. It may be that the introduction of a further dopant ion introduces such sites. It has been established both theoretically and experimentally that the introduction of a second lanthanide ion does not modify the 4fN energy level scheme of the first lanthanide ion (except for very slight shifts due to changes in lattice constants) because the interaction between the two sets of inner electron orbitals is very weak,27 contrary to recent suggestions.
Certainly, the statement that in doping a second lanthanide ion, all 4f/5d orbitals with spin-up configuration are promoted to energy levels slightly higher than the 4f orbitals with spin-down configuration, is incorrect.171
The incident laser power, P, is related to the upconverted or downconverted emission intensity, IUP/DOWN, by a power law, IUP/DOWN ∝ (P)n. Ideally, for two photon upconversion the slope of the plot of ln(IUP/DOWN) vs. ln(P) is 2, whereas for one-step quantum cutting it is 0.5, but there may be other considerations.148,152 Also, the increase in laser power may extremely heat the sample and magnify nonradiative processes. Hence, the weak NIR absorption strengths of lanthanide ions have led researchers to develop enhancement schemes to more efficiently utilize NIR radiation for upconversion, besides optimizing the local environment of the ion172 and epitaxial shell growth.173 A NIR dye with large oscillator strength has been employed to sensitize Yb3+ or Er3+131,138,149 (Fig. 10a). Alternatively, a nanoparticle has been coated with a gold shell to plasmonically increase the emission of a lanthanide ion by ET.174,175 A five-fold increase in green emission intensity was observed for NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles coated with gold, Fig. 12.176
 Fig. 12  (a) Upconverted Er3+ emission (λexc = 975 nm) from 25 nm NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles coated with silica with (blue line) and without (dashed red line) 12 nm gold shell. (b) Atomic force microscope line profile with (c) height image of a single Au-coated nanoparticle. (Adapted from ref. 176, Open access.) 
Wegh et al.177 suggested various quantum cutting schemes, which employ between one to three ions where one ultraviolet photon is transformed into two visible photons whose summation can (in principle) produce white light. The reader is referred to recent reviews of this subject.178–180 The recent observation that photon cutting results in bunched photon emission on the timescale of the excited-state lifetime is interesting.181
Energy transfer from ligand to lanthanide ion
Following an earlier report in 1987 by Sabbatini and Lehn, the “antenna phenomenon” was described by Andrade et al.182 in 1996: “the mechanism of light conversion is thought to be as follows: (i) light in the UV region is absorbed by the ligands (antennas); (ii) the excited ligands decay rapidly to their lowest triplet state; (iii) energy is transferred from this triplet state to the quasi-resonant energy state of the lanthanide ion (for instance, 5DJ for Eu3+183 and 5D4 for Tb3+); (iv) the excited lanthanide metal ion decays to the ground state via photon emission in the visible region“.
The definitions of quantum yield in the literature are confusing, with adjectives such as internal, external, intrinsic and overall. The external quantum yield (i.e. number of photons emitted/number of incident photons) of lanthanide ion emission upon excitation into the antenna ligand, Φ, is given herein by: Φ = ξabsϕsensϕem = ξabsϕiscϕetτ/τR(17)where ξabs is the absorption yield of the ligand; ϕsens is the overall ET yield from the ligand to the metal ion (usually comprising intersystem crossing, ϕisc, and transfer to the metal ion from a triplet state, ϕet), and ϕem is the quantum yield of lanthanide emission, which compares the observed lifetime τ to the radiative lifetime τR of the activator ion (ϕem = τ/τR). The latter is usually called the quantum efficiency or intrinsic quantum yield since it is the probability that a photon is emitted after the system has been excited to its emitting state. Eqn (17) effectively describes the brightness of emission of a phosphor, which we consider to be a more important parameter than the Gold Book quantum yield. By contrast to semiconductor physics and solar energy conversion where the first process in eqn (17), ξabs, is considered, Chemists usually define (internal) quantum yield = number of photons emitted/number of photons absorbed, as in the Gold Book. The quantum efficiency and internal quantum yield are equal for a two-level system because the absorption of each photon excites the system to its emitting state. However, the quantum yield is lower than the quantum efficiency when there are more complicated energy levels and/or decay paths, as in organolanthanide systems. Hebbink et al.184 define the overall quantum yield of sensitized lanthanide ion emission by three individual steps: the intersystem crossing quantum yield, the ET efficiency, and the lanthanide ion quantum yield. Bünzli185 defines the sensitization yield as (i) the efficiency with which the feeding level(s) (i.e., 1S, 3T, ILCT, LMCT, 3MLCT, 4f5d states) is (are) populated by the initially excited state(s) and (ii) the efficiency of the ET from the donor state to the accepting Ln3+ level. In both of these cases the absorption yield of incoming photons has been assumed to be unity. Furthermore, the “intrinsic quantum yield”186τ/τR is determined under direct 4f–4f excitation and the “overall quantum yield”186 (= ϕsensϕem) is determined under direct ligand excitation. In view of the different definitions in the literature concerning quantum yield it is advisable to include an explanation in terms of photons. For example, Bünzli defines external quantum yield as ϕsensϕem and internal quantum yield as ϕem in the context of lanthanide coordination compounds. Note that quantum efficiency is not the same as energy conversion efficiency. The measurement of quantum yield for samples in various forms has been described in several publications.187–190
The ligand transition from the ground singlet state to an excited singlet state is normally ED allowed and has a high oscillator strength (for example, ∼0.7 for the 242 nm absorption of 1,10-phenanthroline = phen). However, the absorption yield does vary from one ligand to another, and from one wavelength to another. Also, for Eu3+ and Tb3+, the internal quantum yields are high (say, 0.6–0.9, in the absence of high frequency vibrators). The weak link may therefore be the sensitization efficiency (such from interligand electron transfer191 or quenching of emission such as by a LMCT state (Fig. 1c)). Note that the separation between the antenna absorption wavelength and the lanthanide emission wavelength does not correspond to a “Stokes shift”11 because the two transitions differ in nature. A Stokes shift indicates the shift between absorption and emission maxima of the same electronic transition.192
The work of Latva193 involved the study of the quantum yields of many lanthanide chelates at micromolar concentrations in aqueous solvents and it was concluded that ligand-5D4 Tb3+ ET occurs efficiently (Φ ∼ 0.1) for lowest triplet levels in the range studied between 22500–27000 cm−1, but back-transfer from 5D4 to ligand occurs for Tb3+ 5D4-triplet energy differences <1850 cm−1.194 The conclusion was less clear for ligand-Eu3+ ET, with triplet levels in the region 20000–23500 cm−1 giving quantum efficiencies around 0.1. Latva's work assumed the proportionality between ET rate and quantum yield and since it was carried out in solution the speciation may be uncertain. Kleinerman195 deduced that the 5D4 lifetime activation energy in a 1,10-phenanthroline complex with Tb3+ corresponded with the difference in energy 5D4–T1. He had previously stressed the importance of direct singlet (S1 → Ln3+) ET in other systems when the S1 → T intersystem crossing rate <1011 s−1.196 The direct ET from a ligand singlet state to a lanthanide ion has been proposed in some other cases197,198 despite the fact that intersystem crossing is fast, especially in the presence of a lanthanide ion.
Moore et al.199 designed an antenna ligand for sensitizing Tb3+ with the triplet state located at 2750 cm−1 above 5D4. The HOMO–LUMO transition in tris–dipicolinate complexes involves charge transfer. This singlet transition has been suggested to be the donor to Eu3+200 although the corresponding triplet transitions were not studied. Similarly, the involvement of intraligand charge transfer has been shown for a tetrahedral cage Eu3+ complex,201 but it is not clear if the final ET step involves triplet or singlet states. Klink et al.202 demonstrated from time-resolved luminescence that the 5D0 state is not directly populated upon excitation of a polydentate m-terphenyl-based Eu3+ complex, but the ligand triplet state populates 5D1 instead. However, it is still widely believed that the ligand ET occurs to the Eu3+ 5D0 level (for example, ref. 203). Energy transfer from a ligand state to the 5D0 state of Eu3+ is forbidden to first order by J-selection rules, and only enabled by J-mixing of 7F0 with another J-multiplet, but it has often been assumed to occur by inspection of ligand triplet energy levels204 and by calculation, as in Table 2.
Table 2 Model calculations of ET rates in lanthanide complexes




Complex type
Model
ET pathway
ΔE (cm−1)
Overall ET ratea (s−1)
Comments
Ref.





a Overall transfer rate = forward rate − backward rate. btfa (4,4,4-trifluoro-1-phenyl-1,3-butanedione); dmbpy (4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine); Tpy-OCH3 4′-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine; TTFA 2-thenoyltrifluoroacetone; L1 4,4,5,5,5-pentafluoro-3-hydroxy-1-(9-phenyl-9H-carbazol-2-yl)pent-2-en-1-one; L2 4,4,5,5,5-pentafluoro-3-hydroxy-1-(9-(4-methoxyphenyl)-9H-carbazol-2-yl)pent-2-en-1-one; tfaa 1,1,1-trifluoro-2,4-pentanedione; bipy 2,2′-bipyridyl; L1′ dimethyl(4-methylphenylsulfonyl)amidophosphate; L2′ dimethyl-2-naphthylsulfonylamidophosphate; Ibf Ibuprofen; H6MELL, mellitic acid, C12O12H6.





[Eu(btfa)3(dmbpy)]
Sparkle/PM6
T1 → 5D1


6 × 109
Only S1–5D4, T1–5D1 and T1–5D0 considered

205



T1 → 5D0
8 × 109

λ
exc 370 nm






Eu(TTA)2Tpy-OCH3·2H2O in film
Sparkle/RM1
S1 → 5D4


1 × 104

λ
exc 365 nm but S1 at 307 nm

206



T1 → 5D1
−1 × 1015
T1 at 658 nm


T1 → 5D0
−8 × 1011








Eu(L1)3(C2H5OH)2
Sparkle/PM3
—


—

λ
exc 400 nm. Quantum yields calculated

207



Eu(L2)3(C2H5OH)2
LUMPAC


[Eu(tfaa)3bpy]
Sparkle/RM1
S → 5D4


5 × 103

λ
exc not given but appears to be below the energy of S (270 nm) chosen for ET pathway

208



T1 → 5D1


5 × 109


T1 → 5D0


1 × 1011


[Eu(tfaa)3H2O]
Sparkle/RM1
S → 5D4


2 × 104

208



T1 → 5D1


1 × 1011


T1 → 5D0


1 × 1011






[Eu(tfaa)3phen]
Sparkle/RM1
S → 5D4


4 × 102

λ
exc not given but appears to be below the energy of S (261 nm) chosen for ET pathway

209



T1 → 5D1
7 × 106


T1 → 5D0
7 × 106


Na[Eu(L1′)4]
Malta model
S1 → 5L6
975
4 × 105

λ
exc 320 nm is applicable to singlet S1 excitation

197



S1 → 5G3
8834
2 × 105
Eu3+ (5DJ, 5LJ, 5GJ) and Tb (5DJ, 5GJ, 5LJ, 5HJ, 5FJ, 5IJ) included in the calculations


S1 → 5D3
11045
2 × 105
Exchange and multipole mechanisms


S1 → 5G6
8235
2 × 105




T1 → 5D1
4216
2 × 102




Na[Eu(L2′)4]
S1 → 5G6
4425
7 × 104




S1 → 5D4
3546
5 × 104




S1 → 5G3
5043
4 × 104





5D1 → T1
1040
6 × 102




T1 → 5D0
748
4 × 102




Na[Tb(L1′)4]
S1 → 5G6
8420
3 × 106




S1 → 5G5
7132
1 × 106




S1 → 5L7
5556
1 × 106




T1 → 5D4
2642
8 × 102





5G6 → T1
3412
7 × 102




Na[tb(L2′)4]
S1 → 5G5
3322
2 × 106




S1 → 5L7
1746
5 × 105




S1 → 5L9
2746
4 × 105




S1 → 5L8
2030
4 × 105




T1 → 5D4
2614
3 × 102





5D4 → T1
2614
2 × 103





5L7 → S1
1746
8 × 102








[Eu2(Ibf)6(phen)2]
Sparkle/RM1
S1→ 5D4


8.5

λ
exc 334 nm is below the energy of S1

210



T1 → 5D1
1 × 109


T1 → 5D0
8 × 108






Eu2O3
Sparkle/RM1

5D1 → 5D0


5 × 104

λ
exc 395 nm

211







EuMELL
Sparkle/RM1
S1 → 5D4


17

λ
exc not given

212



T1 → 5D1
1 × 1010


T1 → 5D0
2 × 1010




Current modelling of ligand–metal ET employs the theory set out by Malta et al. and the reader is referred to his papers for the detailed model.127,130,197,213 The equations for the ET rates by different mechanisms are collected in Appendix E. The ligand and metal are considered as independent systems with Coulomb and exchange interactions between them, differing from an alternative analysis of Eu3+ complexes considering spin–orbit coupling between metal–ligand states.214 The Malta model includes the appropriate overlap of singlet or triplet emission with metal ion acceptor states. The 4f–4f acceptor nonradiative transition intensities are described by parameters which include both the forced ED mechanism and the dynamic coupling mechanism (i.e., the action of the ligand dipole in inducing multipoles at the rare earth ion). The coordination geometry and nature of chemical environment around the rare earth ion are also taken into account. The use of tensor operators in the theory enables selection rules to be formulated, as in Table 1(ii). Notice that some of these model calculations have envisaged transfer from a ligand triplet state to the lanthanide ion by the exchange mechanism.215,216 The Sparkle Model, initiated in 1994 and refined in 2008, was introduced to carry out semiempirical molecular orbital calculations of lanthanide ion complexes, determining their structures and generating electronic wavefunctions.217 The model was incorporated into MOPAC2012218 and subsequently, with refinements, into LUMPAC.10,217,219 Some studies are listed in Table 2 and an example of the calculated ET pathways is displayed in Fig. 13.208 There are estimations in rates displayed these diagrams such as: ligand S0 → S1 104 s−1; S1 → S0 106 s−1; Eu3+ 5D4 → 5D1 106 s−1; 5D1 → 5D0 106 s−1 and some of these could be in error by several orders of magnitude. No account is taken of the rates of internal conversion or intersystem crossing by the software. Usually, only one singlet state (the one with highest oscillator strength in absorption) and one triplet state are included in the ET calculation. If the energy of the singlet state is higher than the energy of exciting radiation employed it does not play a role in the relevant ET process (compare with Table 2). The excited states calculation in LUMPAC (using ORCA) takes only a minute or two. The calculated triplet energies may vary enormously depending upon the system, number of occupied and unoccupied molecular orbitals and number of states chosen. This should be checked.
 Fig. 13  Rate constants (s−1) and energy levels (103 cm−1) of the [Eu(tfaa)3bpy] complex (tfaa = 1,1,1-trifluoro-2,4-pentanedione and bpy = 2,2′-bipyridyl) showing the most probable channels for ET processes as calculated by the Sparkle/RM1 model in LUMPAC. (Adapted from ref. 208). Refer to Table 2 for comment. 
Unlike DFT-based methods, the XMCQDPT2/CASSCF (complete active space self-consistent field) approach using the Firefly package220 is said to correctly predict the localization of excitation and the positions of triplet states relative to the singlet states. The ET pathway from antenna to Eu3+ in [Eu(cfqH) (cfq)(H2O)4]2+ (cfqH = ciprofloxacin) was proposed to involve triplet state ET221 but no proof was given (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Photophysical processes in [Eu(cfqH)(cfq)(H2O)4]2+ (cfqH is ciprofloxacin). Schematic diagram of excitation (upward orange arrow), nonradiative relaxation (wavy blue arrow) and intersystem crossing from S1, the first excited singlet state of the ligand, to the triplet level T1 (yellow block arrow) and energy transfer from T1 to Eu3+ 5D2/5D1 (red block arrow), followed by internal conversion (black wavy arrows) and emission from 5D0 (downward red arrow). (Adapted from ref. 221 with permission, copyright American Chemical Society, 2016.) 
Another approach in elucidating antenna-lanthanide ion ET pathways has been to study the separate fragments: ligand singlet and triplet levels and to match the acceptor levels to donor ones at 2500–5000 cm−1 higher in energy.222,223 It has been pointed out, however, that the energies of a ligand may change when it is in a complex.224 Besides, there is no evidence that an “effective match” results in effective ET. The ligand triplet state(s) may be estimated by calculation and the lowest triplet state may be experimentally located from the phosphorescence of the appropriate Gd3+, La3+ or Lu3+ complex. The calculated energy does not relate to the band maximum but to the zero phonon line, which is not always evident experimentally and often assigned incorrectly.210 Note that in most cases there are many triplet and singlet states which are potential ET donors. The lanthanide ion energy levels are more accurately located by excitation and emission experiments, or crystal field calculations225–227 rather than by DFT calculations.223
Another approach in studying ligand–lanthanide ion ET is based upon the conclusion that the lowest triplet excited state is localized upon one ligand only and its energy is independent of the particular lanthanide ion.194 Then, a variation in the strength of the ionic interaction (envisaged as a change in the ligand–metal electrostatic interaction) can explain the energy position variation of an excited state. Hence computations were performed in which (i) all but one ligand are replaced by chloride ions; (ii) the lanthanide ion is replaced by Na+.228 The approach reproduced trends in triplet levels for different hydroxamate complexes.
Critical interaction distance and concentration quenching
The donor luminescence quantum yield ϕDA/ϕD has often been equated to IDA/ID where IDA and ID are the donor luminescence intensity in the presence and absence of the acceptor, respectively, at the same concentration of donor (i.e. the number of photons absorbed by the donor is the same). This assumption is not true if the acceptor absorbs at the same wavelength utilized to excite the donor (refer to ref. 70 for the correction if this occurs).
The word ‘critical’ has been applied in several senses in ET studies and the readers should be aware of its different uses. Note that this is defined differently by Förster (as the Förster distance, [τDWET] = 1) and Dexter ([τDrWET] = 1), refer to eqn (8) and (9) above.
For a randomly distributed acceptor ion of concentration c, the volume of one ion is V = c−1 and the radius of the ball with this volume is: (18)For a critical concentration c0 of acceptors, the radius of the ball is R0 = R(c0), where: (19)and c0 = number of ions per unit of volume (m−3) at the critical concentration51 and is related to the donor lifetime in the absence of the acceptor, τD, (eqn (D2)87) (or more correctly, to the donor radiative lifetime).17 In the following, to avoid repetition we assume only a minor difference between these lifetimes and continue with the former definition of Kushida. The ET rates for the different multipolar mechanisms (s = 6, 8, 10) can be written as:87 (20a)where the microparameters α(s)DA represent the interaction strength: (20b)and where s = 6, 8 or 10; α(6)DA = W(6)DA × R6 for ED–ED transfer; W(6)DA is the ET rate (s−1). The determination of c0 or R0 has been made from eqn (8)–(11) involving measurement of the spectral overlap integral. In fact, the definition of c0 in eqn (19) is general for any type of interaction and just expresses the volume concentration at the critical distance. Moreover, this definition (eqn (19)) refers to the case of one donor–acceptor pair. Only one acceptor is on the surface of a sphere of a donor (i.e., the acceptor occupies the volume V0). For a random arrangement of acceptors,  and Kushida87 has given the critical acceptor ion concentration for the average ET yield of 0.5 in terms of c0 (refer to Appendix D and compare with eqn (D2)). Dexter and Schulman229 have given expressions for the ET yield as a function of reduced acceptor concentration (ya = xaN′V; xa mole ratio; N′ is the number of potential lattice sites per unit volume for the activator; V an effective volume, (4/3)πR3) for conditions of high and low concentration.
With increasing concentration of an activator ion in a host lattice, due to increased absorption, the emission intensity increases up to a maximum value and then begins to decrease. The quenching of emission at constant temperature can be due to several reasons. First, migration of the excitation between the ions can occur over longer distances when the ions are closer together and hence the probability of meeting a quenching centre such as OH−, especially at the particle surface, becomes greater. In this case of a killer centre the excitation is transferred into vibrational energy and subsequently, heat.108 A second reason for emission quenching is the formation of non-luminescent aggregates of the activator ion with increasing concentration. In other cases, cross-relaxation may occur between ions to deactivate the luminescent state, as for the quenching of 5D3 emission of Tb3+.164 Auzel has described a self-generated quenching centre for lanthanide ions.230
In the case of concentration quenching of luminescence (i.e., kNRad > kRad), the donor and acceptor ions are the same. The average distance between a donor and the nearest acceptor (another donor) is twice the radius of a ball belonging to a given acceptor (donor) ion: i.e., the distance D–A = D–D = 2R(c). For the ED–ED mechanism, 2R(c) = R0. For the ED–EQ (or EQ–ED) and EQ–EQ mechanism, 2R(c) = (s/3 − 1)(−3/s)R0, i.e., 0.826R0 and 0.776R0, respectively. Hence when the quenching concentration c0 or xc is determined experimentally, the equation is R0 = 2R(c) = 2[3/(4πc0)]1/3 = 2[3V/(4πxcN)]1/3 for the ED–ED mechanism. Here, V is the volume of the unit cell of the phosphor host material; N is the number of ions in the unit cell of the host crystal; xc is the molar ratio of the dopant ion. Similarly, R0 = 2R(c0)/0.826 = 2.42R(c0) for the ED–EQ (or EQ–ED) mechanism; R0 = 2R(c0)/0.776 = 2.58R(c0) for the EQ–EQ mechanism. Also, if R0 is obtained from eqn (8)–(11), the critical concentration c0 can be calculated from R0 = 2R(c0), 2.42R(c0), or 2.58R(c0), for the three mechanisms, respectively, with the use of eqn (19).
Blasse56 considered an ion doped into a host crystal lattice and introduced a ‘critical concentration’ which corresponds to the concentration “when the luminescence intensity of the ion begins to decrease”. The critical acceptor distance, Rc, (or interaction radius231 is just the geometric relation as above when the acceptor is the same as the donor – the D–A distance is given by eqn (21), rather than eqn (19)). (21)where (c0)−1 = V/(xcN) (mol m−3)−1. The shortest distance, Rs, between the cations substituted by the chromophore can be related to V/N. The equation has even been employed for co-doped samples.95 Blasse found experimentally that the value of Rc from eqn (21) was similar to the value of R0 derived from the spectral overlap integral: i.e., Rc = R0 = 2R(c0) for the ED–ED mechanism and just as above for the other mechanisms. The derived value of xc (or Rc) has no relation to Rs, as shown from the data in Table 3, and depends upon the corresponding ET mechanism. The table also compares the values of Rc calculated in some works from crystal structure data with our calculations.
Table 3 Comparison of values of Rc from the literature with our calculations and shortest cation distances, Rs, from crystallographic data




Compound
Ion
Calc. Rc (Å) [ref.]
Calc. Rc (Å) this
Comment
Closest cation–cation distances, Rs, (Å)




Na3LuSi2O7
Eu2+
20.3234
22.3
18, not 24, Na+ cation sites in Bravais cell
Lu1 6.282; Lu2 5.441


Y2O3
Eu3+
11.2235
8.9

x is 0.1, not 0.05; without distinguishing C3i and C2 sites




Y2O3
Tb3+
19.2235
15.3

x is 0.02, not 0.01; without distinguishing C3i and C2 sites




Ba2Y(BO3)2Cl
Ce3+
23.0236
23.0
Ionic radii Gd(VII):Y(VII) = 1:0.925
3.82(?)


Ba2Gd(BO3)2Cl
Ce3+
33.4236
33.4


Ba2Ho…3.737; Ba2Yb…3.695


Ca2Al3O6F
Eu2+
18.0233
14.3
24, not 12, Ca2+ in Bravais cell
3.99


KMg4(PO4)3
Eu2+
35.8241
35.9
16, not 12, Mg2+ in Bravais cell
Mg1 3.744; Mg2 3.965


KMg4(PO4)3
Mn2+
7.9238
11.3


Ca4(PO4)2O
Ce3+
26.384
16.8
16, not 4, Ca2+, in Bravais cell
Ca1 3.548; Ca2 3.484; Ca3 3.362; Ca4 3.513; Ca5 3.553; Ca6 3.484; Ca7 3.362; Ca8 3.380


Ca4(PO4)2O
Eu2+
16.884
10.6




It is currently accepted that the ET yield, η(ET), is 0.5 at the maximum intensity reached during concentration quenching (see, for example, ref. 77, 232 and 233). This may not be the case.
For example, Fig. 15 shows the concentration dependences of Ce3+ emission intensity and lifetime for Sr5−2xCexNax(PO4)3Cl at room temperature.36 The variations differ. The lifetime shows a continuous decrease from the initial measurement at x = 0.001 whereas the intensity has a maximum for the sample with x = 0.05. The value of η(ET) = kET/(krad + kET) is ∼5% at this concentration showing that most of the contributions to ET are migrations between Ce3+ ions which do not quench the emission. Naturally the migration rate to traps (kTrap) does increase with Ce3+ concentration. The intensity depends not only upon the radiative transition rate (krad = ϕDτD) but also upon kTrap.
 Fig. 15  Room temperature spectra (a) and emission decays (b) of Sr5−2xCexNax(PO4)3Cl under 317 nm wavelength excitation depicting the effects of change in Ce3+ concentration. The sodium ion preserves charge neutrality. The inset in (a) shows that the maximum emission intensity occurs for x = 0.05. The emission decay in (b), measured at 370 nm, is monoexponential and decreases continuously with increasing Ce3+ concentration. (Adapted from ref. 36.) 
Some further points are raised regarding the very frequent use of the Blasse formula (eqn (21)) in the literature:
(1) It is clearer with regard to stoichiometry to refer to the general formula of a phosphor as Ca4−x(PO4)2O:xEu2+ or Ca4−xEux(PO4)2O, for example, rather than Ca4(PO4)2O:xEu2+.
(2) The value of xc is determined experimentally from the stoichiometric formula corresponding to the maximum emission intensity (for example, for Y0.95Bi0.05OCl, xc = 0.0556). The error in determining the concentration xc is typically 10–20% and is usually based upon the nominal composition before synthesis.
(3) Many studies have calculated the value of Rc (equated to R0) for concentration quenching by this method77,81,82,233–241 and the usual conclusion is that if Rc > 5 Å the exchange interactions can be excluded. In fact, the value of Rc has little to do with the detailed mechanism and can apply to all.
(4) The International Tables of Crystallography242 give the crystallographic unit cell and clearly show the symmetry and value of N for each site of a crystal. Alternatively, the number of formula units in the Bravais cell may be identified as in ref. 243, hence giving the number of cation sites. In some studies, N has been incorrectly taken as the number of formula units per unit cell, e.g., ref. 84, 233 and 234, or the number of different symmetry sites,238 when it actually refers to the number of cations occupying the sites in the unit cell that can be potentially occupied by the activator ion.
(5) The eqn (21) has also been used to calculate Rc when the donor and acceptor differ, i.e. for D–A ET. In this case sometimes the value of xc was not given as that of the acceptor244 but that of donor plus acceptor.111,245–249
Simplified treatments of energy transfer phenomena in the current literature: van Uitert and Ozawa equations
Van Uitert and co-workers,250,251 Ozawa252,253 and others254,255 have derived various expressions relating the concentration-dependence of the donor or acceptor and emission intensity. These are listed in Table 4 together with the reference to the first use or thereabouts; some of the assumptions; and references to current use in the literature. The simple derivations and approximations of these equations are given in Appendices G–I.
Table 4 Equations in current literature relating emission intensity or lifetime to donor or acceptor concentration




No.
Equationa
Ref.
Assumptions
Recent literature uses[ref.]





a 
I
D Intensity of emission of donor at concentration cD in presence of acceptor; ID0 Intensity of emission of donor in absence of acceptor. The emission intensity, I, is related to the electron population of the level j by Ij = nj × hν/τDr where nj is the population of the level. β, k, f are constants; R donor–acceptor distance at concentration cA; d dimensionality of ET; η yield of ET; c0 critical concentration (number of ions per unit of volume (cm−3)) when rate of ET to acceptor = reciprocal of donor lifetime in absence of acceptor. c0 = [(4/3)(πR03)]−1. R0 = critical distance. s identifies the multipolar ET mechanism: s = 6, ED–ED ET; s = 8, ED–EQ ET; s = 10, EQ–EQ ET. Assumptions: (i) one donor and one acceptor, with weak excitation of donor; (ii) no migration between donors or back-transfer from acceptor; (iii) nonradiative losses are attributable to ET; (iv) equilibrium intensity measurement.





22
(ID/ID0) ∝ [1/(1 + βR−n)]

250

(i)–(iv); see (G4)




23

I
D/ID0 = [1 + β(cA/cA0)s/3]−1

251

(i)–(iv); see (G5) and (H3)
Ce3+–Mn2+256


24

I
D0/ID ∝ (cA)s/3

257

(i)–(iv) and β(cA/cA0)s/3 ≫ 1
Ce3+–Tb3+;258 Eu2+–Mn2+;238,259 Er3+–Eu3+;240 Tb3+–Eu3+;255 Ce3+–Tb3+;260 Eu3+–Bi3+;261 Ce3+–Eu2+;78 Ce3+–Cr3+;262 Tb3+–Eu3+263


25

I
0/ID ∝ (cD + cA)s/3

264

Invalid derivation; as for eqn (24) and insertion of cD
Ce3+–Eu2+;246,265,266 Ce3+–Mn2+–Tb3+;267 Ce3+–Tb3+;249,268 Eu3+–Tb3+;235 Ce3+–Sm3+;269 Eu2+–Mn2+;234,248 Ce3+–Cr3+262


26

I
D/ID0 ∝ [1 + β(cD/cD0)s/3]−1

250

As eqn (23) cD ≫ cA; cA constant; fast migration




27

I
D/cD = 1/(1 + βcDs/3)

252 and 253

See (G8); assume k = 1
Eu2+;234,270 Ce3+236


28

I
D/cD = k/(1 + βcDs/3)

252

See (G8) and (H3)
Mn2+;271 Eu3+;237,272 Er3+;240 Bi2+;273 Eu2+;83,233,241,274,275 Ce3+;80,239,246,265,266,276,277 Mn4+;278 Tb3+;279 Eu2+280


29

I
D/cD = k/(βcDs/3)


Invalid derivation. (βcDs/3) ≫ 1
Dy3+;281,282 Eu3+/Tb3+;235 Ce3+;265 Eu2+;234 Eu3+283


30
log(ID/cA) = (−s/d)logcA + logf

254

(i)–(iv); cross-relaxation. d = 3; see (I4)
Eu3+;284 Tb3+285


31

I
D/cA = k/(βcAs/3)


See (A3)
Tb3+285


32

τ
a/τ0 = [1 + β(cA/cA0)s/3]−1

251

(i)–(v); τa drawn by tangent construction




33

τ
D0/τD ∝ cAs/3


Invalid derivation; τa = τD; β(cA/cA0)s/3 ≫ 1
Ce3+–Eu2+;84 Ce3+–Mn2+;256 Eu2+–Mn2+;286,287 Ce3+288


34
[1 − ηET]−1 ∝ cAs/3

255

Invalid derivation. As for eqn (33) with ηET = 1 − (τD/τD0)
Tb3+–Eu3+255




Auzel pointed out that strong quenching materials exhibit a quadratic concentration dependence of the quenching rate (defined as WQ = 1/τ − 1/τD0, where τD0 is the lifetime for the donor ion extrapolated for zero concentration) whereas weak quenching ones exhibit a linear dependence.289 The quadratic dependence originates from cross-relaxation whereas the linear dependence results from excitonic trapping at the sample defects or surface. However, neither the linear or quadratic laws, nor the strength of the quenching pertain to the type of host. As mentioned above, the minimum Ln3+–Ln3+ distance is not significant in determining the type of quenching.
The variation of ET yield with acceptor concentration in the case of ED–ED ET has been given by Förster and Dexter, eqn (A5). Dexter and Schulman have given expressions for the fluorescence yield in concentration quenching for a variety of mechanisms and situations.229
Fong and Diestler290 questioned the validity of the formulae in Table 4 which relate concentrations to intensities or quantum yields, with the power s illustrating the transfer mechanism. With the assumption of a fixed distance of ET a linear concentration dependence at low acceptor concentrations is predicted.290 Fong and Diestler therefore attributed the experimental observation of concentration dependence such as in eqn (23), Table 4, to many-body interactions. The reader is referred to their work for the detailed theory, and the main points are itemized here. The interaction of other ions, as in screening the pairwise transfer rate between D and A, was taken into account. Derivations were given for quantum yield in relation to the average transition probability per ion of the radiationless ET during the donor lifetime τDr
(i) For low acceptor concentrations, the dependence of the (pairwise) ion ET rate on concentration is linear for ED–ED and for ED–EQ transfer.
(ii) Three-body interactions (where a donor transfers to two acceptors) give rise to a concentration squared (c2) dependence of the transfer rate,97,290 whereas four body interactions give a c3 dependence.
In the rate approximation approach to ET291 the concentration-dependence of the transfer rate and of the yield reflects only the number of particles engaged in the energy-conserving transfer and not the spatial dependence of the interaction mechanism (see also ref. 289). Grant attributed the application of equations such as 22, 23 to the assumption that the ET interaction occurs with the nearest available acceptor.
The ET rate for 5D4 Tb3+ to 5D0 Eu3+ transfer apparently exhibits a quadratic dependence upon Eu3+ concentration at high Tb3+ concentrations, which indicates a three-body energy transfer process.292 The inverse lifetime of Nd3+ for the cross-relaxation between Nd3+ ions in NdxLa1−xP5O14 (or between Nd3+ and Tb3+ or Eu3+ ions in this material) exhibits a linear dependence of decay rate with concentration, but in this case the excitation migration rate is much greater than the cross-relaxation quenching rate.293 The linear concentration dependence of emission quenching is a simple result of a statistical averaging process by fast energy migration and is not connected with the form of the interionic interaction. The interaction mechanism can therefore only be investigated in the absence of migration, i.e., at low concentrations in this case and it was found to occur by an ED–ED mechanism.
We take the analysis of the mechanism for ET between Ce3+ and Eu2+ in Ca2.8−xCe0.1EuxNa0.1Sc2Si3O12 as an example to illustrate the failure of equations in Table 4. From Table 1, since EQ transitions are parity forbidden the mechanism is clearly ED–ED. Fig. 16 shows the fittings of Ce3+ emission decay curves for different Eu2+ concentrations using a the Inokuti–Hirayama eqn (D1) and b the Dornauf–Heber eqn (D3) for s = 6. The fits are superior to those using s = 8 and s = 10.
 Fig. 16  Emission decay of Ce3+ donor with variable Eu2+ acceptor concentration in Ca2.8−xCe0.1EuxNa0.1Sc2Si3O12 at room temperature fitted by various equations. (a) Inokuti–Hirayama fits for ED–ED ET using different acceptor concentrations, eqn (D1), s = 6 (adapted from ref. 94); (b) Dornhauf–Heber fits for ED–ED ET, eqn (D3), s = 6; (c) Fit using eqn (23) with slope s/3; (d) fit using eqn (24) with slope s/3; (e) fit using eqn (25) with slope s/3; (f) Fit using eqn (30) and (31) with slope of –s/3. The value of s = 5.7 but the linearity is poor; (g) direct fit of eqn (24) for s = 6, 8, 10. 
Eqn (22) in Table 4, assuming multipolar ET between one donor and one acceptor in the presence and absence of the acceptor, is the starting equation for many approximations. In eqn (23), the distance dependence has been replaced by a similar concentration dependence. Eqn (24) and (25) involve assumptions:(ID0/ID) = 1 + β(cA/cA0)s/3 → (ID0/ID) = β(cA)s/3 [23] → [24]or (ID0/ID) = β(cD + cA)s/3 [23] → [25]but have greatly been employed in the literature as in ref. 234, 235, 238, 240, 246, 249, 258, 260, 261 and 265–269 to infer the ET mechanism. It is not clear to us why cD is included in eqn (25).264,294Fig. 16c shows the correct graphical representation of eqn (23) giving s ∼ 6. By contrast, the approximation in eqn (24) gives a nonlinear plot and an incorrect slope (Fig. 16d), as does that in eqn (25) (Fig. 16e). Fig. 16f uses eqn (30) and gives the slope ∼6 although the plot is not linear. Finally, the direct use of eqn (24) has been employed in many publications (Fig. 16g) in attempting to discern the value of s but the result is meaningless considering the assumptions made and the similarity of the fits.
Ozawa deduced the simple eqn (28) for the case of concentration quenching by multipolar interactions of an activator in powder form where scattering dominates over absorption. It assumes weak oscillator strength and low concentration of the activator ion. Although this equation has been cited in many papers it has not been employed in data analysis. Instead, other plots of log(ID/cD) against logcD from eqn (27) [e.g., in ref. 83, 233, 234, 236, 237, 239–241, 246, 265, 266, 270–272, 275, 276, 278 and 294] have employed approximations from it [257, 264] (instead of the correct log form of eqn (27): log[(cD/ID) − 1] vs. logcD giving the slope s/3), or even log(ID/cD) vs. (cD−s/3) from eqn (29) [in ref. 80, 235, 277, 279–281 and 283]. The eqn (26), which compares the emission intensity directly with concentration, has also been stated in some reports but the graphical analysis has also employed a plot of logIDvs. logcD. Fig. 17 shows the fit for the ED–ED quenching of Ce3+ emission using eqn (29) and is clearly inaccurate in determining the ET mechanism.
 Fig. 17  Fit of Ce3+ emission decay at room temperature with variable Ce3+ concentration in Ca2.94−2xCexEu0.06NaxSc2Si3O12 (λex = 440 nm, λem = 550 nm) using eqn (29), slope = −s/3. 
Van Uitert251 also gave the relation τa/τ0 = ID/ID0 = [1 + β(cA/cA0)s/3]−1 (eqn (32)) where τ0 is the monoexponential decay of D under dilute conditions, τa is an arbitrary lifetime, approximated by τi – the lifetime at early times and it is difficult to estimate because it is unlikely to be monoexponential. However, literature reports have utilized τa = τ0 and have given simplified plots, such as logτD0/τDvs. cA256 or τD0/τDvs. cAs/384,256,286–288 which have no theoretical basis. Using the relation between lifetime and ET efficiency, Baur et al.255 have used eqn (34). Finally, the donor emission intensity has been related to the acceptor concentration in eqn (30) and (31).
The eqn (30) concerns cross-relaxation quenching (refer to Appendix 5, (A4)). In only one report that we are aware of, a direct fitting of eqn (30) has been employed.256 It is therefore surprising that eqn (30) was utilized to analyze the quenching of emission from 5D0 (Eu3+)238 since cross-relaxation processes are unavailable (so that the quenching concentrations of Eu3+ systems are relatively high). Actually, for Eu3+ the concentration quenching is due to increase of migration among Eu3+ ions leading to an increased opportunity of migration to those Eu3+ ions with quenching centres nearby. The eqn (30) (A3) was utilized to model the 5D3 → 5D4 cross-relaxation of Tb3+ by plotting log(ID/cD) against log(cD), with slope −s/d. Although the linearity was poor, approximate slopes of −2 were inferred implying that the concentration quenching follows the ED–ED mechanism.
Conclusions
Some brief conclusions are listed from this work:
(1) Many investigations of ET processes contain repeated clichés of incorrect statements, such as using and attributing the simple equations to van Uitert et al. and Dexter; and equating the critical distance of ET to an ET mechanism. The eqn (23) refers to ET between one donor and one acceptor only. Since the ET rate declines rapidly with D–A distance, it may be a fair assumption in some cases. However, the simple equations derived with further assumptions should be avoided (Fig. 16 and 17). It is important to provide a quantitative account of the ET process in addition to qualitative description.
(2) The Förster–Dexter treatments of ED–ED ET are equivalent except for the inclusion of the local field effect, the description of the donor lifetime and the inclusion of the orientation factor. A combined equation has been given in eqn (1). The interaction mechanism should be investigated at low concentrations in the absence of migration.
(3) If the donor and acceptor nearest neighbour distances do not vary greatly for the shells of acceptor neighbours then the multiple acceptor extensions to Förster–Dexter theory should be utilized. In other cases, such as for dyads, Förster–Dexter theory, with the correct inclusion of orientation factor, may give an adequate description of the ET process.
(4) The spectral overlap integral can be calculated using either formalism and its shape differs from the visible spectral overlap of absorption and emission spectra (Box 1).
(5) The importance of migration should be assessed by performing experiments using variable concentrations and fitting the appropriate theoretical model (Appendix D).
(6) J-Selection rules can provide a guide to the ET mechanism (Table 1).
(7) The matching of antenna and metal ion energy levels is insufficient to deduce the ET mechanism. In the design of antenna ligands, little consideration has been given to singlet-triplet splitting. Careful design can considerably change this energy, as shown e.g., for triazines.295 Often, there are numerous singlet and triplet levels with energies below that of the exciting radiation so that investigations of ET processes are not facile. When considering the pathway using LUMPAC, it is essential that the singlet state chosen has the energy similar to (and not above) that of the exciting radiation.
Glossary

(M mass, L length, T time. Commonly used units are given).


W
ET
Energy transfer rate (s−1)

ϕ
D
Quantum yield of the donor emission in the absence of the acceptor (between 0–1)

ϕ
DA
Quantum yield of the donor emission in the presence of the acceptor (between 0–1)

ϕ
DA/ϕDQuantum yield of energy transfer (donor luminescence yield)

τ
Lifetime of the excited state of the donor in the presence of the acceptor (s)

τ
0 = 1/k0Lifetime of ion at very dilute concentration doped into a transparent host lattice (s)

τ
D
Donor lifetime in the absence of the acceptor = 1/(krad + knonrad) = 1/k (s)

τ
Dr
Radiative (= intrinsic or natural) lifetime of the donor = τD/ϕD = 1/krad (s)

τ
0Dr
Natural lifetime of the donor in vacuo (s)

c
X
X = A acceptor, X = D donor concentration (m−3)

c
0
Critical acceptor concentration, when D–A distance is R0 (m−3)


Integrated absorption cross-section (e.g., cm2 eV)

W
Q
Quenching rate = 1/τ − 1/τD (s−1)

η(ET)Energy transfer efficiency = 1 − ϕDA/ϕD =  or 1 − (τ/τD) for monoexponential lifetime (dimensionless)

σ
The absorption cross-section [L2] (e.g., cm2)

ν
Radiation frequency = ω/2π (Hz or s−1), where ω is circular frequency (rad s−1)

ε
Dielectric constant of medium = ε0n2 (F m−1)

ε
0
The vacuum permittivity (8.854187817 × 10−12 F m−1)

E = hνEnergy (eV or J)

P
X
Oscillator strength of X (dimensionless)


Electric field strength of incident electromagnetic radiation (N C−1 or V m−1)


Average of the electric field in the dielectric for that of the incident electromagnetic radiation,  (N C−1 or V m−1)


Electric field experienced by a particle in the medium (N C−1 or V m−1)

α
(s)DA
Microparameter representing the energy transfer strength for interactions s = 6, 8 or 10:  where s denotes the interaction type for αDA and WET and the power for R (cms s−1)

f
Local field correction for the electric field amplitude of radiation experienced by a chromophore:  (no units)

D
Diffusion constant (cm2 s−1)

n
refractive index of the medium (dimensionless)

κ
2
Orientation factor of donor and acceptor; value between 0 and 4; average value 2/3

α
Linear absorption coefficient (m−1)

I(x)Emission intensity at time x (W m−2 or other units)

I
D0, IDIntensity of donor emission without and with the presence of acceptors

L
Avogadro number (6.022140857 × 1023 mol−1)

h
Planck constant (6.62607004× 10−34 J s)

m
Electron mass (9.10938356 × 10−31 kg)

e
Electron charge (1.6021766208 × 10−19 C)

c
The speed of light (2.99792458 × 108 m s−1)

Γ(x)The gamma function , see for example, http://mathworld.wolfram.com/GammaFunction.html

ε
A
Molar decadic absorption coefficient of acceptor (M−1 cm−1 or in SI units m2 mol−1)

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Appendix A: Perrin, Stern–Volmer models: Förster quantum yield
For the situation where the donor is surrounded by a random arrangement of acceptors, the Perrin model: (A1)where the quantum efficiency in the presence (ϕDA) and absence (ϕD) of the quencher is related to the volume of the quenching sphere (V), quencher concentration (cA) and Avogadro constant (L), can be written in the form:92 (A2)where k is a constant. Since exp(x) = 1 + x +… for small x, at small quencher concentrations, the relative quantum efficiency then varies linearly with quencher concentration.
The Stern–Volmer equation for dynamic quenching: (A3)where kq is the quenching constant, can also be written in the form290 with constant k′: (A4)
According to Förster Theory, the relative quantum yield for the random arrangement of acceptors in three-dimensional space around a donor for ED–ED ET is:92 (A5)where ; ; , and s = t/τD. The parameter c0 is the acceptor concentration where the efficiency is 76%. The efficiency of ET is . Notice that the use of intensities instead in this formula, i.e., , assumes that the number of photons absorbed by the donor for a given photon flux is the same in the presence or absence of the acceptor70 (i.e., no overlap of donor and acceptor absorption bands). If not, this can be corrected for.17,70
Appendix B: the overlap integral
The overlap integral covers the region where the lineshapes of the donor emission and acceptor absorption overlap. As employed by Chemists, from Förster Theory: (B1)where Jλ is the spectral overlap integral measured on a wavelength abscissa: (B2)and note that in some texts (e.g., ref. 52) L is expressed in (mmol)−1 so that the factor 9 becomes 9000 instead; n, the refractive index of the medium, is assumed to be constant in the wavelength range of spectral overlap, otherwise it should appear in the denominator of the integral; R is the donor–acceptor distance (cm). In (B2), fD(λ) and εA(λ) are, respectively, the shape function for the donor emission and the molar decadic absorption coefficient (M−1 cm−1) of the acceptor. There is no normalization issue for εA(λ) but fD(λ) is normalized to unit area by: (B3)where the integral is taken over the entire emission band: (B4)
The emission spectrum FDλ(λ) denotes the luminescence intensity recorded by the detector in the small interval dλ. In practice, the data Q of emission spectra are recorded for a finite (even maybe variable) interval Δλ as set by the instrument. Then regardless of Δλ being constant or variable FDλ(λ) ∼ Q/Δλ. The form of fD(λ)dλ is therefore ordinate in nm−1 and abscissa in nm.17,18 The form of εA(λ) is ordinate in M−1 cm−1 (= mol−1 dm3 cm−1) and abscissa in nm. In this case the (clumsy) unit of the overlap integral per nm in (B2) is M−1 cm−1 nm4.
Changing the intensity (I) from a wavelength (λ) to an energy scale (E) requires the recalibration of the ordinate: I(E) = I(λ)λ2. More accurately (and usually neglected) it is not the emission intensity but the emission lineshape that should be considered in (B3) and (B4). For an electric dipole allowed transition, the lineshape is proportional to intensity × (wavelength)4 or to photon flux × (wavelength)3, where photon flux is the number of photons per second per unit area, so the appropriate correction can be made. Also, be reminded that the local field correction is not included in (B1).
Alternatively, as in eqn (B5), the spectral overlap can be displayed on a circular frequency abscissa:12 (B5)Here, fD(ω) is the normalized fluorescence spectrum of the donor on the circular frequency scale as above (integral = 1); σA(ω) is linear absorption cross section of acceptor; FDλ(λ) = FDω(ω)ω2/2πc, or equivalent, FDω(ω) = FDλ(λ)λ2/2πc, since they are both spectral densities, but with respect to different variables (i.e., λ and ω, respectively). The number of photons within a given range dλ and the corresponding d = dλ/λ2 = dω/(2πc) should be equal, i.e., FDλ(λ)dλ = FD()d = FDω(ω)dω and so FDλ(λ) = FDλ()2, FDλ(λ)λ2 = FDλ(), while FD∞(ω) = FD()/(2πc). Notice that εA(λ) = εA() = εA(ω) since εA is proportional to the logarithm of a ratio of intensities.
The spectral overlap integral causes confusion and errors in many papers. For example, in ref. 74 the emission peak height, not the area, has been set to unity. The derivation of eqn (19b) in ref. 17 is confusing and the first step (1) of the derivation following eqn (3.3(c)) therein should read:  so that the correct units of Jλ are given. The use of the unit OLI17 (overlap integral) may also confuse.
Appendix C: Förster theory and the local field effect
The Förster eqn (6) can be rewritten as: (C1)
The electromagnetic radiation of amplitude  for the electric vector which gives rise to electronic transitions exerts an average macroscopic electric field with oscillation amplitude  inside the medium, where  and ε is the dielectric constant of the medium.27 This is different from the electric field actually experienced by the chromophore, , because of polarization effects due to surrounding atoms or ions. Hence, the rates of radiative electronic transitions differ for the chromophore situated in a medium. The natural lifetime of the donor, τDr (eqn (1) and (C1)) is related to that in vacuo, τ0Dr by:62 (C2)where f is a scalar factor and the inclusion of the refractive index of the medium takes into account the density of electromagnetic oscillators per unit of energy. The (decadic) molar attenuation coefficient, εA(λ) (mol−1 dm3 cm−1) is related to that in vacuum by: (C3)where L (mol−1) is the Avogadro number and σ (cm2) is the absorption cross section. Insertion of τ0Dr and ε0A into eqn (1b) gives the result: (C4)so that the ET rate is predicted to depend upon the local field correction (to the fourth power) experienced by the D and A chromophores. This is incorrect. The form of the coefficient f has received much attention in the literature (for example, refer to ref. 62–64).
Taking the orientation average for κ2 (= 2/3), assuming weak excitation intensity, and substituting the donor oscillator strength, PD(ED),51,296 in SI units: (C5)where ν is the spectral overlap frequency (Hz); and noting that the acceptor oscillator strength, PA(ED), is related to the linear absorption coefficient α (m−1) and the absorption cross-section σ (m2), where N (m−3) is the number of absorbing centres per volume by: (C6)we obtain, in SI units from eqn (1) [ref. 51, eqn (10.12)] (C7)
In this case the spectral overlap is determined by normalizing both the donor emission and acceptor absorption to unity. This equation shows that WET = W0ET/n4, where W0ET is the ET rate when n = 1. Hence in Dexter theory, the ET rate does not depend upon the local field and is solely proportional to n−4, since none of the other factors in eqn (C7) is refractive index dependent. The same conclusion applies to eqn (1) since the local field factor in parentheses is cancelled by those of QA and τDr.
Note that the level degeneracies do not enter into these expressions of experimental quantities.
Appendix D: energy transfer involving multiple acceptors
The Inokuti–Hirayama equation applies to randomly-arranged acceptors: (D1)where s = 6, 8 or 10 according to the multipolar mechanism (ED–ED, ED–EQ or EQ–EQ, respectively); Γ is the gamma function so that  becomes Γ(1/2) = π1/2 = 1.77245…; Γ(5/8) = 1.434518…; and Γ(7/10) = 1.298055… for s = 6, 8 or 10, respectively; c0 is the critical (reduced) acceptor concentration:87,92 (D2)and is related to A0, the critical acceptor ion concentration for the average transfer efficiency of 0.5, as given in ref. 87: s = 6, A0 = 0.49c0; s = 8, A0 = 0.58c0 and s = 10, A0 = 0.62c0. Dexter27 gave the value of A0 for s = 6 as 0.65c0 considering the ET from the donor to only the nearest acceptor pairwise ions (which is confusing because his calculation contains an integral over “all space”).
The parameter s can be deduced from the goodness of fit for plots of {ln[I(t)/I(0)]} + t/τD against  for each value of s.
In the case of multipolar ET from a donor to shells of acceptor ions arranged in a crystal:66 (D3)where lZ is the total number of acceptor sites collected in shell l at distance lR from the donor; Z is the total number of sites in k shells; and x is the acceptor molar concentration. N is the total number of acceptors = Zx. The second exponential function represents a correction factor for acceptors outside the chosen shells. No account is taken of D–D migration or D–A back transfer in this equation and R0 and s are fitted as free parameters. A further equation was given for exchange interaction.66 Setlur and Shiang considered electron transfer from an analogous equation.29
Yokota and Tanimoto105 considered donor–acceptor ED–ED ET with the inclusion of weak diffusion after pulsed excitation of the donor, and deduced the following equation in the case of solids: (D4)where a1 = 10.866, a2 = 15.500, b = 8.743; x = D{α(6)DA}−1/3t2/3. D is a diffusion constant (cm2 s−1) and α(6)DA is the ED–ED interaction parameter for donor–acceptor transfer. Formulae for isotropic and two-dimensional diffusion have been given (chapter 3 in ref. 20; 297).
Martín et al.110 extended the equation for other types of multipolar interaction, s = 6, 8 and 10: (D5)where Γ(x) is the gamma function and a1, a2 and b are as above.
Different donor decays exist for random acceptor distributions in a volume (as above), a plane or along a line.298 The appropriate equations have been given in ref. 52.
Appendix E: Malta's theory of ET rates between lanthanide ions127
The original theory of Malta et al.129,197,213,216 was revised in 2008127 to take into account shielding factors, degeneracy factors and the inclusion of the dynamic coupling mechanism for the intensity parameters.
The revised formulae give the ligand–metal ET rates for the dipole–dipole (d–d) mechanism: (E1)metal ion dipole–metal ion quadrupole mechanism: (E2)and quadrupole–quadrupole mechanism: (E3)
In these equations, D and A represent the donor and acceptor ions with separation R; J is the angular momentum quantum number of the metal ion, with(out) ′ representing a final (initial) state, and ψ labels other quantum numbers; σ1 is a screening factor; ΩK are the forced electric dipole Judd–Ofelt parameters;127 〈r2〉 = 〈4f|r2|4f〉, the 4f radial integral; 〈ψJ||U(K)||ψJ〉2 are the squares of reduced matrix elements in the intermediate coupling scheme (available in the literature, with unit tensor operators, such as in ref. 299), with K = 2, 4, 6; 〈3||C(2)||3〉 is a reduced matrix element of the Racah tensor operator C(2). The spectra overlap integral F was defined in terms of the difference between donor and acceptor transition energies in the ET process and the band widths at half-height.127 Notice the different R−n dependences in these formulae.
Appendix F: Malta's theory of ligand–metal energy transfer
The original theory of Malta et al.129,197,213,216 was revised in 2008127 as in Appendix E. The ligand–metal ET rate involving the nonradiative transition between rare earth ion levels αJ and αJ′ arising from the ligand dipole–metal induced 2λ pole Coulomb (dipole at ligand–multipole at metal ion, d–m) mechanism is given by:213 (F1)and due to the dipole–dipole Coulomb interaction (d–d), where the 5d or other metal ion states are admixed with 4f ones according to Judd–Ofelt theory, is given by: (F2)and due to the exchange (ex) interaction: (F3)where SL is the ligand transition dipole strength from the initial state with degeneracy G; J (J′) is the angular momentum quantum number of the initial (final) metal ion state; the temperature dependent spectral overlap factor F contains a sum over Franck–Condon factors and the appropriate energy mismatch condition for the transfer process, as in Appendix E; 〈α′J′||U(λ)||αJ〉2 are the squares of reduced matrix elements in the intermediate coupling scheme (available in the literature, with unit tensor operators, such as in ref. 299), with λ = 2, 4, 6; α specifies the metal multiplet; RL is the distance from the metal ion to the barycenter of the ligand donor state; σ1 is a shielding factor; Ωe.d.λ are electric dipole intensity parameters, comprising contributions from the forced electric dipole and dynamic coupling mechanisms;207sm (m = −1, 0, 1) is the spherical component of the spin operator of electron k in the ligand, μz is the z component of its dipole operator; ϕ and ϕ′ refer to initial and final ligand states; 〈4f|L〉 is the overlap integral between the 4f orbitals and the ligand eigenfunctions;127 〈rλ〉 is the radial expectation value of rλ for 4f electrons; 〈3||C(λ)||3〉 is a reduced matrix element of the Racah tensor operator C(λ) and the σλ's are screening factors due to the 5s and 5p filled sub-shells of the rare earth ion.
The γλ in eqn (F1) are given by: (F4)with γ6 ≪ γ4 ≪ γ2. The value of SL is estimated from the triplet or singlet donor state radiative lifetime: (F5)where  is the transition energy to S0, in cm−1. Note some differences in these formulae in ref. 129, 197 and 216.
However, there are many assumptions necessary in order to simplify the theory as given above such as: (i) states in the J-multiplet of the lanthanide ion are equally populated; (ii) assumptions in the formulation of eqn (F2) and (F3) use of an approximate expression for F in eqn (F1)–(F3) and (iv) neglect of the dielectric constant in describing the Coulomb repulsion.
Appendix G: Van Uitert and Ozawa equations
For each donor, consider only the nearest acceptor at an average distance R, and neglect donor–donor energy migration. Under constant incident light of intensity Iin, the rate equation at the stationary condition is: (G1)where σ is absorption cross section, N0 is the number of donor ions and k0 is the decay rate of donors under dilute conditions. Weak excitation is assumed so that the number of donors that can absorb is equal to the total number of donors. Then the emission intensity, Iem is given by: (G2)and the emission intensity per donor ion is: (G3)
The ratio Iem/N0 is denoted as the intensity ID for the case of the donor with the presence of acceptors, and ID0 for the intensity of the dilute case. Then noting that the ET rate varies exponentially with the donor–acceptor distance, kET(R) ∼ R−n for multipolar ET, where n = 6, 8 or 10:250 (G4)Here, k0 = kR + kNR,0 = kR if the intrinsic nonradiative decay rate kNR,0 is negligible. Alternatively, the multipolar losses due to ET were given to be proportional to acceptor ion concentrations, kET ∼ (cA/cA0)s/3, where cA is the acceptor concentration and CA0 is the critical acceptor concentration; s = 6, 8 or 10.251 (G5)
Ozawa252 has derived eqn (27) and (28) in Table 4 for the case of concentration quenching as follows. The observed emission intensity, ID, depends upon the rate of formation of excited activator ions (proportional to (I0 − It) = [I0 − I0e−εcDd], where I0 is the (weak) incident intensity; It is the transmitted intensity; εcD is the fractional decrease in intensity per unit length due to absorption, taking into account scattering; ε is the decadic molar absorption coefficient; cD is the concentration of activator on a mole basis; and d is the path length), and upon the probability, Pem, that an excited activator ion will undergo emission. Under direct excitation, for electrostatic multipolar quenching, from (G5): Pem ∝ [1 + βcDs/3]−1(G6)Hence (G7)when for weak absorption εcD ≪ 1, with A as a constant; and with AI0εd = k: (G8)
Appendix H: diffusion limited energy transfer
When the concentration of donors is much greater than that of acceptors (which may be traps or killer sites), the diffusion of excitation between donors with rate kD′ is the rate determining step. The luminescence decay from donors is effectively monoexponential, with the rate, k = 1/τ, given by ref. 51: k = k0 + kD′ where kD′ = αcAD3/4(H1)where D is the diffusion constant, which is proportional to cD(s−2)/3,51 and α is a constant. That is, for the case of limited number of quenching centres and in the fast migration limit, the intensity per donor varies with the concentration of donors and quenching centres as: (H2)where β is a constant. For the case of ED–ED ET, s = 6, so that this equation becomes: (H3)when cA is constant, the ratio in (G7) is similar to Table 4, eqn (26) but with s/3 replaced by (s − 2)/4; when cD is constant, it is similar to eqn (23), but with s/3 replaced by 1.
Appendix I: cross-relaxation quenching
Huang et al.254 have derived Table 4, eqn (30) for static multipolar interaction in cross-relaxation in an optically thin sample in the case where acceptors and donors are the same, and at the same time donor–donor migration can be neglected compared with the cross relaxation rate. In this equation ID is the donor intensity in the presence of the acceptor, d is the dimension (= 3) and f is independent of doping concentration. The index s denotes the type of multipolar interaction. The derivation of 30 is given in Chinese in ref. 254 but it may be understood from the highlighted equations in ref. 284: ID ∝ α(1−s/d)Γ(1 + s/d)(I1)for donor emission, where Γ is the gamma function; α = cD × Γ(1 − d/s)[X0(1 + A)/γ]d/s(I2)where γ is the intrinsic transition probability of the ion; X0 and A are constants. Hence: ID = constant × cD(1−s/d) and ID/cD = constant′ × cD−s/d = Table 4, eqn (31)(I3) log(ID/cD) = (−s/d)logcD + constant′′ = Table 4, eqn (30)(I4)
The slope of the plot log(ID/cD) against logcD for concentration quenching is given by −s/d.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Shangda Xia for discussions about ET processes; Dr José Diogo L. Dutra for information concerning LUMPAC; and Professor J.-C. B. Bünzli for a critical reading of the manuscript and comments. Funding from the Hong Kong Research Grants Council General Research fund HKBU 12300117 is gratefully acknowledged for K.-L. W. L. Z. acknowledges funding from the postdoctoral fund project (China postdoctoral science foundation funded project, 2017M622848).
Notes and references
W. R. Algar, H. Kim, I. L. Medintz and N. Hildebrandt, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263–264, 65 CrossRef .
N. Hildebrandt, K. D. Wagner and W. R. Algar, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 125 CrossRef .
O. A. Goryacheva, N. V. Beloglazova, A. M. Vostrikova, M. V. Pozharov, A. M. Sobolev and I. Yu. Goryacheva, Talanta, 2017, 164, 377 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhuo, Y. Liu, D. Liu, P. Huang, F. Jiang, X. Chen and M. Hong, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5050 RSC .
Y. C. Miranda, L. L. A. L. Pereira, J. H. P. Barbosa, H. F. Brito, M. C. F. C. Felinto, O. L. Malta, W. M. Faustino and E. E. S. Teotonio, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 3019 CrossRef .
G. Bao, S. Zha, Z. Liu, C.-F. Chan, H. Li, P.-H. Chu, D. Jin, P. A. Tanner and K.-L. Wong, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 120 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kamkaew, F. Chen, Y. Zhan, R. L. Majewski and W. Cai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3918 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Dow, Phys. Rev., 1968, 174, 962 CrossRef .
H. Lin, G. Zhang, P. A. Tanner and H. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12769 CrossRef .
J. D. L. Dutra, N. B. D. Lima, R. O. Freire and A. M. Simas, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13695 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Tanner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5090 RSC .
D. L. Andrews, Can. J. Chem., 2008, 86, 855 CrossRef .

          D. L. Andrews and D. S. Bradshaw, Resonance Energy Transfer, in Encyclopedia of Applied Spectroscopy, ed. D. L. Andrews, Wiley-VCH,  2009, ch. 15 Search PubMed .
R. C. Powell and G. Blasse, Struct. Bonding, 1980, 42, 43 CrossRef .
X. Liu and J. Qiu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8714 RSC .
S. Speiser, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1953 CrossRef PubMed .

FRET-Förster Resonance Energy Transfer: From Theory to Applications, ed. I. Medintz and N. Hildebrandt, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2014, ch. 3, Sect. 3.5, p. 68 Search PubMed .

          B. W. Van der Meer, G. Coker and S.-Y. S. Chen, Resonance Energy Transfer: Theory and Data, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1994, p. 148, Table 7.3 and p. 44 Search PubMed .

Advances in Energy Transfer Processes, ed. B. DiBartolo and X. Chen, World Scientific, Singapore,  2001 Search PubMed .

Laser Spectroscopy of Solids, ed. W. M. Yen and R. M. Selzer, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2nd edn,  1986 Search PubMed .
N. Yamada, S. Shionoya and T. Kushida, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1972, 32, 1577 CrossRef .
W. A. Wassam and F. K. Fong, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 65, 3102 CrossRef .
L. V. G. Tarelho, L. Gomes and I. M. Ranieri, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 14344 CrossRef .
T. Miyakawa and D. L. Dexter, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 1, 2961 CrossRef .
J. L. Kennedy and N. Djeu, J. Lumin., 2003, 101, 147 CrossRef .
A. J. Garcia, R. Balda and J. Fernández, J. Lumin., 1999, 83–84, 177 CrossRef .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836 CrossRef .
O. L. Malta, J. Lumin., 1997, 71, 229 CrossRef .
A. A. Setlur and J. J. Shiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2792 CrossRef .
N. S. Hush, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1985, 64, 135 CrossRef .
M. Chua and P. A. Tanner, J. Lumin., 1996, 66–67, 203 Search PubMed .
T. Aidilibike, J. Guo, Y. Li, X. Liu and W. Qin, J. Lumin., 2017, 188, 107 CrossRef .
K. Okamoto and Y. Sako, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2017, 46, 16 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. Haitjema, The influence of donor-to-donor migration on luminescence, MSc thesis, Utrecht University,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. J. Silversmith, L. Lou and W. M. Yen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1982, 26, 2656 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, H.-B. Liang, P. A. Tanner, S. Zhang, D. Hou, C. Liu, Y. Tao, Y. Huang and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7155 RSC .
T. Senden, F. T. Rabouw and A. Meijerink, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1801 CrossRef PubMed .
IUPAC Gold Book: radiative lifetime, https://goldbook.iupac.org/html/R/R05064.html.
N. B. D. Lima, J. D. L. Dutra, S. M. C. Gonçalves, R. O. Freire and A. M. Simas, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21204 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Förster, Radiat. Res., Suppl., 1960, 2, 326 CrossRef .

          R. M. Clegg, Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Vol. 33, in FRET and FLIM Techniques, ed. T. W. J. Gadella, Elsevier B.V.,  2009, ch. 1 Search PubMed .

          V. M. Agranovich and M. D. Galanin, Electronic Energy Transfer in Condensed Matter, North-Holland Publishing Co., New York,  1982, p. 11 Search PubMed .
L. Stryer and R. P. Haughland, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1967, 58, 719 CrossRef .
P. R. Selvin and J. E. Hearst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1994, 91, 10024 CrossRef .
R. M. Clegg, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 1995, 6, 103 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle, Govindjee and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Şener, J. Strümpfer, J. Hsin, D. Chandler, S. Scheuring, C. N. Hunter and K. Schulten, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 518 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Enderlein, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2012, 13, 15227 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. S. Loura, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2012, 13, 15252 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wallace and P. J. Atzberger, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0177122 CrossRef PubMed .

          B. Henderson and G. F. Imbusch, Optical Spectroscopy of Inorganic Solids, Clarendon Press, Oxford,  1989, p. 453 Search PubMed .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Kluwer/Plenum, New York, 2nd edn,  1999, Lakowitz Eq. 13.2 and Sec. 15.2 Search PubMed .
M. J. A. de Dood, J. Knoester, A. Tip and A. Polman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 115102 CrossRef .
C. Blum, N. Zijlstra, A. Lagendijk, M. Wubs, A. P. Mosk, V. Subramaniam and W. L. Vos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 203601 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Knoester and S. Mukamel, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1989, 40, 7065–7080 CrossRef .
G. Blasse, Philips Res. Rep., 1969, 24, 131 Search PubMed .
J. de Torres, M. Mivelle, S. B. Moparthi, H. Rigneault, N. F. Van Hulst, M. F. García-Parajo, E. Margeat and J. Wenger, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6222 CrossRef PubMed .
F. T. Rabouw, S. A. den Hartog, T. Senden and A. Meijerink, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3610 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Knox and H. van Amerongen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5289–5293 CrossRef .
G. D. Mahan, Phys. Rev., 1967, 153, 983 CrossRef .
W. B. Fowler and D. L. Dexter, Phys. Rev., 1962, 128, 2154 CrossRef .
D. Toptygin, J. Fluoresc., 2003, 13, 201 CrossRef .
C.-K. Duan, H. Wen and P. A. Tanner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 245123 CrossRef .
C.-K. Duan and M. F. Reid, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2006, 6, 348 CrossRef .

Photonics Vol. 4: Biomedical Photonics, Spectroscopy, and Microscopy, ed. D.L. Andrews, Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey,  2015 Search PubMed .
H. Siebold and J. Heber, J. Lumin., 1981, 23, 325 CrossRef .
K. B. Eisenthal and S. Siegel, J. Chem. Phys., 1964, 41, 652 CrossRef .
J. C. Conte and J. M. G. Martinho, J. Lumin., 1981, 22, 273 CrossRef .
J. M. G. Martinho, A. L. Maçanita and M. N. Berberan-Santos, J. Chem. Phys., 1989, 90, 53 CrossRef .
J.-C. Bourcet and F. K. Fong, J. Chem. Phys., 1974, 60, 34 CrossRef .
A. Blumen and J. Manz, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 71, 4694 CrossRef .
A. F. van Driel, I. S. Nikolaev, P. Vergeer, P. Lodahl, D. Vanmaekelbergh and W. L. Vos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 035329 CrossRef .
M. S. Kodaimati, C. Wang, C. Chapman, G. C. Schatz and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5041 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Langlois, J.-M. Camus, P.-L. Karsenti, R. Guilard and P. D. Harvey, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 2506 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Melinger, A. Khachatrian, M. G. Ancona, S. Buckhout-White, E. R. Goldman, C. M. Spillmann, I. L. Medintz and P. D. Cunningham, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 659 CrossRef .
G. Blasse, J. Solid State Chem., 1986, 62, 207 CrossRef .
G. Blasse, Phys. Lett. A, 1968, 28, 444 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, D. Deng, S. Xu, Y. Hua, S. Zhao, H. Wang, C. Li, H. Ju and Y. Li, J. Lumin., 2013, 136, 204 CrossRef .
W. van Schaik, S. Lizzo, W. Smit and G. Blasse, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 216 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Zhao, Q. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11396 RSC .
H. Lin, H. Liang, Z. Tian, B. Han, J. Wang, Q. Su and G. Zhang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 165409 CrossRef .
D. Hou, C. Liu, X. Ding, X. Kuang, H. Liang, S. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 493 RSC .
C. Liu, Z. Xia, Z. Lian, J. Zhou and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 7139 Search PubMed .
Y. Jia, R. Pang, H. Li, W. Sun, J. Fu, L. Jiang, S. Zhang, Q. Su, C. Li and R.-S. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 11399 RSC .
S. T. Kochuveedu, T. Son, Y. Lee, M. Lee, D. Kim and D. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4735 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Nakazawa and S. Shionoya, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 47, 3211 CrossRef .
T. Kushida, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1973, 34, 1318 CrossRef  , 1327, 1334.
R. G. Peterson and R. C. Powell, J. Lumin., 1978, 16, 285 CrossRef .
J. Y. Liew, J. J. Brown, E. G. Moore and M. Schwalbe, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 16178 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hsu and R. C. Powell, J. Lumin., 1975, 10, 273 CrossRef .
M. Hauser, U. K. A. Klein and U. Gösele, Z. Phys. Chem., 1976, 101, 255 CrossRef .
M. Inokuti and F. Hirayama, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 43, 1978 CrossRef .
A. J. Silversmith, N. T. T. Nguyen, B. W. Sullivan, D. M. Boye, C. Ortiz and K. R. Hoffman, J. Lumin., 2008, 128, 931 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, W. Zhou, F. Pan, R. Shi, L. Huang, H. Liang, P. A. Tanner, X. Du, Y. Huang, Y. Tao and L. Zheng, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2834 CrossRef .
M. Rathaiah, A. D. Lozano-Gorrín, P. Babu, C. K. Jayasankar, V. Lavín and V. Venkatramu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 78669 RSC .

          X. Chen, Y. Liu and D. Tu, Lanthanide-doped luminescent nanomaterials: from fundamentals to bioapplications, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  2014, ch. 2 Search PubMed .
V. Lupei, J. Lumin., 1991, 48–49, 157 CrossRef .
A. I. Burshtein, J. Lumin., 1985, 34, 167 CrossRef .
D. L. Huber, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1979, 20, 2307 CrossRef .
H. Dornauf and J. Heber, J. Lumin., 1980, 22, 1 CrossRef .
H. Siebold and J. Heber, J. Lumin., 1981, 22, 297 CrossRef .
S. O. Vasquez, C. D. Flint and R. Sabry-Grant, J. Appl. Spectrosc., 1995, 62, 979 CrossRef .
S. O. Vasquez and C. D. Flint, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 238, 378 CrossRef .
O. Vasquez, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 8575 CrossRef .
M. Yokota and O. Taminoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1967, 22, 779 CrossRef .
R. K. Watts and H. J. Richter, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 1584 CrossRef .
A. I. Burshtein, Soviet Phys. JETP, 1972, 35, 882 Search PubMed .
Yu. V. Orlovskii, A. V. Popov, V. V. Platonov, S. G. Fedorenko, I. Sildos and V. V. Osipov, J. Lumin., 2013, 139, 91 CrossRef .
P. Kellendon and G. Blasse, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1981, 108, 541 CrossRef .
I. R. Martín, V. D. Rodríguez, U. R. Rodríguez-Mendoza, V. Lavín, E. Montoya and D. Jaque, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 1191 CrossRef .
M. Rathaiah, P. Haritha, A. D. Lozano-Gorrín, P. Babu, C. K. Jayasankar, U. R. Rodriguez-Mendoza, V. Lavin and V. Venkatramu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14720 RSC .
P. Solarz and W. Ryba-Romanowski, Radiat. Meas., 2007, 42, 759 CrossRef .
R. Deng, J. Wang, R. Chen, W. Huang and X. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15972 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhou, L. Tao, Y. Chai, S. P. Lau, Q. Zhang and Y. H. Tsang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12356 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tao, Y. Zhao and J. Li, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 1022 CrossRef .
J. K. Hannestad, P. Sandin and B. Albinsson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15889 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Th. W. de Hair, J. Lumin., 1979, 18–19, 797 CrossRef .
G. Blasse, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1982, 73, 205 CrossRef .
K. Bartosiewicz, V. Babin, K. Kamada, A. Yoshikawa and M. Nikl, J. Lumin., 2015, 166, 117 CrossRef .
J. J. H. A. van Hest, G. A. Blab, H. C. Gerritsen, C. de Mello Donega and A. Meijerink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19373 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Shimizu and T. Isobe, Mater. Lett., 2013, 110, 180 CrossRef .
P. A. M. Berdowski, M. Buijs and G. Blasse, J. Phys., 1985, 46, C7 Search PubMed .
A. J. de Vries, B. P. Minks and G. Blasse, J. Lumin., 1988, 39, 153 CrossRef .
R. Mahiou, B. Jacquier and C. Madej, J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 89, 5931 CrossRef .
J. Wang, R. Deng, M. A. MacDonald, B. Chen, J. Yuan, F. Wang, D. Chi, T. Sum, A. Hor, P. Zhang, G. Liu, Y. Han and X. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 157 CrossRef PubMed .
S. O. Vásquez, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 8664 CrossRef .
O. L. Malta, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354, 4770 CrossRef .
F. Tanaka and T. Ishibashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 1105 RSC .
O. L. Malta and F. R. Gonçalves e Silva, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1998, 54, 1593 CrossRef .
G. F. de Sà, O. L. Malta, C. de Mello Donegá, A. M. Simas, R. L. Longo, P. A. Santa-Cruz and E. F. da Silva Jr., Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 196, 165 CrossRef .
J. Xu, M. Sun, Y. Kuang, H. Bi, B. Liu, D. Yang, R. Lv, S. Gai, F. He and P. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1495 RSC .
P. Vergeer, T. J. H. Vlugt, M. H. F. Kox, M. I. den Hertog, J. P. J. M. van der Eerden and A. Meijerink, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 014119 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, S. Lin, X. Zhang, J. Xu and K. Chen, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2017, 864, 012067 CrossRef .
J. T. van Wijngaarden, S. Scheidelaar, T. J. H. Vlugt, M. F. Reid and A. Meijerink, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 115112 CrossRef .
L. Aarts, B. M. van der Ende and A. Meijerink, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 023522 CrossRef .
L. Guo, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Wang and P. Dong, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 636 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhou, B. Shi, D. Jin and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 924 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560 CrossRef .
H.-Q. Wang, M. Batentschuk, A. Osvet, L. Pinna and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2675 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen and J. X. Zhao, Sensors, 2012, 12, 2414 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Gamelin and H. U. Gűdel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 235 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, P. Ma, Z. Hou, Z. Cheng, C. Li and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1416 RSC .
G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1635 RSC .
H. Dong, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1608 RSC .
X. Chen, D. Peng, Q. Jua and F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1318 RSC .
F. Auzel, J. Lumin., 1990, 45, 341 CrossRef .
W. Zheng, P. Huang, D. Tu, E. Ma, H. Zhua and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1379 RSC .
D. R. Gamelin and H. U. Güdel, Top. Curr. Chem., 2001, 214, 1 CrossRef .
X. Xie, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Guo, A. I. Pendharkar, M. Lu, L. Huang, W. Huang and G. Han, Small, 2017, 13, 1602843 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nadort, J. Zhao and E. M. Goldys, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13099 RSC .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pollnau, D. R. Gamelin, S. R. Lüthi and H. U. Güdel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 3337 CrossRef .
M. P. Hehlen, K. Kramer, H. U. Güdel, R. A. McFarlane and R. N. Schwartz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 12475 CrossRef .

          P. A. Tanner, Lanthanide luminescence in solids, in Lanthanide Luminescence: Photophysical, Analytical and Biological Aspects, ed. P. Hänninen and H. Härmä, Springer Series on Fluorescence, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  2011, vol. 7, pp. 183–233, ISBN 978-3-642-21022-8 Search PubMed .
S. O. Vásquez, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 125103 CrossRef .
S. O. Vásquez, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 723 CrossRef .
P. Goldner and F. Pellé, Opt. Mater., 1996, 5, 239 CrossRef .
A. Brenier, C. Garapon, C. Madej, C. Pédrini and G. Boulon, J. Lumin., 1994, 62, 147 CrossRef .
M.-F. Joubert, S. Guy, B. Jacquier and C. Linarès, Opt. Mater., 1994, 4, 43 CrossRef .
M.-F. Joubert, Opt. Mater., 1999, 11, 181 CrossRef .
M. F. Joubert, S. Guy, S. Cuerq and P. A. Tanner, J. Lumin., 1997, 75, 287 CrossRef .
X. Zhou and P. A. Tanner, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 413, 284 CrossRef .
P. A. Tanner, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1987, 83, 1367 RSC .
C.-K. Duan, C.-C. Ko, G. Jia, X. Chen and P. A. Tanner, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 506, 179 CrossRef .
J. Hegarty, D. L. Huber and W. M. Yen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1982, 25, 5638 CrossRef .
J. F. Suyver, J. Grimm, M. K. van Veen, D. Biner, K. W. Krämer and H. U. Güdel, J. Lumin., 2006, 117, 1 CrossRef .
M. T. Berry and P. S. May, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 9805 CrossRef PubMed .
K. W. Krämer, D. Biner, G. Frei, H. U. Güdel, M. P. Hehlen and S. R. Lüthi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1244 CrossRef .
J. Zuo, Q. Li, B. Xue, C. Li, Y. Chang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Tu, H. Zhang and X. Kong, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7941 RSC .
C. W. Struck and W. H. Fonger, J. Lumin., 1970, 1(2), 456 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, X. Xie, B. Huang, L. Liang, S. Han, Z. Yi, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. Fan, L. Huang and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 7713 CrossRef .
A. Kar, S. Kundu and A. Patra, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 16, 505 Search PubMed .
N. J. J. Johnson, S. He, S. Diao, E. M. Chan, H. Dai and A. Almutairi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3275 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. Crawford, C. M. Andolina, D. C. Kaseman, B. H. Ryoo, A. M. Smith, K. A. Johnston and J. E. Millstone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17767 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, J. Zuo, Q. Li, Y. Chang, Y. Zhang, L. Tu, X. Liu, B. Xue, H. Zhao, H. Zhang and X. Kong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 92, 335 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Green, J. Wirth and S. F. Lim, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 135201 CrossRef PubMed .
R. T. Wegh, H. Donker, K. D. Oskam and A. Meijerink, Science, 1999, 283, 663 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zou, L. Feng, C. Cao, J. Zhang and Y. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24884 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Han, W. Huang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173 RSC .
Q. Y. Zhang and X. Huang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2010, 55, 353 CrossRef .
M. de Jong, A. Meijerink and F. T. Rabouw, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15537 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. M. de Andrade, R. L. Longo, A. M. Simas and G. F. de Sá, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 1835 RSC .
L. N. Puntus, K. A. Lyssenko, M. Yu. Antipin and J.-C. G. Bünzli, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11095 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Hebbink, L. Grave, L. A. Woldering, D. N. Reinhoudt and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 2483 CrossRef .
J.-C. G. Bünzli, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2729 CrossRef PubMed .
N. M. Shavaleev, R. Scopelliti, F. Gumy and J.-C. G. Bünzli, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 6178 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ishida, S. Tobita, Y. Hasegawa, R. Katoh and K. Nozaki, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2449 CrossRef .
S. Leyre, E. Coutino-Gonzalez, J. J. Joos, J. Ryckaert, Y. Meuret, D. Poelman, P. F. Smet, G. Durinck, J. Hofkens, G. Deconinck and P. Hanselaer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2014, 85, 123115 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Murase and C. Li, J. Lumin., 2008, 128, 1896 CrossRef .
M. S. Wrighton, D. S. Ginley and D. L. Morse, J. Phys. Chem., 1974, 78, 2229 CrossRef .
A. S. Kupryakov, V. F. Plyusnin, V. P. Grivin, J. A. Bryleva and S. V. Larionov, J. Lumin., 2016, 176, 130 CrossRef .
IUPAC Gold Book: http://goldbook.iupac.org/S06031.html.
M. Latva, H. Takalo, V.-M. Mukkala, C. Matachescu, J. C. Rodriguez-Ubis and J. Kankare, J. Lumin., 1997, 75, 149 CrossRef .
F. Gutierrez, C. Tedeschi, L. Maron, J.-P. Daudey, R. Poteau, J. Azema, P. Tisnès and C. Picard, Dalton Trans., 2004, 1334 RSC .
M. Kleinerman and S.-I. Choi, J. Chem. Phys., 1968, 49, 3901 CrossRef .
M. Kleinerman, J. Chem. Phys., 1969, 51, 2370 CrossRef .
E. Kasprzycka, V. A. Trush, V. M. Amirkhanov, L. Jerzykiewicz, O. L. Malta, J. Legendziewicz and P. Gawryszewska, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 1318 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu Mironov, E. B. Sveshnikova and V. L. Ermolaev, Opt. Spectrosc., 2015, 119, 77 CrossRef .
E. G. Moore, A. P. S. Samuel and K. N. Raymond, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 542 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D’Aléo, A. Picot, A. Beeby, J. A. Gareth Williams, B. Le Guennic, C. Andraud and O. Maury, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10258 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-L. Liu, R.-L. Zhang, C.-S. Lin, L.-P. Zhou, L.-X. Cai, J.-T. Kong, S.-Q. Yang, K.-L. Han and Q.-F. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12474 CrossRef PubMed .
S. I. Klink, G. A. Hebbink, L. Grave, P. G. B. Oude Alink, F. C. J. M. van Veggel and M. H. V. Werts, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 3681 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, H. Yang, P. He, Y. He, J. Zhao and H. Tang, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 2839 RSC .
S. Dasari, S. Singh, S. Sivakumar and A. K. Patra, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 17387 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Marques, H. P. Santos, K. A. D’Oliveira, N. P. Botezine, M. C. R. Freitas, R. O. Freire, J. D. L. Dutra, J. S. Martins, C. Legnani, W. G. Quirino and F. C. Machado, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2017, 458, 28 CrossRef .
C. Yang, S. Liu, J. Xu, Y. Li, M. Shang, L. Lei, G. Wang, J. He, X. Wang and M. Lub, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 1147 RSC .
B. Francis, C. Heering, R. O. Freire, M. L. P. Reddy and C. Janiak, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 90720 RSC .
R. Ilmi and K. Iftikhar, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 333, 142 CrossRef .
R. Ilmi and K. Iftikhar, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016, 325, 68 CrossRef .
T. C. d. de Oliveira, H. P. Santos, M. G. Lahoud, D. F. Franco, R. O. Freire, J. D. L. Dutra, A. Cuin, J. F. de Lima and L. F. Marques, J. Lumin., 2017, 181, 196 CrossRef .
R. da Silva Viana, E. H. L. Falcão, J. D. L. Dutra, N. B. da Costa, R. O. Freire and S. Alves, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2014, 281, 1 CrossRef .
R. Milani, L. L. da Luz, A. C. V. de Araújo, N. M. Rodrigues, E. H. L. Falcão, W. M. de Azevedo, N. B. da Costa Jr., M. B. Cardoso, R. O. Freire and S. A. Júnior, J. Lumin., 2017, 187, 555 CrossRef .
O. L. Malta, H. F. Brito, J. F. S. Menezes, F. R. Gonçalves e Silva, S. Alves, F. S. Farias and A. V. M. de Andrade, J. Lumin., 1997, 75, 255 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, L. Wu, X. Cao, X. Chen, W. Fang and M. Dolg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7986 CrossRef PubMed .
P. P. Lima, S. S. Nobre, R. O. Freire, S. A. Júnior, R. A. S. Ferreira, U. Pischel, O. L. Malta and L. D. Carlos, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17627 CrossRef .
F. R. Gonçalves e Silva, O. L. Malta, C. Reinhard, H.-U. Gűdel, C. Piguet, J. E. Moser and J.-C. G. Bűnzli, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 1670 CrossRef .
J. D. L. Dutra, T. D. Bispo and R. O. Freire, J. Comput. Chem., 2014, 35, 772 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. J. P. Stewart, MOPAC2012, Stewart Computational Chemistry, Colorado Springs, CO, USA,  2012, http://OpenMOPAC.net Search PubMed .

LUMPAC, Lanthanide Luminescence Software Package, Pople Computational Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, Brazil, http://www.lumpac.pro.br/ Search PubMed .

          A. A. Granovsky, Firefly version 8.1.0,  2014http://classic.chem.msu.su/gran/firefly/index.html Search PubMed .
T. B. Emelina, A. Ya. Freidzon, A. A. Bagaturyants and V. E. Karasev, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 7529 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Coban, A. Amjad, M. Aygun and H. Kara, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2017, 455, 25 CrossRef .
M. J. Beltrán-Leiva, P. Cantero-López, C. Zúñiga, A. Bulhões-Figueira, D. Páez-Hernández and R. Arratia-Pérez, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 9200 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Basurto, R. R. Zope and T. Baruah, Chem. Phys., 2016, 469-470, 1 CrossRef .
O. L. Malta, S. J. L. Ribeiro, M. Faucher and P. Porcher, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1991, 52, 587 CrossRef .
S. D. Xia and M. F. Reid, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1993, 54, 777 CrossRef .
J. Wen, M. F. Reid, L. X. Ning, J. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, C. K. Duan and M. Yin, J. Lumin., 2014, 152, 54 CrossRef .
F. Gutierrez, C. Tedeschi, L. Maron, J.-P. Daudey, J. Azema, P. Tisnès, C. Picard and R. Poteau, THEOCHEM, 2005, 756, 151–162 CrossRef .
D. L. Dexter and J. H. Schulman, J. Chem. Phys., 1954, 22, 1063 CrossRef .
F. Auzel, J. Lumin., 2002, 100, 125 CrossRef .
H. Dornhauf and J. Heber, J. Lumin., 1979, 20, 271 CrossRef .
F. Xiao, Y. N. Xue and Q. Y. Zhang, Physica B, 2009, 404, 3743 CrossRef .
Z. Xia, R.-S. Liu, K.-W. Huang and V. Droz, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15183 RSC .
K. Li, M. Xu, J. Fan, M. Shang, H. Lian and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11618 RSC .
S. Som and S. K. Sharma, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 415102 CrossRef .
H. Jing, C. Guo, G. Zhang, X. Su, Z. Yang and J. H. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13612 RSC .
J. Zhong, D. Chen, Y. Zhou, Z. Wan, M. Ding, W. Bai and Z. Jia, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4762 RSC .
J. Chen, Y.-G. Liu, L. Mei, Z. Wang, M. Fang and Z. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5516 RSC .
S.-P. Lee, C.-H. Huang and T.-M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8925 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Liu, G. Liu, X. Dong and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 97995 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Mei, H. Liu, M. Fang and Z. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9673 CrossRef PubMed .

International Tables of Crystallography, Volumes A–D, ed. T. Hahn. Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2005 Search PubMed .
W. G. Fateiey, N. T. McDevitt and F. F. Bentley, Appl. Spectrosc., 1971, 25, 55 Search PubMed .
Z. Xia, J. Zhuang, A. Meijerink and X. Jing, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 6327 RSC .
M. Müller and T. Jüstel, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 10368 RSC .
Z. Xia, S. Miao, M. Chen, M. S. Molokeev and Q. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7684 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Guo, Y. Huang, M. Yang, Y. Song, Y. Zheng and H. You, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15077 RSC .
Z. Fen and T. Wanjun, Opt. Mater., 2014, 37, 561 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Z. Xia and Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4197 RSC .
L. G. Van Uitert and L. F. Johnson, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 44, 3514 CrossRef .
L. G. Van Uitert, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1967, 114, 1048 CrossRef .
L. Ozawa, H. Forest, P. M. Jaffe and G. Ban, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 482 CrossRef .
L. Ozawa and P. M. Jaffe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1678 CrossRef .
H. Shihua and L. Liren, Chin. J. Lumin., 1990, 11, 1 Search PubMed .
F. Baur, F. Glocker and T. Jüstel, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2054 RSC .
M. Müller, S. Fischer and T. Jüstel, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 67979 RSC .
R. Reisfeld, E. Greenberg, R. Velapoldi and B. Barnett, J. Chem. Phys., 1972, 56, 1698 CrossRef .
X. Zhang and M. Gong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 7632 CrossRef .
W.-R. Liu, C.-H. Huang, C.-W. Yeh, J.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Chiu, Y.-T. Yeh and R.-S. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 9636 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Y. Liang, M. Zhang, M. Tong, G. Liab and S. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 98350 RSC .
F. Kang, Y. Zhang and M. Peng, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 1462 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ma, C. Ma, J. Zhang, J. Long, Z. Wen, X. Yuan and Y. Cao, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 454 CrossRef .
M. Back, R. Marin, M. Franceschin, N. S. Hancha, F. Enrichi, E. Travea and S. Polizzi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1906 RSC .
R. Reisfeld, J. Solid State Chem., 1972, 4, 417 CrossRef .
S. Miao, Z. Xia, M. S. Molokeev, J. Zhang and Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8322 RSC .
M. Chen, Z. Xia, M. S. Molokeev and Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 12477 RSC .
G. G. Li, D. L. Geng, M. M. Shang, Y. Zhang, C. Peng, Z. Y. Cheng and J. J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21882 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, G. Li, D. Geng, M. Shang, C. Peng and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 11655 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xin, D. Tu, H. Zhu, W. Luo, Z. Liu, P. Huang, R. Li, Y. Cao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7386 RSC .
H. J. Song, D. K. Yim, H.-S. Roh, I. S. Cho, S.-J. Kim, Y.-H. Jin, H.-W. Shim, D.-W. Kim and K. S. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 500 RSC .
L. Hu, Q. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wang and X. Peng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 104708 RSC .
Y. Shi, B. Liu, B. Liu, C. Lia and Z. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95953 RSC .
L. Li, M. Peng, B. Viana, J. Wang, B. Lei, Y. Liu, Q. Zhang and J. Qiu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 6028 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Müller, M.-F. Volhard and T. Jüstel, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 8483 RSC .
Y. Xia, Y.-G. Liu, Z. Huang, M. Fang, M. S. Molokeev and L. Mei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4675 RSC .
S. Miao, Z. Xia, M. S. Molokeev, M. Chen, J. Zhang and Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4616 RSC .
W. Geng, X. Zhou, J. Ding, G. Lia and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11605 RSC .
Z. Zhou, J. Zheng, R. Shi, N. Zhang, J. Chen, R. Zhang, H. Suo, E. M. Goldys and C. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6177 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Upasani, Opt. Mater., 2017, 64, 70 CrossRef .
J. Chen, C. Guo and T. Li, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2016, 8, 1374 CrossRef .
S. Dutta, S. Som and S. K. Sharma, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 9654 RSC .
Q. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Han, X. Li and G. Fu, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 515, 16 CrossRef .
J. Ding, Q. Wu, Y. Li, Q. Long, Y. Wang, X. Ma and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 10102 CrossRef .
Q. Dai, H. Song, M. Wang, X. Bai, B. Dong, R. Qin, X. Qu and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19399 CrossRef .
Q. Meng, B. Chen, W. Xu, Y. Yang, X. Zhao, W. Di, S. Lu and X. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 093505 CrossRef .
J. Han, F. Pan, W. Zhou, Z. Qiu, M. Tang, J. Wang and S. Lian, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 98026 RSC .
N. Guo, Y. Huang, H. You, M. Yang, Y. Song, K. Liu and Y. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 10907 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, D. Geng, M. Shang, X. Yang, Y. Kang, H. Zhang, H. Lian and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10222 CrossRef .
F. Auzel, J. Dexpert-Ghys and C. Gautier, J. Lumin., 1982, 27, 1 CrossRef .
F. K. Fong and D. J. Diestler, J. Chem. Phys., 1972, 56, 2875 CrossRef .
W. J. C. Grant, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 4, 648 CrossRef .
M. Bettinelli and C. D. Flint, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1990, 2, 8417 CrossRef .
W. Lenth, G. Huber and D. Fay, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 23, 3877 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, Z. Xia, M. S. Molokeev, L. Shia and Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9078 RSC .
T. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Yuan, Z. An, R. Chen, Y. Tao, H. Li, X. Xie and W. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10923 CrossRef PubMed .

The Phosphor Handbook, ed. W. M. Yen, Taylor and Francis,  2006, Section 2.1 and 2.6, eqn (34) and (35) Search PubMed .
D. L. Huber, D. S. Hamilton and B. Barnett, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1977, 16, 4642 CrossRef .
A. L. Rogach, T. A. Klar, J. M. Lupton, A. Meijerink and J. Feldmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1208 RSC .
W. T. Carnall, P. R. Fields and K. J. Rajnak, J. Chem. Phys., 1968, 49, 4450 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Peter A. Tanner
	After two short spells in the chemical industry, Prof. Peter Tanner completed the Cert. Ed. Degree at the University of Birmingham. He has taught in secondary, further and higher education. He studied the PhD degree in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Colin Flint at London University (1980) and was awarded the DSc degree in 1996 by University of Surrey (where he previously studied the MSc in Spectroscopy course). He retired from City University of Hong Kong in 2011 after 22 years thereat and subsequently taught at The Education University of Hong Kong, Sun Yat-sen University, South China University of Technology and the University of Kyoto before joining the Chemistry Department of Hong Kong Baptist University in 2017 as a Visiting Professor. His research focuses upon environmental and analytical chemistry in addition to solid-state spectroscopy and energy transfer.

Lei Zhou
	Lei Zhou was born in Ningxia, China. He earned his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from Sun Yat-sen University in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Hongbin Liang. Subsequently he worked as a postdoctoral researcher for two years in the field of materials chemistry together with Prof. Mingmei Wu at Sun Yat-sen University. In September 2018 he will join Prof. Xiaogang Liu at the National University of Singapore as a postdoctoral researcher. His research interests focus on the development of novel lanthanide-doped luminescent materials and energy transfer studies, for applications in new fields such as electronic paper, 3D printing artwork and 3D display. He has published 16 papers in international refereed journals.

Ka-Leung Wong
	The research of Prof. Ka-Leung Wong (Gary) mainly focuses on lanthanide chemistry for spectroscopic studies, molecular imaging and cancer therapy. He completed the PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Wong at the University of Hong Kong in 2006 and was awarded a Royal Society post-doctoral fellowship with Professor Parker at Durham University in 2008. He joined the Department of Chemistry at Hong Kong Baptist University as a faculty member and was promoted to Professor in 2017 and Head of Department in February 2018. Prof. Wong has published more than 100 articles in peer reviewed journals. He serves as the main editor of Journal of Luminescence (Elsevier) and is a member of the international advisory board of ChemPlusChem (Wiley). He was also awarded an international prize, the 2015 European Rare Earth and Actinide Society (ERES) Junior Award. He is a co-founder of the spin-off company “New Life Medicine Technology Limited”.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Multiplexing of emission in three dimensions. The combination of x emission wavelengths (e.g., from different quantum dot sizes) with y emission decay times (e.g., from different Tb3+ donor to quantum dot acceptor distances) and z emission intensities (e.g., from microbeads doped with different concentrations of Tb3+–quantum dot hybrid nanoparticles) can offer zxy different distinct signals for multiplexed sensing or optical barcoding. This example of 5 colours, 3 decay times and 3 intensities leads to 14348907 different codes.2 (Reprinted with permission from N. Hildebrandt, K. D. Wagner and W. R. Algar, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 125. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V. Netherlands.) (b) (i) Design of a multilayered KSc2F7 nanorod comprising different Yb–X (X = Ho, Er, Tm) pairs separately incorporated in layers and thickness-tuneable pure KSc2F7 interlayers to manipulate cross-relaxation ET (as shown above) in one single nanorod. (ii) Shows the integrated luminescence intensity of KSc2F7 doped with Yb, Tm, Er, Ho (labelled Tm/Er/Ho) compared with the two nanorods illustrated in the figure. The effect of the KSc2F7 interlayer manipulates cross-relaxation ET (adapted from ref. 4). (c) Structures of (i) dimeric [Eu2(dpm)6] and (ii) monomeric [Eu(dpm)2(NO3)(tppo)2] complexes (dpm dipivaloylmethanate; tppo triphenylphosphine oxide). (iii) Qualitative energy level diagram of the intramolecular ET mechanism for these complexes. The ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) state is correlated with the chelating [in (i)] and chelate-bridging [in (ii)] coordination modes of the dpm ligand and the monomeric complex exhibits higher luminescence intensity because the state is at higher energy and has a reduced quenching effect.5 (Reproduced from Y. C. Miranda, L. L. A. L. Pereira, J. H. P. Barbosa, H. F. Brito, M. C. F. C. Felinto, O. L. Malta, W. M. Faustino and E. E. S. Teotonio, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 2015, 3019 with permission, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (d) Cell-permeable ytterbium complex showing reversible binding with Hg2+ by a carbodithiote claw in aqueous solution and in vitro by off–on rhodamine visible and Yb3+ NIR emission by ET from 4-(phenylethynyl)pyridine antenna. The trapping of Hg2+ produces a ring opening of the rhodamine-B unit and triggers emission.6 (Reproduced with permission from G. Bao, S. Zha, Z. Liu, C.-F. Chan, H. Li, P.-H. Chu, D. Jin, P. A. Tanner and K.-L. Wong, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 120, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (e) (i) Principle of X-ray activated scandium nanoparticles (ScNPs) acting as an X-ray transducer for photodynamic therapy (PDT) by 1O2 production. (ii) PDT mechanism. The ET from ScNPs to photosensitizer leads to singlet state excitation and then intersystem crossing to the long-lived triplet state which transfers energy to nearby oxygen molecules and generates 1O2 in most cases by pathway type II which can damage surrounding cells.7 (Reproduced from A. Kamkaew, F. Chen, Y. Zhan, R. L. Majewski and W. Cai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3918 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Changes in lifetime and emission spectrum of Ce3+ in the presence of Tb3+ due to ET. (a) The decay curve of Ce3+ emission for Ba0.94Ce0.025Tb0.005Na0.030CaBO3F (λex = 357 nm, λem = 400 nm) at 295 K fitted by a monoexponential function. The inset shows the shortening of the Ce3+ lifetime with increasing Tb3+ concentration: plotting of Ce3+ decay times, τD, against Tb3+ concentration ratio, x, for Ba0.95−2xCe0.025TbxNa0.025+xCaBO3F. (b) Energy level diagram showing a schematic of the Ce3+ → Tb3+ ET process. HS high spin, LS low spin. (c) The Ce3+ emission intensity decreases in the presence of Tb3+ and excitation into a Ce3+ absorption band also gives Tb3+ emission: (i) using 344 nm excitation, broad Ce3+ emission (shaded green) and Tb3+ emission (shaded blue) are observed; (ii), (iii) the excitation spectrum of Tb3+ emission at 544 nm exhibits Ce3+ absorption bands (shaded green) in addition to the host lattice absorption, using a conventional spectrometer (ii) and a synchrotron (iii) to probe the vacuum ultraviolet region. (Adapted from ref. 9.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Simple illustration of ED (f → d) and EQ (f → f) transitions. The colours represent the phases (+ or −) of wavefunctions which are important for bonding properties.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic ED–ED resonant transfer between donor (Ce3+) and acceptor (Eu2+). The horizontal bars show linked processes. Notice that the donor and acceptor transitions are resonant in energy and that they are both ED allowed. The donor lifetime is monoexponential with lifetime τD: I(t) = I(0)exp[−(1/τD) − WET]t; (b) transfer from one donor to several acceptors at different distances: the donor decay is no longer characterized by a monoexponential lifetime: .18 Migration between donor ions leading to ET to acceptors (c) and to defect/trap sites (d). (Adapted from ref. 34 with permission, copyright University of Utrecht, 2015.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Ce3+ emission decay, showing excitation and emission spectra of Sr4.998Ce0.001Na0.001(PO4)3Cl (adapted from ref. 36). Fitting of Ce3+ emission intensity decay on a (b) linear ordinate (I = I0 + Aexp(−t/τD): τD = 24.31 ± 0.04 ns; Radj2 = 0.99906) and (c) logarithmic ordinate (ln(I) = lnA − t/τD: τD = 24.75 ± 0.07 ns; Radj2 = 0.98387) scale. It is advisable to use fewer parameters as in (c). Alternatively, I0 in (b) can be removed by baseline subtraction prior to fitting. (d) Emission decay of LaPO4 nanoparticles doped with 5% and 90% Tb3+ followed for five lifetimes. The emission decay deviates from monoexponential (τD = 2.71 ms, Radj2 = 0.9989) for isolated Tb3+ ions and migration between Tb3+ to traps occurs more at the higher dopant ion concentration and leads to a shorter lifetime (τD = 1.19 ms, Radj2 = 0.9916). (We thank Luo Yuxia for providing this data.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A single molecule FRET event starts when a molecule labeled by a donor (green)–acceptor (red) pair diffuses into a volume of large laser intensity near the focal point. The counts for detected photon emissions from the acceptor and donor are recorded until the molecule diffuses out of the focal volume (top right). During the donor excitation either a photon is emitted or energy is nonradiatively transferred to the acceptor and emitted with rates dependent upon the molecular conformation (lower right). (b) The FRET process is shown for donor–acceptor dyes Cy3 and Cy5.50 (Reproduced from with permission from B. Wallace and P. J. Atzberger, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0177122(1–22). Copyright 2017 Wallace, Atzberger.)	 

 		 
Box 1. Comparison of calculation of R0 by Förster and Dexter equations. The figures a–l are referred to in the calculations below.We take as an example, the nonradiative ET from the 4-(phenylethynyl)pyridine moiety (4P) to a rhodamine B unit (Rh).6Förster method(i) Baseline correct the emission spectrum of the 4P donor: wavelength col(A), counts col(B).(ii) Measure the emission area by integration: 2.7479017 × 107 (fig. a).(iii) Divide the counts column (B) by this number, giving col(C), so that the area becomes 1.0000 in fig. b.(iv) Display the baseline corrected absorption spectrum of the Rh acceptor: wavelength col(D), molar absorptivity col(E) in Fig. c. col(D) wavelengths must match those of col(A) exactly along each row.(v) Multiply col(E) by col(C) and [col(A)]4 to give col(G): i.e., col(G) = col(E) × col(C) × [col(A)]4 × dλ, where dλ is the wavelength separation between the individual column values – in this case 1 nm. Sum up the values in col(G) (for example using Descriptive Statistics on Columns in Origin software) to give 6.9929 × 1013 M−1 cm−1 (nm)4: this value is the spectral overlap integral, . In fact, we have used summation, not integration because the graphs of emission and absorption are plotted on two different sets of ordinates. Notice that the plot of the spectral overlap integral does not look like that given in most of the literature. Here, col(G) has been plotted against wavelength (we can use col(A) or col(D) as the wavelength abscissa – they are the same) to get Fig. d.If, instead of multiplying each row value by λ4, we have taken λ4 outside the integral as a constant, average value (say, 520 nm) then the plot of col(E) × col(C) × dλ = col(F) looks smaller at longer wavelengths, Fig. e, but gives the spectral overlap value of Jλ = 6.7437 × 1013 M−1 cm−1 (nm)4, which differs from the above value by 3.6%.(vi) Using the value of Jλ = 6.9929 × 1013 M−1 cm−1 (nm)4, insertion into the formula:R0 = 0.02108[ϕDκ2n−4Jλ]1/6with κ2 = 2/3; n = 1.5; ϕD ∼ 1, gives R0 = 3.05 nm = 30.5 Å.Dexter method(i) Change the baseline-corrected emission spectrum into an ordinate scale of energy. I(E) = I(λ)λ2: col(Y) = col(B) × λ2. Change the abscissa into eV: col(X) = 1239.84/col(A). Plot Fig. f: the baseline is shown.(ii) Normalize the area by dividing col(Y) by 3.334 × 1010. col(Z) = col(Y)/3.334 × 1010. Plot col(Z) vs. col(X) as Fig. g.(iii) For the baseline corrected absorption spectrum, convert the ordinate to σ (col(N)) and the abscissa to eV (col(M)). σ = (ln10 × 1000/L) × ε; L = Avogadro number and σ is in cm2, Fig. h. ; so QA = 2.943 × 10−17 cm2 eV−1.(iv) Normalize the plot of σ and energy: col(P) = col(N)/2.943 × 10−17. Plot col(P) and col(M) in Fig. i.(v) Using the summation , as in the Förster Method, with matching energy, col(M), in each row of col(Z) and col(P):col(Q) = col(Z)[i] × col(P)[i] × −(col(M)[i + 1] − col(M)[i])/{col(M)[i]}4 = 0.00255, where the square brackets represent the rows, col(Q) is plotted vs. col(M) in Fig. j.  Taking κ2 = 2/3; n = 1.5; and  for comparison with Förster method.  R0 = 28.5 Å(vi) Using the Blasse approach,56 overlap the normalized emission (col(Z)) and absorption (col(P)) spectra on the energy scale col(M) (Fig. k) and measure overlap area in Fig. l. This overlap area, . Take an average value of E ∼ 2.519 eV.    R0 = 27.8 ÅThe results from the Förster and Dexter methods are similar: 28.5 Å and 30.5 Å, differing by 7% due to baseline errors. Taking the wavelength or energy as a constant and removing it from the integral gives a slightly lower answer in each case.	R0 = 0.02108[ϕDκ2n−4Jλ]1/6		 		 		 		 	R0 = 28.5 Å		 		 		 		 	R0 = 27.8 Å
R0 = 0.02108[ϕDκ2n−4Jλ]1/6

 		 

 		 
R0 = 28.5 Å

 		 

 		 
R0 = 27.8 Å
R0 = 0.02108[ϕDκ2n−4Jλ]1/6

 		 

 		 
R0 = 28.5 Å

 		 

 		 
R0 = 27.8 Å
	(1)
κ = (μD·μA) − 3(R·μD)(R·μA)	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Angles and vectors relevant to the calculation of the orientation factor, κ2. The vectors μD and μA are the donor and acceptor transition dipole moments and R is the centre to centre separation vector.46 (Reprinted with permission from T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle, Govindjee and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.)	 
WET(Förster) = WET(Dexter) × f4	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Experiments to show that the nonradiative ET rate is independent of the photonic environment. (a) Ce3+ emission decay at 340 nm from LaPO4:Ce3+ (1%) nanocrystals dispersed in solvents of different refractive index, from 1.36 (methanol, red) to 1.51 (DMSO, purple). The decay is assumed to be purely radiative. (b) Emission decay curves for LaPO4:Ce3+(1%)Tb3+(20%) nanocrystals, where efficient ET from Ce3+ to Tb3+ is possible. (c) Dividing decay curves of (b) by those of (a) reveals the contribution of ET and shows that it is independent of the refractive index of the solvents used. (d) Emission spectra of LaPO4:Ce3+(1%)Tb3+(2%) nanocrystals normalized to the Ce3+ emission intensity (between 310 nm and 400 nm) in different solvents. The inset is a zoom of the 5D4 → 7F6 Tb3+ emission band showing a decrease in Tb3+ emission intensity with increasing refractive index of the solvent. (e) Plot of the intensity ratio of Tb3+ emission (470–630 nm) and Ce3+ emission (310–400 nm) as a function of solvent refractive index. There is a ∼19% increase from DMSO to methanol in agreement with the solid black line from calculation.58 (Reproduced from F. T. Rabouw, S. A. den Hartog, T. Senden and A. Meijerink, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3610 with permission. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.)	 
ID(t) = ID(0)exp[−(1/τD + WET)t]	(4)
ID(t) = ID(0)exp[(−1 − (R0/R)6)(t/τD)]	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
R0 = 0.02108[ϕDκ2n−4Jλ]1/6	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
ND(t) = N0Dexp(−kt)f(t)	(14)

 	Fig. 9  (a) The time evolution of donor decay under various conditions illustrated by a schematic semilog plot of f(t) in eqn (14) against t. (i) Non-exponential decay for D–A transfer in the absence of D–D transfer, eqn (15); (ii) diffusion limited case: D–A transfer as in (i) together with weak D–D migration. The decay eventually becomes exponential; (iii) faster D–D migration but with the same D–A rate as in (i), (ii). The decay becomes monoexponential after a short time; (iv) very fast D–D migration. Excited donor ions sense an average acceptor environment. The decay is monoexponential, eqn (16). (Adapted from ref. 51, p. 458 and ref. 99). (b) Decay curves of the 3H4 →3H6 emission of Tm3+ under resonant excitation in [Lu1−xTmx]3Ga5O12 fitted by the Martín model for ED–ED transfer: x = 0.01 (i), 0.02 (ii), 0.03 (iii), 0.04 (iv) and 0.05 (v). (Adapted from ref. 111.)	 
	(15)
	(16)

(i) Ln–Ln ET	
	
	
	

ED	ΔJ = 0, 1	
J = 0 to J = 0 excluded. Dominant for interconfigurational transitions, 4fN−15d1 ↔ 4fN. Involves parity change.	Ce3+ and Eu2+: 5d → 4f	

Forced ED	6 ≥ ΔJ ≥ 0	Forbidden for J = 0 to J = 0 and J = 0 to/from J odd. Applies to 4f–4f transitions.	Eu3+: 5D0 → 7F2,4,6	
87

EQ	ΔJ ≤ 2	Except for J = 0 → J = 0, 1; very weak for ΔJ > 2. Initial and final states are same parity.	Yb3+: 2F5/2–2F7/2	
87

Exchange	|J − J′| = 0, 1	
J′ = J = 0 excluded.	Eu3+: 5D1 → 5D0	
129



(ii) Ligand–Ln ET	
	
	
	

Dipole-2λ pole and dipole–dipole	|J − J′| < λ ≤ J + J′	The part of the selection rule for the ion with 2λ pole: J′ = J = 0 excluded; λ = 2, 4 or 6. The selection rule may be relaxed by J-mixing (for example, Eu3+ 7F2 mixing with 7F0).	Eu3+ transfer from 7F0 to 5D2, 5L6, 5G6, 5D4. 7F0 to 5D0,1 forbidden.	
28, 127 and 130

Exchange	|J − J′| = 0, 1	
J′ = J = 0 excluded.	ET involving Eu3+ 7F0–5D0 forbidden, but relaxed by J-mixing; Eu3+ 7F0–5D1

 	Fig. 10  (a) Energy level diagram and upconversion processes in IR-808 dye sensitized core–shell–shell nanoparticles (CSS) upon 808 nm excitation. The surface antenna dye first absorbs the 808 nm excitation radiation (12376 cm−1, shown not to scale, red arrow), and then emits broadband near IR photons. The Nd3+ and Yb3+ ions confined in the outer shell harvest these photons and after internal nonradiative relaxation, the Yb3+ 2F5/2 and Nd3+ 4F3/2 states are populated. The Yb3+ ions in the transition layer extract the excitation energy from these sensitizers, followed by energy migration over the Yb3+ sublattice, and finally ET to Er3+ ions embedded in the core zone. Red (4F9/2 → 4I15/2) and green (4S3/2 → 4I15/2) Er3+ emission results. The transition layer serves as a shield to prevent the undesired quenching effects between the activator (Er3+) and sensitizer (Nd3+). The Nd3+/Yb3+ coupled active-shell in combination with dye-sensitization on the surface can enlarge the absorptivity of the nanostructure and boost the up-conversion intensity of CSS nanoparticles upon 808 nm excitation. The inset depicts the nanoparticle structure.131 (Reproduced with permission from J. Xu, M. Sun, Y. Kuang, H. Bi, B. Liu, D. Yang, R. Lv, S. Gai, F. He and P. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1495. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Schematic representation of the cooperative and accretive quantum cutting pathways for ET from Tb3+ to Yb3+. The red arrows indicate excitation of Tb3+ into the 5D4 state. Downconversion then occurs from one Tb3+ to two Yb3+ ions (labelled Yb13+ and Yb23+). Two mechanisms are depicted by dotted lines and in both an opposite parity (e.g., 5d) virtual state is indicated. This state belongs to Yb3+ in the accretive mechanism and to Tb3+ in the cooperative mechanism. The resonance condition implies that the transition energy of Tb3+ balances the sum of the transition energies of Yb3+. The authors found that the cooperative mechanism was more important for Y0.99−xYbxTb0.01PO4 (x between 0.05 and 0.99). (Adapted from ref. 132.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic mechanisms of second harmonic generation (SHG), two-photon absorption (TPA), excited state absorption (ESA), photon avalanche (PA) and cross-relaxation ET upconversion (ETU). The red dotted arrows indicate emission. (Adapted from ref. 154.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Upconverted Er3+ emission (λexc = 975 nm) from 25 nm NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles coated with silica with (blue line) and without (dashed red line) 12 nm gold shell. (b) Atomic force microscope line profile with (c) height image of a single Au-coated nanoparticle. (Adapted from ref. 176, Open access.)	 
Φ = ξabsϕsensϕem = ξabsϕiscϕetτ/τR	(17)


[Eu(btfa)3(dmbpy)]	Sparkle/PM6	T1 → 5D1	
	6 × 109	Only S1–5D4, T1–5D1 and T1–5D0 considered	
205

T1 → 5D0	8 × 109	
λ
exc 370 nm


Eu(TTA)2Tpy-OCH3·2H2O in film	Sparkle/RM1	S1 → 5D4	
	1 × 104	
λ
exc 365 nm but S1 at 307 nm	
206

T1 → 5D1	−1 × 1015	T1 at 658 nm
T1 → 5D0	−8 × 1011	



Eu(L1)3(C2H5OH)2	Sparkle/PM3	—	
	—	
λ
exc 400 nm. Quantum yields calculated	
207

Eu(L2)3(C2H5OH)2	LUMPAC
[Eu(tfaa)3bpy]	Sparkle/RM1	S → 5D4	
	5 × 103	
λ
exc not given but appears to be below the energy of S (270 nm) chosen for ET pathway	
208

T1 → 5D1	
	5 × 109
T1 → 5D0	
	1 × 1011
[Eu(tfaa)3H2O]	Sparkle/RM1	S → 5D4	
	2 × 104	
208

T1 → 5D1	
	1 × 1011
T1 → 5D0	
	1 × 1011


[Eu(tfaa)3phen]	Sparkle/RM1	S → 5D4	
	4 × 102	
λ
exc not given but appears to be below the energy of S (261 nm) chosen for ET pathway	
209

T1 → 5D1	7 × 106
T1 → 5D0	7 × 106
Na[Eu(L1′)4]	Malta model	S1 → 5L6	975	4 × 105	
λ
exc 320 nm is applicable to singlet S1 excitation	
197

S1 → 5G3	8834	2 × 105	Eu3+ (5DJ, 5LJ, 5GJ) and Tb (5DJ, 5GJ, 5LJ, 5HJ, 5FJ, 5IJ) included in the calculations
S1 → 5D3	11045	2 × 105	Exchange and multipole mechanisms
S1 → 5G6	8235	2 × 105	

T1 → 5D1	4216	2 × 102	

Na[Eu(L2′)4]	S1 → 5G6	4425	7 × 104	

S1 → 5D4	3546	5 × 104	

S1 → 5G3	5043	4 × 104	


5D1 → T1	1040	6 × 102	

T1 → 5D0	748	4 × 102	

Na[Tb(L1′)4]	S1 → 5G6	8420	3 × 106	

S1 → 5G5	7132	1 × 106	

S1 → 5L7	5556	1 × 106	

T1 → 5D4	2642	8 × 102	


5G6 → T1	3412	7 × 102	

Na[tb(L2′)4]	S1 → 5G5	3322	2 × 106	

S1 → 5L7	1746	5 × 105	

S1 → 5L9	2746	4 × 105	

S1 → 5L8	2030	4 × 105	

T1 → 5D4	2614	3 × 102	


5D4 → T1	2614	2 × 103	


5L7 → S1	1746	8 × 102	



[Eu2(Ibf)6(phen)2]	Sparkle/RM1	S1→ 5D4	
	8.5	
λ
exc 334 nm is below the energy of S1	
210

T1 → 5D1	1 × 109
T1 → 5D0	8 × 108


Eu2O3	Sparkle/RM1	
5D1 → 5D0	
	5 × 104	
λ
exc 395 nm	
211



EuMELL	Sparkle/RM1	S1 → 5D4	
	17	
λ
exc not given	
212

T1 → 5D1	1 × 1010
T1 → 5D0	2 × 1010

 	Fig. 13  Rate constants (s−1) and energy levels (103 cm−1) of the [Eu(tfaa)3bpy] complex (tfaa = 1,1,1-trifluoro-2,4-pentanedione and bpy = 2,2′-bipyridyl) showing the most probable channels for ET processes as calculated by the Sparkle/RM1 model in LUMPAC. (Adapted from ref. 208). Refer to Table 2 for comment.	 

 	Fig. 14  Photophysical processes in [Eu(cfqH)(cfq)(H2O)4]2+ (cfqH is ciprofloxacin). Schematic diagram of excitation (upward orange arrow), nonradiative relaxation (wavy blue arrow) and intersystem crossing from S1, the first excited singlet state of the ligand, to the triplet level T1 (yellow block arrow) and energy transfer from T1 to Eu3+ 5D2/5D1 (red block arrow), followed by internal conversion (black wavy arrows) and emission from 5D0 (downward red arrow). (Adapted from ref. 221 with permission, copyright American Chemical Society, 2016.)	 
	(18)
	(19)
	(20a)
	(20b)
	(21)

Na3LuSi2O7	Eu2+	20.3234	22.3	18, not 24, Na+ cation sites in Bravais cell	Lu1 6.282; Lu2 5.441
Y2O3	Eu3+	11.2235	8.9	
x is 0.1, not 0.05; without distinguishing C3i and C2 sites	

Y2O3	Tb3+	19.2235	15.3	
x is 0.02, not 0.01; without distinguishing C3i and C2 sites	

Ba2Y(BO3)2Cl	Ce3+	23.0236	23.0	Ionic radii Gd(VII):Y(VII) = 1:0.925	3.82(?)
Ba2Gd(BO3)2Cl	Ce3+	33.4236	33.4	
	Ba2Ho…3.737; Ba2Yb…3.695
Ca2Al3O6F	Eu2+	18.0233	14.3	24, not 12, Ca2+ in Bravais cell	3.99
KMg4(PO4)3	Eu2+	35.8241	35.9	16, not 12, Mg2+ in Bravais cell	Mg1 3.744; Mg2 3.965
KMg4(PO4)3	Mn2+	7.9238	11.3
Ca4(PO4)2O	Ce3+	26.384	16.8	16, not 4, Ca2+, in Bravais cell	Ca1 3.548; Ca2 3.484; Ca3 3.362; Ca4 3.513; Ca5 3.553; Ca6 3.484; Ca7 3.362; Ca8 3.380
Ca4(PO4)2O	Eu2+	16.884	10.6

 	Fig. 15  Room temperature spectra (a) and emission decays (b) of Sr5−2xCexNax(PO4)3Cl under 317 nm wavelength excitation depicting the effects of change in Ce3+ concentration. The sodium ion preserves charge neutrality. The inset in (a) shows that the maximum emission intensity occurs for x = 0.05. The emission decay in (b), measured at 370 nm, is monoexponential and decreases continuously with increasing Ce3+ concentration. (Adapted from ref. 36.)	 


22	(ID/ID0) ∝ [1/(1 + βR−n)]	
250
	(i)–(iv); see (G4)	

23	
I
D/ID0 = [1 + β(cA/cA0)s/3]−1	
251
	(i)–(iv); see (G5) and (H3)	Ce3+–Mn2+256
24	
I
D0/ID ∝ (cA)s/3	
257
	(i)–(iv) and β(cA/cA0)s/3 ≫ 1	Ce3+–Tb3+;258 Eu2+–Mn2+;238,259 Er3+–Eu3+;240 Tb3+–Eu3+;255 Ce3+–Tb3+;260 Eu3+–Bi3+;261 Ce3+–Eu2+;78 Ce3+–Cr3+;262 Tb3+–Eu3+263
25	
I
0/ID ∝ (cD + cA)s/3	
264
	Invalid derivation; as for eqn (24) and insertion of cD	Ce3+–Eu2+;246,265,266 Ce3+–Mn2+–Tb3+;267 Ce3+–Tb3+;249,268 Eu3+–Tb3+;235 Ce3+–Sm3+;269 Eu2+–Mn2+;234,248 Ce3+–Cr3+262
26	
I
D/ID0 ∝ [1 + β(cD/cD0)s/3]−1	
250
	As eqn (23) cD ≫ cA; cA constant; fast migration	

27	
I
D/cD = 1/(1 + βcDs/3)	
252 and 253
	See (G8); assume k = 1	Eu2+;234,270 Ce3+236
28	
I
D/cD = k/(1 + βcDs/3)	
252
	See (G8) and (H3)	Mn2+;271 Eu3+;237,272 Er3+;240 Bi2+;273 Eu2+;83,233,241,274,275 Ce3+;80,239,246,265,266,276,277 Mn4+;278 Tb3+;279 Eu2+280
29	
I
D/cD = k/(βcDs/3)	
	Invalid derivation. (βcDs/3) ≫ 1	Dy3+;281,282 Eu3+/Tb3+;235 Ce3+;265 Eu2+;234 Eu3+283
30	log(ID/cA) = (−s/d)logcA + logf	
254
	(i)–(iv); cross-relaxation. d = 3; see (I4)	Eu3+;284 Tb3+285
31	
I
D/cA = k/(βcAs/3)	
	See (A3)	Tb3+285
32	
τ
a/τ0 = [1 + β(cA/cA0)s/3]−1	
251
	(i)–(v); τa drawn by tangent construction	

33	
τ
D0/τD ∝ cAs/3	
	Invalid derivation; τa = τD; β(cA/cA0)s/3 ≫ 1	Ce3+–Eu2+;84 Ce3+–Mn2+;256 Eu2+–Mn2+;286,287 Ce3+288
34	[1 − ηET]−1 ∝ cAs/3	
255
	Invalid derivation. As for eqn (33) with ηET = 1 − (τD/τD0)	Tb3+–Eu3+255

 	Fig. 16  Emission decay of Ce3+ donor with variable Eu2+ acceptor concentration in Ca2.8−xCe0.1EuxNa0.1Sc2Si3O12 at room temperature fitted by various equations. (a) Inokuti–Hirayama fits for ED–ED ET using different acceptor concentrations, eqn (D1), s = 6 (adapted from ref. 94); (b) Dornhauf–Heber fits for ED–ED ET, eqn (D3), s = 6; (c) Fit using eqn (23) with slope s/3; (d) fit using eqn (24) with slope s/3; (e) fit using eqn (25) with slope s/3; (f) Fit using eqn (30) and (31) with slope of –s/3. The value of s = 5.7 but the linearity is poor; (g) direct fit of eqn (24) for s = 6, 8, 10.	 
(ID0/ID) = 1 + β(cA/cA0)s/3 → (ID0/ID) = β(cA)s/3 [23] → [24]
or (ID0/ID) = β(cD + cA)s/3 [23] → [25]

 	Fig. 17  Fit of Ce3+ emission decay at room temperature with variable Ce3+ concentration in Ca2.94−2xCexEu0.06NaxSc2Si3O12 (λex = 440 nm, λem = 550 nm) using eqn (29), slope = −s/3.	 
(M mass, L length, T time. Commonly used units are given).	


W
ET
	Energy transfer rate (s−1)

ϕ
D
	Quantum yield of the donor emission in the absence of the acceptor (between 0–1)

ϕ
DA
	Quantum yield of the donor emission in the presence of the acceptor (between 0–1)

ϕ
DA/ϕD	Quantum yield of energy transfer (donor luminescence yield)

τ
	Lifetime of the excited state of the donor in the presence of the acceptor (s)

τ
0 = 1/k0	Lifetime of ion at very dilute concentration doped into a transparent host lattice (s)

τ
D
	Donor lifetime in the absence of the acceptor = 1/(krad + knonrad) = 1/k (s)

τ
Dr
	Radiative (= intrinsic or natural) lifetime of the donor = τD/ϕD = 1/krad (s)

τ
0Dr
	Natural lifetime of the donor in vacuo (s)

c
X
	X = A acceptor, X = D donor concentration (m−3)

c
0
	Critical acceptor concentration, when D–A distance is R0 (m−3)


	Integrated absorption cross-section (e.g., cm2 eV)

W
Q
	Quenching rate = 1/τ − 1/τD (s−1)

η(ET)	Energy transfer efficiency = 1 − ϕDA/ϕD =  or 1 − (τ/τD) for monoexponential lifetime (dimensionless)

σ
	The absorption cross-section [L2] (e.g., cm2)

ν
	Radiation frequency = ω/2π (Hz or s−1), where ω is circular frequency (rad s−1)

ε
	Dielectric constant of medium = ε0n2 (F m−1)

ε
0
	The vacuum permittivity (8.854187817 × 10−12 F m−1)

E = hν	Energy (eV or J)

P
X
	Oscillator strength of X (dimensionless)


	Electric field strength of incident electromagnetic radiation (N C−1 or V m−1)


	Average of the electric field in the dielectric for that of the incident electromagnetic radiation,  (N C−1 or V m−1)


	Electric field experienced by a particle in the medium (N C−1 or V m−1)

α
(s)DA
	Microparameter representing the energy transfer strength for interactions s = 6, 8 or 10:  where s denotes the interaction type for αDA and WET and the power for R (cms s−1)

f
	Local field correction for the electric field amplitude of radiation experienced by a chromophore:  (no units)

D
	Diffusion constant (cm2 s−1)

n
	refractive index of the medium (dimensionless)

κ
2
	Orientation factor of donor and acceptor; value between 0 and 4; average value 2/3

α
	Linear absorption coefficient (m−1)

I(x)	Emission intensity at time x (W m−2 or other units)

I
D0, ID	Intensity of donor emission without and with the presence of acceptors

L
	Avogadro number (6.022140857 × 1023 mol−1)

h
	Planck constant (6.62607004× 10−34 J s)

m
	Electron mass (9.10938356 × 10−31 kg)

e
	Electron charge (1.6021766208 × 10−19 C)

c
	The speed of light (2.99792458 × 108 m s−1)

Γ(x)	The gamma function , see for example, http://mathworld.wolfram.com/GammaFunction.html

ε
A
	Molar decadic absorption coefficient of acceptor (M−1 cm−1 or in SI units m2 mol−1)
	(A1)
	(A2)
	(A3)
	(A4)
	(A5)
	(B1)
	(B2)
	(B3)
	(B4)
	(B5)

 		 
	(C1)
	(C2)
	(C3)
	(C4)
	(C5)
	(C6)
	(C7)
	(D1)
	(D2)
	(D3)
	(D4)
	(D5)
	(E1)
	(E2)
	(E3)
	(F1)
	(F2)
	(F3)
	(F4)
	(F5)
	(G1)
	(G2)
	(G3)
	(G4)
	(G5)
Pem ∝ [1 + βcDs/3]−1	(G6)
	(G7)
	(G8)
k = k0 + kD′ where kD′ = αcAD3/4	(H1)
	(H2)
	(H3)
ID ∝ α(1−s/d)Γ(1 + s/d)	(I1)
α = cD × Γ(1 − d/s)[X0(1 + A)/γ]d/s	(I2)
ID = constant × cD(1−s/d) and ID/cD = constant′ × cD−s/d = Table 4, eqn (31)	(I3)
log(ID/cD) = (−s/d)logcD + constant′′ = Table 4, eqn (30)	(I4)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
