Retrieving and converting energy from polymers: deployable technologies and emerging concepts  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE41360H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE41360H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3467-3482Retrieving and converting energy from polymers: deployable technologies and emerging concepts

        
          
            Bilge 
            Baytekin†
, 
      
        
          
            H. Tarik 
            Baytekin†
 and 

        
          
            Bartosz A. 
            Grzybowski
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3113, USA. E-mail: grzybor@northwestern.edu;  Fax: +1-847-467-1257;   Tel: +1-847-491-3024
Received 
      22nd April 2013
    , Accepted 19th August 2013First published on 20th August 2013AbstractEvery year, several tens of million tonnes of polymers end up as waste. Contrary to popular belief and optimistic media stories of ever-improving recycling efforts, only a small fraction – indeed, a few percent – of this polymeric litter is actually being recycled and reused. In the U.S., some 3 million tonnes of plastics are recycled annually, yet over 28 million tonnes age unproductively – if the energy of this waste could be harnessed at a moderate 50% efficiency, the greater Chicago area would glow and spark almost all year round! Fortunately, significant progress is being made in technologies that aim at retrieving energy from waste polymers. On the large, often industrial, scales, polymers are being incinerated, pyrolized, and chemically degraded. Some of these technologies can produce viable fuels at costs as low as $0.75 per gallon, some five times smaller than what Mr Smith nowadays pays at the gas pump. There is also plenty of interesting, exploratory science done at smaller scales, where polymers are used in electrostatic or piezoelectric generators, or as materials converting mechanical to chemical energy. Several proof-of-concept devices have been shown to produce enough energy to power personal electronic devices or drive laboratory-scale chemical reactions. Together, the large- and small-scale technologies constitute a realistic strategy to retrieve a sizeable fraction of energy stored in polymers that would otherwise be only presenting a serious environmental concern.Bilge BaytekinBilge Baytekin received her BSc and MSc degrees from METU (Ankara, Turkey), and her PhD degree in Chemistry from Free University of Berlin, Germany in 2008 under the supervision of Professor Christoph A. Schalley with summa cum laude. She has been working with Professor Bartosz A. Grzybowski at Northwestern University as a postdoctoral researcher since 2009. She has authored some 25 publications in high ranking journals on topics ranging from organic and polymer materials to static electricity and mechanochemistry.H. Tarik BaytekinH. Tarik Baytekin received his PhD from METU (Ankara, Turkey). He received a DAAD fellowship for his postdoctoral studies in Germany, and worked at Bonn University, Free University of Berlin, and in Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und Prüfung (BAM). In 2009, he moved to Northwestern University, where he is working as a Senior Research Associate in Prof. Bartosz A. Grzybowski's group. He is the author of many publications on diverse topics of materials science, some of which have also attracted attention from popular media. His research interests include static electricity, retrieving energy from polymers, surface analysis techniques including SPM, and mechanochemistry.Bartosz A. GrzybowskiBartosz A. Grzybowski graduated summa cum laude and Honoris in Chimia from Yale University in 1995. He obtained his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Harvard University in 2000. In 2003 he joined the faculty of Northwestern University where he is now Burgess Professor of Physical Chemistry and Chemical Systems Engineering and the director of the Non-Equilibrium Energy Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Grzybowski pioneered research on dynamic self-assembly and complex chemical networks. His other scientific interests include chemistries in non-equilibrium/dynamic systems, nanostructured materials and catalysts, unconventional electronics, mechanochemistry and nanobiology.

Broader context
Owing to their high caloric content, the millions of tons of polymers we produce – and often discard – could constitute a viable source of energy that can be retrieved by either breaking or rearranging the orientations of constituent chemical bonds. Despite optimistic media reports, we are still harnessing only a small fraction of this energy; in the U.S. alone, some 28 million tons of polymers are simply wasted each year, translating into the loss of almost a trillion MJ of energy that could be put to productive use. This article reviews a wide range of approaches by which energy “hidden” in polymers can be retrieved or transduced – examples range from traditional polymer incineration and chemolysis to the cutting-edge research on triboelectric, piezoelectric or thermoelectric generators with applications in personal electronics, MEMS, and small-scale synthesis. While none of these approaches offers a net-positive energy balance, their synergistic deployment on scales from industrial to personal could amount to societally appreciable energy savings.

1. Introduction
Securing energy resources is one of the major challenges that mankind is currently facing.1 With the annual growth rate of ∼2.5%,2 the global energy demand will increase by about a half by 2040, largely due to an increased demand for plastics and other advanced products (Fig. 1a).3 Although the “peak oil” times4,5 for the countries that are currently major producers have not yet arrived, and although new technologies utilizing nonconventional sources of oil keep emerging,3 the non-renewable, conventional sources of fossil fuels are predicted to run out within ca. 40–60 years.6–8 If, by then, there are no alternatives, a global energy crisis will ensue with consequences hard to predict. Not surprisingly, much research has been devoted to the identification of new sources of energy8 (biofuel,9 wind,10–12 blue energy of mixing sea and river water,13,14 tidal and wave energy,15 geothermal energy16), to the optimization of the known ones (e.g., using more efficient solar panels17–21 and thermoelectric materials22,23), and also to the retrieval of energy from industrial waste products24 (Fig. 1b). Although the retrieval strategy will never offer a net-positive energy balance, it would be unwise to disregard waste materials whose energy content is often commensurate with that of fossil fuels – for instance, the heat capacity of polyethylene is 43.3 MJ kg−1vs. 42.5 MJ kg−1 for heavy fuel oil. In addition, retrieval/recycling offers benefits to the environment by removing often harmful substances from the soil or water.
 Fig. 1  (a) Past and projected global energy demand for years 1990–2035. The blue region corresponds to the energy demand for OECD countries and the red region shows the rapidly growing demand for non-OECD countries. (b) Annual energy consumption in the U.S. categorized into primary energy sources. Data and the projections between years 1980 and 2040. The graphs in (a) and (b) are redrawn based on values from ref. 25. 
This Review focuses on retrieving energy from synthetic polymers. These materials offer a range of useful properties (light weight, resistance to corrosion, ease of production and manufacture, etc.) and have become ubiquitous in our lives: from packaging we encounter in a local supermarket (interestingly, 35% of all plastics worldwide26 and even higher in some countries; e.g., 42% in India vs. 27% in Germany27), to plastic utensils, to car tires, to construction elements, to paints and adhesives. In 2009, the production of polymeric materials reached 245 million tons per annum28 with estimated worldwide sales of $454 billion which are expected to reach $567 billion by 2017 (with an average growth rate of 3.8% between 2012 and 2017).29 What is significant from the energy point of view is that 8% of all the oil worldwide is used for production of polymers and plastics – 4% as material and 4% as energy input.30
Unfortunately, only a small fraction of the rapidly accumulating polymeric waste is being reused or recycled. According to the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) data for 2010, polymer (plastics) solid waste (PSW) constituted less than 1% (by weight) of the municipal solid waste (MSW) in the U.S. in 1960 but increased to 8% in 2000 and to 11.7% in 2006. In Europe, the PSW/MSW weight ratio was 15–25% in 2004 and 20–30% based on the volume ratio.31 Alarmingly, in the U.S., only 8% of the 31 million tons of non-biologically degradable plastic waste produced annually is being recycled.32 This means that over 28 million tons of highly energetic material are wasted – assuming that, conservatively, 50% of this energy could be retrieved and with the heat capacity of typical polymers on the order of tens of MJ kg−1 (see Fig. 3), one obtains an estimate of 6.06 × 1011 MJ of energy (enough to power the Chicago area for 8 months (ref. 33)) that Americans let go unproductively every year. In reality, this economic balance is even worse for it does not take into account environmental pollution caused by the disposed polymers. The accumulation of polymers as landfill has become a major problem due to their hazardous effects on animals34 as well as the emission of harmful CO2 and CH4 to the atmosphere upon decomposition.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of large-scale methods of energy retrieval from polymers. Although incineration of polymers is much more common than the newer thermolysis or chemolysis techniques, the latter two allow for the recycling of feedstock, which is becoming increasingly important given soaring oil prices and growing environmental concerns. 
For these reasons, the UNEP (United Nations Environmental Program) has initiated a solid waste management (ISWM) system based on 3Rs: reduce, reuse, recycle.35 Unfortunately, recycling of polymers, though the name implies a complete “regeneration,” is typically only a down-cycling process, in which more advanced/complex polymers are converted into polymers of lower quality and performance characteristics.36
In what follows, we focus on the emerging strategies of retrieving and/or “channeling” energy stored in the chemical bonds of polymers. In the first part, we describe large-scale processes – many already in the deployable-technology stage – which use heat, pressure, solvents, and when necessary catalysts to liberate energy stored in polymer waste (Fig. 2). In the second part, we look into the smaller-scale and often proof-of-concept systems, in which polymers act as active elements converting mechanical or thermal energy into either electricity or chemical energy. The applications we discuss do not necessarily rely on the polymer waste but use “everyday” polymers whose synthesis is well known and the commercial production is well-established. These processes are not per se energy retrieval but still useful as they can harness energy from mechanical deformation that would otherwise be wasted unproductively during, for instance, walking on polymeric shoe soles or even driving a car (when car tires are compressed). We believe that taken together – and, of course, if further perfected – these multipronged approaches can offer substantial savings of energy which is becoming an ever more precious commodity.
2. Experimental
2.1. Heat-to-chemical energy conversion

2.1.1. Incineration of polymers. 
The traditional way of retrieving energy from post-consumer plastic materials is by burning (incineration). The attractiveness of this somewhat crude approach is that plastics have an energy content similar to petroleum fuels (cf.Fig. 3). In 1992, more than 190 solid waste incinerators were operational in the U.S., each working above its nominal design capacity of 110 tonnes per day and overall processing >7.5 million tonnes per year. In Germany, which has the highest number of incinerators in Europe, over 53 such facilities are processing more than 10.7 million tonnes per year.42 According to the 2010 EPA report,43 11.7% of the MSW is being incinerated.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) High temperature “eco-clean” plastic-fueled burners designed to minimize emissions from polymer incineration. According to EcoClean Burners, the burner shown in (a) can produce enough energy “to heat a 4-story office building and keep it at 72 °F”.37 The unit shown in (b) produces 800000 Btu h−1 and heats two greenhouses.36 Images are reproduced with permission from ref. 37 and 38. (c) Calorific values of common polymers compared to some other materials.39–41 
Direct incineration of polymers results in a volume reduction by 90–99%, which is beneficial in terms of land-filling PSW.44–46 However, environmental concerns still remain and are no different from those accompanying incineration of other waste: production of CO2, NOx, SOx as well as generation of volatile organic compounds, smoke (particulate matter), and particulate-bound heavy metals. In addition, incineration of polymers such as polyvinyl chloride, PVC, polyethylene, PE, polystyrene, PS, or poly ethylene terephthalate, PET, produces carcinogenic substances such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and dioxins, though there are methods to reduce emissions of toxic substances,47 increase safety, and minimize the risk associated with plant design. Several countries including Denmark, Sweden and Germany use incineration of MSW (of which 7% is polymer waste)48,49 as a source for generating electricity (up to 10% of local demand).
As an advantage, the process of incineration provides such high energies that together with metallurgical coke, polymers can even be used as a resource for electric arc furnaces in steelmaking.50–52 Since the combustion energy of polymers is as high as that of coal, and since polymers have higher hydrogen to carbon ratio, less CO2 is produced by simultaneous injection of plastics and coal into furnaces – it has been shown that such co-injection reduces CO2 emissions by up to 25%,53 making this process a more environmentally friendly alternative to burning coal itself.


2.1.2. Thermolytic conversion techniques. 
Beyond simple incineration, other thermal treatments can retrieve useful materials from the PSW (Fig. 2). One approach is the so-called thermal conversion of polymers31,35,44,54 which usually employs high-temperature processes such as pyrolysis, gasification, or hydrogenation – performed under an inert atmosphere, low-oxygen environment, or hydrogen gas, respectively. In all of these processes, polymers are degraded into smaller fragments to retrieve valuable chemicals (Fig. 4). Of great importance is the catalytic pyrolysis process, which is now being implemented by several companies worldwide55 and is used in developing a new technology commonly known as polymer-to-fuel (PTF).56–58
 Fig. 4  Thermal cracking/pyrolysis of polyolefins. Thermal degradation of polyolefins may start from homolytic bond cleavage at a random point on the polymer chain or at the end of the chain. The polymeric radicals then depropagate – in “reverse” of the propagation step in radical polymerization. During depropagation, polymers disintegrate generating smaller fragments via several mechanisms, e.g., H-chain transfer or β-cleavage. Branching may occur upon radical recombination (or coupling), which ceases the propagation. Disproportionation is another reaction by which termination takes place. 
Pyrolysis (also referred to as thermal cracking31) of common synthetic polymers has been studied extensively. Of a multitude of literature examples, non-catalytic pyrolysis of polyethylene, PE,59–66 and polypropylene, PP,67–73 has attracted most attention owing to its possible industrial applications in oil production (see below). Less studied are analogous processes involving PVC,74,75 poly(methylmethacrylate), PMMA,63 and polyurethane, PU.76 Although PS77 and PET78 can also be pyrolized (in addition to chemical conversion described later), they are not suitable for oil production because they lack long-chain aliphatic fragments. On the other hand, there have been reports where pyrolysis retrieved valuable monomers in high yields – for instance, 97 wt% of methylmethacrylate from PMMA,79,80 60–75 wt% of styrene from PS,81 76 wt% of tetrafluoroethylene from PTFE,82 and 40 wt% of ethylene and propylene from polyolefins.83,84 Natural and synthetic rubbers can also yield their monomers in moderate yields,85,86 while used car tires can be pyrolized to obtain carbon black, styrene and 1,3-butadiene.87
Although conventional pyrolysis might seem a convenient method to convert PSW (major components of which are high-density polyethylene, HDPE, low-density polyethylene, LDPE, PP, and PVC) to fuels, only fuels with low octane values and high residue contents can be obtained at moderate temperatures.31 For this reason, production of gasoline-range fuels is not efficient,61,67 and upgrading to useful products is necessary.88,89 Moreover, high energy consumption of the (non-catalytic) pyrolysis due to high-temperature requirements of the process (from at least 350–500 °C (ref. 90–92) to 700–900 °C (ref. 93–95) for decent yields) suggests the use of appropriate catalysts, which we discuss next.


2.1.3. Catalytic pyrolysis of polymers. 
Catalytic cracking significantly lowers the pyrolysis temperatures, time, and hence the energy required.96–100 The use of catalysts also allows for much better control over the hydrocarbon distribution.101–104 The choice of the catalyst and pyrolysis conditions (temperature, pressure) has been studied extensively.44 Desired selectivity in degradation processes and high yields are obtained with catalysts including molecular sieves such as silica alumina, zeolites,105 and MCM-41. For polyolefin pyrolysis, the most commonly used zeolites are beta, USY, ZSM-11, REY, mordenite, and ZSM-5 (an aluminosilicate zeolite with the formula NanAlnSi96–nO192·16H2O, n < 27) for which conversion into lighter oil fractions (in the gasoline range) is significantly more effective than by thermal cracking alone.73,97,104 Other catalytic materials are clays (montmorillonite and saponite),106 activated carbon, metal oxides, metal complexes of type MCln-AlCl3 or M(AlCl4)n (M = Li, Na, K, Mg, Ca, Ba; n = 1–2) and alkali and alkaline metal carbonates (Fig. 5).107
 Fig. 5  Examples of simple modes of bond breaking upon catalytic cracking of polyolefins. 
With catalytic cracking of polymers, yields as high as 30% in gasoline and 20% in heavy oil have been reported31 suggesting that industrial upscaling could be promising.108 Moreover, it has also been shown that the PSW-derived fuel and regular gasoline have almost identical physical and chemical properties, and similar costs of production.31,109


2.1.4. Industrial applications. 
With a proper plant design, waste-to-fuel technologies can be efficient at the industrial scale and it has been estimated,110 for example, that by 2020 up to 17% of the electrical energy demand in the UK could come from polymeric waste. Although industrial pyrolysis of PSW111 dates back to early 90s, scaling up the catalytic pyrolysis processes has attracted attention only in the 2000s. The industrial-scale production of oil from polymers, commonly referred to as polymer-to-fuel (PTF) technology, is now gaining prominence, especially given the increase in oil prices and environmental considerations (PTF is an excellent alternative to landfill or incineration as it produces significantly less waste, greenhouse gases, or CO2). The new pyrolytic PTF technologies are being deployed mostly in Europe and Asia. Envirohub is building the first large scale plant in Singapore for the cost of 50 million dollars. This plant will process 100 tonnes of waste plastic per day, 30000 tonnes per year, and is expected to produce 20 million liters of diesel, 4000–5000 tonnes of gas, and 1500 tonnes of coke (the specific procedure uses catalytic pyrolysis that breaks down polymer waste to 85% diesel, 10% liquid petroleum gas, and 5% coke).112 There are also some smaller scale plants currently in operation such as that of Environmental Technologies, producing 2000 tonnes of gasoline and diesel per year from 2740 tonnes of waste plastics.31 Many operational pilot-scale facilities are deployed in North America, Europe and Asia55 using several catalytic technologies such as the Fuji process (large scale, low-temperature catalytic cracking, zeolite catalyst, 80% oil, 15% gas output), the Kentucky process (research scale, 90% oil output), or the Nikon process (pilot scale, low temperature, metal catalyst, 80% oil output).113
There are several other challenges that need to be considered in large-scale deployment of catalytic pyrolysis. Aside from the adaptation of this technology to the current industry, more efficient and selective catalysts should be designed to convert mixed polymer feedstocks into fuel while minimizing the need for the costly pre-separation of materials (either by density sorting, triboelectric separations, spectroscopic and manual sorting, etc.). Another challenge is to prevent contaminants in the waste stream. For example, PVC might be present as a contaminant in other polymers such as PET (e.g., as safety seals, cap liners, or labels wrapped around the PET bottles). In general, a maximum of 2% chlorine content is expected in packaging waste streams. Although some catalytic pyrolysis processes can tolerate up to 5% chlorine content, they entail increased operating and investment costs to counter the aggressive operating environment and to ensure the quality of the hydrocarbon products.48
PTF technologies lead to a range of useful products: fuel114,115 and other valuable hydrocarbons,116,117 aromatics,118 coke, and hydrogen gas.119 Among the fuel products are fuel no. 2 (commonly called “diesel”), fuel no. 6 (heavy fuel, generally used in industrial boilers or ships), naphtha (a light fuel), and petcoke (a high BTU fuel which can be further used as an energy and carbon source).120 The hydrocarbon products can be obtained with yields as high as 70–90%.31,121,122
The PTF technology produces low-to-zero emissions, is ultra-clean, and yields fuels with a low sulphur content. Additionally, its major industrial advantage is that the processors are designed to accept mixed and unwashed plastics and composites. The commercial plant setup is designed according to the feedstock, i.e., PSW that is available. Though the percentages may slightly vary from country to country, PSW mixtures contain mostly high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density polyethylene (LDPE), and polypropylene (PP), which are much more abundant than all other thermoplastics in the MSW (about 60% in total in Western Europe, Fig. 6).29 Polyvinylchloride (PVC) is another highly abundant component that can also be pyrolized, although the resulting HCl needs to be neutralized, which necessitates the use of a solid lime absorbent to treat the hot gas formed.123,124 Specially designed methods are also employed to obtain HCl123 and CaCl2 (ref. 111 and 125) from PVC. PTF procedures have been successfully applied to waste car tires126–128 of which in the U.S. alone we generate some ca. 300 million per year129 and, so far, have accumulated over 3 billion as landfill.130 Interestingly, one car tire used as an input into the PTF process is reported to produce 1 gallon of oil, together with syngas and char.130
 Fig. 6  Plastics consumed by polymer type (Europe, 2008). A total of 38 million tons of thermoplastics were used in Europe in 2008.29 
Because most of the PTF processes are at the very industrial forefront, much of the information about this technology (in particular, the specifics of the catalysts used) remains undisclosed and is available mostly through company materials. However, the overall mode of operation can be summarized schematically as in Fig. 7. The process starts with loading the plastic feedstock into a hopper which leads to a pre-melt reactor. The plastic is then heated (off-gases produced by the process can also be used for heating) until the plastic is liquefied. Then, this melt is separated in a solid–liquid separator, and the liquid is fed into the main reactor, where it is cracked into various hydrocarbons in the range C20–C50, which are further cracked into the gas phase to obtain lighter hydrocarbons. Products such as ethene and propene, unstable at high temperatures, can react to form benzene or toluene. The gaseous hydrocarbons are then condensed and separated. Lighter fractions (called “off-gases”) such as methane, ethane, butane and propane are separated and used to fuel the furnaces. The whole process converts plastics back into the fuel, ultimately pumped into storage tanks. Technologies such as those used by the companies listed in ref. 55 allow for the energy recovery efficiencies up to 55–75%.131 In one example, 264 gallons of fuel were recovered from one ton of plastic, with the production costs of $0.75 per gallon. In terms of energy values, PTF technology is significantly better than the traditional incineration affording higher BTU output per the same amount of plastic used.
 Fig. 7  Scheme of a PTF process. Polymer waste is cleaned and cut into smaller pieces and is fed into a pyrolysis chamber. Products of pyrolysis are separated by distillation. Valuable fuel products such as gasoline, kerosene, and diesel can be obtained. These products, as well as the off-gases produced in pyrolysis, can also be used to power the plant. 

2.2. Chemical-to-chemical energy conversion

2.2.1. Chemical degradation. 
One of the most established ways of recycling polymers is chemical retrieval of their valuable monomers (or smaller fragments of polymers). In this context, hydrolysis,132 glycolysis,133–136 methanolysis,137,138 or aminolysis134,135 reactions (or their combinations)139 carried in hot steam (200–450 °C) of the corresponding solvents (water, glycol, methanol, ethanolamine) and under high pressure can break the polymers into molecular fragments.46,121,123,140 This approach has long been used for post-consumer PSW, and though it is applicable to all condensation-derived polymers (e.g., polyamides, polyesters, or nylons) to obtain the initial diacid, diols or diamines,31 it is mostly utilized for treatment of PET and polyurethane, PU, foams. Chemical treatment of these polymers produces the monomers with yields as high as 90% (see Fig. 8); these monomers can then be used to produce new plastics.46 Currently, there are several plants (e.g., Dupont Canada (Nylon 6) and GE plastics (PET)) using chemical depolymerization treatment of PSW to retrieve their monomers.141
 Fig. 8  Examples of chemical conversion of polymers to useful monomers. (a) Hydrolysis of PU retrieves the “original” diols. (b) Glycolysis of PET yields monomeric units of bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET). 

2.3. Mechanical-to-chemical energy conversion
So far, we have discussed both the traditional approaches (incineration) and the emerging new technologies (catalytic pyrolysis and chemolysis) of recovering chemical energy from polymers by using heat alone or in combination with other effects. In addition, mechanical energy can also be applied, and by causing polymers' deformation can also result in the breaking of energy-rich chemical bonds. This approach is a domain of mechanochemistry and dates back to the pioneering works of Staudinger who worked on the reduction of polymers' molecular weight by mastication.142,143 He and later others144–150 showed that when polymers are mechanically deformed or ground, their entangled chains can break (cf.Fig. 9). In this way, rheological properties of rubbers can be tuned,154–156 biopolymers such as starch can be degraded to desired molecular weights,157–159 and hazardous polymer contaminants can be dehalogenated.160 In addition, when mechanical stresses are applied during grinding or milling of monomers, their bonds are activated resulting in polymerization or copolymerization. The effect of mechanical action on polymers can be tuned and focused by the synthesis of specially designed polymers161–171 containing mechanically responsive chemical moieties called mechanophores.172–174 The mechanochemical approach has also been used to produce mechanochromic polymers which change color or become fluorescent175,176 upon deformation, thus allowing for the visualization of stress patterns in these materials and utilization of these polymers for damage sensing and self-healing. However, in all of these applications (recently extensively reviewed, see ref. 149, 177 and 178), the focus has been on a specific change in the polymer's properties and not on the energetic aspects – here, we are interested in the possibility of polymers acting as energy transducers to convert mechanical stresses into other forms of energy179 that can then be used productively. We begin by considering mechanochemical schemes leading to chemical energy.
 Fig. 9  Illustration of a polymer's response to mechanical stimulus. At the macroscopic scale, crazing of a plastic surface (here, a Petri dish) is clearly visible to a naked eye. At the nanoscopic level, this process corresponds to the polymer chains elongating to accommodate mechanical stresses. At the molecular level, chemical bonds break. 

2.3.1. Polymers as hydrogen peroxide “sponges”. 
As mentioned above, mechanical stresses applied to polymers can cleave the entangled polymeric chains – this bond breaking can be either heterolytic (leading to + and − charged species) or homolytic, leading to radicalic species R˙ (Fig. 10). While the charged fragments of polymers are usually not highly reactive (because they are either stabilized or quenched by the solvent molecules at the polymer–solvent interface where the reactions could occur)180 and thus not a likely source of chemical energy, the radicals can be used to drive a variety of chemistries in the medium surrounding the polymer. This, however, can happen only if the radicals produced in the polymer's bulk can “migrate” – without recombination181–185 – to the polymer's surface at which the reaction of interest is to take place. In our group's recent work,147 we reasoned that this process would be facilitated by using highly porous/foamy polymers having high surface area to weight ratios. Accordingly, we prepared foamy polymers such as poly(dimethylsiloxane), PDMS, immersed them in water, and mechanically compressed them. The hypothesis was that the mechanoradicals produced in the polymer would react with water to yield hydrogen peroxide – a highly reactive and energetic molecule which some decades ago was used as rocket fuel.186–188 Indeed, analysis by various instrumental techniques confirmed the formation of radicals in compressed polymers (Fig. 11a–c) and of H2O2 in the surrounding solution (Fig. 11d–h). For the foamy, soft polymers such as “spongy” PDMS, tens of milligrams of hydrogen peroxide were produced per 1 m2 of the polymer–water interface and for 1 J of mechanical energy supplied to compress these polymers. As detailed in ref. 147, these parameters translate into the overall efficiency of mechanical-to-chemical energy conversion about 30–40%. This mode of energy transduction is useful in all situations whereby polymeric materials are under stress – like shoe soles during walking, car tires during driving, construction elements bending in the wind, etc. In fact, one of the first proof-of-concept experiments we performed involved a Nike Air shoe with air pockets in the sole. We filled these pockets with a water solution containing a non-fluorescent, boronic acid derivative of umbelliferone, which is known to break into the fluorescent umbelliferone in the presence of aqueous hydrogen peroxide. Fig. 12a confirms that upon walking in the shoe for minutes to hours, the solutions indeed became fluorescent due to the mechanoradicals/hydrogen peroxide produced by repeated mechanical compression of the polymer. This example is clearly only a demonstration with “applications” of the “lightning shoes” perhaps limited to nightclubs and discos. Mechanically generated hydrogen peroxide, however, can have more serious uses. One example is illustrated in Fig. 12b whereby compression of a polymeric test-tube drives a radical-mediated synthesis of gold nanoparticles,147,189,190 AuCl4− +2H2O2 → Au + 2O2 + 4HCl. An example in Fig. 12c illustrates a reaction in which a neutral red dye is bleached by mechanically produced hydrogen peroxide. Finally, Fig. 12d shows an example of mechanopolymerization, whereby monomers of acrylamide polymerize into polyacrylamide.
 Fig. 10  Homolytic (leading to radicals)151,152 and heterolytic (leading to anions and cations)153 chain breaking of polymers upon mechanical input. The specific example shown is for polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). 
 Fig. 11  Mechanochemical production of hydrogen peroxide. (a) A compressible polymer tube filled with water produces radicals upon each squeeze–release cycle. These radicals can be detected (b) by ESR (black line: uncompressed, red line: compressed) and (c) by the reaction of radicals with the radical scavenger DPPH whereby the purple color of DPPH is bleached in acetonitrile. (d) When these tubes are filled with water, the radicals react with water to form hydrogen peroxide, which can be detected by its (e) 1H NMR signal in D2O, (f) UV-Vis absorption spectrum taken in water, (g) characteristic cyclic voltammogram, and (h) by the so-called Fenton's test. For experimental details see ref. 147. Images are reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright© 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 12  Examples of chemical reactions driven by hydrogen peroxide produced by compression of polymers. (a) Fluorescence of the umbelliferone solution in the pockets of a Nike Air shoe sole. (b) Bleaching of a neutral red dye in a compressed PDMS tube. (c) Reduction of a gold salt to gold nanoparticles by compression of a PDMS tube. See ref. 147 for further experimental details. The mechanically generated hydrogen peroxide can also be used to (d) initiate polymerization of acrylonitrile, or (e) kill bacteria in water. Images (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright© 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
Naturally, the scales on which these mechanical-to-chemical conversions can work are small, and it would be hard to imagine a plant operating on compressing PDMS blocks to produce industrial quantities of hydrogen peroxide (e.g., as in the Riedl–Pfleiderer/anthraquinone process).191,192 On the other hand, in situations where polymers are already being compressed/compacted (a pre-step in plastic recycling122), there are currently no means of retrieving even a fraction of the mechanical energy expanded – performing the process in water and “coupling” H2O2 generated to drive other chemical reactions do not seem like a pipe dream at all. Second, compressed polymers could be used as “radical sponges” for laboratory-scale radical chemistries, for instance, to functionalize the surface of mechanically treated polymers. The practical advantage of such materials would be the ease of their retrieval from the reaction mixture, without any by-products. Last but not least, we signal a much bigger societal problem, where compressed polymers could be of use – namely, in water remediation. Here, the radicals produced by polymer compression can be used to kill bacteria – this is, in fact, the effect we observed in experiments illustrated in Fig. 12e. Here, two vials are shown with E. coli bacteria in water after mixing the solutions with the same amounts (2 mL) of pure water (right) and an aqueous H2O2 solution formed by mechanical treatment (squeezing) of PDMS for 30 min. The solution on the right is much clearer because the bacteria are effectively killed by the mechanochemically produced hydrogen peroxide. Based on these findings, we imagine what would probably be the simplest water-remediation system for the developing world: a bucket full of water with a polymer sponge placed on its bottom and compressed by a stone.
While generation of mechanoradicals was observed for a diverse selection of mechanically treated polymers (we tested PS, HDPE, PVC, PDMS, PTFE, polyoxymethylene, POM, and Tygon), other classes of chemicals can also be mechano-generated from specially designed polymers. In an interesting recent example Moore and co-workers193 incorporated mechanophores with acid-releasing capabilities into PMMA matrices. Upon compression of the polymer, these moieties rearrange to release HCl into solution, as probed by a pH indicator. This example suggests that force-induced acid release can further be used in acid-catalyzed cross-linking reactions.

2.4. Mechanical-to-electrical energy conversion

2.4.1. Triboelectric (electrostatic) generators based on polymers. 
The earliest demonstration of electricity production was through mechanical action, e.g., upon rubbing a piece of cotton or silk against amber.194 The so-called contact electrification can provide another means of converting mechanical energy into electricity. In contact electrification of polymers, two pieces of such materials are brought into contact and then separated (with or without friction) to produce charges on their surfaces.148,195–204
Although this phenomenon has been studied for centuries, it has only been recently that modern instrumental techniques confirmed unequivocally the involvement of heterolytic bond breaking in the production of charged surface species (Fig. 10; as opposed to earlier theories of pure electron or ion transfer). Irrespective of the mechanism (for discussion, see ref. 148, 199–202 and 204), however, contact electrification has been used widely as a basis of electrostatic generators, of which the Van de Graaff one is perhaps the best known but not really useful. More modern embodiments include devices such as those shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Energy production by contact electrification of polymers. (a) A polymer generator based on contact electrification of PET and Kapton. (b) Efficiency of the device can be enhanced by increasing the area of contact (by embossing microstructures on the polymers' surfaces). (c) These generators can be used to retrieve energy from everyday activities such as walking or even dancing. Shown here is an image of a triboelectric generator attached to a dress to light up LEDs on the dress. (d) Mechanical action on polymers (here, by peeling-off an adhesive tape) can produce enough X-rays to develop an X-ray film (here, of a finger). Images are reproduced with permission from ref. 205, Copyright© 2012 Elsevier, ref. 206, Copyright© 2012 ACS, ref. 207, Copyright © 2008 Nature Publishing Group, and ref. 212 Copyright© 2011 Springer. 
In Fig. 13a, a thin sheet of Kapton (a polyimide by Dupont) is placed in contact with a sheet of polyester.205 Bending of the device produces charges at the interface between the two polymers (Kapton charges negatively and polyester positively) which, in turn, induce charges at the gold electrodes. Removal of mechanical stress ceases charge production and neutralization takes place whereby the induced charges on the metal electrodes “flow back” producing an overall alternating current. This system was shown to produce a power density of 10.4 mW cm−3. The power output can be enhanced by micropatterning polymer surfaces with protruding microstructures.206 When placed in contact, such corrugated surfaces experience more friction leading to higher surface charge densities, currents up to 0.13 A and voltages of 18 V. Interestingly, this device has been shown to act as a sensitive pressure sensor capable of producing measurable currents when pressures applied to the polymer films are on the order of 10 mPa.
Another triboelectric generator based on contact electrification between a metal and a polymer was shown to charge portable electronics208 – in one example, a lithium ion battery of a cell phone was charged. The current and power densities were even higher (15.5 μA cm−2 and 128 mW cm−3, respectively) in another design, in which gold nanoparticles were used to increase the surface area of contact. This high-power generator could produce 2.0 mA of (short-circuit) current, an instantaneous power output of 1.2 W and a power density of 313 W m−2, which was enough to light up 600 LEDs simultaneously by gently compressing the device. This way of harvesting energy from compressed polymers (see also ref. 209) has been demonstrated in devices coupled to walking, light wind blow, respiration and water waving, with performance similar to that of traditional piezoelectric generators based on inorganic materials. Energy of vibrations can also be harvested by polymer triboelectric generators.210,211 In yet another example, polymer-based triboelectric generators were incorporated in a dress and were shown to produce enough energy to light up the LED lamps on the dress, demonstrating the compatibility of these generators with everyday activities212 (Fig. 13c). From a practical point of view, fabrication of polymer triboelectric generators is a low-cost straightforward process, which suggests their widespread uses in personal electronics, environmental monitoring, or medical devices.205
Another application of contact-charging polymers involves production of high-energy radiation. A surprisingly simple material for this purpose is a common adhesive tape. It was shown that when such a tape is peeled-off in air, it generates a broad spectrum of radiation.213,214 If peeling-off takes place under vacuum (3 cm s−1 peeling rate at 10−3 torr), the spectrum includes X-rays.215,216 Although the mechanism of the triboluminescence generated is still being debated,217 the fact remains that the process generates enough radiation to take a realistic X-ray of a body part (e.g., of a finger in Fig. 13d).216 We note that since the original papers by Deryagin and co-workers,215 the idea of using mechanical energy to produce high energy emission has been extended to other triboelectric generators using materials other than adhesive tapes.218


2.4.2. Piezoelectric generators based on polymers. 
Finally, we discuss situations where bond-breaking is not necessary to harvest energy from polymers. Piezoelectricity,194 discovered by Pierre and Jacques Curie in 1880, entails generation of electric fields proportional to the mechanical energy applied to a crystalline material having no inversion center of symmetry.219 Since 1950s, it has been known that biopolymers such as cellulose220 and collagen, as well as optically active polyamides and polylactic acid can also be piezoelectric.221 More recently, a layer of ordered viruses was shown to be piezoelectric and capable of generating enough electrical energy to light up a digit on a calculator display.222 The most widely studied unnatural piezoelectric polymer is polyvinylidenefluoride (PVDF), which was first demonstrated by Kawai in 1969.223 Since then, there have been many interesting demonstrations of piezoelectricity of PVDF224,225 in piezoelectric devices226–228 and it was shown that a piezoelectric device consisting of PVDF mounted on a shoe heel can generate a total power on the order of a few dozens of microwatts, which is sufficient to run MEMS or microelectronic devices229 (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  (a) Polymer piezoelectric device inserted in a shoe sole to harvest mechanical energy from walking. (b) The device uses the piezoelectric polymer PVDF, and (c) upon walking, a few dozen microwatts can be produced, which is enough to operate various MEMS. Images are reproduced from ref. 229 with permission. 
Inorganic–PVDF hybrid systems, as well as other polymers such as polyurea, poly(methyl glutamate), nylons, and copolymers of vinylidene fluoride with trifluoroethylene, and of vinylcyanide with vinylacetate, have been studied and used as gramophone pickups, microphones, and ultrasonic transducers. The mechanism of piezoelectricity in these materials differs depending on their macromolecular structures. For instance, in PVDF, the electronegativity difference between H and F in the –(CH2–CF2)n– units translates into a high dipole moment of the chains. When subjected to a mechanical input, the alignment of the dipoles changes, ultimately leading to a voltage difference/electric field between the two surfaces according to the (simplified) equations, D = dT + εTE, S = sET + dE where D = dielectric displacement, T = mechanical stress, E = electric field vector, S = mechanical strain, d = piezoelectric charge constant, εT = permittivity (at constant T), and sE = elasticity constant (at constant E).230 In piezoelectric generators, this voltage difference is used to induce a current in the circuit to which the piezo element is attached. In this way, it is possible to harvest mechanical energy from everyday motions (vibrations, walking, respiration, etc.) similar to triboelectric generators.

2.5. Heat-to-electrical energy conversion
So far, we have discussed energy retrieval from “everyday” polymers, for which the synthetic background is well-established and there already exist commercial applications. Of course, research on energy-related polymers is not limited to such cases and encompasses synthesis of many modified or entirely new structures.231 We do not cover here any of the exciting advances in polymer photovoltaics since the literature on the topic is voluminous and there are many outstanding reviews already available.232–236 Instead, we narrate a perhaps less familiar area of recent and growing interest – namely, polymer thermoelectrics, where new polymer chemistry meets physics to convert thermal energy into electricity. The global demand for electrical energy will rise to ca. 26 TW by 2050 and can, in principle, be generously covered by sunlight providing some 600 TW of usable irradiating power.237 While solar technologies can convert sunlight to electrical energy with efficiency up to 40%, solar heat remains largely unused.237
Thermoelectricity combines three fundamental physical phenomena: (1) the Seebeck effect, which describes the generation of an electrical potential within a conductor subjected to a temperature gradient; (2) the Peltier effect, whereby a temperature difference is generated at the junction between two dissimilar conductors upon the passage of an electric current; and (3) the Thomson effect, which describes generation of heat within a single conductor supporting a temperature gradient while an electric current passes through it.23 Together, these effects can be quantified by the following equations:i = σ(E − α∇T)q = αTi − λ∇Twhere i is the electric current density, q is the heat current density, E is the electric field, σ is the electrical conductivity, α is the Seebeck coefficient, λ is the thermal conductivity at zero electric field, and T is the absolute temperature. The coefficients (i.e., α, σ, and λ) relate the changes in the electric and heat currents to the electric field and temperature gradient, at which the Seebeck effect drives electric currents to generate the Peltier and Thomson effects in thermoelectric generators.23
For an efficient energy conversion from heat to electricity, a material should have a high Seebeck coefficient, high electrical conductivity and low thermal conductivity. To date, for low temperature energy conversion, inorganic semiconductors such as bismuth antimony telluride alloys have mostly been used. However, these materials are expensive because of the low natural abundances of their elements and are also considered as environmentally unfriendly. In search for better thermoelectrics, polymers exhibiting low thermal conductivity and high electrical conductivity can offer advantages of low cost, reduced toxicity, better mechanical properties, and improved processability for personal/portable thermoelectric devices.23 Doping conductive polymers (e.g. polyacetylene) with dopants such as iodine or benzenesulfonic acid is used as one method to achieve high Seebeck coefficients.238 Synthesis of new and complex polymers is another approach to reach such characteristics.23 Furthermore, conductivities and Seebeck coefficients can be increased by tuning chain conformations of known polymers – in one notable example, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) nanowires made by lithographic patterning had a conductivity of 16.8 S cm−1 and a Seebeck coefficient of −74 mV compared to 11.1 S cm−1 and −48 mV for conventional PEDOT films.239 Polymer–polymer nanocomposites240 and polymer–inorganic nanocomposites are other materials that can enhance the properties of thermoelectric devices. Recently,241 the highest energy conversion value and the best thermoelectric properties of a polymer–inorganic composite have been demonstrated in a PEDOT:PSS–Te nanorod material (electrical conductivity of ∼19 S cm−1vs. 1.32 S cm−1 for pure PEDOT:PSS and 0.08 S cm−1 for Te). Given the increasing interest in these materials (see excellent reviews23,237) and the growing number of important publications on the subject (a dozen in 2005, 48 in 2010, and 195 in 2012), it is reasonable to assume that an improved understanding of charge and heat transport mechanisms in polymers will soon lead to even more efficient and practically applicable polymer-based thermoelectrics.
3. Conclusions
From simple incineration, through catalytic pyrolysis, to chemolysis, several large-scale technologies are being developed and commercialized to retrieve energy and valuable materials from waste polymers. This effort is well justified given at least four factors: (1) increasing oil prices, (2) high caloric content of the polymers, (3) increasing volumes of polymeric waste being produced, and (4) serious environmental concerns related to unprocessed polymer waste. At smaller scales, polymer triboelectric and piezoelectric generators are being developed to harvest energy from everyday mechanical motions (e.g., walking, respiration) and deformations of polymers in everyday situations (e.g., in wind blow). Some exciting discoveries are being made in the area of mechanochemistry, where mechanical stresses can be transduced into chemical energy to “power” chemical processes. Since these approaches likely exhaust the possibilities of breaking chemical bonds in polymers (via thermal, chemical, or mechanical means), we suggest that future developments in this area should focus not so much on the discovery of fundamentally new effects (though such discoveries would certainly be welcome!) but rather on improving the performance characteristics of the existing devices (e.g., beyond mW powers of triboelectric generators). In this respect, we envision a fruitful synergy between polymer science and microfabrication techniques. Micropatterning and micromolding techniques can help to increase surface/contact areas on which, for example, the triboelectric phenomena are so crucially dependent. Similarly, methods of three-dimensional fabrication can lead to highly porous polymers which, as we have seen above, increase the efficiency of mechanoradical production.
Although none of the strategies/methods we described offers a net-positive energy balance, harnessing even small amounts of thermal, chemical or electrical energy from the ubiquitous polymeric waste can add up to a societally appreciable effect. Naturally, future research should also encompass new polymers or polymer composites combining established knowledge with the emerging concepts of nanoscience (as in the nanostructured thermoelectrics we briefly discussed). Overall, we see the future of the field in combining the large-scale processes (incineration, thermolysis, chemolysis) with small-scale devices powering personalized electronics, sensors, or MEMS.
Notes and references
J. Chow, R. J. Kopp and P. R. Portney, Science, 2003, 302, 1528–1531 CrossRef PubMed .
BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2012, http://www.bp.com/statisticalreview.
The Outlook For Energy: A View to 2040, Exxon Mobil.
“Peak oil” is the point in time at which the world's oil supplies go into irreversible decline (as defined by Financial Times Lexicon 2012).
S. Nashawi, A. Malallah and M. Al-Bisharah, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 1788–1800 CrossRef .

          J. Vidal, The end of oil is closer than you think, The Guardian,  21 April 2005, http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2005/apr/21/oilandpetrol.news Search PubMed .

          C. J. Campbell and J. H. Laherrère, The End of Cheap Oil, Scientific American,  March 1998, pp. 78–83 Search PubMed .
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demirbas, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86, 108–117 CrossRef PubMed .

          Wind Energy and Environment, Environmental Benefits, External Costs, Local Impacts, Public Acceptance, Wind Energy the Facts, The European Wind Energy Association (EWEA) Search PubMed.

Wind power delivers too much to ignore, New Scientist,  January 2013, vol. 2900, pp. 26–27 Search PubMed.
M. Z. Jacobson and G. M. Masters, Science, 2001, 293, 1438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Brogioli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 058501 CrossRef .

          W. Moskwa, Norway opens world's first osmotic power plant, Reuters,  November 24, 2009, http://www.reuters.com/article/2009/11/24/us-norway-osmotic-idUSTRE5AN20Q20091124 Search PubMed .

          J. Margolis, Wave farms show energy potential, BBC News,  March 2, 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/6410839.stm Search PubMed .
I. B. Fridleifsson, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2001, 5, 299–312 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Solar Energy Perspectives: Executive Summary, International Energy Agency,  2011 Search PubMed.
D. Turney and V. Fthenakis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3261–3270 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Fthenakis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 2746–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O. Poehler and H. E. Katz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8110–8115 CAS .
M. He, F. Qiua and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1352–1361 Search PubMed .

          G. C. Young, Municipal Solid Waste to Energy Conversion Processes: Economic, Technical, and Renewable Comparisons, Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey,  2010 Search PubMed .

International Energy Outlook 2011DOE/EIA-0484, U.S. Energy Information Administration,  September 2011 Search PubMed.

          J. H. Clark and J. J. E. Hardy, Towards sustainable chemical manufacturing: polylactic acid – a sustainable polymer, in Sustainable Development in Practice: Case Studies for Engineers and Scientists, ed. A. Azapagic, S. Perdon and R. Clift, Wiley, Chichester,  2004, pp. 250–282 Search PubMed .
N. H. Muthaa, M. Patel and V. Premnath, Conserv. Recycl., 2006, 47, 222–244 CrossRef PubMed .
Data taken from Plastics Information Europe, 2009, http://www.pieweb.plasteurope.com/.

Global Polymer Industry 2012–2017: Trend, Profit, and Forecast Analysis, Lucintel Market Report,  June 2012 Search PubMed.

          Introduction to Sustainable Development in: Sustainable development in practice: case studies for engineers and scientists, ed. A. Azapagic, S. Perdon ana R. Clift, Wiley,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. K. Panda, R. K. Singh and D. K. Mishra, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 233–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Common Waste & Materials – Plastics, U.S. Environment Protection Agency, EPA, http://www.epa.gov/osw/conserve/materials/plastics.htm Search PubMed.
Chicago Regional Energy Snapshot, Profile and Strategy Analysis, CNT Energy, 2009.

          J. Roach, Are Plastic Grocery Bags Sacking the Environment?, National Geographic News,  September 2, 2003 Search PubMed .

Converting Waste Plastics into a Resource, Compendium of Technologies, United Nations Environmental Programme, Division of Technology, Industry and Economics, International Environmental Technology Center, Osaka/Shiga, Japan,  2009 Search PubMed.

          R. A. Bennett, Recycled plastics: product applications and potential, in Emerging Technologies in Plastics Recycling, ed. G. D. Andrews and P. M. Subramanian, ACS Sym. Ser., vol. 513, Washington, DC,  1992, pp. 26–38 Search PubMed .

          D. D. Smit, EcoClean Burners on target for $1M for plastic to energy tech, hiring 54,  September 23, 2009, http://www.popcitymedia.com/innovationnews/ecoclean0923.aspx.
Waste Plastics as Fuel, http://www.extension.psu.edu/natural-resources/energy/waste-to-energy/resources/waste-plastics-fuel.

          J. Ylä-Mella, Recycling of Plastics from the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE), Department of Process and Environmental Engineering, University of Oulu, Finland Search PubMed.
F. J. Mastral, E. Esperanza, C. Berrueco, M. Juste and J. Ceamanos, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2003, 70, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .

          M. L. Mastellone, Thermal treatments of plastic wastes by means of fluidized bed reactors, PhD thesis, Department of Chemical Engineering, Second University of Naples, Italy,  1999 .
Pollution Issue, Incineration, 2007, http://pollutionissues.com.

Municipial Solid Waste Characterization Report, U.S Environment Protection Agency, EPA,  2010 Search PubMed.
S. M. Al-Salem, P. Lettieri and J. Baeyens, Waste Manage., 2009, 29, 2625–2643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Scheirs, Polymer Recycling, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  1998 Search PubMed .
K. M. Zia, H. N. Bhatti and I. A. Bhatti, React. Funct. Polym., 2007, 67, 675–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yassin, P. Lettierim, S. J. R. Simons and A. Germana, Proc. ICE, Eng. Sust., 2005, 158, 97–103 CrossRef .

          A. Tukker, H. de Groot, L. Simons and S. Wiegersma, Chemical recycling of plastic waste: PVC and other resins, European Commission, DG III, Final Report, STB-99-55 Final. Delft, The Netherlands,  1999 Search PubMed .

          T. Rand, J. Haukohl and U. Marxen, Municipal solid waste inciniration: requirements for a successful project, World Bank Technical Paper no. WTP462,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. A. Diez, R. Alvarez, S. Melendi and C. Barriocanal, Fuel, 2009, 88, 1937–1944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, V. Sahajwalla and J. Wood, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 2557–2563 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sahajwalla, M. Zaharia, S. Kongkarat, R. Khanna, N. Saha-Chaudhury and P. O'Kane, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 379–391 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Murai, M. Sato and T. Ariyama, Proceedings of the Workshop on Science and Technology of Innovative Ironmaking for aiming at Energy Half Consumption, Tokyo, Japan,  November 27–28, 2003, pp. 205–209 Search PubMed .

          L. A. Wall, The Mechanisms of Pyrolysis, Oxidation, and Burning of Organic Materials, Based on Invited Papers and Discussion, National Bureau of Standards,  1972 Search PubMed .
There are several companies worldwide using pyrolytic conversion of polymers to gain energy and fuel from plastics. To name a few in North America: Agilyx (http://www.agilyx.com), Climax Global Energy (http://www.climaxglobalenergy.com), Envion (http://www.envion.com), GEEP (http://www.geepglobal.com), GreenMantra (http://www.greenmantra.ca), Natural State Research (http://www.naturalstateresearch.com), Nexus Fuels (http://www.nexusfuelproducts.com), Klean Industries, Inc. (Canada) (http://www.kleanindustries.com), Plastic2Oil (http://www.plastic2oil.com), Plastic Advanced Recycling Corp. (http://www.plastic2x.com), Polymer Energy (http://www.polymerenergy.com), PolyFlow (http://www.polyflowcorp.com), Vadxx (http://www.vadxx.com). Companies located outslide of North America: Anhui Oursun Environmental Technologies (China) (http://www.oursunchina.com), Blest (Japan) (http://www.blest.co.jp/seihin-english.html), Cynar (Ireland) (http://www.cynarplc.com), PlastOil (Switzerland) (http://www.plastoil.ch), Promeco/Cimelia (Italy/Singapore) (http://www.promeco.it and http://www.cimeliaglobal.com), T Technology (Poland) (http://www.tokarz.pl).
J. Aguado, D. P. Serrano and J. M. Escola, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 7982–7992 CrossRef CAS .

          Plastic Recycling, in Uhlmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, VCH, Weinheim,  1992, A21, pp. 64–68 Search PubMed .
G. Menges, R. Fischer and V. Lackner, Int. Polym. Process., 1992, 7, 291–302 CAS .
K. Murata, K. Sato and Y. Sakata, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2004, 71, 569–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dolezal, V. Pacakova and J. Kovarova, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2001, 57, 177 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kim and S. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2004, 98, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kaminsky, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1985, 8, 439–448 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kaminsky, M. Predel and A. Sadiki, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2004, 85, 1045–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Murata, Y. Hirano, Y. Sakata and M. A. Uddin, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2002, 65, 71–90 CrossRef CAS .
P. Onu, C. Vasile, S. Ciocîlteu, S. Iojoiu and H. Darie, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1999, 49, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Mastral, E. Experanza, P. García and M. Juste, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2002, 63, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
D. Seth and A. Sarkar, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 2433–2445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tsuchiya and K. Sumi, J. Polym. Sci., 1969, 7, 1599–1607 CAS .
J. K. Y. Kiang, P. C. Uden and J. C. W. Chien, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1980, 2, 113–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hayashi, J. Nakahara, K. Kusakabe and S. Morooka, Fuel Process. Technol., 1998, 55, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Chan and S. T. Balke, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1997, 57, 135–149 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ranzi, M. Dente, T. Faravelli, G. Bozzano, S. Fabini, R. Nava, V. Cozzani and L. Tognotti, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1997, 40-41, 305–319 CrossRef .
G. Audisio, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1984, 7, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Scott, S. R. Czernik, J. Piskorz and A. G. Radlein, Energy Fuels, 1990, 4, 407–411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sakata, M. A. Uddin, K. Koizumi and K. Murata, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1996, 53, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
R. Font, A. Fullana, J. A. Caballero, J. Candela and A. García, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1991, 58–59, 63–77 Search PubMed .
W. S. Cha, S. B. Kim and B. J. McCoy, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2002, 19, 239–245 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshioka, G. Gause, C. Eger, W. Kaminsky and A. Okuwaki, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2004, 83, 499–504 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Kaminsky and J. Franck, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1991, 19, 311–318 CrossRef CAS .
K. Smolders and J. Baeyens, Waste Manage., 2004, 24, 849–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Woo, N. Ayala and L. J. Broadbelt, Catal. Today, 2000, 55, 161–171 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Simon and W. Kaminsky, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1998, 62, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kaminsky, B. Schlesselmann and C. Simon, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1995, 32, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Simon, W. Kaminsky and B. Schlesselmann, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1996, 38, 75–87 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Groves, R. S. Lehrle, M. Blazsó and T. Székely, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1991, 19, 301–309 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kaminsky, C. Mennerich and Z. Zhang, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2009, 85, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kaminsky and C. Mennerich, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2001, 58–59, 803–811 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Songip, Appl. Catal., B, 1993, 2, 153–164 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Joo and J. A. Guin, Fuel Process. Technol., 1998, 57, 25–40 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murata, K. Sato and Y. Sakata, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2004, 71, 569–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sorum, M. G. Gronli and J. E. Hustad, Fuel, 2001, 80, 1217–1227 CrossRef CAS .
T. Faravelli, M. Pinciroli, F. Pisano, G. Bozzano, M. Dente and E. Ranzi, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2001, 60, 103–121 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Mastral, E. Esperanza, P. García and M. Juste, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2002, 63, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garforth, Y. H. Lin, P. N. Sharratt and J. Dwyer, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 169, 331–342 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demirbas, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2004, 72, 97–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Ding, J. Liang and L. L. Anderson, Fuel Process. Technol., 1997, 51, 47–62 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Park, E. Y. Hwang, J. R. Kim, J. K. Choi, Y. A. Kim and H. C. Woo, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 65, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lee, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2001, 74, 297–305 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohkita, R. Nishiyama, Y. Tochihara, T. Mizushima, N. Kakuta and Y. Morioka, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1993, 32, 3112–3116 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marcilla, M. Beltran and J. A. Conesa, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2001, 58, 117–126 CrossRef .
R. Bagri and P. T. Williams, J. I. Energy, 2002, 75, 117–123 CAS .
J. R. Kim, J. H. Yoon and D. W. Park, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2002, 76, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Hwang, J. R. Kim, J. K. Choi, H. C. Woo and D. W. Park, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2002, 62, 351–364 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aguado, D. P. Serrano, J. M. Escola, E. Garagorri and J. A. Fernândez, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2000, 69, 11–16 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aguado, D. P. Serrano, G. S. Miguel, J. M. Escola and J. M. Rodriguez, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2007, 78, 153–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Manos, Y. Isman, Y. N. Papayannakos and N. H. Gangas, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2001, 40, 2220–2225 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Buekens and H. Huang, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 1998, 23, 163–181 CrossRef .
Y. Sakata, M. A. Uddin and A. Muto, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1999, 51, 135–155 CrossRef CAS .

The Biofuels Handbook (RSC Energy Series), ed. J. G. Speight, RSC,  2011 Search PubMed .
L. Yassin, P. Lettieri, S. J. R. Simons and A. Germana, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 2648–2656 CrossRef CAS .
T. Malkow, Waste Manage., 2004, 24, 53–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheam, Recycling company building $50m plastic-to-fuel plant, http://www.asiaone.com/Business/News/SME%2BCentral/Story/A1Story20071221-42041.html.
S. M. Al-Salem, P. Lettieri and J. Baeyens, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 103–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ng, H. Seoud, M. Stanciulescu and Y. Sugimoto, Energy Fuels, 1995, 9, 735–742 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kodera and Y. Ishihara, Energy Fuels, 2005, 20, 155–158 CrossRef .
H. S. Joo and J. A. Guin, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 586–592 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Miller, N. Shah and G. P. Huffman, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 1580–1586 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Cho, S.-H. Jung and J.-S. Kim, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 1389–1395 CrossRef CAS .
Hydrogen can also be produced as a final product by subjecting hydrocarbons obtained through pyrolysis to catalytic steam reforming:   S. Czernik and R. J. French, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 754–758 CrossRef CAS .
For product photos of a PTF process refer to: http://www.plastic2oil.com/site/fuel-products.

          J. Scheirs and W. Kaminsky, Feedstock Recycling of Waste Plastics, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2006 Search PubMed .

          J. Aguado and D. P. Serrano, Feedstock Recycling of Plastic Wastes, RSC Clean Technology Monographs, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  1999 Search PubMed .
Information system on plastic waste management in Western Europe, 1995 Data, Sofres Conseil for APME, Brussels, Belgium, 1997.
PVC Feedstock recycling in Europe: an overview of processes and recent developments. European Council of Vinyl Manufacturers (ECVM), May 1997.

          G. Wypych, PVC Degradation and Stabilization, ChemTec Publishing, Ontario,  2008 Search PubMed .
I. F. Elbaba, C. Wu and P. T. Williams, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 3928–3935 CrossRef CAS .
S. Portofino, S. Casu, P. Iovane, A. Russo, M. Martino, A. Donatelli and S. Galvagno, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 2232–2241 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, M. Su and J. Baeyens, Powder Technol., 1997, 93, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.epa.gov/osw/conserve/materials/tires/index.htm
        .

          http://www.tiretofuel.com
        .

          K. Stoklosa, Taming Wild Polymers, http://www.recyclingtoday.com/rt0911-waste-residue-energy-markets.aspx.
R. López-Fonseca, J. R. González-Velasco and J. I. Gutiérrez-Ortiz, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 146, 287–294 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Shukla, A. M. Harad and L. S. Jawale, Waste Manage., 2008, 28, 51–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Shukla, A. M. Harad and L. S. Jawale, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2009, 94, 604–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamaye, Y. Nago, M. Sasaki, T. Tsuru, K. Mukae, T. Yoshinaga, R. Murayama and C. Tahara, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2006, 91, 2014–2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Imran, B.-K. Kim, M. Han, B. G. Cho and D. H. Kim, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 1686–1693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kurokawa, M. Ohshima, K. Sugiyama and H. Miura, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2003, 79, 529–533 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jie, H. Ke, Q. Wenjie and Z. Zibin, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2006, 91, 2527–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Güclü, T. Yalcinyuva, S. Özgümüs and M. Orbay, Polymer, 2003, 44, 7609–7616 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. Brandrup, M. Bittner, W. Michaeli and G. Menges, Recycling and Recovery of Plastics. Hanser Publishers, Munich, Germany,  1996 Search PubMed .

Conversion technology: A complement to plastic recycling, 4R Sustainability Inc.,  April 2011 Search PubMed.
H. Staudinger and E. O. Leupold, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. B, 1930, 63, 730–733 CrossRef .
H. Staudinger and W. Heuer, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. B, 1934, 67, 1159–1164 CrossRef .
M. K. Beyer and H. Clausen-Schaumann, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2921–2948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Potter and G. Scott, Eur. Polym. J., 1971, 7, 489–497 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Porter and A. Casale, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1985, 25, 129–156 CAS .
H. T. Baytekin, B. Baytekin and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3596–3600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Baytekin, H. T. Baytekin and B. A. Grzybowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7223–7226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Caruso, D. A. Davis, Q. Shen, S. A. Odom, N. R. Sottos, S. R. White and J. S. Moore, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5755–5798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Kausch and C. J. G. Plummer, Polymer, 1994, 35, 3848–3857 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Dubinskaya, S. F. Nikul'shin, A. Y. Rabkii and B. G. Zavii, Polym. Sci., U.S.S.R, 1980, 22, 2212–2220 CrossRef .
A. M. Dubinskaya and A. N. Streletski, Polym. Sci. U.S.S.R, 1982, 24, 2202–2210 CrossRef .
J. R. Thomas and D. L. de Vries, J. Phys. Chem., 1959, 63, 254 CAS .
M. Pike and W. F. Watson, J. Polym. Sci., 1952, 9, 229–251 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Harmon and H. L. Jacobs, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1966, 10, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Leblanc and R. Lionnet, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1992, 32, 989–997 CAS .
M. Kuzuya, Y. Yamauchi and S.-i. Kondo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8051–8059 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. van den Einde, A. J. van der Goot and R. M. Boom, J. Food Sci., 2003, 68, 2396–2404 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. van den Einde, C. Akkermans, A. J. van der Goot and R. M. Boom, Carbohydr. Polym., 2004, 56, 415–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Birke, J. Mattik and D. Runne, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Wiggins, J. N. Brantley and C. W. Bielawski, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1(5), 623 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Klukovich, T. B. Kouznetsova, Z. S. Kean, J. M. Lenhardt and S. L. Craig, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 110–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lenhardt, J. W. Ogle, M. T. Ong, R. Choe, T. J. Martinez and S. L. Craig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3222–3225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lenhardt, M. T. Ong, R. Choe, C. R. Evenhuis, T. J. Martinez and S. L. Craig, Science, 2010, 329, 1057–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Brantley, K. M. Wiggins and C. W. Bielawski, Science, 2011, 333, 1606–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Wiggins and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1640–1643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Piermattei, S. Karthikeyan and Rint. P. Sijbesma, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 133–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Black, J. A. Orlicki and S. L. Craig, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8460–8465 RSC .
J. M. Lenhardt, A. L. Black, B. A. Beiermann, B. D. Steinberg, F. Rahman, T. Samborski, J. Elsakr, J. S. Moore, N. R. Sottos and S. L. Craig, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8454–8459 RSC .
J. M. Lenhardt, A. L. Black and S. L. Craig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10818–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Klukovich, Z. S. Kean, A. L. Black Ramirez, J. M. Lenhardt, J. Lin, X. Hu and S. L. Craig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9577–9580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Hickenboth, J. S. Moore, S. R. White, N. R. Sottos, J. Baudry and S. R. Wilson, Nature, 2007, 446, 423–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Potisek, D. A. Davis, N. R. Sottos, S. R. White and J. S. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13808–13809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ribas-Arino, M. Shiga and D. Marx, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10609–10614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Davis, A. Hamilton, J. Yang, L. D. Cremar, D. Van Gough, S. L. Potisek, M. T. Ong, P. V. Braun, T. J. Martinez, S. R. White, J. S. Moore and N. R. Sottos, Nature, 2009, 459, 68–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, A. J. H. Spiering, S. Karthikeyan, G. W. M. Peters, E. W. Meijer and R. P. Sijbesma, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 559–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Black, J. M. Lenhardt and S. L. Craig, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1655–1663 RSC .
J. N. Brantley, K. M. Wiggins and C. W. Bielawski, Polym. Int., 2013, 62, 2–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Brantley, K. M. Wiggins and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201210025 .
D. Aktah and I. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3402–3406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Nikitina, V. D. Khavryutchenko, E. F. Sheka, H. Barthel and J. Weis, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 11355–11365 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Zhurkov, V. A. Zakrevskyi, V. E. Korsukov and V. S. Kuksenko, J. Polym. Sci., Part A2, 1972, 10, 1509–1520 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Butiagin, Pure Appl. Chem., 1972, 30, 57–76 CrossRef .
J. Sohma, Pure Appl. Chem., 1983, 55, 1595–1601 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Buchanan, III, P. F. Britt, Ki. B. Thomas and C. A. Biggs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 2182–2189 CrossRef .
N. S. Davis and J. H. Keefe, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1956, 48, 745–748 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Tormey, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1957, 49, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sanscrainte, Planet. Space Sci., 1961, 4, 184–193 CrossRef .
B. R. Panda and A. Chattopadhyay, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 1911–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Sarma, D. Chowdhury, A. Paul and A. Chattopadhyay, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1048–1049 RSC .
H. Riedl and G. Pfleiderer, U.S. Patent 2,158,525 , (1939) .
J. M. Campos-Martin, G. Blanco-Brieva and J. L. G. Fierro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6962–6984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Diesendruck, B. D. Steinberg, N. Sugai, M. N. Silberstein, N. R. Sottos, S. R. White, P. V. Braun and J. S. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12446–12449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. G. Cady, Piezoelectricity, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1946 Search PubMed .
J. Lowell and A. C. Rose-Innes, Adv. Phys., 1980, 29, 947–1023 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Horn and D. T. Smith, Science, 1992, 256, 362–364 CAS .
R. G. Horn, D. T. Smith and A. Grabbe, Nature, 1993, 366, 442–443 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. McCarty and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2188–2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Baytekin, B. Baytekin, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6766–6770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Baytekin, A. Z. Patashinski, M. Branicki, B. Baytekin, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Science, 2011, 333, 308–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Baytekin, B. Baytekin, J. T. Incorvati and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed, 2012, 51, 4843–4847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lacks and R. M. Sankaran, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 453001 CrossRef .
M. Sow, R. Widenor, A. Kumar, S. W. Lee, D. J. Lacks and R. M. Sankaran, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed, 2012, 51, 2695–2697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Williams, AIP Adv., 2012, 2, 010701 CrossRef .
F.-R. Fan, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, L. Lin, G. Zhu, W. Wu, R. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3109–3114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sanderson, Sticky tape generates X-rays, Nature News, 22 October 2008, http://www.nature.com/news/2008/012345/full/news.2008.1185.html.
S. Wang, L. Lin and Z. Lin Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6339–6346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Kiziroglou, C. He and E. M. Yeatman, Electron. Lett., 2010, 46, 166–167 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Suzuki, IEEE Symposium Micro-Nanomechatronics and Human Science,  2008, pp. 180–183 Search PubMed .
Y. Suzuki, D. Miki, M. Edamoto and M. Honzumi, J. Micromech. Microeng, 2010, 20, 104002 CrossRef .
E. R. Post and K. Waal, Pers. Ubiquit. Comput., 2011, 15, 115–121 CrossRef PubMed .
N. E. Harvey, Science, 1939, 89, 460–461 Search PubMed .
M. Zhenyi, J. Fan and J. T. Dickinson, J. Adhes., 1988, 25, 63–77 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Karasev, N. A. Krotova and B. W. Deryagin, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1953, 88, 777 CAS .
C. G. Camara, J. V. Escobar, J. R. Hird and S. J. Putterman, Nature, 2008, 455, 1089–1092 CrossRef CAS .
E. Constable, J. Horvat and R. A. Lewis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 131502 CrossRef .
J. R. Hird, C. G. Camara and S. J. Putterman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 133501 CrossRef .

          G. Gautschi, Piezoelectric Sensorics: Force, Strain, Pressure, Acceleration and Acoustic Emission Sensors, Materials and Amplifiers, Springer, Berlin,  2002 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, S. Yun and Z. Ounaies, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4202–4206 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fukada, IEEE T. Ultrason. Ferr., 2000, 47, 1277–1290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Lee, J. Zhang, C. Zueger, W.-J. Chung, S. Y. Yoo, E. Wang, J. Meyer, R. Ramesh and S.-W. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 351–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kawai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1969, 8, 975–976 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Seymour, J. Chem. Educ., 1990, 67, 763–765 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, R. Cooper, K. Wang and H. Liang, Sensors, 2008, 8, 7359–7368 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. Wang, Y.-K. Fuh and L. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cha, S. M. Kim, H. Kim, J. Ku, J. I. Sohn, Y. J. Park, B. G. Song, M. H. Jung, H. K. Lee, B. L. Choi, J. J. Park, Z. L. Wang, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5142–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, M. Dommer, C. Chang and L. Lin, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 356–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fourie, MIT MURJ, 2010, 19, 66–70 Search PubMed .
IEEE Standards on Piezoelectricity, IEEE, New York, 1988.
F. Vilela, K. Zhang and M. Antonietti, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7819–7832 CAS .

Polymer Photovoltaics: A Practical Approach, ed. F. C. Krebs, SPIE Press Monograph, vol. PM175,  2008 Search PubMed .

Stability and Degradation of Organic and Polymer Solar Cells, ed. F. C. Krebs, Wiley,  2012 Search PubMed .

Organic Photovoltaics: Mechanisms, Materials and Devices, ed. S.-S. Sun and N. S. Sariciftci, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. Sista, Z. Hong, L.-M. Chen and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1606–1620 CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bubnova and X. Crispin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9345–9362 CAS .
B. P. Tripathi and V. K. Shahi, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Taggart, Y. A. Yang, S. C. Kung, T. M. McIntire and R. M. Penner, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, J. Ge, Z. Lin, X. Feng, X. Wang, H. Lu, Y. Yanga and F. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8351–8358 CAS .
K. C. See, J. P. Feser, C. E. Chen, A. Majumdar, J. J. Urban and R. A. Segalman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† B. Baytekin and H. T. Baytekin contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Bilge Baytekin	Bilge Baytekin received her BSc and MSc degrees from METU (Ankara, Turkey), and her PhD degree in Chemistry from Free University of Berlin, Germany in 2008 under the supervision of Professor Christoph A. Schalley with summa cum laude. She has been working with Professor Bartosz A. Grzybowski at Northwestern University as a postdoctoral researcher since 2009. She has authored some 25 publications in high ranking journals on topics ranging from organic and polymer materials to static electricity and mechanochemistry.
H. Tarik Baytekin	H. Tarik Baytekin received his PhD from METU (Ankara, Turkey). He received a DAAD fellowship for his postdoctoral studies in Germany, and worked at Bonn University, Free University of Berlin, and in Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und Prüfung (BAM). In 2009, he moved to Northwestern University, where he is working as a Senior Research Associate in Prof. Bartosz A. Grzybowski's group. He is the author of many publications on diverse topics of materials science, some of which have also attracted attention from popular media. His research interests include static electricity, retrieving energy from polymers, surface analysis techniques including SPM, and mechanochemistry.
Bartosz A. Grzybowski	Bartosz A. Grzybowski graduated summa cum laude and Honoris in Chimia from Yale University in 1995. He obtained his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Harvard University in 2000. In 2003 he joined the faculty of Northwestern University where he is now Burgess Professor of Physical Chemistry and Chemical Systems Engineering and the director of the Non-Equilibrium Energy Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Grzybowski pioneered research on dynamic self-assembly and complex chemical networks. His other scientific interests include chemistries in non-equilibrium/dynamic systems, nanostructured materials and catalysts, unconventional electronics, mechanochemistry and nanobiology.

Broader context
Owing to their high caloric content, the millions of tons of polymers we produce – and often discard – could constitute a viable source of energy that can be retrieved by either breaking or rearranging the orientations of constituent chemical bonds. Despite optimistic media reports, we are still harnessing only a small fraction of this energy; in the U.S. alone, some 28 million tons of polymers are simply wasted each year, translating into the loss of almost a trillion MJ of energy that could be put to productive use. This article reviews a wide range of approaches by which energy “hidden” in polymers can be retrieved or transduced – examples range from traditional polymer incineration and chemolysis to the cutting-edge research on triboelectric, piezoelectric or thermoelectric generators with applications in personal electronics, MEMS, and small-scale synthesis. While none of these approaches offers a net-positive energy balance, their synergistic deployment on scales from industrial to personal could amount to societally appreciable energy savings.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Past and projected global energy demand for years 1990–2035. The blue region corresponds to the energy demand for OECD countries and the red region shows the rapidly growing demand for non-OECD countries. (b) Annual energy consumption in the U.S. categorized into primary energy sources. Data and the projections between years 1980 and 2040. The graphs in (a) and (b) are redrawn based on values from ref. 25.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of large-scale methods of energy retrieval from polymers. Although incineration of polymers is much more common than the newer thermolysis or chemolysis techniques, the latter two allow for the recycling of feedstock, which is becoming increasingly important given soaring oil prices and growing environmental concerns.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) High temperature “eco-clean” plastic-fueled burners designed to minimize emissions from polymer incineration. According to EcoClean Burners, the burner shown in (a) can produce enough energy “to heat a 4-story office building and keep it at 72 °F”.37 The unit shown in (b) produces 800000 Btu h−1 and heats two greenhouses.36 Images are reproduced with permission from ref. 37 and 38. (c) Calorific values of common polymers compared to some other materials.39–41	 

 	Fig. 4  Thermal cracking/pyrolysis of polyolefins. Thermal degradation of polyolefins may start from homolytic bond cleavage at a random point on the polymer chain or at the end of the chain. The polymeric radicals then depropagate – in “reverse” of the propagation step in radical polymerization. During depropagation, polymers disintegrate generating smaller fragments via several mechanisms, e.g., H-chain transfer or β-cleavage. Branching may occur upon radical recombination (or coupling), which ceases the propagation. Disproportionation is another reaction by which termination takes place.	 

 	Fig. 5  Examples of simple modes of bond breaking upon catalytic cracking of polyolefins.	 

 	Fig. 6  Plastics consumed by polymer type (Europe, 2008). A total of 38 million tons of thermoplastics were used in Europe in 2008.29	 

 	Fig. 7  Scheme of a PTF process. Polymer waste is cleaned and cut into smaller pieces and is fed into a pyrolysis chamber. Products of pyrolysis are separated by distillation. Valuable fuel products such as gasoline, kerosene, and diesel can be obtained. These products, as well as the off-gases produced in pyrolysis, can also be used to power the plant.	 

 	Fig. 8  Examples of chemical conversion of polymers to useful monomers. (a) Hydrolysis of PU retrieves the “original” diols. (b) Glycolysis of PET yields monomeric units of bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET).	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustration of a polymer's response to mechanical stimulus. At the macroscopic scale, crazing of a plastic surface (here, a Petri dish) is clearly visible to a naked eye. At the nanoscopic level, this process corresponds to the polymer chains elongating to accommodate mechanical stresses. At the molecular level, chemical bonds break.	 

 	Fig. 10  Homolytic (leading to radicals)151,152 and heterolytic (leading to anions and cations)153 chain breaking of polymers upon mechanical input. The specific example shown is for polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS).	 

 	Fig. 11  Mechanochemical production of hydrogen peroxide. (a) A compressible polymer tube filled with water produces radicals upon each squeeze–release cycle. These radicals can be detected (b) by ESR (black line: uncompressed, red line: compressed) and (c) by the reaction of radicals with the radical scavenger DPPH whereby the purple color of DPPH is bleached in acetonitrile. (d) When these tubes are filled with water, the radicals react with water to form hydrogen peroxide, which can be detected by its (e) 1H NMR signal in D2O, (f) UV-Vis absorption spectrum taken in water, (g) characteristic cyclic voltammogram, and (h) by the so-called Fenton's test. For experimental details see ref. 147. Images are reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright© 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Examples of chemical reactions driven by hydrogen peroxide produced by compression of polymers. (a) Fluorescence of the umbelliferone solution in the pockets of a Nike Air shoe sole. (b) Bleaching of a neutral red dye in a compressed PDMS tube. (c) Reduction of a gold salt to gold nanoparticles by compression of a PDMS tube. See ref. 147 for further experimental details. The mechanically generated hydrogen peroxide can also be used to (d) initiate polymerization of acrylonitrile, or (e) kill bacteria in water. Images (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright© 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  Energy production by contact electrification of polymers. (a) A polymer generator based on contact electrification of PET and Kapton. (b) Efficiency of the device can be enhanced by increasing the area of contact (by embossing microstructures on the polymers' surfaces). (c) These generators can be used to retrieve energy from everyday activities such as walking or even dancing. Shown here is an image of a triboelectric generator attached to a dress to light up LEDs on the dress. (d) Mechanical action on polymers (here, by peeling-off an adhesive tape) can produce enough X-rays to develop an X-ray film (here, of a finger). Images are reproduced with permission from ref. 205, Copyright© 2012 Elsevier, ref. 206, Copyright© 2012 ACS, ref. 207, Copyright © 2008 Nature Publishing Group, and ref. 212 Copyright© 2011 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Polymer piezoelectric device inserted in a shoe sole to harvest mechanical energy from walking. (b) The device uses the piezoelectric polymer PVDF, and (c) upon walking, a few dozen microwatts can be produced, which is enough to operate various MEMS. Images are reproduced from ref. 229 with permission.	 
i = σ(E − α∇T)
q = αTi − λ∇T
Footnote
† B. Baytekin and H. T. Baytekin contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
