Recycling of carbon dioxide to methanol and derived products – closing the loop  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00122B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00122B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7995-8048Recycling of carbon dioxide to methanol and derived products – closing the loop

        
          
            Alain 
            Goeppert
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Miklos 
            Czaun
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            John-Paul 
            Jones
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            G. K. 
            Surya Prakash
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            George A. 
            Olah
          
          
        
      *
      Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute and Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA 90089-1661, USA. E-mail: gprakash@usc.edu; olah@usc.edu; goeppert@usc.edu; czaun@usc.edu
Received 
      2nd April 2014
    First published on 17th June 2014AbstractStarting with coal, followed by petroleum oil and natural gas, the utilization of fossil fuels has allowed the fast and unprecedented development of human society. However, the burning of these resources in ever increasing pace is accompanied by large amounts of anthropogenic CO2 emissions, which are outpacing the natural carbon cycle, causing adverse global environmental changes, the full extent of which is still unclear. Even through fossil fuels are still abundant, they are nevertheless limited and will, in time, be depleted. Chemical recycling of CO2 to renewable fuels and materials, primarily methanol, offers a powerful alternative to tackle both issues, that is, global climate change and fossil fuel depletion. The energy needed for the reduction of CO2 can come from any renewable energy source such as solar and wind. Methanol, the simplest C1 liquid product that can be easily obtained from any carbon source, including biomass and CO2, has been proposed as a key component of such an anthropogenic carbon cycle in the framework of a “Methanol Economy”. Methanol itself is an excellent fuel for internal combustion engines, fuel cells, stoves, etc. It's dehydration product, dimethyl ether, is a diesel fuel and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) substitute. Furthermore, methanol can be transformed to ethylene, propylene and most of the petrochemical products currently obtained from fossil fuels. The conversion of CO2 to methanol is discussed in detail in this review.
Alain Goeppert
Alain Goeppert obtained his PhD in 2002 from the University of Strasbourg, France. He is currently a research scientist in the Olah/Prakash group at the University of Southern California. His research focuses on methane and CO2 activation and catalytic transformation to products including methanol, dimethyl ether and formic acid. He is also involved in the catalytic decomposition of formic acid to hydrogen and CO2 as well as the development of regenerative sorbents for the separation and capture of CO2 from various sources including the air. He is a co-author of the book “Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy”.
Miklos Czaun
Miklos Czaun received his chemical engineering degree from the University of Veszprem (Hungary) in 1998 and completed his PhD (Summa Cum Laude, 2003) under the supervision of Prof. Gabor Speier. He joined the research group of Profs. George A. Olah and G. K. Surya Prakash at the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute at University of Southern California in 2009. Presently, he is a Senior Research Associate focused on the development of solid adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture and the conversion of carbon dioxide to synthesis gas (dry-reforming and bi-reforming reactions). He is also interested in carbon neutral energy- and hydrogen storage systems.
John-Paul Jones
John-Paul Jones is a graduate student in the research group of Professors Prakash and Olah, where he is studying electrochemical CO2 reduction, particularly under pressure. He obtained his Bachelor of Science degree in Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley. After that, he worked for Amyris Biotechnologies in Emeryville, California, where he focused on the development of synthetic replacements for diesel, gasoline, and jet fuels.
G. K. Surya Prakash
G. K. Surya Prakash received BSc (Honors) (1972) from the Bangalore University, MSc (1974) from IIT, Madras and PhD (1978) from the University of Southern California (USC). After his postdoctoral work at USC, he joined the faculty at USC in 1981 and currently is a Professor and Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute holding the Olah Nobel Laureate Chair in Hydrocarbon Chemistry. His research interests are in fluorination and synthetic methods, mechanistic studies, superacid chemistry, electrochemistry and hydrocarbon chemistry. He is a co-proponent of the Methanol Economy concept, prolific and has received several American Chemical Society National Awards.
George A. Olah
George A. Olah is a Distinguished Professor of Chemistry and Founding Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Institute at the University of Southern California. His pioneering research on hydrocarbon chemistry and fundamental aspects of carbocations in superacids fetched him the unshared 1994 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. He is prolific with 1400 publications, 20 books and 120 patents. His current research interests are in new energy areas covering chemical carbon dioxide recycling and the derived methanol economy concept. He has received many awards and recognitions including 12 honorary degrees from various universities and memberships in some 20 National Academies and Scientific Societies.
1. Introduction
To satisfy the energy demand of an increasing world population, fossil fuels including coal, petroleum and natural gas are being burnt on an unprecedented scale. Presently, about 22 million tonnes of coal, 85 million barrels of oil (around 12 million tonnes) and 10 billion m3 of natural gas are consumed each and every day to fulfill some 82% of the energy demand.1 Together they contribute to the annual release of more than 30 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide into the environment.2 While part of this CO2 is utilized by plants and absorbed into the oceans, contributing to seawater acidification, about half of it remains in the atmosphere where it accumulates over time. From a pre-industrial level of about 270 ppm, the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has now surpassed the 400 ppm mark. CO2 being a so-called greenhouse gas has the effect of trapping the sun's heat and is believed to be one of the main contributors to the presently observed climate change phenomena. The natural carbon cycle has been exceeded and is presently unable to keep up with the input of large amounts of anthropogenic CO2 emitted. Numerous solutions have been proposed to alleviate the problems associated with this inevitable by-product of fossil fuel combustion. Energy conservation can help but will not solve the problem by itself. The use of renewables as well as nuclear energy to fulfill an increasing part of our energy mix is also being pursued but they will be hard pressed to replace fossil fuels, at least in the short term. The gift that nature has given us in the form of fossilized sunshine, i.e. fossil fuels, has enabled an extraordinary development of human societies to a level that could only be dreamed of a few centuries ago. To put it in perspective, it has been determined that a single barrel of oil has an energy content equivalent to 12 humans working all year round or about 25000 man-hours. Considering that each American on average consumes 25 barrels of oil annually, about 300 people working on a yearly basis would be required to power the industries, fuel the transportation sector and provide for many of their household needs to cover and maintain the current standard of living of each of them.
Despite their considerable size, our fossil fuel reserves are finite and limited, and will therefore be increasingly depleted. While the exploitation of unconventional fossil fuel resources such as shale oil and shale gas, and possibly methane hydrate in the future, could significantly increase the availability of affordable fossil fuels, the impact of their production on the environment is also raising numerous concerns. A number of countries including France and Germany banned or put a moratorium on the use of hydraulic fracturing, also called “fracking”, technologies used to exploit shale resources as long as they are not proven safe for the environment. The utilization of these unconventional resources exacerbates the problems associated with greenhouse gas emissions. If humankind wants to continue using fossil fuels, a solution is clearly needed to control these problems. The most commonly proposed one is carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) where CO2 would be captured from various point sources including power plants and industrial facilities, concentrated, pressurized and then pumped underground into geological formations. It could also be used for enhanced oil recovery (EOR).3 Alternatively, the captured CO2 could be mineralized either on the surface or underground. For the CO2 capture, different technologies including absorption into liquids, adsorption on solids and membrane separation could be utilized depending on the CO2 concentration, temperature, presence of impurities, etc. in the effluent to be treated. Eventually, even the CO2 present in the air could be captured and technologies are presently being developed for this purpose.4,5 Direct air capture is important to address about half the CO2 emissions that originate from small and dispersed fossil fuel burning units such as cars, airplanes, trains, stoves, domestic heating, etc. for which CO2 capture at the source would be impractical and/or not economically feasible. However, CCS has not been proven yet on the immense scale needed, tens of billions of tonnes of CO2 per year, and we have to make sure that all the CO2 stored underground also remains there and does not leak overtime, rendering the overall process pointless. Monitoring of stored CO2 over decades and probably centuries is therefore very important but might be difficult to enforce. The storage of large amounts of CO2 underground has also seen pushback from local populations, which do not wish to have such facilities located close to them. While in general people agree that something has to be done about CO2 emissions, on a local level, we are therefore facing the classical “not in my backyard (NIMBY)” syndrome.
In the recent past it was thought that demand for petroleum oil and natural gas would outpace the global production capacity in the relatively near term (the so-called global Hubbert's peak), after which the availability of these resources would decrease and their prices increase sharply. With the recently found shale gas and oil resources and the future possibility of economical exploitation of methane hydrate and still very large reserves of coal, it seems that we will not run out of fossil fuels for quite a while. However, if no acceptable and economical solution is found for the CO2 problem, it could well be that our usage of fossil fuels will be strongly constrained by the levels of CO2 emissions and the accompanying environmental effects that we are willing to accept and not by their actual availability. Sheik Zaki Yamani, a former oil minister from Saudi Arabia might therefore well be right when he said that “the stone age didn't end for lack of stone, and the oil age will end long before the world runs out of oil”.6
At the same time, renewable energies, in particular wind and solar, which are realistically the main sources available on the scale needed (beside safe nuclear energy) to replace fossil fuels, are becoming more feasible and economical. They will increasingly compete favorably with fossil resources, especially if environmental benefits are also taken into account.
Whether humankind uses up most of the fossil fuel resources (combined with carbon capture) or uses increasingly alternative energies, the need for transportation fuels and materials that we currently obtain from petroleum oil and natural gas will remain. With increasing population, products based on carbon from plastics to medicines will also be required in increasing quantities. In order to fulfill the demand for carbon based products, CO2 will have to be recycled in an anthropogenic version of nature's own carbon cycle. Carbon capture and recycling (CCR) will capture CO2 from any source, and eventually mainly from the atmosphere, and recycle it to new materials and fuels using any alternative energy source. In one way most of our energy comes from the sun: solar, wind, hydro, waves and even fossil fuels, which are the decomposition product of some plant and animal matter that lived on earth millions of years ago.7 Nuclear fission or possibly fusion, albeit made safer, will also have a significant role to play. One of the most versatile, simple and easy to obtain liquid product from CO2 is methanol through hydrogenation, electrochemically and by other means. Biomass, which is already a form of recycled CO2 can also be transformed efficiently to methanol. The produced renewable and sustainable methanol can then be further processed into dimethyl ether, ethylene, propylene, gasoline and all other products currently obtained from petroleum and natural gas. Once methanol and its derivatives are combusted they will release CO2 which can then be recycled back, effectively closing the carbon loop (Fig. 1). The object of this review is to give an overview of the conversion of CO2 to methanol substantially solving our carbon conundrum.
 Fig. 1  Anthropogenic carbon cycle within the Methanol Economy. 
2. Advantages of using methanol
Renewable energy sources including wind, solar, hydro and geothermal as well nuclear energy that are bound to play an increasing role in the world's energy mix, produce primarily electricity. While electrical energy is a good way to transfer energy over relatively short distances, its storage on a large scale remains a challenge. Pumped hydro, compressed air storage, flywheels and batteries are all possible but have limited capacity. This is especially problematic for the two most promising renewable energies, solar and wind, which by their nature are intermittent and highly fluctuating. Solar produces much less power under cloudy conditions and none at night. Wind, on the other hand does not blow constantly or consistently at the same speed. For these renewable sources to fulfill more than a marginal portion of our energy needs, evening out these fluctuations in production will be essential for the stability of the electrical grid. Presently, the production of electrical power follows closely the demand by varying the production of power plants. While this is possible when using fossil fuels, especially natural gas, it does not seem to be an option for intermittent renewable energy sources. Storing excess capacity and use it when needed is therefore required. One way of achieving this is by storing electrical energy in the form of chemical energy (bonds) in compounds such as hydrogen, methanol, methane and higher hydrocarbons. These chemicals can then be stored and/or transported and used at a later time to produce electricity or in other applications such as transportation, heating, cooking, etc.
The simplest compound that can be produced from electrical energy is hydrogen, by splitting of water. The sole practical method to split water into hydrogen today is electrolysis, but others such as photochemical and thermal splitting as well as high temperature chemical cycles (vide infra) are also under investigation. Electrolysis of water has been practiced for more than 100 years and is efficient with overall system conversions higher than 75 to 80% with further improvements possible.
Hydrogen gas, has been proposed as an energy storage media and is an excellent and clean fuel which produces, besides energy, only water when combusted. In theory a “Hydrogen Economy” based on simple recycling of water to hydrogen would be very attractive.8 In practice, however, due to its physical and chemical properties, hydrogen has a number of serious drawbacks.9 Because of its low volumetric density it requires either compression to high pressures (350 to 700 bars) or liquefaction at very low temperature (−253 °C), making its storage problematic and energy intensive. It is also highly flammable and explosive and can diffuse through many commonly used metals and materials. The infrastructure needed to transport, store and dispense hydrogen safely would therefore be very expensive.
Other, less cumbersome ways of storing electrons in chemical bonds are thus needed. Among the possible chemical storage media, a liquid would be preferable to a gaseous one in most applications. In the transportation sector in particular, a transition from liquid fossil fuel derived products (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene etc.) to a renewable and sustainable liquid fuel would be highly desirable. This would enable the use of the existing infrastructure with only minor modifications. Among the possible candidates fulfilling these requirements, methanol,10 the simplest liquid compound containing only one carbon can be produced easily through hydrogenation of CO2 whereas direct electrochemical reduction methods are also being developed.11–13 Methanol has many advantages and its use as an energy carrier has been promoted in the past.14–22 Due to its high octane rating, it is an excellent additive or substitute for gasoline in internal combustion engines (ICE). Methanol can also be used efficiently in modified diesel engines23,24 as well as in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) converting the chemical energy in methanol to electrical power directly at ambient temperature.25 Dimethyl ether (DME), produced from methanol by simple dehydration, is a gas that can be easily liquefied at moderate pressure, much like liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). DME, which is an excellent diesel fuel substitute with high cetane rating producing almost no soot emissions has attracted much interest.26,27 It can also replace LPG in most applications such as heating and cooking. Furthermore, methanol and DME are superior fuels for electric power generation in gas turbines.28–30 If needed methanol can even be transformed to gasoline through the methanol-to-gasoline (MTG) process developed by Mobil in the 1970–1980s.31 Besides its fuel application, methanol is also a feedstock for numerous chemicals such as formaldehyde, acetic acid and methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE). Through the methanol-to-olefins process (MTO), it can produce light olefins including ethylene and propylene used in polymers (chiefly polyethylene and polypropylene), as well as any hydrocarbon and product currently obtained from petroleum oil.
Methanol is already one of the most important organic feedstock in the chemical industry with a current worldwide annual production of about 65 million tonnes.32 Although, for economic reasons, methanol is presently almost exclusively produced from fossil fuels (natural gas and coal), it could be made from any carbon containing feedstock including biomass and any CO2 source in the future. Such a “Methanol Economy” concept includes an anthropogenic carbon cycle to produce methanol, which can then be used as a renewable fuel or for the synthesis of nearly all products presently derived from fossil fuels. Many aspects of a “Methanol Economy” have been described in detail in our recent papers and a monograph.11–13,33
3. Methanol from CO2 and fossil fuels
Methanol synthesis from syngas
Almost all methanol produced worldwide is synthesized from synthesis gas (syngas)34 with a composition of CO:2H2, called metgas according the reactions shown in eqn (1) and (2). While the conversion of H2–CO mixture to methanol and the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol are exothermic, the reverse water gas shift reaction (RWGS, eqn (3)) is endothermic. CO + 2H2 ⇌ CH3OH ΔH298K = −21.7 kcal mol−1(1) CO2 + 3H2 ⇌ CH3OH + H2O ΔH298K = −11.9 kcal mol−1(2) CO2 + H2 ⇌ CO + H2O ΔH298K = 9.8 kcal mol−1(3)
All three reactions are reversible and the optimal reaction conditions were developed to shift these equilibria to the formation of methanol, which require higher pressures and lower temperature according to the Le Chatelier's principle. Although the original methanol synthesis technologies introduced by BASF in the 1920's were operated at high pressures of 250–300 atm and temperatures of 300–400 °C over zinc oxide/chromium oxide catalysts, present technologies require milder reaction conditions (200–300 °C, 50–100 atm) using copper-based catalysts. Methane from any source such as natural gas and shale gas is the preferred feedstock for syngas production due to the relatively low level of impurities (H2S, COS and mercaptans) and ease of handling compared to coal-based gasification technologies. Using methane as a feed thus allows the application of more active and selective catalysts at lower pressures and temperatures resulting in fewer side products (higher alcohols, DME and hydrocarbons) and lower capital cost. Almost all present processes are carried out via the gas phase reaction of H2 and CO. However, the catalyst arrangement (e.g. tube, fixed bed or suspension) and the reactor design may differ.
Syngas production
Despite some differences in the process parameters, the conversion of syngas to methanol is a well established technology, while the syngas production shows more diversity. The next several paragraphs will give a brief summary of processes and methods resulting in mixtures of H2 and CO using a variety of starting materials, giving particular attention to those that utilize recycled carbon dioxide.

Syngas from fossil fuels. 
Traditionally syngas was produced by coal gasification35 processes that combine partial oxidation and steam treatment of coal as described by the eqn (4) and (5) below. Although most of the syngas worldwide is presently produced from natural gas, coal-based technologies are still practiced in countries such as China and South Africa, where huge coal reserves are still available but natural gas resources are scarce.
Partial oxidation of coal C + 1/2O2 → CO ΔH298K = −29.4 kcal mol−1(4)Steam treatment of coal C + H2O ⇌ CO + H2 ΔH298K = 31.3 kcal mol−1(5)Water gas shift reaction CO + H2O ⇌ H2 + CO2 ΔH298K = −9.8 kcal mol−1(6)Reverse Boudouard reaction CO2 + C ⇌ 2CO ΔH298K = 40.8 kcal mol−1(7)
The water gas shift (WGS, eqn (6)) reaction is applied to adjust to the proper H2 to CO ratio and the symproportionation of CO2 and carbon to CO (eqn (7), also called the reverse Boudouard reaction, vide infra) also takes place under the reaction conditions.
Endothermic catalytic conversions of hydrocarbons to synthesis gas using steam or CO2 are called reforming reactions. Steam reforming of methane (SMR, eqn (8))36 or other hydrocarbons is a widely used method to produce the mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide (syngas) mainly for methanol or ammonia synthesis (utilizing H2). CH4 + H2O ⇌ CO + 3H2 ΔH298K = 49.1 kcal mol−1(8)
This highly energy demanding process (ΔH298K = 49.1 kcal mol−1) is generally carried out on nickel containing catalysts at temperatures of 800–1000 °C and pressures of 20–40 atm.
In order to maximize or adjust the proper H2/CO ratio required by the subsequent utilization of the syngas (e.g. ammonia synthesis, commercial H2 production) the water gas shift reaction (WGS, eqn (6)) is often carried out after steam reforming.
One of the advantages of SMR is the lower possibility of coking due to the high partial pressure of water. However the resulting H2/CO ratio (S = 3) is not practical for methanol synthesis (eqn (1)) which require a lower ratio (S ≈ 2–2.2) and therefore appropriate adjustments.
Partial oxidation of methane (eqn (9)) is the reaction between methane and less than 2 equivalents of oxygen (that would lead to complete combustion) giving the mixture of hydrogen and CO in the ratio of 2 to 1 either in the presence or absence of a catalyst.37 Practically, the gas mixture contains CO2 and H2O due to side reactions such as H2 or CO oxidation (eqn (10) and (11)) reactions and complete oxidation of methane to CO2 (eqn (12)), which cause losses in product gases and also lead to safety concerns.
Partial oxidation of methane CH4 + 1/2O2 → CO + 2H2 ΔH298K = −8.5 kcal mol−1(9)Oxidation of hydrogen H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O ΔH298K = −57.7 kcal mol−1(10)Oxidation of carbon monoxide CO + 1/2O2 → CO2 ΔH298K = −67.6 kcal mol−1(11)Complete combustion of methane CH4 + 2O2 → CO2 + 2H2O ΔH298K = −210.2 kcal mol−1(12)
If we want to render the syngas production energy neutral in order to simplify the process heat management, the endothermic reforming reactions should be combined with exothermic (partial) oxidation as it is conducted in autothermal reforming and tri-reforming.38
Autothermal reforming of methane viz. the combination of partial oxidation and steam reforming or CO2 reforming of methane (depending on the addition of H2O or CO2) can be carried out either in two separate reactors or in one reactor, lowering capital cost. Even though the two reactor arrangement increases the complexity of the system, this solution allows optimization of the reaction temperature for each reaction and the unreacted methane from the steam reformer can be oxidized in the second reactor leaving low amount of residual methane in the product gas.39
Tri-reforming is a process that combines the exothermic methane oxidation reactions such as complete combustion and partial oxidation of methane and the endothermic reforming reactions such as methane CO2 reforming and steam reforming.38,40–43 In this process gas mixtures that contain CO2, steam and oxygen can be combined with methane and converted to syngas with the desired H2/CO ratio. By adjusting the relative amount of oxidants (O2, CO2 and H2O) to CH4 and the H2/CO ratio can be shifted and the coke formation reduced.
Korean gas (KOGAS) developed a natural gas-based tri-reforming process to produce syngas providing a H2/CO ratio in the range of 1.2–1.5 (Fig. 2).43
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of KOGAS tri-reforming process. Based on ref. 43. 
The process includes a pre-reformer where C2 and C3 components are converted into C1 species and hydrogen at 30 bar and 350 °C, and a tri-reformer unit. In the tri-reformer, the combustion of methane takes place in the catalyst-free homogeneous region, while the reforming reaction occurs in the heterogeneous region where a NiO–Mg/Ce–ZrO2/Al2O3 catalyst is placed. The exothermic methane combustion provides the necessary heat for the endothermic syngas formation. The obtained syngas exits the tri-reformer at a temperature of 1000 °C and a pressure of 20 bar. It was found that the coke formation on the reactor wall could be significantly suppressed using tri-reforming.

CO2 conversion to methanol using fossil fuels: syngas and subsequent methanol production from CO2 using fossil fuels

Dry reforming of methane (MDR). 
Carbon dioxide reforming of methane (eqn (13), also called “dry” reforming indicating the absence of steam) is the reaction between equimolar amount of CO2 and CH4 giving one to one ratio of CO and H2 (S = 1).44 In commercial processes, the reaction is conducted on Ni/MgO or Ni/MgAl2O4 catalyst at temperatures from 800–1000 °C.
Dry reforming CO2 + CH4 ⇌ 2CO + 2H2 ΔH298K = 59.1 kcal mol−1(13)Methanation reaction CO2 + 4H2 ⇌ CH4 + 2H2O ΔH298K = −60.4 kcal mol−1(14)Boudouard reaction 2CO ⇌ CO2 + C(s) ΔH298K = −40.8 kcal mol−1(15)Methane decomposition CH4 ⇌ C(s) + 2H2 ΔH298K = 18.1 kcal mol−1(16)
Dry reforming of methane and other hydrocarbons was applied commercially (Calcor process) to produce high purity carbon monoxide.45 The chemical composition of the obtained product (CO, H2, H2O, CH4), in addition to the carbon deposits indicates the appearance of side reactions such as the reverse water gas shift reaction (RWGS, eqn (3)) and methanation of CO2 (eqn (14), also called the Sabatier reaction).46
The advantage of dry reforming is that it utilizes very cost effective raw materials and the fact that one molecule of CO2 is used for each CH4 molecule, making the process even more attractive as an alternative to mitigate global warming. This process can be environmentally beneficial if the reaction heat comes from renewable energy and the utilized CO2 is obtained from a CO2 rich stream or from the air. It should be also noted that natural gas deposits contain various amounts of CO2 and its removal can be avoided if used in dry reforming, thus lowering the purification cost. The price of the raw materials will obviously increase and chemical technologies which utilize CO2 may be subsidized in the future, making the envisioned anthropogenic carbon cycle more feasible. Regardless of all its advantages, dry reforming suffers from coking, severely shortening the lifetime of the applied catalysts. This undesired carbon formation can be due to the Boudouard reaction (eqn (15)) and the thermal decomposition of methane (eqn (16)). The Boudouard reaction (eqn (15)), named after the French chemist Octave L. Boudouard, who first investigated this equilibrium in detail, is the disproportionation of carbon monoxide into CO2 and carbon. Although the Boudouard reaction is used to produce a variety of graphites and carbon nanotubes and takes place in blast furnaces, this reaction is often undesirable since it is responsible for the deactivation of industrial catalysts due to coke formation.
Another disadvantage of dry reforming in the context of methanol production is the low H2/CO (S = 1) ratio in the product gas, which is not suitable for methanol synthesis. Enrichment of the obtained H2–CO mixture by adding H2 from other sources, would be a solution to adjust the needed H2/CO ratio (S ≈ 2) but it would also increase the complexity and cost.


Bi-reforming of methane for methanol production. 
Production of metgas (S ≈ 2) can also be achieved by a selective process that has been termed “bi-reforming”47,48 (Registered Trademark). Bi-reforming (eqn (17)) can be described as the combined steam reforming and dry44 reforming of methane giving exclusively metgas, the needed feed for subsequent methanol synthesis (Fig. 3).49
 Fig. 3  Bi-reforming of methane. 
The bi-reforming of methane is also a practical procedure for natural (shale) gas that contains CO2 because it does not require the removal and release of CO2 into the atmosphere and it allows the adjustment of the feed ratio according to local conditions.
Bi-reforming compared to MDR, gives exclusively the 2H2/CO ratio, and the fact that similar catalysts active for steam reforming or dry reforming (Ni/MgO at 800–1000 °C) can be used is also an advantage. The presence of steam in this process helps to suppress carbon formation (coking) that otherwise could lead to catalyst deactivation. Finally, higher aliphatic hydrocarbons can also be utilized as feedstocks for bi-reforming (eqn (18))47,48,50 allowing the utilization of wet shale gas without separating the homologous alkanes. 3CnH2n+2 + (3n − 1)H2O + CO2 ⇌ (3n + 1)CO + (6n + 2)H2(18)
Since most of previous works on the combination of dry- and steam reforming51–55 were carried out at atmospheric pressure, it seemed challenging to conduct bi-reforming at higher pressure in order to move closer to practical application. In the study of Olah et al., a MgO supported NiO catalyst with a NiO content of 5–35% was used for the reforming of a gas feed of CH4/CO2/H2O with a molar ratio of 3/1.2/2.4 in a temperature range of 800–950 °C at pressures of 5–30 atm under flow conditions.56 The catalyst with 15% NiO showed good stability and high performance. For example, conversions up to 80–85% could be obtained in a single pass.


Oxidative bi-reforming of methane. 
A practical modification of methane bi-reforming (vide supra); so called “oxidative bi-reforming”57 has been reported by Olah et al. (Fig. 4). Complete combustion of methane providing CO2, steam and reaction heat was combined with bi-reforming,56 resulting in a 2:1 mixture of H2 and CO (metgas) for exclusive methanol synthesis.
 Fig. 4  Oxidative bi-reforming for producing metgas exclusively for methanol synthesis. 
Oxidative bi-reforming offers a solution for a long lasting challenge, namely how to incorporate one oxygen atom into the C–H bond of methane for synthesizing methanol. As is well known, direct oxygenation of methane to methanol could be carried out either with high selectivity but low conversion or vice versa but there is no report that both high selectivity and high conversion of methane have been achieved.58


Carnol process. 
Although methanol synthesis from H2–CO mixture is an exothermic reaction, the conventional metgas production via reforming reactions is very energy intensive. Since the required heat energy is derived from burning fossil fuels in conventional syngas production processes, it results in significant CO2 emission. Consequently, environmentally more benign processes emitting less or no CO2 have to be considered for hydrogen production.
The Carnol process, which was also used to produce carbon black as a filler material or pigment has been developed by the Brookhaven National Laboratory.59 As indicated in Fig. 5, methane is thermally decomposed at temperatures above 800 °C in the absence of air to hydrogen and carbon (fossil fuel decarbonization).60,61 In the following step, catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 (captured from any industrial or domestic sources or from the atmosphere) can be carried out to produce methanol.
 Fig. 5  Carnol process. 
It is apparent, that all three carbon atoms from methane end up in elemental carbon (eqn (19)) while carbon atoms from the added CO2 are incorporated into methanol.


Combination of methane decomposition with dry reforming. 
Carbon dioxide can be converted into methanol by the combination of methane decomposition62 and dry reforming as described in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Combination of methane decomposition with dry reforming. 
Compared with the Carnol process, less carbon derived from methane is converted to elemental carbon, so this method results in more CO2 emission after using the produced methanol as a fuel for example.

Fig. 7 gives a summary of processes for converting carbon dioxide to methanol using still abundant natural gas resources.
 Fig. 7  Processes to convert CO2 to methanol using methane. 


Addition of CO2 to syngas from steam reforming. 
Not only by the combination of steam reforming and dry reforming can the proper H2/CO ratio of 2 be achieved, but also by the addition of CO2 to the syngas from steam reforming during the methanol synthesis step leading to the same overall composition (Fig. 8). The advantage of this method is that the excess hydrogen produced by steam reforming can be also utilized in the same process.
 Fig. 8  Addition of CO2 to syngas from steam reforming. 

H2 from CH4 without CO2 formation (CH4 decomposition)
Large scale cost effective production of hydrogen is essential for industry since hydrogen is a starting material for numerous important technologies such as ammonia synthesis, hydrocracking, methanol synthesis, etc. Hydrogen is also considered a “clean fuel” for H2/air fuel cells and for cars powered by liquefied hydrogen because its only combustion product is environmentally benign water. It must be noted however that due to the fact that these technologies utilize fossil fuels, the production of H2 is accompanied by high CO2 emissions. Direct methane decomposition62 to hydrogen and elemental carbon may give a promising alternative for hydrogen production because all carbon atoms from the fossil fuel end up in solid form (carbon), which can be easily disposed or utilized as a construction material or as a filler giving a lower net carbon dioxide emission.63
Generally, there are two groups of catalyst that are used for reducing the required temperature for the thermocatalytic decomposition of methane (TCD). Among the metal catalysts the activity decreases in the order of Co, Ru, Ni, Rh > Pt, Re, Ir > Pd, Cu, W, Fe, Mo. However further studies are necessary to establish a general agreement on this order due to some discrepancies in the literature.64
Any of these catalysts will eventually become deactivated due to carbon deposition (coking) on the catalyst surface. Utilization of a carbon catalyst65 helps to overcome this problem in addition to other advantages such as lower price and the fact that such catalysts cannot be poisoned by sulfur.
Dimethyl ether (DME)
As it was shown earlier in this article, methanol is an excellent fuel or fuel additive due to its high octane number and clean burning properties, but we can find promising fuel candidates among methanol derived products as well. Dimethyl ether (DME, also called wood ether or methyl oxide) is the simplest ether and has been used mainly as a pressurizing agent in consumer products, in paints and for insect control. Although at ambient pressure DME is a gas (bp = −25.1 °C) due to its low vapor pressure (VP25°C = 0.6 MPa), it is easy to liquefy, simplifying its handling and transportation. Not only because of its high cetane number but also due to its advantageous combustion properties such as no soot and SOx emission and low NOx emission, DME is an excellent diesel substitute. In addition, unlike other alkyl ethers its low propensity to form explosive peroxides makes this material a safe diesel car fuel, an electric power generation fuel and LPG substitute.66
Traditionally, DME is synthesized from methanol by bimolecular dehydration over a variety of acidic catalysts (alumina or phosphoric acid modified γ-Al2O3) according to eqn (20). 2CH3OH → CH3OCH3 + H2O ΔH298K = −5.5 kcal mol−1(20)
The required methanol is mainly derived from natural gas or coal-based syngas but eventually methanol from any other source such as electrochemical or catalytic reduction of carbon dioxide or biomass conversion is suitable for DME synthesis.
In order to simplify the process, the synthesis of DME directly from syngas by combining the methanol synthesis with the dehydration of methanol has gained increasing attention. The combination of methanol synthesis catalyst (Cu/ZnO/Al2O3) with that used for dehydration of methanol resulted in excellent equilibrium conversion. 2CO + 4H2 → CH3OCH3 + H2O ΔH298K = −49.0 kcal mol−1(21) 3CO + 3H2 → CH3OCH3 + CO2 ΔH298K = −58.7 kcal mol−1(22)
Japan Steel Engineering (JSE) has used the reaction in eqn (22), a combination of reactions in eqn (1), (6) and (20), in its technology.67 The source of syngas is autothermal reforming of methane viz. the combination of the exothermic partial oxidation of methane with the endothermic dry reforming (eqn (23)). 2CH4 + O2 + CO2 → 3H2 + 3CO + H2O(23)
As it is indicated in eqn (23), two hydrogen atoms from methane form water, which is a significant H2 loss.
Haldor Topsøe has applied the pathway in eqn (21), a combination of eqn (1) and (20), in its DME plant, which uses metgas, with a H2/CO ratio of 2. As it was discussed, this ratio can be achieved by bi-reforming of methane. The obtained water from eqn (21), if needed, can be recovered and used in bi-reforming and thus all hydrogen utilized in producing DME.47,50,68 This is of significance in arid areas, where water resources are scarce.
Current reserves of methane from natural gas are still very large. The exploitation of unconventional natural gas resources such as shale gas and methane hydrates could also significantly increase the amounts of methane available to humankind. Nevertheless, these resources are finite and will eventually run out. On the other hand, innovative processes are being explored for the transformation of methane into easy-to-handle liquid fuels, primarily methanol, but this will not solve the problem of increasing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere and its detrimental effects on the global climate. Even though methane does release less CO2 upon combustion than coal or petroleum, its increased utilization to fill the world's growing energy needs will still produce vast quantities of CO2. Thus, new ways are needed to fulfill humankind's ever increasing appetite for energy, without adversely affecting our environment. In the long term, methanol will, therefore, have to be produced from sources that release only minimal quantities of CO2, if at all. In this respect, the use of biomass is one possibility that is being explored and described, vide infra.
4. Biomass and waste based methanol and DME – bio-methanol and bio-DME
Biomass, based on recycled CO2, is generally referred to as any type of plant or animal matter, i.e. any materials produced by life forms. This includes wood and agricultural crops and their waste byproducts, municipal solid waste, animal waste as well as aquatic plants and algae. Methanol itself was originally named wood alcohol because it was made exclusively through the thermal destructive distillation of wood. This relatively inefficient route was however quickly abandoned with the development of syngas based synthetic processes at the beginning of the 20th century. Current socio-economical factors such as energy security, availability, and cost but also climate change concerns have prompted a reconsideration of biomass, which should play a more significant role in our energy mix on a global scale. Because biomass itself is a very general term used to describe a variety of heterogeneous materials (in most cases bulky solids such as wood and agricultural crops and by-products) its conversion to a single, convenient and easy to transport liquid product such as methanol could be advantageous. The methods for producing bio-methanol from biomass are now much more efficient than a century ago.69,70 Depending on the nature of the feedstock, various technologies, namely pyrolysis, liquefaction, gasification and combinations thereof can be used (Fig. 9).71–75 For solid feedstocks such as wood and other cellulosic materials the technologies are similar to the ones used to convert coal to methanol, i.e. gasification to syngas followed by methanol synthesis. For some other biomass feedstocks such as animal manure, the conversion to biogas, a mixture rich in methane and CO2, followed by reforming to syngas and finally methanol synthesis is a possibility. An overview of various options is shown in Fig. 10. In theory any organic carbon containing material can be utilized in the process, making it relatively flexible. The direct conversion of biomass to methanol following enzymatic routes is also an attractive alternative but is still in early research phase.
 Fig. 9  Thermochemical conversion – products and uses. (LHV: lower heating value; MHV: medium heating value). Reproduced with permission from Elsevier from ref. 76. 
 Fig. 10  Simplified schematic illustrating the methanol production from biomass based feedstocks. Based on ref. 77. 
Gasification
The most straightforward method for the transformation of biomass to an intermediate product that can be used to make methanol is gasification. Gasification is a thermochemical process in which a carbon containing feedstock, in this case biomass, is converted at high temperature to a gas mixture containing carbon monoxide, hydrogen, CO2 and steam, i.e. syngas. For the gasification process, the biomass feedstock (most commonly a solid) is usually first dried and pulverized to obtain particles with a more uniform size and a moisture content no higher than 15–20% to yield optimal results. The pre-treated biomass is then sent to a gasifier where it is mixed with water and oxygen, generally under pressure. Oxygen is used to burn a part of the biomass, generating the heat necessary for the gasification. The generated combustion gases, CO2 and steam, also react with the biomass to produce hydrogen and carbon monoxide. Biomass, being the heating fuel in the process, requires no external heat source. The production of syngas from biomass in a single partial oxidation step is very elegant, but this method has experienced significant technical problems. Therefore, gasification of biomass is generally conducted in a two-step process. In the first step, named “pyrolysis” or “destructive distillation”, the dried biomass is heated to 400–600 °C in an atmosphere deficient in oxygen to avoid complete combustion. The obtained pyrolysis gas is composed of carbon monoxide, hydrogen, carbon dioxide, steam, methane and volatile tars. The leftover residue, representing about 10–25% of the original biomass, is charcoal. In the second step of the process, called “char conversion”, this charcoal residue is reacted with oxygen at much higher temperature (1300–1500 °C) to produce carbon monoxide. The syngas obtained from the combination of the gases from the pyrolysis and char conversion has to be adjusted to right ratio of H2/(CO + CO2) and purified before being sent to the methanol production unit.
The advantage of biomass compared to most coals is its much lower sulfur content (0.05–0.20 wt%), while heavy metals impurities (mercury, arsenic, etc.) are present only in minute quantities. However, biomass gasification has its own issues. Tar formation in particular is problematic in the commercialization attempt of any biomass based gasification process. Composed mainly of oxygenated compounds due to the nature of the feedstock (basically sugar polymers, cellulose) and higher molecular weight hydrocarbons, these tars condense in pipes, boilers, transfer lines, particulate filters, etc. leading to flow restriction, clogging and other operational difficulties. The amount and nature of these tars is dependent on the biomass composition, gasification technology used and operating conditions. Selecting the proper gasification technology and operation conditions can significantly reduce their level.78 Other gasification methods such as supercritical water reforming was proposed for glycerol gasification to H2, CO, and CO2 followed by methanol synthesis.79 Using wood and forest residues, biomass to methanol conversion efficiencies as high as a 60% were achieved.10,80–82
Sources of heat for the gasification
In conventional gasification systems, a part of the biomass feedstock is burned to provide the needed energy for the process. Significant amounts of heat are thus released, which can be used to dry the biomass before gasification. If no drying is needed, as in the case of the use of dry biomass, the excess heat could be directed to the generation of electricity and for district heating.83 To improve the utilization of biomass and reduce the amount of CO2 emitted, other sources of heat could also be used. However, due to the high temperatures required (>400 °C) only a few alternative energy sources could be potentially used for gasification, namely solar thermal84–88 and nuclear energy. Gasification of biomass at 800–1000 °C in a molten salt medium heated by concentrated solar energy has for example been proposed. Storage of energy in the form of heat in the molten salt could allow the production of syngas from solar energy without interruption.89 Lower grade heat from solar, geothermal and nuclear could also be used to dry wet biomass prior to the gasification step, reducing somewhat the required energy input.
Bio-crude
Transporting bulky biomass products with relatively low energy density over long distances is in most cases not economical. In order to keep transportation cost at a reasonable level, one of the solutions is therefore to operate medium sized methanol plants in the center of a biomass collection area with a limited range (50–100 km from the plant). Such a model has for example been proposed for Germany and Austria.90,91
Although the conversion of biomass to methanol is possible on a small scale, large scale methanol production facilities are generally preferable due to substantial economies of scale resulting in lower production costs and increased efficiency. The high volume of biomass needed to feed a world scale 2500 tonnes-per-day methanol plant (about 1 million tonnes per year) are however tremendous; on the scale of about 1.5 million tonnes per year. Biomass would therefore have to be collected over large areas.92 To avoid excessive transportation costs of biomass, their transformation via fast pyrolysis to an intermediate liquid product, which would be easier to handle and transport has therefore been proposed.93 In this process, which can be more easily conducted in smaller units, biomass is heated rapidly to 400–600 °C at atmospheric pressure to produce oxygenated hydrocarbon gases. These gases are then immediately quenched to avoid further decomposition through cracking. The product of fast pyrolysis is a black liquid called “bio-crude” due to its resemblance to crude oil (Fig. 11).94,95 Bio-crude has potentially a wide range of applications. It can be processed into a substitute for fuel oil and used in furnaces for electricity and heat generation. After altering its chemical composition, bio-crude could also be processed alongside traditional petroleum crude in refineries able to handle this feedstock. Beside bio-crude obtained in 70–80% yield, fast pyrolysis also generates other combustible gases as well as char, a fraction of which is used to drive the overall process. Parts of the char could also be ground to a fine powder, added to bio-crude to form a slurry. This slurry, like bio-crude itself could be stored, pumped and transported via pipelines, freight cars, etc. in much the same way as crude oil today. The handling of biomass in this form would thus be made much easier. Although fast pyrolysis still requires further developments, it is a relatively simple process, operating at low pressure and moderate temperature, it could be used on both small and large scale. The production of bio-crude from delocalized plants, followed by its conversion to methanol via syngas using well established technologies in a centralized large scale methanol plant (2500 tonnes per day and larger) seems therefore to be a feasible and economical option depending on the right set of local conditions.
 Fig. 11  “Biocrude”. 
The production of bio-crude from algae through hydrothermal liquefaction under high pressure (100–300 bars) and temperature in the range of 300–400 °C has also been studied.72,96–98 The liquid bio-crude obtained in this case was composed of lipid derived alkanes and heterocyclic compounds. By catalytic hydrotreatment, the heteroatoms could be separated from the bio-crude and the obtained liquid blended in existing petroleum refineries. Catalytic hydrothermal gasification of the algal feedstock is also possible.72,98 The resulting gas is mostly composed of methane and CO2 (similar to biogas) and has therefore to be further processed via reforming reactions to syngas followed by methanol synthesis.
Combination of biomass and coal
Because of the seasonality of biomass production especially in temperate and colder climates, the production of methanol in plants able to handle both coal and biomass has also been proposed.76,99–102 When not enough or no biomass is available, these plants could continue to operate at full capacity. The co-gasification of biomass and coal using solar thermal energy was also reported.85 Polygeneration of power, methanol and FT hydrocarbons using biomass and coal have been modeled by Chen et al.103 Depending on the conditions including product pricing, carbon tax policies, carbon capture and sequestration, etc. different optimal product portfolios were obtained.
The co-production of methanol and electricity from biomass104 as well as the co-production of methanol and district heating have been considered.105 Guang-jian et al. showed that the energy savings in such a system were mainly due to heat exchange processes.106 The co-production of methanol, electricity and heat was also reviewed and studied by Holmgren et al.83 They reported that addition of a MTO process unit to a stand alone biomass to methanol plant was found to have little impact on the overall energy balance of the system. Electricity and steam are needed for the MTO process but less is necessary for the methanol production step since distillation can be omitted.
Excess CO2 in the gas mixture derived from biomass
Production of methanol from biomass suffers from some of the same problems as its production from coal. Due to their chemical composition, both of these feedstocks produce a syngas mixture with a low hydrogen/carbon ratio and a high CO2/CO ratio. For methanol synthesis the optimal ratio S = (H2–CO2)/(CO + CO2) has to be close to 2. To adjust the ratio, part of the CO2 is generally separated after gasification. A pressure swing adsorption (PSA) process has, for example, been discussed by Ribeiro et al. to obtain a CO2 stream with a purity higher than 95% besides methanol.107 Preferably, the captured CO2 should be sequestered or used for some other process but it could also simply be vented. Because the production of methanol from biomass generates a lot of CO2, the apparent conversion of biomass into methanol is reduced.77 Another possibility is to react the excess CO2 with hydrogen from some other source.108 Syngas with a H2/CO ratio close to 3 obtained from steam reforming of natural gas could be used to compensate for the lack of hydrogen in the syngas produced from biomass.109,110 Biomass–natural gas hybrid plants would avoid the need for a H2/CO ratio adjustment and CO2 addition usually practiced in natural gas based plants. At the same it would avoid the need for CO2 removal encountered in the biomass based plant.
The Hynol process, originally developed at the Brookhaven National Laboratory, was successful in converting materials such as woodchips into methanol on a pilot scale.111–113 In this case, the biomass was directly treated with hydrogen and steam in a hydrogasification step followed by steam reforming of the process gas with natural gas and finally ending with methanol synthesis. One of the advantages is that the hydrogasification avoids the need for oxygen generally used in the gasification step. For this, part of the hydrogen-rich gas after the methanol synthesis was recycled to the hydrogasification unit. The combination of biomass gasification products with steel-work off-gases such as coke oven gas containing typically about 66% hydrogen was also studied.114 While natural gas and other industrial gases can be used, renewable sources of hydrogen would be preferable to lower the carbon footprint of overall methanol production.
The use of nuclear based energy is also a possibility due to its low carbon footprint. Such a hybrid system based on biomass and alternative energy sources has been proposed for the production of methanol22,93,108,115–118 as well as Fischer–Tropsch hydrocarbon liquids.119 Ouellette et al. for example discussed the production of bio-methanol from biomass and hydrogen produced via electrolysis of water using hydroelectricity.115 In Denmark, the combination of hydrogen produced from water in a solid oxide electrolyzer cell (SOEC) and biomass was studied for the production of methanol and DME (Fig. 12).120 This study reported that in comparison to a traditional methanol synthesis plant operating on biomass gasification without electrolysis, the output of methanol from the plant is doubled and the methanol production efficiency is boosted from 59% to 71%. The total plant efficiency was 81.6%. With this process, it should be possible to synthesize 1053 t of methanol per day with 1000 t of wood per day and 141 MW of installed SOEC. Oxygen produced as a by-product of water electrolysis could also be used to gasify the biomass, eliminating the need for a stand-alone air separation unit. The cost of the methanol produced was estimated at between $120–140 per barrel of oil equivalent (energy contained in one barrel of petroleum oil) using SOEC.
 Fig. 12  Methanol/DME synthesis based on electrolysis assisted gasification of wood. From ref. 120. 
Methanol from biogas
Most mammals, as well as termites and other bio-organisms, produce a flammable gas called “biogas” when they digest their food. Biogas is also generated in wetlands, swamps and bogs where large amounts of rotting vegetation may accumulate. It is formed when anaerobic methanogenic bacteria break down organic material in the absence of oxygen in a process called “methanogenesis”. Biogas is in fact a waste product of such microorganisms, composed mainly of methane and CO2 in variable proportions, and trace levels of other gases such as hydrogen sulfide. This biological process has been adapted commercially in anaerobic digestion reactor to treat various feedstocks such as animal dung, municipal organic waste, sewage sludge and wastewater from food, paper and pulp, fiber, meat, milk, brewing and pharmaceutical plants.121 All types of biomass can be used as substrates for biogas production as long as they contain carbohydrates, proteins, fats, cellulose, and hemicelluloses as main components. However, strong lignified organic substances such as wood are generally not suitable due to their slow anaerobic decomposition. The gas produced in anaerobic digesters, depending on the feedstock and effectiveness of the process, consists of 50–70% methane with the remainder being mostly CO2. At present, the gas is mainly used to produce electricity or heat. Biogas is however also used as a transportation fuel in the form of compressed methane, notably in Sweden in buses. After purification and the removal of impurities (especially hydrogen sulfide), biogas could also be used for the production of methanol in much the same way as natural gas. However, as in the case of biomass gasification, biogas contains an excess of CO2, which would have to be removed, and possibly stored, or reacted with hydrogen from another source.117 Utilization of wind energy to produce H2 by electrolysis of water in a SOEC and combination with biogas has for example been studied in Denmark for the production of methanol and DME (Fig. 13).120,122 Bi-reforming of biogas is also a possibility.57,123
 Fig. 13  Methanol production concept from biogas and H2via SOEC using wind energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. 
Whereas the syngas route to methanol is the only viable one presently for the conversion of biogas to methanol, alternative routes for the conversion of methane have also been proposed, but remain in the developmental stage. These include direct oxidation of methane to methanol and conversion through monhalogenated124–127 or sulfonated128,129 intermediates. Biological routes as well as photochemical pathways for the synthesis of methanol from methane have also been studied but practical application remains elusive.
Industrial activity in the biomass to methanol and DME conversions
Over the past two decades, a number of commercial entities have been involved in the development and production of methanol from various biomass sources ranging from wood products to municipal waste. BioMCN in The Netherlands has been producing methanol from the gasification of glycerin left over from processing vegetable oil (a by-product from bio-diesel production) and animal fat.130 Rising glycerin prices have however forced the company to diversify its feedstock to biogas and residues from the forestry and wood processing industry.
Chemrec, in Sweden has built and is operating a bioDME plant, where methanol is produced as an intermediate. The process relies on gasification of black liquor (mostly lignin), a by-product of pulp and paper mills. At the pilot scale, the plant has an annual capacity of about 1400 t of renewable methanol (4 t per day), equivalent to about 1.8 million liters per year.131,132 The DME produced at this plant is being field-tested in Volvo trucks, which have driven more than 1 million miles on this fuel as of the end of 2013. Worldwide, the pulp and paper industry produces about 170 million tonnes of black liquor each year. The United States alone could potentially produce 28 million tonnes of methanol per year from black liquor.133 Also in Sweden, VärmlandsMetanol is planning the construction of a full scale plant for the production of 100000 t of fuel grade methanol per year based on forest residues. It will be strategically placed in the forest rich province of Värmlands. The plant will gasify about 1000 t of wood per day while also providing district heating.134,135
Enerkem, based in Canada, is producing methanol from municipal solid waste (MSW) by first gasifying it to syngas.136 The methanol is currently being used as an intermediate product for the production of renewable ethanol and chemicals. After successful operation of a pilot and commercial plant, a full scale commercial plant with a capacity of 38 million liters of methanol/ethanol per year (∼30000 t per year) is under construction and should begin production in 2014. Oberon Fuels in California is commercializing small scale plants (∼40000 L per day) for the production of DME and methanol from biogas. Other companies are also working on various aspects of the production of methanol and DME from biomass sources.
The Bioliq process developed by the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) is based on decentralized production of biocrude by fast pyrolysis of biomass followed by gasification under pressure at a temperature of 1200 °C in a larger facility. The produced syngas is then transformed to methanol, DME or gasoline through the MTG process.137–139
Limitations of biomass
Although waste products from wood processing, agricultural residues and by-products, as well as solid municipal waste, represent suitable feedstocks for methanol production, the quantities that can be generated from these resources are limited. In the long term, growing demand for bio-methanol will necessitate larger and reliable sources of raw biomass. There is growing concern that the use of food crops for the production of fuels, such as ethanol from corn (1st generation biofuels), contributes to increasing food prices by competing for the same agricultural resources.140 For the production of bio-methanol, non-food crops selected specifically for energy purposes would therefore have to be cultivated on a large scale if a significant amount of methanol were to be produced from biomass resources. Suitable “energy crops” are being identified, and the most promising – essentially fast-growing grasses and trees – are being field tested. In large countries with a relatively low population density such as the United States, Australia or Brazil, a significant portion of idle food-crop lands, pasture range and forest land could be used for energy crops. Marginal land would be preferable to the production of energy crops if adapted species and cultivation methods are identified. However, in more densely populated areas such as Western Europe, Japan and China, most of the arable land is already in use for food production. Unless surplus land is available, energy crops will directly and adversely compete with food and fiber production. In developing countries already struggling to produce the necessary food for their growing population, the production capacity for energy crops is clearly limited. Furthermore, crop production requires sufficient water, a suitable temperature range, fertilizers (mostly derived from fossil fuel resources) as well as agricultural land. Energy crops should also not compete with food crops for these essential resources. Increased pollution due to fertilizer run-off leading to such problems as “dead zones” in the ocean is also a concern141 as is the carbon footprint of biomass production.142,143 Taking these and other factors into account, it has been estimated that biomass produced in a renewable and sustainable manner can cover at most about 20% of our energy needs of the future.144–147
5. Methanol production from CO2 and H2
The most straightforward ways to produce methanol and DME from CO2 is by catalytic hydrogenation with H2, eqn (2). Chemists have known since the early 20th century how to convert CO2 and H2 to methanol.148 Some of the earliest methanol plants operating in the 1920s and 1930s in the U.S. were in fact commonly using CO2 and H2, obtained as by-products of fermentation processes, for methanol production.149,150 Both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts have been studied for the hydrogenation of CO2. The latter is however preferable in terms of cost, stability, separation, handling and reuse of the catalyst as well as reactor design and is also the one currently practiced for the industrial production of methanol from syngas. We will therefore first focus on these heterogeneous catalysts.
Heterogeneous catalysts for the production of methanol from CO2 and H2
Efficient heterogeneous catalysts based on metals and their oxides, notably copper and zinc, have been developed for the conversion of CO2 to methanol.151,152 These catalysts are very similar to those used presently in the industry for methanol production via fossil fuel based syngas based on Cu/ZnO/Al2O3. In view of the mechanism of methanol synthesis from syngas, this is not unexpected. It is now generally accepted that methanol is most probably formed by hydrogenation of CO2 contained in syngas on the catalyst's surface. To be converted to methanol, the CO in the syngas first undergoes a water gas shift reaction to form CO2 and H2. The formed CO2 then reacts with hydrogen to yield methanol.148,153–156 CO would therefore serve essentially as a CO2 source as well as a scavenger for the oxygen atoms in water, which acts as an inhibitor for the active metal sites.157,158 It has been shown that reacting on a commercial methanol catalyst (copper, zinc oxide and alumina (60%, 30% and 10%, respectively, by weight), a CO–H2 mixture, carefully purified from CO2 and water, produces no or very little methanol. Isotopic labeling also showed that CO2 is the main source of carbon in methanol formed from syngas.157
A number of reviews have been dealing with the various aspects of the production of methanol from syngas including catalyst design, catalyst preparation, reaction kinetics, catalyst deactivation, reactor design, etc.149,158–163 We will therefore focus here on the synthesis of methanol from CO2 and H2.
A good catalyst should remain active for several years, so as to sustain high plant output. Deactivation through sintering (clustering of copper sites), carbon deposition and other phenomena should therefore be minimal to avoid premature catalyst replacement and associated costs. Improvement to the catalyst system's activity and stability over time is therefore of prime importance for the economics of any methanol plant.164
Lurgi AG, a leader in methanol synthesis process technology in collaboration with Süd-Chemie, developed and thoroughly tested a high activity catalyst (C79-05-GL, based on Cu/ZnO) for methanol production from CO2 and H2.151,164,165 Operating at a temperature around 260 °C, slightly higher than that used for conventional methanol synthesis catalysts, the selectivity in methanol was excellent. The activity of this catalyst decreased at about the same rate as the activity of commercial catalysts currently used in methanol synthesis plants. Other companies commercializing methanol synthesis catalysts such as Sinetix, Haldor Topsøe and Mitsubishi Gas Chemical have also developed more stable catalysts over the years.
On a commercially standard catalyst (Süd Chemie), CO2 hydrogenation was found to be slower than CO hydrogenation.166 The selectivity was, however, higher, with less by-product formation, when CO2 was used as a carbon source. More problematic was that conventional Cu/ZnO based methanol synthesis catalysts exhibit a tendency to deactivate prematurely at higher CO2 partial pressures.164 It appears, however, that the effect of high CO2 levels have on the methanol catalysts is substantially due to the presence of water formed during the synthesis reaction and not the CO2 itself. In the presence of CO, this water can react via the WGS reaction to form more CO2 and H2 as described by Clarke et al.167 In the presence of a larger excess of CO2 or even absence of CO2, the presence of water can inhibit the metal active sites of the catalyst and lead to poorer performance and deactivation in conventional catalysts.156,168–170 Water accelerates the crystallization of Cu and ZnO resulting in faster sintering and associated deactivation of the catalyst.171

Cu and ZnO based catalysts. 
Due to the lack of long term stability of conventional syngas to methanol catalysts in the presence of high levels of CO2, more stable catalysts have been studied and developed. A majority of them still rely on Cu and Zn as their main active components169,172 while modified with various metals including Zr,173 Ga,169,174–177 Si, B,178 Cr,179 Ce,173 V, Cr,177 Ti and combinations of those.152,180 On Cu/ZnO, it was suggested that the high activity and selectivity resulted from the high dispersion of Cu and the preferential emergence of flat surface Cu species.181 One of the goals is to at least keep and preferably improve the high dispersion of Cu/ZnO crystallites responsible for the high activity.182,183 Modification of conventional Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalysts with Pd, Pt, Rh, Co, Mn, Ti, Zr, La, Ce, Y, etc. has been explored.180,182,184–189 Modifying the preparation method of Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalysts and ratio of the components190 were also investigated. Hong et al., for example, used a gel-network co-precipitation method to prepare an ultrafine Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst with high activity and selectivity.191 In a recent paper, de Jong et al. showed that the uniformity of Cu nanoparticle distribution in Cu/Zn/SiO2 played an essential role in the catalyst activity and stability over time.192 Compared to a catalyst with a non-uniform nanoparticle distribution or a reference Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst, the deactivation of the catalyst with uniform nanoparticle distribution slowed down by an order of magnitude. Cu/ZnO based catalysts modified with metal oxides Ga2O3, ZrO2 and Cr2O3 were found to be more stable than commercial catalysts for the CO2 hydrogenation to methanol over 3400 h experimental runs at 250 °C and 50 bars.168,193 In skeletal Cu/ZnO/Cr2O3 catalyst, it was described that Cr2O3 improved the structural development of high surface Cu.179 It was also reaffirmed that the promoting effect of ZnO on the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol was due to its role as an inhibitor for the RWGS reaction. In another study, Cu/ZnO/Ga2O3 showed high activity and selectivity towards methanol as well as superior stability due in part to the highly dispersed Cu+ species on the surface.176 Multicomponent catalysts based on Cu/ZnO/Ga2O3 supported on hydrophobic silica were shown to be effective and stable with selectivity to methanol higher than 99% at temperatures of 250–270 °C.175 The combination of Ga2O3 and Pd was also found to be beneficial for CO2 hydrogenation.169 Pd promoted Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst had a higher activity for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol.194 This was explained by the promotion of hydrogen spillover from Pd to Cu.


Cu/ZrO2 based catalysts. 
For CO2 hydrogenation, high activity of the catalysts containing Cu and zirconia has been well documented.170,195–200 Wambach et al. in particular gave a good overview of this field up to 1999.196 Cu and Ag on ZrO2 catalyze mainly the formation of methanol, while methanation is preferred over, e.g., Ni and Ru on ZrO2. The simultaneous formation of methanol, carbon monoxide (by RWGS reaction) and methane is catalyzed by less reactive metal constituents Pd, Rh, Pt and Au.196 A similar trend was observed for Cu, Ag and Au on ZrO2 by Baiker et al.201,202 Whereas the selectivity to methanol was similar for Cu and Ag, the activity of Cu/ZrO2 was markedly higher.203 Au, on the other hand, favored the RWGS reaction, exhibiting the lowest methanol selectivity.
The addition of chromium oxides to Cu/ZrO2 and to a lesser extent the addition of manganese oxides, had a positive effect by retarding the sintering of the copper particles and shifting the crystallization of ZrO2 to higher temperature, thus resulting in an increased thermal stability of the catalyst.204 The addition of La to Cu/ZrO2 in the right amounts (∼5% of the total amount of Cu and Zr) was found to increase the Cu surface area.205 A linear relationship was described between this Cu surface area and conversion of CO2. The selectivity to methanol in this system is related to the distribution of basic sites on the surface.
The phase of ZrO2, tetragonal (t-) or monoclinic (m-) was also found to be of importance for Cu/ZrO2 catalysts.206 Whereas the surface area and Cu dispersion was essentially identical on both phases, Cu/ZrO2 prepared with m-ZrO2 was 4.5 times more active for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol than the one prepared with t-ZrO2. Similarly, a 10 times higher activity was observed by Bell et al. for Cu/m-ZrO2 compared to Cu/t-ZrO2.207 The use of nanocrystalline ZrO2 improved both the CO2 conversion and selectivity to methanol compared to catalysts prepared in a conventional co-precipitation method.208 The addition of B2O3 or Ga2O3 to the Cu/nanocrystalline ZrO2 also improved the activity.


Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 based catalysts. 
Cu/ZnO systems modified with ZrO2 have been particularly well studied. The presence of ZrO2 induces a high copper dispersion, leading to a higher activity for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol.209 The lower water affinity of catalysts based on ZrO2 compared to commercial Al2O3 based ones also plays a role.156,163,170 Employing a series of Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 catalysts of varying contents of ZrO2 and ZnO, it has been suggested that in this ternary system ZrO2, rather than ZnO, plays a more effective role in the formation of methanol from CO2.210 The addition of ZnO in the proper amounts to Cu/ZrO2 increased the catalytic activity of the system, however. Arena et al. indicated that on a Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 catalyst, ZnO promotes the dispersion and reactivity of metal Cu, while both ZnO/ZrO2 supports enhance the surface CO2 adsorption in the proximity of Cu0 hydrogenation sites.211 ZrO2 compared to two other metal oxides, CeO2 and Al2O3, was found to be a superior support for Cu/ZnO due to better synergy with zirconia.212 The catalytic activity seems to depend on this synergy of metal and basic oxide sites, pointing to a dual-site reaction path. The oxide carrier controls the texture and adsorption properties of the Cu–ZnO system.
The Cu–ZnO–ZrO2 system itself has been modified with small amounts of B, Ga, In, Gd, Y, Mn and Mg oxides.213 The addition of these oxides influenced the catalytic activity, dispersion of Cu and stability of the catalyst. Here again, the addition of Ga2O3 resulted in the highest yield of methanol. In2O3 on the other hand, reduced drastically the activity of the catalyst. Mn and Mg helped the Cu dispersion in the reduced catalysts and led to an increase in activity for methanol synthesis.214 A similar increase in activity with the addition of Mn was also observed by Lachowska et al.215 The promotional effect of Ga on Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 was also observed by Ladera et al., who ascribed it to a selective segregation of Cu towards the surface, increasing the number of active sites.216 A methanol selectivity of 89% was obtained at 210 °C, decreasing to 69% at 250 °C.
Multi-component catalysts Cu/ZnO/ZrO2/Al2O3 and Cu/ZnO/ZrO2/Al2O3/Ga2O3 were also found to have high activity for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol.188,217 The addition of small amounts of colloidal SiO2 to these catalysts improved greatly the stability of the catalyst and crude methanol with a purity of 99.9% was obtained in a bench-scale synthesis unit.
Besides Cu, Ag and Au were also tested on this same system (ZnO/ZrO2).213,218 The catalyst containing Cu exhibited, by far the highest catalytic activity due to synergy between Cu and ZnO or ZrO2.


Other Cu based catalysts. 
Silica, SiO2, is commonly used as a catalyst support due to favorable properties such as thermal stability, porosity, texture and acidic nature. Cu supported on high purity silica was, however, found to be almost inactive for the methanol synthesis.219 The addition of Ca, La or Zn oxide had a strong promoting effect on Cu/SiO2. In the case of Cu/Zn/SiO2 the activity for methanol synthesis increased with increasing CO2 content in a CO–CO2–H2 mixture suggesting that CO2 was the source for the methanol. However, the main product remained CO, probably formed by the RWGS reaction. Fujitani et al., on the other hand, found that Cu/SiO2 had some activity for the CO2 to methanol reaction, whereas the addition of ZnO was also found to increase considerably the activity of Cu/SiO2.177,220 Similarly, the addition of ZrO2 to Cu/SiO2 greatly enhanced (25 times) the activity for methanol synthesis.221–223 Multicomponent catalysts Cu/Zn/Ga supported on hydrophobic SiO2 were found to be efficient and very stable over time.175 On Cu/SiO2, Bell et al. found that the rate of methanol synthesis was an order of magnitude faster with H2/CO2 compared to H2/CO.167 The selectivity to methanol remained, however, low due to the strong preference of CO2 to undergo RWGS reaction. At 0.72 MPa, a selectivity of only 12% was obtained for methanol. With increasing pressure, selectivity increased dramatically and a selectivity higher than 90% at 573 K and 2.16 MPa using a Cu/SiO2 catalyst.224 The addition of K to Cu/SiO2 accelerated the RWGS reaction but hindered the methanol synthesis.
Interestingly, Fujitani et al. found that the activity for methanol synthesis was correlated with the oxygen coverage of the Cu surface and was dependant on the support/additive used.177 A maximum activity was obtained for a coverage of about 0.16 oxygen atom per Cu atom. At lower and higher coverage, the activity diminished.
Other Cu systems studied for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol include Cu/γ-Al2O3,225–228 Cu/γ-Al2O3/TiO2,227 YBa2Cu3O7,229 LaCr0.5Cu0.5O3 perovskite,230 La–M–Cu–Zn–O perovskites where M = Y, Ce, Mg or Zr,231 CuB and CuB doped with Zr, Th and Cr,232 Cu/V/γ-Al2O3,226 Cu/Zr/γ-Al2O3,225 Cu/CeO2/γ-Al2O3 and Cu over yttria doped CeO2,228 Cu/Zr/V,233 and Cu on various metal carbides including Mo2C, Fe3C and WC.234


Catalysts based on metals other than Cu. 
In the noble metal series, Pd-based catalysts are the most commonly used because they exhibit considerable activity and selectivity for hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol. Pd supported on Al2O3, SiO2, TiO2 and MgO showed only modest selectivity for methanol.235 Pd/CeO2 had a methanol selectivity of up to 92%; however at very modest CO2 conversion of about 3%.236 The method of preparation and the calcinations and reduction temperature had a major effect on Pd/ZnO catalysts with maximum selectivity to methanol remaining modest (∼50%), however.237 Pd/ZnO supported on carbon nanotubes (CNT) showed a relatively high selectivity for methanol (up to 99.6% at 30 bars and 250 °C). Similarly, Pd/ZnO supported on activated carbon and γ-Al2O3 had a lower activity and selectivity. Fujitani et al. studied catalysts based on Pd on various supports including Al2O3, Cr2O3, TiO2, ZnO and ZrO2.238 Pd/Ga2O3 was the most active the series with a CO2 conversion close to 20% at 50 bars. The turnover frequency was actually 20 times higher on a Cu/ZnO catalyst they also tested. At the other end of the reactivity spectrum, Pd/SiO2 showed essentially no activity. The products obtained on Pd/Ga2O3 were methanol and CO in almost equal amounts. Ga2O3–Pd/SiO2 was also studied.239,240
Pt–W/SiO2 was also reported to reach methanol selectivity of up to 92.2% at a relatively modest CO2 conversion of 2.6%.241 Pt–Cr/SiO2 in the same study had a much lower selectivity of 51.1%.
Some researchers attempted to use transition metal carbides for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. The results indicated that Mo2C and Fe3C had high CO2 conversion but modest methanol selectivity, while TaC and SiC were almost inactive.234 On WC, significant amounts of DME were produced. In all cases the main products were CO and CH4.
Recently, Studt et al. reported the discovery of a Ni–Ga based catalyst for CO2 reduction to methanol.242 Ni5Ga3 was found to be particularly active and selective. In comparison to conventional Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalysts, a similar methanol synthesis activity was observed with, however, a much lower CO generation. This is of interest for the production of methanol at lower pressures and possibly even ambient pressure.


Influence of catalyst preparation conditions. 
For all catalysts, the preparation methods and conditions including co-precipitation,170,181,191,200,213,214,218,243 impregnation,175,183 leaching, sol–gel,203,244,245 deposition–precipitation and combustion synthesis246,247 as well as calcination temperature248 also played a major role in the behavior of the catalysts.163,208,243,247–252 Practical catalyst preparation is based substantially on used “art” and not only science. This topic is, however, outside the scope of our review. What is in fact needed is a more rational design of catalysts based on controlling closely the nature and stability of the active sites as well as detailed mechanistic studies to improve the state of the art.


Reaction mechanism of CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. 
To understand the high selectivity of Cu based catalysts, especially when combined with ZrO2 and ZnO, for the synthesis of methanol from CO2 hydrogenation a number of studies on the reaction mechanism were carried out. Bianchi et al. reported the spillover of adsorbed hydrogen from zirconia to copper.253 On Cu/ZrO2, Bell et al. studied the reaction of CO2 and CO to methanol and proposed a dual-site, bifunctional, mechanism.207,221–223,254 Studying the reaction of CO2 and H2 on Cu/ZnO/ZrO2, Arena et al. proposed a similar mechanism.211 Two active centers are thus involved in this catalytic process. According to the currently accepted dual-site or bifunctional mechanism, the adsorption and dissociation of hydrogen occur on the Cu site, while the adsorption of CO2 as a bicarbonate takes place on the ZrO2 site. Via spillover, the atomic hydrogen then transfers from the surface of Cu onto the surface of ZrO2 and hydrogenates stepwise the adsorbed carbon containing species to methanol, which is desorbed from the surface (Fig. 14). Formate was proposed as a common intermediate for the synthesis of methanol and the reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) reaction by Fisher et al.221 A similar conclusion was reached by Hong et al. using first-principle kinetic Monte Carlo simulations.255 In light of the proposed mechanism, higher surface area of Cu, appropriate adsorption, both in strength and amount of CO2 and effective interaction between the active parts of the catalyst are of prime importance for the hydrogenation reaction, providing a guideline for the preparation of highly effective catalysts. Modifications by various additives to improve one or several aspects of the catalytic steps is one of the possible pathways to influence these parameters, and has been studied extensively (vide supra) to increase the catalytic activity. The addition of La2O3 onto Cu/ZrO2, for example, was reported to affect the dispersion of Cu as well as increase the surface basicity, which in turn had an effect on the adsorption of H2 and CO2, respectively.205 Used in the right proportions, La2O3 increased the activity of the catalyst for methanol production from CO2.
 Fig. 14  Catalyst surface and functionality of the various surface sites on Cu/ZrO2 and Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 under CO2 hydrogenation conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. 
To describe the reaction mechanism of methanol synthesis from CO and CO2, a micro-kinetic model based on 13 individual steps was suggested by Rasmussen et al. (see Scheme 1).256 The hydrogenation of dioxomethylene (eqn (11)) was described as the most probable rate limiting step.148 Interestingly, the syngas based methanol synthesis and carbon dioxide chemical recycling to methanol seem to essentially share the same type of chemical intermediates. However, some studies have found that methanol can be obtained with higher rates and carbon utilization factors by CO2 hydrogenation than by CO hydrogenation.156,158,257 More recently, Grabow et al. considered many different reaction paths and determined by DFT calculations that the steps represented in Scheme 2 and Fig. 15 were the most likely one for the synthesis of methanol from CO2 and H2.258 In this model, HCOO* preferentially led to the formation of HCOOH* and not H2COO* as suggested in Scheme 1. HCOOH* is then further hydrogenated to H2COOH*, which itself forms H2CO* by splitting off a OH group. H3CO* is the final intermediate for the formation of CH3OH* and subsequently CH3OH(g). A similar mechanism was proposed by Behrens et al. on Cu/Zn(211) surfaces.259 Using a combination of experimental data and DFT calculations, they determined that the active sites consist of steps of Cu decorated with Zn atoms, stabilized by well defined bulk defects. The presence of both steps of Cu and ZnOx in close proximity, serving as adsorption sites for oxygen-bound intermediates, creates the ensemble needed for highly active catalysts for the conversion of CO2 (and CO) to methanol.
 Scheme 1  Micro-kinetic model of the methanol synthesis. * represents a free surface site and X* symbolizes the adsorbed atom or molecule X. Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from Springer. 
 Scheme 2  Micro-kinetic model of the methanol synthesis from CO2 and H2 on Cu proposed by Grabow et al. based on DFT calculations. * represents a free surface site and X* symbolizes the adsorbed atom or molecule X. Based on ref. 258. 
 Fig. 15  Potential energy surface of methanol synthesis via CO2 hydrogenation. To improve legibility, H* was omitted from the labels after the adsorption of six H atoms in the first step. The black line indicates the lowest-energy pathway through the HCOO*, HCOOH*, CH3O2*, CH2O*, and CH3O* intermediates. The main intermediates along the red path are HCOO*, H2CO2*, CH2O*, and CH2OH*. The two dashed horizontal lines indicate the desorption barriers of HCOOH and CH2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
As can be seen, a large number of studies have been devoted to the development of efficient and stable heterogeneous catalysts for the production of methanol from CO2 hydrogenation. Most of the studied catalysts are based on Cu on a support such as ZrO2 and diverse additives to improve the activity, stability and other parameters (Fig. 16). Some of these catalysts are already used in pilot and demonstration plants.
 Fig. 16  Most common combinations of supports and additives used for Cu based heterogeneous catalysts for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol. 

Production of DME from CO2 hydrogenation over heterogeneous catalysts
DME can be produced by conventional bimolecular dehydration of methanol, which is readily carried out catalytically over varied solid acids such as alumina or phosphoric acid-modified γ-Al2O3, eqn (20).166,260 Like methanol, dimethyl ether (DME) can also be produced by direct catalytic hydrogenation of CO2. Similar to the route from syngas to DME, CO2 hydrogenation to DME can use a hybrid catalyst system consisting of a combination of methanol synthesis and dehydration catalysts.261,262 These “bi-functional” catalyst systems thus contain two different catalysts, one for the methanol synthesis, and another for the dehydration. Combinations of Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/Ga2O3/MgO for the methanol synthesis and γ-Al2O3 or ZrO2/Al2O3 for the dehydration step have been studied and it was shown that the catalyst bed was the most effective when the methanol synthesis catalyst was placed in a layer upstream of the dehydration catalyst layer.261,263 A number of other systems were also tested. They include: (Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/ZrO2)/HZSM-5,264,265 (Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/La2O3)/HZSM-5,266 (Cu/ZnO/Al2O3)/γ-Al2O3,267,268 (Cu/ZnO/Al2O3)/HZSM-5,267 (Cu/ZnO/ZrO2)/HZSM-5,269 and (Cu/TiO2/ZrO2)/HZSM-5.270
A core–shell type catalyst with a CuO/ZnO/Al2O3 core and an outer shell composed of a membrane of metal doped silica–alumina was also recently proposed for DME synthesis by CO2 reduction.271
Homogeneous reduction of CO2 to methanol

Hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol using homogeneous catalysts. 
While numerous heterogeneous systems were described for the direct hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to methanol, just a limited number of homogeneous catalysts have been reported in the literature. A recent work by He et al.272 reviewed the literature of homogeneous hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to methanol and its repetition here is therefore not necessary. However, an outline of the applied approaches and catalysts is given in the next few paragraphs.
The first example of direct hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol under homogeneous conditions was reported by Tominaga et al.273 using Ru3(CO)12 catalyst precursor in the presence of KI additive. In addition to methanol, the formation of CO, CH4 and C2H6 was also observed. It was also shown by the same authors that the catalytic performance of Ru3(CO)12–KI system exceeds the ones of other transition metal carbonyls such as Ir4(CO)12, Rh4(CO)12, W(CO)6, Mo(CO)6, Fe2(CO)9 and Co2(CO)8.274
Instead of the six electron reduction of CO2 to methanol, the so called cascade process275 divides it into three steps (1) reduction of CO2 to formic acid (FA), (2) esterification of FA to formate esters and (3) hydrogenation of formate ester to methanol (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol in a cascade system.275 
This approach requires a different catalyst for each step which can coexist and must each be tolerant to the reaction conditions and relatively high temperature (135 °C) and pressure (40 bar).
Leitner and Klankermayer276 reported the hydrogenation of CO2 (60 bar H2, 20 bar CO2, 140 °C) in the presence [(triphos)Ru-(TMM)] (TMM = trimethylenemethane, Triphos = 1,1,1-tris(diphenylphosphinomethyl)ethane) giving a maximum TON of 221. The authors also showed that the same catalyst is active for the hydrogenation of formate esters (Et- or Me-formate) to methanol.
In addition to the direct hydrogenation of CO2 itself to methanol, the hydrogenation of CO2 derivatives such as carbonates, polycarbonates, carbamates, urea derivatives and formates277 has gained a lot of attention278 because the activation barriers of these reactions are smaller and the above molecules can be readily synthesized from CO2 (Fig. 18).278
 Fig. 18  Methanol production by indirect hydrogenation of CO2. 


Homogeneous chemical reduction of CO2 to methanol. 
A variety of reducing agents such as silanes and hydrides can be used in the presence of organocatalysts, e.g. N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHC) or with sterically encumbered Lewis acid–Lewis base ion pairs (so called “frustrated” pairs, FLP).
Although silanes are not cost effective reducing agents it was shown in the study by Zhang et al.279 that the NHC-catalyzed reduction of CO2 to methoxides takes place under ambient conditions. The subsequent hydrolysis of methoxysilanes results in methanol and silanol derivatives (Fig. 19). Computational studies280 confirmed the formation of intermediates such as formoxysilane, bis(silyl)acetal, silylmethoxide, and disiloxane, which were experimentally observed earlier.279 This metal-free system279 showed better performance than that applied the [Ir(CN)(CO)dppe] catalyst in C6D6 at ambient temperatures and CO2 pressures using Me3SiH, Me2SiH2 and Et2SiH2 hydride sources.281
 Fig. 19  NHC-catalyzed reduction of CO2 and the subsequent hydrolytic liberation of methanol. 
Another interesting example of the metal-free catalysis is the application of frustrated Lewis pairs for CO2 reduction to methanol.282 In the first step, sterically encumbered TMP/B(C6F5)3 promotes the heterolytic cleavage of molecular hydrogen (TMP = 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine, Fig. 20) giving [TMPH]+[HB(C6F5)3]−. The reaction between CO2 and [TMPH]+[HB(C6F5)3]−, results in a formatoborate derivative. The coordinatively unsaturated B(C6F5)3 attacks the nucleophile and a formato bridged intermediate forms. The latter reacts with [TMPH]+[HB(C6F5)3]− giving a formaldehyde acetal derivative, which subsequently undergoes a stepwise cleavage and reduction leading to a methanol precursor, a methyl borate derivative.
 Fig. 20  Lewis acid/Lewis base-catalyzed hydrogenation of CO2. 
Bis-borane 1,2-C6H4(BCl2)2 in combination with PtBu3 was shown to react as a FLP and activate CO2 (Fig. 21).283 The obtained stable formate species was reduced by ammonia borane derivatives and subsequently hydrolyzed with D2O giving deutero methanol (CH3OD).
 Fig. 21  FLP-catalyzed reduction of CO2 to methanol using borane derivatives. 
Schwartz's reagent, [(Cp)2Zr(H)(CI)], (Cp = η5-C5H5) was applied as a hydride source for the stepwise stoichiometric reduction of carbon dioxide to formaldehyde and methanol, respectively (Fig. 22).284,285 While the conversion of CO2 to formaldehyde accompanied by the formation of the μ-oxo complex was observed in the first step, the deeper reduction of CH2O by addition of more Schwartz's reagent occurred resulting in a zirconium methoxide in the second step.
 Fig. 22  Two step reduction of CO2 to methanol with Schwarz's reagent. 
Reduction of CO2 to methanol with various boranes. 
The reactivity of Ni–PCP catalyst was studied towards boranes as well as catecholborane (HBcat), BH3·THF and 9-BBN (9-borabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane).286,287 The impact of the substituent's bulkiness on the P donor atoms of the ligands on the efficiency of Ni-hydrides for the catalytic reduction of CO2 with boranes was investigated. Two advantages of bulky substituents were found, minimizing catalyst degradation by protecting the P–O bonds of the pincer ligand from borane attack and acceleration of catalytic reduction when bulky substituents are present on the phosphorus atom (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Catalytic reduction of CO2 with catecholborane over Ni–PCP catalyst.288 
A comparative study was reported by Guan et al.289 on the Ni-pincer hydride-catalyzed reduction of CO2 with catecholborane and the NHC-catalyzed reduction of CO2 using silanes (R3SiH) as reducing agents (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Comparison of Ni-catalyzed CO2 reduction with catecholborane and NHC-catalyzed CO2 reduction with silanes.289 Note: “Exp.” stands for experimentally observed species. 
In addition to the obvious similarities between the Ni and the Si containing systems e.g. the necessity of three equivalents of reducing agent for one equivalent of CO2, it was found that among the experimentally detected complexes there are some one-to-one correlations such as CH3OBcat ↔ CH3O[Si], catBOBcat ↔ [Si]O[Si] and HCOOBcat ↔ HCOO[Si]. The formation of the formaldehyde intermediate was also suggested in both catalytic systems. The major difference between the two systems was that while the presence of [Si]OCH2O[Si] has been confirmed experimentally, no evidence was found to support the formation of CatBOCH2OBCat.
Activation and reduction of CO2 was demonstrated in the presence of an ambiphilic metal-free catalyst 1-Bpin-2-PPh2–C6H4 using catecholborane.290 The carbon dioxide molecule itself has ambiphilic character involving an electrophilic carbon atom and two nucleophilic oxygen atoms and consequently it does not require a strong bonding interaction with an ambiphilic catalyst to undergo reduction using hydroboranes as the hydrogen source. CO2 was treated with a variety of borane derivatives such as HBCat (catecholborane), HBPin (pinacolborane), 9-BBN, BH3·SMe2 and BH3·THF resulting in methanol precursors, CH3OBCat or (CH3OBO)3, respectively which molecules could then be hydrolyzed to methanol (Fig. 25). TON and TOF were measured up to 2950 and 853 h−1, respectively.
 Fig. 25  Reduction of CO2 to methanol with catecholborane in the presence of a phosphine–borane organocatalyst.290 
The same research group reported reduction of CO2 to boronic acid methylesters with catecholborane catalyzed by the ambiphilic Al(C6H4(o-PPh2))3 wherein the aluminum center is surrounded by a trisarylphosphine scaffold.291 The organoaluminium compound depicted in Fig. 26 was shown as a precatalyst for the reduction of CO2 with catecholborane (HBcat) to form CH3OBcat, a direct precursor of methanol.
 Fig. 26  Al(C6H4(o-PPh2))3-catalyzed reduction of CO2 with catecholborane.291 
Other aluminum and phosphorus based FLPs system developed by Stephan et al.292,293 (Mes3P·AlX3, where X = Cl or Br and Mes = mesytilene) were also shown to be able to reduce CO2 to methoxide derivative in the presence of ammoniaborane (NH3BH3).
The pinacolborane–Ru-tris(aminophosphine) system was also shown to reduce CO2 to methyl borate which can be eventually hydrolyzed to methanol (Fig. 27).294 The Ru-hydride complex295 was reacted with CO2 resulting in its insertion to the Ru–P bond. The obtained complex was then subjected to reduction by adding five equivalents of pinacolborane in CD2Cl2 solution. The stoichiometric reduction of the obtained complex was confirmed by NMR spectroscopy by detecting CH3OBpin and O(Bpin)2. Neither the application of higher excess of pinacolborane nor the increase of CO2 pressure from 1 to 5 atm affected the product distribution. Similarly, the addition of different reducing agents such as catecholborane or 9-borabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane did not help to increase the reaction rate.
 Fig. 27  Ruthenium tris(aminophosphine)-catalyzed reduction of CO2 to methanol with pinacolborane (PinBH).294 
Another example of CO2 reduction with pinacolborane over an organoruthenium catalysts [RuH2(H2)2(PCy3)2] (Cy = cyclohexyl) was presented by Sabo-Etienne et al.296,297 Formation of [RuH(κ2-CO2H)(η2-H2)(PCy3)2] took place via the insertion of CO2 into Ru–H bond (Fig. 28). NMR tube experiments proved that the reaction between CO2 and pinacolborane in the presence of [RuH2(H2)2(PCy3)2] affords a series of reduction products such as PinBOCH2OCHO (derives from the reductive coupling of two CO2 molecules) (PinB)2O, PinBOCHO, PinBOCH2OBPin, and PinBOCH3. The latter can be hydrolyzed to methanol.
 Fig. 28  CO2 reduction to a borate ester with pinacolborane in the presence of [RuH2(H2)2(PCy3)2] (Cy = cyclohexyl).296 
We have reviewed numerous elegant approaches to reduce CO2 to methanol/methanol precursors in homogeneous systems based on chemistry, which make a significant contribution to fundamental science and pave the way for further development. It must be noted here that in general the main driving force of CO2 reduction using boranes or silanes is the formation of high stability B–O or Si–O bonds. However, the obtained organoboranes and siloxanes have to be recycled and converted back to reducing agents by renewable energy sources directly or using hydrogen generated with renewables. In cases where the exhausted reducing agents are not reusable, the application of these processes raises serious feasibility concerns.
Other reducing agents. 
Na et al.298 have demonstrated a visible light-driven multicomponent system, that is capable of selectively reducing CO2 to MeOH. The RuQ complex (Fig. 29) collects two electrons upon the reaction with ascorbate in a light driven step and then RuQ2− reduces CO2 to MeOH in the presence of [Co(NDS)2]2− in aqueous solution (NDS = 1-nitroso-2-naphthol-3,6-disulfonate). Even though the performance of the system is low (four turnovers on [Co(NDS)2]2− and 73 turnovers based on RuQ), it was found that the reduction of CO2 is not stoichiometric on the cobalt catalyst and RuQ.
 Fig. 29  Light-driven multicomponent system for CO2 reduction to MeOH.298 
MacDonnell et al.299 reported another elegant photoinduced reduction of CO2 to formic acid and in lower yield to methanol under homogeneous conditions using pyridine as a catalyst for CO2 reduction applying visible light irradiation at 470 ± 20 nm. [Ru(phen)3]2+ was applied as a chromophore and ascorbic acid was added as a sacrificial reducing agent, using visible light irradiation at 470 ± 20 nm. This system showed 76 and 0.15 turnovers per Ru for formate and methanol, respectively, but it became inactive due to the degradation of the chromophore over 6 hours of irradiation.

Practical applications of direct CO2 hydrogenation to methanol
Practically, only heterogeneous catalysts have been used for the synthesis of methanol from CO2 and H2. Beside the experience of Lurgi AG described vide supra, the synthesis of methanol from CO2 and H2 has also been demonstrated on a 50 kg CH3OH per day laboratory pilot scale in Japan where a methanol selectivity of 99.8% was achieved over a Cu/ZnO based catalyst.152,300 A liquid-phase methanol synthesis process was also developed, which allows a CO2 and H2 conversion to methanol of about 95% with very high selectivity in a single pass.301
The first contemporary commercial CO2 to methanol recycling plant using locally available, cheap geothermal energy is presently being operated in Iceland by the Carbon Recycling International (CRI) company. The demonstration plant, with an initial annual capacity of 4500 m3 of methanol (10 ton per day), is based on the conversion of CO2 accompanying the readily available local geothermal energy (hot water and steam) sources (Fig. 30). The needed H2 is produced by water electrolysis using cheap geothermally produced electricity.130,302 Iceland embarked on this development as a means to exploit and possibly export its cheap and clean electrical energy. The produced methanol, called Vulcanol, is currently mixed with gasoline. In Japan, Mitsui chemicals has also announced the planned construction of a 100 tonne-per-year demonstration plant to produce methanol from CO2, obtained as an industrial by-product, and hydrogen generated by photochemical splitting of water using solar energy.303 Blue Fuel Energy in Canada is planning to use hydroelectricity and concentrated CO2 emissions from natural gas processing to produce methanol preferably.304 There is also significant industrial interest in CO2 to methanol conversion in China, Australia, the European Union and other countries, in conjunction with widespread research interest. Graves et al. claimed an electricity-to-fuel efficiency of about 70% in a state of the art methanol plant operating on CO2 and H2 feedstocks.305 The capital investment for a methanol synthesis unit using CO2 and H2 is estimated to be about the same as that for a conventional syngas based plant.151 The limiting factor for large scale-up of such processes is the availability and price of CO2 and H2 and primarily the necessary electrical energy.
 Fig. 30  The “George Olah Renewable Methanol Plant” of Carbon Recycling International (CRI) in Iceland. Based on local geothermal energy and CO2. Courtesy: K. C. Tran (CRI). 
Alternative two step route for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol
Methanol can also be produced in two steps from CO2. In a first step, CO2 and H2 are fed to a reactor where part of the CO2 is converted to CO through the RWGS reaction. After elimination of the water produced, the resulting gas composed of CO/CO2/H2 is fed to a methanol synthesis reactor. This process called CAMERE (carbon dioxide hydrogenation to methanol via RWGS reaction) was developed by the Korean Institute of Science and Technology (KIST).306 It was claimed that the two step process allows a sizable reduction in size of the methanol synthesis reactor with respect to the direct route. The process is also described as having higher efficiency, with twice the methanol production yield, and lower operating costs. The RWGS reaction has to be operated at temperatures higher than 600 °C to obtain a reasonable CO2 conversion to CO (>60%). The catalyst employed is based on zinc aluminate.307 The catalyst for the second step, methanol synthesis, is composed of Cu/ZnO/ZrO2/Ga2O3.306 A pilot plant using the CAMERE process with a production capacity of 100 kg methanol per day has been built in Korea to test this concept.307
6. Electrochemical conversion of CO2 to methanol
Electrochemical reduction of CO2 has been used for many decades on a lab scale, but has not yet successfully made the transition to an industrial process. Part of this reluctance by industry to adopt electrochemical CO2 processing techniques has been the lack of a driving force to utilize CO2. Part of it has been due to the lack of practical technology to electrochemically convert CO2 into useful products. Both of these areas are rapidly changing, and this section describes some of the recent progress made in developing new solutions to the problems encountered in CO2 electrolysis. A much more in-depth review of CO2 reduction on metal electrodes was published by Hori.308 Depending on the conditions and electrocatalyst, a variety of reduced products can be generated electrochemically from CO2, some of which are presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Standard potentials for CO2 reduction from ref. 309




Half-cell reaction

E° vs. SHE




CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.11


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.10


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → CH2O + H2O
−0.028


CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
+0.031


CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
+0.17




None of these reactions are well-separated by potential, so the control between various products must come from choice of catalyst and conditions rather than potential. Although all of these standard potentials are close to the standard potential for hydrogen evolution, generation of the first intermediate (carbon dioxide radical anion, CO2˙−) has been estimated to occur only at −1.89 V vs. SHE.309 Although it can be stabilized, this high energy intermediate must be produced for CO2 reduction to occur on a traditional metal electrode, and the result is that CO2 reduction generally requires significant over-potentials to occur at a reasonable rate. Water is typically present as a proton source (and electrolyte) and thus the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) must be taken into account while considering CO2 reduction. For this reason, many metals that are reported for CO2 reduction also have relatively high HER overpotentials. A balancing act must be conducted to find the optimal CO2 reduction electrode that will reduce CO2 selectively at high rates and low overpotentials without reducing water simultaneously.
Overcoming the large overpotential to CO2 reduction also results in low energy efficiency values. Table 2 gives the standard full cell reaction potentials instead of the half-cell reactions for CO2 reduction to formic acid, formate and carbon monoxide converted from thermodynamic heats of formation. The full cell potential must then be compared to these values to determine the efficiency of the overall process. Very few, if any, high rate processes described in the literature would achieve even 50% energy efficiency based on these values. Improvements in this area are critical if electrochemical CO2 reduction is ever to become a viable choice for energy storage since a loss of energy efficiency must be made up with additional renewable energy.
Table 2 Full cell electrochemical reactions derived from thermodynamic heat of formation310




Reduction product
Full cell reaction

E
0c (V)




Formic acid
CO2(aq) + H2O(l) → HCOOH(aq) + 1/2O2(g)
1.496


Formate
CO2(aq) + OH−(aq) → HCOO−(aq) + 1/2O2(g)
1.207


Carbon monoxide
CO2(aq) → CO(g) + 1/2O2(g)
1.567




Electrochemical CO2 reduction mechanism
The mechanism for electrochemical reduction of CO2 has been studied with the aim of being able to provide an explanation for the selectivity of various products on various metal surfaces. Since the electrocatalyst is generally regarded as the most important factor determining selectivity, it is often helpful to group electrodes together based on product for the purposes of determining the mechanism, as has been depicted in Fig. 31. This general mechanism has been compiled from several sources,311–321 with the aim of providing an overarching guideline for metal electrodes. Although much of the recent literature has focused on non-metallic electrodes or molecular co-catalysts, understanding these mechanisms can still be helpful, especially since many of the reports in the literature of high-rate electrochemical reduction of CO2 still rely on metal electrodes.
 Fig. 31  Mechanism for electrochemical CO2 reduction on metal surfaces in water. 
We can generally divide metal electrodes into three groups for CO2 reduction based on their ability to bind CO2˙− and reduce CO. These groups are not exclusive, however; for example, tin can be made to produce CO instead of formate by changing the electrolyte and operating pressure.311,314,322,323 This indicates that metals have the ability to reduce CO2 by multiple mechanisms, probably determined by surface oxidation324–327 and crystal faces328–336 as well as the reaction conditions. Group 1 (Hg, Pb, Sn, etc.) metals do not bind either CO2˙− or reduce CO to any appreciable degree, and therefore the mechanism for electron transfer from the electrode to CO2 must take place through the electrical double layer. As a result of this inability to bind CO2˙−, it is generally surrounded by solvent (typically water), with which it reacts immediately due to its unstable nature. In the absence of water, these radicals can dimerize to form oxalate instead of formate.337 Group 2 (Au, Ag, Zn, etc.) metals bind CO2 or stabilize the CO2˙− intermediate to varying degrees, but cannot reduce CO, and therefore release it as a product in CO2 reduction. As a result of the coordination of CO2˙−, water cannot coordinate with the carbon atom to generate the C–H bond in formate. The group 3 metals (copper) reduce CO to further products such as methanol, methane, and even higher alcohols and hydrocarbons with C–C bonds such as ethanol and ethane. Unfortunately, this last group of metals generally ends up producing a wide variety of products rather than a specific one,338–340 making them problematic to consider for industrial scale-up. Selective processes for higher products using copper must thus rely on control of conditions to achieve selectivity.341 Other potential solutions to this problem include developing novel non-metallic electrodes including GaAs, InP334 and various oxides342 or adding molecular co-catalysts.343
Energy efficiency is potentially the biggest issue facing commercialization of electrochemical CO2 reduction because the cost of electricity would likely be the main factor influencing the cost of the product. In alkaline water electrolysis, probably the closest commercial process, the cost of electricity is estimated to contribute to 80% of the total cost of the product. If we take the work from Li and Oloman from 2007344 as an example, we can see that, using a tin electrode in a flow cell, they were able to reduce CO2 to potassium formate at −2.7 V and 60 mA cm−2. Since the heat of formation for the full cell reaction (taken from Table 2) is 1.207 V, the electrical energy efficiency of the process was therefore 45%. Although this is a good value for electrochemical CO2 reduction, it pales in comparison to electrochemical hydrogen evolution, where energy efficiency is generally reported to be from 60 to over 80%.345 Many recent efforts to increase the energy efficiency of CO2 reduction have showed promise, but there is still much work to be done to achieve energy efficient systems capable of high current. The potential at which CO2 reduction takes place is directly related to the energy efficiency of the process, but most CO2 reduction experiments are conducted relative to a reference electrode, so care must be taken by the reader to avoid misinterpretation. The full cell potential is rarely reported, and this is the potential which is required to determine the efficiency of the system (see Table 2). Some electrolysis cells, however, do not have reference electrodes due to their design, therefore authors reporting results from these cells often give the full cell potential. This can make their results look inferior at first glance since the voltage will be higher because oxygen evolution (which typically occurs at >1.4 V on platinum depending on the current density) is included in the potential. Some authors also correct for resistance346–348 in their papers, while others do not,349,350 making comparisons challenging.
Yield based on CO2, which is always used in large excess, is rarely calculated because it would be much more challenging to recover the unreacted CO2. In an industrial setting, however, the yield based on CO2 would be just as important as faradaic efficiency because the CO2 that is not converted must be re-circulated. It is unclear if the low conversion of CO2 reported in most processes is the significant hurdle to overcome before industrial electrochemical reduction of CO2 can be practiced.
Direct electrochemical CO2 reduction to methanol
Converting CO2 to methanol directly has the distinct advantage of producing a useful product that can be directly utilized by many energy-consuming devices. This would allow for very simple anthropogenic carbon recycling where methanol could be used by energy consuming devices, giving off CO2 that could then be recycled directly in an electrolysis cell back to methanol in one step. There is considerable interest in this field, given its allure from a practical standpoint. Table 3 presents a collection of conditions reported in the literature to achieve methanol directly from CO2.
Table 3 Direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 to methanol




Entry
Electrode

E vs. NHE (V)
Major product
FE (%)
Current density (mA cm−2)
Ref.
Electrolyte





a Solar irradiation of the working electrode.





1

n-GaAs
−1.06
MeOH
1.0
0.16

334

Sat. Na2SO4


2

p-GaAs
−1.06
MeOH
0.52
0.08

334

Sat. Na2SO4


3

p-InP
−1.06
MeOH
0.8
0.06

334

Sat. Na2SO4


4
Mo
−0.56
MeOH
84
0.12

351

0.2 M Na2SO4


5
CuO
−1.3
MeOH
28
6.9

352

0.5 M KHCO3


6
Pt–Ru/C
−0.06
MeOH
7.5
0.4

353

Flow cell


7
Pd
−0.51
MeOH
30
0.04

354

0.5 M NaClO4 + pyridine


8a

n-GaP
−0.06
MeOH
90
0.27

343

10 mM pyridine pH 5.2


9
RuO2/TiO2 nanotubes
−0.6
MeOH
60
1

355

0.5 M NaHCO3




One of the most striking features of Table 3 is that very few metals have been used for the generation of methanol directly. The only example is entry 4, with the remainder being semiconductors (entries 1–3 and 8), oxides (entries 5 and 9), alloys (entry 6), or electrolytes containing a homogeneous catalyst (entries 7 and 8). Canfield and Frese first determined that semiconductors have some ability to form methanol from CO2 in 1983,334 albeit at extremely low faradaic efficiencies (FEs) and current densities. Subsequent efforts by a variety of research groups increased both the FE of the process as well as the current density. Bocarsly et al.354 introduced the concept of adding in a homogeneous co-catalyst (pyridine) and then improved their method by switching to a semiconductor irradiated with light.343 The latter example has the highest FE, coupled with the lowest applied potential (entry 8) in Table 3. Using pyridine (which is protonated to form the active pyridinium species in situ) as a co-catalyst has been explored extensively recently, particularly with the aim of determining the mechanism of activation precisely.356–361 Entry 8 also involves an irradiated semiconductor, so some of the energy for CO2 reduction is coming from the light irradiation.
These examples of direct CO2 to methanol reduction all exhibit relatively low current density when compared to two electron reduction products such as CO and formate, likely due to the increased complexity of reducing CO2 with 6 electrons. Direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 to methanol certainly holds much promise. However, at these current densities, it is not practical on a large scale since it has been shown that investment cost is almost proportional to the surface area of the electrode.362 To minimize these costs, therefore, current density must be in the range of at least hundreds of mA cm−2, which is several orders of magnitude higher than anything reported in Table 3. For this reason, we will consider the electrochemical reduction of CO2 by 2 electrons (since these processes have been demonstrated at relatively high current densities) followed by its subsequent conversion to methanol using more traditional chemical processes (see Section 5).
Methods for high rate electrochemical CO2 reduction
Electrochemical reduction of CO2 directly to methanol would be ideal, but is currently outside the scope of industrially viable processes. Therefore we will consider the application of two electron reduction products (CO or formate/formic acid) to the production of methanol. As Fig. 32 shows, CO2 and H2O can be electrochemically reduced either simultaneously or separately to yield any given ratio of H2:CO. In the case of methanol synthesis, the most desirable H2:CO ratio is 2:1, which can be directly converted into methanol using known processes, as described in more detail in Section 3 of this review. Alternatively, CO2 can be reduced to formic acid (another two electron reduction product) to be converted into syngas for methanol synthesis as described vide infra of this review, or esterified to methyl formate and then hydrogenated (with hydrogen from water electrolysis) to yield methanol, as shown in Fig. 33. Although hydrogenation of methyl formate is not commonly practiced industrially due to the higher value of formic acid and methyl formate compared to methanol, it can be accomplished using heterogeneous catalysts.363,364
 Fig. 32  Two electron reduction of CO2 to CO with concomitant H2 evolution for subsequent production of methanol. 
 Fig. 33  Two electron reduction of CO2 to formic acid with subsequent esterification to methyl formate and further hydrogenation to methanol. 
Most electrochemical CO2 reductions reported have been conducted in aqueous systems with metal working electrodes and CO2 introduced into the solution.365 When increased CO2 reduction rate was desired, one of the first approaches was to increase the pressure of CO2, thus increasing its concentration locally.366,367 Increased pressure has two positive effects on CO2 reduction; increased faradaic efficiency and the prospect for increased rate, an example of which can be found in Fig. 34. By increasing the pressure, one can even use metals for CO2 reduction that would typically evolve far too much H2, such as platinum.348 Another strategy to increase the efficiency of CO2 reduction has been to use a continuous flow reactors,368,369 like the one depicted in Fig. 35, instead of a static electrochemical cell. Flow reactors are widespread in industrial chemical processes, making these studies more conducive to scale up, however, the membranes typically used to separate the anode and cathode can lead to changes in CO2 reduction selectivity and efficiency.370
 Fig. 34  The dependence of the faradaic efficiencies of reduction products on the CO2 pressure in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 on a Ag-GDE at 300 mA cm−2 in 0.5 mol dm−3 KHCO3: (○) CO, (□) HCOO−, (●) H2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 371. 
 Fig. 35  Example of a flow electrolyzer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 372. 
Instead of increasing pressure to increase performance for CO2 reduction, one can instead focus on developing chemical solutions to the problems of throughput and selectivity. Molecular catalysts offer the possibility to use an additional chemical to chaperone the electrons from the working electrode to CO2 in a way that hopefully gives better selectivity, higher energy efficiency or both. Fig. 36 depicts the interaction between a pyridinium radical and CO2 that allows for a lower energy barrier to generate the CO2˙− intermediate. This concept is actually quite old, with the first report dating back to 1980,373 but this is the one that has seen significant attention as of late.374,375 The concept is certainly a sound one. However, most of the reports in the literature focus on reducing the energy barrier of CO2 reduction without much concern for current density. While the energy barrier to electrochemical CO2 reduction is definitely one of the biggest hurdles to commercialization, one must also be able to build a cost effective reactor to process vast quantities of CO2, and that cannot be realized without large current densities. The concept of physically or chemically attaching a catalyst (e.g. metal-porphyrines) to an electrode376,377 appears to be quite promising for large scale application.
 Fig. 36  Pyridinium radical complex interacting with CO2, from ref. 356. 
Using non-aqueous solvents for CO2 reduction is another way to chemically alter the mechanism of CO2 reduction rather than engineer a solution. Several solvents dissolve CO2 more readily than water, methanol being a prime example of such a solvent.378 Kaneco and co workers have extensively studied CO2 reduction in methanol using a wide variety of conditions, including low temperatures, different cathodes, and the effect of the electrolyte cation.326,379–388 Protons are required for CO2 reduction to formate, and generally necessary for CO production as well, so some water is often utilized389 to provide the necessary protons for the reaction to take place. Ionic liquids have also been used recently as solvents or co-solvents for CO2 reduction,390–392 where the anion (BF4−, for example) can potentially interact with CO2 directly to lower the barrier for electrochemical CO2 reduction, as depicted in Fig. 37.
 Fig. 37  Possible interaction between ionic liquid and CO2. 
A collection of some of the highest reported current densities for efficient electrochemical CO2 reduction is presented in Table 4. While certainly not all-encompassing, this table is intended to give an idea of the range of conditions that researchers have used to generate systems capable of high rate CO2 reduction. It would not be feasible to scale up many of the processes in these reports (only two of them are flow cells), but the potential for high rate electrochemical CO2 reduction is clearly there. With the exception of entry 6, which also includes light irradiation, all of the examples utilize electricity as the only source of energy for the transformation.
Table 4 Efficient, high rate two-electron CO2 reduction




Entry
Electrocatalyst

E vs. SHE (V)
Current density (mA cm−2)
Major product
FE (%)
Ref.
Electrolyte
Notes





a Cell voltage, not referenced.





1
Ag
−1.02
300
CO
86

371

0.5 M KHCO3
20 atm CO2


2
Au/C
−2.22
200
CO
64

315

0.5 M KHCO3
Flow PEM Cell


3
Sn
−1.19
163
HCOO−
92

367

0.1 M KHCO3
30 atm CO2


4
Pb
−1.37
163
HCOO−
96

367

0.1 M KHCO3
30 atm CO2


5
Co-TPP
−0.88
100
CO
97

376

0.5 M KHCO3
Metal porphyrin catalyst, 20 atm CO2


6

p-InP
−2.7
100
CO
93

393

MeOH
Photoelectrochemical, 40 atm CO2


7
Ag
−2.96
100
CO
53

394

0.5 M K2SO4
Static PEM cell


8
Ag
−3.5a
80
CO
33

395

0.5 M KHCO3
Flow PEM cell


9
Sn
−2.7a
60
HCOO−
91

344

0.45 M KHCO3 + 2 M KCl
Flow PEM cell


10
40 wt% Ag/TiO2
−1.6
100
CO
90

396

1 M KOH
Flow cell




Solid oxide electrolysis cells for CO2 reduction
Recently, solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) have been used for CO2 reduction397,398 coupled with steam electrolysis, which presents a different strategy compared to the methods described earlier. Instead of relying on electricity for all of the energy required to reduce CO2, SOECs operate at very high temperatures (typically ∼800–900 °C) where some of the energy required for CO2 reduction can be supplied by heat. The reverse water gas shift reaction can come into play as well as direct electrochemical CO2 reduction at these temperatures. SOECs have the advantage of being capable of producing extremely high current densities compared to other processes while simultaneously operating at relatively low cell potentials. Research is still very active in understanding the mechanisms at play in a SOEC used for CO2 reduction.399
Hydrogen and occasionally CO are often fed into SOEC reactors along with CO2 and water, making faradaic efficiency calculations challenging. In an attempt to provide some information to the reader about the efficiency of the processes reported in the literature, “CO FE Equivalent” has been calculated for each SOEC report when it was possible. This was accomplished by subtracting out the amount of H2 and/or CO being fed into the reactor to compare with the net CO produced with the applied current. Since CO may also be formed by way of the reverse water gas shift reaction, however, this value is not directly comparable to faradaic efficiency for a pure electrochemical process. That being said, the output of the reactors is directly comparable, and the FE equivalent value represents the number of electrons which eventually end up in CO2 reduction products compared to the number that end up in either H2 or side products. SOECs are capable of operating at very high current densities of up to 1500 mA cm−2 at very reasonable cell potentials of 2.65 V or less (Table 5).400
Table 5 SOECs for CO2 reduction




Entry
Cathode

T (°C)
Cell potential (V)
Feed (H2:CO2:H2O:CO:inert)
CO FE equivalent

J (mA cm−2)
Ref.
Notes





a 
E vs. LSM/scandium stabilized zirconia quasi-reference electrode.





1
Ni/ScSZ
800
1.15
7:14:19:0:61
50
230

397

Button cell


2
Ni/Sc/SZ
800
1.4
12:12.7:11.4:0:63.3
62
188

397

Stack


3
Ni/YSZ
800
1.3
1:1:2:0:0
n/a
1000

402





4
LSCM/YSZ
900
2.25a
0:9:0:1:0
n/a
540

403

Three electrodes


5
LSCM/GDC
900
2.25a
0:9:0:1:0
n/a
610

403

Three electrodes


6
Ni/YSZ
900
2.25a
0:9:0:1:0
n/a
800

403

Three electrodes


7
Ni/YSZ
850
1.25
0:1:1:1:1
n/a
900

404





8
BCZYZ
614
2.65
0:1:0:0:0
29.5
1500

400

Proton conductor




One limitation of SOECs is that they are essentially limited to CO as the product, since other products decompose at such high temperatures. Hallinder et al. have been investigating this constraint by developing a system designed to function at intermediate temperatures (∼300 °C) where hydrocarbon products would be stable.401 This system would benefit from some of the thermodynamic advantages of SOECs, while still being capable of producing hydrocarbon products instead of CO exclusively. Another related technology inspired by SOEC for CO2 reduction is the use of solid proton conductors, which have been reported to yield both CO and CH4 electrochemically.400
Electrochemical water splitting
While not the focus of this review, electrochemical water splitting is a critical technology that impacts most of the anthropogenic carbon cycles in some way. Water electrolysis takes place according to the equations in Fig. 38 depending on whether the media is acidic or basic. The overall reaction is, however, the same regardless of the pH of the solution. Ursua et al. recently reviewed this field comprehensively,362 therefore we will give only an overview here. There are three types of water electrolysis based on the type of electrolyte: alkaline, PEM, and SOEC. Alkaline electrolyzers (Fig. 39) are by far the most mature of the three, with the first demonstration in 1800,405 and virtually all of the large scale electrolysis facilities utilize this technology. The main advantages that alkaline electrolysis cells have over competing technologies are maturity, low installation cost, large scale, and long lifetime. Since alkaline electrolysis is the oldest technology, improvements must be demonstrated relative to it.
 Fig. 38  Water electrolysis in acid and base. 
 Fig. 39  Alkaline electrolysis cell. 
The alkaline electrolyzers on the market today are mostly considered “advanced alkaline electrolyzers”,406 which feature several design improvements including minimized distance between the electrodes,407 new separator materials,408,409 higher temperature of operation, and new electrocatalysts. These advancements have led to electrolyzers capable of achieving >80% energy efficiency. Very high hydrogen production rates can be achieved using alkaline electrolyzers, with power demands reaching into the megawatt range. A concern with alkaline electrolyzers is that they cannot be quickly switched on and switched off, which is problematic if they are to be coupled with fluctuating energy generation from wind, solar, or even in an environment when they must only be used during low energy demand.
PEM electrolyzers are available commercially,362 often from the same companies that produce alkaline electrolyzers. However, they struggle with high initial cost and short lifetime compared to alkaline electrolyzers. Their main advantages include the production of higher purity gases (limiting the need for purification), high current density, high voltage efficiency, and rapid response to changes in load.345 Their consistent performance across a relatively wide load range is their main advantage compared to alkaline electrolyzers. Given that many renewable energy sources are intermittent, this could prove to be a valuable advantage. These advantages are offset by their high cost, shorter lifetime, and smaller size compared to alkaline electrolyzers. The cost of a PEM stack is broken down in Fig. 40, with the largest single portion going to the flow fields and separators and the next largest one to the MEA itself. These values are high due to the specialized materials required for operation within the acidic environment of the PEM electrolyzer. Conversely, most of the advantages of PEM electrolyzers (high current density, high voltage efficiency, and rapid response) are related to their acidic nature.
 Fig. 40  Capital Cost Breakdown of PEM Electrolyzer (MEA: membrane electrode assembly). Reprinted with permission from ref. 410. 
SOECs operate by utilizing materials capable of transporting oxygen atoms through solid ceramic materials at very high temperatures. These designs offer very high efficiencies and current densities and are potentially much cheaper than PEM cells due to the use of non-noble metal catalysts, but they are still in the process of being commercialized. The very high temperatures they require constitutes both a strength and a weakness, as it increases the electrical efficiency to values much higher than those achievable with either alkaline electrolyzers or PEM cells, but induces many problems in the form of material durability and compatibility at such high temperatures. Another disadvantage of SOECs is their inability to tolerate many start–stop cycles due to the strain to internal components caused by varying degrees of thermal expansion at high temperature.411 Also, their high temperature of operation indicates that they likely would only operate efficiently within a narrow load range, much like alkaline electrolyzers. The ability to use waste heat makes this technology very attractive to nuclear power, however, where the excess heat generated by the reactor could be used to heat the SOEC and thereby significantly increase the overall efficiency of a nuclear power plant.
Syngas (metgas) production from formic acid synthesized by electrochemical reduction of CO2
Direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 can result in the formation of formate in a basic aqueous medium.350 The unique feature of formic acid (FA) is that it can be decomposed in two different pathways and should be considered to produce syngas (metgas) from recycled carbon dioxide using renewable energies (Fig. 41). The decomposition of FA to the mixture of CO and H2O (decarbonylation, also referred to as dehydration) was first reported by Paul Sabatier412 in 1911 and it is usually conducted over heterogeneous catalysts.413 On the other hand, the dehydrogenation of FA414 (also called decarboxylation) to form CO2 and H2 is mainly carried out in the presence of homogeneous catalysts for example Ru,415–419 and Ir,420etc.
 Fig. 41  Methanol production form CO2 by sequential electrochemical reduction to FA, FA decomposition and metgas conversion to methanol. 
After the separation of water (in the decarbonylation pathway) and carbon dioxide (in the decarboxylation pathway) the combined metgas streams with a H2/CO ratio of 2 can be subjected to methanol synthesis.
The catalytic activity of RuCl3 for FA dehydrogenation has been investigated extensively and it was found that RuCl3 is converted to [Ru4(CO)12H4]419 upon heating with FA and Na-formate in aqueous solution. The latter complex was shown to be an active catalyst for the decarboxylation of FA. The reaction between RuCl3 and FA/Na-formate in the presence of PPh3 or O = PPh3 results in the mixture of ([Ru(HCO2)2(CO)2(PPh3)2], [Ru(CO)3(PPh3)2], [Ru2(HCO2)2(CO)4(PPh3)2] and ([Ru12C30H14Na2O50·6(C18H15OP)·2(C7H8)·4(H2O)])421 respectively. These findings also highlight the importance of FA as a carbonyl source and a reducing agent that allows the synthesis of metal carbonyls without using toxic and explosive gases like CO and H2, respectively.
7. Thermochemical and photochemical routes to methanol
Thermochemical production of CO and H2 for methanol synthesis

Solar driven conversion of CO2 to CO. 
Roughly 174 PW (1 PW = 1015 W) energy arrives from the Sun to the upper atmosphere of the Earth continuously.422 This energy is several orders of magnitudes higher than the potential of other renewable energies such as wind, hydro, tidal, etc. Both silicon- and organic photovoltaics-based solar cells are of particular interest and their global contribution to the renewable energy production will become even more significant. In addition to solar photons, the thermal effect of sunshine accounts for an enormous amount of energy which humankind should also take increasingly advantage of. The thermal energy of (concentrated) sunshine can be utilized for example in households to heat/preheat water or air but this energy can be converted to fuels as well.423 The concept of “sunshine to fuels” or “solar fuels” developed among others at the Sandia National Laboratories may sound unusual at first glance, but in fact it simply stands for the conversion of stable carbon and/or hydrogen sources (where the elements are in their most stable oxidation state) to fuels utilizing the energy of sunshine; much like nature uses solar energy to recycle CO2 and H2O.
The solar-driven conversion of carbon dioxide and water to carbohydrates and other plant based materials, as well as the subsequent formation of fossil fuels, readily take place in Nature, but humankind consumes these natural sources much faster than they can form. As an ultimate solution, the artificial conversion of CO2 to fuels (anthropogenic carbon cycle) has to be developed in order to provide forthcoming generations with fuels and commodity materials in a sustainable way.
Due to the high stability of CO2, its direct splitting (thermolysis) is not favorable and even at 2000 °C only approximately 2% of CO2 is decomposed to CO and O2.424 In addition to choosing the proper materials that can resist such high temperatures other issues such as separation of explosive product gases or fast quenching in order to avoid recombination upon cooling makes the direct thermal splitting challenging.
Two step thermochemical cycles operated at lower temperatures can overcome the above issues associated with the direct thermal splitting of carbon dioxide (Fig. 42).
 Fig. 42  Solar thermochemical cycle for metal oxide-assisted reduction of CO2 to CO. MxOy: metal oxide with the metal in its higher oxidation state, MmOn: metal oxide with the metal in its lower oxidation state. 
In the first, solar driven, endothermic step a metal oxide is dissociated to oxygen and elemental metal or to a metal oxide in which the metal is in its lower oxidation state. This step is followed by a non-solar exothermic reaction between CO2 and the reduced metal/metal oxide giving CO and recovering the initial metal oxide. It should be added here that elemental carbon may form in the course of the second step as well which can be safely stored but this approach is not discussed in the present review. The only gas which has to be separated in the first step is oxygen.
Numerous redox systems have been developed for the thermochemical splitting of CO2 such as Fe3O4/FeO,424,425 ZnO/Zn,426 SnO2/SnO,424 nonstoichiometric ceria427 or Ni-, Fe-, Mg- and Mn-doped ceria/zirconia solid solutions428 which differ in the decomposition temperature of the oxide material.
Carbon monoxide derived from CO2 is then mixed with hydrogen and can be used for methanol synthesis (eqn (1)) or Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (eqn (24)) to produce synthetic hydrocarbons. The required hydrogen can be generated from any source, including reforming reactions, water electrolysis, and water gas shift reaction of the obtained CO from CO2 splitting.
Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (24)


Thermochemical cleavage of H2O to H2 with solar or nuclear energy. 
Similar to CO2, water can be split thermally into H2 and O2 at very high temperatures (2000–2500 °C and higher). This reaction suffers, however, from the same problems. The thermolysis products, H2 and O2, have to be rapidly separated or quenched to avoid their recombination. To obtain the high temperatures needed, solar furnaces have to be used and materials able to withstand such high temperatures over prolonged periods of time have to be developed. This makes the direct, high temperature, thermal decomposition of water impractical for the time being.
Thermochemical water splitting, based on chemical cycles, can, on the other hand, be achieved at a more reasonable temperature. One of the most extensively studied thermochemical cycle, among many, is the so called iodine–sulfur cycle.429 In that cycle, SO2 and iodine are added to water to form sulfuric acid and hydrogen iodide. When heated above 350 °C, HI decomposes to hydrogen and iodine, the latter being recycled. Sulfuric acid decomposes at temperatures above 850 °C into SO2 and water, which are recycled, as well as oxygen. With iodine and SO2 and iodine continuously recycled, the only feeds to the process are water and high temperature heat and the products are hydrogen, oxygen and low grade heat. The overall reaction is basically the splitting of water to hydrogen and oxygen. Thermochemical cycles have often been proposed in conjunction with nuclear energy. New, generation IV nuclear power plants currently in development would be especially well suited for this application as they are planned to operate at temperatures of 700 to 1000 °C; compared to only 300 and 400 °C for presently used reactors. Heat provided by concentrated solar sources could also be used.430 Problems remain however, such as the corrosive nature of chemicals employed.
Interestingly, similar thermochemical cycles to the ones proposed for the reduction of CO2 to CO, employing less corrosive intermediates, have also been tested for the production of H2 from water. For example Fe3O4/FeO,431 multivalent ferrites (MxFe3−xO4, with M = Mn, Co, Ni, and Zn),432 or ZnO/Zn,433 and SnO2/SnO434 were developed for water-splitting to produce and store hydrogen as a “solar fuel”.435
The thermochemical splitting of both CO2 and H2O are promising in the long range, but remain, for now, far from practical large scale deployment.

Direct photochemical reduction of CO2 to methanol
Direct photochemical reduction of CO2 to methanol shares some similarities with electrochemical CO2 reduction, particularly when it comes to molecular catalysts used in both cases. One recent report in particular cites the pyridinium approach to photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction, but instead uses ruthenium(II) trisphenanthroline as a chromophore to generate the electrons necessary for CO2 reduction instead of a semiconductor.299 Although the selectivity for methanol is quite low, the conversion of CO2 directly to methanol using photochemistry has been demonstrated. Typically, photochemical (or photocatalytic) CO2 reduction gives either formate or CO as a major product, an area which was reviewed in 2010.436 One of the major limitations to photochemical CO2 reduction as it is generally practiced is that a sacrificial hydride source (generally an amine, ascorbic acid, or 1-benzyl-1,4-dihydronicotinamide) must be added to the solution to substitute for the anode, which would generally be used in electrochemical CO2 reduction. While several groups are actively working on photochemical regeneration of hydride donor,437 it remains a major challenge. Turnover frequency and turnover number for photochemical catalysts for CO2 reduction are still limited (TOFs are generally around 20 h−1), and will require significant improvement if these processes are to be considered for industrial application. In addition to the molecular catalyst approach, several research groups have experimented with semiconductors and metal oxides such as silicon carbide,438 WO3,439 InVO4,440 TiO2,441–444 InTaO4,445 NiO,444 and ZnO444 either by themselves or in combination with various other heterogeneous catalysts to achieve the same goal. Contamination of semiconductors can cause spurious results,446 however, so meticulous cleaning of the surface is essential to obtain reproducible results. A challenge to producing methanol on semiconductors irradiated with light is that the reaction can be reversible,438,444 so strategies to mitigate methanol oxidation are essential to realizing a practical industrial process.
Instead of directly reducing CO2 photochemically, one could produce hydrogen using a photochemical cell447,448 and use this renewable hydrogen to hydrogenate CO2 in a separate process. While this approach would not be as straightforward as direct photochemical CO2 reduction, it could still reduce the number of steps required for CO2 reduction by combining light harvesting with hydrogen evolution. A perspective was recently written on this subject describing the current state of the art and the challenges to its commercialization.449 Typically, a photovoltaic material (e.g. a silicon semiconductor), an oxygen evolution catalyst (e.g. cobalt oxide), and a hydrogen evolution catalyst (e.g. NiMoZn) are combined to form a device which can capture energy from sunlight using the photovoltaic, oxidize water to oxygen on one catalyst, and reduce water to hydrogen gas on the other catalyst.450 Compared to photochemical CO2 reduction, water splitting can occur at higher efficiencies (>12%) and current densities (120 mA cm−2) using a system comprised of p-GaInP2 in tandem with GaAs.451 A significant amount of research is currently ongoing in this area, with centers like the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (JCAP) focused entirely on photochemical reactions and their potential commercialization.
8. Sources of CO2
CO2 capture from relatively concentrated sources
To produce fuels from CO2, the first step is to capture it from natural and anthropogenic sources the most efficiently and economically possible. Because of their relatively high CO2 concentration, typically between 5 and 15% CO2 by volume, flue gases from fossil fuel burning power plants are presently the most readily available large scale source of CO2. Technologies for the capture of CO2 from such sources have been described extensively in the literature (Fig. 43).452 They include retrofitting existing power plants for post combustion CO2 capture and purification using well known as well as emerging separation technologies.453,454 In new, advanced power plants it would be advantageous to apply pre-combustion CO2 capture and oxy-fuel combustion.455 In pre-combustion capture the fossil fuel is first gasified to a mixture of H2, CO and CO2 that is further subjected to the WGS reaction in order to obtain a gas mixture containing mostly H2 and CO2. The resulting high concentration CO2 under high pressure is separated from the H2 that is sent to a gas turbine for electricity production. In the case of oxy-fuel combustion, the fossil fuel is burned in a mixture of O2 and CO2. The absence of nitrogen in the flue gas makes the separation of CO2 much easier. So called “clean coal” power plants based on these technologies are under development or being built. Besides fossil fuel burning power plants, carbon dioxide emissions from numerous industrial facilities such as cement, aluminum, iron, steel factories as well as fermentation plants, which also contain high CO2 concentrations, could also be utilized. Natural gas, in some cases, also contains substantial amounts of CO2 (in excess of 50% for some gas fields).
 Fig. 43  Currently favored carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) processes from fossil fuel burning power plants. Adapted from ref. 452. 
The removal and capture of CO2 from gas streams can be achieved by a range of separation techniques depending on CO2 concentration, pressure, temperature, etc. They are based on different physical and chemical processes including absorption into a liquid solution system, adsorption onto a solid, cryogenic separation and permeation through membranes (Fig. 44). The use of these techniques for the separation of CO2 from relatively concentrated sources have been reviewed in the recent past and will therefore be only briefly summarized here.452,453,455–461
 Fig. 44  CO2 separation and capture technologies. 
Cryogenic distillation, although widely used for the separation of gases such as nitrogen and oxygen, is very energy intensive and generally considered impractical for large scale CO2 separation. Membranes are more suited for relatively high concentrations of CO2 such as those encountered in some natural gas deposits or for pre-combustion separation in fossil fuel burning power plants. They might therefore not be the best choice for post-combustion CO2 capture or from other more dilute sources.
Alcohols, polyethyleneglycols (PEG) and other oxygenated compounds have been used as physical solvents for acid gas removal, mainly CO2 and H2S for at least four decades. Commercial processes include for example SELEXOL® from Union Carbide (now a UOP process, using polyethylene glycol dimethyl ethers), Rectisol (methanol chilled at −40 °C) and Sepasolv MPE® from BASF (mixture of polyethylene glycol dialkyl ethers).461 These physical solvents are generally used for the separation of CO2 at high pressure such as in the purification of syngas or natural gas sweetening. The regeneration by heating or reduced pressure is less energy intensive than in the case of chemical sorbents. Another advantage is that these sorbents are non-corrosive. However, due to their relatively low selectivity for CO2, they are not well suited for the separation of CO2 from dilute and low pressure sources.
The use of solid physical sorbents for the separation of CO2 is based on the ability of porous solids to reversibly adsorb certain components in gas mixtures. These solids can have a large distribution of pore size such as silica gel, alumina and activated carbon or a pore size controlled by the crystal structure like zeolites. At lower temperature (e.g. room temperature), zeolite based adsorbents have shown high absorption capacities for CO2 (zeolite 13X: 160 mg CO2 per g and zeolite 4A 135 mg CO2 per g at 25 °C in pure CO2).462 One of the drawbacks of these adsorbents is their fast decline in adsorption capacities with increasing temperature. Moreover, as the gases are only physically adsorbed, the separation factors between different gases (such as CO2–N2 mixtures) are low, which makes capture from sources containing lower CO2 concentrations impractical. Moreover, the usefulness of most of these adsorbents decreases dramatically in the presence of water.
Among the various CO2 separation technologies, one of the most suitable and widely employed for high volume flue gas streams treatment is based on amine solutions, which have been used industrially for more than half a century. The commonly used absorbents are typically 25–30 wt% aqueous solutions of alkanolamines such as monoethanolamine (MEA) and diethanolamine (DEA), which form carbamates and bicarbonates with CO2.461 However, the energy required to use this well developed amine solution for CO2 capture is intense. The energy penalty for CO2 capture from a coal-based power station using a MEA solution has for example been estimated to be 25 to 40%. High energy requirements for the regeneration step, limited concentration of amines due to corrosion problems and amine degradation are major drawbacks warranting the development of more efficient, regenerable and robust CO2 sorbents.
To circumvent some of the problems associated with the use of liquid amines and still achieve a high selectivity for CO2 the use of solid amines or hybrid materials (amine/support) is a promising pathway.456 For this, different approaches can be envisioned including: (i) use of solid amines or polyamine directly as absorbents,463 (ii) amines or polyamines deposited (physical adsorption) on a solid support such as silica or alumina,5,456,464–470 (iii) amines or polyamines chemically bonded to the surface of a solid.456,471–476
Other materials for the separation of CO2 such as ionic liquids and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have also gained attention in recent years. Readers interested in the synthesis and CO2 capture performance of these materials are directed to recent reports and references therein.477,478
CO2 capture from the air
As long as industrial and natural sources with relatively high CO2 concentrations are available, it would be more economical and less energy demanding to separate CO2 from these sources. However, while about half of the anthropogenic CO2 emissions are the result of large industrial sources such as power plants and cement factories, the other half originates from small distributed sources such as home and office heating and cooling, and the transportation sector.479 The collection of CO2 from these countless small fossil fuel burning units at the source would be difficult if possible at all, and probably economically prohibitive. Capture of CO2 onboard an airplane, for example, would be impossible because of the added weight involved. Moreover, CO2, once captured would have to be transported to a sequestration or conversion site, requiring the construction of a vast and costly infrastructure. To avoid the need for such an enormous CO2 collection infrastructure, CO2 could be captured directly from the atmosphere. The atmosphere would thus essentially serve as a “CO2 conveyor belt” to transport CO2 at no cost from the source point to the site of capture. Direct air capture (DAC), which has already been proposed in the past, would make the CO2 collection independent from the CO2 source.15,22,480–493 This means that CO2 from any source, large or small, static or mobile, could be captured. The CO2 concentration being similar all around the globe, CO2 extraction plants could be placed anywhere, ideally, close to sequestration site or hydrogen production sites for recycling. The fact that DAC is independent from CO2 sources could also open the possibility to actually extract more CO2 than is emitted from human activity and not only control but eventually even reduce the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere. In the long term, when our fossil fuel reserves will be depleted, CO2 from the air will also continue to provide humankind with an almost limitless carbon source.
Despite the very low concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere, presently around 400 ppm, the theoretical minimum energy requirement for DAC to go from a concentration of 400 ppm to a relatively pure gas (>90% CO2) is only about 5 kcal mol−1 (equivalent to ∼0.4 GJ per tCO2).485,494,495 Theoretically, DAC would therefore require only between 1.8 and 3.4 times as much energy as capture of CO2 from a fossil fuel power plant.485,496 Of course, the actual energy needed for air capture will be significantly higher than the theoretically determined minimum energy and depend on a number of factors including the technology employed for the capture. Nevertheless, DAC is clearly possible and this subject has been reviewed recently.4 We will therefore only give a brief overview of the type of sorbents that can be used for DAC.
Due to the low CO2 concentration in air (∼400 ppm), the presence of moisture, the necessity to operate close to room temperature and ambient pressure, many of the technologies described vide supra for gases containing higher CO2 concentration can be ruled out. At atmospheric pressure, physical adsorbents such as zeolites, activated carbon and alumina can be excluded due to their low selectivity for CO2 in the presence of moisture and very low heat of adsorption, which result in low adsorption capacities. Physical adsorption in liquids for the capture of CO2 at rather high pressure is also not applicable. In practice, only sorbents having a chemical interaction can be used effectively for the capture of CO2 from the air. Widely used MEA based sorbents suffer from stability problems when contacted with air as well as evaporation issues due to the large volume of gas to be handled. While strong bases such as calcium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, sodium hydroxide and their aqueous solutions can be used, they bind CO2 too strongly, thus requiring high temperature for their regeneration. Amine and polyamine based solid sorbents either physically adsorbed or chemically bound on a support such as silica, mesoporous solids (MCM-41, MCM-48, SBA-15, etc.), polymers as well as carbon fibers have been recognized as potential candidates for DAC.467,473,497–508 Hyperbranched aminosilicas (HAS) prepared by in situ polymerizing of aziridine on porous solids have also been reported for DAC.509,510 Adsorbents based on modified metal–organic frameworks (MOF)511,512 and porous polymer networks513 as well as quaternary ammonium functionalized anionic exchange resin that can be regenerated by moisture swing protocols are another possibility.482,514–516
Whereas practical applications have been developed for the essential removal of CO2 from submarines and spacecrafts,467,517 the separation and recovery of CO2 from ambient air on a larger scale is still in its infancy.518 While there is no question that the capture of CO2 from the air is possible, more research and development is clearly needed to optimize this technology and determine its economic viability. Using current technologies, the cost of removing a ton of CO2 from point sources such as a coal burning power plant that contain 10–15% CO2 has been estimated at between $30–100. The estimated cost of DAC, on the other hand, still varies greatly from about $20 to more than $1000 per ton of CO2.482,483,485,495,496,519–526
The cost of a commercial plant will depend on many factors including the process used, labor cost, materials and energy use. Only with the construction of demonstration and pilot plants will we have a better understanding of the total cost associated with DAC. A few start-up companies including Carbon Engineering,527–529 Kilimanjaro Energy,530–533 Global Thermostat534 and Climeworks535,536 have started such efforts. Examples of proposed devices and prototypes for DAC are represented in Fig. 45. It should also be pointed out that the costs associated with DAC units are not “stand alone”. Once captured, the CO2 can be used for applications such as enhanced oil recovery (EOR) or recycling into chemicals and fuels including methanol, DME and hydrocarbons (CCR). This will give an economic value to the captured CO2, lowering the de facto cost of DAC and provide a more favorable overall picture of the process. Depending on the process, water (moisture) could also be separated from the air at the same time as CO2, which could provide clean water as an added value.
 Fig. 45  Examples of prototypes and proposed designs for the separation of CO2 from the air. (a) Prototype for CO2 capture from the air. Reproduced by permission of Kilimanjaro Energy. (b) Solid amine based swing bed for CO2 removal in human spaceflights. Currently undergoing tests in the International Space Station (ISS). Reproduced by permission of NASA. Courtesy J. C. Graf. (c) Artist rendering of an atmospheric CO2 capture contactor. Reproduced by permission of Carbon Engineering. (d) Artist rendering of an array of atmospheric CO2 capture units also known as Synthetic Trees. Reproduced by permission of Stonehaven Production. (e) Artist rendering of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air using an anionic exchange resin and regeneration by moisture swing. Reproduced by permission of Kilimanjaro Energy. (f) Construction of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air in Alberta, Canada. Reproduced by permission of Carbon Engineering.4 Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Atmospheric CO2 to methanol
The collection of CO2 from the atmosphere and its transformation to methanol and other fuels and materials has been proposed in the past.15,22,537–539 As early as the 1970s, Steinberg et al. described the use of nuclear energy for electrolysis of water to H2 and subsequent methanol synthesis from atmospheric CO2.489,491,540,541 Eight different methods for DAC were proposed. Among them, the absorption/stripping of air with dilute potassium carbonate solutions was found to require the least energy. After CO2 adsorption at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, the formed KHCO3 solution was treated in a stripper with steam to get K2CO3 back and obtain a concentrated CO2 flow for methanol synthesis. The needed heat for the absorbent regeneration was provided by nuclear heat as also proposed by Sherman.542 A similar approach using a K2CO3 solution for DAC and subsequent methanol production was presented in the frame of the Green Freedom project at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.543 However, instead of the traditional thermal stripping process for the regeneration of the adsorbent and separation of CO2, a selective electrolytic stripping was developed. Furthermore, this process also produces hydrogen as a by-product, reducing the needed supplemental hydrogen production by 33%. Overall the process produces methanol and oxygen (Scheme 3). Capture of 95% of the CO2 present in the air in a single pass as well as 96% less energy consumption compared with conventional thermal stripping was claimed using this process.
 Scheme 3  Methanol from atmospheric CO2 and water in the Green Freedom™ process. 
Stucki et al. have captured atmospheric CO2 with potassium hydroxide (KOH) on microporous hollow fiber membranes.544 CO2 was desorbed by electrolysis of the resulting K2CO3 and KOH recycled back to the absorption unit. As in the case of the Green Freedom process, beside CO2, the electrolysis cell also produced an equivalent of H2 for methanol synthesis.
Absorption2KOH + CO2 → K2CO3 + H2ODesorption  
Specht et al. at the Center for Solar Energy and Hydrogen Research (ZSW) have also proposed the production of methanol from atmospheric CO2 and H2 obtained from renewable sources and have been testing this reaction on a bench scale.22 DAC with a solution of NaOH and desorption with solar heat was described.165,545 A similar approach was followed by the Air Fuel Synthesis company in Canada, capturing CO2 from the atmosphere using a solution of NaOH and combining it with H2 obtained by electrolysis of water to produce hydrocarbon fuels and methanol in a demonstration plant with a capacity of 5–10 L per day.130
Graves et al. have also reviewed the possibilities to recycle CO2 from the atmosphere and other sources to methanol and hydrocarbons with renewable or nuclear energy.305 The use of exchange resin based sorbents, which can be regenerated by moisture swing has been first suggested by Lackner et al.483,514,515 Because the evaporative drying of water on this solid sorbent provides the energy needed to drive the adsorption–desorption cycle, the energy consumption is relatively low. Such resins placed in passive collectors standing in the wind have therefore been proposed for DAC. Combined with H2 obtained from wind energy, such systems have been proposed for the production of Fischer–Tropsch liquids in a remote location, i.e. the Kerguelen Islands.546 Methanol could, however, also be produced. Such a remote location was chosen to illustrate the possibility of capturing CO2 from the atmosphere and sequestering it far from an inhabited area while at the same time using part of the captured CO2 for the production of renewable fuels from wind energy.
Regardless of the method used to separate CO2 from various sources, once CO2 has been purified and compressed to the right pressure it can be converted to methanol using the catalysts described earlier.
9. Economics of CO2 and biomass conversion to methanol
The cost of producing methanol and DME from renewable sources will depend on a variety of factors including feedstock, technology choice, energy demand, production capacity, operating conditions, desired purity of the product, etc.
Presently, the most mature technology for the production of methanol from biomass is gasification to syngas followed by methanol synthesis with or without the addition of supplemental H2 to make the best use of carbon contained in biomass. In the case of CO2 from industrial sources or the atmosphere, the most mature and scalable method to prepare methanol sustainably without the use of fossil fuels remains the combination of water electrolysis and subsequent catalytic methanol synthesis with CO2. The cost of methanol produced by this route is highly dependent on the cost of hydrogen. The cost of hydrogen itself is closely linked with the cost of electricity needed to produce it.
A number of studies have been conducted on the cost of producing methanol using these routes. In 2007, Cifre and Badr,116 reviewing the results of previous studies, evaluated the cost of methanol production from biomass to lie in a range of €300–400 per tonne of methanol and the production cost of CO2-based methanol between €500 and 600 per tonne. They observed that despite the higher production costs compared with methanol produced by conventional natural gas reforming (i.e. €100 to 200 per tonne, aided by the low current price of natural gas), these new processes incorporate environmentally beneficial aspects that have to be taken into account.
The cost of methanol obtained by gasification of biomass in conjunction with H2 from the electrolysis of water was summarized in 2010 in the framework of the GreenSynFuels project.120 Prices of methanol ranged from $129 per tonne all the way to $933 per tonne, depending mainly on the operational expenditures (OPEX) assumptions of the different studies. Besides being significantly influenced by the price of electricity and biomass, the possibility to generate revenue by supplying excess heat from the process for district heating also had a considerable effect, resulting in a reduction of 40% or more of the price of methanol. The report itself determined a cost of $470–560 per tonne methanol on a production basis of 1053 t methanol per day using a combination of wood gasification and H2 from SOECs in Denmark.
In a more recent review, from 2013, on bio-methanol production published by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA),547 the production costs of methanol from coal, natural gas, wood, waste and CO2 were compared. These costs were found to be highly sensitive to local conditions, which will influence the technology used and have a significant impact on the economics. This translates into a wide range of production costs estimates as shown in Fig. 46. Bio-methanol was found to be about 1.5 to 4 times more expensive to produce compared to natural gas based methanol at €100–200 per tonne. Estimated production costs of wood based bio-methanol went from €160 per tonne all the way to €940 per tonne.70,80,90–92,105,108,117,118,548–552 When using waste streams, the estimated costs were between €200–940 per tonne).114,133,551,553–556 Production costs from either CO2 captured from flue gases or the atmosphere were estimated at between €510–900 per tonne.116,117,165,557 Not taking into account some outlier data points, Fig. 46 suggests that, as in the case of natural gas plants, a considerable economy of scale can be achieved with lower costs for larger plants. On a purely cost basis, it seems that renewable methanol can presently only compete with methanol produced from coal and natural gas in the most optimistic scenarios. In some cases, the co-production of methanol and DME, heat, electricity or hydrogen was found to be advantageous to reduce the price of bio-methanol. The cost could also be lowered if a market for the oxygen co-produced during the electrolysis step was available.558
 Fig. 46  Production costs and production capacity of (Bio-)methanol for various feedstocks from the literature. Source: IRENA analysis.547 Excludes co-feed set-ups; all costs converted to 2010 Euro values using national GDP deflators (World Bank); assumed Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) average inflation if no specific region is mentioned; assumed 8000 operational hours per year (if necessary); for costs beyond 2010, 2.5% annual inflation was assumed (OECD average for 1995–2010). Based on ref. 22, 80, 91, 105, 108, 117, 118, 165, 548–557 and 560–567. Reproduced with permission of IRENA from ref. 547. 
Considering production costs, most of the current bio-methanol and bio-DME projects are focused on the use of waste streams from other industrial processes, such as black liquor (lignin) in Sweden,131,132 municipal waste in Canada136 or glycerin in the Netherlands.130 The cost of bio-DME from black liquor has been estimated at $65 per barrel of oil equivalent.559
In the short term, the production of methanol from biomass and waste products seems to be the most economical in most locations. However, although the available amounts of biomass and derived materials are enormous, they are also limited and will not be able to cover all our energy needs by themselves, as discussed, vide supra. The largest potential for the production of renewable methanol remains with the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol. Production from CO2 does not suffer of the same limitations as biomass or waste products in terms of feedstock availability. CO2 can be collected from many point sources such as fossil fuel burning power plants, cement and iron factories or eventually the atmosphere. The production cost of methanol from CO2 will mainly depend on the cost of the starting materials, CO2 and H2. The price of carbon dioxide will depend on many factors such as its source, local policies (carbon tax or trading scheme) but is expected to remain the “cheap” component compared to the other feedstock, H2. Whereas hydrogen can certainly be produced from fossil fuels, through syngas, at a relatively low cost ($0.5–1.00 per kg), the production costs for H2 from electrolysis of water are generally higher.568 The cost of hydrogen itself is closely linked to the cost of electricity needed to produce it. It was determined by Clausen et al. that 65% of the cost of methanol from CO2 and H2 obtained by electrolysis of water was electricity.117 This is not surprising considering that electrolysis of water is an energy intensive process. To produce 1 kg of hydrogen with a 100% theoretical efficiency requires 39.4 kW h of electricity. In practice, however, it is closer to 50 kW h kg−1.569 In electrolyzer units with a capacity of 1000 kg H2 per day, it was determined that the cost of electricity represents about 80% of the cost of hydrogen produced. Capital investment represents only 11%.570 In larger electrolysis units the contribution of the cost of electricity is expected to be even higher. The cost of electricity is therefore the major driving force to minimize the cost of producing hydrogen from electricity.
Comparing the cost of electricity generation from renewable energy sources, it can be seen in Fig. 47 that small hydro, biomass, geothermal and wind can be competitive with the wholesale power price produced with conventional fossil fuels or nuclear energy. Hydroelectricity, which is very cost competitive and covered 15.8% of the world consumption of electricity in 2011 is still the largest renewable electricity source.571 The addition of new large hydro capacity is, however, limited due to a number of factors including capital costs and environmental concerns. Solar thermal, in some cases can be competitive at the retail power price. Although photovoltaic electricity prices are dropping, they remain too expensive at present. Among the renewable energy sources competitive with wholesale power price, geothermal, small hydro and biomass have only relatively limited growth capacity. Wind, on the other hand, does not have these limitations, and possible sites with good wind speeds, for installation of wind turbines either onshore or offshore, are plentiful all around the world.572 Considering these factors, wind has been the renewable energy source with the second highest growth rate in the last 20 years at 23.1% per year, after photovoltaics (Fig. 48).571 This explains the exponential growth in wind mill installations around the world (Fig. 49). Over 280 GW of wind generating capacity is now installed worldwide (as a comparison, a typical nuclear power plant has a generating capacity of about 1 GW).573 According to the IEA, by 2050, wind energy could generate 18% of global electricity demand from 2.6% today.574
 Fig. 47  Cost-competitiveness of selected renewable power technologies, before credit for carbon savings (Source: IEA).579 
 Fig. 48  Share in OECD non-hydro renewable electricity in 2012 (Source: IEA).571 
 Fig. 49  Annual growth rates of electricity production between 1990 and 2012 in OECD countries (Source: IEA).571 
The price of electricity generated from wind is expected to decrease to an average of about 4 ¢ kW−1 h−1 (including transmission) in the future.575 Among renewable sources (except hydro), wind power is economically the most competitive, with electricity prices at 4 to 5 ¢ kW−1 h−1 at the best wind sites (without subsidies) General Electric estimates that it would cost about $3.4 per kg to produce hydrogen from electricity derived from wind with a large wind farm of 500 MW installed capacity and 40% efficiency. This wind farm would allow the production of 108000 kg of H2 per day (4500 kg h−1).576 In “The Hydrogen Economy, Opportunities, Costs, Barrier and R&D Needs” published by the National Research Council and National Academy of Engineering, it is estimated that with improvements in technologies, hydrogen from wind could be produced at a cost of $2.86 per kg.575
Locally, some other sources of electricity could be used. In Iceland for example, the company Carbon Recycling International (CRI) is using cheap and plentiful geothermal energy to produce H2 for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. Countries like Canada could probably also utilize some of their large hydro resources to produce methanol. Besides renewables, nuclear energy, either fission or fusion if realized, is also a possible option. Despite the current backlash on this form of energy in many countries, it is a relatively economical method to produce H2 by electrolysis of water at an estimated cost of about $2 per kg.568 Countries, such as France, which produce a large portion of their electricity from nuclear power could already today make use of off peak capacity to generate hydrogen for methanol synthesis at a reasonable price. The same is true for wind energy for which excess capacity might exist, especially at night when demand is low. In Denmark, a champion of wind energy, for example, according to Energinet, the Danish grid operator, the production capacity of wind now often exceeds the consumption of electricity. On December 1st, 2013, between 4:00 and 5:00, wind power produced 135.8% of the electricity needs of the country.577 As the percentage of power generated by wind increases in a grid, so does the period of time when the average power spot price for wind energy is close to zero.578 Instead of being stranded, wasted or having to export it, this low-cost electricity could be used to produce hydrogen and methanol. In the U.S., using this electricity would also allow the producer to claim the currently available federal renewable production tax credit (PTC) of 2.3 ¢ kW−1 h−1.
Even considering relatively low renewable electricity prices of 4 ¢ kW−1 h−1, the production of hydrogen through electrolysis ($2.5–3 per kg) remains, however, high, compared with more traditional ways to produce H2 from fossil fuels. The cost of producing methanol from CO2 and H2 at about $3 per kg can be estimated at around $600 per tonne in a large plant with a methanol production capacity of 5000 t per day.580 This price is well above the historic methanol prices around $100–200 per tonne, but close to recent prices in North America; about $630 per t in January 2014 (Methanex non-discounted reference price).581 This translates into ∼$0.5 for 1 liter of methanol or $1.8 per gallon. Taking into account that methanol contains only about half the energy density of gasoline, about 2 liters of methanol would be needed to replace 1 liter of gasoline in existing ICEs, which means about $1 to replace a liter of gasoline ($3.6 per gallon). This is not too far from the retail prices paid today by U.S. car owners and much less than the retail price paid by Europeans with prices as high as $2.5 per liter ($10 per gallon) in Norway. In Europe it could, already today, make sense to make and sell methanol produced from electrolytically generated H2 and CO2. Indeed, the methanol produced by CRI from geothermal energy and CO2 is already being used for blending with gasoline not only in Iceland but also in Holland where it is being exported and sold under the name “Vulcanol”.130
The cost of the raw material, in this case hydrogen based on the cost of electric power, is the main factor setting the price of methanol. Any reduction in the cost of electricity would therefore greatly decrease the price of methanol.
Advantages of producing methanol from CO2 and H2
In a conventional natural gas to methanol plant, the natural gas has to be reformed first (with steam, CO2 and or oxygen) to syngas in an endothermic process. Part of the energy contained in the natural gas raw material is used for this step. Subsequently, syngas is reacted in an exothermic reaction to produce methanol.
In the case of CO2 hydrogenation with H2, the energy consuming endothermic step of syngas generation is eliminated; hydrogen and CO2 being generated from other sources. Only the methanol synthesis step is left unchanged. This is important because the syngas generation unit generally accounts for more than half of the total capital investment in a natural gas based methanol plant.166 For plants using coal, the capital cost of the syngas step represents even more, usually between 70–80%. The elimination of the syngas generation step simplifies and lowers the cost of the methanol plant considerably. In addition, the lower by-product content of methanol produced from CO2 may simplify the methanol distillation step.166 The capital cost to build a methanol plant based on electrically generated H2 and CO2 should therefore be considerably reduced compared to a conventional fossil fuel based methanol plant. Of course the methanol plant would still require the energy intensive H2 generation from water electrolysis.
10. Reduction of greenhouse gas emission
One of the main advantages of biomass and CO2 based methanol and DME production is the reduction of overall CO2 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. For a complete life-cycle analysis, or cradle-to-grave analysis, all steps of the methanol production, distribution and use as well as the environmental impact of each of these steps including GHG emissions, other pollutant emissions (NOx, CO, particulates, SOx, etc.) and water use have to be taken into account. These depend on a number of parameters including the nature of the feedstocks, by-product generation, process used, type of utilization, and so on, which are beyond the scope of this article. More specific well-to-wheel (WTW) analysis for the use of methanol, DME and other fuels in the transportation sector have been performed and focus generally on GHG emissions and overall energy efficiency of the fuel pathways. The WTW analysis itself can be divided in two individual steps: Well-to-tank (WTT) and tank-to-wheel (TTW) analysis. The WTT focuses on the extortion of the raw materials, production of the fuel and its distribution to the vehicle. The TTW accounts for the utilization of the fuel in the vehicle, i.e. the conversion of the chemical energy contained in the fuel to kinetic energy in the power train.
Relative to conventional fuels on a well-to-tank (WTT) basis, producers estimate that renewable methanol offers carbon reduction benefits ranging from 65% to 95%.582 These GHG benefits were among the highest for alternative fuels that can displace gasoline and diesel.
For the tank-to-wheels (TTW) portion of the full fuel cycle, methanol as a transportation fuel can also offer advantages. Methanol has a higher octane number than gasoline (RON + MON average of 100), allowing higher compression ratios, resulting in more efficient use of energy in the appropriate engine, translating into lower tailpipe emission of CO2.16RON and MON stand for research octane number and motor octane number, respectively. Methanol–gasoline blends also have considerably higher octane numbers than gasoline alone and were also found to reduce CO2 emissions.11,583,584 Furthermore, methanol is cleaner burning than regular gasoline, reducing the emission of other pollutants. Methanol could also be used in advanced vehicles propelled by fuel cells, reducing further the tailpipe emissions. Direct methanol fuel cell vehicles are expected to be virtually zero emission vehicles (ZEV; in regard to pollutants other than CO2).585 Tests conducted with Georgetown University's reformed methanol fuel cell bus have shown that it is almost a ZEV, releasing only negligible amounts of carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons, and no NOx or particulate matter (PM).586 DME trucks developed and tested in Japan and Sweden are satisfying the most stringent PM, CO and hydrocarbon emission regulations of Japan, the EU and the U.S.11,587,588 Due to the intrinsic clean burning characteristics of DME, the exhaust treatment system is simpler than in existing diesel vehicles.
Comparing various biomass sources for the production of methanol, Chaplin determined that black liquor, wood waste and farmed wood had WTW CO2 emissions of 3.3, 5.32 and 7.32 gCO2e per MJ, respectively.589 Methanol from crude glycerin and biogas had somewhat higher emissions, with 30.6 and 34.4 gCO2e per MJ (Fig. 50). With improvement in the farmed wood WTW CO2 emission is expected to be lowered to 4.57 gCO2e per MJ. The WTW CO2 emissions of methanol from CO2 recycling and H2 from renewable sources was estimated at 1.74 gCO2e per MJ. Compared to a reference fossil fuel emission of 83.8 gCO2e per MJ,590 this is a substantial decrease. Methanol from black liquor and farmed wood, reduced WTW CO2 emissions by about 96% and 95%, respectively. WTW CO2 emissions reduction of methanol from CO2 capture and recycling were estimated at 98% compared to gasoline and diesel. As such, these routes to methanol already fulfill the emission saving requirements for biofuels in the European Union, which require that all biofuels to have GHG emission reduction of at least 35% compared to emissions of 83.8 gCO2e per MJ from a fossil fuel reference. These emission reduction requirements will be gradually increased to 50% in 2017 and 60% in 2018.
 Fig. 50  WTW GHG emissions of renewable methanol and comparative fossil and biofuel pathways (gCO2e per MJ). Reproduced with permission from ref. 589. 
Volvo591 also found that the WTW GHG emissions were reduced by about 90% for methanol and 95% for DME when these fuels were produced from black liquor. Similar results were reported by the European Commission Joint Research Center, Institute of Energy-EUCAR-CONCAWE collaboration (JEC), which showed that for example for a diesel motor (DICI 2010 no DPF), the WTW emissions were reduced from 145 gCO2eq per km for regular diesel to 5 gCO2eq per km for DME from black liquor; a reduction of 97%.592 For DME from waste wood and farmed wood the reduction was 94% and 92%, respectively.
This is well below the 95 gCO2eq per km needed to comply with the recently proposed EU regulation on GHG emissions from new passenger cars for 2020.593
For heavy duty buses, WTW reductions of 94% and 96% in GHG emissions were calculated for when using DME in compression engines and methanol combined with fuel cells, respectively. In this case methanol and DME were obtained from poplar.594
As we move forward, the increased use of biomass and CO2 recycled with H2 from renewable energies will make carbon fuels increasingly carbon neutral and renewable on the human time scale. Eventually, CO2 contained in the atmosphere either recycled directly or through biomass will be our predominant source of carbon, solving at the same time the problem of excess emissions of this GHG.
11. Conclusions and outlook
The energy harvested by burning of fossil fuels has allowed the rapid and unprecedented development of human society. However, the utilization of this fossilized sunshine has come at the price of adverse global environmental changes, the full extent of which we are only starting to grasp. On the other hand, even if reserves of fossil fuels, either conventional or unconventional are still considerable, they will eventually be depleted. As these are complex issues, there will not be a single solution. The discussed approach of chemical recycling of carbon dioxide to produce carbon neutral renewable methanol fuels and derived materials offers, however, a feasible and powerful new alternative to tackle both problems; global climate change and the inevitable depletion of fossil fuels.
The production of methanol, DME, hydrocarbons and other synthetic materials from natural and anthropogenic sources including biomass and recycling of CO2 in flue gases of various industries could be the first steps towards an anthropogenic carbon cycle. As fossil fuels become less abundant and their use regulated by stricter emission standards, related CO2 emissions will eventually diminish. At the same time, the amounts of biomass that can be generated in a sustainable way are large but nevertheless limited and will not be able to cover all our needs by themselves. These limitations imply that methanol and derived products would be increasingly produced from CO2 captured from the air, which offers a nearly inexhaustible carbon source for humankind. The required energy could be provided by renewable energy sources or atomic energy, albeit made safer. Depending on varied factors, including policies, state of development, locally available resources and competing technologies, the timeline and layout for the transition to sustainable fuels and products could vary from country to country, and location to location. A tentative outline for the transition to a sustainable future for carbon fuels and hydrocarbon products is shown in Fig. 51.
 Fig. 51  Possible transition to a sustainable fuel future based on methanol and derived products. Based on ref. 595. 
Processes and catalysts for the efficient conversion of CO2 are in various stages of development. The most mature technology for CO2 to methanol relies on hydrogenation with H2 on heterogeneous catalysts based on copper. However, significant bottlenecks remain, such as the cost of electricity from renewable sources needed to produce hydrogen. The amount of energy required to replace petroleum oil and other fossil fuels is also staggering. With half the volumetric energy density compared to gasoline, about 62 billion barrels of methanol (7.8 billion tonnes) would be required to replace the 31 billion barrels of petroleum presently used globally each year. This represents more than hundred times the current methanol production of 65 million tonnes per year!32 Nevertheless, these problems are not unique to methanol and all alternative fuels face similar economic and scale hurdles.
Methanol from non-renewable sources such as natural gas and coal is already competitive with gasoline and diesel fuel, and could therefore constitute a bridge towards renewable methanol. Hybrid systems using both renewable and fossil fuels with less or no CO2 emissions to produce methanol could also be used during the transition period. Once the infrastructure for the distribution of methanol is in place, it could be seamlessly shifted to sustainable renewable methanol in the future.
References

Key World Energy Statistics 2013, International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,  2013 Search PubMed .

IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III of the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.
H. H. Khoo and R. B. H. Tan, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 1914–1924 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, G. K. Surya Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7833–7853 CAS .
S. Meth, A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 3082–3090 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Maass, The Breaking Point, N.Y.T.,  2005 Search PubMed .

          V. Smil, Energy at the Crossroads, Global Perspectives and Uncertainties, MIT Press, Cambridge,  2003 Search PubMed .

          J. Rifkin, The Hydrogen Economy, Tarcher/Putnam, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
U. Bossel, Proc. IEEE, 2006, 94, 1826–1837 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Bromberg and W. K. Cheng, Methanol as an Alternative Transportation Fuel in the US: Options for Sustainable and/or Energy-Secure Transportation, final report, Massachusetts Institute of Technology report PSFC/RR-10-12, 2010.

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 487–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Olah, G. K. S. Prakash and A. Goeppert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12881–12898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Methanol as an Energy Carrier, ed. P. Biedermann, T. Grube and B. Höhlein, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Institut für Werkstoffe und Verfahren der Energietechnik,  2006 Search PubMed .

          F. Asinger, Methanol, Chemie- und Energierohstoff. Die Mobilisation der Kohle, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg,  1987 Search PubMed .

On the Road with Methanol: The present and Future Benefits of Methanol Fuel, prepared for the Methanol Institute, available at http://www.methanol.org, 1994.
T. B. Reed and R. M. Lerner, Science, 1973, 182, 1299 CAS .

          J. H. Perry and C. P. Perry, Methanol, Bridge to a Renewable Energy Future, University Press of America, Lanham, Maryland,  1990 Search PubMed .
A. S. Moffat, Science, 1991, 251, 514–515 CrossRef .

          C. L. Gray Jr. and J. A. Alson, Moving America to Methanol, The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor,  1985 Search PubMed .

Methanol as an Alternative Fuel Choice: An Assessment, ed. W. L. Kohl, The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, DC,  1990 Search PubMed .

          M. Specht and A. Bandi, “The Methanol Cycle” - Sustainable Supply of Liquid Fuels, Center for Solar Energy and Hydrogen Research (ZSW), Stuttgart, Germany,  1999 Search PubMed .

          L. Bromberg and D. R. Cohn, Alcohol Fueled Heavy Duty Vehicles Using Clean, High Efficiency Engines, PSFC/JA-09-31, MIT, Cambridge, 2009.

          L. Bromberg and D. R. Cohn, Heavy Duty Vehicles Using Clean, High Efficiency Alcohol Engines, PSFC/JA-10-43, MIT, Cambridge, 2010.
K. M. McGrath, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2004, 10, 1063–1080 CAS .
T. A. Semelsberger, R. L. Borup and H. L. Greene, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 497–511 CrossRef CAS .
C. Arcoumanis, C. Bae, R. Crookes and E. Kinoshita, Fuel, 2008, 87, 1014–1030 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Temchin, Analysis of Market Characteristics for Conversion of Liquid Fueled Turbines to Methanol, Prepared for The Methanol Foundation and Methanex by Electrotek Concepts,  2003 Search PubMed .

          A. Basu and J. M. Wainwright, Presented at the PETROTECH-2001 Conf., New Dehli, India, January, 2001.

GE Position Paper: Feasibility of Methanol as Gas Turbine Fuel, General Electric,  2001 Search PubMed .

          C. D. Chang, in Methanol Production and Use, ed. W.-H. Cheng and H. H. Kung, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1994, p. 133 Search PubMed .
Methanol Institute, http://www.methanol.org, accessed 02/15/2014.
G. A. Olah, Catal. Lett., 2004, 93, 1–2 CrossRef CAS .

Syngas: Production Methods, Post Treatment and Economics, ed. I. B. A. Kurucz, Nova Science Publishers, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .

          D. Bell, B. Towler and M. Fan, Coal Gasification and Its Applications, Elsevier,  2010 Search PubMed .

          V. Subramani, P. Sharma, L. Zhang and K. Liu, Hydrogen and Syngas Production and Purification Technologies, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2009, pp. 14–126 Search PubMed .
T. V. Choudhary and V. R. Choudhary, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1828–1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Song, Chem. Innovation, 2001, 31, 21–26 CAS .

          J. B. Hansen and P. E. Højlund Nielsen, Handbook of Heterogeneous Catalysis, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2008 Search PubMed .
C. Song and W. Pan, Catal. Today, 2004, 98, 463–484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Halmann and A. Steinfeld, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 170–178 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lee, W. Cho, W.-S. Ju, B.-H. Cho, Y.-C. Lee and Y.-S. Baek, Catal. Today, 2003, 87, 133–137 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cho, T. Song, A. Mitsos, J. T. McKinnon, G. H. Ko, J. E. Tolsma, D. Denholm and T. Park, Catal. Today, 2009, 139, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. J. Bradford and M. A. Vannice, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 1999, 41, 1–42 CAS .
H. H. Gunardson and J. M. Abrardo, Hydrocarbon Process., 1999, 78, 87–93 CAS .
W. Wei and G. Jinlong, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2011, 5, 2–10 CrossRef .

          G. A. Olah and G. K. S. Prakash, Conversion of Carbon Dioxide to Methanol and/or Dimethyl Ether Using Bi-Reforming of Methane or Natural Gas, Int. Pat. Appl., WO 2008157673 A1,  2008 Search PubMed .
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 487–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. A. Olah and G. K. S. Prakash, US Pat., 7,906,559,  2011 Search PubMed .

          G. A. Olah and G. K. S. Prakash, US Pat., 8,133,926,  2012 Search PubMed .
H.-S. Roh, K. Y. Koo, J. H. Jeong, Y. T. Seo, D. J. Seo, Y.-S. Seo, W. L. Yoon and S. Bin Park, Catal. Lett., 2007, 117, 85–90 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Roh, K. Y. Koo, U. D. Joshi and W. L. Yoon, Catal. Lett., 2008, 125, 283–288 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Koo, H.-S. Roh, U. H. Jung and W. L. Yoon, Catal. Lett., 2009, 130, 217–221 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Koo, H.-S. Roh, U. H. Jung, D. J. Seo, Y.-S. Seo and W. L. Yoon, Catal. Today, 2009, 146, 166–171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Koo, H.-S. Roh, Y. T. Seo, D. J. Seo, W. L. Yoon and S. Bin Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 2036–2043 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, M. Czaun and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 648–650 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Olah, G. K. S. Prakash, A. Goeppert, M. Czaun and T. Mathew, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10030–10031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. A. Olah and A. Molnar, Hydrocarbon Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2nd edn,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. Steinberg, Energy, 1997, 22, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Steinberg, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1999, 24, 771–777 CrossRef CAS .

          M. M. Halmann and M. Steinberg, Greenhouse Gas Carbon Dioxide Mitigation; Science and Technology, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  1999 Search PubMed .

          M. Steinberg, Technical Report, Brookhaven National Lab., Upton, NY, USA, 1994.
N. Muradov, F. Smith, C. Huang and A. T-Raissi, Catal. Today, 2006, 116, 281–288 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Abbas and W. M. A. Wan Daud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 1160–1190 CrossRef CAS .
N. Muradov, F. Smith and A. T-Raissi, Catal. Today, 2005, 102–103, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Adachi, M. Komoto, I. Watanabe, Y. Ohno and K. Fujimoto, Fuel, 2000, 79, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohno, M. Yoshida, T. Shikada, O. Inokoshi, T. Ogawa and N. Inoue, JFE Refract. Tech. Rep., 2006, 8, 34–40 Search PubMed .

          G. A. Olah and G. K. S. Prakash, US Pat., US20080319093 A1,  2008 Search PubMed .

          P. L. Spath and D. C. Dayton, Preliminary Screening—Technical and Economic Assessment of Synthesis Gas to Fuels and Chemicals with Emphasis on the Potential for Biomass-Derived Syngas, NETL/TP-510-34929, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, 2003.
C. N. Hamelinck and A. P. C. Faaij, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater, Appl. Catal., 1994, 116, 5–47 CrossRef CAS .

Thermochemical Processing of Biomass: Conversion into Fuels, Chemicals and Power, ed. R. C. Brown, Wiley,  2011 Search PubMed .
D. A. Bulushev and J. R. H. Ross, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Larson, Annu. Rev. Energy, 1993, 567–630 CrossRef .

          R. L. Bain, Material and Energy Balances for Methanol from Biomass Using Biomass Gasifiers, NREL/TP-510-17098, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, 1992.
T. Chmielniak and M. Sciazko, Appl. Energy, 2003, 74, 393–403 CrossRef CAS .
W. Reschetilowski, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2013, 82, 624–634 CrossRef .

          T. A. Milne, R. J. Evans and N. Abatzoglou, Biomass Gasifier “Tars”: Their Nature, Formation, and Conversion, NREL/TP-570-25357, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 1998.
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, A. Serrera, S. Galera and P. Ollero, Fuel, 2013, 105, 739–751 CrossRef .
R. H. Williams, Energy Sustainable Dev., 1995, 1, 18–34 CrossRef .
C. Azar, K. Lindgren and B. A. Andersson, Energy Policy, 2003, 31, 961–976 CrossRef .

          A. K. Stark, Multi-Criteria Lifecycle Evaluation of Transportation Fuels Derived from Biomass Gasification, Master of Science in Technology and Policy and Master of Science in Mechanical Engineering, MIT, February, 2010.
K. M. Holmgren, T. Berntsson, E. Andersson and T. Rydberg, Energy, 2012, 45, 817–828 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lédé, Sol. Energy, 1999, 65, 3–13 CrossRef .
D. W. Gregg, R. W. Taylor, J. H. Campbell, J. R. Taylor and A. Cotton, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25, 353–364 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2003, 29, 567–597 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kruesi, Z. R. Jovanovic and A. Steinfeld, Fuel, 2014, 117, 680–687 CrossRef CAS .
N. Piatkowski, C. Wieckert, A. W. Weimer and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 73–82 CAS .
R. Adinberg, M. Epstein and J. Karni, Trans. ASME, 2004, 126, 850–857 CrossRef CAS .
S. Leduc, D. Schwab, E. Dotzauer, E. Schmid and M. Obersteiner, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 1080–1091 CrossRef CAS .
S. Leduc, E. Schmid, M. Obersteiner and K. Riahi, Biomass Bioenergy, 2009, 33, 745–751 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. Hamelinck and A. P. C. Faaij, Future Prospects for Production of Methanol and Hydrogen from Biomass, University Utrecht, Copernicus Institute, The Netherlands,  2001 Search PubMed .
K. S. Ng and J. Sadhukhan, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 1153–1169 CrossRef CAS .

          W. P. M. Swaaij, S. R. A. Kersten and F. G. van den Aarsen, Routes for Methanol from Biomass, International Business Conference on Sustainable Industrial Developments, Delfzijl, The Netherlands, April, 2004.

          E. Henrich, Kraftstoff aus Stroh, NRW Fachtagung “Was Tanken wir Morgen?”, Oberhausen,  2002 Search PubMed .
D. C. Elliott, T. R. Hart, A. J. Schmidt, G. G. Neuenschwander, L. J. Rotness, M. V. Olarte, A. H. Zacher, K. O. Albrecht, R. T. Hallen and J. E. Holladay, Algal Res., 2013, 2, 445–454 CrossRef .
M. C. Chow, W. R. Jackson, A. L. Chaffee and M. Marshall, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 1926–1950 CrossRef CAS .

          D. C. Elliott, G. G. Neuenschwander, T. R. Hart, L. J. Rotness, A. H. Zacher, D. M. Santosa, C. Valkenburg, S. B. Jones and S. A. Tjokro-Rahardjo, Catalytic Hydrothermal Gasification of Lignin-Rich Biorefinery Residues and Algae PNNL-18944, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, 2009.
K. Kumabe, T. Hanaoka, S. Fujimoto, T. Minowa and K. Sakanishi, Fuel, 2007, 86, 684–689 CrossRef CAS .
W. de Jong, J. Andries and K. R. G. Hein, J. Renewable Energy, 1999, 16, 1110–1113 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, R. Zhang and J. Bi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 2722–2726 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, H. Jin, L. Gao and W. Han, Energy, 2010, 35, 858–863 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, T. A. Adams and P. I. Barton, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 5099–5113 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peduzzi, L. Tock, G. Boissonnet and F. Maréchal, Energy, 2013, 58, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. Leduc, J. Lundgren, O. Franklin and E. Dotzauer, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guang-jian, L. Zheng, W. Ming-hua and N. Wei-dou, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 2854–2859 CrossRef .
A. M. Ribeiro, J. C. Santos and A. E. Rodrigues, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 163, 355–363 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Specht, A. Bandi, F. Baumgart, C. N. Murray and J. Gretz, in Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies, ed. B. Eliasson, P. W. F. Riemer and A. Wokaum, Pergamon, Amsterdam,  1999, p. 723 Search PubMed .
R. H. Borgwardt, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1998, 37, 3760–3767 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. Hong, H. Jin and R. Cai, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 2846–2853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong and M. Steinberg, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 971–977 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong and R. H. Borgwardt, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 479–484 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Norbeck and K. Johnson, The Hynol Process: A Promising Pathway for Renewable Production of Methanol, College of Engineering, Center for Environmental Research and Technology, University of California, Riverside,  2000 Search PubMed .
J. Lundgren, T. Ekbom, C. Hulteberg, M. Larsson, C. E. Grip, L. Nilsson and P. Tunå, Appl. Energy, 2013, 112, 431–439 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ouellette, H. H. Rogner and D. S. Scott, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1995, 20, 873–880 CrossRef CAS .
P. Galindo Cifre and O. Badr, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 519–527 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Clausen, N. Houbak and B. Elmegaard, Energy, 2010, 35, 2338–2347 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mignard and C. Pritchard, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2008, 86, 473–487 CrossRef CAS .
R. Agrawal, N. R. Singh, F. H. Ribeiro and W. N. Delgass, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 4828–4833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Lebaek, ed., GreenSynFuels. Economical and Technological Statement Regarding Integration and Storage of Renewable Energy in the Energy Sector by Production of Green Synthetic Fuels for Utilization in Fuel Cells, Final Project Report, EUDP Project Journal Number: 64010-0011, Danish Technological Institute, 2011.
P. Weiland, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 849–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. H. Pedersen and R. H. Schultz, Technical and Economic Assessment of Methanol Production from Biogas, Master thesis, Department of Energy Technology, University of Aalborg, Denmark,  2012 Search PubMed .
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, M. Czaun and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 648–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Olah, B. Gupta, M. Farina, J. D. Felberg, W. M. Ip, A. Husain, R. Karpeles, K. Lammertsma, A. K. Melhotra and N. J. Trivedi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 7097–7105 CrossRef CAS .

          G. A. Olah, Methyl Halides and Methyl Alcohol from Methane, US Pat., 4,523,040,  1985 Search PubMed .

          A. E. Schweizer, M. E. Jones and D. A. Hickman, US Pat., 6,452,058,  2002 Search PubMed .
I. Lorkovic, M. Noy, M. Weiss, J. Sherman, E. McFarland, G. D. Stucky and P. C. Ford, Chem. Commun., 2004, 566–567 RSC .

          B. L. Conley, W. J. Tenn, K. J. H. Young, S. Ganesh, S. Meier, V. Ziatdinov, O. Mironov, J. Oxgaard, J. Gonzales, W. A. Goddard and R. A. Periana, Activation of Small Molecules, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2006, pp. 235–285 Search PubMed .
R. A. Periana, T. J. Taube, E. R. Evitt, D. G. Löffler, P. R. Wentrcek, G. Voss and T. Masuda, Science, 1993, 259, 340–343 CAS .
BioMCN, http://www.biomcn.eu/, accessed in February 2014.

          I. Landälv, Two Years Experience of the BioDME Project - A complete Wood to Wheel Concept, presented at tcbiomass2013, Chicago, 4 September, 2013.
BioDME website: http://www.biodme.eu/, accessed 15/02/2014.

          T. Ekbom, M. Lindblom, N. Berglin and P. Ahlvik, Cost-Competitive, Efficient Bio-Methanol Production from Biomass via Black Liquor Gasification, Altener Program of the European Union,  2003 Search PubMed .
VärmlandsMetanol, http://www.varmlandsmetanol.se/, accessed 15/02/2014.

          J.-G. Hemming and B. Lindhé, Drivmedel av Koldioxid och Vatten (Fuels from Carbon Dioxide and Water), Benght Lindhé förlag, Skara, Sweden,  2010 Search PubMed .
Enerkem, http://www.enerkem.com, accessed 02/15/2014.
Biomass to Liquid Karlsruhe, http://www.bioliq.de/, accessed 02/14/2014.
N. Dahmen and E. Dinjus, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2010, 82, 1147–1152 CAS .

          N. Dahmen, E. Dinjus and E. Henrich, Renewable Energy, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2012, pp. 83–87 Search PubMed .

Proceedings of the High Level Conference on World Food Security: The Challenges of Climate Change and Bioenergy. Soaring Food Prices: Facts, Perspectives, Impacts and Actions Required (HLC/08/INF/1), Conference organized by the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome, 3–5 June, 2008.
S. D. Donner and C. J. Kucharik, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 4513–4518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fargione, J. Hill, D. Tilman, S. Polasky and P. Hawthorne, Science, 2008, 319, 1235–1238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Searchinger, R. Heimlich, R. A. Houghton, D. Fengxia, A. Elobeid, J. Fabiosa, S. Tokgoz, D. Hayes and T.-H. Yu, Science, 2008, 319, 1238–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Doornbosch and R. Steenblik, Biofuels: Is the Cure Worse Than the Disease? Report SG/SD/RT(2007)3, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2007.
K. Hedegaard, K. A. Thyø and H. Wenzel, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 7992–7999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

World Energy Outlook 2004, International Energy Agency, Paris,  2004 Search PubMed .
R. J. Pearson, M. D. Eisaman, J. W. G. Turner, P. P. Edwards, J. Zheng, V. L. Kuznetsov, K. A. Littau, L. di Marco and S. R. G. Taylor, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 440–460 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Chorkendorff and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinetics, Wiley, Weinheim,  2007 Search PubMed .

Methanol Production and Use, ed. W.-H. Cheng and H. H. Kung, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1994 Search PubMed .

          J. K. Paul, Methanol Technology and Application in Motor Fuels, Noyes Data Corporation, Park Ridge,  1978 Search PubMed .
H. Goehna and P. Koenig, CHEMTECH, 1994, 39 Search PubMed .
M. Saito, Catal. Surv. Jpn., 1998, 2, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .

          J. B. Hansen, in Handbook of Heterogeneous Catalysis, ed. G. Ertl, H. Knözinger and J. Weitkamp, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1997, vol. 4, p. 1856 Search PubMed .
V. E. Ostrovskii, Catal. Today, 2002, 77, 141–160 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Rozovskii and G. I. Lin, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fujita, M. Usui, H. Ito and N. Takezawa, J. Catal., 1995, 157, 403–413 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Chinchen, P. J. Denny, D. G. Parker, M. S. Spencer, K. C. Waugh and D. A. Whan, Appl. Catal., 1987, 30, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. J. Bart and R. P. A. Sneeden, Catal. Today, 1987, 2, 1–124 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Waugh, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 51–75 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Chinchen, P. J. Denny, J. R. Jennings, M. S. Spencer and K. C. Waugh, Appl. Catal., 1988, 36, 1–65 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Klier, in Adv. Catal., ed. H. P. D. D. Eley and B. W. Paul, Academic Press,  1982, vol. 31, pp. 243–313 Search PubMed .
H. H. Kung, Catal. Rev., 1980, 22, 235–259 CAS .
X.-M. Liu, G. Q. Lu, Z.-F. Yan and J. Beltramini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 6518–6530 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. A. Tijm, F. J. Waller and D. M. Brown, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 221, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .
M. Specht, A. Bandi, M. Elser and F. Staiss, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 1998, 114, 363–366 CrossRef .
F. Pontzen, W. Liebner, V. Gronemann, M. Rothaemel and B. Ahlers, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 242–250 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Clarke and A. T. Bell, J. Catal., 1995, 154, 314–328 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saito, T. Fujitani, M. Takeuchi and T. Watanabe, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 138, 311–318 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inui, H. Hara, T. Takeguchi and J.-B. Kim, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arena, K. Barbera, G. Italiano, G. Bonura, L. Spadaro and F. Frusteri, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Saito, M. Takeuchi and T. Watanabe, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 218, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohyama, J. Jpn. Inst. Energy, 1995, 74, 137–146 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arena, G. Mezzatesta, G. Zafarana, G. Trunfio, F. Frusteri and L. Spadaro, J. Catal., 2013, 300, 141–151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Toyir, P. R. de la Piscina, J. Llorca, J.-L. G. Fierro and N. Homs, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 4837–4842 RSC .
J. Toyir, P. R. r. de la Piscina, J. L. G. Fierro and N. s. Homs, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 29, 207–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Toyir, P. Ramírez de la Piscina, J. L. G. Fierro and N. s. Homs, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 34, 255–266 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujitani, M. Saito, Y. Kanai, T. Kakumoto, T. Watanabe, J. Nakamura and T. Uchijima, Catal. Lett., 1994, 25, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Saito and H. Mabuse, Catal. Lett., 2000, 68, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, T. Tran and M. S. Wainwright, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 295–304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, K. Moon, S. Lee, S. Lee and Y. Kim, Catal. Lett., 1995, 34, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Fujita, S. Moribe, Y. Kanamori, M. Kakudate and N. Takezawa, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 207, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, J. Li, Y. Zuo, Q. Zhang, D. Wang and J. Wang, Catal. Lett., 2007, 118, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, K. Futagami, T. Fujitani and J. Nakamura, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 208, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
I. Melián-Cabrera, M. López Granados and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Catal., 2002, 210, 273–284 CrossRef .
I. Melián-Cabrera, M. L. Granados and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Catal., 2002, 210, 285–294 CrossRef .
I. Melián-Cabrera, M. López Granados and J. L. G. Fierro, Catal. Lett., 2002, 79, 165–170 CrossRef .
I. Melián-Cabrera, M. López Granados, P. Terreros and J. L. G. Fierro, Catal. Today, 1998, 45, 251–256 CrossRef .
M. Saito and K. Murata, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2004, 8, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, F. Li, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 468, 442–452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ahouari, A. Soualah, A. Le Valant, L. Pinard, P. Magnoux and Y. Pouilloux, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2013, 110, 131–145 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-s. Hong, Y. Cao, J.-f. Deng and K.-n. Fan, Catal. Lett., 2002, 82, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prieto, J. Zečević, H. Friedrich, K. P. de Jong and P. E. de Jongh, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saito, T. Fujitani, I. Takahara, T. Watanabe, M. Takeuchi, Y. Kanai, K. Moriya and T. Kakumoto, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36, 577–580 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sahibzada, D. Chadwick and I. S. Metcalfe, Catal. Today, 1996, 29, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Q. Sun, D. Wu, W.-H. Fan, Y.-L. Zhang and J.-F. Deng, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 171, 45–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wambach, A. Baiker and A. Wokaun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 5071–5080 RSC .
E. E. Ortelli, J. Wambach and A. Wokaun, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 216, 227–241 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Amenomiya, Appl. Catal., 1987, 30, 57–68 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Koeppel, A. Baiker and A. Wokaun, Appl. Catal., A, 1992, 84, 77–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nitta, T. Fujimatsu, Y. Okamoto and T. Imanaka, Catal. Lett., 1993, 17, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Baiker, M. Kilo, M. Maciejewski, S. Menzi and A. Wokaun, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., ed. F. S. L. Guczi and T. P, Elsevier,  1993, vol. 75, pp. 1257–1272 Search PubMed .
C. Fröhlich, R. A. Köppel, A. Baiker, M. Kilo and A. Wokaun, Appl. Catal., A, 1993, 106, 275–293 CrossRef .
R. A. Köppel, C. Stöcker and A. Baiker, J. Catal., 1998, 179, 515–527 CrossRef .
M. Kilo, J. Weigel, A. Wokaun, R. A. Koeppel, A. Stoeckli and A. Baiker, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1997, 126, 169–184 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, D. Mao, G. Lu, S. Wang and G. Wu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 345, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jung and A. Bell, Catal. Lett., 2002, 80, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Rhodes and A. T. Bell, J. Catal., 2005, 233, 198–209 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and Z.-F. Yan, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 279, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z. Ma, N. Zhao, W. Wei, T. Hu and Y. Sun, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 222–227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nitta, O. Suwata, Y. Ikeda, Y. Okamoto and T. Imanaka, Catal. Lett., 1994, 26, 345–354 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arena, G. Italiano, K. Barbera, S. Bordiga, G. Bonura, L. Spadaro and F. Frusteri, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 350, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arena, G. Mezzatesta, G. Zafarana, G. Trunfio, F. Frusteri and L. Spadaro, Catal. Today, 2013, 210, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
J. Słoczyński, R. Grabowski, P. Olszewski, A. Kozłowska, J. Stoch, M. Lachowska and J. Skrzypek, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 310, 127–137 CrossRef .
J. Słoczyński, R. Grabowski, A. Kozłowska, P. Olszewski, M. Lachowska, J. Skrzypek and J. Stoch, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 249, 129–138 CrossRef .
M. Lachowska and J. Skrzypek, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2004, 83, 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ladera, F. J. Pérez-Alonso, J. M. González-Carballo, M. Ojeda, S. Rojas and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
J. Toyir, R. Miloua, N. E. Elkadri, M. Nawdali, H. Toufik, F. Miloua and M. Saito, Phys. Procedia, 2009, 2, 1075–1079 CrossRef CAS .
J. Słoczyński, R. Grabowski, A. Kozłowska, P. Olszewski, J. Stoch, J. Skrzypek and M. Lachowska, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 278, 11–23 CrossRef .
A. Gotti and R. Prins, J. Catal., 1998, 178, 511–519 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujitani and J. Nakamura, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 191, 111–129 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Fisher, H. C. Woo and A. T. Bell, Catal. Lett., 1997, 44, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Fisher and A. T. Bell, J. Catal., 1997, 172, 222–237 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Fisher and A. T. Bell, J. Catal., 1998, 178, 153–173 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Brown Bourzutschky, N. Homs and A. T. Bell, J. Catal., 1990, 124, 73–85 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Fei, Y. Yu and X. Zheng, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 47, 3360–3367 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Fei, Y. Yu and X. Zheng, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2007, 16, 12–15 CrossRef CAS .
G.-X. Qi, X.-M. Zheng, J.-H. Fei and Z.-Y. Hou, Catal. Lett., 2001, 72, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wang, H.-K. Lee and T.-J. Huang, Catal. Lett., 2002, 83, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Gao and C. T. Au, J. Catal., 2000, 189, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, J. Gao, W. Fang and Q. Li, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 2000–2003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, F. Li, P. Gao, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Liaw and Y. Z. Chen, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 206, 245–256 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kanoun, M. P. Astier and G. M. Pajonk, Catal. Lett., 1992, 15, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Dubois, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Chem. Lett., 1992, 21, 5–8 CrossRef .
A. Erdöhelyi, M. Pásztor and F. Solymosi, J. Catal., 1986, 98, 166–177 CrossRef .
L. Fan and K. Fujimoto, J. Catal., 1994, 150, 217–220 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kim, J. Lee and D. L. Trimm, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 319–324 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujitani, M. Saito, Y. Kanai, T. Watanabe, J. Nakamura and T. Uchijima, Appl. Catal., A, 1995, 125, L199–L202 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Chiavassa, S. E. Collins, A. L. Bonivardi and M. A. Baltanás, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 150, 204–212 CrossRef CAS .

          A. L. Bonivardi, D. L. Chiavassa, C. A. Querini and M. A. Baltanás, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., ed. F. V. M. S. M. Avelino Corma and G. F. José Luis, Elsevier,  2000, vol. 130, pp. 3747–3752 Search PubMed .
C. Shao, L. Fan, K. Fujimoto and Y. Iwasawa, Appl. Catal., A, 1995, 128, L1–L6 CrossRef CAS .
F. Studt, I. Sharafutdinov, F. Abild-Pedersen, C. F. Elkjaer, J. S. Hummelshøj, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 320–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raudaskoski, M. Niemelä and R. Keiski, Top. Catal., 2007, 45, 57–60 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Carnes and K. J. Klabunde, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 194, 227–236 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Y.-L. Zhang, H.-Y. Chen, J.-F. Deng, D. Wu and S.-Y. Chen, J. Catal., 1997, 167, 92–105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, D. Mao, G. Lu, S. Wang and G. Wu, J. Catal., 2010, 271, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, D. Mao, S. Wang, G. Wu and G. Lu, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 1661–1664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Zhong, Q. Guo, H. Fan, H. Zheng and K. Xie, Fuel, 2010, 89, 1348–1352 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, D. Mao, G. Lu, S. Wang and G. Wu, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 1095–1098 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Pan, R. Cao, D. L. Roberts and G. L. Griffin, J. Catal., 1988, 114, 440–446 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jingfa, S. Qi, Z. Yulong, C. Songying and W. Dong, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 139, 75–85 CrossRef .
G. Bonura, M. Cordaro, C. Cannilla, F. Arena and F. Frusteri, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152–153, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bianchi, T. Chafik, M. Khalfallah and S. J. Teichner, Appl. Catal., A, 1995, 123, 89–110 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Rhodes, K. A. Pokrovski and A. T. Bell, J. Catal., 2005, 233, 210–220 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-J. Hong and Z.-P. Liu, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 1869–1876 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Rasmussen, P. M. Holmblad, T. Askgaard, C. V. Ovesen, P. Stoltze, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Catal. Lett., 1994, 26, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Jia, Y. S. Tan and Y. Z. Han, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 1152–1159 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kühl, M. Hävecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B.-L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Nørskov and R. Schlögl, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, J. H. Lunsford, D. W. Goodman and A. Bhattacharyya, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 149, 289–301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirano, T. Imai, T. Yasutake and K. Kuroda, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2004, 47, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Arena, L. Spadaro, O. Di Blasi, G. Bonura and F. Frusteri, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., ed. B. Xinhe and X. Yide, Elsevier,  2004, vol. 147, pp. 385–390 Search PubMed .
M. Hirano, T. Imai, T. Yasutake and K. Kuroda, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2002, 45, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, Y.-Z. Zuo, Q. Zhang, D.-z. Wang and J.-F. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 6547–6554 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, W. Lu, M. Wang and X. Xu, Catal. Commun., 2004, 5, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, H. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Guo and M. Jia, J. Rare Earths, 2013, 31, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Naik, T. Ryu, V. Bui, J. D. Miller, N. B. Drinnan and W. Zmierczak, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 362–368 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ereña, I. Sierra, A. T. Aguayo, A. Ateka, M. Olazar and J. Bilbao, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 174, 660–667 CrossRef .
G. Bonura, M. Cordaro, L. Spadaro, C. Cannilla, F. Arena and F. Frusteri, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 16–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, D. Mao, X. Guo, G. Wu and G. Lu, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 1367–1370 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zha, J. Ding, Y. Chang, J. Ding, J. Wang and J. Ma, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 51, 345–352 CrossRef .
Y.-N. Li, R. Ma, L.-N. He and Z.-F. Diao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1498–1512 CAS .
K. Tominaga, Y. Sasaki, M. Kawai, T. Watanabe and M. Saito, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 629–631 RSC .
K. Tominaga, Y. Sasaki, T. Watanabe and M. Saito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1995, 68, 2837–2842 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Huff and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18122–18125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wesselbaum, T. vom Stein, J. Klankermayer and W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7499–7502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Balaraman, C. Gunanathan, J. Zhang, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 609–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choudhury, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 609–611 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Riduan, Y. G. Zhang and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3322–3325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, G. Lu, L. L. Zhao, H. X. Li and Z. X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12388–12396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Eisenschmid and R. Eisenberg, Organometallics, 1989, 8, 1822–1824 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Ashley, A. L. Thompson and D. O'Hare, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9839–9843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Sgro, J. Domer and D. W. Stephan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7253–7255 RSC .
S. Gambarotta, S. Strologo, C. Floriani, A. Chiesivilla and C. Guastini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fachinetti, C. Floriani, A. Roselli and S. Pucci, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1978, 269–270 RSC .
S. Chakraborty, Y. J. Patel, J. A. Krause and H. R. Guan, Polyhedron, 2012, 32, 30–34 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakraborty, J. Zhang, Y. J. Patel, J. A. Krause and H. R. Guan, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 37–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakraborty, J. Zhang, J. A. Krause and H. R. Guan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8872–8873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, C. G. Zhang, J. L. Jiang, Z. X. Wang and H. R. Guan, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3816–3825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Courtemanche, M.-A. Legare, L. Maron and F.-G. Fontaine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9326–9329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-A. Courtemanche, J. Larouche, M.-A. Legare, W. Bi, L. Maron and F.-G. Fontaine, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 6804–6811 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ménard and D. W. Stephan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1796–1797 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Menard and D. W. Stephan, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 5447–5453 RSC .
M. J. Sgro and D. W. Stephan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11343–11345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Sgro, F. Dahcheh and D. W. Stephan, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 578–586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bontemps, L. Vendier and S. Sabo-Etienne, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1671–1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bontemps and S. Sabo-Etienne, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10253–10255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Na, P. Lincoln, J. R. Johansson and B. Norden, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1746–1750 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Boston, C. Xu, D. W. Armstrong and F. M. MacDonnell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16252–16255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ushikoshi, K. Moria, T. Watanabe, M. Takeuchi and M. Saito, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 1998, 114, 357–362 CrossRef .

Commercial-Scale Demonstration of the Liquid Phase Methanol (LPMEOH™) Process: Final Report, prepared by Air Products Liquid Phase Conversion Company for the US DOE National Energy Technology Laboratory, 2003.

          A. M. Shulenberger, F. R. Jonsson, O. Ingolfsson and K.-C. Tran, Process for Producing Liquid Fuel from Carbon Dioxide and Water, US Pat. Appl., 2007/0244208 A1,  2007 Search PubMed .
J.-F. Tremblay, Chem. Eng. News, 2008, 86, 13 Search PubMed .
Blue Fuel Energy, http://bluefuelenergy.com/, accessed 15/02/2014.
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen and K. S. Lackner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
O.-S. Joo, K.-D. Jung, I. Moon, A. Y. Rozovskii, G. I. Lin, S.-H. Han and S.-J. Uhm, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1999, 38, 1808–1812 CrossRef CAS .

          O.-S. Joo, K.-D. Jung and Y. Jung, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., ed. J.-S. C. Sang-Eon Park and L. Kyu-Wan, Elsevier,  2004, vol. 153, pp. 67–72 Search PubMed .

          Y. Hori, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White and M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco, Springer, New York,  2008, vol. 42, pp. 89–189 Search PubMed .

Carbon Dioxide Chemistry: Environmental Issues, ed. J. P. Pradier and C. M. Pradier, Woodhead Publishing,  1994 Search PubMed .

Standard Potentials in Aqueous Solution, ed. R. P. Allen, J. Bard and J. Jordan, IUPAC,  1985 Search PubMed .
S. Ikeda, T. Takagi and K. Ito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1987, 60, 2517–2522 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1989, 85, 2309–2326 RSC .
B. Innocent, D. Pasquier, F. Ropital, F. Hahn, J. M. Léger and K. B. Kokoh, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1911–B1926 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1902–B1910 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986–1989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Whipple, E. C. Finke and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, D109 CrossRef .
B. Eneau-Innocent, D. Pasquier, F. Ropital, J. M. Léger and K. B. Kokoh, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 98, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ichinohe, T. Wadayama and A. Hatta, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1995, 26, 335–340 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Stevens, T. Reda and B. Raguse, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 526, 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saeki, K. Hashimoto, N. Kimura, K. Omata and A. Fujishima, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 404, 299–302 CrossRef .
J. Wu, F. Risalvato and X.-D. Zhou, ECS Trans., 2012, 41, 49–60 CAS .
G. Ghadimkhani, N. R. de Tacconi, W. Chanmanee, C. Janaky and K. Rajeshwar, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1297–1299 RSC .
Y. Momose, K. Sato and O. Ohno, Surf. Interface Anal., 2002, 34, 615–618 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohya, S. Kaneco, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Chang, R.-M. Liang, P.-W. Wu, J.-Y. Chen and Y.-C. Hsieh, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1001–1003 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hoshi, M. Kato and Y. Hori, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 440, 283–286 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms4242 .
K. J. P. Schouten, E. Pérez Gallent and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1292–1295 CrossRef CAS .
I. Takahashi, O. Koga, N. Hoshi and Y. Hori, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 533, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 106, 15–17 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Surf. Sci., 1995, 335, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
D. Canfield and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 1772–1773 CrossRef CAS .
E. Andrews, M. Ren, F. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Sprunger, R. Kurtz and J. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, H841–H846 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Abbott and C. A. Eardley, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 775–779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terunuma, A. Saitoh and Y. Momose, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 434, 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saeki, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, N. Kimura and K. Omata, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 8440–8446 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komatsu, M. Tanaka, A. Okumura and A. Kungi, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 745–753 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yano and S. Yamasaki, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38, 1721–1726 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schwartz, R. L. Cook, V. M. Kehoe, R. C. MacDuff, J. Patel and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 614–618 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Barton, D. M. Rampulla and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6342–6344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and C. Oloman, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 1107–1117 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Mahmood, D. Masheder and C. J. Harty, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1987, 17, 1159–1170 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, A. Tsuneto, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 2097–2103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, A. Kudo, T. Sakata and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L57–L59 CrossRef CAS .
F. Köleli and D. Balun, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 274, 237–242 CrossRef .
G. K. S. Prakash, F. A. Viva and G. A. Olah, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .

          K. W. Frese, Jr., S. C. Leach and D. P. Summers, US Pat., 4609441A,  1986 Search PubMed .
M. Le, M. Ren, Z. Zhang, P. T. Sprunger, R. L. Kurtz and J. C. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, E45–E49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shironita, K. Karasuda, K. Sato and M. Umeda, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
G. Seshadri, C. Lin and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 372, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang and C. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3576–3580 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Morris, R. T. McGibbon and A. B. Bocarsly, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 191–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Barton Cole, P. S. Lakkaraju, D. M. Rampulla, A. J. Morris, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11539–11551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Lim, A. M. Holder and C. B. Musgrave, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 142–154 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7580–7583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Kamrath, R. A. Relph and M. A. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15508–15511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Ertem, S. J. Konezny, C. M. Araujo and V. S. Batista, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 745–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ursua, L. M. Gandia and P. Sanchis, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 410–426 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Gormley, V. U. S. Rao, Y. Soong and E. Micheli, Appl. Catal., A, 1992, 87, 81–101 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iwasa, M. Terashita, M. Arai and N. Takezawa, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2001, 74, 93–98 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Teeter and P. Van Rysselberghe, J. Chem. Phys., 1954, 22, 759–760 CAS .
S. Nakagawa, A. Kudo, M. Azuma and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1991, 308, 339–343 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 391, 141–147 CrossRef .
H. Li and C. Oloman, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2005, 35, 955–965 CrossRef CAS .
F. Köleli, T. Atilan, N. Palamut, A. M. Gizir, R. Aydin and C. H. Hamann, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 447–450 CrossRef .
L. M. Aeshala, S. U. Rahman and A. Verma, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 94, 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara and T. Sakata, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1997, 70, 571–576 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, F. G. Risalvato, P. P. Sharma, P. J. Pellechia, F.-S. Ke and X.-D. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F953–F957 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Fisher and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7361–7363 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rakowski Dubois and D. L. Dubois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974–1982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Tornow, M. R. Thorson, S. Ma, A. A. Gewirth and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19520–19523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sonoyama, M. Kirii and T. Sakata, Electrochem. Commun., 1999, 1, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Magdesieva, T. Yamamoto, D. A. Tryk and A. Fujishima, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, D89–D95 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saeki, K. Hashimoto, N. Kimura, K. Omata and A. Fujishima, Chem. Lett., 1995, 361–362 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, K. Iiba, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 11, 490–495 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, K. Iiba, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 128, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, Y. Ueno, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Chem. Eng. J., 2006, 119, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, K. Iiba, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 4880–4885 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Energy Fuels, 2005, 20, 409–414 CrossRef .
S. Kaneco, H. Yamauchi, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, K. Iiba, K. Ohta, T. Mizuno and A. Saji, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 441, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, K. Iiba, K. Ohta, T. Mizuno and A. Saji, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 573–578 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizuno, K. Ohta, M. Kawamoto and A. Saji, Energy Sources, 1997, 19, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizuno, A. Naitoh and K. Ohta, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 391, 199–201 CrossRef .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, T. Jiang, B. Han, Z. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. He and W. Wu, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2004, 32, 287–291 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8798–8801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Snuffin, L. W. Whaley and L. Yu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, F155–F158 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hirota, D. A. Tryk, T. Yamamoto, K. Hashimoto, M. Okawa and A. Fujishima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9834–9843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, H. Ito, K. Okano, K. Nagasu and S. Sato, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2651–2657 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway, J. B. Kerr and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B42–B49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, Y. Lan, G. M. J. Perez, S. Moniri and P. J. A. Kenis, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 866–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Stoots, J. J. Hartvigsen, J. E. O'Brien and J. S. Herring, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2008, 6, 011014 CrossRef .
Z. Zhan and L. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7250–7254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Luo, N. Cai, J. Qian, S. Wang, W. Li and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 644–653 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, Y. Zhang, G. Meng and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 195–198 RSC .
J. Hallinder, P. Holtappels and M. Mogensen, ECS Trans., 2012, 41, 61–73 CAS .
Z. Zhan, W. Kobsiriphat, J. R. Wilson, M. Pillai, I. Kim and S. A. Barnett, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3089–3096 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yue and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F442–F448 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Ebbesen, R. Knibbe and M. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F482–F489 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kreuter and H. Hofmann, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 661–666 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wendt and G. Imarisio, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1988, 18, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fischer, H. Hofmann, G. Luft and H. Wendt, AIChE J., 1980, 26, 794–802 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vandenborre, R. Leysen and L. H. Baetslé, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1980, 5, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vermeiren, W. Adriansens, J. P. Moreels and R. Leysen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 321–324 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Ayers, E. B. Anderson, C. Capuano, B. Carter, L. Dalton, G. Hanlon, J. Manco and M. Niedzwiecki, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 3–15 CAS .
R. M. Ormerod, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 17–28 RSC .
P. Sabatier and A. Mailhe, Compt. Rend., 1911, 152, 1212–1215 Search PubMed .
B. Loges, A. Boddien, F. Gartner, H. Junge and M. Beller, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 902–914 CrossRef CAS .
F. Joo, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 805–808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boddien, B. Loges, H. Junge, F. Gartner, J. R. Noyes and M. Beller, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2517–2520 CrossRef CAS .
B. Loges, A. Boddien, H. Junge and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3962–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sponholz, D. Mellmann, H. Junge and M. Beller, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1172–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Laurenczy, C. Fellay and P. J. Dyson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3966–3968 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Czaun, A. Goeppert, R. May, R. Haiges, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1241–1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Himeda, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 2018–2022 RSC .
M. Czaun, A. Goeppert, J. Kothandaraman, R. B. May, R. Haiges, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, ACS Catal., 2013, 4, 311–320 CrossRef .

          V. Smil, General Energetics: Energy in the Biosphere and Civilization, Wiley-Interscience,  1991 Search PubMed .
A. Steinfeld and A. W. Weimer, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A100–A111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Abanades and M. Chambon, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 6667–6674 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Galvez, P. G. Loutzenhiser, I. Hischier and A. Steinfeld, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 3544–3550 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Loutzenhiser, M. E. Galvez, I. Hischier, A. Graf and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 1855–1864 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S. M. Haile and A. Steinfeld, Science, 2010, 330, 1797–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kang, J. Zhang, C. Wang, F. Wang, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18878–18885 RSC .

The Hydrogen Economy: Opportunities, Costs, Barriers and R&D Needs, National Research Council and National Academy Engineering, The National Academic Press, Washington, DC, 2004.
S. Abanades, P. Charvin, G. Flamant and P. Neveu, Energy, 2006, 31, 2805–2822 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld, S. Sanders and R. Palumbo, Sol. Energy, 1999, 65, 43–53 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb, A. G. Konstandopoulos, L. Nalbandian, V. T. Zaspalis, C. Sattler, P. Stobbe and A. M. Steele, Sol. Energy, 2005, 79, 409–421 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chambon, S. Abanades and G. Flamant, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 5326–5336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abanades, P. Charvin, F. Lemont and G. Flamant, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6021–6030 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 603–615 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Doherty, D. C. Grills, J. T. Muckerman, D. E. Polyansky and E. Fujita, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2472–2482 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dibenedetto, P. Stufano, W. Macyk, T. Baran, C. Fragale, M. Costa and M. Aresta, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 373–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gondal, M. Ali, M. Dastageer and X. Chang, Catal. Lett., 2013, 143, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Li, J. Liu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3372–3377 CAS .
Z. F. Jia, F. M. Wang, Y. Bai and N. Liu, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 2033–2037 CrossRef .
X. Li, H. Liu, D. Luo, J. Li, Y. Huang, H. Li, Y. Fang, Y. Xu and L. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 180, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, C. Chen, N. Zhang, S. Hong, H. Wu and Z. Liu, Z. Phys. Chem., 2009, 223, 1465–1476 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. S. Wu, H.-M. Lin and C.-L. Lai, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296, 194–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Yahaya, M. A. Gondal and A. Hameed, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 400, 206–212 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Tsai, H. M. Chen, R.-S. Liu, K. Asakura and T.-S. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10180–10186 CAS .
T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2594–2600 CAS .

          K. Rajeshwar, in Solar Hydrogen Generation, ed. K. Rajeshwar, R. McConnell and S. Licht, Springer, New York,  2008, pp. 167–228 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Grimes, O. K. Varghese and S. Ranjan, Light, Water, Hydrogen. The Solar Generation of Hydrogen by Water Photoelectrolysis, Springer, New York,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 407–414 CrossRef .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Markewitz, W. Kuckshinrichs, W. Leitner, J. Linssen, P. Zapp, R. Bongartz, A. Schreiber and T. E. Muller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7281–7305 CAS .
J. C. M. Pires, F. G. Martins, M. C. M. Alvim-Ferraz and M. Simões, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2011, 89, 1446–1460 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, A. I. Minett and A. T. Harris, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 25–40 CAS .
M. E. Boot-Handford, J. C. Abanades, E. J. Anthony, M. J. Blunt, S. Brandani, N. Mac Dowell, J. R. Fernandez, M.-C. Ferrari, R. Gross, J. P. Hallett, R. S. Haszeldine, P. Heptonstall, A. Lyngfelt, Z. Makuch, E. Mangano, R. T. J. Porter, M. Pourkashanian, G. T. Rochelle, N. Shah, J. G. Yao and P. S. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 130–189 CAS .
S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 796–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. D'alessandro, B. Smit and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6058–6082 CrossRef PubMed .
N. MacDowell, N. Florin, A. Buchard, J. Hallett, A. Galindo, G. Jackson, C. S. Adjiman, C. K. Williams, N. Shah and P. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1645–1669 CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Luo, Z. Zhong and A. Borgna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 42–55 CAS .

          R. J. Allam, R. Bredesen and E. Drioli, in Carbon Dioxide Recovery and Utilization, ed. M. Aresta, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,
The Netherlands,  2003, p. 53 Search PubMed .

          A. Kohl and R. Nielsen, Gas Purification, Gulf Publishing Company, Houston, 5th edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
R. V. Siriwardane, M.-S. Shen, E. P. Fisher and J. A. Poston, Energy Fuels, 2001, 15, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .

          E. J. Beckman, US Pat., 5 886 061,  1999 Search PubMed .
A. Goeppert, S. Meth, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1949–1960 CAS .

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, S. Meth and G. K. S. Prakash, US Pat., 7,795,175,  2010 Search PubMed .

          H. A. Zinnen, R. Oroskar and C.-H. Chang, US Pat., 4,810,266,  1989 Search PubMed .
S. Satyapal, T. Filburn, J. Trela and J. Strange, Energy Fuels, 2001, 15, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C. Song, J. M. Andresen, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1463–1469 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C. Song, J. M. Andresen, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 62, 29 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 19403–19417 RSC .
G. Knowles, J. V. Graham, S. W. Delaney and A. L. Chaffee, Fuel Process. Technol., 2005, 86, 1435–1448 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hiyoshi, K. Yogo and T. Yashima, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2005, 48, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Belmabkhout, R. Serna-Guerrero and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
R. Serna-Guerrero, E. Da'na and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 9406–9412 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. E. Harlick and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 446–458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Czaun, A. Goeppert, R. B. May, D. Peltier, H. Zhang, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, J. CO2 Utilization, 2013, 1, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Gassensmith, H. Furukawa, R. A. Smaldone, R. S. Forgan, Y. Y. Botros, O. M. Yaghi and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15312–15315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Dong, Z. Zhao, S. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6668–6681 CAS .

IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007.

          K. S. Lackner, P. Grimes and H.-J. Ziock, Proceedings of the 24th Annual Technical Conference on Coal Utilization and Fuel Systems, March 8–11, 1999, Clearwater, Florida, 1999, 885–896.

          K. S. Lackner, H.-J. Ziock and P. Grimes, SourceBook, 1999, 57, 6.
K. S. Lackner, Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top., 2009, 176, 93–106 CrossRef .
K. S. Lackner, Sci. Am., 2010, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. Keith and M. Ha-Duong, CO2 Capture from the Air: Technology Assessment and Implications for Climate Policy, Sixth International Conference on Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies, Kyoto, Japan, 2003, 187–197.
D. W. Keith, M. Ha-Duong and J. K. Stolaroff, Clim. Change, 2006, 74, 17–45 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Stolaroff, D. W. Keith and G. V. Lowry, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2728–2735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahmoudkhani, K. R. Heidel, J. C. Ferreira, D. W. Keith and R. S. Cherry, Energy Procedia, 2009, 1, 1535–1542 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahmoudkhani and D. W. Keith, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2009, 3, 376–384 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Steinberg and V. D. Dang, Use of Controlled Thermonuclear Reactor Fusion Power for the Production of Synthetic Methanol from the Air and Water, Report BNL 20016R, Brookhaven National Laboratory, 1975.
V. D. Dang and M. Steinberg, Energy Convers., 1977, 17, 133–140 CrossRef .
M. Steinberg and V.-D. Dang, Energy Convers., 1977, 17, 97–112 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Specht and A. Bandi, in Forschungsverbund Sonnenenergie, Themen 1994–1995, Energiespeicherung, 1995, p. 41.

          J. Pasel, R. Peters and M. Specht, in Forschungsverbund Sonnenenergie, Themen 1999–2000: Zukunftstechnologie Brennstoffzelle, Berlin, Germany, 2000, p. 46.
F. Zeman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 7558–7563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Ranjan, Feasibility of Air Capture, Master of Science in Technology and Policy, MS thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. Ranjan and H. J. Herzog, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 2869–2876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Belmabkhout, R. Serna-Guerrero and A. Sayari, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 3695–3698 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher and A. Steinfeld, Eur. Pat. Appl., EP2266680A1,  2010 Search PubMed .

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, S. Meth and G. K. S. Prakash, US Pat., 7 795 175,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. A. Wurzbacher, C. Gebald and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3584–3592 CAS .
N. R. Stuckert and R. T. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 10257–10264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chaikittisilp, R. Khunsupat, T. T. Chen and C. W. Jones, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 14203–14210 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher, P. Tingaut, T. Zimmermann and A. Steinfeld, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9101–9108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Didas, A. Kulkarni, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2058–2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 51, 12660–12661 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Deng, H. Wei, B. Wang, J. Huang and G. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 6937–6945 CAS .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, R. B. May, G. K. S. Prakash, G. A. Olah and S. R. Narayanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20164–20167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goeppert, H. Zhang, M. Czaun, R. B. May, G. K. S. Prakash, G. A. Olah and S. R. Narayanan, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1386–1397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, J. H. Drese, P. M. Eisenberger and C. W. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 2420–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Choi, J. H. Drese, R. R. Chance, P. M. Eisenberger and C. W. Jones, US Pat. Appl., 2011/0179948A1,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Choi, T. Watanabe, T.-H. Bae, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1136–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. McDonald, W. R. Lee, J. A. Mason, B. M. Wiers, C. S. Hong and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7056–7065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, J. P. Sculley, D. Yuan, R. Krishna and H.-C. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem., 2013, 117, 4057–4061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, K. S. Lackner and A. B. Wright, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 504–514 RSC .
T. Wang, K. S. Lackner and A. Wright, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 6670–6675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, W. Li, M. Zhong, D. Konkolewicz, D. Wu, K. Yaccato, T. Rappold, G. Sugar, N. E. David and K. Matyjaszewski, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 488–493 CAS .
Z. Huang, Z. B. Chen, N. Q. Ren, D. X. Hu, D. H. Zheng and Z. P. Zhang, J. Zhejiang Univ., Sci., A, 2009, 10, 1642–1650 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7833–7853 CAS .
A. J. Simon, N. B. Kaahaaina, S. J. Friedmann and R. D. Aines, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 2893–2900 CrossRef .
K. Z. House, A. C. Baclig, M. Ranjan, E. A. van Nierop, J. Wilcox and H. J. Herzog, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 20428–20433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Pielke Jr., Environ. Sci. Policy, 2009, 12, 216–225 CrossRef .

Negative Emissions and Carbon Recycling - Air Capture, Environment Policy Statement 11/01, UK Institution of Mechanical Engineers, IMechE, 2011.

          N. McGlashan, S. Nilay and M. Workman, The Potential for the Deployment of Negative Emissions Technology in the UK, a Report by AVOID, Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change, Imperial College London, 2010.

          J. K. Stolaroff, Capturing CO2 from Ambient Air: a Feasibility Assessment, PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,  2006 Search PubMed .

          K. Heidel, G. Holmes, A. Singh and D. W. Keith, Process Design and Costing of an Air-contactor for Air-capture, Information sheet, Carbon Engineering Ltd., Calgary, Canada,  2011 Search PubMed .

Direct Air Capture of CO

2

with Chemicals. A Technology Assessment for the APS Panel on Public Affairs, American Physical Society (APS), available at http://www.aps.org, 2011.

          D. W. Keith and M. Mahmoudkhani, US Pat. Appl., 2010/0034724,  2010 Search PubMed .

          D. W. Keith, M. Mahmoudkhani, A. Biglioli, B. Hart, K. Heidel and M. Foniok, US Pat. Appl., 2010/0064890 A1,  2010 Search PubMed .
Carbon Engineering Inc., http://www.carbonengineering.com, accessed 15/02/2014.

          A. B. Wright, K. S. Lackner, B. Wright, M. Wallen, U. Ginster and E. J. Peters, US Pat., 8,088,197,  2012 Search PubMed .

          A. B. Wright and E. J. Peters, US Pat., 7.993,432,  2011 Search PubMed .

          K. S. Lackner and A. Wright, US Pat., 7,833,328,  2010 Search PubMed .
Kilimanjaro Energy Inc., http://www.kilimanjaroenergy.com/, accessed 14/02/2014.
Global Thermostat, http://www.globalthermostat.com, accessed 15/02/2014.
Climeworks, http://www.climeworks.com/, accessed 15/02/2014.

          C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher and A. Steinfeld, Eur. Pat. Appl., 2266680A1,  2010 Search PubMed .

          M. Specht and A. Bandi, Forschungsverbund Sonnenenergie, Themen 1994–1995, Energiespeicherung,  1995, p. 41 Search PubMed .

          J. Pasel, R. Peters and M. Specht, Forschungsverbund Sonnenenergie, Themen 1999-2000: Zukunftstechnologie Brennstoffzelle, Berlin, Germany,  2000, p. 46 Search PubMed .

          K. R. Williams and N. Van Lookeren Campagne, Symposium on Non-Fossil Chemical Fuels, Fuel Chem. Div., Symposium Proceedings, ACS meeting, Boston, April 9–14, 1972, p. 17.

          M. Steinberg, Symposium on Non-Fossil Chemical Fuels, Fuel Chem. Div., Symposium Proceedings, ACS meeting, Boston, April 9–14, 1972, p. 1.

          R. B. Polak and M. Steinberg, US Pat. Appl., 2012/0003722A1,  2012 Search PubMed .
S. R. Sherman, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2009, 28, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .

          J. F. Martin and W. L. Kubic, Green Freedom - A Concept for Producing Carbon-Neutral Synthetic Fuels and Chemicals, LA-UR-07-7897, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, 2007.
S. Stucki, A. Schuler and M. Constantinescu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1995, 20, 653–663 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weimer, K. Schaber, M. Specht and A. Bandi, Energy Convers. Manage., 1996, 37, 1351–1356 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Goldberg, K. S. Lackner, P. Han, A. L. Slagle and T. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 7521–7529 CAS .

Production of Bio-Methanol. Technology Brief 108, IEA-ETSAP and IRENA, 2013.

          C. N. Hamelinck and A. P. C. Faaij, Production of Methanol from Biomass, Utrecht University, NWS-E-2006-387, 2006.
G. H. Huisman, G. L. M. A. Van Rens, H. De Lathouder and R. L. Cornelissen, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, S155–S166 CrossRef .

          D. C. C. Barrañon, Methanol and Hydrogen Production: Energy and Cost Analysis, Master thesis, Div. of Energy Engineering, Dept. of Applied Physics, Mechanical and Material Engineering, Luleå University, of Technology,  2006 Search PubMed .
S. Sarkar, A. Kumar and A. Sultana, Energy, 2011, 36, 6251–6262 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tock, M. Gassner and F. Maréchal, Biomass Bioenergy, 2010, 34, 1838–1854 CrossRef CAS .
B. Amigun, J. Gorgens and H. Knoetze, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 312–322 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Ekbom, N. Berglin and S. Lögdberg, Black Liquor Gasification with Motor Fuel Production - BLGMF II. A Techno-Economic Feasibility Study on Catalytic Fischer–Tropsch Synthesis for Synthetic Diesel Production in Comparison with Methanol and DME as Transport Fuels, Report P21384-1, Swedish Energy Agency, 2005.

          A. E. Hokanson and R. M. Rowell, Methanol from Wood Waste: A Technical and Economic Study, General Technical Report FPL 12, Forest Products Laboratory, Forest Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1977.
J. Xiao, L. Shen, Y. Zhang and J. Gu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 9999–10007 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, C. A. Henao, T. A. Johnson, D. E. Dedrick, J. E. Miller, E. B. Stechel and C. T. Maravelias, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3122–3132 CAS .
D. Mignard, M. Sahibzada, J. M. Duthie and H. W. Whittington, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 455–464 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Rudberg, The Future of 2nd Generation Biofuels in Europe. Toward a New Vision for the Pulp and Paper Mill, Answers from the RENEW Project to the Biofuel Debate, Brussels, September 15th, 2008.

Economic Analysis -LPMEOH Process as an add-on to IGCC, prepared for the US DOE, Federal Energy Technology Center by Air Products and Chemicals Inc., 1998.

Commercial-Scale Demonstration of the Liquid Phase Methanol (LPMEOH™) Process. Project Performance Summary. Clean Coal Technology Demonstration Program, DOE/FE-0470, Air Product Liquid Phase Conversion Company, 2004.

          T. Ekbom, M. Lindblom, N. Berglin and P. Ahlvik, Technical and Commercial Feasibility Study of Black Liquor Gasification with Methanol/DME Production as Motor Fuels for Automotive Uses - BLGMF, Altener Program of the European Union, 2003.

          E. C. Heydorn, B. W. Diamond and R. D. Lilly, Commercial-Scale Demonstration of the Liquid Phase Methanol (LPMEOH™) Process: Final Report, prepared for Air Products Liquid Phase Conversion Company and the US DOE National Energy Technology Laboratory under cooperative
agreement No. DE-FC22-92PC90543, 2003.

          G. M. Intille, Predicting Chemical Profitability in the Chemical Industry – New Breakthrough Chemical Manufacturing Technologies, SRI Consulting,  2003 Search PubMed .

          G. Kraaij, RES-FC Market - Status and Cost of the Technology Options, Final Report, ECN, 2008.

          V. Roan, D. Betts, A. Twining, K. Dinh, P. Wassink and T. Simmons, An Investigation of the Feasibility of Coal-Based Methanol for Application in Transportation Fuel Cell System, Final Report, University of Florida, Gainesville, 2004.

          M. Ohlstrøm, T. Maekinen, J. Laurikko and R. Pipatti, New Concepts for Biofuels in Transportation: Biomass-Based Methanol Production and Reduced Emissions in Advanced Vehicles, Valtion Teknillinen Tutkimuskeskus (VTT) Energy, Finland,  2001 Search PubMed .

Office of Fossil Energy - Hydrogen Program Plan; Hydrogen from Natural Gas and Coal: The Road to a Sustainable Energy Future, Hydrogen Coordination Group, 2003.

          D. R. Simbeck and E. Chang, Hydrogen Supply: Cost Estimate for Hydrogen Pathways - Scoping Analysis, National Renewable Energy Laboratory NREL/SR-540-32525, Golden, Colorado, 2002.

          J. Ivy, Summary of Electrolytic Hydrogen Production, Milestone Completion Report, NREL/MP-560-35948, NREL, Golden, Colorado, April 2004.

Renewables Information 2013, International Energy Agency, OECD, Paris, 2013.
C. L. Archer and M. Z. Jacobson, J. Geophys. Res., 2005, 110, D12110 CrossRef .

Global Wind Report. Annual Market Update 2012, Global Wind Energy Council, 2013.

Technology Roadmap. Wind Energy, International Energy Agency, Paris, 2013.

The Hydrogen Economy, Opportunities, Costs, Barriers, and R&D Needs, National Research Council and National Academy of Engineering, The National Academies Press, Washington D.C., 2004.

          E. Liu, Large Scale Wind Hydrogen Systems, General Electric Global Research,  2003 Search PubMed .
Energinet, Danish grid operator website, http://energinet.dk, accessed 15/02/2014.
C. Jørgensen and S. Ropenus, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5335–5344 CrossRef .

Renewables Information 2007, International Energy Agency, OECD, Paris, 2007.

          A. Pavone, Mega Methanol Plants, Report 43D, Process Economics Program, SRI Consulting, Menlo Park, California, 2003.
Methanex website: http://www.methanex.com/, accessed 15/02/2014.

          K. Law, J. Rosenfeld and M. Jackson, Methanol as a Renewable Energy Resource, White Paper, prepared for the Methanol Institute by TIAX LLC, 2013.
L. Sileghem, A. Coppens, B. Casier, J. Vancoillie and S. Verhelst, Fuel, 2014, 117, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Turner and R. Pearson, proActive Mag., 2011, 42, 27–31.
J. W. Bunger, P. M. Crawford and H. R. Johnson, Oil Gas J., 2004, 102, 16–24 Search PubMed .

          P. Berinstein, Alternative Energy. Facts, Statistics, and Issues, Oryx Press, Westport, Connecticut,  2001 Search PubMed .

          S. Kajitani, Development and promotion of environmental friendly heavy duty vehicles such as DME trucks, Washington, DC,  2006 Search PubMed .

Conference on the Development and Promotion of Environmentally Friendly Heavy Duty Vehicles such as DME Trucks, Washington DC, March 17, 2006.

          A. G. Chaplin, Renewable Methanol. An Analysis of Technological Potentials in Light of the EU Biofuels Policy Objectives of Greenhouse Gas Savings, Security of Supply and Employment, Master's thesis, Sustainable Energy Planning and Management, Aalborg University,  2013 Search PubMed .

Directive 2009/30/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 amending Directive 98/70/EC as regards the specification of petrol, diesel and gas-oil and introducing a mechanism to monitor and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and amending Council Directive 1999/32/EC as regards the specification of fuel used by inland waterway vessels and repealing Directive 93/12/EEC, Official Journal of the European Union, L 140/88, 2009.

Climate Issues in Focus, 2008, AB Volvo, Goteborg, Sweden, 011-949-027, 01-2008 GB, available at http://www.volvogroup.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/Volvo%20AB/values/environment/climate_issues_in_focus_eng.pdf, accessed 21/02/2014.

Well-to-Wheels Analysis of Future Automotive Fuels and Powertrains in the European Context, EUR 24952 EN - 2011, Well-to-Wheels Report, Version 3c, European Commision Joint Research Centre, Institute for Energy and Transport, Concawe, European Council for Automotive R&011.

Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 to Define the Modalities for Reaching the 2020 Target to Reduce CO

2

Emissions From New Passenger Cars, COM (2012) 393 final, European Commission, available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2012:0393:FIN:en:PDF, 2012.

          J. Pont, Full Fuel Cycle Assessment: Well-to-Wheel Energy Inputs, Emissions, and Water Impacts. State Plan to Increase the Use of Non-Petroleum Transportation Fuels AB 1007 (Pavley) Alternative Transportation Fuels Proceeding, Consultant Report, Prepared for the California Energy Commission by TIAX LLC, 2007.

          R. J. Pearson, J. W. G. Turner and A. J. Peck, Gasoline-Ethanol-Methanol Tri-Fuel Vehicle Development and Its Role in Expediting Sustainable Organic Fuels for Transport, Lotus Engineering, Norwich, U.K.,  2009 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Alain Goeppert
	Alain Goeppert obtained his PhD in 2002 from the University of Strasbourg, France. He is currently a research scientist in the Olah/Prakash group at the University of Southern California. His research focuses on methane and CO2 activation and catalytic transformation to products including methanol, dimethyl ether and formic acid. He is also involved in the catalytic decomposition of formic acid to hydrogen and CO2 as well as the development of regenerative sorbents for the separation and capture of CO2 from various sources including the air. He is a co-author of the book “Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy”.

Miklos Czaun
	Miklos Czaun received his chemical engineering degree from the University of Veszprem (Hungary) in 1998 and completed his PhD (Summa Cum Laude, 2003) under the supervision of Prof. Gabor Speier. He joined the research group of Profs. George A. Olah and G. K. Surya Prakash at the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute at University of Southern California in 2009. Presently, he is a Senior Research Associate focused on the development of solid adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture and the conversion of carbon dioxide to synthesis gas (dry-reforming and bi-reforming reactions). He is also interested in carbon neutral energy- and hydrogen storage systems.

John-Paul Jones
	John-Paul Jones is a graduate student in the research group of Professors Prakash and Olah, where he is studying electrochemical CO2 reduction, particularly under pressure. He obtained his Bachelor of Science degree in Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley. After that, he worked for Amyris Biotechnologies in Emeryville, California, where he focused on the development of synthetic replacements for diesel, gasoline, and jet fuels.

G. K. Surya Prakash
	G. K. Surya Prakash received BSc (Honors) (1972) from the Bangalore University, MSc (1974) from IIT, Madras and PhD (1978) from the University of Southern California (USC). After his postdoctoral work at USC, he joined the faculty at USC in 1981 and currently is a Professor and Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute holding the Olah Nobel Laureate Chair in Hydrocarbon Chemistry. His research interests are in fluorination and synthetic methods, mechanistic studies, superacid chemistry, electrochemistry and hydrocarbon chemistry. He is a co-proponent of the Methanol Economy concept, prolific and has received several American Chemical Society National Awards.

George A. Olah
	George A. Olah is a Distinguished Professor of Chemistry and Founding Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Institute at the University of Southern California. His pioneering research on hydrocarbon chemistry and fundamental aspects of carbocations in superacids fetched him the unshared 1994 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. He is prolific with 1400 publications, 20 books and 120 patents. His current research interests are in new energy areas covering chemical carbon dioxide recycling and the derived methanol economy concept. He has received many awards and recognitions including 12 honorary degrees from various universities and memberships in some 20 National Academies and Scientific Societies.

 	Fig. 1  Anthropogenic carbon cycle within the Methanol Economy.	 
CO + 2H2 ⇌ CH3OH ΔH298K = −21.7 kcal mol−1	(1)
CO2 + 3H2 ⇌ CH3OH + H2O ΔH298K = −11.9 kcal mol−1	(2)
CO2 + H2 ⇌ CO + H2O ΔH298K = 9.8 kcal mol−1	(3)
C + 1/2O2 → CO ΔH298K = −29.4 kcal mol−1	(4)
C + H2O ⇌ CO + H2 ΔH298K = 31.3 kcal mol−1	(5)
CO + H2O ⇌ H2 + CO2 ΔH298K = −9.8 kcal mol−1	(6)
CO2 + C ⇌ 2CO ΔH298K = 40.8 kcal mol−1	(7)
CH4 + H2O ⇌ CO + 3H2 ΔH298K = 49.1 kcal mol−1	(8)
CH4 + 1/2O2 → CO + 2H2 ΔH298K = −8.5 kcal mol−1	(9)
H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O ΔH298K = −57.7 kcal mol−1	(10)
CO + 1/2O2 → CO2 ΔH298K = −67.6 kcal mol−1	(11)
CH4 + 2O2 → CO2 + 2H2O ΔH298K = −210.2 kcal mol−1	(12)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of KOGAS tri-reforming process. Based on ref. 43.	 
CO2 + CH4 ⇌ 2CO + 2H2 ΔH298K = 59.1 kcal mol−1	(13)
CO2 + 4H2 ⇌ CH4 + 2H2O ΔH298K = −60.4 kcal mol−1	(14)
2CO ⇌ CO2 + C(s) ΔH298K = −40.8 kcal mol−1	(15)
CH4 ⇌ C(s) + 2H2 ΔH298K = 18.1 kcal mol−1	(16)

 	Fig. 3  Bi-reforming of methane.	 
3CnH2n+2 + (3n − 1)H2O + CO2 ⇌ (3n + 1)CO + (6n + 2)H2	(18)

 	Fig. 4  Oxidative bi-reforming for producing metgas exclusively for methanol synthesis.	 

 	Fig. 5  Carnol process.	 

 	Fig. 6  Combination of methane decomposition with dry reforming.	 

 	Fig. 7  Processes to convert CO2 to methanol using methane.	 

 	Fig. 8  Addition of CO2 to syngas from steam reforming.	 
2CH3OH → CH3OCH3 + H2O ΔH298K = −5.5 kcal mol−1	(20)
2CO + 4H2 → CH3OCH3 + H2O ΔH298K = −49.0 kcal mol−1	(21)
3CO + 3H2 → CH3OCH3 + CO2 ΔH298K = −58.7 kcal mol−1	(22)
2CH4 + O2 + CO2 → 3H2 + 3CO + H2O	(23)

 	Fig. 9  Thermochemical conversion – products and uses. (LHV: lower heating value; MHV: medium heating value). Reproduced with permission from Elsevier from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 10  Simplified schematic illustrating the methanol production from biomass based feedstocks. Based on ref. 77.	 

 	Fig. 11  “Biocrude”.	 

 	Fig. 12  Methanol/DME synthesis based on electrolysis assisted gasification of wood. From ref. 120.	 

 	Fig. 13  Methanol production concept from biogas and H2via SOEC using wind energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122.	 

 	Fig. 14  Catalyst surface and functionality of the various surface sites on Cu/ZrO2 and Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 under CO2 hydrogenation conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211.	 

 	Scheme 1  Micro-kinetic model of the methanol synthesis. * represents a free surface site and X* symbolizes the adsorbed atom or molecule X. Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from Springer.	 

 	Scheme 2  Micro-kinetic model of the methanol synthesis from CO2 and H2 on Cu proposed by Grabow et al. based on DFT calculations. * represents a free surface site and X* symbolizes the adsorbed atom or molecule X. Based on ref. 258.	 

 	Fig. 15  Potential energy surface of methanol synthesis via CO2 hydrogenation. To improve legibility, H* was omitted from the labels after the adsorption of six H atoms in the first step. The black line indicates the lowest-energy pathway through the HCOO*, HCOOH*, CH3O2*, CH2O*, and CH3O* intermediates. The main intermediates along the red path are HCOO*, H2CO2*, CH2O*, and CH2OH*. The two dashed horizontal lines indicate the desorption barriers of HCOOH and CH2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Most common combinations of supports and additives used for Cu based heterogeneous catalysts for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol.	 

 	Fig. 17  Hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol in a cascade system.275	 

 	Fig. 18  Methanol production by indirect hydrogenation of CO2.	 

 	Fig. 19  NHC-catalyzed reduction of CO2 and the subsequent hydrolytic liberation of methanol.	 

 	Fig. 20  Lewis acid/Lewis base-catalyzed hydrogenation of CO2.	 

 	Fig. 21  FLP-catalyzed reduction of CO2 to methanol using borane derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 22  Two step reduction of CO2 to methanol with Schwarz's reagent.	 

 	Fig. 23  Catalytic reduction of CO2 with catecholborane over Ni–PCP catalyst.288	 

 	Fig. 24  Comparison of Ni-catalyzed CO2 reduction with catecholborane and NHC-catalyzed CO2 reduction with silanes.289 Note: “Exp.” stands for experimentally observed species.	 

 	Fig. 25  Reduction of CO2 to methanol with catecholborane in the presence of a phosphine–borane organocatalyst.290	 

 	Fig. 26  Al(C6H4(o-PPh2))3-catalyzed reduction of CO2 with catecholborane.291	 

 	Fig. 27  Ruthenium tris(aminophosphine)-catalyzed reduction of CO2 to methanol with pinacolborane (PinBH).294	 

 	Fig. 28  CO2 reduction to a borate ester with pinacolborane in the presence of [RuH2(H2)2(PCy3)2] (Cy = cyclohexyl).296	 

 	Fig. 29  Light-driven multicomponent system for CO2 reduction to MeOH.298	 

 	Fig. 30  The “George Olah Renewable Methanol Plant” of Carbon Recycling International (CRI) in Iceland. Based on local geothermal energy and CO2. Courtesy: K. C. Tran (CRI).	 

CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.11
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.10
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → CH2O + H2O	−0.028
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	+0.031
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	+0.17

Formic acid	CO2(aq) + H2O(l) → HCOOH(aq) + 1/2O2(g)	1.496
Formate	CO2(aq) + OH−(aq) → HCOO−(aq) + 1/2O2(g)	1.207
Carbon monoxide	CO2(aq) → CO(g) + 1/2O2(g)	1.567

 	Fig. 31  Mechanism for electrochemical CO2 reduction on metal surfaces in water.	 


1	
n-GaAs	−1.06	MeOH	1.0	0.16	
334
	Sat. Na2SO4
2	
p-GaAs	−1.06	MeOH	0.52	0.08	
334
	Sat. Na2SO4
3	
p-InP	−1.06	MeOH	0.8	0.06	
334
	Sat. Na2SO4
4	Mo	−0.56	MeOH	84	0.12	
351
	0.2 M Na2SO4
5	CuO	−1.3	MeOH	28	6.9	
352
	0.5 M KHCO3
6	Pt–Ru/C	−0.06	MeOH	7.5	0.4	
353
	Flow cell
7	Pd	−0.51	MeOH	30	0.04	
354
	0.5 M NaClO4 + pyridine
8a	
n-GaP	−0.06	MeOH	90	0.27	
343
	10 mM pyridine pH 5.2
9	RuO2/TiO2 nanotubes	−0.6	MeOH	60	1	
355
	0.5 M NaHCO3

 	Fig. 32  Two electron reduction of CO2 to CO with concomitant H2 evolution for subsequent production of methanol.	 

 	Fig. 33  Two electron reduction of CO2 to formic acid with subsequent esterification to methyl formate and further hydrogenation to methanol.	 

 	Fig. 34  The dependence of the faradaic efficiencies of reduction products on the CO2 pressure in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 on a Ag-GDE at 300 mA cm−2 in 0.5 mol dm−3 KHCO3: (○) CO, (□) HCOO−, (●) H2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 371.	 

 	Fig. 35  Example of a flow electrolyzer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 372.	 

 	Fig. 36  Pyridinium radical complex interacting with CO2, from ref. 356.	 

 	Fig. 37  Possible interaction between ionic liquid and CO2.	 


1	Ag	−1.02	300	CO	86	
371
	0.5 M KHCO3	20 atm CO2
2	Au/C	−2.22	200	CO	64	
315
	0.5 M KHCO3	Flow PEM Cell
3	Sn	−1.19	163	HCOO−	92	
367
	0.1 M KHCO3	30 atm CO2
4	Pb	−1.37	163	HCOO−	96	
367
	0.1 M KHCO3	30 atm CO2
5	Co-TPP	−0.88	100	CO	97	
376
	0.5 M KHCO3	Metal porphyrin catalyst, 20 atm CO2
6	
p-InP	−2.7	100	CO	93	
393
	MeOH	Photoelectrochemical, 40 atm CO2
7	Ag	−2.96	100	CO	53	
394
	0.5 M K2SO4	Static PEM cell
8	Ag	−3.5a	80	CO	33	
395
	0.5 M KHCO3	Flow PEM cell
9	Sn	−2.7a	60	HCOO−	91	
344
	0.45 M KHCO3 + 2 M KCl	Flow PEM cell
10	40 wt% Ag/TiO2	−1.6	100	CO	90	
396
	1 M KOH	Flow cell


1	Ni/ScSZ	800	1.15	7:14:19:0:61	50	230	
397
	Button cell
2	Ni/Sc/SZ	800	1.4	12:12.7:11.4:0:63.3	62	188	
397
	Stack
3	Ni/YSZ	800	1.3	1:1:2:0:0	n/a	1000	
402
	

4	LSCM/YSZ	900	2.25a	0:9:0:1:0	n/a	540	
403
	Three electrodes
5	LSCM/GDC	900	2.25a	0:9:0:1:0	n/a	610	
403
	Three electrodes
6	Ni/YSZ	900	2.25a	0:9:0:1:0	n/a	800	
403
	Three electrodes
7	Ni/YSZ	850	1.25	0:1:1:1:1	n/a	900	
404
	

8	BCZYZ	614	2.65	0:1:0:0:0	29.5	1500	
400
	Proton conductor

 	Fig. 38  Water electrolysis in acid and base.	 

 	Fig. 39  Alkaline electrolysis cell.	 

 	Fig. 40  Capital Cost Breakdown of PEM Electrolyzer (MEA: membrane electrode assembly). Reprinted with permission from ref. 410.	 

 	Fig. 41  Methanol production form CO2 by sequential electrochemical reduction to FA, FA decomposition and metgas conversion to methanol.	 

 	Fig. 42  Solar thermochemical cycle for metal oxide-assisted reduction of CO2 to CO. MxOy: metal oxide with the metal in its higher oxidation state, MmOn: metal oxide with the metal in its lower oxidation state.	 
	(24)

 	Fig. 43  Currently favored carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) processes from fossil fuel burning power plants. Adapted from ref. 452.	 

 	Fig. 44  CO2 separation and capture technologies.	 

 	Fig. 45  Examples of prototypes and proposed designs for the separation of CO2 from the air. (a) Prototype for CO2 capture from the air. Reproduced by permission of Kilimanjaro Energy. (b) Solid amine based swing bed for CO2 removal in human spaceflights. Currently undergoing tests in the International Space Station (ISS). Reproduced by permission of NASA. Courtesy J. C. Graf. (c) Artist rendering of an atmospheric CO2 capture contactor. Reproduced by permission of Carbon Engineering. (d) Artist rendering of an array of atmospheric CO2 capture units also known as Synthetic Trees. Reproduced by permission of Stonehaven Production. (e) Artist rendering of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air using an anionic exchange resin and regeneration by moisture swing. Reproduced by permission of Kilimanjaro Energy. (f) Construction of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air in Alberta, Canada. Reproduced by permission of Carbon Engineering.4 Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 3  Methanol from atmospheric CO2 and water in the Green Freedom™ process.	 
2KOH + CO2 → K2CO3 + H2O

 		 

 	Fig. 46  Production costs and production capacity of (Bio-)methanol for various feedstocks from the literature. Source: IRENA analysis.547 Excludes co-feed set-ups; all costs converted to 2010 Euro values using national GDP deflators (World Bank); assumed Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) average inflation if no specific region is mentioned; assumed 8000 operational hours per year (if necessary); for costs beyond 2010, 2.5% annual inflation was assumed (OECD average for 1995–2010). Based on ref. 22, 80, 91, 105, 108, 117, 118, 165, 548–557 and 560–567. Reproduced with permission of IRENA from ref. 547.	 

 	Fig. 47  Cost-competitiveness of selected renewable power technologies, before credit for carbon savings (Source: IEA).579	 

 	Fig. 48  Share in OECD non-hydro renewable electricity in 2012 (Source: IEA).571	 

 	Fig. 49  Annual growth rates of electricity production between 1990 and 2012 in OECD countries (Source: IEA).571	 

 	Fig. 50  WTW GHG emissions of renewable methanol and comparative fossil and biofuel pathways (gCO2e per MJ). Reproduced with permission from ref. 589.	 

 	Fig. 51  Possible transition to a sustainable fuel future based on methanol and derived products. Based on ref. 595.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
