The prospects of developing a highly energy-efficient water electrolyser by eliminating or mitigating bubble effects  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE01886D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01886D
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1280-1310The prospects of developing a highly energy-efficient water electrolyser by eliminating or mitigating bubble effects

        
          
            Gerhard F. 
            Swiegers
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Richard N. L. 
            Terrett
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            George 
            Tsekouras
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Takuya 
            Tsuzuki
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ronald J. 
            Pace
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Robert 
            Stranger
          
        
      b
aIntelligent Polymer Research Institute, ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterial Science, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. E-mail: swiegers@uow.edu.au
bComputational Quantum Chemistry Group, Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia. E-mail: Richard.Terrett@anu.edu.au
cResearch School of Electrical, Energy and Materials Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia
Received 
      23rd December 2020
    , Accepted 29th January 2021First published on 10th February 2021AbstractHighly efficient and inexpensive electrochemical splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen gas constitutes the most critical capability needed for the development of a future hydrogen economy based on renewable energy. This work considers the prospects of developing a commercially-feasible water electrolyser with 95–100% energy efficiency (relative to the Higher Heating Value, HHV, of hydrogen) at the cells in the near future. We show that at least a 5–10% improvement in energy efficiency over the best, existing commercial water electrolysers would be needed. The elimination or mitigation of the direct and indirect energy losses arising from bubble formation in electrolysers would produce the needed energy savings. This work reviews the many strategies that have been proposed to improve the efficiency and cost of water electrolysers in that respect. Innovations in electrolyser design and engineering that seek to avoid the indirect losses are described, particularly innovations in the balance-of-plant that supports the electrolysis cells in an electrolyser. Thereafter, approaches aiming to avoid the direct energy losses are discussed, including: (1) the creation of hydrophobic locations on electrode surfaces to advantageously control where bubbles form and release, (2) the use of gas capillary actions to directly extract gas through a porous hydrophobic membrane as it is created, before bubbles form, (3) the creation of a superwetting surface morphology on electrodes to accelerate and control bubble dynamics, (4) the modification of the liquid electrolyte and its interface with the electrode surface to promote bubble formation and release, (5) sonication of the electrolyte to assist in bubble detachment and mass transport, (6) centrifuging to create a supergravity field within an electrolyser that maintains the electrodes and inter-electrode space free of bubbles, (7) rapidly pumping electrolyte over electrode surfaces to remove and separate bubbles as soon as they are formed, (8) applying continuous pressure swings to dynamically alter the buoyancy of the bubbles and thereby accelerate their release and removal; and (9) the use of magnetic fields to accelerate gas bubble detachment and transport. A combination of such an approach, coupled with innovative engineering to diminish the balance of plant, may potentially provide the improvements needed to realise truly energy-efficient, low-cost electrolysers.
Introduction
The electrolytic splitting of water (H2O) into hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) is a field of intense research interest as it offers a route to the production of hydrogen using renewable energy, thereby avoiding reliance on exhaustible fossil fuels. Hydrogen is attractive as a potential fuel because it is carbon-neutral; i.e. it does not release carbon dioxide (CO2) upon combustion. The secular increase in the atmospheric concentration of CO2 since the industrial revolution has been identified as the key driver of anthropogenic climate change, as well as ocean acidification and sea level rise.1
The proposition that hydrogen could serve as a non-polluting and carbon-free energy carrier has formed the basis of innumerable proposals for a future ‘hydrogen economy’.2 As far back as 1874, author Jules Verne envisioned a world where “water will one day be employed as a fuel, that hydrogen and oxygen, which constitute it, used singly or together, will furnish an inexhaustible source of heat and light”.3
While hydrogen may have captured the public imagination, in 2006 Ulf Bossel raised a very pertinent question;4 namely: does a hydrogen economy make sense? In his exposition, Bossel argued that the high energy losses involved in generating hydrogen from renewable energy, as well as consuming it,made it fundamentally unfeasible as an energy carrier when compared with electricity (stored in batteries, for example) (Fig. 1).4 In particular, he observed that the sheer energy intensity and inefficiency of producing hydrogen by electrolysis was highly unfavourable when compared with storing electricity.4 He argued that this relative inefficiency undermined the case for hydrogen as a future carrier of renewable energy, at least when compared to electricity.4 His analysis did not take into account the relative capital costs and storage capacities of the technologies.
 Fig. 1  Ulf Bossel's 2006 flow-chart comparing hydrogen as a carrier of stored renewable energy with electricity (in the form of batteries). The energy efficiency of each step in the storage process, as of 2006, is shown in round brackets. As can be seen, for every 100 kW h of renewable electricity, 77 kW h could be captured and stored in the form of electricity in batteries, whereas, at best, only 51 kW h could be stored in the form of renewable hydrogen. This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 4 with permission from the IEEE, copyright 2006. (AC = alternating current; DC = direct current.†) 
At the time, in 2006, the most energy-efficient commercial water electrolysers were Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) electrolysers. They operated at current densities of ∼2000 mA cm−2 and cell potentials of ∼2.00 V at 80 °C.4 Given that 100% energy efficiency, according to the Higher Heating Value (HHV) of hydrogen, is the thermoneutral voltage of electrolysis (1.48 V at 25 °C; 1.47 V at 80 °C), this equated to an energy efficiency across the electrolysis cells of ∼75% HHV† (shown in the ‘Electrolysis’ block in Fig. 1). In the electrolyser industry, this is generally termed the stack efficiency since it considers only the net energy losses across the electrodes in the cells that comprise the electrolyser stack. There were further energy losses in the balance of plant (also called the balance of system), which is the engineering system that supports and controls the electrolysis cells. These included the energy consumed by the pumps, the gas–liquid separators and the power supply (‘AC–DC Conversion’ block in Fig. 1),† which typically amounted to, at best, a further ∼5% of the input electrical energy. Such electrolysers therefore had an overall system efficiency of ∼70% HHV.† A further 10% of the input electrical energy was said to be lost in compressing the hydrogen (‘Compression’ block in Fig. 1) and 20% in transporting it to its storage location (left-most ‘Transport/transfer’ block in Fig. 1).
The process of storing renewable energy in the form of hydrogen, according to Bossel, therefore had a net efficiency of, at best, ∼51% (left-most branch in Fig. 1).4 That is, for every 100 kW h of renewable energy consumed, the produced hydrogen would contain 51 kW h of energy (Fig. 1, left-most branch). About half of the renewable energy would be lost in the storage process. By comparison, the losses in storing electricity as an energy carrier were substantially lower. For every 100 kW h of input renewable energy, the electrical energy carrier would contain around 77 kW h of energy (Fig. 1, right-hand branch),4 which is 26 kW h more than the stored energy in the hydrogen energy carrier.
The key difference between hydrogen and electricity as energy carriers was therefore the inefficiency of water electrolysers. For hydrogen to compete with electricity as an energy carrier, electrolysers would need to produce hydrogen directly at the storage location with stack efficiencies of ≥95% (HHV),† not 75%. For example, if an electrolyser capable of operating commercially at 95–100% stack efficiency could be developed, its produced, compressed hydrogen would store 81–86 kW h out of every 100 kW h input in the hydrogen it generated. Such values would be competitive with electricity as an energy carrier and would, arguably, be essential to the creation of a broad-based hydrogen economy. The higher energy density of hydrogen (141.86 MJ kg−1) relative to, for example, Li ion batteries (0.59–1.06 MJ kg−1) may, of course, favour hydrogen over electricity in particular sectors regardless of the relative storage efficiencies.
In this work we consider the near-term prospects of developing such a high-efficiency water electrolyser. There have been important advances in electrolyser and hydrogen technologies since 2006. The issue of hydrogen storage and transport, which was a major concern in 2006, has today been largely addressed by the development of light-weight, high-pressure carbon fibre tanks and the use of the gas grid to store hydrogen.5 Current densities of ∼1000 mA cm−2 are now considered potentially commercially viable for PEM electrolysers, while ∼500 mA cm−2 are widely used in commercial alkaline electrolysers. At 80 °C, the best commercial alkaline electrolysers today require ∼1.75–1.80 V at 500 mA cm−2 (82–84% HHV† stack energy efficiency) while the best commercial or near-commercial PEM electrolysers require ∼1.64–1.72 V at 1000 mA cm−2 (∼85–90% HHV† stack energy efficiency) (Fig. 2).6,7 The latter is only 5–10% short of the required 95–100% HHV.†
 Fig. 2  The best reported (two-electrode) polarization curves at 80 °C and atmospheric pressure, for:6 (a) and (b) alkaline electrolysers; (c)–(g) PEM electrolysers with inter-electrode ionomer membranes of thickness: (c) ∼183 μm (Nafion 117), (d) and (e) ∼125 μm (Nafion 115), (f) and (g) ∼50 μm (Nafion 212); and (h) alkaline exchange membrane electrolysers. Curve (g) depicts the likely maximum, iR-corrected limit of performance of modern-day electrolysers. These curves represent measures of the stack efficiency of the electrolysers and do not take account of all of the losses in the system. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
While a 5–10% improvement may sound like a relatively small gap, overcoming it will be non-trivial. Given that 95–100% HHV† equates to a cell potential of 1.47–1.53 V, the voltage needed to produce 1000 mA cm−2 in the best commercial PEM electrolysers would have to decline by 0.11–0.25 V. That equates to a ∼4- to 20-fold increase in current density at 1.47–1.53 V, as the best present-day electrolysers generate only ∼100–290 mA cm−2 at these potentials (Fig. 2(a)–(e)). Even larger increases would be needed in alkaline systems. Such amplifications exceed those realised in the best commercial electrolysers over the last 20 years, which raises the question: are there any known inefficiencies in present-day electrolysers that, if overcome, could provide the required improvements in the near future?
There is, in fact, one such inefficiency; namely, the effect of gas bubble formation and release. When gas bubbles form on an electrode in an electrolyser, they create a so-called ‘bubble curtain’ (Fig. 3(a)) that masks the catalytic surface, hindering access of the electrolyte and increasing ohmic resistance in the inter-electrode gap. In so doing, the energy efficiency of the electrolyser is diminished. Recent experiments in which electrolysers were centrifuged to create a “supergravity” environment that maintained the electrode surfaces and inter-electrode volume scrupulously free of gas bubbles during operation, increased their (stack) energy efficiencies by 9–17% HHV† at current densities of >500 mA cm−2.8 That is, eliminating the presence of the gas bubbles amplified the energy efficiency of the electrolysers by more than the 5–10% that would be needed to make hydrogen competitive with stored electricity as an energy carrier.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photograph of a ‘bubble curtain’ on a vertically-disposed plate electrode, showing the bubble froth that is created about and above the electrode; (b) schematic illustrating bubble formation and release dynamics, and strategies for modifying these dynamics, with their domains of applicability. 
Other studies, using other techniques and other cell types, have also reported significant losses in energy efficiency due to bubble formation, including ≥11.9% (water electrolysis),6 10–25% (water electrolysis),9 a 0.09 V higher voltage than needed in the absence of bubbles (water electrolysis at 10 mA cm−2),10 a ∼20% higher voltage than needed (chlor-alkali electrolysis at >600 mA cm−2)11,12 a 0.15–0.35 V higher voltage than needed (aluminium production at 300–900 mA cm−2),13–15 and a 0.08 V higher voltage than needed (chlorate electrolysis with bubble coverage of the cathode only).16 In summary, a significant body of evidence suggests that gas bubble formation substantially increases the voltage and decreases the energy efficiency of electrochemical processes, including water electrolysis.17–21
Eliminating bubble formation or its effects may therefore provide a potential pathway to a high-efficiency electrolyser. While the significance of bubble formation has not enjoyed widespread recognition to date, there have, in fact, been a large number of studies addressing this issue, both directly and indirectly in various guises in the past. In this work, we review the different methodologies that have been examined. Design and engineering innovations that address the indirect losses are considered first, followed by approaches to the direct losses. We further consider the likelihood that one or more of these could be successfully exploited to create a highly efficient, inexpensive electrolyser in the future.
Energy and economic losses due to gas bubbles
Direct energy losses due to gas bubbles
Bubble formation on electrodes may be considered to go through the four stages depicted across the top of Fig. 3(b), namely:17,22,23 (1) bubble nucleation, (2) bubble growth, (3) bubble detachment, and (4) mass transport of the bubbles away from the electrode and out of the inter-electrode space.24,25
Gas-generating electrodes in electrolysers create bubbles by supersaturating the liquid electrolyte about the electrode with dissolved gas. Hydrogen and oxygen are only poorly soluble in water, with equilibrium saturation concentrations of ∼0.000817 mol kg−1 (H2) and ∼0.00133 mol kg−1 (O2) at 20 °C.26 They also have low diffusion constants (∼0.0000317 cm2 s−1 (H2) and ∼0.0000178 cm2 s−1 (O2) at 20 °C).27 So, gas generated by an electrode has, effectively, no way to escape the vicinity of the electrode and instead supersaturates the adjacent electrolyte until gas bubbles are formed. The diffusion rates of supersaturated gases in liquid electrolytes are unknown, however they may be considerable given the high levels of supersaturation that appear to be needed in order to sustain bubble generation.
Numerous studies of supersaturation at gas evolving electrodes have been undertaken. Bon measured a supersaturation of 60 atm for hydrogen at a current density of 40 mA cm−2 at a hydrogen generating electrode.28 Shibata used a galvanostatic transient technique and found the hydrogen supersaturation to be 160 atm at 200 mA cm−2 while the oxygen supersaturation was 70 atm at 100 mA cm−2.29 Janssen and colleagues later measured smaller supersaturations for oxygen in alkaline solution, however their results were likely compromised by their technique, which involved a rotating ring cone electrode from which oxygen was readily lost.30
In practice, the level of gas supersaturation near an electrode depends on many factors, including but not limited to: the reactor and electrode geometry, the wettability of the electrode, the applied current density, the volume/size/shapes/topologies of the other bubbles present, the flow field employed, the time elapsed since the start of electrolysis,31 the electrolyte used, and whether the bubbles nucleate homogeneously (i.e. in open solution near the electrode) or on the heterogeneous surface of the electrode.17 Modestino and Rivas have recently reviewed bubble evolution dynamics, including the levels of supersaturation and the factors at play.17
Perhaps the most definitive studies of late have been those of White and colleagues who used electrodes of radius 7–41 nm to determine that individual hydrogen nanobubbles only nucleate at a Pt electrode surface when the supersaturation concentration reaches ∼0.21 M, which is ∼257-fold larger than the equilibrium saturation concentration at atmospheric pressure.32 That is, an H2 supersaturation of 257 atm was needed for nucleation. The bubble size at nucleation was 4.4–5.3 nm, which corresponded to a remarkable internal pressure of 270–330 atm.32 Oxygen nanobubble formation required a supersaturation concentration of ∼0.17 M, which equated to an O2 supersaturation of ∼130 atm.33
The additional voltage required to generate high supersaturations (formally referred to as the concentration overpotential) is not the only additional energy required as a result of bubble formation at an electrode surface. Beyond nucleation, the growth and detachment of gas bubbles at water oxidising or hydrogen reducing electrodes also diminishes the energy efficiency of electrolysis because, amongst others, it:17,34
(1) Decreases the effective surface area of the electrode as a result of the masking effect of the bubble/s, which create a bubble curtain (as noted earlier). This impedes access by the electrolyte to the electrode surface until the bubble/s are released, creating an energy loss. Because this form of loss has been common to all electrodes, it has generally been considered in the field to form part of the activation overpotential,17 which, conventionally, is the overpotential required to overcome the activation energy of the reaction;
(2) Decreases the conductivity of the electrolyte since the bubbles are non-conducting voids, causing a voltage drop between the electrodes. In particular, the bubbles obstruct the movement of ions along ion conduction pathways between the electrodes, leading to a depletion or a build-up of ionic species at the electrode surface, including changes in pH (formally referred to as the ohmic overpotential);17,35
(3) Causes a non-uniform current distribution,36,37 resulting in constriction of the current to particular, limited portions of the electrode surface (formally referred to as the hyperpolarization overpotential of the electrode);
(4) Increases the catalytic overpotential because of the free energy cost of bubble growth (in addition to bubble nucleation);
(5) Influences or controls the flux (mass transfer) of gas away from the electrodes;38 that is, much of the gas is transported away in the form of gas bubbles that may be subject to external influences, such as buoyancy,39 electrophoretic motion in the electric field between the electrodes, or deliberate pumping of the liquid electrolyte over the electrode surface to continuously sweep the bubbles away.40 The wake created by departing bubbles may also contribute to local mixing and decrease of the concentration gradients;17
(6) May be detrimentally affected by a diverse range of other factors, such as mass transfer of dissolved gas to the bubbles during bubble growth, and electrolyte surface tension and solution-capillary flow effects during detachment and release.17 For example, low detachment rates41 and even the space between the electrodes can affect the efficiency of gas generation.42
The combination of all of the overpotential contributions due to the formation, growth, and release of gas bubbles at an electrode, including the overpotentials associated with the above factors, has been termed the bubble overpotential.43 To date, estimates of such bubble overpotentials have been notable by their rarity, due, undoubtedly, to the difficulty of distinguishing bubble-related from unrelated contributions to overall overpotential. However, as noted in the Introduction, some estimates have been made.6,8–16 These have generally been substantial, falling in the range 80–350 mV for a number of different electrochemical processes. For water electrolysis specifically, they have fallen in the range from a low of 90 mV (at 10 mA cm−2) to a high of 308 mV (at >500 mA cm−2), which represents an efficiency loss of 7–25% when measured against the Lower Heating Value (LHV) of hydrogen that considers only the electrical energy and not the heat energy present in hydrogen. Certainly, the fact that electrolysis of seawater (pH 8.4) leads to the production of relatively soluble chlorine gas (Cl2; Eo 1.36 V) at the anode rather than the thermodynamically expected, but poorly soluble oxygen gas (O2; Eo 1.23 V) indicates that the overpotential due to the formation of bubbles of oxygen is at least 130 mV under standard conditions.6
In summary, bubble nucleation, growth and release encompass an extraordinarily complex set of phenomena that may be influenced by an extensive array of possible interacting factors. It should perhaps then be no surprise that, while numerous studies17,44 have sought to develop accurate theoretical models for bubble generating processes and their influence on electrode performance, predicting and modelling bubble behaviour has been a very challenging task. This has, in turn, made it difficult to optimize and control bubble processes with a view to minimizing their energy losses.
One common, simplified approach that has been used in this regard has been to relate the relative conductance between the electrodes and the mean void fraction (i.e. the fraction of the inter-electrode volume that is bubbles) using the Bruggeman equation (eqn (1)) (Fig. 4):22,37 κ = κ0(1 − ε)3/2(1)where κ0 is the intrinsic conductivity of the electrolyte, and ε is the volumetric void fraction of the electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  Reduction in the conductivity κ of liquid electrolyte with void fraction, κ = κ0(1 − ε)3/2, where κ0 is the intrinsic conductivity of the electrolyte, and ε is the volumetric void fraction of the electrolyte. Bubbles are considered to be insulators. After the model used by Mandin.37 
A number of studies have examined the utility of this approach to improving the performance of gas-generating cells; these studies have generally been somewhat critical of the Bruggeman equation insofar as it relates to water electrolysis, with numerous adjustments and modifications proposed.45–49
Indirect energy and economic losses due to gas bubbles
The involvement of gas bubbles not only diminishes the fundamental energy efficiency of electrolysers, it also adds substantial costs and complexity to their design, as well as to their fabrication, operation, and maintenance. These consequential disadvantages of gas bubbles have not been widely appreciated to date, particularly by the academic community. Indeed, consultation of the scientific literature reveals an almost complete absence of studies addressing these issues. They are, nevertheless, highly significant and have undoubtedly severely impeded the development of high-efficiency and low-cost electrolysers.
For example, until fairly recently, the problem of gas bubbles masking electrode surfaces had the outcome that traditional alkaline electrolysers that utilized buoyancy as the motive force for bubble release, were limited to current densities as low as 185 mA cm−2 in order to achieve acceptable efficiencies. This had the further effect that, to generate industrially useful quantities of hydrogen, the electrodes needed to be very large – larger than 1 m in diameter in some cases. The sheer volume of metal in such electrodes (typically Ni or Ni-coated stainless steel), as well as their housings, fittings, piping, busbars and their balance of plant in general, added considerably to the cost of the electrolyser. Despite their enormous size and scale, such electrolysers still comprise a significant proportion of the commercial electrolysers sold today and plans are afoot to deploy them in gigawatt scale power-to-gas5b,c and other applications.

Indirect losses in the balance-of-plant. 
In more recent designs, the problem of low current densities at acceptable efficiencies has been overcome by continuously pumping circulating liquid over the electrodes, thereby sweeping away the gas bubbles as they are formed. The constant removal of bubbles allows for significantly higher current densities.

Fig. 5 depicts a typical balance of plant for pumping circulating liquid through a representative, ‘filter press’-type electrolyser stack comprising of 5 cells connected in electrical series with bipolar electrodes (“B”) between adjoining cells. The liquid can be either liquid electrolyte (e.g. 25–30 wt% KOH in the case of an alkaline electrolyser and certain alkaline exchange membrane (AEM) electrolysers) or de-ionized water (in the case of a PEM electrolyser or other types of AEM electrolysers). The depiction at the bottom of Fig. 5 denotes and corresponds to the cells in the main schematic above. The H2-generating cathode electrodes and O2-generating anode electrodes of each cell are also denoted with illustrative voltages if a representative 2.00 V were applied across each cell.
 Fig. 5  Schematic showing a typical balance of plant for pumping circulating water/electrolyte through a bipolar electrolyser cell stack. The schematic depicts a stack of five water electrolysis cells, connected in electrical series, with bipolar electrodes “B” between each pair of cells. The schematic at the bottom denotes and corresponds to the cells in the main schematic above. The H2-generating cathode electrodes and O2-generating anode electrodes of each cell are also denoted with illustrative voltages if a representative 2.00 V were applied across each cell. Each individual cell is split into two half cells by the presence of an ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator membrane/ionomer “M”. The separator keeps the H2 gas bubbles apart from the O2 gas bubbles. The stack is fed by two, parallel liquid circulation systems, one of which (anolyte) is for O2 collection, and the other of which (catholyte) is for H2 collection. Liquid is pumped in parallel through each H2 and O2 generating half-cell and the resulting streams of H2 and O2 froth are then separately accumulated in an H2 and an O2 separator, respectively. H2 gas separates from the H2 froth in the H2 separator and is collected from the top of the separator tank. O2 gas similarly separates from the O2 froth and is collected from the top of the O2 separator tank. The gases may then be passed through scrubbers that remove any residual, aerosolized electrolyte from the gas streams. Liquid/electrolyte free of gas bubbles is collected from the bottom of each tank and pumped back through the respective half-cells. One or both electrolyte circulation loops is/are typically also passed through a chiller (not shown for clarity), which cools it and maintains a constant temperature in the stack. After Santos et al..50 
Each individual cell in Fig. 5 is split into two half cells by the presence of an ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator membrane/ionomer (“M”). The separator keeps the H2 gas bubbles apart from the O2 gas bubbles. The stack has two, parallel liquid circulation systems, one of which (anolyte) is for O2 collection, and the other of which (catholyte) is for H2 collection. Liquid is pumped in parallel through each of the H2- and O2-generating half-cells in the stack, with the resulting H2- and O2-containing streams then separately accumulated in H2 and O2 separator tanks respectively.
The liquid containing the bubbles typically comprises a heterogeneous, micro-agglomeration of liquid and gas – a ‘froth’ – whose volumetric density may vary considerably and unpredictably over time. Meshes in the separation tanks burst the bubbles in the froth so that it separates into distinct, bulk liquid and gas phases. H2 and O2 gas is collected off the top of the H2 and the O2 separator tanks respectively and often passed through devices known as ‘scrubbers’. These remove residual, aerosol particles of electrolyte that may be created in the gas stream when the bubbles burst. Scrubbers may take several forms, but a common one involves a particulate bed (sometimes known as a pebble bed) through which the make-up water of the system is trickled downwards into the separator tank. The aerosolized electrolyte particles encounter and dissolve in the water and are carried back into the separator tank. The gas streams must then typically be further dried of water vapour prior to use, including the water vapour introduced by the scrubber.
Liquid free of gas bubbles is drawn from the bottom of each separator tank and pumped back to their respective half-cells. Within each circulating loop, the liquid will typically be passed through a chiller, to cool it and thereby maintain a fixed temperature in the stack. The chillers are not shown in Fig. 5 for clarity. Chillers are refrigeration devices notable for their high energy consumption, large size and substantial capital and operating cost. In some electrolysers, the chillers make up the majority of the physical installation. In decreasing the energy efficiency of electrolysers and thereby increasing their heat output, gas bubbles can be said to contribute indirectly to the need for and size of chillers.
In commercial PEM electrolysers that use circulating de-ionized water, the return stream may also be passed through a Type 1 conductivity de-ionizer (ASTM Standards for Laboratory Reagent Water ASTM D1193-91: <0.056 μS cm−1) to scrupulously remove all ions that are leached from the piping, tanks and fittings. If not removed, such ions, especially multivalent metal ions, bind irreversibly to the PEM ionomer membrane and degrade its capacity to conduct ions between the electrodes. Such degradation has been the cause of the relatively low lifetimes of commercial PEM electrolysers (≤25000 hours) until recently; lifetimes of ∼70000 hours are today more common. Type 1 de-ionizers are renowned for their very high cost. Their presence makes a major contribution to the notably higher cost of PEM electrolysers when compared to their alkaline counterparts.
While engineering arrangements like that shown in Fig. 5 may amplify the gas output of electrolysers, they come with major drawbacks. Pumps, scrubbers, chillers and Type 1 de-ionizers add significantly to the system cost. They also consume copious amounts of electricity, lowering the overall system energy efficiency, and require maintenance, which can constitute a major additional operating expense. Moreover, pump failures may compromise safety, necessitating, in many cases, the installation of a second, back-up pump, with associated piping and engineering. Furthermore, because two gases are produced, each circulation system must generally be duplicated, doubling the materials and engineering cost. (Some PEM electrolysers with mechanically strong ionomer membranes may only have a circulation system for O2 collection with the hydrogen gas collected directly.) The components of each of these systems must employ expensive, high-quality materials that are not corroded by the liquid used or the gaseous products (and do not leach ions in the case of PEM systems). They also need to meet the high safety standards mandated for handling hydrogen or oxygen. For example, an O2-certified pump, fabricated from materials resistant to corrosion by O2 must be used for the O2 loop. The H2 pump must seal for H2 and avoid hydrogen embrittlement.


Indirect losses due to gas crossover. 
Beyond the resulting, very substantial additional capital and operating costs, pumping liquid–gas froths with time-variant densities and volumes, may also create transient or permanent pressure differentials across the ion-permeable, gas-impermeable inter-electrode membranes or ionomers used to separate the half-cells (“M” in Fig. 5). Such pressure differentials may, in turn, increase ‘gas crossover’ between the electrodes, in which a proportion of the hydrogen generated at the cathode crosses over and into the oxygen stream produced at the anode, or some oxygen from the anode contaminates the hydrogen stream generated at the cathode.
Gas crossover diminishes both the overall energy efficiency and the faradaic gas output of the electrolyser. It may also be a serious safety issue since a hydrogen stream containing >4.6% oxygen, or an oxygen stream with >3.8% hydrogen, constitutes an explosive mixture (at the typical operating temperature of 80 °C).6
Many commercial electrolysers monitor gas crossover in real time and are programmed to automatically shut down if the gas crossover exceeds 2% at any time. Gas crossover may fluctuate during normal operation because the relative densities and volumes of the H2- and O2-froths produced often drift in non-simple ways that can defy expectation.
Gas crossover is strongly influenced by the differential in liquid pressures across the inter-electrode separator in each cell.51 Indeed, in such systems it becomes imperative to closely manage and, in real time, maintain equal pressures in the H2 and O2 gases collected since these gases are in direct contact with the circulating electrolyte on each side of the inter-electrode membranes/ionomers and their pressures are transmitted to these locations. Pressure differentials may also damage, or even destroy the inter-electrode separator.


Indirect losses due to shunt currents. 
A further issue is that, with a conductive liquid electrolyte like 25–30 wt% KOH, the anolyte (O2) and catholyte (H2) return lines depicted at the bottom of Fig. 5 provide a highly conductive pathway (containing no resistive gas bubbles) between the different anode and cathode electrodes, respectively, in the stack. This opens the way for unwanted, high-voltage currents known as shunt currents (also called bypass currents or parasitic currents) to flow between the electrodes.52a–d For example, in Fig. 5, a shunt current may flow between anode 1 (shown as being at 10 V) and anode 5 (shown as being at 2 V) along the anolyte (O2) return line. While anode 1 and anode 5 are much further apart from each other than the facing electrodes in Cell 1 or Cell 5, the voltage between them is far greater than that between the facing electrodes in Cell 1 or Cell 5 (namely, 8 V vs. 2 V); this creates the current.52a That is, shunt currents are characterized by having a higher driving force (higher voltage) but longer path-length (higher resistance) than the desired currents between the facing electrodes in each cell in the stack.52a
Shunt currents compete with and diminish the desired currents, robbing the electrolyser of energy efficiency.52a,d The distribution of desired and undesired (shunt) currents (I) is a function of the relative voltage differences (V) and resistances (R) of each according to Ohm's law, I = V/R.52a Shunt currents may further cause corrosion or change the gas generating properties of an electrode. For example, the above-mentioned shunt current between anode 1 and anode 5 in Fig. 5 may cause the closest end of the normally O2-generating anode 5 to act as an H2-generating cathode.52a,d Any H2 produced would be collected with the combined anodic O2 gas streams, diminishing the purity of the O2 produced. Numerous other shunt currents of similar type may flow between the different cathodes or the different anodes in Fig. 5, via the catholyte (H2) and anolyte (O2) return lines respectively.
To minimize shunt currents, alkaline electrolysers have in the past employed return lines that are especially long with particularly narrow diameters, between the different cells in a stack.52b–f This increased the electrical resistance of the pathways along which shunt currents flow and, thereby, decreased their amperage.52b–f


Indirect losses due to design compromises. 
However, even with such measures, shunt currents may significantly limit the number of cells that can be stacked together. Parasitic losses due to shunt currents increase as an approximately cubic function of the stack height.52f,g Many alkaline electrolysers that employ highly conductive KOH electrolyte, therefore incorporate ≤50 cells in a stack because beyond this limit, shunt currents start to consume more than a few percent of the total energy or create significant corrosion.52d–g This limitation has the effect that the power supply must be tailored to the stack; i.e. a relatively more expensive, custom-built, low voltage/high current power supply may be needed.52d–g
Shunt currents are, of course, unique to alkaline electrolysers that utilize highly conductive liquid electrolytes and that have their cells connected in electrical series (i.e. bipolar electrolysers).52d–f They do not occur in bipolar PEM electrolysers that use non-conductive, de-ionized water (although the costs of de-ionization in those systems may more than compensate for this advantage).
Unipolar alkaline electrolysers that have their cells connected in electrical parallel also do not experience shunt currents because they do not have large voltage differences between the electrodes at either end of the stack.52d–f However, they have a far more serious disadvantage, namely, that the overall current passing through the electrolyser increases with each additional cell or electrode area that is included. That is, while the overall voltage applied across a unipolar electrolyser does not increase with the addition of more cells or electrode area, the overall current does and this quickly becomes extremely expensive (and energy inefficient) when producing large quantities of hydrogen. Thus, industrial unipolar electrolysers have typically had to employ very large, expensive busbars to efficiently carry their huge currents (e.g. 18000–100000 A).52d–f Their power supplies further had to deliver such large currents at low voltage, which is the most inefficient and expensive form of power conversion. By contrast, in a bipolar electrolyser, the voltage applied across the electrolyser increases with each additional cell incorporated into the stack, but not the current. The power supply therefore has to deliver low current at high voltage, which is, by far, the more efficient and cheaper form of power conversion.
In summary: the need to handle gas bubbles creates major engineering complexity in electrolysers. It also forces compromises that negatively affect their economics and energy efficiency. None of this complexity and cost would be needed if gas bubbles could be directly collected in some other way, as they are formed.

Eliminating or mitigating the indirect energy and economic losses due to gas bubbles
With the advent of high-performing 3D electrodes capable of producing high current densities even with buoyancy-driven bubble-release, new electrolyser designs have been and continue to be developed. Some of these designs have the potential to significantly diminish the above complexity and even eliminate much of the balance of plant. In particular, the need to circulate water/electrolyte through the cell stack may be avoided, with the bulk-phase gases produced directly in or at the individual cells themselves. That is, in Fig. 5, bulk-phase gases are first produced in the H2 and O2 separation tanks that accumulate froth from all of the cells. However, in the alternative designs, bulk gases are first produced in or at the individual cells themselves, thereby eliminating the need for circulating electrolyte with its associated pumps, pipes, tanks and engineering complexity.
Designs of this type were widely employed in early electrolysers53 and are still common in the chlor-alkali industry.54 In water electrolysis however, circulating electrolyte ultimately became the preferred method for dealing with the gases that were generated, partly because of the variable volumes and densities of the H2- and O2-froths created.
An example of such an alternative design is that of Shimko and colleagues, who incorporated small H2- and O2-separating tanks into each individual cell in their electrolysers.55 That is, instead of having a single, common H2 and O2 separator tank for all of the cells present, each cell had its own separator tanks.
The Shimko cells are schematically depicted in Fig. 6.55,56 An ion-permeable, gas-impermeable membrane/ionomer separator (dashed line in Fig. 6) divided each cell into cathode and anode half-cells. The separator extended only to below the level of the electrodes and not to the bottom of the cell. That is, a gap was left at the bottom of the cell where the liquid electrolyte could move freely between the half cells. This arrangement was intended to eliminate the possibility of a pressure differential developing across the inter-electrode membrane/ionomer separator. Without such a pressure differential, gas crossover should be the smallest possible.
 Fig. 6  Schematic depiction of the individual cells of Shimko and colleagues, showing the key features. Reproduced and adapted from ref. 55. 
When deployed industrially, in an array, the cells were connected to each other in electrical series (i.e. a bipolar arrangement).56b However, each cell effectively operated independently of the other cells. Thus, the liquid electrolyte in each cell was not in contact with the liquid electrolyte in the other cells. Water consumed within each individual cell during operation was, moreover, automatically replenished within that cell, thereby continuously maintaining the electrolyte in the cell. This was done by an electronic level detector that automatically activated a deionized water dispensing valve (Fig. 6) when make-up water was needed.
The key advantage of this approach was that it eliminated the need for circulating electrolyte, as seen in Fig. 5. Parasitic shunt currents between the different cells in the high voltage array were therefore also avoided. This, in turn, allowed the cells to be ‘stacked’ to whatever overall voltage suited the most cost-effective or energy-efficient power supply, which was typically a DC-generating solar panel array.56b The only major external components needed in the balance of plant were the power supply, a pressurised deionized water dispenser and two gas manifolds with associated gas storage vessels, one to collect hydrogen from the cell cathodes and the other to collect oxygen from the cell anodes.56 The tubular design of the cells allowed for air-cooling, making a chiller unnecessary. Except for the gas manifolds and the cells themselves, everything else could be selected from the available, lowest-cost, commercial-off-the-shelf items.
During operation, the H2 and O2 froths generated in each cell rose up the H2- or the O2-collection lines, from where they were diverted by gravity into the hydrogen and the oxygen separation tanks of that cell (Fig. 6). These tanks were, in theory, large enough to accommodate substantial fluctuations in the volumes of the froths produced. Within the respective tanks, the froths separated into bulk liquid and gas phases. The liquid phases were returned to the cell via the catholyte and anolyte return lines shown in Fig. 6. The separated hydrogen and oxygen gases passed through their respective pressure regulating valves into the hydrogen and oxygen gas manifolds, which collected these gases from all of the cells.
Long-terms tests showed that this design had two important drawbacks.56 The first was unexpectedly high gas crossover between the electrodes that periodically exceeded the safety limits. The H2- and the O2-froths that were produced on opposite sides of the separator must have had very different and also transiently changing average volumes and densities on, at least, some occasions. Even with the catholyte and anolyte in fluid contact below the level of the electrodes, there were, presumably, fluctuations in the relative levels of the catholyte and anolyte that led to the high gas crossover. This was most particularly a problem at very high pressures (e.g. >100 bar).56
A second difficulty was that froth, with associated liquid electrolyte, periodically passed through the pressure regulating valves into the gas manifolds.56b Such episodes also necessitated a halt in operations, followed by cleaning and restarting.56 While regulator failures were said to be responsible on some occasions,56b the more likely larger cause was the small size of the separating tanks, which, undoubtedly, resulted in an overflow of froth at some times. Given that a stack of electrolysis cells cannot reasonably accommodate two large separation tanks for each cell, a more efficient method of separation was clearly needed.
In more recent work, ‘filter press’-type bipolar alkaline and PEM cell stacks have been developed that incorporate cell-based separation volumes within the stack itself.57 Because of the limited space available within the stack, such separation volumes were necessarily small, at least relative to the size of the half-cells. It is unknown how successful these designs were in avoiding the problems of the Shimko design.
In the most sophisticated design to date, Seymour and co-workers sought to overcome the challenge of fluctuating froth volumes/densities and separation efficiency by:58 (i) incorporating an expansion volume, balanced by an expansion resistor, at the base of their cell (Fig. 7(a)), and (ii) controlling the flow of froth into the separators. The expansion volume accommodated changes in froth volume and density, by expanding and contracting under the influence of the pressure within the cell. The froth was taken off the top of the catholyte and anolyte by gas collection lines of restricted size (e.g. ‘hypodermic’ tubes) and deposited into relatively small H2 or O2 gas separators (Fig. 7(a)). The liquid/froth level in the half-cells were determined by the height of the hypodermic tubes. This approach ensured that the separator was never overwhelmed by the volume of froth. Indeed, froth going into the separators was noted to commonly “self-separate” when passing through the hypodermic tubes, because the liquid components experienced greater resistance to flow than the gas components due to surface tension interactions with the tube walls.58 The liquid component was collected at the bottom of each separator by an “electrolyte-capture-and-return” system and pumped back into its respective half-cell (Fig. 7(a)). The pumping action was provided by a single, common pump (e.g. a ventricular pump) that drove one-way pumping actuators in the electrolyte capture-and-return systems of all of the half-cells in a stack. The separated H2 and O2 gases passed into gas removal manifolds where they were washed to eradicate any residual, aerosolized electrolyte in the gas. The washing liquid was passed into a water dispenser that dropped make-up water, via a one-way dispensing valve, through a gas gap into the cell (Fig. 7(a)). In this way, all of the electrolyte was kept in the cell indefinitely. The dispensing valve operated passively, opening only when the pressure in the cell fell below the pressure in the water dispenser, which ultimately controlled the pressure of the entire cell.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic depiction of the individual cells of Seymour and co-workers,58 showing the key features (“M” = ion-permeable, gas-impermeable inter-electrode membrane/ionomer, “C” = cathode electrode, “A” = anode electrode). Drawing (b) depicts the actual cell in (a), showing how the individual features were miniaturized and incorporated into the periphery of a thin cell frame suitable for stacking in a bipolar (filter press) arrangement. Adapted from ref. 58. 

Fig. 7(b) depicts a drawing of the actual cell shown schematically in Fig. 7(a), indicating how the different components were miniaturized and incorporated into the periphery of a thin cell frame that could be readily stacked in a ‘filter press’-type bipolar arrangement with other cells in electrical series.58 The cell frame was surrounded by a retention ring capable of maintaining the integrity of the cell when it was pressurized.58 The conductive, metal bipolar plates at top and bottom of Fig. 7(b) contained internal channels for circulating coolant. The conductive springs provided an electrical connection between the respective bipolar plates and their electrodes. When stacked, the bipolar plate at the top of each cell contacted with, or formed the bipolar plate at the bottom of the cell above it.
The Shimko and Seymour designs55,58 are notable not only for their innovation, but also for their illustration of the fundamental dilemma of dealing with gas bubbles in water electrolysis. The generated H2 and O2 froths are complex fluids that necessitate complex apparatus for their handling and separation. Avoiding the creation of these froths avoids this complexity.
Eliminating or mitigating the direct effects of bubble formation in water electrolysers
The suppression or mitigation of gas bubble formation on electrode surfaces has been a field of growing interest in electrochemical water splitting. Fig. 3(b) depicts, at its top, the different stages of bubble formation and release on an electrode, namely, bubble nucleation, growth, detachment, and transport. A diverse range of approaches and modulatory effects have been examined for each of these stages, including:
(a) Creating hydrophobic locations on the electrode surface to control where bubbles form and release (‘Hydrophobic Islands’);
(b) Using gas capillary effects to continuously extract newly-formed gas through a porous hydrophobic membrane, before bubbles form (‘Breathable (‘Bubble-Free’) Electrodes’);
(c) Modifying the surface morphology of the electrode to change the bubble dynamics (‘Superwetting’ electrodes);
(d) Modifying the liquid electrolyte and its interface with the electrode surface to promote bubble formation and release (‘Surfactants’);
(e) Promoting bubble formation, release and transport by sonicating the electrolyte during operation of the electrolyser (‘Sonication’);
(f) Centrifuging the electrolyser to thereby create a ‘supergravity’ field that maintains the electrodes and inter-electrode space free of bubbles during operation (‘Electrolyser Centrifugation’ (‘Supergravity’));
(g) Vigorously pumping electrolyte over the electrode surfaces to remove bubbles as soon as they are formed (‘Mechanical Convection’);
(h) Applying continuous pressure swings to dynamically alter the buoyancy of the bubbles and thereby accelerate their release and removal (‘Pressure Modulation’); and
(i) Using magnetic fields to modulate gas bubble release and transport (‘Magnetohydrodynamics’).
The following sections review each of these approaches.
Hydrophobic islands
As noted above, the first stage of forming gas bubbles involves supersaturating the liquid electrolyte to levels that induce bubble nucleation on local surfaces, such as the electrode surface. However, if alternative local surfaces with a lower surface energy are available – for example, strongly hydrophobic surfaces like those of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) – then the bubbles should preferentially form on them and not on the electrode surface. A lower supersaturation may then be required for bubble-generation. The bubbles that form may, further, mask the hydrophobic surface, not the catalytically active electrode surface, which will be left in full and normal contact with the liquid electrolyte. This should lower the overpotential of gas production provided that the bubbles on the hydrophobic surface do not interfere with the catalysis at the electrode surfaces.
This was the premise behind several reports in 1984–1991 that described coating Ni or Pt electrodes with a multiplicity of tiny islands of PTFE, producing a ‘hydrophobic mosaic’ on the surfaces of the electrodes.59,60 When the resulting electrodes were used to generate hydrogen, a notable decline in overpotential was observed. This was ascribed to the hydrophobic islands acting as collectors (‘scavengers’) of dissolved gas that then formed bubbles on the islands rather than on the surrounding catalytic surfaces. That is, gas bubbles formed and released preferentially on the PTFE surfaces, leaving the catalytic electrode surface uncovered or only partially covered with bubbles.
Teschke and Galembeck studied the effect in some detail and found that the relative coverage of the islands played a critical role in the extent of the overpotential decline, particularly at high current densities.60a In 5 N KOH, the largest effect was observed with a 20% net coverage of PTFE, which required ∼1.58 V (vs. Hg/HgO) to produce hydrogen at the rate of 1000 mA cm−2. Without the PTFE islands, the same electrode required ∼1.73 V to produce 1000 mA cm−2, putting the decline in overpotential created by the hydrophobic islands at ∼0.15 V.
At a fixed potential of 1.58 V (vs. Hg/HgO), the current density of the electrode increased from ∼50 mA cm−2 (uncovered) to ∼1000 mA cm−2 (20% covered with PTFE islands), a ∼20-fold amplification. Thus, the uncovered 80% of the electrode surface must have exhibited a drastically increased catalytic activity that more than compensated for the 20% loss of electrochemically active area.
Teschke and colleagues later also studied columnar PTFE islands deposited using an etching technique on a Ni substrate.60b Significant declines in overpotential were again observed at 1000 mA cm−2.
In another set of experiments, Heidrich and Muller deposited a pattern of PTFE islands on a platinized Pt electrode. However, they observed a smaller, 5- to 10-fold increase in current density at constant potentials in 0.5 M H2SO4.61 At 100 mA cm−2, smaller overpotential declines of ∼0.028 V were also observed at 60 °C.
Later, in 1991, Lasia and co-workers, contested all of the above results and conclusions, claiming, using electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) studies, that they were fully explicable by changes in the roughness of the electrodes.62
Possibly because of the disputes and inconsistencies, further work on this concept appeared to, effectively, halt. However, in 2011 Brussieux and colleagues re-investigated this effect using high resolution photography to determine precisely where the gas bubbles were and were not formed. They deposited various patterns of PTFE islands on Ni and Cu electrodes using photolithography and found that the gas bubbles did, indeed, mainly form on the PTFE islands and not on the surrounding electrode surface.63
The pattern and diameter of the islands was critical to the size of the bubbles produced and their rate of release (Fig. 8). Where the PTFE islands were sufficiently isolated from one another, bubble coalescence was prevented and the dispersity of the evolved gas bubbles was constrained by the perimeter size of each island. Larger islands (e.g. 5.5 mm diameter) produced large bubbles in their center and smaller bubbles around the perimeter. The remainder of the uncovered Ni was, generally, not covered by a bubble or froth curtain. The photolithographic approach to deposition of PTFE allowed for considerable fine control over the size and spacing of islets, and also allowed for structured gradations in island dimensions.63 The authors did not investigate the effect of the hydrophobic islands on the overpotentials or current densities of the electrodes.
 Fig. 8  The acronym “AMELHYFLAM”, the Eiffel Tower and ECP for Ecole Centrale Paris “written” with hydrogen bubbles that formed only on PTFE islands distributed in a photolithographically patterned mosaic on a Cu electrode, at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The bubbles are shown at the following time intervals after a suitable voltage was applied: 21 s, 50 s, and 205 s. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011. 
Eikerling and co-workers further developed the concept of hydrophobic islands of gas-evolving electrodes, by performing numerical analyses of preferential bubble formation in porous (flow-through) and non-porous electrodes.64 The model of non-porous electrode behaviour quite closely reproduced the empirical bubble growth dynamics reported by Brussieux.63
Eikerling and colleagues also examined the diffusion of dissolved gas to such preferential bubble nucleation sites across sharp concentration gradients induced by nearby bubble growth. They pointed out that the deliberate introduction of preferential nucleation sites to the exterior of a porous electrode should have a beneficial effect on electrode stability, because the formation of bubbles inside a porous electrode can exert damaging mechanical stress on the structure.
These reports explained some of the observations of the earlier, 1984–1991 work. The PTFE was clearly demonstrated to scavenge dissolved gas away from electrocatalytic sites, thereby avoiding bubble coverage on the catalytically active surfaces and improving their activity. The outsized effects produced by low overall surface coverages (e.g. 20%) were explained as a compromise needed to balance the gas scavenging and ‘bubble collecting’ effects of the PTFE islands with the need to minimize the loss of active surface area by covering it with PTFE.60a
The apparent electrochemical activity at the interfaces between the deposited PTFE and the Ni electrode is particularly interesting. This effect was cited to be potentially important for the microscopic mechanical integrity of the electrode; Teschke indicated that an overcoating of Ni was needed to stabilize these edges.60a Moreover, bubble nucleation at these edges was speculated to facilitate bubble generation and subsequent flow to the immediately adjacent, attached PTFE regions, where coalescence occurred, leading to larger bubbles. Such processes are described and favoured by the Marangoni effect, which involves mass transfer along an interface between two fluids due to a gradient of surface tension.60a These lessons may plausibly be transferable to other electrodes which incorporate metal/PTFE interfaces, as will be discussed in the next section.
Given the amplifications in current density at constant voltage reported using the above techniques, it seems that they may provide an opportunity to significantly improve the energy efficiency of water electrolysers. We further note that, despite the apparent possibilities of this approach, there have been only very few studies referring to these effects, and no studies at all involving oxygen generation, which is, by far, the more energy-intensive process in water electrolysis.
Whilst the photolithographic approach used by Brussieux and co-workers provided for precise control over the size and position of the deposited islands,63 it is likely impractical for large-scale use. However, other, more easily scaled approaches, such as spray-coating, can potentially be used. Moreover, another way to achieve this effect is to increase the surface roughness and/or the hydrophobic topography of a catalyst layer, so that the surface structure and texture becomes more complex. This changes the surface energy, producing regions that are locally more hydrophobic.65 Bubble coalescence, translation and release may be improved in these regions.65
Thus, for example, a range of surfaces with localised hydrophobic (‘aerophilic’) or super-hydrophobic (‘super-aerophilic’) features have been developed65a using, in some cases, industrially-scalable spray-coating with impacting, hydrophobic particulates.65b Such surfaces have been demonstrated to: (a) control bubble size,65c (b) spontaneously, and directionally transport gas bubbles,65d–g (c) release gas bubbles with small and spherical diameters,65h (d) generate and efficiently collect hydrogen bubbles,65i and (e) provide ‘slippery’ tracks along which bubbles move.65j,k Roughened surfaces with a mosaic of more hydrophobic regions may potentially also be fabricated using plasma activation.65l,m
Breathable (bubble-free) electrodes
‘Breathable’ electrode concepts involve engineering electrodes that utilize capillary effects to avoid bubble formation on or in their active catalyst surface. Such electrodes typically possess a porous, aerophilic substrate that offers an alternative route for evolved gases to be removed from an electrocatalytic layer, whilst being impermeable to the electrolyte. That is, the build-up of a dense bubble curtain on the surface of the electrode is avoided by using a porous electrode, through which the gas may pass to thereby eliminate bubbles from the inter-electrode space.
In early work, specially-designed gas-porous electrodes (gas-diffusion electrodes) were placed horizontally in cells, so that buoyancy caused the bubbles to move through the electrode along inclined channels to the surface of the cell and away from the inter-electrode gap.66a
Later, Pierre Jonville developed a novel class of porous electrodes that were coated on their front face with an electrochemically inactive layer that utilized a capillary effect to suppress bubble formation on that face.6,66b Bubble formation was instead directed to the rear face of the electrode where it was outside of the inter-electrode gap and therefore did not increase the overall cell resistance.6,66b
More recently, gas-diffusion electrodes have been developed that utilize gas capillary structures to draw gases through them. While relatively obscure in electrochemistry, gas capillary effects are well known in other fields of science and technology. They have formed the basis of industrial degassing systems for decades in, for example, electrodialysis,67 HPLC lines and microfluidic systems.68 The principle involves a hydrophobic (‘aerophilic’) pore structure that draws up gases in water in the same way that a capillary tube draws up water in air. The pore structure, which is readily created by, for example, laser drilling,69 may ‘capture’ gas bubbles and draw them into the structure in one direction only, producing a so-called “bubble diode”.70 More recently, wedge-shaped superaerophilic channels have been developed that create a jet-like effect in which gas is drawn out of the water and accelerated away from the gas source by the capillary action.71 Microbubbles may also be manipulated to move over surfaces in controlled ways using similar principles.72

The discovery of bubble-free water electrolysis. 
The first application of a gas diffusion electrode containing such a gas capillary structure in electrolysis was reported by Winther-Jensen and co-workers in 2012.73 They deposited Pt on a porous, hydrophobic GoreTex substrate (Fig. 9(a)) and then tested it as the oxygen-generating anode within a transparent, acrylic, benchtop electrolyser cell (Fig. 10(a) and (b)). GoreTex (brand name), also called Gortex (generic name), comprises a ‘breathable’ fabric that allows gases like water vapour, but not liquid water, to pass through it. It contains an ‘expanded polytetrafluoroethylene’ (ePTFE) membrane made up of Teflon microfibrils with a well-defined, hydrophobic pore structure (Fig. 9(a)).74
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of the Pt-coated expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) membrane in the GoreTex electrode developed by Winther-Jensen and co-workers, showing the Teflon fibrils coated with sputtered Pt. Scale bar: 10 nm (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012); (b) schematic cross-sectional depiction of the Gortex-based gas diffusion electrode used in Fig. 10. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the first electrolyser with a bubble-free anode, showing the electrolysis chamber on the left attached to the gas collection chamber on the right; (b) drawing of gas and ion movements in the cell depicted in (a); and (c) O2 measurements in the electrolyte immediately in front of the anode (‘O2 front’) and in the gas collection chamber behind the anode (‘O2 back’), after application of 10 mA cm−2. Note that, as shown in schematic (b), there was no ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator or ionomer between the electrodes. Such separators are normally essential in electrolysers to prevent gas crossover, which creates a serious safety hazard. This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 73 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011. 
To their surprise, the authors observed that, while the cathode was covered in an agitating foam of gas bubbles at 10 mA cm−2, the anode appeared to be entirely free of gas bubbles (Fig. 10(b)).
To determine why that was the case, they placed a micro-oxygen electrode in the gas chamber behind the GoreTex electrode.73 Applying a current of 10 mA cm−2 led to an immediate and linear increase in the oxygen content of that chamber (Fig. 10(c)), indicating that: (1) oxygen was being produced by the anode, but it was: (2) migrating through the GoreTex electrode into the gas chamber (Fig. 9(b)) without forming visible bubbles on the electrode surface. By contrast, the oxygen content in the liquid electrolyte immediately in front of the electrode showed no increase over time, after applying a 10 mA cm−2 current (Fig. 10(c)). Faradaic efficiency measurements indicated that 90 ± 3% of the produced oxygen passed through the GoreTex into the gas chamber behind it.73
Further studies, using an anode comprising of a Pt-coated, porous Mylar membrane, which, was less hydrophobic than the GoreTex, with a less well-defined pore structure, saw only 61% of the produced oxygen passing through to the rear gas chamber. This indicated, rather conclusively, that a gas capillary effect was at work and it drew the produced oxygen into and through the GoreTex membrane, thereby creating the bubble-free gas generation.
When a GoreTex-based cathode was combined with the GoreTex-based anode, the resulting electrolyser was bubble-free at both electrodes, at least at 10 mA cm−2. Hydrogen passed through the GoreTex of the cathode in the expected 2:1 stoichiometric ratio, in a measured 92% faradaic efficiency.
A remarkable feature of the bubble-free electrolyser was that there appeared to be no need for an ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator between the electrodes in the cell (see, for example, Fig. 10(b)). Separators like Nafion 115 or Zirfon PERL,51 are normally essential to the safe operation of an electrolyser cell since, as previously noted, they keep the oxygen bubbles produced at the anode from crossing over to the cathode and mixing with the hydrogen bubbles generated there, and vice versa.6 As also noted, at 80 °C, a cathode hydrogen stream containing >4.6% oxygen, or an anode oxygen stream with >3.8% hydrogen, constitutes an explosive mixture that will not even be approached during safe operation of an electrolyser.6
The absence of gas bubbles at each electrode made such a separator unnecessary. This was significant for two reasons:
(1) Such separators generally have low conductivities relative to liquid electrolyte (e.g. ∼0.17 S cm−1 for hydrated Nafion and ∼0.4 S cm−1 for alkaline Zirfon PERL membranes vs. >1.35 S cm−1 for 4.5 M H2SO4 and 6 M KOH; 80 °C).6 Indeed, the resistance of such inter-electrode separators constitutes a major source of electrical resistance in electrolysers. Their elimination removes this source of resistance and enables more efficient operation; and
(2) Separators like Nafion 115 or Zirfon PERL typically degrade irreversibly at 100–110 °C, thereby restricting electrolyser operation to lower temperatures. Elimination of the need for a separator lifts this limitation, potentially allowing for operation at much higher temperatures. The PTFE in Gortex is, for example, indefinitely stable at 250 °C. The importance of this feature derives from historical studies that demonstrated near-exponential increases in current densities and declines in overpotentials at more elevated temperatures.75 For example, Miles and colleagues showed that at a temperature of ∼150 °C, with moderate pressures to prevent the electrolyte from boiling, it would be “possible to approach 100% energy efficiency at the current densities commonly used in commercial water electrolysers”.75 This work was done with alkaline electrolyte using simple Ni electrodes.75 Given that the industrial alkaline electrolyte of 30% KOH boils at an estimated 155–170 °C when pressurized to 3–4 bar,75 such an alkaline electrolyser, operating continuously at 150 °C and ≥3 bar, was expected to produce hydrogen that would be competitive as an energy carrier with electricity.75


Bubble-free water electrolysis with conventional gas diffusion layers. 
Villa and co-workers later reported an electrolyser with conventional gas diffusion electrodes at both the anode and cathode (Fig. 11(a)).76 The electrodes comprised a catalyst layer of RANEY® Ni with 10% PTFE binder, laminated to a conductive Ni net gas diffusion layer. The catalyst layer on the cathode electrode included conductive graphite, while the anode electrode was carbon-free (to avoid carbon corrosion by the O2 produced). A porous Celgard separator was loosely placed on the front of each catalyst layer.
 Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional schematic of the electrolyser of Villa and co-workers,75 which had two conventional gas diffusion electrodes. (b) Graph showing the change in voltage at 100 mA cm−2 when an overpressure (Pin) was applied to the liquid electrolyte relative to the gas chambers.76 (c) Polarization curves at different temperatures of the electrolyser, showing significant declines in the onset potential as the temperature was increased from 26 °C to 100 °C. These figures have been reproduced and adapted from ref. 76 and 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012 and 2019. 
As depicted in Fig. 11(a), at a moderate current density at room temperature, hydrogen gas produced by the cathode, passed largely through the porous gas diffusion layer into a hydrogen gas chamber at the rear. The oxygen gas produced at the anode similarly passed mostly through its gas diffusion layer into the oxygen gas chamber. Because not all of the gas went into their respective gas chambers however, bubbles of gas formed and were visible in the space between the catalyst layers and their Celgard separators. The electrolyser required an applied potential of ∼2.05 V to maintain 100 mA cm−2 under these conditions.76
However, when the liquid electrolyte was pressurized to a higher pressure (Pin) than the gas chambers, the voltage required at 100 mA cm−2 declined, to asymptotically approach only ∼1.70 V at Pin = 2 bar (Fig. 11(b)).76 At the same time, the bubbles that had been visible between the catalyst layers and the Celgard separators disappeared, indicating that the electrolysis had become ‘bubble-free’. That is, the overpressure on the liquid electrolyte had, in the author's words: “squeezed out” the gas bubbles, forcing all of the gas to migrate through the electrodes into the gas chambers at their rear.76
The polarization curves of the bubble-free electrolyser (with 2 bar liquid overpressure) were measured at several temperatures between 25 °C and 100 °C (Fig. 11(c)). An interesting phenomena was observed in the ‘onset potentials’, which are the potentials at the first indication of a current (i.e. at ∼0 mA cm−2). As can be seen in Fig. 11(c), the onset potential of ∼1.52 V at 26 °C declined to ∼1.35 V at 100 °C; a 170 mV decrease.6,76 This was noticeably more than the changes in onset potentials normally observed with conventional alkaline electrolysers.6 It also appeared to exceed what may have been expected due only to temperature-induced changes in resistance. Indeed, the onset potentials of ∼1.42 V at 80° and ∼1.35 V at 100 °C appeared to be the lowest ever recorded at those temperatures.6,76 Alkaline and PEM electrolysers typically have onset potentials of ≥1.45 V at 80 °C (Fig. 2).6


Bubble-free water electrolysis with Gortex-based electrodes having thick catalyst layers. 
Further studies were carried out of electrolysers utilizing bubble-free, breathable Gortex-based anodes and cathodes in 2013–2019. In these investigations, the Gortex was coated with hydrophilic catalyst layers that were substantially thicker (∼200 μm) (Fig. 12(a)) than the Pt layers used by Winther-Jensen in the original work.6,73 The thicker layers, which typically comprised of conventional industrial catalysts like RANEY® Ni, 10% Pt on Vulcan XC72 or NiCo2O4, with 40 wt% PTFE as binder and a fine Ni mesh as a current carrier, were needed to generate higher current densities. These systems were studied at 80 °C in aqueous 6 M KOH, which comprise conditions routinely used in industrial alkaline electrolysers. As in the previous studies, the electrolysers had no inter-electrode separators present.
 Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional schematic showing a ∼200 μm thick catalyst layer deposited on Gortex,6,76 and (b) polarization curves at different temperatures of an electrolyser having Gortex-based gas diffusion electrodes as both the anode and cathode, where the Gortex was over-coated with a ∼200 μm thick catalyst layer comprising of plasma-generated nano-Ni (20 nm average diameter) (60 wt%) with PTFE binder (40 wt%) and a fine Ni mesh current carrier (with 6 M KOH electrolyte).6 The electrodes were heat-treated prior to use, which is likely to have slightly modified the pore structure of the Gortex. The data points shown are averages of original data, which was collected in quadruplicate. The cross-section in (a) was prepared by sectioning, polishing and photographing a sample fixed in Epo-fix resin using the cold mounting technique of Struers, Ballerup, Denmark. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
Prior to operating the electrolysers, the individual Gortex electrodes were tested in transparent, 3-electrode cells and found to remain scrupulously bubble-free, at least when viewed with the naked eye, to current densities of 50–150 mA cm−2 at room temperature.6 Higher bubble-free current densities could be realized at elevated temperatures, or with the application of a 0.3–1.5 bar overpressure on the liquid electrolyte, or by tightly overlaying the catalyst surface with a ‘bubble-supressing’ polyethersulfone (PES) membrane that was ∼80% porous.6 The porous PES membrane suppressed bubble formation on the abutting catalyst surface because the capillary pressure of the liquid electrolyte in its pores, which were tight up against the catalyst surface, created an additional pressure that had to be overcome for a bubble to nucleate and expand.6,66b
When operated at 10 mA cm−2 over 1 h at 80 °C, the electrolysers required 2-electrode voltages as low as ≤1.31 V, which was well below the thermoneutral voltage.6 At such potentials, water electrolysis is endothermic, with the cells absorbing heat from the surroundings in order to split water. The cells had to be heated using an external heater to maintain a steady 80 °C.6
Gas collection experiments indicated that ∼98.4% of the produced hydrogen was collected by the cathode gas chamber. The hydrogen was found to be unusually pure, with oxygen undetectable in it using a gas chromatograph. The cells were clearly able to operate safely without a separator between the electrodes to keep the produced oxygen from mixing with the hydrogen, and vice versa. The only gas crossover occurred by diffusion of dissolved gases between the electrodes and that was negligibly low. At a fixed (bubble-free) current density of 10 mA cm−2, without an inter-electrode separator, the crossover was estimated using Fick's law to be only 0.0083% oxygen in the hydrogen stream and 0.0137% hydrogen in the oxygen stream.6 By comparison, at a fixed current density of 10 mA cm−2, no present-day commercial electrolyser – either PEM or alkaline – can operate safely with <2% hydrogen in the oxygen stream, and vice versa. Such electrolysers typically need to operate above 150–350 mA cm−2 to maintain cross-contamination of the gas streams below 2%.2b These results were therefore significant improvements over existing commercial electrolysers.
Moreover, in not requiring an inter-electrode separator to maintain low gas crossover and safe operation, the electrolysers could potentially operate indefinitely at temperatures higher than 110 °C, at which modern separators are destroyed. For example, if fabricated from suitable high temperature polymer materials, such as polysulfone or polyphenylene sulphide, and pressurized to ≥3–4 bar absolute pressure to prevent the 6 M KOH electrolyte from boiling, they could conceivably operate safely at ∼150 °C. As noted above, earlier studies demonstrated that water electrolysis could be readily achieved with 100% energy efficiency at ∼150 °C.75 Moreover, studies confirmed that electrolyser cells with breathable electrodes could be pressurized up to at least 9 bar absolute electrolyte pressure (8 bar gas chamber absolute pressure) without affecting their performance; indeed, their performance improved, likely because the higher pressures forced the gas through the Gortex.74b
As with the Villa electrolyser,76 the polarization curves of the above electrolysers exhibited declines in their onset potentials with increasing temperature. In the best-performing electrolyser the onset potential fell from ∼1.48 V at 40 °C, to ∼1.41 V at 60 °C, to an unprecedented low of ∼1.28 V at 80 °C.6 This, 200 mV change far exceeded conventional alkaline electrolysers whose onset potentials typically decrease by only ∼0.04 V in going from 40 °C to 80 °C (this being essentially dictated by the change in resistance due to the change in temperature). The onset potential of ∼1.28 V was also the lowest yet recorded at 80 °C and far below those of conventional PEM and alkaline electrolysers, which, as noted earlier, were ≥1.45 V at 80 °C.
At elevated temperatures of 80–100 °C, the onset potentials also appeared to decrease as the intensity of the gas capillary effects increased. Thus, a bubble-free electrolyser with Gortex electrodes whose pore structure had been somewhat affected by heat-treatment during coating with plasma-generated nanoparticulate Ni and PTFE binder, exhibited an onset potential of ∼1.30 V at 90 °C (Fig. 12(b)).6 Moreover, Villa's earlier-mentioned bubble-free electrolyser with conventional gas diffusion electrodes, having larger and less hydrophobic pores than the Gortex substrates, displayed an onset potential of ∼1.35 V at 100 °C (Fig. 11(c)).76 The progression of onset potentials was therefore in the order: ∼1.35 V (100 °C) (conventional carbon gas diffusion layer) > ∼1.30 V (90 °C) (heat-treated Gortex) > ∼1.28 V (80 °C) (untreated Gortex). This suggested that the onset potential declined as the intensity of the gas capillary effect of the gas diffusion layer increased.
The first formation of gas bubbles on an electrode surface in a conventional, bubbled alkaline electrolyser, which causes a bubble curtain to cover the electrode, occurs immediately above the ‘diffusion limited’ current – i.e. the maximum current at which all of the formed gases can diffuse away from the electrode. The ‘diffusion limited’ current is, however, exceedingly low for gases like oxygen and hydrogen that are very poorly soluble in 6 M KOH at 80 °C (equilibrium saturation concentrations of ∼0.0000976 mol kg−1 H2 and ∼0.0000876 mol kg−1 O2) and have low diffusion rates (diffusion coefficients of ∼0.0000592 cm2 s−1 (H2) and ∼0.0000198 cm2 s−1 (O2)).
At the first ‘observed’ current therefore (i.e. at the onset potential), the electrodes in a conventional alkaline electrolyser are already covered with bubbles. This bubble curtain creates a large resistance that normally contributes to a high onset potential (≥1.45 V at 80 °C). As the bubble curtain appears to be largely unaffected by changes in temperature, commercial alkaline electrolysers do not seem to exhibit significant changes in onset potential as the temperature increases.6
By contrast, with the Gortex electrodes, the bubble curtain appeared to become increasingly thinned out with temperature, causing the onset potentials of the cells to change significantly (i.e. ∼0.20 V, in going from 40 °C to 80 °C).
It appeared unlikely that the bubble curtain had been entirely eliminated as the onset potential of the best-performing bubble-free electrolyser did not decline to its minimum theoretical potential, corrected for electrolyte, catalyst and electrical conductivity.6 Bubbles that were invisible to the naked eye must presumably still have been present, either on or in the catalyst layer of the electrode. The term ‘bubble-free’ was therefore likely only true for observations made using the naked eye.
Given that low onset potentials correlate with increased energy efficiency and lowered resistance, it could be tentatively concluded that the Gortex-based electrodes with the strongest gas capillary effects were the most successful at minimizing the bubble curtain on their catalysts. Studies suggested that the Gortex substrates more efficiently extracted the gases out of the catalyst layers as they were formed, thereby minimizing the opportunity for bubbles to form on or in their electrodes.
These properties also played out in the potential required by the individual electrodes to maintain a fixed current density of 10 mA cm−2. At 80 °C, the oxygen generating NiCo2O4 catalyst on the anode electrode of the best-performing electrolyser, required a 0.16 V lower voltage to maintain 10 mA cm−2 when operating bubble-free on a Gortex substrate than when producing oxygen bubbles on a non-porous substrate.6 That is, its overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and 80 °C, decreased by 0.16 V.6
This is substantial and of the same order noted in the Introduction to be needed if hydrogen is to become competitive with stored electricity as an energy carrier. Indeed, using the above examples, the energy penalty due to bubble formation in conventional, electrolysers was estimated by the authors to be ≥11.9% LHV,†6 which is again within the required 5–12% improvement in energy efficiency.


Alveolus-like bubble-free water oxidation catalysis. 
In 2019, Cui and co-workers reported O2-generating electrocatalysis in 1 M KOH by a gas diffusion electrode comprising a Au/NiFeOx catalyst layer (50–100 nm thick) deposited on a porous polyethylene membrane with a hydrophobic nano-pore structure.10 The term ‘alveolus-like electrode’ (‘Alv-PE’) was coined by the authors to describe the electrode, which was biomimetic, being inspired by two-way gas transport within mammalian pulmonary systems.10 At room temperature the catalyst on the ‘breathing-mimicking’ nanoporous polyethylene commenced generating current at an onset potential of only 1.42 V but remained bubble-free to the naked eye up to 1.65 V (vs. RHE), which appears to have correlated to a current density of many hundreds of mA cm−2 (Fig. 13; ‘Alv-PE’; see top row of photographs entitled “Reaction onset potential” and “Bubble onset potential”).10 To the best of our knowledge, the onset potential of 1.42 V is the lowest ever reported for an electrolyser at room temperature. It is better even than the onset potentials of conventional bubbled electrolysers at 80 °C (≥1.45 V).
 Fig. 13  Linear sweep voltammograms for water oxidation catalysis of a Au/NiFeOx catalyst layer (50–100 nm thick) deposited on: (1) a polyethylene substrate with a hydrophobic nanopore structure (‘Alv-PE’), (2) a conventional carbon gas diffusion electrode (‘Alv-C GDL’), and (3) on a non-porous polyethylene substrate (‘Flat PE’). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
By contrast when an identical catalyst layer was deposited on a conventional carbon gas diffusion layer, large and likely somewhat static bubbles were observed from the onset potential at 1.46 V (Fig. 13; ‘Alv-C GDL’; see middle row of photographs, with first photograph entitled “Rxn/Bubb onset potential”).10
When the same catalyst layer was deposited on a non-porous polyethylene sheet substrate, vigorous bubble formation and release was observed from the onset potential, which was higher again at 1.50 V (Fig. 13; ‘Flat PE’; see bottom row of photographs, with first photograph entitled “Rxn/Bubb onset potential”).10 The gas bubbles were too small to be seen clearly in the photographs of this electrode in Fig. 13.
Thus, in this example also, a gas capillary effect was clearly evident, with the nanoporous hydrophobic polyethylene membrane creating a significantly lower onset potential (that was bubble-free) than the conventional gas diffusion layer, whose onset potential was lower than the non-porous polyethylene substrate.
An increase in the intensity of the gas capillary action of the substrate led to: (i) bubble-free gas generation, even up to notably high current densities, and (ii) an ever decreasing onset potential in accord with the likelihood that newly-formed gas would be drawn through the electrode instead of producing gas bubbles that covered the electrode and were released by buoyancy-induced detachment.
At a constant 1.4 V (vs. RHE), the ‘alveolus-like electrode’ (‘Alv-PE’) electrode produced a steady 22 mA cm−2, with ∼97% activity retention, over a continuous 250 h of testing (Fig. 14; ‘Alv-PE’; red curve).10 By contrast, the same catalyst deposited on the conventional gas diffusion electrode produced ∼22 mA cm−2 initially but this declined sharply with time, to ∼16 mA cm−2 after 75 h (Fig. 14; ‘Alv-C GDL’; black curve). The catalyst on the non-porous polyethylene substrate produced a stable ∼7.4 mA cm−2 over 110 h of testing (Fig. 14; ‘Flat-PE’; blue curve). Thus, the gas capillary effect of the hydrophobic nanopores of the polyethylene substrate increased the current density by ∼3-fold at a very low applied voltage. This was undoubtedly due to the absence of a (visible) gas curtain on the bubble-free electrode.
 Fig. 14  Chronoamperograms at 1.4 V for water oxidation catalysis of a Au/NiFeOx catalyst layer (50–100 nm thick) deposited on: (1) a polyethylene substrate with a hydrophobic nanopore structure (‘Alv-PE’), (2) a conventional carbon gas diffusion electrode (‘Alv-C GDL’), and (3) on a non-porous polyethylene substrate (‘Flat PE’). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
The authors also measured the potential needed for O2-generation at 10 mA cm−2 and room temperature. The ‘alveolus-like electrode’ (‘Alv-PE’) electrode with the nanoporous polyethylene present needed a 0.09 V lower voltage than the ‘Flat-PE’ electrode with the non-porous polyethylene substrate. This is a substantial difference that will, necessarily, increase at higher temperatures, placing it within the range needed to make hydrogen competitive with stored electricity as an energy carrier.
In the example developed by Cui et al.,10 the gross structure of the electrode consisted of a flexible sac of gas-permeable polyethylene membrane immersed in the electrolyte and covered in an OER catalyst. A potential issue with this electrode architecture was that, without the membrane being rigid, an overpressure could not be applied to the liquid electrolyte to promote gas transport and suppress bubble formation. That is, a pressure differential (ΔP), in which the pressure of the electrolyte (PE) outside the sac was greater than the gas pressure (PG) inside the sac could not be applied without the sac collapsing in on itself. This contrasts with the conventional and Gortex-based gas diffusion electrodes described earlier that could sustain pressure differentials of at least 2 bar.75


Bubble-free water oxidation catalysis under a pressure differential. 
The role of a pressure differential formed one of the topics of a recent study by Tsekouras and co-workers to examine in greater detail, selected features of bubble-free, breathable electrodes.77 The key objective of this work was to try to understand how newly-formed gas moved within the thick (≥200 μm) catalyst layers on the porous, gas capillary ePTFE layer on Gortex electrodes as discussed earlier. As noted, relatively thick catalyst layers are almost invariably needed to achieve high current densities in electrolysers.
To carry out these investigations a new type of breathable electrode was developed in which an interlayer of fused, micron-sized PTFE particles was inserted between the gas-generating catalyst layer and the gas-extracting Gortex substrate. Fig. 15 provides a schematic cross-section of the electrodes. RANEY® Ni was used as the O2-generating anode catalyst and testing was carried out in 1 M KOH at 20–60 °C, with overpressures of: ΔP = PE − PG = 0 kPa to 80 kPa, on the liquid electrolyte.
 Fig. 15  Schematic cross-section of the 3-layer breathable electrodes developed by Tsekouras and colleagues. The gas-generating catalyst-binder layer included a fine Ni mesh current carrier (not shown here for clarity). The dark coloured regions in that layer represent catalyst particles, while the light coloured ones represent fine powder PTFE particles. Pores within the catalyst layer are shown in blue. The PTFE interlayer comprised of powdered PTFE particles that fibrillated together during fabrication. The expanded PTFE (ePTFE) membrane at the bottom was part of a Gortex membrane. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. 
The first question addressed by the authors involved determining whether gas bubbles were formed inside the thick catalyst layer during gas generation. Such gas bubbles would not be visible to the naked eye, so that mere observation could not be relied upon to prove that they were absent.
To answer this question, the authors developed an instrument-based technique they called ‘electrochemical signal drift’, as a sensitive probe of gas bubble formation within the catalyst layer of the electrode itself. Using this technique, they concluded that bubble formation may, indeed, occur within the thick catalyst layer even when no bubbles were visible to the human eye. However, by tuning the weight and volumetric ratio of PTFE to catalyst, detectable new bubble formation within the catalyst layer could be avoided. Such optimizations were accompanied by and directly correlated with significant improvements in electrocatalytic performance.
Comparative photographs of a bubble-generating bare Ni mesh (Fig. 16(a)) and an optimized bubble-free breathable electrode (Fig. 16(b)), both held at a fixed current density of 100 mA cm−2, provided a dramatic juxtaposition of their appearance, as well as their electrocatalytic performance (Fig. 16(c)). The bare Ni mesh was covered in a vigorously agitating bubble curtain (Fig. 16(a)), while the breathable electrode appeared completely free of gas bubbles (Fig. 16(b)).
 Fig. 16  Appearance of oxygen-evolving electrodes at 100 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH and 20 °C of: (a) Bare Ni mesh (covered in gas bubbles), (b) breathable electrode with a PTFE interlayer (ΔP 50 kPa) (showing a complete absence of gas bubbles). (c) Steady-state current–voltage curves of the electrodes shown in (a) and (b). This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 77 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. 
The authors further demonstrated that electrodes optimized in this way were only bubble-free (to the naked eye) at current densities below a maximum limit that was termed the ‘bubble-free limit’. Above this limit, bubbles started forming on or in the catalyst layer. However, if the current was then again decreased to below the limit, then all of those bubbles were quickly extracted and removed, rendering the electrode ‘bubble-free’ once again. That is, bubbles formed inside the catalyst layer at a current density above the bubble-free limit did not persist, but were rapidly removed once the conditions for bubble-free operation were re-established. The application of an overpressure on the liquid electrolyte relative to the gas chamber, expanded the range of current densities at which the electrode was bubble-free.
As to the question of how newly-formed gases were transported within the thick catalyst layer to the gas-extracting ePTFE layer of Gortex during bubble-free operation, two options existed. These were that: (i) the gases dissolved in the polymer structures themselves in the catalyst layer (i.e. in the PTFE binder) and migrated within these structures to the Gortex membrane, or (ii) the gas was scavenged by the hydrophobic surfaces present in the PTFE binder and then migrated along those surfaces to the Gortex (as described in the previous section of this work, entitled Hydrophobic Masking). Studies indicated that the latter was the correct explanation. Flooding of the PTFE interlayer with electrolyte was found to entirely halt all gas extraction by the Gortex membrane. This could not have occurred if the gas was migrating within the body of the polymeric PTFE structures present since the flooding did not interrupt the physical contacts between these structures in the electrode. By contrast, flooding with electrolyte would interrupt the migration of gas along contacting PTFE surfaces exposed to that electrolyte.


Stacking bubble-free cells in a filter-press arrangement. 
A key advantage of bubble-free cells is that they not only minimize or avoid the direct energy losses deriving from gas bubble formation and release, but also escape the associated indirect costs and complexities. For example, in having no gas bubbles, they avoid the presence of gas–liquid froths and thereby allow for a significant simplification of the cell and the balance of plant. As mentioned earlier, froth formation creates potentially serious complications in electrolysers, which may include the need to pump the froths to gas–liquid separators, or, alternatively, accommodate their variable densities/volumes with expansion volumes. By contrast, in a bubble-free electrolyser cell, gas collection can be performed directly in the cell without such complexities.
One report has considered how breathable electrodes may be incorporated into cells and half-cells that can be stacked in a filter press-type arrangement.78 This work examined the fabrication and engineering of such a cell or half-cell – this is critical to realising a simplified overall electrolyser system.
Several designs were described. Fig. 17 depicts one approach in which gas-collecting half-cells were fabricated and then stacked.78 This design was said to be suitable for operation at temperatures of ≥150 °C (presumably using high-temperature polymers), thereby allowing for 100% energy efficient electrolysis with no excess heat generated and no cooling system needed.75 It assumed water- and gas-tight sealing during fabrication that was reliable over long-term operation.
 Fig. 17  Schematic depiction of the fabrication of a stackable, gas-collecting half-cell utilizing breathable electrodes. Cells of this type may be readily stacked with other half-cells in a bipolar (filter press) arrangement, with each successive half-cell in the stack alternatively collecting hydrogen or oxygen. Gas headers running through the stack collect either hydrogen from all of the hydrogen-producing half-cells, or oxygen from all of the oxygen-producing half-cells. The busbars in each half-cell are configured to connect with busbars in the adjoining half-cells to thereby create bipolar electrical connections between electrodes within the stack. These electrical pathways must go around and cannot go through the Gortex gas diffusion layers, which are non-conductive. Reproduced from ref. 78. 
The half-cell involved a circular, polymeric frame having a recessed, square, sub-frame. Two, outwardly-facing gas diffusion electrodes, comprising of Gortex membranes coated with a catalyst layer that included a current collecting metal mesh, were welded along the peripheral edges of the Gortex, to the recessed sub-frame. This created a liquid-tight, gas-receiving chamber between the two electrodes, within the thickness of the recessed sub-frame. A polymer net inter-electrode separator was incorporated into the gas-receiving chamber for mechanical strength.
An exposed portion of each metal mesh current collector extended outward on one edge of each of the Gortex electrodes (marked as ‘exposed electrode’ in Fig. 17). The exposed ends of the metal mesh current collectors were thereafter welded to rectangular metallic busbars that were placed in the locations shown in Fig. 17.
Each busbar was positioned so as to make direct contact with a busbar (and associated electrode) in the next cell above or below in the stack. The busbar connections between the frames in the stack were so arranged that both of the gas diffusion electrodes in each individual frame produced the same gas, either H2 or O2. That is, the gas-receiving chamber in each frame collected one gas, either H2 or O2, with the next frame above (or below) in the stack collecting the other gas. Hydrogen and oxygen gas headers that extended through the stack, connected the respective gas chambers to the other hydrogen or oxygen gas-receiving chambers in the stack.
Within each frame, above and below the recessed gas-receiving chamber, inside the overall outer thickness of the frame, were volumes for liquid electrolyte. Tortuous electrolyte channels connected each electrolyte volume to common electrolyte manifolds that also extended through the stack. The electrolyte channels needed to be tortuous to minimize shunt currents once the stack was filled with electrolyte and operating.
The frames, thus fabricated, were stacked upon each other, with thin, non-conducting polymer nets (not shown) placed between the facing electrodes at the top of each frame and the bottom of the next frame above it. These polymer nets were needed to prevent short circuits between the facing electrodes. They also provided mechanical strength. The assembled stack was then filled with electrolyte. Application of a suitable voltage over the busbars at its two ends, produced hydrogen and oxygen.
This arrangement exhibited significant advantages when compared to conventional alkaline or PEM cells. The advantages included the prospect of substantially improving the energy efficiency of water electrolysis (to, potentially, 100%). It also simplified the engineering and balance of plant needed. Thus, as noted, since H2 and O2 froths would not be produced, there was no need to deal with them using gas–liquid separation systems or expansion volumes. In being capable of operating at 100% energy efficiency, there was potentially also no need for a cooling system, which would considerably reduce energy losses and economic costs. In so doing, the major elements of the balance of plant would, effectively, be reduced to a control system, a power supply, a deionized water supply, and gas handling infrastructure.
The cell also had disadvantages. The main one was the non-conductive nature of the Gortex gas diffusion layers, which forced the electrical connection between the bipolar electrodes in the stack to go around the Gortex in a “side-connection”. This created a more resistive pathway between the bipolar electrodes than is common in conventional cells (including those that connect directly through a conductive gas diffusion layer). While probably not a major constraint at low current densities, this arrangement would limit the energy efficiency with which larger current densities could be applied.
Another disadvantage was the presence of common electrolyte manifolds, which may facilitate shunt currents between the cells. This could, however, be avoided by altering the design to provide make-up water within each individual cell, thereby eliminating the need for circulating electrolyte and the common manifolds (as discussed earlier in, for example, the Shimko or Seymour designs).53,55–58

Superwetting electrodes
Another concept that has been explored has involved modifying the surface morphology of gas-evolving electrodes to encourage the production of smaller, non-coalescing gas bubbles that release rapidly. One way this may be achieved involves creating protrusive spicules on the electrode surface, which minimise the contact area of nucleating bubbles, encouraging their detachment by buoyant forces.79 Such protrusions could be said to be ‘gas-rejecting’ structures, especially if they are hydrophilic or superhydrophilic, and the electrodes can be said to be ‘superwetting’.79 Such nanostructured, aerophobic features therefore improve gas generating performance by enlarging the bubble contact angle and reducing the bubble adhesion force.79 But they also provide other benefits, including higher active surface areas, higher porosity, and enhanced electron transport, all of which may further amplify catalytic performance.79
A large number of studies have demonstrated such effects and the field has been reviewed in some detail.79,80 For this reason, a detailed exposition of the work undertaken is not provided here, except to discuss a selected example that illuminates some of the practical considerations that may arise with the application of this approach to the electrodes in a water electrolyser.
An example of the enhancement of HER electrode performance81 by the nanostructuring of catalyst deposition was provided by Brinkert and colleagues, who achieved this using shadow nanosphere lithography (SNL). This technique82 deposits catalytic particles around a removable template of close-packed, surface-adsorbed nanospheres, resulting in a regular array of ring features. The cusped cross section of these features substantially enhanced bubble detachment, whilst the shape and separation of the features blocked bubble coalescence.81
An illustration of notional functionalisation of SNL-deposited nanostructures is provided in Fig. 18, which was thematically inspired by bimetallic SNL† deposition nanostructures demonstrated by Kosiorek, et al.82 A limitation of the SNL† methodology is that, as an evaporative deposition method, it is sensitive to the angle between the evaporation source and the deposition target. This would likely hamper or preclude the use of the technique to decorate electrodes with undulating surfaces or complex, self-shadowing topologies (of which metal foams are a ready example). Conversely, precipitation of spicular crystals from solution is a more tenable route to the deposition of conformal roughness on metal foams, albeit without the high regularity afforded by the SNL† method.
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of functionalisation of a superwetting electrode surface using the technique of shadow nanosphere lithography (SNL). (a) Pristine deposition substrate. (b) Deposition of cusped, periodic gas-rejecting nanostructure by SNL. Occluding nanospheres have been omitted for clarity. (c) Secondary deposition of isolated nucleation sites for catalyst growth. (d) Tertiary preferential growth of catalytic particles at nucleation sites, affording nanostructured catalytic electrode (inset: depiction of cross-sectional structure of spicule, with nucleated gas bubble). 
Thus, fabrication techniques that impart high regularity and ideal feature structure, leading to optimum catalytic performance, may not be easily and practically applied to the electrodes used in electrolysers. On the other hand, less precise fabrication techniques, such as solution or electrochemical techniques, may not afford the ideal structures that are likely to be needed to fully exploit this effect. The best option may therefore be to combine different techniques in electrode fabrication. For example, a large configuration space of topographically and topologically distinct surface morphologies appears to be accessible via SNL,† through alterations in the SNL† procedure. Thus, regular nanostructures generated by this technique could potentially act as nucleation sites for further precipitation of catalytic particles, so that the practically achievable surface chemistry need not be limited by direct compatibility with the SNL† technique.
Finally, a potentially important and severe disadvantage of superwetting electrodes should be noted. While regular, repeated nanostructure of this type may accelerate bubble detachment and minimise bubble size, it also has the potential to create long-lived, sub-micrometer bubbles, called ‘nanobubbles’. Nanobubbles may remain on, and block surfaces for long periods of time. Until quite recently, such bubbles were not considered to exist based on predictions by Epstein–Plesset theory,83,84 which indicated that they would have to contain within them, unfeasibly high Laplace pressures. However, anomalous long-range (≥100 nm) attractions between hydrophobic mica sheets that have long puzzled theoreticians were recently successfully explained by the bridging of sessile nanobubbles.85 Moreover, persistent surface nanobubbles on various substrates (hydrophobised Si, highly oriented pyrolitic graphite (HOPG), glass) were also directly imaged by tapping-mode atomic force microscopy.86–88 So, surface nanobubbles are now an accepted phenomenon.
They are believed to arise from a combination of gas supersaturation and contact line pinning due to ‘sufficient [geometric or chemical] surface heterogeneity’.89,90 Nanobubbles are characterized by extraordinary stability (with lifetimes up to many days)91 and extremely low buoyancy (e.g. 100 nm diameter bubbles take over two weeks to rise 1 cm),92 meaning that they may remain on the electrode surface and reduce its effective electrochemical surface area for an extended period of time. Ostwald ripening processes of surface nanobubbles have been modelled in detail and indicate that nanobubbles with sufficiently small separations will coalesce into larger bubbles as may be intuitively anticipated.93 However, nanostructured surfaces which interfere with bubble coalescence without encouraging detachment (contrary to the example provided by Brinkert above)81 are likely to yield unsatisfactory performance.
These results explain experimental observations that nanometer-scale surface protrusions encourage nanobubble formation.91 The lattice density functional theory (LDFT) results of Liu, et al.90 are of particular note in this respect because they illustrate the use of a ring-shaped chemical or topographic feature to effect the contact line pinning and stabilisation of a nanobubble. Moreover, they are strikingly similar to the structured surface topology of the electrode of Brinkert, et al. described above81 and suggests possible alternative kinetics for process enhancement in such electrodes.
Sonication
Sonication is the process of applying sound energy to a sample. This may involve audible sound waves within the range of human hearing, or ‘ultrasound’, which involves sound waves with frequencies beyond the upper audible limit of human hearing (≥20 kHz). Sonication has been successfully used to amplify the rates of bubble generation in water electrolysers, and thereby also their current densities. However, there are caveats to the use of sonication in electrolysis due to the high associated energy densities.
Sonication of a liquid creates a rich variety of acoustophoretic effects that are of potential relevance to gas evolving electrodes. The two main effects are: ‘rectified diffusion’ and ‘acoustic microstreaming’.
In a liquid, the phenomenon of rectified diffusion involves acoustically stimulating the isotropic expansion and contraction of a bubble in such a way that gas diffuses into the bubble preferentially (i.e. a form of imperfect ‘gas diode’).94 In effect, the liquid is compressed and decompressed rapidly, causing micro-voids to repeatedly form and then collapse within it. This happens only when the acoustic pressure exceeds a certain threshold (≥10 kPa).94 In water, the power required to achieve such an acoustic pressure is much lower than that required in air.
The net effect of creating and then collapsing voids in this way, is reported to improve the performance of a gas evolving electrode by increasing both the bubble growth rate (and therefore bubble detachment frequency and bubble buoyancy) as well as the clearance of dissolved gases from the vicinity of the electrode. In essence, instead of relying on a high level of gas supersaturation in the liquid electrolyte to create gas bubbles, rectified diffusion cyclically creates bubble-like voids into which dissolved gas may migrate at a lower supersaturation. In this way, gas ‘bubbles’ are produced without the additional voltage needed for high level supersaturation (i.e. the bubble overpotential43 is largely avoided). Moreover, such ‘assisted’ bubble formation need not occur only in the cracks, clefts and defects on the electrode surface itself (heterogeneous bubble formation), as is normally the case. Instead, it can occur in open solutions, away from the electrode surface, so that the ‘bubbles’ thus formed, are already detached (homogeneous bubble formation). The constant back and forth movement induced by sonication and the possibility of gas migrating from one void to the next, further assists in the movement of the gas away from the electrode. That is, the bubble curtain, or, actually, the bubble froth in this case, is highly dynamic; it doesn't block access to the electrode in the same way that a bubble curtain may and it provides a thoroughly mixed two-phase gas/liquid mixture through which newly-formed gases may readily migrate.
Acoustic microstreaming is a fluid motion associated with an acoustically driven bubble. Gas flow simply arises from the fact that bubbles/dissolved gases are entrained in the microstreaming fluid. With small bubbles, these flows derive from radial and translational modes of bubble oscillation.95 However, in bubbles larger than approximately 1 mm, surface modes, known as Faraday waves, become dominant and accessible to excitation at quite low acoustic pressures (30–50 Pa) and frequencies 1–10 kHz.96 A complete theory of acoustic microstreaming has been constructed by the successive contributions of many researchers over approximately half a century.95
A critical point to note is that microstreaming is most efficient around the resonant frequency of the bubble in the small-amplitude Rayleigh–Plesset approximation97 (eqn (2)). (2)where ρ is the liquid density, κ is an effective polytropic coefficient such that pVκ is constant, σ is the surface tension, p is the pressure, a is the bubble radius, and V is the volume.
This frequency closely matches the Minnaert resonant frequency (eqn (3)) for bubbles larger than 10 μm (10−5 m), as illustrated in Fig. 19. (3)
 Fig. 19  Comparison of Rayleigh–Plesset and Minnaert resonant frequencies f for an idealised isolated spherical bubble in water, as a function of bubble radius a, for ρ = 998.2 kg m−3, σ = 7.28 × 10−2 N m−1, κ = 1.2 (approximately consistent with ref. 98), p = 1.01 × 105 Pa. 
At bubble sizes exceeding approximately 110 μm, the corresponding Rayleigh–Plesset frequency is within the nominal range of human hearing (≤20 kHz), which implies that bubble excitation at this scale is attainable with commercial transducers for audio applications. Where bubbles are encapsulated in an amphiphilic surfactant micelle, the resonant frequency is higher, and better described by the model of Marmottant and coworkers.99,100 Acoustic microstreaming is enhanced by the presence of other bubbles or rigid walls, which act as acoustic mirrors (the ‘Narcissus effect’).100
A large number of studies have examined the effect of ultrasound irradiation on chemical reactions. Early work concerned metal electroplating in jewellery and other applications, where improved rates, morphologies, adhesion and a reduced need for brighteners in the coating solution were noted.101 Later studies reported acoustic effects on organic electrosynthesis (e.g. of the Kolbe reaction, ketone electroreduction, copolymer formation that was initiated electrochemically, and the preparation of organotellurium and organoselenium compounds).101 In addition light emission by electrochemiluminescence may be substantially increased by ultrasound, while environmentally-important waste treatment processes (e.g. electrochemical dehalogenation of aromatics in microemulsions) may also rely on ultrasound.101
In 1996, Walton and colleagues undertook voltametric studies under carefully oriented ultrasound irradiation (38 kHz), of hydrogen and oxygen gas evolution in 1 M H2SO4, as well as chlorine gas generation in 2.5 M NaCl/0.1 M HCl at platinized Pt electrodes.101 These studies demonstrated a ∼2.1-fold higher rate of hydrogen generation at −0.05 V (vs. RHE). At 38 kHz, the wavelength of sound in water is ∼4 cm, explaining why careful positioning of the ultrasonic source was required. By comparison, the rate of oxygen generation at 2.00 V (vs. RHE) diminished by 17% under sonication. This was ascribed to the growth of an insulating oxide layer that appeared to be accelerated by the irradiation. Chlorine generation was also amplified when sonicated, but this was smaller than hydrogen at ∼1.2-fold. The higher solubility of chlorine gas in the electrolyte explained the difference.
McMurray and co-workers later demonstrated amplifications in current densities for catalytic hydrogen evolution of >4-fold, in neutral 0.7 M aqueous Na2SO4 at 30 °C by the use of a Ti ‘sonotrode’ oscillating at 15–40 kHz.102 Over the range −1.25 V to −1.6 V, the overpotentials declined by 500 mV. This study identified sonication-enhanced bubble desorption and mass transport by microstreaming as likely mechanisms for enhancement, among others.102 The employed frequency regime corresponded to stimulation of bubbles with radii of ∼75–200 μm, in the Minnaert model (Fig. 19).
Li, et al. demonstrated overall improvements in the efficiency of alkaline water electrolysis (0.1–1.0 M NaOH) with specific enhancement of the HER by orienting sonic transducers parallel to a pair of Ti electrodes coated with RuO2 and TiO2.9 The efficiency of the OER was, contrarily, somewhat diminished in most operational regimes of current density and electrolyte concentration. The authors attributed this to differences in hydrogen and oxygen gas bubble dynamics. The energy saving for hydrogen production by using the ultrasonic field was 10–25%, which the authors attributed to enhancement of the electrochemical surface area by enhanced bubble clearance from the electrodes. It should be noted that this work stated that a 60 Hz transducer was used.9 This was presumable meant to be 60 kHz, since it would otherwise be audible to the human ear and not ultrasonic in nature. A frequency of 60 Hz would have corresponded to a Minnaert radius of 5.1 cm, which is larger than the 3 cm inter-electrode separation employed in the cell.103
Subsequent to the above work, several patent applications sought to claim electrolysers fitted with sonication devices.104 The basis for such applications has, effectively, been that the energy input required for the sonication was less than the energy saving achieved in the electrolysis process thanks to the sonication; that is, that sonication leads to an enhanced return on the energy invested in water electrolysis.
Despite the possibilities of sonication-assisted bubble growth, detachment, and transport, it should be noted that the large shear flows induced by cavitation are capable of causing substantial damage to microstructures like those that may be present in modern-day catalyst layers within electrolyser electrodes. Within the human body, the reversible and irreversible creation of pores in cell membranes and vesicles is a well-characterised effect of ultrasonication (known as ‘sonoporation’),105,106 as is the increased risk of fluids passing through vein walls during intravenous infusion.107 In renal/urethral108 and dental109 applications, ultrasound is used to destroy unwanted crystalline solids, such as kidney stones. Whilst not arising from sonication, cavitation-induced erosion is well-known to damage marine propellers.110
In the same way, ultrasound-related cavitation damage of OER/HER sonotrodes has been identified as an important impediment to the practical realisation of sonication-enhanced catalysis.111 Such damage may be severe in highly friable electrodes, such as those produced by deposition of metal oxide particles on open-cell substrates, like Ni foams. Indeed, sonication of such electrodes may denude such electrodes of catalytic particles by processes analogous to those found in ultrasonic cleaning.
Whilst literature examining the effect of ultrasonic cavitation on liquid-immersed metal foam- or other structured electrodes is scarce, investigations have been carried out on the effect of ultrasound (20 kHz, 300 W) on open-cell Ni foam/bisphenol A resin/SiC nanoparticle co-continuous composites.112 The volume of the electrode was completely filled by a combination of the metal foam, nanoparticles, and the resin infill. This research found that ultrasonic irradiation facilitated pervasive damage of the composites, particularly of the Ni foam and particularly in acidic media. However the apparent lack of non-irradiated controls in this work precludes unambiguous assignment of the causes of damage to the composite.
In a similar vein, Madigan and co-workers reported rapid degradation of a variety of electrode surfaces due to ultrasonic (20 kHz) cavitation, drawing particular attention to ‘nucleated cavitation’ inside a pre-existing surface depression as a mechanism of damage enhancement in ceramic electrodes.113 Such results bode poorly for the durability of porous electrodes under similar conditions. The authors correlated the rate of electrode damage with increasing electrode hardness and stiffness (Young's modulus); bare metal surfaces sustained relatively low damage under analogous conditions.
Even in the absence of cavitation, ultrasonic driving of gas bubbles is likely to damage catalyst-loaded electrodes. Biophysical investigations provide some insight in this respect. Studies of ultrasonic gas bubble oscillations in blood vessels have demonstrated severe cyclic distention and turning inside-out, of the flexible vessel walls.114 Additionally, oscillating bubbles confined to narrow channels generate effective one-dimensional flows of greater characteristic intensity than free bubbles.115 In less elastic channels, the peak circumferential stresses generated by an oscillating bubble are larger.116 As such, it can be reasonably anticipated that relatively intense shear flows will be generated within the narrow, rigid pores of metal foams, and that the energy of those flows will be substantially transmitted to adsorbed catalyst layers deposited at the circumference of the pore.
While ultrasonic irradiation is a credible mode of improving the energy efficiency of water electrolysis, it is unlikely that its use will be compatible with finely structured and surface-decorated electrodes, which places it at odds with contemporary innovation in electrode design.
Surfactants
There have been a number of reports suggesting that bubble dynamics in water-splitting electrodes may be changed by the inclusion of surfactants in the electrolyte. On the face of it, this approach appears reasonable, given that gas bubbles are known to be charged.23 Within the context of catalytic oxygen generation however, questions do arise as to whether the surfactants are preferentially oxidized at the anode electrode, which facilitates the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Organic molecules are generally more readily oxidisable than water or hydroxide, so that increases in current density upon the addition of a surfactant may potentially reflect the addition of a parallel surfactant oxidation process. Some surfactants may potentially also be reduced at the cathode but this is less of a concern. To be sure that such competing processes do not take place to any significant extent, studies should ideally confirm that the surfactants are oxidized or reduced outside of the water-splitting window, or that the faradic efficiency of oxygen and hydrogen production does not change when the surfactant is used. In cases where control experiments of this type are absent, claims regarding surfactant effects should be treated with appropriate caution.
The introduction of ionic and non-ionic surfactants into an electrode/electrolyte system has recently been shown to decrease the overpotential (relative to the onset potential) in some cases and increase the current density in all cases of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) by 47–460% at carbon paste electrodes (CPE) and copper nanoparticle/CPE electrodes (Table 1).117 A reduction in bubble size, bubble/electrode adhesion, and blocking of the electrode surface by bubbles was observed to accompany this effect. The authors also suggested that certain of the surfactants may enhance the adsorption of reactant hydronium ions (H+) at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces, which would improve the kinetics of hydrogen generation in the HER.103
Table 1 The effect of adding surfactants to the electrolyte of hydrogen generating electrodes on their overpotentials and current densities in 0.1 M H2SO4 solution117




Reactiona
Catalystb
Surfactantc,d
Over-potential changee
Current density increasef





a Catalytic hydrogen evolution in the range −0.35 V to −0.95 V vs. Ag/Ag/Cl (3 M KCl).
b CPE = carbon paste electrode.
c SDS = sodium dodecylsulfate.
d CTAB = cetyltrimethylammonium bromide.
e Relative to the onset potential.
f Absolute current, taking into account changes in onset potential.





2H+ → H2
CPE
SDS
−8%
+93%


2H+ → H2
CPE
CTAB
−8%
+144%


2H+ → H2
CPE
Triton X-100
−15%
+460%


2H+ → H2
Nano-Cu/CPE
SDS
0%
+47%


2H+ → H2
Nano-Cu/CPE
CTAB
−12%
+373%


2H+ → H2
Nano-Cu/CPE
Triton X-100
0%
+86%




Similar results were reported for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline electrolyte at a NiFe LDH electrode when the cationic surfactant cetrimonium bromide (CTAB) was incorporated.118 NiFe LDH has many hydroxyl groups on its surface. Ingress of the hydroxide (OH−) reactant to the electrode surface for the OER was therefore slowed by electrostatic repulsion. When the surface was modified with CTAB however, its surface charge was balanced and the cationic ends of the surfactant molecules favoured OH− ingress. This facilitated higher catalytic activities as well as gas bubble release, thereby lowering OER overpotentials at high current densities. The nanostructured NiFe LDH–CTAB electrodes exhibited ultrahigh current density increases of 9.39 mA (mV cm2)−1, which was 2.3 times higher than conventional NiFe LDH electrodes.118 For example, over 10 h of testing at a fixed current density of 100 mA cm−2, a NiFe LDH–CTAB electrode required only ∼1.47 V (vs. RHE) compared to its surfactant-free NiFe LDH control, which required ∼1.52 V; a 50 mV lower voltage.118 At 1.47 V (vs. RHE), the NiFe LDH–CTAB electrode produced ∼360 mA cm−2, whereas it surfactant-free, control NiFe LDH produced ∼90 mA cm−2; a 4-fold amplification in current.118
Electrode performance was, however, diminished by the use of the surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).118
Statistical analysis of bubble size, contact angle, and adsorption tension indicated a considerable reduction in the median bubble size and adhesive force for both surfactants,118 suggesting that a complex interplay of physico-chemical factors may have influenced the performance of such surfactant-mediated electrodes. The enhancement of electrode activity may potentially have been due to: (i) a decrease in the specific surface energy associated with bubble formation and growth,117 (ii) a modification of the catalyst surface by adsorbed surfactants leading to enhanced wettability (and therefore increased ‘aerophobicity’),118 or a combination of both of those factors.
Direct electrochemical effects may conceivably also have a bearing on the relative activity of surfactant-modified electrodes. Brinkert, et al. reported that HER performance in aged electrodes could be recovered by the addition of isopropanol to the electrolyte.81 They attributed this effect to a decrease in electrolyte surface tension.81 In this instance, it is possible that the reduction in surface tension overcomes kinetic barriers induced by electrode aging, rather than recuperating the original conditions of the pristine electrode.
It should also be noted that the use of surfactants may significantly complicate gas–liquid separation. That is, in modifying the hydrophobicity/aerophilicity of the electrode surface and decreasing the electrolyte surface tension, the use of surfactants may also encourage the formation of highly persistent liquid–gas froths. Such froths may be harder to separate into bulk liquid and gas phases in the tank separators presently used in electrolysers. This may necessitate larger separators and/or more extensive scrubbers to ensure that the produced gas is scrupulously free of electrolyte. The capital and operating costs of such modifications may offset the benefits of using surfactants. The formation of surfactant micelles around gas bubbles (generating so-called ‘coated bubbles’) is routinely used to suppress coalescence and encourage monodispersity in the microbubbles used for contrast enhancement in medical ultrasound.99 There is no reason to believe that the presence of surfactants would not have similar effects in electrolysis.
Electrolyser centrifugation (supergravity)
Electrolyser performance in the microgravity of outer space is well-known to be very poor due to the rapid formation of a persistent bubble curtain, also termed a ‘froth layer’,81 on the electrodes and the near-absence of electrolyte convection around the electrode.119,120 Thus, in the gravity of Earth, there must be a strong dependence on bubble buoyancy and associated agitation for electrolytic performance. It is this dependence that substantially diminishes the performance of water electrolysers in low- or microgravity environments, such as may be expected in free-fall, lunar (ḡ = 1.6 m s−2),121 or Martian (ḡ = 3.7 m s−2)122 contexts.
In the microgravity limit, bubble curtain formation is incessant and increases in void fraction to the point that the electrolysis is almost but not completely halted; various microconvection mechanisms ensure that it is not completely suppressed.123 This has implications for water electrolysis in regenerative fuel cell/oxygen production contexts, as pointed out by Matsushima and co-workers,119,120 who also studied modifications of the wettability of the electrode surface as a means of mitigating the issue.124 These studies involved terrestrial (1G) and microgravity (free-fall) environments, the latter of which were realised by dropping the test electrolysers down drop shafts.124 A special electrochemical control system was devised for these experiments.
At present, the only functional water electrolyser in orbit is the Oxygen Generation Assembly (OGA) of the International Space Station (ISS). This device employs a pump to continuously sweep the bubble froth off the electrodes.125,126 The froth is pumped into a Rotary Separator Accumulator, where the hydrogen is separated from the liquid electrolyte by centrifugation; that is, the froth is centrifuged to separate the produced hydrogen.125,126 The separated liquid electrolyte is then returned to the electrolyser. The hydrogen can either be vented into space or used in a Sabatier reactor where it reacts with exhaled carbon dioxide to produce water, thus closing the loop with regard to oxygen and water, with the produced methane vented to space.125
While this is the procedure used in the ISS OGA, two other modes of sustained, high-volume electrolytic water splitting in space that could have been used are:
(1) Centrifugal electrolysis, in which the electrolyser itself is spun in a centrifuge to create an artificial gravity that separates the hydrogen during operation; or
(2) Electrolysis utilizing breathable electrodes, which rely on gas capillary effects that are unaffected by gravity, or its absence, to extract gas as it is formed.
The use of breathable electrodes was discussed in an earlier section. It offers an intriguing approach to microgravity electrolysis. Bubble-free electrolysis entirely avoids the issues of bubble froth formation under microgravity since the gases are continuously and directly extracted from the catalyst layer as they are formed. There would therefore be no need to continuously remove the froth from the electrode surfaces or then have to separate it into bulk liquid and gas phases. A microgravity electrolyser based on the principles of breathing electrodes can be conceived of as a monolithic unit, with a substantial reduction in moving parts. Nevertheless, the complexities of engineering potentially life-critical systems for space applications are both sobering and outside of the scope of this work.
The other alternative, namely, a centrifugal electrolyser, has also been studied and, in fact, demonstrated to increase the efficiency of water electrolysis.8,127 When employed on Earth, such an electrolyser mimics the effect of an increased gravitational field on bubble adhesion. It has therefore been dubbed ‘supergravity’ by Wang and co-workers.8 This technique may employ quite extreme centripetal acceleration to keep the electrodes free of attached bubbles.
Following extensive early work on rotating electrolysers and electrochemical cells,128–136 Scott and colleagues studied and reported water electrolysis under industrial conditions with centrifugal acceleration in 2002.127 They compared the cell voltages and electrode potentials as a function of current density with and without centrifugation. At a relative acceleration rate of 190 G at 80 °C, large reductions in cell voltages of up to 0.700 V were observed at a fixed current density of 300 mA cm−2, relative to the stationery state. Anode and cathode potential declines of up to 0.500 V and 0.350 V respectively, were reported. The improved energy efficiency more than offset the much smaller energy required to rotate the cells. Most of the improvement in energy efficiency was found to come from accelerated mass transport, which led to bubbles being quickly removed from the electrode surfaces, thereby minimizing ohmic resistance. The authors concluded that centrifugation with a high acceleration field, had significant potential in commercial water electrolysis, where it should lead to higher system efficiencies.
Wang and colleagues carried out a similar study in 2010.8 In their work, they measured the voltage and overpotential declines under galvanostatic conditions as a function of the applied gravity coefficient (G) and the current density. They also took photographs of the hydrogen froth produced under various effective gravitational conditions (Fig. 20(a)). As can be seen, a truly dramatic decrease in the froth volume with increased effective gravitational field was evident. The authors reported that water electrolysis was notably amplified under centrifugation, with large declines in cell voltage relative to the stationery state, especially under high effective gravitational fields and at high current densities.
 Fig. 20  Water electrolysis under supergravity conditions: (a) photographs of the hydrogen froths produced under various effective gravity conditions (G) after chronoamperometric measurements; (b) cell voltage reduction (ΔUG), and (c) % energy savings as a function of effective gravity (G) at various current densities for water electrolysis. This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 8 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010. 
An approximately logarithmic decrease in cell overpotential with respect to the effective gravitational field was generally observed (Fig. 20(b)), leading to energy savings that increased the energy efficiency by 9–17% HHV† at current densities above 500 mA cm−2 (Fig. 20(c)).8 These improvements fall well within the 5–10% HHV† improvement in energy efficiency that was noted in the introduction to be needed for hydrogen to compete with electricity as an energy carrier.
A potential complication with the industrial realisation of such supergravity techniques is the requirement for high-durability, high-velocity electrical slip-rings, for rotary coupling of the electrodes to an external power source. Notionally, at the highest tested rotational velocity (approximately 7.0 Hz) in the apparatus constructed by Wang,8 the slip-ring underwent 100 million rotations in under 4000 hours, or less than half a year.
Cognisant of this fact, Lao, et al.137 investigated two liquid metal rotary electrical coupling configurations in an industrial scale prototype apparatus and found that such couplings performed acceptably at industrially relevant electrical currents. However the use of mercury carries significant environmental considerations on account of the toxicity of the metal and its compounds. By contrast, a Bi/Pb/Sn/Cd eutectic alloy-based coupling that was also tested rapidly attained a ‘mousse-like consistency’ inappropriate for long-term operation.137 The presence of Pb and Cd in this alloy poses its own environmental safety concerns due to the cumulative toxicity of these metals.
Rotary inductive coupling (i.e. a rotary transformer) offers a potential alternative route to transmitting electrical power through a slip ring interface. This mode of power transmission has been realised in low-power contexts in the form of simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) LIDAR sensors138 and helical scan videocassette recorders,139 whilst high power applications include rotary gantries for computed tomography (CT) scanners140 and interfaces for power transmission from wind turbine nacelles.141
To the best of our knowledge, only one centrifugal electrolyser has ever been developed to the point of a commercial prototype. The device, which was given the trade name Rotolyzer was developed by the Norwegian inventor, Age Skomsvold,142 and acquired by the large electrolyser company NEL in 2015.143 It is not clear what the status of this technology is and whether it is or will still become commercially available.
While centrifugal electrolysis undoubtedly provides major improvements in the energy efficiency of water electrolysers, it is hamstrung by complex and demanding engineering that is likely not only expensive, but also extremely challenging to scale up to industrially useful size.
Mechanical convection
As noted earlier, the void fraction at the working surface of an electrode can be reduced by pumping the liquid electrolyte over it. This creates a convective current (‘fluidic drag force’)144 which serves to remove bubbles from the electrode. If the flow is fast enough, the bubble curtain at the electrodes can be essentially eliminated. Recently-developed approaches have sought to harness this effect.
Gillespie and colleagues145,146 have described a Divergent Electrode-Flow-Through (DEFT) alkaline electrolyser in which two closely facing mesh electrodes separated by a gap of 800–2500 μm, had electrolyte injected between them at modest velocity (Fig. 21). The electrolyte flowed outward from the inter-electrode volume, in opposite directions, through the two opposing electrodes, thereby sweeping the bubbles formed by the electrodes to their rear. The prompt transport of bubbles away from the electrodes resulted in negligible void fraction in the inter-electrode space, and therefore optimal ionic conductivity between the electrodes. Moreover, despite the small electrode separation, the divergent flow of electrolyte also served to effectively separate the gas products, thereby minimizing gas crossover between the electrodes and facilitating safe operation.145,147,148
 Fig. 21  The principle of a Divergent Electrode-Flow-Through (DEFT) alkaline electrolyser. Electrolyte is injected at moderate speed into the inter-electrode space (blue arrows), causing it to flow outward through the facing electrodes, which are porous. In so doing, the gas bubbles formed on the porous electrodes are swept to the rear of each electrode, thereby maintaining both the inter-electrode volume and the electrode active surfaces free of gas bubbles. The produced hydrogen and oxygen is also separated, thereby avoiding the need for an ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator between the electrodes. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. 
With mesh electrodes of 30 mm diameter and an electrolyte flow velocity of 0.075–0.100 m s−1, the optimum electrode gap was found to be ∼2.5 mm.145 Higher flow velocities allowed for smaller gaps, down to 0.8 mm. While the absence of a bubble curtain on the electrodes and a separator between the electrodes should have imparted high energy efficiencies, the cell achieved only modest current densities of 220 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V and 70 °C when using precious metal catalysts on Ni mesh electrodes and 30 wt% KOH as electrolyte.145 The large inter-electrode gap (0.8–2.5 mm) likely negated the above benefits. The key advantage of the technology appeared to be its capacity to generate extremely high current densities approaching 4000 mA cm−2 at voltages around 3.5 V.145 The technology was later scaled up147 and developed into a filter press-type stack.148
A similar concept was described by Hartvigsen et al.149,150 In this case liquid electrolyte was pumped at pressure and temperatures of 83–246 °C into an inter-electrode chamber flanked by porous Ni electrodes without a separator between them. The electrolyte flowed through the Ni electrodes carrying the H2 and O2 gases away from the electrodes to separate locations. In this case however, at 246 °C and with bare Ni electrodes, the cell approached 100% energy efficiency at ∼500 mA cm−2, even taking into account the energy consumption of the pump (which equated to an equivalent overpotential of 70–100 mV).150 Unfortunately, the cell experienced notable corrosion and material compatibility issues, so that it could not be operated indefinitely.150
The concept of flow-induced gas separation has also been realised on a microfluidic scale, with hydrogen and oxygen bubbles entrained in separate but parallel laminar flows.144 Separation was dramatically enhanced at high electrolyte velocities by the Segré–Silberberg effect.151 However, the requirement for laminar Poiseuille flow constrained the scale and geometry of this gas separation modality, particularly as moving bubbles tend to produce wake turbulence.152 Nevertheless, a massively parallel microfluidic apparatus based on this principle can be easily conceived.
Integrated electrolysers which effect gas separation through fluid dynamic effects are attractive because they obviate the need for an inter-electrode separator to avoid gas product mixing. However, to date they have clearly not achieved their full potential.
Pressure modulation
Work by Bakker and Vermaas has recently examined the concept of modulating gas bubble size in an attempt to rapidly dislodge bubbles adhered to the electrodes in electrolysers.153 This was achieved by applying ‘pressure swings’ to the cell. Such swings increased the size and buoyancy of the gas bubbles to thereby mechanically induce release of the bubble froth layer, either for bubbles individually or via ‘synergistic bubble cluster detachment’. When pressure swings were applied every 100–300 s, a voltage reduction of ∼0.1 V was obtained. This voltage reduction was found to amplify nearly linearly with current density.
This technique requires a pressurised reactor, and any industrial application would have to consider the energy cost of re-pressurising the reactor after each purge.
Magnetohydrodynamics
Placement of OER electrodes within a strong transverse magnetic field has been shown to accelerate bubble growth and detachment dynamics, by magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) convection.154,155 However, the stabilisation of gas bubbles by strong magnetic fields normal to microelectrode surfaces have also been reported.112,156 These latter results have been rationalised theoretically156 and on the basis of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations,112 which demonstrated enhanced suction of bubbles to the electrode induced by highly local Lorentz forces.
Several complications arise in the design and use of MHD assisted electrodes:
(a) Very strong fields are required to elicit significant effects (B ≈ 5 T).155 This is likely to require superconducting electromagnets and can also be anticipated to complicate the design and operation of reactors that contain magnetically susceptible materials;
(b) Existing permanent magnets or Halbach arrays do not appear to be capable of supplying homogeneous long-range fields of sufficient flux density to meaningfully improve bubble removal in industrial-scale apparatuses;
(c) The requirement for transverse magnetic flux places constraints on allowable electrode geometry, and
(d) The magnetohydrodynamic Lorentz force is proportional to the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte,157 which may be otherwise constrained by cell chemistry.
Nevertheless, MHD-driven convection is of interest due to its ability to drive bubble removal without any moving parts.
Magnetic heating has also been successfully employed to improve catalytic activity in water electrolysis.158 This technique uses a radio frequency (300 kHz) magnetic field to achieve local micro-heating of magnetic catalytic particles through inductive coupling. The highly localised heating confers improved alkaline OER performance (indicated as being equivalent to operating the reactor at 200 °C)158 without requiring substantially elevated bulk electrolyte temperatures. This approach is limited to catalytic particles which possess a sufficient magnetic susceptibility to efficiently couple to the RF magnetic field.
Conclusions
In this work we have reviewed and examined the different ways in which the deleterious direct and indirect effects of bubble formation and release in water electrolysis could be eliminated or mitigated. Approaches to address the indirect effects have involved engineering and design innovations to simplify and streamline the balance of plant. The direct effects have been tackled with more fundamental strategies, including the use of: (1) hydrophobic islands to direct bubble formation to particular locations, (2) gas capillary effects to directly extract and collect gas as it is created, before bubbles form, (3) superwetting surfaces to assist and control bubble release, (4) surfactants to promote bubble formation and release, (5) sonication as a means of accelerating bubble detachment and mass transport, (6) a supergravity field to maintain the electrodes and inter-electrode space free of bubbles, (7) electrolyte convection over the electrodes to remove bubbles as soon as they are formed, (8) continuous pressure swings, and (9) magnetic fields.
Of the latter techniques, approaches (1)–(3) above appear (subjectively to the authors at least) to be both the least explored and the most promising. The application of hydrophobic/hydrophilic and capillary effects that either eliminate the deleterious effects of gas bubbles, or eliminate the gas bubbles themselves, in water-splitting electrodes, should be studied further. The fundamental nature of these effects should be elucidated in full detail.
These approaches should be combined however, with a judicious appreciation of the need for design and engineering measures that simplify the entire system, including the balance of plant. For too long, researchers have focussed only on optimising the electrodes in electrolysers without consideration of the full system. It is now clear that electrode optimisation only makes sense if it also makes it possible to maximally shrink and simplify the balance of plant and the system as a whole.
It seems to the authors, that until means are developed to effectively and properly minimise the effects of bubble formation in electrolysers, both direct and indirect, a true hydrogen economy that effectively competes with fossil fuels will remain elusive.
Conflicts of interest
Several patent applications of the company AquaHydrex, Inc., of which GFS was a founder, are described.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA), Grant number RS009 (entitled: ‘Bio-inspired hydrogen generation by novel bubble-free electrocatalytic systems’). This activity received funding from ARENA as part of ARENA's Research and Development Program-Renewable Hydrogen for Export. Support from the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence Scheme (Project Number CE140100012) is also gratefully acknowledged. The authors also acknowledge the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF) Materials Node for assistance.
Notes and references

          IPCC Citing Team, Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. R. K. Pachauri and L. A. Meyer, Geneva, Switzerland,  2015 Search PubMed .
See, for example: 
  (a) A. Zuettel, A. Remhof, A. Borgschulte and O. Friedrichs, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 3329–3342 CrossRef ; 
  (b) 
            A. Godula-Jopek, Hydrogen Production by Electrolysis, Wiley-VCH,  2015, and references therein Search PubMed .

          J. Verne, L'ille Mysterious, Pierre-Jules Hetzel, Paris,  1874 Search PubMed .
U. Bossel, Proc. IEEE, 2006, 94, 1826–1836 CAS .
See, for example: 
  (a) E. Rivard, M. Trudeau and K. Zaghib, Materials, 2019, 12, 1973 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            https://www.enea-consulting.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/ENEA-Consulting-The-potential-of-power-to-gas.pdf, accessed  21 Oct 2020; 
  (c) M. Thema, F. Bauer and M. Sterner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 112, 775–787 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tiwari, G. Tsekouras, K. Wagner, G. F. Swiegers and G. G. Wallace, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 23568–23579 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein. See also: International patent applications WO2012075546, WO2013185170, WO2015013765, WO2015013766, WO2015013767, WO2017100840, WO2017100841, WO2017100846, WO2018213889, WO2018213891.
These ranges exclude: (1) PEM electrolysers with thin ionomer membranes (e.g. Nafion 211, 212, 1035) that cannot be operated safely at moderate pressures/current densities due to high gas crossover (see ref. 7a below), (2) PEM electrolysers with precious metal catalyst loadings of ≥0.5 mg cm−2 that are generally considered commercially unviable (see ref. 7b below), (3) alkaline exchange membrane electrolysers that have not been shown to display sustained operation at elevated temperatures (see ref. 7c and d below), and (4) electrolysers that include carbon at the O2-generating anode, causing them to produce current densities that are likely artificially inflated by carbon corrosion (see ref. 7d and f below).
  (a) See for example: P. Trinke, System Relevant Observation of Gas Crossover – Necessity of Mitigation Strategies, Abstract and presentation 39, 2nd International Conference on Electrolysis, Loen, Norway,  June 9–13, 2019, https://www.sintef.no/globalassets/project/ice2019/book-of-abstracts-ice-2019.pdf/ Search PubMed; 
  (b) See: for example:   H. Su, B. J. Bladergroen, S. Pasupathi, V. Linkov and S. Ji, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 4223–4234 CAS ; 
  (c) See: for example: M. R. Kraglund, M. Carmo, D. Ali, G. Schiller, E. Christensen, A. Friedrich, D. Stolten and J. O. Jensen, Alkaline membrane electrolysis with PEM-level electrochemical performance, Presentation 12 at the First International Conference on Electrolysis, Copenhagen,  2017, https://www.ice2017.net/conference/presentations Search PubMed; 
  (d) See: for example:   P. Chen and X. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2002285 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) See: for example:   Z. Liu, S. D. Sajjad, Y. Gao, J. J. Kaczur and R. I Masel, ECS Trans., 2017, 77, 71–73 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) See, for example:   H. Koshikawa, H. Murase, T. Hayashi, K. Nakajima, H. Mashiko, S. Shiraishi and Y. Tsuji, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1886–1893 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Z. Wang and Z. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 3198–3205 CrossRef CAS .
S.-D. Li, C.-C. Wang and C.-Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3877–3883 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Chen, Z. Lu, J. Xu, A. Pei, Y. Peng, X. Zheng, Z. Zhang, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Joule, 2019, 3, 557–569 CrossRef CAS .
P. Granados Mendoza, S. Moshtarikhaha, A. S. Langenhan, M. T. de Groot, J. T. F. Keurentjes, J. C. Schouten and J. van der Schaaf, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2017, 128, 120–129 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, K. Scott and C. Ramshaw, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2002, 32, 831–838 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Cooksey, M. P. Taylor and J. J. J. Chen, JOM, 2008, 60, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Haupin, JOM, 1971, 23, 46–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Wang, J. Tie, G.-F. Tu, S.-C. Sun, R. T. Zhao and Z.-F. Zhang, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2015, 25, 335–344 CrossRef .

          Y. De Stryker, A Bubble Curtain Model Applied in Chlorate Electrolysis. PhD thesis, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden,  2012 .
A. Angulo, P. van der Linde, H. Gardeniers, M. Modestino and D. Fernández Rivas, Joule, 2020, 4, 555–579 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
H. Vogt, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 495–499 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Gong and Z. Guo, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 29, 573–588 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mazloomi, N. B. Sulaiman and H. Moayedi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 3314–3326 CAS .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Sides and C. W. Tobias, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 583 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Brandon, G. H. Kelsall, S. Levine and A. L. Smith, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1985, 15, 485–493 CrossRef CAS .

          N. P. Brandon, The Growth Kinetics and Interfacial Properties of Electrogenerated Bubbles, PhD thesis, Imperial College,  1985 .
C. A. C. Sequeira, D. M. F. Santos, S. B. Sljukic and L. Amaral, Braz. J. Phys., 2013, 43, 199–208 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.

          M. Kraglund, Alkaline membrane water electrolysis with non-noble catalysts, PhD thesis, Danish Technical University,  2017and references therein; see p. 54 (Fig. 2.9) for a compilation of hydrogen and oxygen solubilities in KOH .
Diffusion co-efficients for oxygen and hydrogen gas in KOH can be found in: 
  (a) M. K. Tham, R. D. Walker and K. E. Gubbins, J. Phys. Chem., 1970, 74, 1747–1751 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y.-Q. Lu, S. H. Li, S.-N. Wang, H. Du and Y. Zhang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2015, 31, 1045–1053 CAS .

          C. Bon, MSc thesis, University of California, Berkeley,  1970 .

  (a) S. Shibata, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1960, 33, 1635 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Shibata, Electrochim. Acta, 1978, 23, 619 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. M. P. Sillen, E. Barendrecht, L. J. J. Janssen and S. J. D. van Stralen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 577–587 CrossRef CAS .
See: for example:   M. E. Tawfik and F. J. Diez, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 792–797 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. German, M. A. Edwards, H. Ren and H. S. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4047–4053 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, S. R. German, M. A. Edwards, Q. Chen and H. S. White, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2450–2454 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lesitra and P. J. Sides, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 2422–2446 Search PubMed .
See, for example:   H. Vogt, Electrochim. Acta, 1981, 26, 1311–1317 CrossRef CAS .
See, for example:   P. J. Sides and C. W. Tobias, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 288–291 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mandin, J. Hamburger, S. Bessou and G. Picard, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 1140–1156 CrossRef .
See, for example:   H. Vogt and K. Stephan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 348–356 CrossRef CAS .
See: for example: F. Frey, Experimental set-up for bubble behaviour in a high pressure alkaline electrolyte, Masters thesis, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,  2016 .
See, for example:   D. Zhang and K. Zeng, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 13825–13832 CrossRef CAS .
See, for example:   H. Matsushima, T. Iida and Y. Fukunaka, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 617–623 CrossRef CAS .
See, for example:   M. Nagai, M. Takeuchi, T. Kimura and T. Oka, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 35–41 CrossRef .
P. Mandin, Z. Derhoumi, H. Roustan and R. Wuethrich, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 128, 248–258 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Sides and C. W. Tobias, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2715–2720 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mandin, A. A. Aissa, H. Roustan, J. Hamburger and G. Picard, Chem. Eng. Process., 2008, 47, 1926–1932 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vogt, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 183–187 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Bongenaar-Schlenter, Ohmic Resistance and Current Distribution at Gas-Evolving Electrodes, PhD thesis, Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven,  1984 .
G. Kreysa and M. Kuhn, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1985, 15, 517–526 CrossRef CAS .

          C. W. M. P. Sillen, The effect of gas bubble evolution on the energy efficiency of water electrolysis, PhD thesis, Technical University Eindhoven,  1983 .
D. M. F. Santos and C. A. C. Sequeira, Quim. Nova, 2013, 36, 1176–1193 CrossRef CAS .
See: for example: 
  (a) M. Schalenbach, G. Tjarks, M. Carmo, W. Lueke, M. Mueller and D. Stolten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F3197–F3208 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Schalenbach, W. Lueke and D. Stolten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1480–F1488 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Schalenbach, M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14921–14933 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Schalenbach, A. R. Zeradjanin, O. Kasian, S. Cherevko and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 1173–1226 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            P. G. Grimes, R. J. Bellows and M. Zahn, Shunt Current Control in Electrochemical Systems Theoretical Analysis, in Electrochemical Cell Design, ed. R. E. White, Plenum Press, New York,  1984, pp. 259–275 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            P. G. Grimes and R. J. Bellows, Shunt Current Control Methods in Electrochemical Systems – Applications, in Electrochemical Cell Design, ed. R. E. White, Plenum Press, New York,  1984, pp. 277–292 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            M. Zahn, P. G. Grimes and R. J. Bellows, US Pat., 4197169,  1980 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) See: for example:   R. L. LeRoy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1983, 8, 401–417 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) See for example:   R. L. LeRoy and A. F. Hufnagel, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1983, 8, 581–588 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) See: for example:   R. L. LeRoy and A. K. Stuart, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1981, 6, 589–599 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) See: for example: E. Seymour, et al., International Patent Application, WO2019246433,  2019 .
See: for example, the Renard electrolyser and other early electrolysers, which are described in: 
  (a) 
The Production of Hydrogen and Oxygen through the Electrolysis of Water, Scientific American Supplement, vol. XXXII, no. 819, New York,  1891, https://www.gutenberg.org/files/14990/14990-h/14990-h.htm, accessed 18 December 2020 Search PubMed; 
  (b) 
            V. Engelhardt, Monographs on Applied Electrochemistry, vol. 1, The Electrolysis of Water, Process and Applications, The Chemical Publishing Company, Easton, PA,  1904, https://ia800704.us.archive.org/27/items/electrolysisofwa00engerich/electrolysisofwa00engerich.pdf, accessed 18 December 2020 Search PubMed.
M. Paidar, V. Fateev and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 209, 737–756 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.

          M. A. Shimko, et al., International Patent Applications, WO2004076721 (2004) and WO2013066331 (2013) .

  (a) 
            P. Dunn and M. Shimko, Project #PD029 Report, DOE Merit Reviews,  2010, https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review10/pd029_shimko_2010_o_web.pdf; 
  (b) N. A. Kelly, T. L. Gibson and D. B. Ouwerkerk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15803–15825 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.

          J. T. Hinatsu, et al., US Pat., 8057646 (2011), 8999135 (2015) and 9133553 (2015) Search PubMed .

          E. Seymour, et al., International Patent Application, WO2020160424,  2020 .
S. Peng, V. Spandan, R. Verzicco, D. Lohse and X. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 532, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) O. Teschke and F. Galembeck, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1095 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. U. Kleinke, M. A. B. de Moraes and O. Teschke, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1815 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Heidrich and L. Muller, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 1089–1093 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Borodzinski and A. Lasia, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1993, 18, 985–994 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brussieux, P. Viers, H. Roustan and M. Rakib, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7194–7201 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kadyk, D. Bruce and M. Eikerling, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–14 CrossRef .

  (a) C. Yu, P. Zhang, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703053 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. Y. Lau, T. Vuong, J. Wang, M. Muradoglua, O. W. Liew and T. W. Ng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 311, 89–94 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Xue, R. Wang, L. Lan, J. Wang, Z. Xue and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5099–5106 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) W. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Xue, J. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3076–3081 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) R. Ma, J. Wang, Z. Yang, M. Liu, J. Zhang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2384–2389 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C. Yu, M. Cao, Z. Dong, J. Wang, K. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3236–3243 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) X. Xue, C. Yu, J. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10887–10893 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) J. Zhang, X. Jingjing, Z. Xue, J. Wang, L. Jiang and P. Zhang, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 665–672 RSC ; 
  (i) C. Yu, M. Cao, Z. Dong, K. Li, C. Yu, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6830–6835 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) C. Yu, X. Zhu, K. Li, M. Cao and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701605 CrossRef ; 
  (k) C. Zhang, B. Zhang, H. Ma, Z. Li, X. Xiao, Y. Zhang, X. Cui, C. Yu, M. Cao and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2048–2065 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (l) C. Penache, C. Gessner, T. Betker, V. Bartels, A. Hollaender and C.-P. Klages, IEE Proc.: Nanobiotechnol., 2004, 151, 139 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (m) M. Junkin, S. L. Leung, Y. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Volmering and P. K. Wong, Journal of Visualized Experiments, 2011, 52, E3115 Search PubMed .
See: for example: 
  (a) 
            F. Brandmair, German patent application, DE2420011,  1975 ; 
  (b) 
            P. Jonville, US Pat. 4086155,  1978 Search PubMed .
See: for example: R. M. Pashley and L. R. Pashley, International Patent Application, WO200606066345,  2016 and references therein Search PubMed .
For example, see:   D. D. Meng, J. Kim and C.-J. Kim, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2006, 16, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
For example, see: 
  (a) S. Wu, D. Meng, C. Chen, L.-A. Shi, L. Zhou, Z. Huang, J. Li, Y. Hu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901176 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. Chen, L.-A. Shi, Z. Huang, Y. Hu, S. Wu, J. Li, D. Wu and J. Chu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900297 CrossRef .

  (a) C. Pei, Y. Peng, Y. Zhang, D. Tian, K. Liu and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5489–5494 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Yin, S. Yang, X. Dong, D. Chu, J.-A. Duan and J. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 243701 CrossRef ; 
  (c) S. Yan, F. Ren, C. Li, Y. Jiao, C. Wang, S. Wu, S. Wei, Y. Hu, J. Li, Y. Xiao, Y. Su and D. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 261602 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Han, L. Huang, Y. Chen, J. Liu, X. Wang, X. Liu and S. Ling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23808–23814 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Long, Y. Zhao, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Yu, Y. Wu, J. Ma, M. Cao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1908099 CrossRef CAS .
O. Winther-Jensen, K. Chatjaroenporn, B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8185–8189 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. Tiwari, G. Tsekouras, G. F. Swiegers and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28176–28186 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            G. F. Swiegers, et al., International Patent Application, WO2015013764,  2015 ; 
  (c) K. Wagner, P. Tiwari, G. F. Swiegers and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702285 CrossRef ; 
  (d) K. Wagner, P. Tiwari, G. F. Swiegers and G. G. Wallace, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 172–184 RSC .
M. H. Miles, G. Kissel, P. W. T. Lu and S. Srinivasan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 332–336 CrossRef CAS  . For the boiling point of KOH solutions under pressure, see: Graph 6 in the caustic potash handbook, Occidental Chemical Corporation, March 2018, https://www.oxy.com/OurBusinesses/Chemicals/Products/Documents/CausticPotash/KOH-Handbook-2018-ed.pdf, accessed Oct 5, 2020.
S. Marini, P. Salvi, P. Nelli, R. Pesenti, M. Villa, M. Berrettoni, G. Zangari and Y. Kiros, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 384–391 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tsekouras, R. Terrett, Z. Yu, G. F. Swiegers, T. Tsuzuki, R. Stranger and R. J. Pace, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 808–819 RSC .

  (a) For cell fabrication, see: G. Swiegers, et al., International Patent Application, WO2017100845,  2017 ; 
  (b) For operation at 100% energy efficiency, see: G. Swiegers, et al., International Patent Application, WO2017100842,  2017 .
W. Xu, Z. Lu, X. Sun, L. Jiang and X. Duan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1590–1598 CrossRef CAS .
See, for example: 
  (a) P. C. Wang and B. G. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4795–4811 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. J. Kim, G. R. Lee, E. N. Cho, Y. S. Ying and S. Yeon, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907500 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. I Jamesh, Y. Kuang and X. M. Sun, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1550–1575 CrossRef ; 
  (d) B. Su, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(6), 1727–1748 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brinkert, M. H. Richter, O. Akay, J. Liedtke, M. Giersig, K. T. Fountaine and H.-T. Lewerenz, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2527 CrossRef .
A. Kosiorek, W. Kandulski, P. Chudzinski, K. Kempa and M. Giersig, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1359–1363 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Epstein and M. S. Plesset, J. Chem. Phys., 1950, 18, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alheshibri, J. Qian, M. Jehannin and V. S. J. Craig, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 11086–11100 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Parker, P. M. Claesson and P. Attard, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 8468–8480 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ishida, T. Inoue, M. Miyahara and K. Higashitani, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 6377–6380 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Lou, Z.-Q. Ouyang, Y. Zhang, X.-J. Li, J. Hu, M.-Q. Li and F.-J. Yang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct., 2000, 18, 2573–2575 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. G. Tyrrell and P. Attard, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lohse and X. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2015, 87, 981–1035 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 014706 CrossRef .
X. H. Zhang, A. Quinn and W. A. Ducker, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4756–4764 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruckenstein, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 423, 112–114 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, R. Verzicco, X. Zhang and D. Lohse, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 2006–2014 RSC .
L. A. Crum, Ultrasonics, 1984, 22, 215–223 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Doinikov and A. Bouakaz, J. Fluid Mech., 2014, 742, 425–445 CrossRef .
A. O. Maksimov, European Journal of Mechanics, B: Fluids, 2007, 26, 28–42 CrossRef .
D. Ahmed, X. Mao, J. Shi, B. K. Juluria and T. J. Huang, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 2738 RSC .
W. K. Soh and A. A. Karimi, Appl. Math. Model., 1996, 20, 638–645 CrossRef .
D. Lohse, Phys. Rev. Fluids, 2018, 3, 110504 CrossRef .
P. Marmottant, S. van der Meer, M. Emmer and M. Versluis, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 2005, 118, 3499–3505 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Walton, L. D. Burke and M. M. Murphy, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 41, 2747–2751 CrossRef  , and references therein.
H. N. McMurray, D. A. Worsley and B. P. Wilson, Chem. Commun., 1998, 887–888 RSC .
If 60 Hz was used, then this suggests that large-scale excitation of the electrolyte and/or electrodes may have been responsible for the process enhancement, rather than direct excitation of bubbles. It may further be speculated that the walls or electrodes of similar reactors could function Chladni plates at higher frequencies (2 kHz, although the fundamental frequency depends on a large number of material and geometric parameters). This would encourage migration of bubbles and their coalescence along nodal arcs. Along these lines, we note a publication which demonstrates impressive acoustophoretic control over the position and coalescence of supported liquid droplets, as well as the manipulation of other small objects on thin silicon Chladni plates (50 × 50 × 0.5mm) oscillated at frequencies from 1.0 to 29.8 kHz; see:   Q. Zhou, V. Sariola, K. Latifi and V. Liimatainen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12764 CrossRef CAS .
See, for example: J. A. Kirchoff, J. L. Marques, F. A. Nottke, R. E. Seligmann, P. D. Vasquez and T. M. Marshall, International Patent Application, WO2013003499,  2013 Search PubMed .
See: For example:   P. Marmottant and S. Hilgenfeldt, Nature, 2003, 423, 153–156 CrossRef CAS .
See, For example:   C.-D. Ohl, Biophys. J., 2006, 91, 4285–4295 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Rupp, R. M. Ferre, J. S. Boyd, E. Dearing, C. D. McNaughton, D. Liu, K. L. Jarrell, C. M. McWade and W. H. Self, Acad. Emerg. Med., 2016, 23, 918–921 CrossRef .
A. J. LeRoy and J. W. Segura, Am. J. Roentgenol., 1984, 143, 785–788 CrossRef CAS .
I. Darby, Aust. Dent. J., 2009, 54, S86–S95 CrossRef .
J. R. Blake and D. C. Gibson, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 1987, 19, 99–123 CrossRef .
H. N. McMurray, D. A. Worsley and B. P. Wilson, Chem. Commun., 1998, 887–888 RSC .
H. Liu, L.-M. Pan, H. Huang, Q. Qin, P. Li and J. Wen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 754, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
N. Madigan, C. R. S. Hagan, H. Zhang and L. A. Coury, Ultrason. Sonochem., 1996, 3, S239–S247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, W. Kreider, A. A. Brayman, M. R. Bailey and T. J. Matula, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 034301 CrossRef .
A survey of experimental and theoretical treatments of these phenomena can be found in:   B. Dollet, P. Marmottant and V. Garbin, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2019, 51, 331–355 CrossRef .
F. Gao, Y. Hu and H. Hu, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2007, 44, 7197–7212 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Hosseini, S. Ghasemi and S. A. Ghasemi, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 222, 1068–1075 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xie, D. Zhou, P. Li, Z. Cai, T. Xie, T. Gao, R. Chen, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2302–2306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsushima, T. Nishida, Y. Konishi, Y. Fukunaka, Y. Ito and K. Kuribayashi, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 4119–4125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsushima, Y. Fukunaka and K. Kuribayashi, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 4190–4198 CrossRef .
C. Hirt and W. E. Featherstone, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2012, 329–330, 22–30 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hirt, S. J. Claessens, M. Kuhn and W. E. Featherstone, Planet. Space Sci., 2012, 67, 147–154 CrossRef .
M. Sakura, Y. Sone, T. Nishida, H. Matsushima and Y. Fukunaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 100, 350–357 CrossRef .
G. Sakuma, H. Matsushima and Y. Fukunaka, International Journal of Microgravity Science and Applications, 2008, 25, 3 Search PubMed  , https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.1087.2500%26rep=rep1%26type=pdf, accessed Oct 5, 2020.

          K. C. Takada, A. E. Ghariani and S. Van Keuren, Oxygen Generation Assembly Design for Exploration Missions, 48th International Conference on Environmental Systems,  8–12 July 2018, pp. 1–15, https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20180006335, accessed Oct 5, 2020 Search PubMed.

          K. C. Takada, A. E. Ghariani and S. Van Keuren, Advancing the Oxygen Generation Assembly Design to Increase Reliability and Reduce Costs for a Future Long Duration Mission, 45th International Conference on Environmental Systems,  2015, pp. 1–16 Search PubMed .
H. Cheng, K. Scott and C. Ramshaw, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, D172 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. W. Jansson, R. J. Marshall and J. E. Rizzo, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1978, 8, 281–285 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. W. Jansson, R. J. Marshall and J. E. Rizzo, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1978, 8, 287–291 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. W. Jansson, Electrochim. Acta, 1978, 23, 1345–1350 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aimek, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 1984, 49, 1122–1133 CrossRef .
F. B. Thomas, P. A. Ramachandran, M. P. Dudukovic and R. E. W. Jansson, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1988, 43, 2013–2018 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Thomas, P. A. Ramachandran, M. P. Dudukovic and R. E. W. Jansson, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1988, 18, 768–780 CrossRef CAS .
M. Simek and I. Rougar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1991, 21, 11–17 CrossRef .
For a review of rotating electrochemical cells, see:   K. Scott, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1406–1426 CrossRef  , and references therein.
For a review of rotating electrochemical cells, see:   F. C. Walsh and C. P. de Leon, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 280, 121–148 CrossRef CAS  ; and references therein.
L. Lao, C. Ramshaw and H. Yeung, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 645–656 CrossRef CAS .
For example, see: C. Xu, et al., US Patent Application, 2019/0033449,  2019 .

          M. Mino, US Pat., 3838451,  1974 Search PubMed .

          J. S. Katcha and J. R. Schmidt, US Pat., 7197113,  2007 Search PubMed .

          D. Robertson, US Pat. Application, 2014/0021795,  2014 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Skomsvold, US Pat., 8608936 (2013) and 2010/0243469 (2010) Search PubMed .

NEL ASA – Acquisition of RotoLyzer,  24 August 2015, Investor Presentation, https://mb.cision.com/Public/115/9818516/90d0005e07dc5830.pdf, accessed 3 Oct 2020 Search PubMed.
S. M. H. Hashemi, M. A. Modestino and D. Psaltis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2003–2009 RSC .
M. I. Gillespie, F. van der Merwe and R. J. Kriek, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 228–235 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Anagostopoulos, International Patent Application, WO2013/118104,  2013 .
M. I. Gillespie and R. J. Kriek, J. Power Sources, 2017, 372, 252–259 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Gillespie and R. J. Kriek, J. Power Sources, 2018, 397, 204–213 CrossRef CAS .

          J. L. Hartvigsen, et al., US Pat., 8940151,  2015 Search PubMed .

          J. Hartvigsen, F. Dogna and J. Smith, High Temperature Membraneless Alkaline Electrolysis, Presentation 58, 1st International Conference on Electrolysis, Copenhagen,  June 2015 Search PubMed .
G. Segré and A. Silberberg, Nature, 1961, 189, 209–210 CrossRef .

          P. Schwarz, Bubble induced turbulence in two-fluid simulation of bubbly flow, The 26th International Symposium on Transport Phenomena,  2015, pp. 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. M. Bakker and D. A. Vermaas, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 148–157 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iida, H. Matsushima and Y. Fukunaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, E112–E115 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsushima, T. Iida and Y. Fukunaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 100, 261–264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fernández, M. Martine, A. Meagher, M. E. Möbius and J. M. D. Coey, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 18, 28–32 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Ji and J. Zhu, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2013, 418, 012014 CrossRef .
C. Niether, S. Faure, A. Bordet, J. Deseure, M. Chatenet, J. Carrey, B. Chaudret and A. Rouet, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 476–483 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Abbreviations: HHV – relative to the high heating value of hydrogen, LHV – relative to the lower heating value of hydrogen, AC – alternating current, DC – direct current, SNL – shadow nanosphere lithography.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Ulf Bossel's 2006 flow-chart comparing hydrogen as a carrier of stored renewable energy with electricity (in the form of batteries). The energy efficiency of each step in the storage process, as of 2006, is shown in round brackets. As can be seen, for every 100 kW h of renewable electricity, 77 kW h could be captured and stored in the form of electricity in batteries, whereas, at best, only 51 kW h could be stored in the form of renewable hydrogen. This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 4 with permission from the IEEE, copyright 2006. (AC = alternating current; DC = direct current.†)	 

 	Fig. 2  The best reported (two-electrode) polarization curves at 80 °C and atmospheric pressure, for:6 (a) and (b) alkaline electrolysers; (c)–(g) PEM electrolysers with inter-electrode ionomer membranes of thickness: (c) ∼183 μm (Nafion 117), (d) and (e) ∼125 μm (Nafion 115), (f) and (g) ∼50 μm (Nafion 212); and (h) alkaline exchange membrane electrolysers. Curve (g) depicts the likely maximum, iR-corrected limit of performance of modern-day electrolysers. These curves represent measures of the stack efficiency of the electrolysers and do not take account of all of the losses in the system. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photograph of a ‘bubble curtain’ on a vertically-disposed plate electrode, showing the bubble froth that is created about and above the electrode; (b) schematic illustrating bubble formation and release dynamics, and strategies for modifying these dynamics, with their domains of applicability.	 
κ = κ0(1 − ε)3/2	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Reduction in the conductivity κ of liquid electrolyte with void fraction, κ = κ0(1 − ε)3/2, where κ0 is the intrinsic conductivity of the electrolyte, and ε is the volumetric void fraction of the electrolyte. Bubbles are considered to be insulators. After the model used by Mandin.37	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic showing a typical balance of plant for pumping circulating water/electrolyte through a bipolar electrolyser cell stack. The schematic depicts a stack of five water electrolysis cells, connected in electrical series, with bipolar electrodes “B” between each pair of cells. The schematic at the bottom denotes and corresponds to the cells in the main schematic above. The H2-generating cathode electrodes and O2-generating anode electrodes of each cell are also denoted with illustrative voltages if a representative 2.00 V were applied across each cell. Each individual cell is split into two half cells by the presence of an ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator membrane/ionomer “M”. The separator keeps the H2 gas bubbles apart from the O2 gas bubbles. The stack is fed by two, parallel liquid circulation systems, one of which (anolyte) is for O2 collection, and the other of which (catholyte) is for H2 collection. Liquid is pumped in parallel through each H2 and O2 generating half-cell and the resulting streams of H2 and O2 froth are then separately accumulated in an H2 and an O2 separator, respectively. H2 gas separates from the H2 froth in the H2 separator and is collected from the top of the separator tank. O2 gas similarly separates from the O2 froth and is collected from the top of the O2 separator tank. The gases may then be passed through scrubbers that remove any residual, aerosolized electrolyte from the gas streams. Liquid/electrolyte free of gas bubbles is collected from the bottom of each tank and pumped back through the respective half-cells. One or both electrolyte circulation loops is/are typically also passed through a chiller (not shown for clarity), which cools it and maintains a constant temperature in the stack. After Santos et al..50	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic depiction of the individual cells of Shimko and colleagues, showing the key features. Reproduced and adapted from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic depiction of the individual cells of Seymour and co-workers,58 showing the key features (“M” = ion-permeable, gas-impermeable inter-electrode membrane/ionomer, “C” = cathode electrode, “A” = anode electrode). Drawing (b) depicts the actual cell in (a), showing how the individual features were miniaturized and incorporated into the periphery of a thin cell frame suitable for stacking in a bipolar (filter press) arrangement. Adapted from ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 8  The acronym “AMELHYFLAM”, the Eiffel Tower and ECP for Ecole Centrale Paris “written” with hydrogen bubbles that formed only on PTFE islands distributed in a photolithographically patterned mosaic on a Cu electrode, at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The bubbles are shown at the following time intervals after a suitable voltage was applied: 21 s, 50 s, and 205 s. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of the Pt-coated expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) membrane in the GoreTex electrode developed by Winther-Jensen and co-workers, showing the Teflon fibrils coated with sputtered Pt. Scale bar: 10 nm (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012); (b) schematic cross-sectional depiction of the Gortex-based gas diffusion electrode used in Fig. 10.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the first electrolyser with a bubble-free anode, showing the electrolysis chamber on the left attached to the gas collection chamber on the right; (b) drawing of gas and ion movements in the cell depicted in (a); and (c) O2 measurements in the electrolyte immediately in front of the anode (‘O2 front’) and in the gas collection chamber behind the anode (‘O2 back’), after application of 10 mA cm−2. Note that, as shown in schematic (b), there was no ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator or ionomer between the electrodes. Such separators are normally essential in electrolysers to prevent gas crossover, which creates a serious safety hazard. This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 73 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional schematic of the electrolyser of Villa and co-workers,75 which had two conventional gas diffusion electrodes. (b) Graph showing the change in voltage at 100 mA cm−2 when an overpressure (Pin) was applied to the liquid electrolyte relative to the gas chambers.76 (c) Polarization curves at different temperatures of the electrolyser, showing significant declines in the onset potential as the temperature was increased from 26 °C to 100 °C. These figures have been reproduced and adapted from ref. 76 and 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012 and 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional schematic showing a ∼200 μm thick catalyst layer deposited on Gortex,6,76 and (b) polarization curves at different temperatures of an electrolyser having Gortex-based gas diffusion electrodes as both the anode and cathode, where the Gortex was over-coated with a ∼200 μm thick catalyst layer comprising of plasma-generated nano-Ni (20 nm average diameter) (60 wt%) with PTFE binder (40 wt%) and a fine Ni mesh current carrier (with 6 M KOH electrolyte).6 The electrodes were heat-treated prior to use, which is likely to have slightly modified the pore structure of the Gortex. The data points shown are averages of original data, which was collected in quadruplicate. The cross-section in (a) was prepared by sectioning, polishing and photographing a sample fixed in Epo-fix resin using the cold mounting technique of Struers, Ballerup, Denmark. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  Linear sweep voltammograms for water oxidation catalysis of a Au/NiFeOx catalyst layer (50–100 nm thick) deposited on: (1) a polyethylene substrate with a hydrophobic nanopore structure (‘Alv-PE’), (2) a conventional carbon gas diffusion electrode (‘Alv-C GDL’), and (3) on a non-porous polyethylene substrate (‘Flat PE’). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 14  Chronoamperograms at 1.4 V for water oxidation catalysis of a Au/NiFeOx catalyst layer (50–100 nm thick) deposited on: (1) a polyethylene substrate with a hydrophobic nanopore structure (‘Alv-PE’), (2) a conventional carbon gas diffusion electrode (‘Alv-C GDL’), and (3) on a non-porous polyethylene substrate (‘Flat PE’). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic cross-section of the 3-layer breathable electrodes developed by Tsekouras and colleagues. The gas-generating catalyst-binder layer included a fine Ni mesh current carrier (not shown here for clarity). The dark coloured regions in that layer represent catalyst particles, while the light coloured ones represent fine powder PTFE particles. Pores within the catalyst layer are shown in blue. The PTFE interlayer comprised of powdered PTFE particles that fibrillated together during fabrication. The expanded PTFE (ePTFE) membrane at the bottom was part of a Gortex membrane. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 16  Appearance of oxygen-evolving electrodes at 100 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH and 20 °C of: (a) Bare Ni mesh (covered in gas bubbles), (b) breathable electrode with a PTFE interlayer (ΔP 50 kPa) (showing a complete absence of gas bubbles). (c) Steady-state current–voltage curves of the electrodes shown in (a) and (b). This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 77 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic depiction of the fabrication of a stackable, gas-collecting half-cell utilizing breathable electrodes. Cells of this type may be readily stacked with other half-cells in a bipolar (filter press) arrangement, with each successive half-cell in the stack alternatively collecting hydrogen or oxygen. Gas headers running through the stack collect either hydrogen from all of the hydrogen-producing half-cells, or oxygen from all of the oxygen-producing half-cells. The busbars in each half-cell are configured to connect with busbars in the adjoining half-cells to thereby create bipolar electrical connections between electrodes within the stack. These electrical pathways must go around and cannot go through the Gortex gas diffusion layers, which are non-conductive. Reproduced from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of functionalisation of a superwetting electrode surface using the technique of shadow nanosphere lithography (SNL). (a) Pristine deposition substrate. (b) Deposition of cusped, periodic gas-rejecting nanostructure by SNL. Occluding nanospheres have been omitted for clarity. (c) Secondary deposition of isolated nucleation sites for catalyst growth. (d) Tertiary preferential growth of catalytic particles at nucleation sites, affording nanostructured catalytic electrode (inset: depiction of cross-sectional structure of spicule, with nucleated gas bubble).	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 19  Comparison of Rayleigh–Plesset and Minnaert resonant frequencies f for an idealised isolated spherical bubble in water, as a function of bubble radius a, for ρ = 998.2 kg m−3, σ = 7.28 × 10−2 N m−1, κ = 1.2 (approximately consistent with ref. 98), p = 1.01 × 105 Pa.	 


2H+ → H2	CPE	SDS	−8%	+93%
2H+ → H2	CPE	CTAB	−8%	+144%
2H+ → H2	CPE	Triton X-100	−15%	+460%
2H+ → H2	Nano-Cu/CPE	SDS	0%	+47%
2H+ → H2	Nano-Cu/CPE	CTAB	−12%	+373%
2H+ → H2	Nano-Cu/CPE	Triton X-100	0%	+86%

 	Fig. 20  Water electrolysis under supergravity conditions: (a) photographs of the hydrogen froths produced under various effective gravity conditions (G) after chronoamperometric measurements; (b) cell voltage reduction (ΔUG), and (c) % energy savings as a function of effective gravity (G) at various current densities for water electrolysis. This figure has been reproduced and adapted from ref. 8 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 21  The principle of a Divergent Electrode-Flow-Through (DEFT) alkaline electrolyser. Electrolyte is injected at moderate speed into the inter-electrode space (blue arrows), causing it to flow outward through the facing electrodes, which are porous. In so doing, the gas bubbles formed on the porous electrodes are swept to the rear of each electrode, thereby maintaining both the inter-electrode volume and the electrode active surfaces free of gas bubbles. The produced hydrogen and oxygen is also separated, thereby avoiding the need for an ion-permeable, gas-impermeable separator between the electrodes. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 
Footnote
† Abbreviations: HHV – relative to the high heating value of hydrogen, LHV – relative to the lower heating value of hydrogen, AC – alternating current, DC – direct current, SNL – shadow nanosphere lithography.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
