A deconvoluted PL approach to probe the charge carrier dynamics of the grain interior and grain boundary of a perovskite film for perovskite solar cel ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP01140G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP01140G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 9143-9148A deconvoluted PL approach to probe the charge carrier dynamics of the grain interior and grain boundary of a perovskite film for perovskite solar cell applications

        
          
            Abdullah Al 
            Mamun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tanzila Tasnim 
            Ava
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyeon Jun 
            Jeong
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Mun Seok 
            Jeong
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Gon 
            Namkoong
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Applied Research Centre, 12050 Jefferson Avenue, Newport News, VA 23606, USA. E-mail: gnamkoon@odu.edu
bDepartment of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea
cCenter for Integrated Nanostructure Physics, Institute for Basic Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea
Received 
      20th February 2017
    , Accepted 8th March 2017First published on 8th March 2017AbstractWe explore a new characterization approach capable of probing the grain interior (GI) and grain boundary (GB) of a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite thin film. In particular, we have found that the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum observed for a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite thin film is asymmetric, and can be deconvoluted using a bi-Gaussian function, representing the ordered and disordered phases of the perovskite film. In order to understand the origin of the ordered and disordered phases of the perovskite film, two-dimensional (2D) PL mapping was performed to resolve the PL spectra at the nanoscale level. Quantitative analysis of the local PL spectra revealed that the ordered phase originated from the GIs while the disordered phase mainly came from the GBs. In particular, power-dependent PL measurements of the deconvoluted PL spectra revealed that smaller grained perovskites showed defect-mediated recombination at GBs but exciton-like transitions at GIs. In contrast, perovskite films with large grains followed an excellent power law, showing exciton-like recombination at both GIs and GBs. As expected, perovskite solar cells fabricated with large grains showed an increased efficiency with higher light absorption and higher charge extraction efficiency.
Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as a promising candidate in the field of photovoltaic technology and have shown a remarkable energy conversion efficiency improvement within a short period.1–3 This big improvement was attributed to the superior material properties including high absorption coefficient, high mobility of electrons (7.5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and holes (12.5–66 cm2 V−1 s−1), and long carrier lifetime and diffusion length.4–6 However, there are still some issues such as long-term stability, hysteresis, and defects in perovskite films.7–9 In particular, there has been controversy about the nature of the grain boundary (GB),10–13 which plays a decisive role in the solar cell performance. The GBs of perovskite solar cells have been examined by using nanoscale characteristic tools including Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), conductive-atomic force microscopy (c-AFM), electron beam-induced current (EBIC), and confocal microscopy.10–14 To date, based on KPFM, c-AFM and EBIC measurements, the benign characteristic of GBs has been reported,10,11 providing effective charge separation and collection at grain boundaries, which results in a higher photocurrent. However, according to confocal microscopy measurements,12 the grain boundaries are characterized by a source of nonradiative recombination centres with lower PL intensity and faster nonradiative decay. In addition, there is controversy about the nature of GBs in theoretical studies.15,16 First principles calculation studies performed by Yin, et al.15 showed that GBs are benign because they do not produce deep defect states. On the other hand, Agiorgousis, et al.16 also conducted the same first principles calculations but reported that Pb cations and I anions were strongly covalently bonded by the formation of Pb dimers and I trimers, which led to the formation of deep defect states within the band gap. However, in spite of the experimental and theoretical controversies about GBs, there is agreement on the positive effect of increased grain size on the reduction of notorious hysteresis and improved performance of perovskite solar cells.17,18 This suggests that controlling the grain size and GBs is important for achieving a reliable and high energy conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells. In this regard, it is important to develop a rapid method for measuring the nature of GBs that can provide timely feedback to modify the processing methods and conditions of the perovskite film. However, the prevalent method of studying the effect of GBs relies on nanoscale equipment, including KPFM, c-AFM, EBIC, confocal microscopy, etc. that limit the flexibility of experiments due to sample preparation and time consuming processes. In this paper, a comprehensive new method of simultaneously probing both grain interiors (GIs) and GBs of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite films is introduced using well-established, regular photoluminescence (PL) measurements. In particular, we were able to resolve the PL spectra which were typically asymmetric and deconvoluted with a bi-Gaussian function representing the ordered and disordered phases of the perovskite film. Quantitative analysis of two-dimensional (2D) PL mapping using confocal microscopy revealed that the ordered PL spectra originated from GIs whereas the disordered PL spectra mainly came from GBs. The systematic analysis of the ordered and disordered PL spectra provided deep insight into the recombination processes of the GIs and GBs of perovskite films. Remarkably, we found that the GIs showed exciton-like recombination processes regardless of grain size. However, the recombination process of the GBs was largely dependent upon the size of the grains which induced nonradiative recombination or exciton-like transition. We also correlated the performance of perovskite solar cells with perovskite morphology. In particular, higher efficiency perovskite solar cells were achieved with a larger grain size while much lower efficiency was achieved with smaller grains.
Experimental methods
Perovskite film preparation
Perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) films were prepared using a hot-casting technique18,19 by dissolving equimolar ratios of lead iodide (PbI2, Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) and methylamine hydrochloride (MACl, Sigma-Aldrich) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, 99.8%) at 11 wt% concentration. The solution was preheated to 70 °C on a hot plate for 24 h in a N2 filled glove box. FTO substrates were etched to make the desired electrodes for perovskite solar cells and cleaned using de-ionized (DI) water, methanol, acetone, and 2-propanol (IPA), respectively. Afterwards, the substrates were dried with nitrogen, followed by heating on a hot plate at 120 °C for 15 minutes to remove the last traces of any solvent. PEDOT:PSS was diluted using 2-propanol in a ratio of 1:3 and was spin-coated on FTO substrates at a speed of 3000 rpm. PEDOT:PSS films were kept at 180 °C while perovskite solution was left at 70 °C. The solution was then immediately deposited on FTO/glass by spin-coating at 4000 rpm while maintaining the temperature. The previously reported approach18 to controlling morphology and particle size was to change the glass slide temperature to below the boiling point of the DMF solvent (153 °C). However, it is also found that the thickness of the glass slide has a significant effect on the grain morphology and size of the perovskite film, resulting in grain sizes of 1–2 μm, 10–20 μm and larger than 50 μm with glass slide thicknesses of 0.5 mm, 1.5 mm and 2.2 mm, respectively. In this case, all treatment conditions of the perovskite precursor concentration, spin speed, and glass slide temperature were kept the same except for the glass slide thickness. The electron transport layer consisting of PCBM(Nano-c) was dissolved in di-chlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich) and spin coated on the top of the perovskite layer at a speed of 1500 rpm in a N2 containing glove box. A 170 nm thick silver layer was deposited by using electron beam evaporation.
PL, SEM, and UV-vis measurements
Two different systems are used for PL measurements, one for confocal spectral imaging and the other for typical (non-confocal) PL measurements. For nanoscale 2D PL mapping, confocal spectroscopy (NTEGRA spectra, NTMDT) was used with an in-plane spatial resolution of ∼380 nm that was achieved with an objective lens of numerical aperture of 0.7 and a 405 nm solid-state laser for excitation. The signal collected by the objective lens was detected by a thermoelectrically cooled CCD detector. In addition, we also performed typical PL spectral measurements using a Horiba FluoroLog-3 spectrofluorometer equipped with a 450 nm solid-state laser. The laser beam spot size was about 25 μm. For PL measurements, all samples were prepared on top of glass substrates and coated with PMMA to avoid degradation in air. A field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM7500F, JEOL) was used to investigate the surface morphology of the perovskite films. The UV-vis spectrum was measured by using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 45 spectrophotometer in absorption mode. To measure UV-vis, an active layer of perovskite was prepared on top of a glass substrate following the same fabrication procedure as mentioned in the film preparation section.
Photovoltaic characterization
The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded by using potential bias with a digital source (Keithley 2400) under the illumination of simulated sunlight from the Xenon lamp (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2) of a solar simulator (Newport 69907). The light intensity was calibrated using a Si solar cell as a reference.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (MAPbI3−xClx) perovskite thin films that were measured using a Horiba FluoroLog-3 spectrofluorometer. The perovskite film was excited by a 450 nm solid-state laser that had a beam spot size of about 25 μm. The perovskite film was prepared on a glass slide using a hot-casting technique. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the perovskite film is also shown in Fig. 1. The perovskite film exhibits PL peak positions at 760 nm within the sharp absorption range associated with the band edge observed in the range from 730 nm to 790 nm.
 Fig. 1  (a) Absorption and PL of MAPbI3−xClx that was fitted by a single Gaussian function and (b) PL spectrum fitted by a bi-Gaussian function. Residual values are also displayed at the bottom of each figure. The inset shows a SEM image of the perovskite film used for PL measurement. 
A close examination of the PL spectra in Fig. 1(a) indicates that the PL spectral line is asymmetric and cannot be fitted into a single Gaussian function. Analysis of the residual plot showed that a larger residual value was observed on the short wavelength side indicated by an arrow. However, when the PL spectra are fitted by a bi-Gaussian function, the residual value was significantly reduced, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In particular, the deconvoluted PL spectra in Fig. 1(b) contain two distinct emission peaks. One has a broad full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of 86.8 nm but a shorter wavelength of 749.5 nm whereas another PL spectrum showed a narrow FWHM of 43.5 nm but a longer wavelength of 762.1 nm. Recently, the deconvoluted PL spectra were described as the ordered and disordered phases of perovskite films,20 represented by longer and shorter wavelengths, respectively. However, the origin of the disordered phase of perovskite films has not been identified.
To further investigate the origin of the ordered and disordered phases of PL, two dimensional (2D) PL mapping was performed using confocal spectroscopy (NTEGRA spectra, NTMDT) to probe spatially resolved PL spectra at the nanoscale level. Our confocal spectroscopy has an in-plane spatial resolution of ∼380 nm which was achieved by an objective lens with a numerical aperture of 0.7 and a 405 nm solid-state laser. Fig. 2(a) shows the 2D PL intensity of the perovskite film, where the grain boundary exhibited strong PL quenching. In addition, the analysis of 2D spectral PL mapping in Fig. 2(b) shows a dominant PL peak of ∼750 nm at the GIs but an abrupt blue-shift of PL at the GBs (denoted by blue color in the 2D PL map). It should be noted that some dark spot regions in the intensity map in Fig. 2(a) are larger than the sizes of the blue-shifted PL spectra in Fig. 2(b). However, it is clearly shown that the blue-shifted PL spectra are located in the dark spot region when the intensity and spectral PL maps overlap, as shown in Fig. 2(c). In addition, the high magnification SEM image in Fig. 2(d) indicates that the pinholes are partially covered by perovskite islands. This suggests that blue-shifted PL spectra originated from a number of small perovskite islands located in the dark region. Interestingly, confocal PL spectra from the GI and GB can be fitted by a single Gaussian function but not by a bi-Gaussian function, as shown in Fig. 2(e) and (f). We found that the PL at the GBs showed a relatively lower intensity and a shorter wavelength while the GIs showed a higher intensity and a longer wavelength. This is reminiscent of the deconvoluted ordered and disordered PL spectra obtained from typical (or non-confocal) PL measurements in Fig. 1. Therefore, it is inferred that the disordered phase of the PL spectrum in Fig. 1 mainly originated from the GBs whereas the ordered phase PL spectra came from the GIs. However, we cannot exclude the possibility of the contribution of the disordered phase from the GIs which contain chemical disorder within the GIs. Previously, we reported 2D PL and chemical mapping studies21 on perovskite films with various morphologies and grain sizes. The grain size of perovskite films varied from a few micrometres to over 50 micrometres. In particular, the smaller the grain size, the more the non-stoichiometric chemical composition of the perovskite film was observed. Critically, chemical analysis of controlled morphologies21 revealed that non-stoichiometric chemical disorder increased towards the GBs. In addition, the blue-shift of the PL spectra was increased towards the GBs while the GIs showed relatively very uniform but longer wavelengths. Remarkably, the GB was found to consist of Pb-rich CH3NH3PbIx or PbIx with high oxygen concentration. Our observation is in good agreement with recent electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) studies that revealed iodine deficiency, that is, Pb-richness at the GBs.14 Note that pure PbI2 will have an energy bandgap of 2.3 eV22 while the stoichiometric CH3NH3PbI3−xClx has an energy bandgap of 1.66 eV. Therefore, the GBs consisting of Pb-rich CH3NH3PbIx or PbIx will have a relatively larger energy bandgap than the GIs. In particular, it is found that the larger energy bandgap material at the GBs has a type I alignment with the lower bandgap material of the GIs.22 Such band alignment is also shown in the inset of Fig. 2(f). Rationally, the shoulder peaks of shorter wavelengths from the deconvoluted PL spectra in Fig. 1 cannot be explained by defect-mediated PL transitions from the GIs but should originate from the bandgap broadened GBs.
 Fig. 2  (a) Two-dimensional (2D) PL intensity, (b) spectral mapping, and (c) overlapped intensity/spectral PL mapping showing that the blue-shifted PL spectra are located in the dark spot region. (d) High magnification SEM image shows that the pinholes are partially covered by a number of perovskite islands. In addition, PL spectra from (e) the grain interior and (f) the grain boundary were fitted by a single Gaussian function. This inset of (f) shows a type I alignment of energy band gaps between the GI and GB. 
As shown, the confocal PL mapping approach provides valuable insights into local PL variations at the nanoscale level but is a time-consuming process. However, the typical (or non-confocal) PL approach using a laser with a larger beam diameter can provide prompt measurements capable of probing the optical properties of the GIs and GBs at the same time. For instance, deconvoluted PL measurements can be used as a metric to promptly and simultaneously assess the nature of the GIs and GBs including charge carrier dynamics from an analysis of the power-dependent PL measurements, described below. This PL approach can promptly provide feedback on the optical quality of both GIs and GBs. For this study, we intentionally fabricated defective perovskite films with smaller grains and high-quality perovskite films with larger grains, as shown in Fig. 3. Specifically, we have fabricated MAPbI3−xClx films with three different grain sizes ranging from 1–2 μm to 10–20 μm, and >50 μm, as shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c). We conducted power dependent PL measurements using a 450 nm laser with a beam size of 25 μm. As shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c), the perovskite film with larger grains (>50 μm) showed an emission peak at 755 nm (1.66 eV) while a significant blue shift of 26–31 meV was observed for the perovskite films with smaller grains. In addition, we found that the intensity of the perovskite films with a larger grain size was three or six times stronger than those with smaller grain sizes in the range of 10–20 μm or 1–2 μm, suggesting better optical quality for larger grain perovskite films. The PL spectra obtained from excitation-dependent PL for all samples were analysed by a bi-Gaussian function to investigate the underlying recombination processes of the ordered and disordered phases of perovskite films. Power dependent PL intensity was plotted on a double-logarithmic scale to explain the linearity effect shown in Fig. 3(d)–(f). The recombination process23,24 can be elucidated by investigating the change in PL intensity (IPL) and a power index value (β), expressed as IPL ∝ IEXβ. For the free-to-bound recombination and donor–acceptor pair, the power index value will be less than unity, i.e. β < 1 while for exciton-like recombination the power index value will be in the range of 1 < β < 2. Interestingly, regardless of grain size, ordered phases have power index β values in the range of 1 and 2 which corresponds to exciton-like recombination. However, we found that the recombination dynamics of GBs are diverse and strongly dependent upon the grain size. It is noticeable that the disordered phase of smaller grain perovskite films with a lower excitation intensity of 120 mW cm−2 or less exhibited power index values of β = 0.66 and β = 0.92, suggesting non-radiative recombination. In contrast, the perovskite film with a larger grain size (>50 μm) showed β = 1.60, which indicates exciton-like recombination. This suggests that the charge carrier recombination at the GBs showed a very strong dependence on the grain size in which the smaller grains showed defect-mediated recombination while for larger grains the exciton-like transition at GBs was observed. In other words, the characteristics of GBs are not stationary but might strongly depend upon the processing conditions that might lead to different degrees of structural disorder, morphologies, and chemical inhomogeneities.
 Fig. 3  Power dependent PL spectra excitation intensity of (a) 1–2 μm grains, (b) 10–20 μm grains and (c) >50 μm grain. The insets in (a–c) show the corresponding microscopic images. A double-logarithmic PL plot for (d) 1–2 μm grains, (e) 10–20 μm grains, and (f) >50 μm grains was used to calculate the power index values. In addition, the evolutions of energy peak position values for (g) 1–2 μm grains, (h) 10–20 μm grains, and (i) >50 μm grains are shown. 

Fig. 3(g)–(i) shows the evolution of the peak energy, which is indicative of distinct states of ordered and disordered phases of perovskite films. The ordered phases for all samples remained in the same peak position between 1.65 and 1.69 eV regardless of grain size. This confirms that the PL transition of the ordered phase of PL originated from band-edge radiative recombination. This is consistent with the observation of power index values indicating exciton-like recombination. However, for the disordered phase, we observed a gradual blueshift for all samples upon increasing excitation intensity, which is a typical characteristic of defective films.25,26 However, we observed different transient trends of disordered phases of smaller and larger grain perovskites. For instance, the smaller grain perovskite showed a continuous increase in energy peak positions upon increased power density, as shown in Fig. 3(g) and (h). Typically, the shift of the peak position towards higher energy is attributed to the trap filling from a moderately deep level to a shallow energy level. The continued increase in energy peak positions indicates that perovskite films with smaller grains contain a high density of deeper defect states. In contrast, the disordered phase of the larger grain perovskite film in Fig. 3(i) showed a rapid blueshift and then the energy peak position remained the same. It suggests that larger grain perovskites contain a lower density of defects that quickly saturate with increased power excitation.
We also investigated the photovoltaic performance by fabricating hybrid perovskite solar cells with different grain sizes composed of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ag, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Fig. 4(b) shows the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics under 100 mW cm−2 illumination using AM 1.5G and the resultant photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The perovskite solar cells with smaller grains showed energy conversion efficiencies of 2.59% and 9.19%, respectively; however, a dramatic increase in efficiency to 13.72% was observed for the perovskite solar cell with larger grains. An enhanced performance was attributed to improved photovoltaic parameters of short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF). We found that the enhancement of JSC with increased grain size is closely related to an increased light absorption in the range from 400 nm to 600 nm, as shown in Fig. 4(c). Interestingly, the larger grain perovskite film showed a sharp absorption edge between 700 and 800 nm while the absorption edge of smaller perovskite solar cells was not well defined but gradually decreased. This indicates that perovskite films with smaller grains contain larger chemical disorders which will lead to broader absorption profiles but not sharp absorption edges. Another critical observation is the quenching efficiency of photogenerated charge carries at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface. Typically, PEDOT:PSS is commonly used as a hole transport layer (HTL) for perovskite solar cells and relatively higher PL intensity of MAPbI3−xClx with a PEDOT:PSS quenching layer indicates poor quenching efficiency. Fig. 4(d) shows the comparison of the PL spectra with the PEDOT:PSS quenching layer, showing that the larger grain perovskite showed the lowest PL intensity, indicating the excellent charge extraction efficiency. In contrast, a poor charge extraction efficiency was observed for a perovskite film with smaller grains. This might be attributed to defective perovskite layers that slow down the extraction process of photogenerated charge carriers.
 Fig. 4  (a) Device structure of the perovskite solar cell, (b) current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics, (c) UV/vis spectra and (d) PL spectra for three perovskite/PEDOT/FTO films with different grain sizes. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters for perovskite solar cells




Grain size

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η (%)




1–2 μm
8.77
0.63
46.88
2.59


10–20 μm
16.39
0.93
60.29
9.19


>50 μm
22.59
0.97
62.61
13.72




Conclusions
In conclusion, we have developed a new characterization method capable of probing perovskite films which can provide prompt feedback on the quality of films. In particular, the deconvoluted PL approach can provide information on the ordered and disordered phases of perovskite films that mainly originate from the GIs and GBs, respectively. Systematic analysis of power dependent PL spectra on smaller and larger grain perovskites revealed that the nature of the GBs strongly depended on the grain size. The larger grains followed an excellent power law that exhibited exciton-like recombination for both the ordered and disordered phases of the PL spectra. In contrast, perovskite films with smaller grain size showed exciton-like recombination for the ordered phase while non-radiative recombination dominated for the disordered phase. Such an observation was closely correlated with the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells. A perovskite solar cell with a large grain size increased the efficiency with higher absorption and effective charge separation at the PEDOT/perovskite interface. In contrast, much lower efficiency was observed for solar cells with smaller grains which showed poor quenching efficiency and light harvesting capability.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under projects 1428298 and 1547771.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
NREL chart homepage, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg (accessed: November, 2016).
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 3, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2013, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. J. Li, J. Y. Ma, Q. Q. Ge, J. S. Hu, D. Wang and L. J. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28518–28523 CAS .
J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, S. H. Woo, Y. Heo, J. Seidel and M. A. Green, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Dane, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, H. Cai, H. Wen, Y. Wu, Z. Li, J. Xu and J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 83264–83272 RSC .
B. Yang, O. Dyck, J. Poplawsky, J. Keum, A. Puretzky, S. Das and K. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9210–9213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y. Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570–14575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927–2934 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta and H. L. Wang, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Namkoong, A. A. Mamun, T. T. Ava, K. Zhang and H. Baumgart, Org. Electron., 2017, 42, 228–233 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Park, S. M. Jain, X. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and T. Edvinsson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2088–2101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Namkoong, J. H. Jeong, A. Mamun, H. Byun, D. Demuth and S. M. Jeong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 155, 134–140 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, Q. Yu, H. Li, J. Li, J. Si, Y. Jin, N. Wang, J. Wang, J. He, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shibata, M. Sakai, A. Yamada, K. Matsubara, K. Sakurai, H. Tampo and S. Niki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 6113 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Gasanly, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 073504 CrossRef .
W. Kong, Z. Ye, Z. Qi, B. Zhang, M. Wang, A. Rahimi-Iman and H. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16405–16411 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Absorption and PL of MAPbI3−xClx that was fitted by a single Gaussian function and (b) PL spectrum fitted by a bi-Gaussian function. Residual values are also displayed at the bottom of each figure. The inset shows a SEM image of the perovskite film used for PL measurement.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Two-dimensional (2D) PL intensity, (b) spectral mapping, and (c) overlapped intensity/spectral PL mapping showing that the blue-shifted PL spectra are located in the dark spot region. (d) High magnification SEM image shows that the pinholes are partially covered by a number of perovskite islands. In addition, PL spectra from (e) the grain interior and (f) the grain boundary were fitted by a single Gaussian function. This inset of (f) shows a type I alignment of energy band gaps between the GI and GB.	 

 	Fig. 3  Power dependent PL spectra excitation intensity of (a) 1–2 μm grains, (b) 10–20 μm grains and (c) >50 μm grain. The insets in (a–c) show the corresponding microscopic images. A double-logarithmic PL plot for (d) 1–2 μm grains, (e) 10–20 μm grains, and (f) >50 μm grains was used to calculate the power index values. In addition, the evolutions of energy peak position values for (g) 1–2 μm grains, (h) 10–20 μm grains, and (i) >50 μm grains are shown.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Device structure of the perovskite solar cell, (b) current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics, (c) UV/vis spectra and (d) PL spectra for three perovskite/PEDOT/FTO films with different grain sizes.	 

1–2 μm	8.77	0.63	46.88	2.59
10–20 μm	16.39	0.93	60.29	9.19
>50 μm	22.59	0.97	62.61	13.72

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
