Self-assembled carbon dot-wrapped perovskites enable light trapping and defect passivation for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA00036E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA00036E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7508-7521Self-assembled carbon dot-wrapped perovskites enable light trapping and defect passivation for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Ngoc Duy 
            Pham‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Amandeep 
            Singh‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Weijian 
            Chen
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Minh Tam 
            Hoang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Wang
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Annalena 
            Wolff
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoming 
            Wen
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Baohua 
            Jia
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Prashant 
            Sonar
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Hongxia 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemistry and Physics, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia. E-mail: hx.wang@qut.edu.au
bCentre for Materials Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
cCentral Analytical Research Facility, Institute for Future Environments, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
dCentre for Translational Atomaterials, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia
Received 
      3rd January 2021
    , Accepted 15th February 2021First published on 16th February 2021AbstractSimultaneously improving photovoltaic performance and longevity has become the main focus towards the commercialization of metal halide perovskite solar technology. Herein, we demonstrate resilient, high-efficiency triple-cation perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by incorporating carbon dots (CDs) derived from human hair into the perovskite film synthesis. It is found that a toluene-based antisolvent containing CDs results in the formation of a bilayer structure where a wave-like textured top perovskite layer is assembled on the bottom dense perovskite counterpart, enabling reduced optical losses through light trapping. Further characterization has revealed that the CDs are formed around and over the surface of perovskite crystals, serving as a full armour to preserve the perovskite stoichiometry during the crystallization and operation. Accordingly, the CD-wrapped perovskite film demonstrates a reduced density of interfacial defects including metallic lead clusters and uncoordinated halide vacancies, improved carrier recombination lifetime, better energy alignment with the adjacent hole transport layer, and enhanced hydrophobicity. By leveraging these advantages to enhance the efficiency of PSCs, we have achieved a maximum power conversion efficiency of 20.22%, higher than 18.72% for PSCs without CDs, and the device stability is also significantly enhanced.
1. Introduction
Metal halide perovskites have become a front runner for next-generation photovoltaics owing to a combination of their outstanding opto-electronic properties and ease of fabrication.1,2 Single junction solar cells made from metal halide perovskites have yielded an excellent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.5%, exceeding those of most other thin-film photovoltaics.3 Nevertheless, this PCE remains below their Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit (30.86%) for a bandgap of ∼1.56 eV.4,5 As such, to extract the full potential of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), key metrics such as optical losses and non-radiative recombination should be effectively minimized.
One specific source of optical losses in the state-of-the-art PSCs arises from insufficient light paths. This obstacle mainly originates from the plunge in the absorption coefficient of perovskite light-absorbers towards the near-infrared region (λ > 650 nm), resulting in large losses in light absorption, and thus low photocurrent in the state-of-the-art PSCs.1,6,7 Previously, attempts to enhance photocurrent in PSCs via employing thick perovskite light-absorbers have been reported.8–11 However, a major challenge to achieve high PCEs with these methods is the poor charge carrier collection caused by the increased non-radiative recombination in thick perovskite junctions, along with higher material costs. On the other hand, texturing perovskite light-absorbers itself could provide a more robust way to maximize the light harvesting efficiency of PSCs without compromising charge carrier collection efficiency and material costs.12–17 For instance, Pascoe et al. have used a gas-assisted technique to fabricate textured perovskite films on a mesoporous titanium dioxide substrate which enabled a substantial improvement in light-harvesting efficiency, which in turns improved photocurrents of the resultant PSCs from 21.3 ± 0.2 to 22.1 ± 0.4 mA cm−2.15 Lu et al. have demonstrated coral-like perovskite nanostructures through post treating the perovskite film with a precursor solution of formamidinium iodide in a co-solvent mixture of dimethylformamide/isopropanol.13 Compared to the flat perovskite film, the coral-like counterpart displayed a much higher light absorption and subsequently enhanced device photocurrents (from 22.46 ± 0.9 to 23.82 ± 0.7 mA cm−2). Wang et al. have utilized a micro-nanophotonic imprinting technique to construct uniform, well-defined perovskite nanostructures, with which the resulting PSC yielded a PCE of nearly 20% with much improved photocurrent.16,17 But such textured perovskite films showed faster photoluminescence quenching as compared to the flat ones upon touching the charge transport layer under open-circuit conditions,13,15–17 which is indicative of increased non-radiative losses such as surface recombination.18–20
It has been proposed that lead clusters (Pb0) and uncoordinated halide vacancies, which are induced by the evaporation of organic components from the perovskite surface during the thermal annealing process are among the predominant deep charge traps at the perovskite surface.21–24 Such deep charge traps are likely to accelerate non-radiative recombination, which in turn reduces the device performance.25 Besides, they may act as degradation initiators to limit the device lifetime.26 Consequently, effectively passivating or suppressing the formation of such deep charge traps is ultimately beneficial to simultaneously maximize PCEs and long-term durability of PSCs.23,26–28 Previously, strategies to effectively passivate or suppress the formation of these traps have been reported.21,26,29–32 For example, Zhang et al. have shown that addition of a strong reducing agent, hypophosphorous acid (HPA) directly into the perovskite precursor solution could reduce the oxidized I2 back into I−, leading to an improved stoichiometry in the perovskite crystal and reduced density of lead clusters, while the HPA was absent in the annealed perovskite film.21 Deng et al., meanwhile, have shortened the thermal annealing time of perovskite films to be less than three minutes in order to mitigate the loss of halide anions through evaporation that resulted in perovskite films with halide/lead stoichiometry close to 3.29 It must be noted however, that in these initial studies, the effect of deep trap suppression was temporary, which diminished as soon as the additive was fully consumed or the thermal process was further implemented. To tackle this issue, Wang et al., have incorporated europium(III) acetylacetonate (Eu(acac)3) directly into the PbI2 precursor solution via a two-step deposition method.26 The Eu3+–Eu2+ ion pair was found to form and reside near the perovskite surface and grain boundaries (GBs), serving as the redox shuttle to eliminating lead clusters and uncoordinated halide vacancies simultaneously in PSCs over their life span. Alternatively, Wu et al. have post treated perovskite films with cadmium iodide (CdI2) to compensate the loss of iodide and stabilize iodine ions via the formation of strong Cd–I ionic bonds.30 Despite achieving impressive PCEs and stability with PSCs, these studies are unlikely to be commercially attractive due to the use of rare-earth (Eu)26 or highly toxic (Cd)-based materials.30
Herein, we report the use of inexpensive, eco-friendly carbon dots (CDs) derived from human hair to fabricate high-performance, stable PSCs. Our synthesized CDs have a size of ∼10 nm and a hole mobility of ∼0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. S1†). Although research on using CDs that were added directly into the perovskite precursor solution to passivate perovskite GBs for reducing the density of deep traps has been reported,33,34 these studies failed to fabricate reproducibly high-performance PSCs, which could be due to the insufficient defect passivation given the fact that a very low concentration was used to passive the grain boundaries of perovskite. However, it is known that besides grain boundaries, the perovskite surface is another important source of electronic defects, which reduces the device performance.35 In contrast, we show that a new methodology in which nanosized CDs were dispersed in a toluene-based antisolvent for dripping (illustrated in Fig. S2†) can effectively solve the above issues. The resulting perovskite film had a wave-like textured microstructure as opposed to that of flat characteristics of the control film processed without CDs. This unique textured microstructure enabled reduced reflection losses in the perovskite film and the resultant PSC through the light trapping effect and localized enhanced film thickness. Furthermore, we have observed that CDs tended to self-assemble around and over the facets of perovskite crystals, forming a wrapping layer to protect the perovskite against thermal and moisture degradation. Compared to the control film, the CD-processed film exhibited improved stoichiometry, especially at the film surface, and had a longer carrier lifetime, better contact with the adjacent hole transport layer, and enhanced hydrophobicity. By incorporating these films into photovoltaic devices, we achieved increased PCEs, from 18.72% for the control to 20.22% for the CD-treated one, owing to the improved photocurrent and open-circuit voltage. In addition, unencapsulated CD-treated PSCs exhibited much improved stability against multiple stressors including high humidity, elevated temperature, light illumination, and external bias. This work provides a simple yet effective approach to simultaneously achieve highly efficient and stable PSCs.
2. Results and discussion
To assess the influence of CDs on device performance, we fabricated n–i–p PSCs with the following architecture: glass/ITO/SnO2/Cs0.05FA0.80MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45-perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au, where Spiro-OMeTAD represents 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Fig. 1a). PSCs without CD treatment (denoted as control) exhibited a mean PCE of 17.70 ± 0.50%, with an average open-circuit voltage (Voc), current density (Jsc), and fill-factor (FF) of 1.135 ± 0.007 V, 22.34 ± 0.27 mA cm−2, and 69.57 ± 2.03%, respectively (Fig. 1b). In contrast, when CDs were incorporated into the perovskite film, the device performance was dramatically increased, peaking at 3 mg mL−1 of CDs in toluene, and then reduced at higher CD contents (Fig. S3†). At the optimum CD concentration (3 mg mL−1), the PSCs (denoted as CDs-PSK) demonstrated an average PCE of 18.57 ± 0.87% with a Voc, Jsc, and FF of 1.158 ± 0.006 V, 22.59 ± 0.21 mA cm−2, and 70.97 ± 2.72%, respectively (Fig. 1b). From the acquired performance metrics, it is clearly seen that the performance enhancement is attributed to the improvement of all photovoltaic parameters including Voc, Jsc and FFs and the enhancement of Voc is prominent in particular.
 Fig. 1  Photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). (a) Schematic diagram of n–i–p PSCs and graphic representation of ligand-capped carbon dots (CDs). (b) Statistical photovoltaic parameters of control and CDs-PSK PSCs (PCE%: power conversion efficiency; Voc: open-circuit voltage; J: short-circuit current density; FF (%): fill-factor). (c) Current–voltage characteristics of the representative CDs-PSK (3 mg mL−1 CDs in toluene) and control devices, and corresponding stabilized power output (SPO%, inset). (d) External quantum efficiency spectra together with integrated Jsc of PSCs. 
In Fig. 1c, we show the current–voltage characteristics (J–V) of the CDs-PSK and control devices, and the corresponding stabilized power output (SPO%). Owing to the improved Voc (from 1.132 to 1.166 V) and Jsc (from 22.47 to 23.05 mA cm−2), the PCE was increased from 18.72 to 20.22% with the addition of CDs. In parallel, the SPO% of the device was also improved from 18.02 to 19.03% (inset in Fig. 1c). Meanwhile, both devices showed a small hysteresis in the J–V curves and that the addition of CDs did not significantly affect the degree of hysteresis (Fig. S4†). The corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the control and CDs-PSK devices are compared in Fig. 1d. It is apparent that the CDs-PSK cell exhibits a higher EQE than that of the control cell, especially in the near infrared region (λ = 600–800 nm). The integrated Jsc values from the corresponding EQE spectra of the CDs-PSK and the control PSCs are 21.11 mA cm−2 and 20.58 mA cm−2, respectively. This result is consistent with the measured J–V curves showing that the CDs-PSK device generated a higher short circuit photocurrent density than the control PSC (Fig. 1c). It is noticed that the integrated Jsc is slightly lower (8.5%) than the Jsc in the J–V measurement. This phenomenon has been commonly observed in the field of PSCs. It is usually believed to be caused by multiple reasons associated with the much weaker light intensity and smaller illuminated active area of the PSC in the EQE measurement compared to the J–V measurement, which in turn influences recombination kinetics and thus photocurrent density in the device as reported previously.36 The spectral mismatch (up to 5%) between the EQE measurement and the AM1.5 solar spectrum used in the I–V measurement could also contribute to the difference between the integrated Jsc from EQE and the Jsc in the I–V measurement. It is noteworthy that the increase in EQE with the addition of CDs came along with the decreased reflectance and increased internal quantum efficiency of the PSC (Fig. S5†). This result suggests that both light harvesting capacity and charge collection efficiency of the PSC were improved upon the addition of CDs.
It should be noted that the surface of CDs in this work is attached with two types of ligands including aminohexadecan and poly(9-vinylcarbazole) (PVK) in order to create controlled aggregation of CDs during deposition (details are shown in the Experimental section). Therefore, the obtained performance enhancement of the PSC treated with the CD-containing precursor solution (Fig. 1b and c) could be attributed to the combined effect of both aminohexadecan-attached CDs and PVK. In fact, our results on device performances have confirmed that PVK did play a positive role in enhancing the PSC performance, which boosted the PCE from 18.72 to 19.34% (Fig. S6†). However, in contrast to the device fabricated in the presence of CDs (PCE of 20.22%), the PCE of the device with PVK alone was still lower, indicating the necessity of CDs for maximizing the solar cell performance.
To understand the possible origins of the enhanced device performance with the addition of CDs, we firstly assessed the morphology of perovskite films by microscopy measurements. We show three-dimensional atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the control and the CDs-PSK films in Fig. 2a and b. We see from the AFM images that unlike the control film which has an even, flat surface with a root mean square value of height deviation (Rq) of 29.5 nm over a 50 × 50 μm2 area, the CDs-PSK film has a wave-like morphology with 4–5 μm wide ridges and ∼400 nm deep trenches and a Rq of 185.0 nm. However, adding CDs was yet to compromise the surface coverage as both perovskite films showed full coverage on the substrate with the absence of pinholes, albeit this resulted in a decreased grain size (Fig. S7†). We note that PVK alone hardly changes the surface morphology of the perovskite film (Fig. S8†). According to previous reports on wave-like perovskite morphology that was made by using a specially designed method.37,38 This typical microstructure is possibly associated with compressive stress arising in the process of film formation due to the rapid phase transition from intermediate states to the perovskite phase. Given the nano size of our CDs (Fig. S1a†), a feature that could allow them to serve as heterogeneous seed nuclei to enable accelerated nucleation crystallization and thus rapid conversion into perovskites from their intermediate states, we believe that the same microstructural transformation mechanism can be applied to the current work. Our hypothesis is corroborated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results (Fig. S7b and d†) which show that the CD–PSK film has a smaller grain size than the control film, a typical characteristic of faster nucleation crystallization.39,40Fig. 2c and d reveal the cross-sectional SEM images of the control and CDs-PSK film deposited on glass/ITO, respectively. The control film had a uniform thickness of ∼550 nm (Fig. 2c), whereas the CDs-PSK film was comprised of a bilayer structure where a wave-like textured top layer (∼400 nm thick) was assembled on the bottom dense layer (∼550 nm thick) (Fig. 2d) although the same spin-coating procedure was used for the preparation of both films. It is worth pointing out that the slight detachment of the perovskite film from the substrate observed in Fig. 2d is caused by the imbalanced mechanical force used to cut and break the sample for SEM measurements. It by no means indicates that the perovskite film was detached from the substrate in the PSCs. Otherwise, the PSCs would not produce an energy conversion efficiency over 20% as shown above.
 Fig. 2  Morphological characteristics of perovskite films and the corresponding optical properties. (a and b) Three-dimensional atomic force microscopy images for the (a) control perovskite film and (b) CDs-PSK perovskite film. (c and d) The corresponding cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images. (e) Reflection and absorption spectra of corresponding perovskite films. 
It has been proposed that the perovskite film with a textured surface could demonstrate enhanced light harvesting efficiency thanks to the beneficial light trapping effect.12–17 To investigate whether this light trapping effect is valid for our wave-like textured CDs-PSK perovskite film or not, we carried out ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-vis) measurements. We found that while the bandgap of the perovskite remained unchanged (∼1.61 eV), the light harvesting capacity of the perovskite film was significantly enhanced with the addition of CDs (Fig. 2e and S9†). Notably, compared to the control film, the CDs-PSK film had reduced reflectance losses throughout the absorbing wavelengths (350 to 750 nm) (Fig. 2e), in line with the reflection reduction of the corresponding PSCs (Fig. S5a†). Also, comparison of the plot of light absorbance which was calculated from the transmission and reflection spectra (Fig. 2e and S9b†) recorded on both films reveals that the CDs-PSK film absorbs more light than the control film. The improved light absorption in the perovskite film processed with the CDs can be attributed to two main factors: reduced light reflection loss through the light trapping effect (Fig. 2e) and the thicker perovskite film (Fig. 2d).
It is worth pointing out that the great absorption coefficient of >105 cm−1 at the UV-visible wavelength of <650 nm means that the perovskite film with a thickness of ∼500 nm should have the capacity to sufficiently absorb all the light in the wavelength range of <650 nm,1 and the small improvement in light absorption in this wavelength region does not change device photocurrent dramatically. However, the enhanced film thickness is expected to benefit the light harvesting of the perovskite film in the near infrared region with a wavelength range of >650 nm due to the weaker light absorption of the material. Collectively, these optical results indicate that the morphological change of the perovskite film from mirror-like to wave-like structure with the addition of CDs should improve the light harvesting efficiency of the perovskite film and the subsequent device performance through the light trapping effect and enhanced light absorption. This coincides with the above results that the CDs-PSK device exhibited enhanced EQE spectra and photocurrent density compared to that of the control counterpart (Fig. 1c and d).
To reveal the possible location of CDs in the perovskite film, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements with both perovskite film and powder samples. In Fig. 3a, we show the high resolution XPS spectra of the C 1s core levels peak of the surface of control and CDs-PSK films. All the XPS spectra were calibrated via aligning the peaks with Au 4f7/2 at ∼84 eV (Fig. S10a†). The C 1s core levels of the surface of the control perovskite (Fig. 3a, bottom) are found to comprise three components: the peak at 284.1 eV is ascribed to C–C adventitious carbon (48.27%), the peak at 286.1 eV is ascribed to the C–N bond (11.65%), and the peak at 287.9 eV is ascribed to the CN bond (40.08%). The latter two are attributed to the methylammonium and formamidinium components, respectively of the triple-cation perovskite.41 However, in the C 1s spectrum of the surface of the CDs-PSK, the typical characteristics of both neat CDs and the perovskite can be observed, and that the former one is predominant (Fig. 3a, and S10b†). Specifically, the C 1s spectrum of the surface of the CDs-PSK consists of three peaks: the peak at 284.5 eV is ascribed to the CC bond (81.62%), the peak at 285.5 eV is ascribed to the CO bond (11.08%), and the peak at 287.9 eV is attributed to the CN bond (7.31%). The characteristic observation in the XPS spectrum clearly suggests that the CDs are predominantly present on the surface of the perovskite film. To further elucidate the location of the CDs in the perovskite layer, we performed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements for the cross-section of the CDs-PSK sample wherein the cross-section was cut using a plasma focused ion beam/scanning electron microscope (PFIB/SEM) (Fig. 3b). In situ STEM measurements were performed in the plasma FIB/SEM before the sample was transferred for the TEM measurement. For this, High Angle Dark Field (HADF) images were recorded of the device cross-section that shows atomic number (Z) contrast. We see from the HADF images that, unlike the ITO layer and PbI2 particles within the perovskite, the CDs are not readily visible due to their low Z (Fig. 3c, top panel), but are clearly confirmed in the EDS measurement (Fig. 3c, bottom panel). The CDs are also clearly visible in the corresponding TEM image (Fig. 3b). A PFIB process required a thin platinum rich deposition layer containing carbon on top of the device. The HADF results are in good agreement with the TEM EDS line-scan across the device (Fig. 3c, bottom panel). In, Sn, Pb, Ca are plotted here only to represent the different layers for ease of reading. We observed a continuous and gradual increase in C intensity towards the perovskite surface near the Pt/C layer (indicated by the arrow in Fig. 3c, bottom panel). This suggests that the CDs were also incorporated into the perovskite film with a gradient distribution near the film surface. By further assessment with TEM measurements for the mixture of CDs and perovskite, we have found that the CDs self-assembled surrounding the perovskite particles, forming a protective layer (Fig. 3d).
 Fig. 3  Determination of the location of CDs in the perovskite film. (a) High resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra (Al-Kα = 1486.6 eV) of the C 1s core levels of the perovskite films. (b) Cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image and corresponding high-resolution TEM image (inset) of the CDs-PSK sample fabricated using the focused ion beam technique. (c) Cross-sectional high angle annular dark field STEM image of the CDs-PSK sample and 1σ thresholded EDS line-scan (TruLine). (d) TEM images of the perovskite/CDs mixture (powder), wherein CDs aggregated surrounding the perovskite crystal. 
In Fig. 4a–c, we demonstrate how the surface chemical compositions of the perovskite films, especially lead and halide components, change with the addition of CDs. Fig. 4a shows the high resolution XPS spectra of Pb 4f core levels of the surface of the control film before and after thermal aging at 100 °C for 45 hours in a N2-filled glovebox. It is revealed that in addition to the major components, namely the Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 doublets at 137.9 and 142.8 eV, respectively, we observed two shoulder peaks at 141.3 and 136.4 eV associated with metallic lead (Pb0) (Fig. 4a, black curve).23,26 These two shoulders became more prominent after thermal aging at 100 °C for 45 hours. In contrast, we did not detect any trace of Pb0 on the surface of the CDs-PSK film even after thermal aging (Fig. 4b). The high resolution XPS spectra of I 3d and Br 3d and full details of peak positions can be found in Fig. S11 and Table S1.† By analysis of the fittings of the XPS spectra, we observed no significant shifts in the binding energies of the Pb 4f, I 3d and Br 3d, but there is a great difference in the atomic ratio of Pb0/(Pb0 + Pb2+) and halide/Pb of the surface of the control and CDs-PSK films as displayed in Fig. 4c. The calculations show that the Pb0/(Pb0 + Pb2+) and the halide/Pb ratios for the as-prepared control film were 3.46% and 2.64, respectively. This indicates that a halide-deficient and Pb0-abundant characteristic already existed at the surface of the as-prepared control film. In other words, uncoordinated halide vacancies and lead clusters (Pb0) were present at the surface of the as-prepared control film. This result is consistent with previous reports which proposed the formation of these undesirable deep traps due to the evaporation of organic components from the perovskite surface during the thermal annealing process.21–24 After thermal aging at 100 °C for 45 hours, the former ratio went up to 10.79% while the latter ratio went down to 1.92, suggesting that thermal aging significantly increased the density of deep traps in the control film. In contrast, the Pb0/(Pb0 + Pb2+) ratio in the surface of the CDs-PSK film remained zero both before and after the annealing aging process. In addition to that, the halide/Pb ratio in the surface of the CDs-PSK film was found to be 2.89 and 2.42 for the fresh and aged film, respectively. Given the much higher halide/Pb ratio and zero value of the Pb0/(Pb0 + Pb2+) ratio in the surface of the CDs-PSK film as compared to that of the surface of the control film, we can conclude that the presence of CDs in the perovskite film effectively preserved the stoichiometry of the film surface, and therefore suppressed the formation and development of interfacial deep traps.
 Fig. 4  Chemical compositions of the surface and bulk of perovskite films. (a and b) High resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra (Al-Kα = 1486.6 eV) of the Pb 4f core levels for both fresh and aged perovskite films. The aged perovskite films are those that were subjected to 100 °C for 45 hours in a N2-filled glovebox. (c) Fitted results of the Pb0/(Pb0 + Pb2+) and halide/Pb ratio. (d) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films. (e) Schematic illustration showing a metallic lead cluster and halide vacancy management in the case of CD incorporation. 
To examine whether the inclusion of CDs has a significant impact on the crystal structure and phase composition of the perovskite films or not, we conducted X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. We present the XRD patterns of control and CDs-PSK films in Fig. 4d. By using the Rietveld refinement method to fit the XRD patterns, we found that the crystal structure of the perovskite film remains unaltered with the addition of CDs, as the main diffraction peaks from both films are well assigned to the orthorhombic Cs0.05FA0.80MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45 perovskite phase (Fig. S12 and Table S2†). Nevertheless, the average crystallite size of the perovskite slightly decreased with the addition of CDs, from 47.16 ± 0.84 to 43.07 ± 0.70 nm (Table S2†), which is consistent with the SEM top-view results (Fig. S7†), and is in agreement with our hypothesis that the inclusion of nanosized CDs in perovskite synthesis accelerates nucleation crystallization. Interestingly, we found that the weight percentage (wt%) of PbI2 in the perovskite film decreased by approximately 3-fold with the addition of CDs, from 1.47 ± 0.16 to 0.45 ± 0.13 wt% (Table S2†). We note that both films were fabricated with the same perovskite precursor solution and thermal annealing process, and as such we believe that the decrease in PbI2 content occurred because of improved thermal resistance of the perovskite film processed with CDs.42 Based on the above results, we propose a mechanism on how the addition of CDs suppresses deep trap formation as shown in Fig. 4e. In the left column, we present the control perovskite film, where a large density of deep traps such as metallic lead clusters and uncoordinated halide vacancies are observed, and further heating at elevated temperature increases the density of these defect species. When the CDs are used, they selectively aggregate surrounding and over the surface of perovskite crystals, serving as a wrapping layer (Fig. 4e, right column). This CD layer then mitigates the evaporation of organic components from the perovskite surface and GBs during heating, thereby suppressing the formation of the deep traps.
To gain insight into the charge carrier dynamics of the perovskite films with and without the addition of CDs, we carried out steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence decay (TRPL) measurements. The PL and TRPL were measured by using a laser with a wavelength of 405 nm with which a penetration depth of ∼50 nm was estimated (Fig. S13† and relevant discussion). As such, the PL and TRPL results mainly reflect the charge carrier dynamics within an ∼50 nm depth of the perovskite film surface. In Fig. 5a and b, we show the PL and TRPL spectra of perovskite films deposited on a glass substrate wherein the incident light was from the air side. Compared to the control film, the perovskite film processed with CDs demonstrated ∼5-fold higher intensity of PL emission and ∼1.6-fold longer carrier lifetime, from 333.50 to 549.44 ns (Fig. 5a, b and Table S3†). This implies that the addition of CDs greatly suppressed the surface nonradiative recombination originating from deep traps. Meanwhile, we also observed the longer PL decay lifetime of the CDs-PSK film than the control sample when the laser was incident via the substrate glass side (Fig. S14†), despite that the CDs were found to concentrate on the film surface. This can be possibly attributed to the diffusion of CDs and/or ligands along the GBs during the dripping and thermal annealing process as shown in Fig. 3c, which could also suppress deep trap formation at the bottom surface of perovskite films. After coming into contact with a charge transport layer of either SnO2 or Spiro-OMeTAD, we observed a significant decrease in PL lifetime in both films but that the PL lifetimes remained much longer for the CDs-PSK as compared to the control film (Fig. S15†). Since these TRPL spectra were recorded under the condition of no electrical contact (open-circuit condition), the longer PL lifetime of the CDs-PSK film when being in contact with the charge transport layer is indicative of reduced interfacial recombination. Collectively, the PL and TRPL results indicate that the inclusion of CDs in perovskite film synthesis is beneficial for reducing nonradiative losses in both perovskite bulk and at the interfaces.
 Fig. 5  Charge carrier dynamics in the perovskite films and devices. (a) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) of the control and CD treated perovskite films on a glass substrate and (b) corresponding time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) with fittings. The perovskite films were illuminated from the front side (air side). (c) Band energy aliment at the interface between the perovskite and the Spiro-OMeTAD. (d) Open-circuit voltage as a function of light illumination intensity. The ideality factors were determined from the linear fits. 
We further explored the effect of CDs on the energy alignment between the perovskite and Spiro-OMeTAD-based hole transport layer by using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) along with UV-vis measurements. We present the UPS spectra of the perovskite films in Fig. S16.† From the secondary electron cut-off of both samples (Fig. S16b†), the sample work function (WF) was derived to be −4.16 eV for the perovskite film and −4.01 eV for the CD film. Also, fitting the extrapolation of valence band spectra of the two samples in a logarithmic scale (Fig. S16c†) resulted in a valence band maximum of −1.5 eV. By combining these band energy position results with the optical gaps of perovskite (1.61 eV, Fig. S7b†) and CDs (3.5 eV),43 we obtained the energy level alignment between the perovskite and the Spiro-OMeTAD-based hole transport material, which has a conduction band and valence band position of −2.23 and −5.26 eV, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5c. We can see that the valence band position of CDs (−5.51 eV) lies perfectly between that of the perovskite (−5.66 eV) and doped Spiro-OMeTAD (−5.26 eV). This graded band alignment can facilitate effective hole injection from the perovskite into the top electrode. Moreover, the CD layer with a much higher conduction band position than that of Spiro-OMeTAD could act as an efficient electron-blocking layer, a characteristic that could therefore suppress carrier recombination.
In addition, the influence of CDs on charge recombination in the complete PSC was characterized by performing light intensity-dependent open-circuit voltage and impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements. In Fig. 5d, we show the Voc as a function of incident light intensity on a linear log scale where the ideality factor (mΦ) calculated from the slope is representative of the charge carrier recombination process.44 We have found that besides radiative recombination, trap-assisted recombination exists in both types of devices as the extracted ideality factor is between 1 and 2. However, the contribution of trap-assisted recombination is smaller in the CDs-PSK device as compared to the control one since its ideality factor mΦ2 = 1.62 is smaller than that of the control PSC device (mΦ1 = 1.80).
Next, we performed impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements for both types of PSCs. We note that the IS measurements were performed under open-circuit conditions to examine the charge recombination process in the PSCs. We show the IS spectra and corresponding fittings in Fig. S17a and b,† where we used an equivalent circuit illustrated in Fig. S17c† for fitting. It is shown that the total recombination resistance (Rrec) as a sum of low and high-frequency resistance (R2 and R1, respectively) of the CDs-PSK PSC is always higher than that of the control PSC at the same bias (Fig. S17d†), indicating that non-radiative losses in the latter are higher than those in the former. Overall, the combination of IS, ideality factor, band energy alignment, PL and TRPL results can well explain the observed open-circuit voltage increase of the device with the addition of CDs (Fig. 1b and c).
To investigate the impact of CDs on the ambient stability of the perovskite film, we compared the XRD patterns of the aged perovskite films (Fig. 6a). The corresponding fittings are shown in Fig. S18 and Table S4.† Over the course of 4 days under RH = 55 ± 1%, T = 30 °C, the wt% of PbI2 in the control film was increased by a factor of two, from 1.47 ± 0.16 wt% to 3.11 ± 0.11 wt%, whereas the change in the CDs-PSK film was negligible (Tables S2 and S4†). This indicates that compared to the control film, the CDs-PSK film is more stable against moisture. To reveal the underlying reason for this, we measured the water contact angle of the perovskite films processed with and without CDs. As shown in Fig. 6b, the surface of the control perovskite film is hydrophilic with a contact angle (CA) of only 47.4°. In contrast, with the CD modification, the CA increased to 94.7°, suggesting the transformation of the surface wetting properties of the perovskite to hydrophobic. The more hydrophobic nature of the film surface can well explain the improved moisture stability of the CDs-PSK perovskite film as compared to the control one.
 Fig. 6  Stability of perovskite films and devices. (a) XRD patterns of perovskite films placed under RH = 55 ± 1%, T = 30 °C for 4 days (in the dark). (b) Characterization of the wettability of perovskite films measured 10 s after water droplet deposition. (c and d) Environmental and operational stability of the corresponding PSCs, respectively. 
The ambient and operational stability of unencapsulated PSCs processed with and without CDs was also evaluated. In Fig. 6c, we compare the ambient stability of the devices over the course of 135 days under RH = 55 ± 1%, T = 30 °C. Over the course of 135 days, the PCE of the control device dropped by 18% of its initial PCE, whereas that of the CDs-PSK device dropped by only 8%, demonstrating its significantly improved environmental stability. This outcome likely originates from the hydrophobic nature of the surface of the CDs-PSK film that acts as a robust barrier towards water ingress thereby reducing degradation of the perovskite underneath. The slight fluctuation of the PCE of the PSCs on different days in Fig. 6c is probably caused by small variation in environmental temperature and humidity during the performance measurement of the device, which is known to affect the performance of PSCs.45–47 The operational stability of the unencapsulated control and CDs-PSK devices was examined under combination of multiple stressors: ambient environment RH 63 ± 5%, 1 sun light illumination (xenon lamp, 450 W), T = 70 ± 2 °C, and at maximum power point tracking. As shown in Fig. 6d, the CDs-PSK device retained ∼60%, whereas the control device maintained only ∼41% of its initial performances over the course of 120 min. We attribute the substantial enhancement in the operational stability of the CDs-PSK device to the combination of: (1) the reduced density of deep trap generation in the perovskite bulk and surface induced by CD incorporation, and (2) improved surface hydrophobicity of the perovskite film.
3. Conclusion
In summary, we have demonstrated an effective strategy of wrapping perovskite grains via self-assembled CDs, which can synchronously suppress the generation of deep traps such as metallic lead clusters and uncoordinated halide vacancies at both surfaces and GBs of the perovskite film, stabilizing the grains at the nanoscale. The corresponding CD-wrapped perovskite film showed improved carrier lifetime, better contact with the adjacent hole transport layer, and enhanced thermal and environmental stability. Moreover, the current methodology of using CDs wherein the CDs were pre-dispersed in a toluene-based antisolvent for dripping also produced perovskite films with textured microstructure and reduced reflection losses. These beneficial factors have led to much improved device performance with the peak PCE of 20.22% along with enhanced environmental and operational stability.
4. Experimental section
4.1 Materials
All materials purchased were used as received unless otherwise stated. Lead bromide (PbBr2, 99.99%), cesium iodide (CsI, 99.999% trace metals basis), magnesium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonimide) (Mg-TFSI2, 97%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous, ≥99.9%), chlorobenzene (CB, anhydrous, 99.8%), toluene (anhydrous, 99.8%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (4-tBP, 98%), acetonitrile (ACN, anhydrous, 99.8%), and tin(II) chloride (98%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Methylammonium bromide (MABr), formamidinium iodide (FAI), and tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)-cobalt(III) tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (FK 209) were purchased from Greatcell Solar. Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9%) was purchased from Youxuan Tech. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) was supplied by Borun New Material.
4.2 Triple cation perovskite Cs0.05FA0.80MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45 precursor solution
The triple cation perovskite Cs0.05FA0.80MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45 precursor solution was prepared by adding 50 μL CsI precursor solution (1.5 M, in DMSO) into a precursor solution of 1.1 mmol FAI, 1.2 mmol PbI2, 0.2 mmol MABr and 0.2 mmol PbBr2 in 1 mL mixture DMF/DMSO (4:1, v/v), and then magnetically stirring for one hour. The triple cation perovskite precursor solution was filtered using a syringe filter (pore size: 0.22 μm) prior to use.
4.3 Synthesis of the CD precursor solution
The CDs were extracted from human hair using a two-step process following a previous report.43 The human hair was collected from local barber shops. Before being used, the hair samples were cleaned by careful washing to remove any unwanted dyes. It was found that when we randomized the sample by mixing different types of hair together, the extracted carbon dots from the hair samples showed very good reproducibility. In brief, human hair (2 grams) was firstly washed sequentially by ultra-sonication in water and acetone before being dried in a hot air oven at 60 °C. The sample was then transferred to an autoclave and heated at 100 °C for 24 hours to completely depolymerize the hair strands. The cooled product was collected and sonicated in water for 60 min to get a homogeneous suspension. Further processes including evaporating the solvent and grinding the residue in a pestle and motor were implemented to obtain fine powder. The obtained powder was then heated at 240 °C in octadecane solvent for 5 hours before being column filtered by using aluminium oxide as an adsorbent to adsorb the unwanted reaction by-product. To enable nitrogen doping and linker attachment of CDs, the linker molecule, 1-aminohexadecan (AHD) was used in the above step by reheating both solutes in octadecane at 240 °C for the next 2 hours. Acetone was added to the above mixture after cooling it to room temperature leading to flocculation of CDs. The process was repeated three times and the resultant product was oven-dried to obtain powder CDs with the linker. It should be noted that after enabling nitrogen doping and attaching to the CDs, the pristine AHD linker was absent in the synthesized CD powder. The obtained powder was redispersed in a poly(9-vinylcarbazole) (PVK) solution of toluene. The ratio of CDs to PVK was set at 3:1 (w/w) to form controlled aggregation of CDs during the deposition process.
4.4 Hole transport material precursor solution
The hole transport material solution was prepared following our recent work.48 In short, 15 μL of Mg-TFSI2 pre-dissolved in ACN, 2.5 mg mL−1 FK 209, 29 μL 4-tBP, and 72.3 mg Spiro-OMeTAD were added to 1 mL of CB and magnetically stirred for 15 minutes. The prepared hole transport material solution was filtered by using a syringe filter (pore size: 0.22 μm) prior to use.
4.5 Device fabrication
A compact SnO2 layer (∼40 nm) was spin-coated on pre-patterned, pre-UV-ozone-treated ITO-coated glass (10 Ω sq−1, Kaivo) using a precursor of SnCl2 (0.1 M, in ethanol, 96%) at 3000 rpm for 33 s. The compact SnO2 film was then dried at 100 °C and 185 °C for 10 min and 60 min, respectively, before being treated with UV-ozone for 15 min and then transferred to a N2-filled glove box. The as-prepared triple-cation perovskite precursor solution was spin coated on the substrate in two-step programs at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 6000 rpm for 30 s, respectively. About 10 s prior to the end of the second step, 0.2 mL of toluene was dropped onto the centre of the spinning substrate. To prepare CD-based perovskite films, different concentrations of CDs in toluene (1 mg mL−1, 3 mg mL−1, and 6 mg mL−1) were used as antisolvents. All perovskite films were annealed at 100 °C for 60 min. The hole-transport layer was prepared by spin coating the as-prepared hole transport material precursor at 4000 rpm for 30 s. We note that preparation and deposition of perovskite and hole transport materials were performed in a N2-filled glove box. Finally, the device was completed by e-beam evaporation of 100 nm of gold under ≈10−6 Torr pressure. To ensure the Spiro-OMeTAD containing Mg-TFSI2 as an additive to be oxidized properly to obtain the optimal performance, complete devices were kept in a dry environment (RH ∼ 40%) for three days.
4.6 Characterization
The hole mobility was measured by Hall effect measurements (Cryogenic Ltd Mini Cryogen-free System, Cryogenic Ltd., London, UK) on a thin film sample using the van der Pauw method with a magnet in the range of 0–5 T. The measurements were performed at room temperature. The thin film (1 cm × 1 cm) was prepared by spin-coating the CD solution on a non-conducting glass. Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images were captured with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV using a field emission scanning electron microscope (JOEL 7001F) equipped with an Everhart–Thornley detector. TEM images of perovskite/CDs powder were obtained with a JEOL 2100 TEM, operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. To prepare perovskite/CDs powder, 100 μ CD precursor solution (3 mg mL−1, dispersed in toluene) was dropped in 1 mL perovskite precursor solution (the same concentration used to fabricate PSCs) before stirring for 1 h. The diluted solution (diluted in a mixture of DMF/DMSO (1:4, v/v)) is then dropped onto a copper Omniprobe grid before being dried using an infrared lamp.
The TEM lamella of the thin film sample was prepared using a Tescan S8000X Plasma FIB/SEM. For this, 2 protective platinum layers were deposited on the sample surface to protect it from the ion beam in the subsequent processes. The first platinum deposition layer was deposited using an electron beam at 2 kV acceleration voltage. 3 nA beam current was chosen to deposit the layer with the RLE scanning strategy and a settle factor of 2. The second platinum deposition layer was deposited with an ion beam using 10 kV acceleration voltage, 1 nA beam current and a 100 nm spotsize to achieve the required current density. The deposition time was set to 8 minutes and the RLE scanning strategy was used. 15 μm deep cross-sections were cut using 30 kV and 10 nA using the rectangular stair pattern followed by a 1 nA polishing rectangle patterning step to reduce the tapering of the lamella. In both cases, ion beam induced sample alterations were not observed. The sample was then cut free and placed on a copper TEM grid and thinned to sub 100 nm thickness at 30 kV using first 0.1 nA beam current, followed by 50 pA beam current. The amorphous layers were reduced in a final polishing step using 5 kV acceleration voltage and 50 pA beam current. In situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was performed on the prepared TEM lamella using a Tescan S8000X. High Angle Dark Field (HADF) images of the sample were recorded in analysis mode, using 30 kV in combination with the best imaging resolution beam current setting. A JEOL 2100 TEM, equipped with an Oxford Nmax 80 mm2 EDS detector was used to analyse the PFIB/SEM prepared TEM lamella. The lamella was imaged using the largest condenser aperture and the second largest objective aperture, spot 1 and alpha 2. HRTEM images of the CDs were recorded using the largest condenser and largest objective aperture, spot 1 and alpha 1. An EDS linescan across the sample was recorded in STEM mode with process time 5 and 4000 passes to ensure that roughly 1 million counts were recorded in the line sum spectrum. The TruLine was evaluated here and a threshold of 1σ was set to ensure that only statistically relevant data were evaluated.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectra were collected through a Kratos AXIS Supra photoelectron spectrometer with HeI as the resonance line and the photoenergy was 21.22 eV. Absorbance spectra of the perovskite film and the doped Spiro-OMeTAD films were measured with a UV-visible spectrometer (Cary 500). The PL and TRPL spectra were measured at room temperature via a spectrometer (Ocean Optics, QE-Pro) and a time-correlated single-photon counting module (TCSPC, PicoHarp 300) respectively. The excitation laser is a 405 nm picosecond diode laser (pulse duration 50 ps, repetition rate set at 2.5 MHz). The XRD patterns were collected in grazing incident geometry using a Cu Kα parallel beam conditioned by a parabolic mirror in a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer; 1° incident angle was used with the incident angle adjusted to just illuminate the thin film sample. Each pattern was collected in 1 hour. The current density–voltage (J–V) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) was collected using a solar simulator (Oriel Sol3A, Newport) equipped with a 450 W xenon lamp in ambient air (≈25 °C, RH% = 55–70%). The PSCs were masked with a black tape aperture (0.115 cm2) to define the active area. Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements were conducted using a quantum efficiency system (IQE 200B, Newport) under AC mode. For the shelf-life stability test, performances of un-encapsulated devices stored in the dark, under a humid environment (in ambient air (≈25 °C, RH% = 55–70%)) were periodically monitored. For the operational stability test, the devices were kept at maximum power output voltage under 1 sun illumination in air and under a temperature of ∼70 °C. Impedance spectra of the devices under different light intensity illumination were recorded in a frequency range from 1 MHz to 100 mHz using an electrochemical workstation (VSP BioLogic Science Instruments) under open-circuit conditions.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results was financially supported by the Australian Research Council Discovery Project (DP190102252). N. D. P., A. S., M. T. H., Y. Y., T. W., A. W., P. S., and H. W. thank the support of Centre for Material Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT). P. S. is thankful to QUT for the financial support from the Australian Research Council (ARC) for the Future Fellowship (FT130101337) and QUT core funding (QUT/322120-0301/07). The data of SEM, TEM, XPS, UPS, AFM and XRD reported in this article were obtained at the Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF), QUT. Access to CARF was supported by the generous funding from Science and Engineering faculty, QUT.
References
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, Organometallic Halide Perovskites: Sharp Optical Absorption Edge and Its Relation to Photovoltaic Performance, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, The emergence of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .

          National-Renewable-Energy-Laboratory, Best Research-Cell Efficiencies,  2020, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20200803.pdf Search PubMed.
C. Ma and N.-G. Park, A Realistic Methodology for 30% Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Chem, 2020, 6, 1254–1264 CAS .
S. Rühle, Tabulated values of the Shockley–Queisser limit for single junction solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2016, 130, 139–147 CrossRef .
J. M. Ball, S. D. Stranks, M. T. Hörantner, S. Hüttner, W. Zhang, E. J. W. Crossland, I. Ramirez, M. Riede, M. B. Johnston, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Optical properties and limiting photocurrent of thin-film perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 602–609 RSC .
D.-L. Wang, H.-J. Cui, G.-J. Hou, Z.-G. Zhu, Q.-B. Yan and G. Su, Highly efficient light management for perovskite solar cells, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18922 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Solvent Annealing of Perovskite-Induced Crystal Growth for Photovoltaic-Device Efficiency Enhancement, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Hu, H. Jiao, L. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Chemical Reduction of Intrinsic Defects in Thicker Heterojunction Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606774 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Electro-optics of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. Zuo, Y. Zhang, X. Lian, W. Fu, J. Yan, J. Li, G. Wu, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, High-Performance Thickness Insensitive Perovskite Solar Cells with Enhanced Moisture Stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800438 CrossRef .
Q. G. Du, G. Shen and S. John, Light-trapping in perovskite solar cells, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 065002 CrossRef .
Y.-A. Lu, T.-H. Chang, S.-H. Wu, C.-C. Liu, K.-W. Lai, Y.-C. Chang, Y.-C. Chang, H.-C. Lu, C.-W. Chu and K.-C. Ho, Coral-like perovskite nanostructures for enhanced light-harvesting and accelerated charge extraction in perovskite solar cells, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Liao, W.-Q. Wu, Y. Jiang, D.-B. Kuang and L. Wang, Maze-Like Halide Perovskite Films for Efficient Electron Transport Layer-Free Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800268 CrossRef .
A. R. Pascoe, S. Meyer, W. Huang, W. Li, I. Benesperi, N. W. Duffy, L. Spiccia, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Enhancing the Optoelectronic Performance of Perovskite Solar Cells via a Textured CH3NH3PbI3 Morphology, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1278–1285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, P. Wang, X. Zhou, C. Li, H. Li, X. Hu, F. Li, X. Liu, M. Li and Y. Song, Diffraction-Grated Perovskite Induced Highly Efficient Solar Cells through Nanophotonic Light Trapping, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702960 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M. Li, X. Zhou, P. Li, X. Hu and Y. Song, High efficient perovskite whispering-gallery solar cells, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 556–562 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Maximizing and stabilizing luminescence from halide perovskites with potassium passivation, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zohar, M. Kulbak, I. Levine, G. Hodes, A. Kahn and D. Cahen, What Limits the Open-Circuit Voltage of Bromide Perovskite-Based Solar Cells?, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Hutter, T. Kirchartz, B. Ehrler, D. Cahen and E. v. Hauff, Pitfalls and prospects of optical spectroscopy to characterize perovskite-transport layer interfaces, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 100501 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Enhanced optoelectronic quality of perovskite thin films with hypophosphorous acid for planar heterojunction solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Defect passivation in hybrid perovskite solar cells using quaternary ammonium halide anions and cations, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, M. Jiang, Z. Liu, A. Jamshaid, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells Enabled by Multiple Ligand Passivation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903696 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Imperfections and their passivation in halide perovskite solar cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Charge-Carrier Dynamics and Mobilities in Formamidinium Lead Mixed-Halide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, A Eu3+/Eu2+ ion redox shuttle imparts operational durability to Pb–I perovskite solar cells, Science, 2019, 363, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W.-Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Resolving spatial and energetic distributions of trap
states in metal halide perovskite solar cells, Science, 2020, 367, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Origin and elimination of photocurrent hysteresis by fullerene passivation in CH3NH3PbI3 planar heterojunction solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, Z. Ni, A. F. Palmstrom, J. Zhao, S. Xu, C. H. Van Brackle, X. Xiao, K. Zhu and J. Huang, Reduced Self-Doping of Perovskites Induced by Short Annealing for Efficient Solar Modules, Joule, 2020, 4, 1949 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, P. N. Rudd, Z. Ni, C. H. Van Brackle, H. Wei, Q. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Reducing Surface Halide Deficiency for Efficient and Stable Iodide-Based Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3989–3996 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Y. Lin, L. Ren, X. Shi, E. Strounina, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, X. Zheng, Y. Lin, Z.-G. Chen, Y. Du, L. Wang and J. Huang, Oligomeric Silica-Wrapped Perovskites Enable Synchronous Defect Passivation and Grain Stabilization for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Photovoltaics, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1231–1240 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, F. Cao, M. Wang, M. Wang and L. Li, Observing Defect Passivation of the Grain Boundary with 2-Aminoterephthalic Acid for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4161–4167 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, F. Yuan, B. Zhang, S. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Bai, L. Fan, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. a. Tan, Passivation of the grain boundaries of CH3NH3PbI3 using carbon quantum dots for highly efficient perovskite solar cells with excellent environmental stability, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 115–124 RSC .
Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, R. Hu, M. Jiang, R. Zhang, H. Lv, J. Tian, L. Chu, J. Zhang, Q. Xue, H.-L. Yip, R. Xia, X. a. Li and W. Huang, Enhancing the Performance of Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells via Grain Boundary Passivation with Carbon Quantum Dots, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3044–3052 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, S. Bai, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and F. Gao, Defects engineering for high-performance perovskite solar cells, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 22 CrossRef .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Impact of microstructure on local carrier lifetime in perovskite solar cells, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS .
S. Braunger, L. E. Mundt, C. M. Wolff, M. Mews, C. Rehermann, M. Jošt, A. Tejada, D. Eisenhauer, C. Becker, J. A. Guerra, E. Unger, L. Korte, D. Neher, M. C. Schubert, B. Rech and S. Albrecht, CsxFA1−xPb(I1−yBry)3 Perovskite Compositions: the Appearance of Wrinkled Morphology and its Impact on Solar Cell Performance, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17123–17135 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Bush, N. Rolston, A. Gold-Parker, S. Manzoor, J. Hausele, Z. J. Yu, J. A. Raiford, R. Cheacharoen, Z. C. Holman, M. F. Toney, R. H. Dauskardt and M. D. McGehee, Controlling Thin-Film Stress and Wrinkling during Perovskite Film Formation, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1225–1232 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Ultrasmooth organic–inorganic perovskite thin-film formation and crystallization for efficient planar heterojunction solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tidhar, E. Edri, H. Weissman, D. Zohar, G. Hodes, D. Cahen, B. Rybtchinski and S. Kirmayer, Crystallization of Methyl Ammonium Lead Halide Perovskites: Implications for Photovoltaic Applications, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13249–13256 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, L. Liang, J. Hu, B. Cao, L. Yang, T. Wu, X. Li, B. Zhang and P. Gao, High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells with Enhanced Environmental Stability Based on a (p-FC6H4C2H4NH3)2[PbI4] Capping Layer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802595 CrossRef .
R. Wang, J. Xue, L. Meng, J.-W. Lee, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, L. Cai, T. Huang, Z. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Duan, J. L. Yang, S. Tan, Y. Yuan, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Caffeine Improves the Performance and Thermal Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells, Joule, 2019, 3, 1464–1477 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, A. Wolff, S. D. Yambem, M. Esmaeili, J. D. Riches, M. Shahbazi, K. Feron, E. Eftekhari, K. Ostrikov, Q. Li and P. Sonar, Biowaste-Derived, Self-Organized Arrays of High-Performance 2D Carbon Emitters for Organic Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906176 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker and P. W. M. Blom, Light intensity dependence of open-circuit voltage of polymer:fullerene solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123509 CrossRef .
E. Aydin, T. G. Allen, M. De Bastiani, L. Xu, J. Ávila, M. Salvador, E. Van Kerschaver and S. De Wolf, Interplay between temperature and bandgap energies on the outdoor performance of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 851–859 CrossRef CAS .

          A. D. Maria, V. L. Ferrara, G. Rametta, L. V. Mercaldo, E. Bobeico, A. Bruno, F. Matteocci, A. D. Carlo and P. D. Veneri, Effect of fabrication and measurement conditions on un-encapsulated perovskite solar cells, 19th Italian National Conference on Photonic Technologies (Fotonica 2017), Padua,  2017, pp. 1–4,  DOI:10.1049/cp.2017.0203 .
I. Mesquita, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Temperature Impact on Perovskite Solar Cells Under Operation, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2186–2194 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Pham, J. Shang, Y. Yang, M. T. Hoang, V. T. Tiong, X. Wang, L. Fan, P. Chen, L. Kou, L. Wang and H. Wang, Alkaline-earth bis(trifluoromethanesulfonimide) additives for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104412 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta00036e‡ N. D. P. and A. S. contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). (a) Schematic diagram of n–i–p PSCs and graphic representation of ligand-capped carbon dots (CDs). (b) Statistical photovoltaic parameters of control and CDs-PSK PSCs (PCE%: power conversion efficiency; Voc: open-circuit voltage; J: short-circuit current density; FF (%): fill-factor). (c) Current–voltage characteristics of the representative CDs-PSK (3 mg mL−1 CDs in toluene) and control devices, and corresponding stabilized power output (SPO%, inset). (d) External quantum efficiency spectra together with integrated Jsc of PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphological characteristics of perovskite films and the corresponding optical properties. (a and b) Three-dimensional atomic force microscopy images for the (a) control perovskite film and (b) CDs-PSK perovskite film. (c and d) The corresponding cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images. (e) Reflection and absorption spectra of corresponding perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 3  Determination of the location of CDs in the perovskite film. (a) High resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra (Al-Kα = 1486.6 eV) of the C 1s core levels of the perovskite films. (b) Cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image and corresponding high-resolution TEM image (inset) of the CDs-PSK sample fabricated using the focused ion beam technique. (c) Cross-sectional high angle annular dark field STEM image of the CDs-PSK sample and 1σ thresholded EDS line-scan (TruLine). (d) TEM images of the perovskite/CDs mixture (powder), wherein CDs aggregated surrounding the perovskite crystal.	 

 	Fig. 4  Chemical compositions of the surface and bulk of perovskite films. (a and b) High resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra (Al-Kα = 1486.6 eV) of the Pb 4f core levels for both fresh and aged perovskite films. The aged perovskite films are those that were subjected to 100 °C for 45 hours in a N2-filled glovebox. (c) Fitted results of the Pb0/(Pb0 + Pb2+) and halide/Pb ratio. (d) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films. (e) Schematic illustration showing a metallic lead cluster and halide vacancy management in the case of CD incorporation.	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge carrier dynamics in the perovskite films and devices. (a) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) of the control and CD treated perovskite films on a glass substrate and (b) corresponding time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) with fittings. The perovskite films were illuminated from the front side (air side). (c) Band energy aliment at the interface between the perovskite and the Spiro-OMeTAD. (d) Open-circuit voltage as a function of light illumination intensity. The ideality factors were determined from the linear fits.	 

 	Fig. 6  Stability of perovskite films and devices. (a) XRD patterns of perovskite films placed under RH = 55 ± 1%, T = 30 °C for 4 days (in the dark). (b) Characterization of the wettability of perovskite films measured 10 s after water droplet deposition. (c and d) Environmental and operational stability of the corresponding PSCs, respectively.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta00036e
‡ N. D. P. and A. S. contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
