On the design, functions, and biomedical applications of high-throughput dielectrophoretic micro-/nanoplatforms: a review  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR08892G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR08892G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 4330-4358On the design, functions, and biomedical applications of high-throughput dielectrophoretic micro-/nanoplatforms: a review

        
          
            Yalin 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Keming 
            Wan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingxue 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Guo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaomin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Gang 
            Wei
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qingdao University, 266071 Qingdao, PR China. E-mail: weigroup@qdu.edu.cn; yanwang@qdu.edu.cn
bResearch Center for High-Value Utilization of Waste Biomass, College of Life Science, College of Life Science, Qingdao University, 266071 Qingdao, PR China
Received 
      16th December 2020
    , Accepted 9th February 2021First published on 9th February 2021AbstractAs an efficient, rapid and label-free micro-/nanoparticle separation technique, dielectrophoresis (DEP) has attracted widespread attention in recent years, especially in the field of biomedicine, which exhibits huge potential in biomedically relevant applications such as disease diagnosis, cancer cell screening, biosensing, and others. DEP technology has been greatly developed recently from the low-flux laboratory level to high-throughput practical applications. In this review, we summarize the recent progress of DEP technology in biomedical applications, including firstly the design of various types and materials of DEP electrode and flow channel, design of input signals, and other improved designs. Then, functional tailoring of DEP systems with endowed specific functions including separation, purification, capture, enrichment and connection of biosamples, as well as the integration of multifunctions, are demonstrated. After that, representative DEP biomedical application examples in aspects of disease detection, drug synthesis and screening, biosensing and cell positioning are presented. Finally, limitations of existing DEP platforms on biomedical application are discussed, in which emphasis is given to the impact of other electrodynamic effects such as electrophoresis (EP), electroosmosis (EO) and electrothermal (ET) effects on DEP efficiency. This article aims to provide new ideas for the design of novel DEP micro-/nanoplatforms with desirable high throughput toward application in the biomedical community.Yan WangYan Wang received his PhD from the Center for Environmental Research and Sustainable Technology, University of Bremen, Germany, in 2016. From 2017, he worked as an associate professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of the Qingdao University, China. His research interests include novel separation techniques, nanomaterials, and microfluidics.Xiaomin LiuXiaomin Liu received her PhD degree from the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. She worked in the Institute of Process Engineering of Chinese Academy of Sciences from 2008 to 2018. From 2018, she started working in Qingdao University as the group leader of “Simulation and Application of Green Mediums”. She won the “National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars” in 2017 and Young Taishan Scholars of Shandong province in 2019. She mainly engages in molecular designing and molecular simulation of new solvents and green mediums.Gang WeiGang Wei is currently a full professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of the Qingdao University, China. From 2007–2011, he worked as Alexander-von-Humboldt Fellow at the Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, and from 2012–2019, he worked as a senior researcher and group leader at the University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include nanomaterials, two-dimensional materials, biomaterials, supramolecular self-assembly, and biosensors. He has published 140+ papers in the peer-reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 5900 times with an H-index of 47.
1. Introduction
With the development of society and the continuous improvement of standards of living, human health issues have attracted more and more attention, and various diseases have become huge barriers for the development of human beings. If a rapid and accurate diagnosis can be made for patients and complemented with active treatments in the early stage of cellular lesions, it will be the most direct and effective way to save their lives. Currently, most of the existing disease diagnostics are hindered by problems of expensive equipment, complicated operations, and long analysis periods. On one hand, this would result in less-developed countries or regions being unable to afford high equipment and operating costs; meanwhile, it may delay the treatment time of patients.1,2 Dielectrophoresis (DEP) provides a rapid and highly effective diagnostic approach for diseased cells by using relatively simple equipment with low diagnostic cost. Based on the differences in the dielectric properties of cells, such as the membrane capacitance and membrane conductance with different physiological states and external environments of cells, the DEP technique can be used to screen the changes in the surface morphology or inner structure of cells quickly, resulting in a feasible diagnosis of the disease stage.3,4 The use of DEP biochips for disease diagnosis has the advantages of small sample consumption, high sensitivity, and fast analysis. Besides, the portability of DEP biochips endows the operation with greater flexibility, demonstrating their huge daily application potential in medical laboratories.
In addition, operations such as the separation and enrichment of target bioparticles before diagnosis using chips are often the key to further biomedical analysis. Traditional macro-manipulation methods mainly include sedimentation, centrifugation, membrane separation, etc. Centrifugation is often not conducive to maintaining the activity of biological samples that are sensitive to shear effects. Membrane separation often faces the inevitable problem of membrane fouling. With the development of micro-manufacturing technology, micro-manipulation technology of bioparticles has gradually emerged. Hydrodynamic approaches such as deterministic lateral displacement (DLD) and field flow fractionation (FFF) can achieve the manipulation of biological particles such as cells with higher flux. However, they often rely on complex and rigorous design of the channel microstructure, which confines the flexibility of particle manipulation. Besides, larger fluxes with high shear stress are likely to cause channel blockage and may damage the sample structure. Magnetic, optical and electrodynamic techniques are also commonly applied for particle manipulation. While the magnetic method requires magnetization of the sample, the addition and removal of magnetic markers may affect sample properties. Optical methods generally have good biocompatibility and high resolution, but the equipment is rather complicated and costly, with small processing volume. As a typical electrodynamic technique, the DEP chip can perform operations such as separation, enrichment, and transportation of cells and other bioparticles in a non-uniform electric field based on the differences of physical properties. Without labelling, the sample remains in its original state, and thus more reliable data can be acquired with excellent performance especially in the DEP screening of tumor cells. In view of these capabilities, DEP has exhibited a broad range of applications in analytical chemistry, biomedicine, and other fields.5–7 At present, the separation of dead cells from living cells and the isolation of tumor cells and bacteria from blood have been achieved by DEP.8,9 Moreover, cell culture based on the existence of extracellular matrix (ECM) was often employed to simulate the real living environment of cells. By monitoring the behavior of cells and studying the response of cells to injected drugs through the DEP technique, the potential toxic and side effects of those drugs can be evaluated in vitro, which facilitates more effective drug exploitation.10
Despite the fact that the DEP technique has been widely used in biomedicine, the problem of “low throughput” is still one of the key obstacles affecting its commercial applications. In fact, DEP has been verified by numerous studies to hold some unique features such as continuous and label-free operation, good flexibility and scalability, facile integration with other techniques, as well as manipulation of bioparticles with high sensitivity and selectivity, all of which potentially make it suitable for high-throughput biomedical applications. Nevertheless, existing DEP-based biomedical applications are mostly operating at an analytical level with throughput in the range of 0.1–100 μL min−1 (about 103–106 cells per min); unfortunately, research on DEP relevant separations at a real clinical level with possible throughput reaching several to hundreds of mL min−1 have rarely been reported. It should be pointed out that the general concept of “throughput” in this review refers not merely to the flow throughput (e.g. μL min−1), but indicates the sample throughput (e.g. cells per min) of the DEP system as well. Besides, the process of using DEP to treat biological samples will inevitably induce side effects such as Joule heating, which is extremely unfavorable for the experimental results, and may lead to the destruction of the structures or characteristics of the samples and even the loss of biological activity. The temperature gradient caused by Joule heating induces the vortex motion of the fluid and affects the manipulation of biological particles.11 Based on this, some researchers started to focus on the factors of influence when using DEP to process biological samples. They pointed out that the electrode structure, channel structure, conductivity of the suspension medium, input signal, and other factors could affect the experimental results. Fig. 1 presents key impact factors and their relations to the tailoring design of DEP platforms toward high-throughput biomedical applications, which comprises electrode and flow channel geometries and materials, hydrodynamic flow conditions, input voltage and frequency, as well as various sample properties. In fact, different attempts were performed by adjusting these parameters to seek the best combination of parameters, achieving high-throughput and high-efficiency manipulation of biological samples.
 Fig. 1  Key impact factors and their relations (arrow lines) to the tailoring design of DEP platform, in which “+” denotes a positive relation and “−” means a negative relation. 
Recently published reviews regarding DEP and its applications involving comprehensive state-of-the-art analysis and summary as well as critical and constructive comments act as beneficial guidance and inspiration for the researchers from DEP relevant communities, and can be found elsewhere.6,12–17 In-depth investigation and detailed analysis of all DEP relevant reviews are certainly beyond the scope of this paper, while some of the representative review work with respect to DEP-based systems for various biomedical applications promotes the development of DEP in this field and thus should be mentioned. For example, Swami and co-workers compared various DEP micro-platforms for selective manipulation of microbials and their integration with existing detection systems in a critical review, in which design challenges and emerging trends of DEP-based microbial detection systems were discussed in great detail.13 In another critical review, Abd Rahman et al. summarized recent applications of DEP in medical sciences from the theory and electrode geometry of DEP-based systems to the separation and manipulation of various bio-samples including cells, bacteria, mycoses, DNA and proteins, etc. Current challenges and future directions of DEP in biomedical applications were briefly proposed.6 A very recent review written by Henslee in 2020 aims to support the development of DEP-based cell electrophysiological characterization. This review comprises a theoretical review of DEP characterization, DEP-based techniques for the determination of cell parameters and biomedical applications relevant to DEP cell electrophysiology.15
To date, DEP technology has been greatly developed for the effective separation and manipulation of bioparticles from the low-flux laboratory level to high-throughput clinical applications in the biomedical community. However, to the best of our knowledge, comprehensive review papers with regards to various designs and functions of DEP micro-/nanoplatforms toward high-throughput biomedical applications have not yet been published. Hence in this review, we would like to summarize recent advances of DEP technology toward high-throughput biomedical applications. In section 2, the design of various DEP platforms is introduced, including a short introduction to DEP theory, the design of both the electrode and the flow channel, materials for the DEP devices, input signals and other improved DEP system designs; in section 3, DEP platforms with different functions such as the separation, purification, capture, enrichment, connection and positioning of bioparticles, as well as the integration of multi-functions into a DEP chip, are demonstrated; in section 4, biomedical application of DEP in four directions including disease detection, drug synthesis and screening, biosensing and cell position adjustment are presented; in section 5, the limitations of current DEP micro-/nanoplatforms for biomedical application are illustrated, and in particular, throughput limitations and the impact of other electrodynamic phenomenon such as electrophoresis, electroosmosis and electrothermal effects on DEP efficiency are discussed in detail; finally, conclusions are given and future directions of the DEP technology for biomedical application are predicted. It is worth mentioning that the key novelty of this review involves comprehensive and elaborate discussions of the various design strategies and inspirations, limitations and challenges of existing DEP platforms, and we expect that this work can shed light on tailoring the design of DEP-based function-specific systems with further improved throughput, bridging the gaps between laboratory analysis and commercialized biomedical applications.
2. Design of high-throughput DEP micro-/nanoplatforms
2.1 Introduction to DEP
The phenomenon of DEP was first discovered in 1951. Pohl observed in an experiment that the particles in the suspension medium can undergo directional movement (the migration of carbon particles to the tungsten wire electrode) under the force of a non-uniform electric field, and named this phenomenon DEP. In the following ten years, the potential of DEP technology for separating cells and other bioparticles was proved. Since then, DEP technology has aroused extensive interest in biomedicine and environmental biology. Further studies indicated that the suspended medium and particles in a non-uniform electric field will be affected by the electric field force, which causes the internal charges to rearrange, resulting in the enrichment of induced charges with different electrical properties at the interface between the medium and the particles, thereby forming an electric dipole. The interactions between the effective dipole and the spatial gradient of the electric field causes the particles to move. Maxwell first theoretically analyzed the force of spherical particles polarized in a non-uniform electric field, and put forward the original theory of interface polarization. Later, Wagner supplemented the theory and proposed the Maxwell–Wagner theory suitable for dilute systems of homogeneous spherical particles.18 The charge distribution of the polarized particle is shown in Fig. 2.19
 Fig. 2  Charge distribution during cell interface polarization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Based on this theory, the expression of the dipole moment of the particle in the electric field is derived, and the formula of the time-average dielectrophoretic force on the spherical particle is obtained: FDEP = 2πεmr3Re[fCM(ω)]∇|Erms|2(1)where εm is the dielectric constant of the suspension, r is the radius of the spherical particle, Re[fCM(ω)] denotes the real part of the Clausius–Mossotti factor, and Erms is the root mean square value of the applied electric field. (2)where  and  represent the composite permittivity of particles and suspensions, respectively. Both are functions of the angular frequency ω of the electric field, which can be expressed as: ε* = ε − jσ/ω.
It can be derived from eqn (1) that the magnitude of the DEP force on the particles is proportional to the cube of their radius, the dielectric constant of the suspension medium, and the gradient of the square of the electric field. Meanwhile, the direction of the DEP force is determined by the real part of the Clausius–Mossotti factor, and its value ranges from −0.5 to 1. If the polarizability of the suspension medium is greater than that of the particle, Re[fCM(ω)] < 0, the particle is subjected to a negative dielectrophoresis force (nDEP); otherwise it is a positive dielectrophoresis force (pDEP). The magnitude of Re[fCM(ω)] is related to the conductivity, the dielectric constant of the medium and particles, and the frequency of the applied electric field. At low frequencies, the real part of the CM factor is mainly determined by the conductivity of the medium and particles: (3)where σp and σm indicate the conductivity of the particles and suspension media, respectively. When a high-frequency electric field is applied, the movement of the charge cannot catch up with the change in direction of the magnetic field due to insufficient response time of the charge. At this time, the real part of the CM factor mainly depends on the dielectric constant of the medium and particles: (4)where, εp and εm are the dielectric constants of the particles and suspension media, respectively. It is worth noting that the above expression of DEP force (eqn (1)) is only based on the derivation of homogeneous spherical particles. For heterogeneous spherical particles such as cells, their internal dielectric properties are often different from those of the membranes. Besides, some biological cells also have a wall structure, which increases the complexity of deriving the dielectrophoretic force on the cell. For this reason, the single-shell model and the multi-shell model of the cell are proposed. Since not all cells are spherical (e.g. red blood cells), ellipsoid models of cells are proposed to facilitate the characterization of the dielectric properties of cells. Researchers have repeatedly modified these DEP models to promote them to be more accurate. These are described in great detail in Zhang et al.'s review,20 and will not be discussed here again.
Particles with different sizes or dielectric properties give rise to different DEP responses. Based on this, the separation, enrichment and capture of cells and other bioparticles are expected to be achievable with the characteristics of a non-invasive, low-cost, well controllable and continuous operation. In addition, DEP is easy to integrate with other technologies and has shown great potential in particle manipulation. However, broader commercial applications of using DEP are usually limited due to its low flux. At present, the research for the design and optimization of high-throughput DEP micro-/nanoplatforms toward biomedical applications is still challenging. The simplest way to improve the throughput is to increase the flow rate of the fluid;21 nevertheless, the resulting problem may be the reduction of manipulation capabilities due to the intrinsic short-range nature of the DEP force. Moreover, the throughput can be increased by scaling up the size of the device, but this also means an increase in the electrode spacing. In order to provide enough DEP force to manipulate the particles, a larger driving voltage is therefore needed, which may lead to undesirable electrolysis, air bubbles, Joule heating, and other effects, affecting the activity of the samples and hence the efficiency of the separation. To this end, many researchers have made explorations and in-depth studies to expand the throughput of the DEP micro-/nanoplatforms.22–24 In the following part, some of the representative work with regards to the design and optimization of electrode structure, electrode materials, and channel geometry targeted for boosting the DEP effects as well as the device throughput will be discussed in detail.
2.2 Electrode design
As discussed above, the high throughput can be achieved by scaling up the size of the DEP chip. Nevertheless, the major issue is the dilemma between the electrode dimension and suspension flow rate as well as the applied voltage for effective particle manipulation. For instance, the enhancement of suspension flow rate at a given DEP force on the particles requires an increment in both the characteristic length (i.e., electrode dimension and/or electrode spacing) and the input voltage to maintain identical particle manipulation efficiency. On one hand, a DEP system with a low voltage input demands a considerably small characteristic length to trigger sufficient electric fields that could hardly be achieved in case of high flow rates. On the other hand, a DEP system based on a high voltage input and a large characteristic length inevitably requires correspondingly high energy input, which in turn gives rise to detrimental effects. Therefore, a tailored design of electrode parameters such as electrode shape, structure and array for exerting a desirable DEP force on particles is expected to solve the aforementioned conflicts in designing a high-throughput DEP platform to realize optimal separation efficiency with minimal detrimental effects.
In early studies of DEP applications, large-scale electrode structures were often employed. In this case, a large external electric field was required to move the particles, resulting in a localized temperature rise. This phenomenon is more obvious especially in biological solutions with high electric conductivity, which is extremely unfavorable for biological products, and it may lead to the destruction of the biological materials and even the deterioration of the electrodes. The micro-manufacturing technology of DEP devices was first reported in 1988. Several research groups began to replace the traditional macro-wire and plate electrodes with micro-electrodes. The emergence of micro-electrode structures is a milestone in the development of DEP technology. By using microelectrodes, sufficient fields for particle separation can be generated in the system at a small applied voltage, which greatly reduces the electrothermal effects. The use of microelectrodes has been considered to be a very effective means to realize low-temperature DEP. In addition, it also effectively alleviates the deterioration of the electrode and increased throughput to a certain extent. The microelectrode manufacturing technology has stimulated the explosive development of DEP experimental studies. Various reports on DEP platforms based on microelectrode design are intensively increasing. Fig. 3 shows several common electrode geometries, including the interdigitated, castellated, curved, and extruded ones.25
 Fig. 3  Common microelectrodes with various geometries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 

2.2.1. Planar electrodes. 
Planar electrodes are usually used to embed metal on silicon and glass substrates by means of photolithography and electrodeposition. As the most widely adopted planar electrode, the planar interdigital electrode with a symmetric structure (Fig. 3a) is easy for constructing a non-uniform electric field to achieve modeling by using a smaller voltage to generate a larger electric field gradient, so that the particles are subjected to greater dielectrophoretic force. As early as in 1994, Markx et al. employed plate interdigital electrodes to separate live yeast cells from dead cells successfully.26 Besides, the study of asymmetric planar electrode structures is also expanding. For example, Vafaie et al. used a discretized asymmetric electrode structure to control the direction of the fluid by appropriately switching the voltage applied to it, which revealed better assistance for the manipulation of particles.27 Currently, the planar electrode has been widely applied in various DEP devices because of its simple manufacturing process and low cost. However, it also has its own defects, for instance the effective working range is relatively small. In the region far away from the electrode, the gradient of the electric field decreases sharply, resulting in a rapid reduction of the DEP force that acts on the particles, and as a result, particles in such the region cannot be manipulated by DEP effectively. In order to minimize this defect and enable the DEP force to continuously manipulate particles in the entire area, studies on 3D microelectrodes have become more and more popular.


2.2.2. 3D microelectrodes. 
Compared with a 2D electrode, a 3D microelectrode has higher capture efficiency and larger processing capacity, because the effective working area of a 3D electrode is broader. The DEP force acts on the particles in almost the entire microchannel space, so as to realize the efficient manipulation of the particles.28 Furthermore, 3D microelectrodes can significantly reduce the Joule heating effect as low voltages are often required for effective particle manipulation and thus guarantee the activity of biological samples such as cells to the greatest extent, which is beneficial for subsequent cell culture and analysis.12,29 The dentate profile of 3D castellated microelectrodes induces more inhomogeneity of the electric field, enabling a smaller applied voltage to form a larger electric field gradient, thus generating a greater DEP force. Yildizhan et al. employed a DEP platform of 3D carbon electrodes to achieve the separation of living/dead leukemia cells.30 It was proved that the use of 3D carbon microelectrodes inhibited the electrolysis phenomenon effectively due to the wider electrochemical stability of a carbon as compared with a metal electrode. Also, thanks to the excellent mechanical properties of the carbon electrode, the height of the electrode can be tailored to enlarge the inner volume of the DEP chip, thereby improving the flux of the DEP system.
Although 3D carbon microelectrodes have enormous advantages, the relatively complex fabrication process and high cost have restricted their large-scale preparation. To overcome this problem, some research groups proposed the strategy for the preparation of 3D carbon microelectrodes using screen printing technology, which is not only cost-effective but also easy for production on a large scale, thereby meeting the requirements of industrialization.31,32
Compared with metal electrodes, carbon electrodes possess a few superiorities. Firstly, they are chemically inert, which reduces the possibility of chemical reactions. Secondly, they have excellent biocompatibility, which is more conducive to maintaining the activity of biological samples.
Since most of the bare electrodes are in direct contact with the suspension medium and the sample, the probability of chemical reactions is therefore increased, which may cause the contamination of the samples and even destruction of the electrodes.33 If the electrode is modified to a certain extent, that is, a protective coating is added, the probability of the above phenomenon will be greatly reduced, which can extend the service life of the electrode and maintain the original properties of the sample. For instance, Lee et al. proposed the corresponding solutions to the problem of electrode contamination caused by biofouling near the electrode.34 They modified the electrode surface with a zwitterionic SPANi coating, which prevented biological contamination while ensuring the electrical properties and improving the efficiency of sample treatment by DEP. Moreover, it was also an effective means to separate the electrode from the suspension medium (i.e. non-contact DEP, cDEP) so that there was no direct contact between the electrode, solution and sample.


2.2.3. Liquid electrodes. 
For the design of high-throughput DEP platforms, researchers have made various attempts to achieve an improvement of electrode design. With the use of ionic liquid, advantages such as environment-friendliness, excellent electrical conductivity, and individualized design have gradually emerged. In addition, using ionic liquid as electrodes can also effectively reduce the Joule heating effect and the generation of air bubbles. Sun et al. designed a DEP device (Fig. 4a and b) with [BMIM][PF6] as liquid electrodes.35 The ionic liquid formed a stable interface with the suspension, avoiding direct contact between the electrode and the sample and alleviating the problem of sample contamination (Fig. 4c). They used the as-designed DEP platform to achieve continuous separation of different types of particles or cells based on the conductivity gradient (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  DEP device with an ionic liquid electrode: (a) microfluidic channel system in the device; (b) scheme of the experimental device; (c) ionic liquid electrode and the main channel; (d) separation mechanism of particles and cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, in order to generate a highly inhomogeneous electric field, the researchers also tried a variety of different electrode designs, integrating microelectrodes of different sizes and structures, ionic liquid electrodes of different configurations, and different types of liquid metal electrodes into the micro systems, achieving great breakthroughs.36 For example, Ren et al. proposed the design of bipolar electrodes to achieve a high-throughput separation and capture of cells.37 It was found that the structure and arrangement of the electrodes could directly affect the distribution of the electric field, giving rise to the formation of different DEP forces. The electrodes could be designed depending on different functional requirements, so that the resultant DEP platform could complete tasks more efficiently, which lays the foundation for the design of high-throughput DEP platforms for biomedical applications.

2.3. Flow channel design
The fabrication of DEP microchannels is generally achieved by patterning micromolded polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) using the SU8 master of the appropriate design. As the main region to achieve the separation of particles, the design of the DEP channel has attracted much attention in recent years. Among them, Li and co-workers have made significant contributions to aspects of DEP flow channel design for bioparticle separation.38–40 As an example, this research team proposed a method based on the asymmetric small orifice on the sidewall of the channel to generate a local uneven electric field by applying an alternating voltage on the electrode, as shown in Fig. 5a, and the as-designed device was used to achieve continuous separation and characterization of droplets and particles.41
 Fig. 5  Flow channel design: (a) schematic diagram of the microchannel used for particle and droplet separation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Contraction channel structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017 IOP Publishing. (c) Insulating column array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The design of most DEP devices that are based on the insulation structure (named iDEP) is mainly related to the design of the DEP flow channel. The electrodes in the iDEP system are generally set outside the fluid channel, and the electric fields generated between the electrodes are distorted in the presence of the microchannel structure to form an extremely uneven electric field, thus exerting a certain dielectrophoretic force on the particles that are suspended in the flow channel.42 The advantages of iDEP equipment include a low probability of sample contamination, and the elimination of the interference of generated air bubbles on the electrode for particle trapping, since the electrodes in iDEP devices are far from the particle trapping region. Besides, the electrodes of iDEP devices are isolated from the main flow channel and thus do not need to be manufactured with the DEP channel; thereby the fabrication process of iDEP devices is simpler and the cost is relatively low as compared to traditional electrode-based DEP (eDEP) devices. However, due to the relatively large distance between the electrodes in the iDEP device, a larger driving voltage is required to generate a sufficient electric field, which inevitably leads to a stronger Joule heating effect. In recent years, iDEP technology has made significant progress; as an example, Lapizco-Encinas reviewed the development of iDEP technology and equipment based on two mechanisms of streaming and trapping iDEP.12 In the following section, we will introduce the design and optimization of iDEP channels to improve the capture efficiency and flux of biological particles.
A representative design of iDEP channels is to set nano-shrink structures or an array of insulating columns in the channel, as shown in Fig. 5b and c.43,44 The structure of the insulating column array was first proposed by Cummings and Singh in 2000,45 and then an analogous array of posts to alter field lines under an applied AC field was introduced in 2002 by the Austin group.46 In fact, the iDEP equipment could be optimized by adjusting the number of insulating columns, as well as changing their shape, material, and position arrangement.47 Lapizco-Encinas et al. studied the relationship between the DEP force and the number of insulating columns, and pointed out that the capture voltage of particles can be reduced by appropriately reducing the number of insulating columns in the device.48 By using an optimized iDEP device, they successfully achieved the separation of nanoparticles at a lower voltage, which lays a good foundation for the application of iDEP platforms in operations with organelles, proteins, DNA, and others, and it also opens the way for the use of iDEP equipment in the field of biomedicine. Nevertheless, reducing the number of insulating posts may result in the potential capture region being too small to achieve effective control of the particles. Therefore, the trade-off between the DEP force and DEP working space should be considered depending on different problems.
For the channel with a nano-shrink structure, there is often a stronger electric field in the shrinking area, where the particles can be separated. The device used in the first report on iDEP by Masuda et al. is a channel with a contraction structure, in which the electric field contracts between the two electrodes, inducing strong electric field distribution.49 Consequently, cells in the suspension are captured and fused in this area due to the dielectrophoretic force.
It should be noted that a recent published paper by Lapizco-Encinas's group revealed that the main force driving and manipulating particle motion in insulator-based devices under a high-magnitude DC electric field (the so-called DC-iDEP) is actually not the DEP effect but the electrokinetic (EK) effect that balances between linear and nonlinear electrophoresis (EP) as well as linear electroosmosis (EO).50 To support this hypothesis, Lapizco-Encinas and co-workers then experimentally confirmed that the EP balancing EO is the dominant mechanism controlling particle motion in the presence of the DC field using different kinds of cells and microparticles, and thus renamed the so-called DC-iDEP as DC-iEK.51 Therefore, it is of importance to distinguish a DC from an AC field for the use of insulating structures.
2.4 Materials for DEP devices
Good stability and biocompatibility of materials are essential for biomedical applications. When using DEP micro-/nanoplatforms for cell capture, separation, and enrichment, the commonly adopted substrate materials are silicon, glass, and polymers. Among them, silicon materials possess excellent characteristics including good chemical inertness and easy integration with electronic products, which makes it possible to obtain etched channels through soft lithography. Nevertheless, the development of silicon materials is limited by the high cost and complex processes. Moreover, since most observations of the DEP phenomenon now rely on microscopes, the opaque optical properties of silicon have become a key obstacle in DEP monitoring. Glass with good light transmittance provides a large flow when employed as the substrate material for the fabrication of DEP platforms, and meanwhile, the rising of temperature is not so obvious. With its cost-effective nature, glass has been widely used in DEP microfluidic chips as the substrate; however its own fragility limits the development of glass to a certain extent. PDMS has gradually become a research hotspot of the substrate materials due to its good biocompatibility, stability, nonconductivity, and transparency.
The selection of electrode materials usually needs to meet the following requirements. First, it can achieve good bonding with the substrate materials to ensure the sealing of the device. Secondly, it has good chemical stability and is not easily electrolyzed. In addition, it has good microfabrication process (MEMS) processability and is facile for manufacture as microelectrodes. Carbon and metal are commonly employed as microelectrode materials. Among various metals, gold and platinum electrodes are ideal candidates for electrode materials due to their stable electrochemical performance. Although pure metal as an electrode material possesses good electrical conductivity, it may lead to poor sealing performance of the chip and liquid leakage problems during sample processing, owing to the low compatibility of metal with PDMS. Some researchers proposed the use of doped silicon or PDMS electrodes instead of traditional carbon and metal microelectrodes, which allows good signal transmission as well as connection between the electrode and the flow channel, ensuring the sealing of the device and thus improving the separation efficiency. Indium tin oxide (ITO), a kind of transparent metal material with good conductivity and stability, is also known as an ideal electrode material. At present, most of the commercially available ITO glass can be used directly as the substrate and electrode materials.
2.5 Input signals
Generally, traditional DEP can be classified into direct current (DC) DEP and alternating current (AC) DEP depending on the different types of input signal. Huang et al. proposed the phase variation of the input electrical signal by applying a traveling wave voltage to the DEP platform, i.e. traveling wave DEP (tw-DEP).52 The phase difference of the electric signal applied on the adjacent electrodes was set as 90°, which induced the change of the electric field periodically. The particles in this field could not only be affected by the traditional DEP force, but also by the traveling wave DEP force. The magnitude of the traveling wave DEP force was related to the phase inhomogeneity of the applied electric field, the conductivity of the solution, as well as the electric field strength. The direction of tw-DEP is determined by the imaginary part of the Clausius–Mossotti factor. Hawkins et al. used a DC-biased AC signal to drive iDEP equipment for the first time, and achieved particle separation in continuous flow.53 Zellner et al. reported the use of a DC-biased signal to capture bacteria in 3D iDEP equipment.54 It was found that the DC-biased signal reduced the voltage required by the iDEP device, which showed superior performance as compared to traditional DC-iDEP in the separation and capture of particles.
Modarres et al. proposed the concept of frequency-hopping DEP to enable microparticle sorting in a tunable microplatform.55 Based on the frequency dependence of polarized particles in a non-uniform electric field, the applied voltage jumps between two different frequencies, i.e., capture frequency and release frequency, and thereby three different sized PS particles can be separated from each other (Fig. 6a and b). The experimental setup of the as-designed DEP particle sorting system is presented in Fig. 6d. By employing frequency-hopping DEP, they not only achieved the sorting of three polystyrene particles with different particle sizes based on their differences in crossover frequency (Fig. 6c), but also successfully enriched MCF7 cells.
 Fig. 6  Frequency-hopping DEP for size-based sorting of microparticles: (a) separation of 3 μm particles from 5 μm and 10 μm particles; (b) separation of 10 μm particles from 3 μm and 5 μm particles; (c) frequency dependent Re[fCM(ω)] factor for different sized particles; (d) experimental setup. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Furthermore, studies on combining DEP signals with acoustic, optical, electromagnetic, and other signals have also been reported. DEP combined with a surface acoustic wave (SAW-DEP) improves the flux of the DEP platform effectively. The electrode is placed outside the channel and the virtual electrode is generated inside the channel. By this means, the Joule heating effect and sample contamination can be suppressed effectively.56 The emergence of optically-induced DEP (oDEP) technology makes the DEP equipment more flexible. It uses virtual electrodes formed on the photoconductive layer surface, and the position of the electrodes can be adjusted according to the demand, which is not limited by the fixed electrode position and can be easily manufactured without photolithography. Liao et al. successfully isolated live CD45neg/EpCAMneg cells from blood samples with high purity based on oDEP technology.57 Chen et al. achieved the precise positioning and effective separation of nanowires by using optically-induced DEP, which helps the preparation of nanodevices.58 Blaire et al. designed a novel type of biological hybrid magnetic microsystem that combines magnetic capture and DEP to achieve efficient separation of magnetic beads and cells.59
2.6 Other improved designs
The designs of DEP-based platforms used for the manipulation of nanoparticles such as exosomes and nanovesicles are very different from those adopted for microparticles due to their relatively small dimension, low density, and high surface conductance.60 Those lipid contents and other extracellular nanovesicles are known as a rich source of biomarkers for various diseases especially cancers since they offer useful phenotypic and genotypic information on the tumor cell; hence effective isolation and characterization of them are the primary steps toward disease diagnosis and therapy.61,62 In a very recent study, Moore et al. designed a flow-through microfluidic device to enable high-throughput isolation of two different kinds of extracellular vesicles (EVs) under a nonuniform AC electric field (Fig. 7a).60 In this device, DEP was initialized by an orthogonally arranged electrode pair from the sample flow and was applied to trap one type of EV at the constriction region (Fig. 7b and c) under a pDEP effect while pushing away another type of EV from the field nonuniformity under an nDEP effect, in which the frequency bandwidth for pDEP was determined through the measurement of their surface conductance differences. Fluorescent images confirmed the effective focusing of BxPC-3 EVs at the constriction region owing to the pDEP effect (Fig. 7d and e). The authors also suggested further improvement of the design of such devices to quantify EVs of different types and to achieve selective DEP isolation of the EV.
 Fig. 7  The flow through a microfluidic device used for the isolation of EVs: (a) schematic diagram of the microfluidic device; (b) image of the sample flow and focusing flow region; (c) constriction region; (d) and (e) fluorescent images of BxPC-3 exosomes trapped near the constriction region at different flow rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
It is possible to use fluid dynamics to separate particles and undertake other manipulations, which are based on the size and shape of the cells and the complex structure design of channels.63,64 In order to realize the separation of particles by hydrodynamics, it is necessary to maintain the fluid at a high flow rate or with a large centrifugal force. Although this way can maintain a large flux with enhanced treatment capacity, the complex channel structure may increase the shear stress on the particles, which will affect the activity of biological samples. In addition, the dimension of the microchannel is relatively small, and therefore too high a flow-rate may lead to channel blockage, thereby affecting the separation efficiency and purity. DEP sorting is based on the difference of sample sizes and dielectric properties under the condition of a non-uniform electric field, which can achieve more precise operation of particles. Significant progress has been made on both DEP sorting and hydrodynamic sorting. Nevertheless, due to the large differences in operating conditions and sorting mechanisms, there are few reports on the combination of these two sorting methods.
With the further development of DEP technology, the precise control of particles can be achieved by adjusting the conductivity of the medium, the voltage, and the frequency of the input electrical signal. However, the problem of throughput has always been the bottleneck for the development of DEP micro-/nanoplatforms.65 In order to overcome this limitation, combinations of DEP technology and passive particle sorting technology (e.g. deterministic lateral displacement (DLD), multi-orifice flow fractionation (MOFF), etc.) by making full use of the two complementary advantages have been conducted.66–68 The addition of passive sorting technology increases the throughput of processing samples. Combined with DEP technology, the key parameters of the passive sorting device can be accurately controlled by the voltage of the input electrical signal, so as to achieve the synchronous improvement of the separation rate and precision. For example, Jung et al. combined DEP with MOFF technology by integrating inertial focusing and DEP in the same chip to screen breast cancer cells from blood cells based on the physical characteristics of the cells.69 Preliminary sorting of the cells was done with high throughput through the first step of hydrodynamic separation. Then, further sorting was completed by DEP with improved sorting accuracy and high-purity separation of breast cancer cells.
Since the DEP force has a strong dependence on the size of the particles, it is more difficult to manipulate nano-scale particles as compared to microparticles. Song et al. introduced photopolymerization reactive mesogen (RM) bead carriers, and achieved the manipulation of nano-scale quantum dot particles embedded in RM beads through the manipulation of RM beads by DEP technology.70 Lapizco-Encinas et al. demonstrated that other particles with obvious differences in dielectric properties can be added to the suspension of the sample as a filler, so as to make full use of the attraction or repulsion interaction between the particles to improve the efficiency of the electrokinetic effects for particle enrichment or separation.44
Based on the above introduction to the design of high-throughput DEP platforms, we provide a table (Table 1) to summarize various DEP micro-/nanoplatforms in terms of the type and materials of electrodes and flow channels, input signals, objectives, flow/sample throughput and their potential design limitations.
Table 1 Summary of the design of various DEP micro-/nanoplatforms and their throughputs




Type of electrode and flow channel
Input signal
Objectives
Flow/sample throughput
Potential design limitations
Ref.




Cylindrical interdigitated electrodes (cIDE), titanium insulated by rutile; cross-flow channel with sheath flow
AC 200Veff, 200 kHz
Fractionation of polystyrene particles
4.7 mL min−1
DEP balances with gravity at the particle levitation direction, which reduces the DEP separation efficiency

22



Two-pair interdigitated array (TPIDA) electrodes, Indium tin oxide (ITO); capillary-sized channel, PDMS
AC 12Vpp, 4 MHz
Single cell–cell pairing
100 μL min−1
The planar structured chip with limited space for specific cell trapping and pairing confines its applicability and throughput

23



Interdigitated, castellated electrodes; polyacetate spacer with microscope cover slip
AC 5Vpp, 10 kHz
Separate viable and non-viable yeast cells
30 mL h−1
High cell separation efficiency can only be achieved at a considerably low concentration of injected suspensions due to a steric hinderance effect, which confines the sample throughput

26



 


3D glass-like carbon-electrode array; 1.8 mm-wide, 3.2 cm-long channel
AC 20Vpp, 300 kHz
Separate live and dead human U937 monocyte cells
1–10 μL min−1
Separation efficiency lower than 40% at flow rate of 10 μL min−1; discontinuous separation operation of viable and nonviable monocytes

30



Interdigitated electrodes with semi-3D structure, carbon; printed with dielectric paste (screen printing)
AC 10 V, 100 kHz,
Separate yeast cells and PS microspheres
0.1 mL h−1
DEP device designed only available for the separation of biological (erythrocytes) and nonbiological (PS) particles depending on pDEP and nDEP, respectively

31



Liquid electrode, ionic liquid, [BMIM][PF6]; PDMS channel
AC 88Vrms, 100 kHz
Separate particles and human cells
50 μL h−1
Complicated electrode and flow channel design with confined particle separation space results in very limited sample throughput

35



Liquid metal 3D microelectrodes, galinstan; PDMS channel
AC 15 V, 20 MHz
Trap WO3 nanoparticles
20 μL min−1
The fabrication technique for 3D microelectrodes induces non-uniformly distributed microstructures with unlike sizes and heights on the substrate, which may result in uneven DEP force being generated for particle manipulation

36



Bipolar electrode; ITO electrode arrays; parallel channels, PDMS
AC 20Vpp, 1 MHz
Separate yeast cells and PS microbeads
0.1 mm s−1
The use of a 2D actuating electrode array embedded on the bottom of the microchannel restricts the DEP working area, leading to separation of cells at low throughput

37



Embedded electrodes (rectangle); copper; with asymmetric orifices, PDMS
AC 0–8Vpp, 100 kHz
Tunable manipulation of particles and droplets
N/A
The microchannel composed of only one pair of asymmetric orifices in between the embedded electrode may confine the effective DEP working space to the vicinity of the small orifice, thereby reducing the sample throughput

41



Platinum electrodes; channel with ridged microstructures
DC-biased, AC 50 V, 1 kHz
Continuous-flow particle trapping and sorting
N/A
The insulated constriction channel design with high constriction ratio may result in low sample throughput and particle clogging at high concentrations in this region

53



Plate electrode; with insulating 3D posts, PDMS
DC-biased, AC 180Vpp at 2 kHz offset by 20 VDC
Selective bacterial trapping
100 μL h−1 and 108 cells per mL
A decrease in cell trapping selectivity in the pDEP regime at high frequencies due to device limitation

54



Interdigitated electrodes, gold; parallel channels, PDMS
FH-DEP 20Vpp, 1 MHz, 85 kHz, 1 Hz
Sorting and enrichment of particles
40 μL h−1
The use of conventional 2D interdigitated electrodes with confined channel height can hardly achieve high-throughput particle sorting

55



Virtual electrode; linear microfluidic PDMS channel
SAW-DEP 10 MHz
Separate viable/non-viable human stromal cells
104 cells per min
The frequency tunability of the SAW-DEP device is restricted by the wavelength dependence of the generated SAW

56



Virtual electrode; T-shaped microchannel
ODEP 8 V, 3 MHz
Isolation of high-purity CD45neg/EpCAMneg Cells
Batch, 2000 cells per test
Current ODEP device is designed only available for batch testing in laboratory-scale analysis

57



Interdigitaded ITO electrodes; PDMS channel
AC 0–11 V, 5 Hz.
Capture and release of magnetic beads
15 μL min−1
The proposed device uses a conventional interdigitated electrode by coupling with DEP and magnetic fields for particle sorting, but only tested for sample magnetically-tagged objects rather than real biological particles

59



Interdigitated electrodes, Au, Cr; multi-orifice channel; PDMS
MOFF-DEP AC 10Vpp, 900 kHz
Separate breast cancer cells from blood samples
54–162 μL min−1
The MOFF-DEP device is capable of sorting cells at high flow rate, but limited with relatively low sample concentration due to unoptimized structure and operating parameters

69





3. Functions of DEP micro-/nanoplatforms
In the biomedical field, continuous capture of cells and other biological samples, accurate position manipulation, and high-precision sorting are essential for subsequent cell culture, disease diagnosis, and bioanalysis. DEP is capable of achieving these functions well without damaging the biological activity of the sample. Moreover, DEP technology was verified to be easily integrated by forming a multifunctional experimental platform on the chip.
3.1 Particle separation
The separation of biological particles is known as an important prerequisite for most bioanalysis. At present, particle separation techniques (Fig. 8) based on microfluidic systems can be divided into two categories: active separation and passive separation.71 The active separation technologies such as inertial separation, microstructure filtration, lateral displacement separation, and bionic separation usually work with relatively high throughput, in which the particles can be separated only by the action of the fluid, and no additional force field is required. These methods usually rely on the specific geometric structure of the separation device or some physical barriers to separate the particles. For example, Yoon et al. proposed a microfluidic device with inclined weirs that can separate circulating tumor cells from the blood.72 The passive separation technologies include DEP separation, magnetic field separation, optical tweezers, etc., which generally have high separation accuracy and good controllability, but require additional force to separate the particles. Among them, DEP separation technology has exhibited huge potential in the separation of biological cells due to its advantages of high sensitivity, good selectivity, as well as non-invasive and label-free properties.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of partial label-free cell sorting: (a) hydrodynamic separation; (b) sonic separation; (c) dielectrophoretic separation; (d) optical tweezers separation; (e) magnetic separation; (f) microfiltration technique. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Since the 1990s, many research groups have used DEP technology to realize the separation of particles based on the difference in particle size or dielectric properties. For example, Morgan et al. achieved the separation of polystyrene microspheres with different sizes by using the difference in particle size.73 The most common DEP biomedical applications are the separation of cells. At present, current commercial cell separation techniques are carried out by using flow cytometry or other complicated and expensive instruments, while the relatively high cost limits its further development. Since the Pethig group first used AC DEP to achieve cell separation, more and more studies have been carried out on cell separation by means of the nonuniform electric field.14
However, when the high-concentration samples are separated by a continuous AC voltage, the accumulation of cells and other particles at the electrode makes it easy to induce channel blockage. Techaumnat et al. adjusted the duty cycle of applied voltage by using a discrete DEP force to achieve the separation of red blood cells and polystyrene particles (the DEP device is shown in Fig. 9a and b).74 They also pointed out that the separation principle proposed in this study is also applicable to the preparation and diagnosis of biomedical samples. So far, the technique of using DEP forces to separate two different particles has been widely reported, but there are still few studies on the high-throughput continuous separation of various particles. Ramiar et al. simulated the separation of three kinds of particle in a two-component fluid in a circular channel via OpenFOAM software.21 Besides, they numerically reported the successful separation of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs) and breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231) under the effect of the DEP force, which gives theoretical support for the continuous separation of various bioparticles.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Staggered electrodes with a certain tilt angle to the microchannel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH. (c and d) Classification device of shrinkage structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
DEP technology has also made great progress in the manipulation of subcellular structures. Since Lao et al. observed the separation of DNA molecules by DEP for the first time in experiments and proved its universal applicability in separating DNA, studies on the use of DEP to separate DNA have been reported frequently.75 For instance, Heller et al. achieved the separation of DNA molecules and magnetic beads in PBS buffer.76 Jones et al. used the shrinkage classification microdevice (as shown in Fig. 9c and d) to achieve continuous separation of DNA molecules, with a sorting efficiency being reached of higher than 90%.77
In addition, DEP filtration is a promising method to achieve high-throughput separation of particles. The working principle of DEP filtration is similar to that of DEP equipment based on the insulating structure. The DEP force exerted on the particles does not depend on the asymmetry of the electrode, but on the local field gradient caused on the surface of the solid–liquid interface of the porous medium.65 Iliescu et al. achieved the separation of live yeast cells from dead yeast cells by using DEP filtration, with a desirable throughput.78 To further improve the throughput of the DEP separation system, Pesch et al. used a simplified microfluidic pore structure to derive the design rules of the DEP filter, and verified it with yeast cells.79 The processing capacity reached 9 mL min−1 while ensuring high filtration efficiency. In subsequent studies, the microporous ceramic structure was adopted to further verify the design rules. By changing the conductivity of the suspension, two mechanisms of pDEP capture and nDEP capture were observed, and the conversion between the two DEP effects was reasonably predicted. Their work laid a foundation for the selective capture of particles, and was expected to play an important role in the liquid biopsy of cell separation and the recovery of precious metals from industrial wastes.80
3.2 Particle capture
We have demonstrated in the previous sections that the use of DEP technology can achieve a good separation between particles with different particle sizes or dielectric properties, and the separation efficiency and accuracy are constantly improved with the deepening of research and improvement of separation equipment. In addition, the use of DEP for particle capture and other operations has also been studied and reported.81 The concept of cell capture was first proposed in 1988. Price et al. measured the dielectric properties of bacteria with interdigital electrodes, and they observed that bacteria tend to accumulate in areas of weaker electric field strength due to the influence of nDEP.82 This discovery means that a more precise control of cells can be achieved, so it has attracted the research and attention of a group of scientific researchers. The ability of DEP to capture leukocytes and circulating tumor cells from whole blood has been widely confirmed, but the operation with considerably low throughput remains an ongoing problem.
In order to improve the throughput, Li and co-workers suggested a DEP platform for circulating tumor cell capture.83 The design of the bipolar electrode array makes it easy for DEP equipment to expand in the X and Y directions. Compared with the traditional DEP capture platforms, it not only improved the throughput, but also had high-fidelity single cell capture capability. Furthermore, there were also major breakthroughs in the capture of sub-micron particles by DEP.
Barik et al. used DEP force to capture nanoparticles and DNA molecules in the region with a large electric field gradient at the edge of the graphene monolayer, and the capture efficiency was close to 100%.84 Ertsgaard et al. integrated a plasma sensing platform that combines DEP capture with real-time Raman spectroscopy imaging technology.85 DEP was employed for quickly locating nanovesicles along a straight line, and surface-enhanced Raman scattering was applied for imaging and detection analysis, which provided a platform for the rapid analysis of biological particles. In recent years, the studies on the application of iDEP in biomedicine have been increasing. Shi et al. used an iDEP (recently known as iEK) device to apply the DC voltage across the entire length of the nanopipette, and the nanoparticles were captured near the tip of the pipette due to the balance of the three forces of DEP, electroosmosis, and electrophoresis (Fig. 10).86 Moreover, successful capture of liposomes and exosomes suspended in PBS solution was done by the as-designed DC-iEK platform, demonstrating its application potential in biomedical fields.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the nanopipette DC-iEK device for recording the ion current and particle trajectory simultaneously. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2018 Nature. 
3.3 Particle purification
In clinical analysis, environmental monitoring, and pharmaceuticals, high-purity processing of target cells and particles is usually required. The ability of DEP technology to process samples without labelling has great application potential in purification for biotechnology and medically related drugs.87 Generally, DEP technology is used to achieve the manipulation of biological particles such as cells, and then carry out purification treatment, in which the electrode is embedded in the microfluidic device to generate an uneven electric field within the device. Therefore, effective manipulation is an important basis for the purification of cells and other biological particles.88
Chu et al. used a design-tailored DEP chip to combine cell separation based on immunomagnetic beads with oDEP technology to achieve the purification of cancer cells, as shown in Fig. 11.89 The purity of cancer cells reached 81.6–86.1% after continuous isolation and purification, which facilitates the subsequent cell analysis. Macrophages play an important role in immune defense and the repair of damaged tissues, the effective purification of which is of great significance for the early diagnosis of some diseases and clinical data analysis. Zhang et al. used a microfluidic chip based on DEP technology to purify a mixture of mammary cells and macrophages.90 The purity of macrophages in the sample reached as high as 99%, which provided a new strategy for the efficient purification of macrophages. The high purity of samples is indispensable for most biological detection. DEP is capable of performing label-free purification of biological particles such as cells without damaging the activity of them. Therefore, it has great application potential in the fields of medicine and biology, and its integration with testing equipment has also promoted the development of portable medical equipment.91
 Fig. 11  (a) Top-view design layout of the oDEP device; (b) working mechanism of the continuous isolation and purification of cancer cells from the magnetic microbead-bound Jurkat cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2020 Frontiers Media S.A. 
3.4 Particle enrichment
The key to much biomedical analysis lies in the enrichment of biological particles. Since the content of some pathological cells in the blood is extremely low, they need to be enriched before further analysis.92 Generally, it is very difficult to complete this task without damaging the biological activity of bioparticles by using traditional methods, but DEP can better achieve this. At present, the DEP technique has been successfully applied for the enrichment and analysis of tumor cells and other pathological cells as well as the enrichment of hematopoietic stem cells for autologous therapy.
Adams et al. achieved the sorting and enrichment of neuronal cells and progenitor cells (hNSPC) by using a two-step DEP technique, which is expected to be used in the treatment of neurological diseases and injuries.93 DEP technology also shows great potential in the enrichment of sub-micron particles. As the main detection index of early disease infection, the selective enrichment of immunoglobulin is of great significance in biological detection. Rohani et al. used a DC-biased AC electric field to achieve selective enrichment of prostate specific antigen (PSA) and anti-mouse immunoglobulin antibodies.94 In this case, a negative DEP effect balanced against EP in a nanoslit channel allows the frequency-selective enrichment of molecular biomarkers (Fig. 12a). Cao et al. used AC-iDEP based on nanorod arrays coated with Ag/SiO2 to enrich and solidify antigen proteins to the antibody binding region.95 The particles are randomly dispersed without voltage, and after applying an AC voltage, particles begin to gather around the nanopillar array due to the DEP force (Fig. 12b). The proposed method is considered to be simple and efficient, which facilitates the subsequent high-sensitivity immunoassays.
 Fig. 12  (a) Enrichment of biomolecules due to the mutual effect of negative DEP and EP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Diagram of DEP-enriched particles in an iDEP device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH. 
The enrichment of biological particles with very low abundance faces certain challenges, because it is necessary to ensure that the conditions are as mild as possible while being effectively enriched to reduce damage to biological samples. This means that the applied voltage should be reduced. However, the enrichment of low-abundance particles often needs to be performed under larger electric field conditions.96 Some researchers have proposed a solution to this problem by adding harmless extra particles to increase the concentration of particles, and then using the interaction between the particles to accelerate the enrichment process. Meanwhile, it should also be ensured that the particles used as fillers do not enrich together with the target particles.97
3.5 Connection and positioning of particles
It is known that the precise positioning of the particle's area at the micron or even nanoscopic scale is a big challenge. But in the fields of biomedicine, aerospace, and micro-nano electronic chip integration, precise control of particles is required. In view of the excellent performance of the DEP force in particle manipulation, researchers have focused on the use of DEP technology to conduct the positioning of micro- and nanoparticles, and then achieve the connection and assembly of these particles. For example, Schutte et al. assembled liver sinusoids using DEP technology, which can capture only living cells and achieve the 3D co-culture of healthy endothelial cells and hepatocyte organoid liver (Fig. 13a).10 The proposed approach was verified to be used as an in vitro test system for predicting liver toxicity in new drug exploitation, which promotes to effective drug development.
 Fig. 13  (a) The assembly principle of DEP cells in the chip. Liver cells (orange) and endothelial cells (green) are arranged like sinuses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2011 Springer. (b) Using DEP to deposit graphene oxide between microelectrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
The effective connection and precise assembly of nanoparticles is of great significance for their applications in biomedical fields. For example, drug-loaded nanoparticles can be transported to a specific location without damage for release in order to observe the interaction and reaction between cells and drugs. Zhou et al. proposed the manipulation and assembly of nanoparticles through atomic force microscope probe-induced DEP (AFM-DEP), which was considered a flexible tool for manipulating nanoparticles.98 Many research groups have achieved the assembly of micro-devices using DEP technology. For instance, Yang et al. used DEP technology to complete the self-assembly of carbon nanotube (CNT) arrays and nets between parallel electrodes.99 Krupke and co-workers prepared CNT-silicon heterojunction solar cells and CNT array transistors by DEP.100 Wang et al. used DEP to assemble graphene oxide (GO) nanostructures between gold electrodes to fabricate a hydrogen sensor with good performance.101 In another case, Wang et al. successfully assembled platinum nanoparticles and GO nanohybrid materials by DEP, and prepared a multi-gas sensor that can be applied to high-sensitivity biochemical analysis (Fig. 13b).102
DEP technology has great development prospects in the non-destructive manipulation of nanoparticles, the preparation of nanostructures, and the assembly of nanodevices, showing the potential of various applications in the biomedical community.
3.6 Multifunctional integrated micro-/nanoplatform
In the DEP platform, it is difficult to meet all the requirements with only a single function. For the detection of circulating tumor cells, a comprehensive platform integrating multiple functions such as separation, enrichment, and capture may be required. With the development of micro-manufacturing technology, microfluidic technology has also made unprecedented progress in recent years. More and more microfluidic components (mixers, reactors, separators, concentrators, etc.) are integrated into one chip that enables the DEP platform to implement multiple functions simultaneously. Sun et al. effectively combined DEP and alternating-current electrothermal (ACET) methods to achieve a DEP platform that integrates particle capture, switching, and sorting (Fig. 14), providing a new strategy for effective particle manipulation.103
 Fig. 14  (a) Three-dimensional schematic diagram of the microfluidic device; (b) particle behavior on the electrode: under specified conditions, particle switching and sorting occur simultaneously. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the DEP platform has simple structure, convenient operation, and easy integration with other equipment to construct a multifunctional particle manipulation platform. For example, DEP technology can be integrated with biochips, detection systems, etc., so that functions such as preparation, enrichment, separation, and detection can be performed simultaneously on one platform.104 Sang et al. combined a DEP operation platform with multiple functions such as enrichment and sorting with surface stress biosensors.105 Through the separation and detection of red blood cells, the diagnosis of hemolytic anemia was achieved, which exhibited the huge application potential of this integrated platform in portable medical care. Park et al. combined DEP capture technology with pre-enrichment based on concentration polarization (CP), in which the surface-functionalized nanoparticles and target biomolecules are pre-concentrated along the edge of the depletion layer to ensure the spatial overlap between them and enhance the binding kinetics.106 After the nanoparticles are captured by DEP, the binding signal is further analyzed by immunoassay. The combination of DEP and CP improves the sensitivity of biological immunoassay.
At present, micro-reactors and sensors have attracted more and more attention due to their advantages such as high accuracy, ease of expansion and control of conditions. Some scholars are committed to achieving their integration with DEP technology to maintain the original properties or biological activities of the sample during the research process. Rashidi et al. reviewed the application of DEP in micromixers, using a DEP force and electric vortex to accelerate the mixing process, and demonstrated its significance and application prospects in the field of micromixing.107 In another work, Sun et al. developed a system that combines an optical sensor, a microfluidic device, and a DEP driver. Under the control of the sensor, the DEP driver achieved the selective extraction of hydrogel from the oil phase to the water phase with an efficiency of 100%, and meanwhile, the activity of the cell loading was better maintained.108
The multi-functional integrated platform enables more flexible manipulation and detection of particles. The multi-functional manipulation method based on cells and other biological particles shows the great application potential of DEP in the biomedicine field (e.g. cell manipulation and targeted therapy).37
To present clearly the contents of above introduction, we provide a table (Table 2) to summarize the objective bioparticles, performance and throughput of various DEP micro-/nanoplatforms with different functions.
Table 2 Summary of performance of DEP micro-/nanoplatforms with various functions




DEP platform
Objective bioparticles
Performance
Flow/sample throughput
Ref.




Separation
Three cells (red blood cells, white blood cells, MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells)
When the potential is 9 V–12 V, it can separate cells and prevent fluid being mixed
4 μL h−1

21



Red blood cells and polystyrene particles
The maximum separation efficiency is 97% for a particle-to-cell number ratio equal to 1:2000
2.4 μL min−1 (4.8 × 106 cells per min)

74



DNA molecules
Sorting efficiencies up to 92%
1.3 μL h−1

77



Yeast cells
The efficiency is 75% at an applied AC voltage of 200 V
0.1 mL min−1

78



Polystyrene particles and yeast cells
The separation efficiency is almost 100%
up to 9 mL min−1

79



Capture
Single circulating tumor cells
Enable high-throughput capture of rare cells and single-cell analysis
0.1 mL h−1 (device: 39.6 mm2)

83



18.9 mL h−1 (device: 7500 mm2)


Nanodiamonds, nanobeads, and DNA
Efficiency is near 100% at voltages as low as 0.45 V



84



Nanoparticles and exosomes
Can rapidly trap nanoparticles in the close proximity of a glass nanopipette's tip by applying 10 V cm−1 DC
0.1 mm s−1

86



Purification
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
Further refine the purity of cancer cells (81.6–86.1%)
1.0 μL min−1

89



Macrophages
The purity of macrophages reached higher than 99%
0.4 μL min−1

90



Droplets
Purification can be performed at 90% efficiency
Up to 90 μm s−1

91



Enrichment
Polystyrene particles
The enrichment of the particles is over 150 times
2.4 μL min−1

73



Human neural stem and progenitor cells
Astrocyte-biased cells were successfully enriched from hNSPC cultures
3.5 μL min−1 (630000 cells per h)

93



Prostate specific antigen (PSA) versus anti-mouse immunoglobulin antibodies
Selective enrichment of PSA and anti-mouse immunoglobulin (IgG) antibodies in the 4–6 MHz range
1 mg mL−1

94



Bovine serum albumin protein
Trapped small proteins at a bias 5 V achieved 1800-fold enrichment of bovine serum albumin protein
180-fold per s

95



Connection and positioning
Hepatocytes and endothelial cells
Assembled liver sinusoids to predict liver toxicity
20–100 μL min−1

10



200 nm polystyrene nanoparticles
Polystyrene particles were assembled into 3D nanostructures of various sizes and shapes
2 μm s−1

98



CNTs
Obtained different nanotube structures via DEP assembly
CNT concentration was 1 μg mL−1

99



Pt nanoparticles, GO
Reduced graphene oxide gas sensors were fabricated
N/A

102



Multifunctional integration
Silica, polystyrene, and droplet
Achieved functions: particle trapping, particle-beam switching, particle sorting (efficiency over 90%)
0.1–3 μL min−1

103



Red blood cells
Separate and detect living/dead red cells for diagnosis of diseases
0.2 μL min−1

105



Polystyrene particles
Enhanced detection signal and important for controlling particle location
>70 μm s−1

106





4. Application of DEP in biomedicine
4.1 Disease detection
In medical diagnosis, timely detection and active treatment to be performed in the early stage of the disease are of great significance for saving the life of human beings. However, most of the detection equipment used in hospitals is complicated and invasive, with time consuming operation. The recent rise of microfluidic technology has brought new ideas to the solution of such problems. It integrates cell filtration, separation, capture, enrichment, screening and other operations on the chip based on specific requirements, and uses an external driving force such as DEP to achieve the analysis and detection of diseased cells in a simple device. The application of lab-on-a-chip technology in disease diagnosis promotes the progress of point-of-care (POC) portability.109
The mechanism of disease detection based on cells is that cells participate in the pathogenesis of various diseases such as cancer, inflammation, and immune disorders. By detecting the changes in DEP characteristic parameters such as cell membrane capacitance and conductance, the cycle and state of cells can be identified. In addition, the crossover frequency could be used to describe the characteristics of the cell. The crossover frequency refers to the input frequency at which the degree of polarization between the particles and suspending media is identical. When the frequency of the applied electric field is exactly the crossover frequency, the net polarizability of the cell in the suspension medium is zero, i.e., the DEP force is zero. The crossover frequency of normal cells is generally 40–100 kHz, while that of diseased cells is generally 10–30 kHz. DEP technology can be adopted to detect the physiological state of the cell and its viability changes promptly, and hence it is often used for disease diagnosis.4
As an example, cancer is a medically unsolved problem, while the current available detection methods are mostly inefficient and lack accuracy. For healthy cells, the cell membrane composed of phospholipid bilayers is selective for the substances entering and leaving the cell. Nevertheless, the cell membrane loses its function when the cell becomes cancerous. The calcium and other ions in the cytoplasm flows out, and the suspension medium enters the cell, resulting in changes in the cell membrane potential, and hence variations in the cell polarization rate. Moreover, different levels of wrinkles can be found on the membrane of cancer cells. All of these distinctions endow cancerous cells and healthy cells with different DEP responses, and a corresponding diagnosis of cancer can be made accordingly.
The metastasis of cancer cells is the major factor that leads to the deterioration or recurrence of cancer. Circulating tumor cells, as cancer cells that shed from the original tumor and enter the peripheral blood, are capable of metastasizing to other organs of the body through the blood, and then cause the corresponding organs to become cancerous.110,111 Therefore, the use of circulating tumor cells as the test sample can reflect the condition of the tumor in a timely manner and guide the next medication. Generally, effective circulating tumor cell monitoring is particularly important for preventing cancer recurrence and for the individualized treatment of patients. However, due to the extremely low concentration of circulating tumor cells in whole blood, effective analysis of them under desirable concentrations and purity is a great challenge for most of the detection methods. Gascoyne et al. for the first time used DEP technology to separate circulating tumor cells from the blood, which attracted the interest of many researchers.112 Since then, DEP was used in more and more studies to isolate cancer cells. The high separation efficiency with sample non-labeling nature renders DEP an ideal cancer detection method. Nguyen et al. used DEP in an annular electrode microfluidic channel to enrich the pulmonary circulating tumor cells in the central sensing area of the electrode and then employed the impedance signal to identify and diagnose the cells.113 In addition, this integrated platform exhibited great potential in the identification of different types of cancer cells, and can be used for various cancer screenings such as cervical and bladder cancers, which facilitates the formulation of targeted disease treatment programs.114–116 The microfluidic system can also be used to mimic the metastatic state of cancer cells for studying their metastatic mechanism, so as to provide new solutions for inhibiting the metastasis and spread of cancer cells.
Very recently, Kim et al. used DEP filtration technology to filter plasma from the blood, and then quantitatively analyzed the proteins of the plasma through changes of impedance, which can serve as a detection index for Alzheimer's disease.117 Besides, the successful detection of viruses such as Gordon fever has been reported via a design-tailored DEP chip.118 When a disease or infection occurs in the body, immune cells often respond rapidly with extremely high sensitivity, and a large number of immune cells are activated to fight against bacteria or viruses. Therefore, effective monitoring of the activation status of immune cells facilitates the diagnosis of diseases. A very recent work reported that DEP technology can effectively discriminate between activated and inactivated immune cells, which allows for label-free disease diagnosis and cell-based immunotherapies (Fig. 15a).119 Both the microfluidic device design and the working principle of DEP T-cell separation and quantification processes are illustrated in Fig. 15b. Rapid discrimination and direct quantification of T-cells have confirmed the as-designed device to be used as a portable and point-of-care diagnostic tool for the quantitative evaluation of immunity and disease state.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of continuous label-free electronic discrimination of T cells by activation state. (b) Microfluidic device design and working principle of DEP cell separation and quantification process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
At present, commercialized DEP-based platforms such as the DEPArray system combined with DEP separation and high-quality imaging are capable of screening out single target particles from complex heterogeneous mixtures, which has been widely applied in biomedical and pharmaceutical fields.120 In the process of separation and screening of single cells using the DEPArray system, contact does not need to be made with cells and thus the biological activity of the cells can be well maintained, which is conducive to the subsequent cell culture, analysis and testing, providing good technical support for clinical diagnosis. Recent published work has verified the use of the DEPArray to achieve single circulating tumor cell sorting that is followed by genome sequencing that gives a basis for disease treatment.121,122 Moreover, this automated platform was confirmed for high-throughput single cell screening with simplified sorting and analysis processes, which promotes in-depth research on single cells to better guide the clinical treatment.
DEP has great application prospects in the field of disease diagnosis, which provides technical support for research into instant medical equipment. It can be used not only for human disease detection, but also for the diagnosis of animal and plant diseases.123 DEP technology can be used for detection and diagnosis in the early stages of the disease by using non-invasive samples, which is undoubtedly a relatively safer and less harmful detection method, and is expected to be more widely used in the future.
4.2 Drug synthesis and screening
As an auxiliary tool for in vitro synthesis and screening of drugs, DEP is mainly used in the manufacture of engineered tissue models to guide the development of drugs. The DEP force directly acting on the particles and the electric vortex generated by the electrode array will accelerate the mixing and reaction of the drugs. In vitro drug synthesis and testing can obtain reliable drug response data with as few cells as possible, which solves the problems of poor reproducibility, high cost and existing ethics of animal models, promoting the efficiency of drug exploitation.6,124
Rapid mixing is a key step in drug synthesis in biomedicine. However, the Reynolds number of the fluid is generally small in microfluidic systems, in which the mixing is mainly dominated by diffusion, giving rise to very low mixing speed and efficiency. The mixing effect is usually improved by increasing the length of the mixing channels and extending the mixing time, but this is often at the expense of efficiency. Exploiting the inhomogeneous electric field formed by electrodes with different shapes, the DEP force is directly applied to the particles and rapid mixing between the particles can be achieved, which facilitates the synthesis of various drugs.125
Animals are often used for drug toxicity testing in vitro for drug screening, but there are great differences in physiology between animals and human beings, as well as some ethical issues.126 Therefore, animals have gradually been replaced by engineered tissue models in the synthesis and screening of drugs. Moreover, engineered tissue models are expected to replace diseased and damaged tissues and organs, providing new solutions for the treatment of tissue diseases. Mohammadi et al. reviewed the manipulation of muscle cells and the manufacture of functional muscle tissue by DEP technology.124 Researchers have successfully used DEP to prepare hydrogels arranged in CNTs, and then synthesized functional skeletal muscle tissues, and employed them for drug screening. Biomimetic scaffolds are used to guide arrangement and manufacture in tissue engineering, which can be applied for the preparation of reliable tissue models for drug screening. Dunne et al. proposed the fabrication strategy of the nanofibrous silk fibroin–chitosan scaffold (eSFCS) through the DEP alignment of nanofibers, which further proved that DEP is a powerful tool for preparing biomimetic scaffolds to guide vasculature in tissue engineering and repair.127
For drug screening, it is better to carry the drugs in a 3D microenvironment in the presence of ECM. Hydrogels and collagen are often adopted to mimic the ECM in vitro to create as close as possible an environment to the real in vivo microenvironment, as good cell growth and survival are the prerequisites for cell reaction and metabolism and also the key to drug screening.128 Compared with traditional animal experiments, the data obtained by in vitro drug testing systems that simulate the in vivo microenvironment were more reliable and cost-effective. In order to better mimic the growth conditions of hepatocytes in vivo and to improve the function of hepatocytes, Lee et al. suggested in vitro liver microsystems for the study of the drug response, in which the typical cell micropatterning technique, i.e., DEP, can be employed to precisely arrange cells at a micrometer scale, the hydrogel biofabrication offers an engineered ECM with a 3D microenvironment, and the microfluidics perfusion simulates internal flow to form a system close to the growth of liver (Fig. 16).129 The proposed system can be applied for the in vitro testing of the drug reaction of the liver microsystem, which helps to reduce the expense of drug exploitation and screening.
 Fig. 16  Liver microsystems in vitro for drug responses, in which DEP is applied for cell micropatterning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2019 Springer. 
4.3 Biosensing
Microbial contamination such as bacteria and viruses has become one of the main factors that endanger public health and safety. A tremendous number of people are infected by bacteria or viruses each year. As a type of device that converts the signal expressed by biological activity into an electric signal that is understandable for human beings, biosensors are capable of continuously and accurately transmitting information, as well as quickly detecting pathogenic bacteria, which has been widely applied in disease diagnosis, genetic analysis, and environmental monitoring.105,130,131 However, the current trade-off between the selectivity and sensitivity of biosensors is a key challenge. Kumar et al. used graphene field-effect transistors (G-FET) with a DEP force to design the biosensors, and employed highly specific peptide probes for bacterial detection. With the aid of the DEP force, the required sample concentration is reduced by three orders of magnitude, which improves the sensitivity of the sensor while ensuring high selectivity.132
Nanomaterials have unique structural characteristics and surface modifications.133 After being introduced into biosensors as sensitive materials, nanomaterials not only reduce the size of the device, but also increase the sensitivity and accuracy of detection, and hence improve the performance of the sensor.134 To achieve the construction and assembly of nanomaterials and biosensors, it is necessary to efficiently manipulate micro- and nanoparticles. DEP technology, with its ability to selectively deposit nano-sensitive materials into pre-designed positions to complete the controllable assembly of nanomaterials between electrodes, has shown great potential in bio-assembly. In another study, Zhang et al. combined DEP with the interphase capacitance detection technique, and used the enrichment ability of DEP to design a specific detection immunosensor for the main cause of bacterial mastitis, i.e., Escherichia coli.135 The as-designed immunosensor was applied for the rapid diagnosis of bovine mastitis.
Designs used for DEP enrichment coupled to on-chip sensing have attributes that differ from those with imaging to monitor enrichment, without quantification of biomarkers.94,136,137 For example, Swami and co-workers developed a sensing microplatform composed of aptamer-immobilized graphene–gold nanocomposites (Gr-AuNs) that were patterned inside a nanoslit for label-free detection of neuropeptide Y (NPY),136 a key neurological biomarker (Fig. 17a). Rapid electrochemical detection of NPY was confirmed to be achievable with enhanced detection sensitivity and binding kinetics owing to the DEP enrichment of NPYs onto the aptamer-functionalized Gr-AuN microelectrode within the nanoslit (Fig. 17b). Also, the detection limit of the sensing system was as low as 10 pM for NPY in a very rapid assay time, i.e., less than 60s after the DEP focusing of NPY.136 In a very recent work, Barik et al. reported the design of a gold nanogap electrode microplatform for low voltage DEP trapping of bioparticles that allows subsequent protein–lipid binding assays for the detection of cell-specific surface antigens.137 By coupling a microfluidic setup onto the nanogap platform, buffer solutions can be readily exchanged, which facilitates pDEP aligning of bioparticles in water and is followed by protein detection in buffers (Fig. 17c). The proposed nanogap platform was applicable for various sized bioparticles and can be operated at a considerably low voltage (1 V DC bias), thus avoiding Joule heating or bubble formation. Design challenges and future directions were suggested by the authors, including the integration of on-chip optical sensing capabilities and the throughput improvement approaches of such a nanogap platform.
 Fig. 17  DEP-based biosensing system: (a) side view of the sensing microplatform with embedded electrodes in a nanoslit and (b) aptamer-functionalized Gr-AuNs microelectrodes utilized for dielectrophoretic focusing of NPY. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the nanogap platform designed for DEP trapping of bioparticles enabling subsequent protein detection. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
Overall, the application of DEP in biosensors improves the sensitivity and selectivity of bio-sample detection, and increases the portability and flexibility of sensors, which exhibits huge application prospects in biotechnology and medical diagnosis.
4.4 Cell position adjustment
The position adjustment of cells is one of the key technologies in biomedical engineering, which is known as an important prerequisite for most cell micromanipulations. In the process of microinjection, the positions and attitude of the cells are often the key to success and have a significant impact on the survival rate of cells. For example, when performing intracytoplasmic sperm microinjection, the position of the first polar body of the oocyte influences the success rate of the operation and the growth of the embryo in the later stages. Hence, it is necessary to adjust the posture of the cells before the microinjection to reduce cell damage and improve the quality of fertilized eggs.138,139 However, most of the posture adjustment methods are manual or semi-automatic, which have severe problems such as poor accuracy and low efficiency. The existing automatic adjustment schemes also have the disadvantages of complex equipment and high cost.140 Therefore, the development of easy-to-operate, low-cost and automatic technology based on cell posture adjustment is particularly required.
The methods for cell position and attitude adjustment include contact and non-contact operations. The contact operation mainly depends on the experience and technical level of the operators, and hence improper operation could easily damage cells. The use of DEP technology for the non-contact posture adjustment of cells effectively alleviates the mechanical damage suffered by the cells during the operation, and is relatively flexible and efficient. Park et al. achieved the adjustment of the horizontal position of the cells through quadrupole electrodes arranged in a plane.141 Tsukada et al. designed a microsystem that uses DEP force to rotate oocytes in space by adopting two chips arranged one above the other.142 The as-designed DEP platform was applied to the nuclear transfer, in which the oocyte was rotated to a certain position and then subjected to nucleation treatment. By this means, the damage to the cell was reduced and the success rate of the operation was improved.
Besides, the use of traveling wave DEP to drive cells to a designated position and adjust them to an appropriate posture under the action of a rotating DEP force has been reported, which is of great significance for the subsequent analysis and operation of cells.
To make it more clear, we provide a table (Table 3) to summarize the aforementioned DEP micro-/nanoplatforms for specific biomedical applications in terms of types of DEP system, tasks, performances, and possible design challenges.
Table 3 Summary of various DEP micro-/nanoplatforms utilized for biomedical applications




Specific biomedical applications
Task
Performance
Design challenges
Ref.




Disease diagnosis
Separate rare cells from cell mixtures
The separation efficiency for CTCs in small samples is more than 90%
To enlarge the DEP chamber for the isolation of clinical samples and to achieve rapid isolation at high efficiency by minimizing side effects such as cell–cell interactions and ion leakage

112



Enrichment and detection of lung cancer cells (A549)
A549 cells are concentrated in the center area, and its enrichment rate is over 90%
To further enhance the efficiency of DEP microchips for CTC cell enrichment at high throughput and to improve the detection sensitivity and specificity of the device

113



Remove the matrix factors larger than the target molecules
Effective diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease by detecting impedance changes in plasma
Optimal design of the interdigitated microelectrode sensor to enhance the sample processing speed (or sample concentration), allowing rapid quantification and detection of target molecules with high sensitivity

117



Capture and detect dengue virus
Using immunoreaction achieved rapid detection of dengue virus (5 min)
To further explore the device toward the application of real clinical samples by enhancing specificity and detection limit

118



Distinguish activated vs naive T cells
Achieve label-free separation of cells for disease diagnosis (0.2 μL min−1)
To address the trade-off between separation sensitivity and specificity via device performance optimization and to broaden the assay range of targets to differential activation states and various phenotypes

119



Drug synthesis and screening
Manipulate the arrangement of nanofibers
A high percentage of the aligned area was obtained for the scaffold with a fine size of fibrils and enhanced elastic modulus
Deep studies on the effects of DEP on scaffold fabrication to guide the scaffold design and manufacture for specific application

127



Drive liver cells to move and form cell clusters
Proposed an in vitro liver microsystem for high-throughput drug screening
Development of a multifunctional liver microsystem that is capable of constructing complex tissue and tuning the microfluidics, allowing in vitro study of drug responses

129



Biosensing
Accelerate the enrichment of particles to be detected
Amplified signal response provides a rapid and economical detection solution
Enhancement of the specificity for the proposed sensor as the current design can detect various biomarkers that present pDEP effects

130



Increase mass transport of E. coli
The introduction of DEP enables sensitive, rapid, and specific bacterial detection
To further modify the sensing surface with multi-functional coatings in combination with DEP to achieve specific detection at low detection limits

131



Guide the binding of bacterial cells to G-FET
Reduced the detection limit (104 cells per mL) and detection time (5 min)
Detect the target bacterial quantitatively by improved design of the biosensor parameters

132



Enrichment of E. coli
Achieved rapid (15 s), sensitive (775 cells per mL) on-site detection of E. coli
Tailoring design of the electrodes of the sensor chip to improve DEP bacterial capturing efficiency

135



Cell position adjustment
Control the orientation of embryonic cells
Improved cell processing speed and survival rate
The coordination of the integrated function for multiple cell manipulation using the cell processor

141



Rotate the mouse oocytes to a specific position
Rotated at 60 deg s−1 and achieved in vitro fertilization and nuclear transfer
To allow DEP operation of oocyte position adjustment in a continuous manner

142





5. Limitations of existing DEP micro-/nanoplatforms in biomedical applications
5.1 Low throughput
At present, most of the DEP applications are still at laboratory level with the throughput being typically tens of microliters per minute, while low throughput has become one of the main factors limiting its development. Although many research groups have made significant improvements to this point, the use of DEP platforms for commercial applications is still underway due to the mutual restriction of various parameters. Cetin and Li pointed out that more research should be focused on the improvement of DEP systems’ throughput to enable DEP-based applications competitive with conventional separation techniques.143 Although the low-throughput issue may not be so serious for some cases with small sample volumes, it is in fact a major problem for specific biomedical applications such as the continuous separation and identification of CTCs from whole blood, in which the target CTC cells are extremely low in quantity within a large volume of blood samples.13 Note that the sample throughput of typical microfluidic cell separation techniques that are based on hydrodynamics such as inertial microfluidics, DLD and the vortex high throughput method are at the level of around 106–108 cells per min, 107–109 cells per min, and 108–1010 cells per min respectively, which tend to offer higher throughput compared with other electric (throughput typically in the range of 101–106 cells per min), optical (throughput typically in the range of 100–106 cells per min) and acoustic (throughput typically in the range of 104–108 cells per min) based techniques.144
Despite the fact that DEP has exhibited excellent features for micro- and nanoparticle manipulation, the throughput of DEP-based separations is, to the best of our knowledge, concentrated in the range of only 103–106 cells per min with mostly analytical-scale applications. Therefore, to achieve the large-scale biomedical application of DEP platforms, that is, the sample throughput of DEP-based devices being at least competitive to hydrodynamic-based microscopic techniques or even comparable with those macroscopic approaches if possible, low throughput issues need to be addressed urgently. Possible solutions would be the specific design of DEP devices, which are associated with electrode and flow channel design, as well as tailoring the required voltage and frequency, for example, the development of DEP platforms assembled with 3D electrode structures and metal-free electrode materials to enhance the working space for effective DEP manipulation on one hand, and to eliminate side effects such as sample electrolysis and contamination on the other hand, enabling high-throughput DEP application. Besides, the addition of floating electrodes in DEP devices is a possible way to reduce the Joule heating interference and thus the energy consumption, and thereby the flow throughput of DEP systems can be improved. Moreover, the combination of DEP with other microfluidic techniques such as DLD, FFF, or inertial techniques to promote synergistic effects on bioparticles is expected to further increase the throughput of these devices. Furthermore, the incorporation of sample pretreatment, DEP separation and subsequent sample characterization into a single device would allow rapid biosample analysis with a significantly reduced assay time.
5.2 Electroosmosis (EO)
Electroosmosis is caused by the Coulomb force, which describes the phenomenon of fluid movement due to the interaction between an electric field and free charge. It produces a constant fluid flow in a DC electric field, but tends to be null in a uniform AC electric field, since charges have the same migration amount and opposite directions in each half cycle, so the net effect in one cycle is zero. When the external electric field is non-uniform, a stable fluid flow can still be generated. The formation of the EO effect mainly depends on the electric double layer (EDL), while the thickness of the EDL is generally inversely proportional to the conductivity of the fluid. For a fluid medium with high conductivity, only a very thin counter ion layer is needed to fully shield the electrode potential due to its high ionic strength, which results in compression of the electric double layer, and hence the EO effect will be reduced.27
In addition, the frequency in the AC electric field also affects the EO phenomenon. When the frequency of the applied electric field exceeds a certain value (usually 100 kHz), the ACEO effect becomes very small or even disappears and thus can be ignored. This is because the EDL cannot be formed at high frequencies, and there is no ACEO phenomenon.145 Therefore, the ACEO effect is more obvious only at low frequencies (lower than 100 kHz), at which point an adverse effect may be exerted on the DEP operation of biological samples. Besides, operation at very low frequencies could induce electrochemical reactions on the electrode, and even lead to deterioration of the electrode, which is extremely unfavorable for DEP applications. Therefore, the use of DEP to manipulate biological particles is usually performed at higher frequencies to avoid the interference of the ACEO effect as much as possible, and achieve more precise and sensitive particle manipulation.
5.3 Electrophoresis (EP)
EP refers to the movement of particles with inherent net electric charge in a DC electric field or a low-frequency AC electric field, while DEP only occurs in a non-uniform electric field with induced charges.146 The surface of biological particles usually has negative charge, and hence EP affects their behavior in the medium to a certain extent, and interferes with the precise positioning and manipulation of the sample particles. The influence of the EP effect can also be effectively reduced by operating biological samples at higher electric field frequencies.
For micron-sized particles, moderate DEP forces are enough for precise manipulation, whereas for nano-sized particles, the DEP force has certain difficulties in achieving effective manipulation. To this end, some researchers proposed the combination of three electrokinetic effects i.e., DEP, EO, and EP, for the effective control of bioparticles. They studied the impact on particle motion with a synergistic effect of the three forces, and optimized various parameters such as voltage and frequency to achieve particle manipulation as precise as possible.50,147
5.4 Electrothermal (ET) forces

5.4.1 Temperature rise. 
When the DEP force is used for particle manipulation, a certain external electric field needs to be provided, which causes heat dissipation in the medium, and gives rise to the temperature rise. As early as in 1998, Ramos et al. pointed out that the power produced per unit volume of a fluid medium is directly proportional to its own conductivity, and this relationship can be expressed by Joule's law: W = σE2.148 This is extremely unfavorable for the transportation of biological suspensions with high conductivity, because an appropriate temperature is particularly important for the activity of biological products. Excessive temperature rise may cause dehydration, membrane rupture, and even death of the biological samples. The temperature rise in a DEP system induced by the localized Joule heating generated by the non-uniform electric field can be estimated by the energy conservation equation.148 Since electric heating is a key factor affecting bioparticle separation, exploring and fully understanding the effect of the thermal field on the separation effect is an important step to improve the separation efficiency of DEP and further expand the application scope of DEP separation.
Hakoda et al. proved that when using DEP to process biological samples, the AC voltage was much more friendly to biological samples.149 Generally, the higher the frequency, the higher the survival rate of cells. Besides, the relative polarizability of the sample and the suspension medium can be adjusted by tuning the frequency of the electric field. Therefore, AC voltage is often employed in DEP systems for biomedically relevant applications.


5.4.2 Fluid flow. 
In the process of using DEP to manipulate biological samples, localized Joule heating causes a temperature gradient of the medium in the DEP system, which also changes the temperature-related dielectric properties of the fluid (such as conductivity and permittivity), and further generates the free charge density. The free charge moves under the action of the applied electric field and drives the surrounding fluid to move due to shear stress. Ramos et al. first proposed the phenomenon that ACET causes fluid motion in their research, and pointed out that the ACET is more effective in highly conductive biological fluids as compared to ACEO.148 The force that causes fluid flow due to Joule heating may be electrothermal force or buoyancy force. In a microsystem, the heat transfer is mainly accomplished by diffusion, and the convection effect is relatively small. Therefore, the fluid flow is mainly caused by electric heating, which is the result of the interaction between the temperature gradient inside the fluid and the non-uniform AC electric field. With the increase of the required throughput, the scale of the system also tends to be enlarged. When the characteristic size of the system rises from the micron level to the millimeter level, a large amount of heat dissipation induces the generation of local density gradients in the fluid medium. The density gradients trigger the buoyancy force in the flow medium and thus enable a convection circulation to be formed in the system, which makes buoyancy an important factor leading fluid flow.150 When the temperature rise is large in an up-scaling system, it also causes the buoyancy force to overwhelm the electric heating force and become dominant, as the ratio of the electrothermal force to the buoyancy force is proportional to |∇T|/ΔT.145 The direction of fluid flow dominated by buoyancy is from a high temperature area to a low temperature area, that is, from a high electric field intensity area to a low electric field intensity area. This is the same as the movement direction of particles subjected to nDEP. Therefore, the buoyancy-induced ACET flow can be adopted to accelerate the movement of nDEP particles, while the movement of pDEP particles can thus be hindered.
Heeren et al. proved that DEP is a short-range interaction, which can only effectively manipulate the particles in the vicinity of the electrodes.151 Besides, DEP has a strong dependence on the size of the particles. Therefore, it is difficult to achieve precise manipulation of submicron particles. ACET exerts a volume force on the suspending medium and obeys the boundary condition of no slip, which means that the particles deposited on the electrode surface will not be affected by the ACET force. Therefore, if the two forces work together, it can affect the particles distributed in almost the entire channel.152 By combining the DEP with ACET, both the efficiency and accuracy of particle separation are expected to be greatly improved. As an example, Sun et al. used the design of a DEP device with floating electrodes to effectively integrate the DEP and ACET effects to achieve continuous trapping, switching and sorting of particles.103
In AC-DEP systems, the ACET effect is often inevitable. If the direction of electric heat flow can be effectively controlled and the ACET effect can be used correctly, it will not affect the mixing and separation of particles, but accelerate the mixing process and improve the separation efficiency.153 Therefore, it is necessary to perform a more in-depth study on the velocity and direction of the fluid caused by ACET. Vafaie et al. discretized the electrode to form an asymmetric electrode structure.154 By changing the voltage applied to the electrode, the variation in the direction of fluid flow caused by ACET can be achieved. In order to make full use of the ACET effect, Lijnse et al. proposed several methods to improve the ACET effect, e.g. the electrodes were coated with a protective layer to prevent electrolysis, and the top and bottom asymmetric electrodes were used to speed up the mixing rate without sacrificing flow.155


5.4.3 Impact factors of ACET. 
The ACET effect is the result of the interaction between the temperature gradient inside the fluid and the non-uniform electric field. The change of ACET effect can be considered from the following two aspects, changing the electric field or changing the temperature field. The former is related to the size of the driving voltage, the electric frequency, and the conductivity of the suspension medium. When the conductivity of the medium is constant, the ACET effect generally increases with the increase of the applied voltage, but this is not always the case. When the applied voltage increases to more than a certain value, a series of chemical reactions may occur on the electrode to cause the deterioration of the electrode, which leads to the attenuation of ACET flow. To prevent this to a certain extent, a thin protective layer (e.g. SiO2 or SixNy) can be coated on the electrode. Regarding the frequency, Vafaie et al. mentioned in a study that only when the frequency of the applied electric field is much lower than the charge relaxation frequency (i.e. 2πfω ≪ ε/σ), the ACET effect is valid and the appropriate frequency range enlarges with increasing the conductivity of the medium.27 In addition, the ACET phenomenon is often more obvious in a suspension medium with higher conductivity. For a solution with high conductivity, the Joule heating effect will be more prominent, which will generate a larger temperature gradient and cause a more obvious electrothermal flow.

5.5 Dielectrowetting
Dielectrowetting refers to the electrohydrodynamic response of a material to an electric field which can be adopted to regulate the wetting properties of a liquid droplet on a solid surface in the presence of a nonuniform electric field. Generally, the uneven electric field is excited by linear interdigital electrodes embedded in a solid substrate without covering the cover plate, and these interact with dipoles in the liquid to generate liquid dielectrophoresis (known as L-DEP).156
In the last decade, dielectrowetting was found to be capable of manipulating the wettability with the DEP force localized at the solid–liquid–vapor interfaces.157 By this means, dielectrowetting technology has been widely applied in droplet microfluidics. Unlike electrowetting, dielectrowetting offers the capability to form a thin liquid film, thus avoiding the contact angle saturation phenomenon that often happens in electrowetting. Based on the principle of energy minimization, Geng and Cho deduced that the cosine of the contact angle is proportional to the square of the applied voltage.158 With the increase of the applied voltage, dielectrowetting may achieve complete wetting of the surface with a zero contact angle, allowing a thin liquid film to be formed. Since the driving force of dielectrowetting is mainly derived from the polarization of the dipole in the liquid, manipulation of both conductive and non-conductive liquids is possible. In addition, there is no need for direct contact between the droplets and the electrodes in dielectrowetting, which reduces the probability of direct electrochemical reactions. To date, great progress has been made on dielectrowetting in various fields including microfluidics such as the splitting, merging and transportation of droplets, optical device manufacturing such as liquid lenses and irises, as well as the development of liquid film devices.159 It should be noted that dielectrowetting has been recently verified to be efficient in carrying and manipulating biological components in insulating liquids, while microfluidic transduction requires strong electric signals at high frequencies, which may exert severe impacts on sensitive biological samples.160
5.6 Influence of other forces
When the polarized particles move in the electric field, they are not only affected by electrodynamic force, but also by other effects such as Brownian motion, sedimentation, particle–particle interaction, etc. These effects have some influence on the manipulation of particles, and even exceed the influence of DEP to dominate the particle movement. In 1998, a research team observed the movement of colloidal particles in a non-uniform electric field and found that it was inconsistent with the movement of particles predicted only by the DEP force.148 Pethig et al. observed the movement of colloidal particles in a castellated electrode array and also noticed the existence of these forces.161 Ramos et al. estimated the various forces experienced by 282 nm latex sphere particles in a microelectrode array within a certain frequency range to determine the magnitude of these forces and their contributions to the movement of the particles.148
6. Conclusion and outlooks
In this work, the design and function-tailoring of various DEP micro-/nanoplatforms, as well as their biomedical applications including disease diagnosis, drug synthesis, biosensing and cell positioning, are reviewed. Key factors that influence the DEP bioparticle manipulation are briefly discussed, and the corresponding solutions are suggested.
The design of high-throughput DEP micro-/nanoplatforms toward biomedical applications remains a challenging task. Currently, DEP technology on the manipulation of various micrometer-sized bioparticles such as cells has been widely applied, but nevertheless, the effective manipulation of submicron and even nanometer-sized bioparticles such as proteins, DNA and virus by DEP is technically immature. Much stronger DEP effects are usually required to move those nanoparticles due to the cubic dependence of the DEP force on particle size. A high electric field in combination with the electric conductive medium inevitably causes localized a huge temperature rise within the DEP system, giving rise to a severe impact on the biological activity of bioparticles or even damage of the samples, thereby imposing DEP platform design challenges.162 With the deepening of the research on DEP technology, researchers have been constantly improving the design of electrode and flow channel structures as well as other key parameters, enabling strong electric field gradients to be generated under moderate external potential without a large temperature rise, and thus achieving the effective manipulation of submicron particles under mild experimental conditions. At present, DEP has been reported for the capture, separation and enrichment of biological molecules such as DNA, RNA and proteins, as well as subcellular entities such as secretions and organelles.12,87,163 In addition, electrokinetic and electrohydrodynamic side effects in DEP applications affect or even limit the efficiency of DEP to a certain extent. To eliminate these side effects or possibly switch them to positive effects on DEP is another research direction of current DEP biomedical application.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no interest of conflict.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51873225 and 21808116), the National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars (no. 21722610), the Taishan Scholars Program of Shandong Province (no. tsqn201909104 and tsqn201909091), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (no. 2019M662301), and the High-Grade Talents Plan of Qingdao University.
References
F. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Cui, Y. T. Fan, Y. Xue, H. P. Miao and G. Y. Li, Extraction of Cell-Free Whole Blood Plasma Using a Dielectrophoresis-Based Microfluidic Device, Biotechnol. J., 2019, 14, e1800181 CrossRef .
L. Keeble, N. Moser, J. Rodriguez-Manzano and P. Georgiou, ISFET-Based Sensing and Electric Field Actuation of DNA for On-Chip Detection: A Review, IEEE Sens. J., 2020, 20, 11044–11065 CAS .
E. O. Adekanmbi and S. K. Srivastava, Dielectric characterization of bioparticles via electrokinetics: The past, present, and the future, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6, 041313 Search PubMed .
E. O. Adekanmbi and S. K. Srivastava, Dielectrophoretic applications for disease diagnostics using lab-on-a-chip platforms, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 2148–2167 RSC .
M. Z. Rashed and S. J. Williams, Advances and applications of isomotive dielectrophoresis for cell analysis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2020, 412, 3813–3833 CrossRef CAS .
N. Abd Rahman, F. Ibrahim and B. Yafouz, Dielectrophoresis for Biomedical Sciences Applications: A Review, Sensors, 2017, 17, 449 CrossRef .
A. Wuethrich, P. R. Haddad and J. P. Quirino, The electric field - An emerging driver in sample preparation, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 80, 604–611 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. C. Gascoyne and S. Shim, Isolation of Circulating Tumor Cells by Dielectrophoresis, Cancers, 2014, 6, 545–579 CrossRef .
L. D'Amico, N. J. Ajami, J. A. Adachi, P. R. C. Gascoynecde and J. F. Petrosino, Isolation and concentration of bacteria from blood using microfluidic membraneless dialysis and dielectrophoresis, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 1340–1348 RSC .
J. Schutte, B. Hagmeyer, F. Holzner, M. Kubon, S. Werner, C. Freudigmann, K. Benz, J. Bottger, R. Gebhardt, H. Becker and M. Stelzle, “Artificial micro organs”-a microfluidic device for dielectrophoretic assembly of liver sinusoids, Biomed. Microdevices, 2011, 13, 493–501 CrossRef .
J. L. Ji, J. X. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, Q. Q. Duan, S. B. Sang, Q. Huang, S. S. Li, W. D. Zhang and X. N. Jiang, Dynamic-coupling analyses of cells localization by the negative dielectrophoresis, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part C, 2020 DOI:10.1177/0954406220929050 .
B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, On the recent developments of insulator-based dielectrophoresis: A review, Electrophoresis, 2019, 40, 358–375 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Fernandez, A. Rohani, V. Farmehini and N. S. Swami, Review: Microbial analysis in dielectrophoretic microfluidic systems, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 966, 11–33 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pethig, Review-Where Is Dielectrophoresis (DEP) Going?, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, B3049–B3055 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Henslee, Review: Dielectrophoresis in cell characterization, Electrophoresis, 2020, 41, 1915–1930 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Zhang, H. L. Chang and P. Neuzil, DEP-on-a-Chip: Dielectrophoresis Applied to Microfluidic Platforms, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 423 CrossRef .
M. Li and R. K. Anand, Cellular dielectrophoresis coupled with single-cell analysis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2018, 410, 2499–2515 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Abraham, The classical theory of electricity and magnetism, Oxford Univeraity,  1990 Search PubMed .
I. Turcan and M. A. Olariu, Dielectrophoretic Manipulation of Cancer Cells and Their Electrical Characterization, ACS Comb. Sci., 2020, 22(11), 554–578 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zhang, Z. Y. Song, Q. X. Liu and Y. X. Song, Recent advances in dielectrophoresis-based cell viability assessment, Electrophoresis, 2020, 41, 917–932 CrossRef CAS .
R. Derakhshan, A. Ramiar and A. Ghasemi, Numerical investigation into continuous separation of particles and cells in a two-component fluid flow using dielectrophoresis, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 310, 113211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, F. Du, G. R. Pesch, J. Koser, M. Baune and J. Thoming, Microparticle trajectories in a high-throughput channel for contact-free fractionation by dielectrophoresis, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 153, 34–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Wu, R. F. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. M. Yu, Y. W. Jiang and X. Cheng, A planar dielectrophoresis-based chip for high-throughput cell pairing, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 4008–4014 RSC .
K. Torres-Castro, C. Honrado, W. B. Varhue, V. Farmehini and N. S. Swami, High-throughput dynamical analysis of dielectrophoretic frequency dispersion of single cells based on deflected flow streamlines, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2020, 412, 3847–3857 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khoshmanesh, S. Nahavandi, S. Baratchi, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Dielectrophoretic platforms for bio-microfluidic systems, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 1800–1814 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Markx, M. S. Talary and R. Pethig, Separation of Viable and Nonviable Yeast Using Dielectrophoresis, J. Biotechnol., 1994, 32, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Vafaie, H. B. Ghavifekr, H. Van Lintel, J. Brugger and P. Renaud, Bi-directional ACET micropump for on-chip biological applications, Electrophoresis, 2016, 37, 719–726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, F. Du, M. Baune and J. Thoming, Dielectrophoresis in aqueous suspension: impact of electrode configuration, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2014, 17, 499–507 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nerguizian, I. Stiharu, N. Al-Azzam, B. Yassine-Diab and A. Alazzam, The effect of dielectrophoresis on living cells: crossover frequencies and deregulation in gene expression, Analyst, 2019, 144, 3853–3860 RSC .
Y. Yildizhan, N. Erdem, M. Islam, R. Martinez-Duarte and M. Elitas, Dielectrophoretic Separation of Live and Dead Monocytes Using 3D Carbon-Electrodes, Sensors, 2017, 17, 2691 CrossRef .
H. W. Zhu, X. G. Lin, Y. Su, H. Dong and J. H. Wu, Screen-printed microfluidic dielectrophoresis chip for cell separation, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 63, 371–378 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Lin, J. Yao, H. Dong and X. D. Cao, Effective Cell and Particle Sorting and Separation in Screen-Printed Continuous-Flow Microfluidic Devices with 3D Sidewall Electrodes, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 13085–13093 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Crowther, S. H. Hilton, L. Kemp and M. A. Hayes, Isolation and identification of Listeria monocytogenes utilizing DC insulator-based dielectrophoresis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1068, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, J. K. Wu, C. H. Chang, C. W. Cheng, H. Y. Chang, P. C. Wang and F. G. Tseng, Sulfonated Polyaniline as Zwitterionic and Conductive Interfaces for Anti-Biofouling on Open Electrode Surfaces in Electrodynamic Systems, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19102–19109 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Sun, P. Agarwal, S. T. Zhao, Y. Zhao, X. B. Lu and X. M. He, Continuous On-Chip Cell Separation Based on Conductivity-Induced Dielectrophoresis with 3D Self-Assembled Ionic Liquid Electrodes, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 8264–8271 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Tang, J. Y. Zhu, V. Sivan, B. Gol, R. Soffe, W. Zhang, A. Mitchell and K. Khoshmanesh, Creation of Liquid Metal 3D Microstructures Using Dielectrophoresis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4445–4452 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Wu, Y. K. Ren, Y. Tao, L. K. Hou and H. Y. Jiang, High-Throughput Separation, Trapping, and Manipulation of Single Cells and Particles by Combined Dielectrophoresis at a Bipolar Electrode Array, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 11461–11469 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Li and D. Q. Li, Separation of Janus droplets and oil droplets in microchannels by wall-induced dielectrophoresis, J. Chromatogr. A, 2017, 1501, 151–160 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao and D. Q. Li, Continuous separation of nanoparticles by type via localized DC-dielectrophoresis using asymmetric nano-orifice in pressure-driven flow, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 250, 274–284 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, Larasati, B. P. Duncker and D. Q. Li, Continuous Cell Characterization and Separation by Microfluidic Alternating Current Dielectrophoresis, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 6304–6314 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao and D. Q. Li, Tunable Droplet Manipulation and Characterization by ac-DEP, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36572–36581 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aghilinejad, M. Aghaamoo, X. L. Chen and J. Xu, Effects of electrothermal vortices on insulator-based dielectrophoresis for circulating tumor cell separation, Electrophoresis, 2018, 39, 869–877 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang and Y. X. Liu, DC biased low-frequency insulating constriction dielectrophoresis for protein biomolecules concentration, Biofabrication, 2017, 9, 045003 CrossRef .
M. A. Saucedo-Espinosa and B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, Exploiting Particle Mutual Interactions To Enable Challenging Dielectrophoretic Processes, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 8459–8467 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Cummings and A. K. Singh, Dielectrophoretic trapping without embedded electrodes, Proc. SPIE, 2000, 4177, 151–160 CrossRef .
C. F. Chou, J. O. Tegenfeldt, O. Bakajin, S. S. Chan, E. C. Cox, N. Darnton, T. Duke and R. H. Austin, Electrodeless dielectrophoresis of single- and double-stranded DNA, Biophys. J., 2002, 83, 2170–2179 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Pesch, F. Du, M. Baune and J. Thoming, Influence of geometry and material of insulating posts on particle trapping using positive dielectrophoresis, J. Chromatogr. A, 2017, 1483, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Perez-Gonzalez, R. C. Gallo-Villanueva, B. Cardenas-Benitez, S. O. Martinez-Chapa and B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, Simple Approach to Reducing Particle Trapping Voltage in Insulator-Based Dielectrophoretic Systems, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 4310–4315 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masuda, M. Washizu and T. Nanba, Novel method of cell fusion in field constriction area in fluid integration circuit, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 1989, 25, 732–737 CrossRef .
B. Cardenas-Benitez, B. Jind, R. C. Gallo-Villanueva, S. O. Martinez-Chapa, B. H. Lapizco-Encinas and V. H. Perez-Gonzalez, Direct Current Electrokinetic Particle Trapping in Insulator-based Microfluidics: Theory and Experiments, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 12871–12879 CrossRef CAS .
S. Antunez-Vela, V. H. Perez-Gonzalez, A. C. De Pena, C. J. Lentz and B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, Simultaneous Determination of Linear and Nonlinear Electrophoretic Mobilities of Cells and Microparticles, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 14885–14891 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. B. Wang, J. A. Tame and R. Pethig, Electrokinetic Behavior of Colloidal Particles in Traveling Electric-Fields - Studies Using Yeast-Cells, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1993, 26, 1528–1535 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Hawkins, A. E. Smith, Y. A. Syed and B. J. Kirby, Continuous-flow particle separation by 3D insulative dielectrophoresis using coherently shaped, dc-biased, ac electric fields, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 7291–7300 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zellner, T. Shake, Y. Hosseini, D. Nakidde, M. V. Riquelme, A. Sahari, A. Pruden, B. Behkam and M. Agah, 3D Insulator-based dielectrophoresis using DC-biased, AC electric fields for selective bacterial trapping, Electrophoresis, 2015, 36, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
P. Modarres and M. Tabrizian, Frequency hopping dielectrophoresis as a new approach for microscale particle and cell enrichment, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 286, 493–500 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Smith, R. D. O'Rorke, A. Kale, R. Rimsa, M. J. Tomlinson, J. Kirkham, A. G. Davies, C. Walti and C. D. Wood, Rapid cell separation with minimal manipulation for autologous cell therapies, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41872 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Liao, C. H. Hsieh, T. K. Chiu, Y. X. Zhu, H. M. Wang, F. C. Hung, W. P. Chou and M. H. Wu, An Optically Induced Dielectrophoresis (ODEP)-Based Microfluidic System for the Isolation of High-Purity CD45(neg)/EpCAM(neg) Cells from the Blood Samples of Cancer PatientsDemonstration and Initial Exploration of the Clinical Significance of These Cells, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 563 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Y. L. Quan, C. F. Song, N. Xiang, D. Jiang, D. K. Sun, J. K. Yang, H. Yi and Z. H. Ni, Accurate control of individual metallic nanowires by light-induced dielectrophoresis: Size-based separation and array-spacing regulation, Sens. Actuators, A, 2015, 225, 139–147 CrossRef .
G. Blaire, A. Masse, L. F. Zanini, V. Gaude, S. Delshadi, T. Honegger, D. Peyrade, M. Weidenhaupt, F. Dumas-Bouchiat, F. Bruckert, O. Cugat and G. Reyne, Hybrid Bio-Mag-MEMS combining magnetophoresis and dielectrophoresis, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2013, 86, 1–6 CrossRef .
J. H. Moore, W. B. Varhue, Y. H. Su, S. S. Linton, V. Farmehini, D. E. Fox, G. L. Matters, M. Kester and N. S. Swami, Conductance-Based Biophysical Distinction and Microfluidic Enrichment of Nanovesicles Derived from Pancreatic Tumor Cells of Varying Invasiveness, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 10424–10431 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ayala-Mar, V. H. Perez-Gonzalez, M. A. Mata-Gomez, R. C. Gallo-Villanueva and J. Gonzalez-Valdez, Electrokinetically Driven Exosome Separation and Concentration Using Dielectrophoretic-Enhanced PDMS-Based Microfluidics, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 14975–14982 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Shi, D. Kuhnell, V. J. Borra, S. M. Langevin, T. Nakamura and L. Esfandiari, Rapid and label-free isolation of small extracellular vesicles from biofluids utilizing a novel insulator based dielectrophoretic device, Lab Chip, 2019, 19, 3726–3734 RSC .
M. E. Warkiani, B. L. Khoo, L. D. Wu, A. K. P. Tay, A. A. S. Bhagat, J. Han and C. T. Lim, Ultra-fast, label-free isolation of circulating tumor cells from blood using spiral microfluidics, Nat. Protoc., 2016, 11, 134–148 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Hong, J. S. Kang, J. E. Lee, S. S. Kim and J. H. Jung, Continuous aerosol size separator using inertial microfluidics and its application to airborne bacteria and viruses, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 1889–1897 RSC .
G. R. Pesch and F. Du, A review of dielectrophoretic separation and classification of non-biological particles, Electrophoresis, 2021, 42, 134–152 CrossRef CAS .
V. Calero, P. Garcia-Sanchez, C. Honrado, A. Ramos and H. Morgan, AC electrokinetic biased deterministic lateral displacement for tunable particle separation, Lab Chip, 2019, 19, 1386–1396 RSC .
M. Aghaamoo, A. Aghilinejad, X. L. Chen and J. Xu, On the design of deterministic dielectrophoresis for continuous separation of circulating tumor cells from peripheral blood cells, Electrophoresis, 2019, 40, 1486–1493 CrossRef CAS .
V. Calero, P. Garcia-Sanchez, A. Ramos and H. Morgan, Electrokinetic biased deterministic lateral displacement: scaling analysis and simulations, J. Chromatogr. A, 2020, 1623, 461151 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Moon, K. Kwon, S. I. Kim, H. Han, J. Sohn, S. Lee and H. I. Jung, Continuous separation of breast cancer cells from blood samples using multi-orifice flow fractionation (MOFF) and dielectrophoresis (DEP), Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 1118–1125 RSC .
V. K. Baliyan, B. Lee and J. K. Song, Quantum Dot Arrays Fabricated Using In Situ Photopolymerization of a Reactive Mesogen and Dielectrophoresis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 36, 40655–40661 CrossRef .
G. H. Lee, S. H. Kim, K. Ahn, S. H. Lee and J. Y. Park, Separation and sorting of cells in microsystems using physical principles, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2016, 26, 013003 CrossRef .
Y. Yoon, J. Lee, M. Ra, H. Gwon, S. Lee, M. Y. Kim, K. C. Yoo, O. Sul, C. G. Kim, W. Y. Kim, J. G. Park, S. J. Lee, Y. Y. Lee, H. S. Choi and S. B. Lee, Continuous Separation of Circulating Tumor Cells from Whole Blood Using a Slanted Weir Microfluidic Device, Cancers, 2019, 11, 200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Morgan, M. P. Hughes and N. G. Green, Separation of submicron bioparticles by dielectrophoresis, Biophys. J., 1999, 77, 516–525 CrossRef CAS .
B. Techaumnat, N. Panklang, A. Wisitsoraat and Y. Suzuki, Study on the discrete dielectrophoresis for particle-cell separation, Electrophoresis, 2020, 41, 991–1001 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. K. Lao and I. M. Hsing, Flow-based and sieving matrix-free DNA differentiation by a miniaturized field flow fractionation device, Lab Chip, 2005, 5, 687–690 RSC .
Y. J. Song, A. Sonnenberg, Y. Heaney and M. J. Heller, Device for dielectrophoretic separation and collection of nanoparticles and DNA under high conductance conditions, Electrophoresis, 2015, 36, 1107–1114 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Jones, G. L. Salmon and A. Ros, Continuous Separation of DNA Molecules by Size Using Insulator-Based Dielectrophoresis, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 1531–1539 CrossRef CAS .
C. Iliescu, G. L. Xu, F. C. Loe, P. L. Ong and F. E. H. Tay, A 3-D dielectrophoretic filter chip, Electrophoresis, 2007, 28, 1107–1114 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Pesch, M. Lorenz, S. Sachdev, S. Salameh, F. Du, M. Baune, P. E. Boukany and J. Thoming, Bridging the scales in high-throughput dielectrophoretic (bio-) particle separation in porous media, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 10480 CrossRef .
M. Lorenz, D. Malangre, F. Du, M. Baune, J. Thoming and G. R. Pesch, High-throughput dielectrophoretic filtration of sub-micron and micro particles in macroscopic porous materials, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2020, 412, 3903–3914 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, B. Hwang, B. J. M. Kim and N. S. Letters, The potential of a dielectrophoresis activated cell sorter (DACS) as a next generation cell sorter, Micro Nano Lett., 2016, 4, 2 CrossRef .
J. A. Price, J. P. Burt and R. Pethig, Applications of a new optical technique for measuring the dielectrophoretic behaviour of micro-organisms, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1988, 964, 221–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li and R. K. Anand, High-Throughput Selective Capture of Single Circulating Tumor Cells by Dielectrophoresis at a Wireless Electrode Array, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8950–8959 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barik, Y. Zhang, R. Grassi, B. P. Nadappuram, J. B. Edel, T. Low, S. J. Koester and S. H. Oh, Graphene-edge dielectrophoretic tweezers for trapping of biomolecules, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1867 CrossRef .
C. T. Ertsgaard, N. J. Wittenberg, D. J. Klemme, A. Barik, W. C. Shih and S. H. Oh, Integrated Nanogap Platform for Sub-Volt Dielectrophoretic Trapping and Real-Time Raman Imaging of Biological Nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5946–5953 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Shi, A. Rana and L. Esfandiari, A low voltage nanopipette dielectrophoretic device for rapid entrapment of nanoparticles and exosomes extracted from plasma
of healthy donors, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 6751 CrossRef .
M. Viefhues and R. Eichhorn, DNA dielectrophoresis: Theory and applications a review, Electrophoresis, 2017, 38, 1483–1506 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Yao, G. P. Zhu, T. Zhao and M. Takei, Microfluidic device embedding electrodes for dielectrophoretic manipulation of cells-A review, Electrophoresis, 2019, 40, 1166–1177 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Chu, C. H. Hsieh and M. H. Wu, The Combination of Immunomagnetic Bead-Based Cell Isolation and Optically Induced Dielectrophoresis (ODEP)-Based Microfluidic Device for the Negative Selection-Based Isolation of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs), Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2020, 8, 921 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. Y. Wang, J. Chen, F. Yang and G. Y. Li, Separation of Macrophages Using a Dielectrophoresis-Based Microfluidic Device, BioChip J., 2020, 14, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nejad and M. Hoorfar, Purification of a droplet using negative dielectrophoresis traps in digital microfluidics, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2015, 18, 483–492 CrossRef .
M. M. Ferreira, V. C. Romani and S. S. Jeffrey, Circulating tumor cell technologies, Mol. Oncol., 2016, 10, 374–394 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. G. Adams, A. Y. L. Jiang, N. S. Mendoza, C. C. Ro, D. H. Lee, A. P. Lee and L. A. Flanagan, Label-free enrichment of fate-biased human neural stem and progenitor cells, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 152, 111982 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rohani, B. J. Sanghavi, A. Salahi, K. T. Liao, C. F. Chou and N. S. Swami, Frequency-selective electrokinetic enrichment of biomolecules in physiological media based on electrical double-layer polarization, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12124–12131 RSC .
Z. Cao, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, S. R. Dong, X. Chen, F. Bai, S. X. Song and J. X. Fu, Dielectrophoresis-Based Protein Enrichment for a Highly Sensitive Immunoassay Using Ag/SiO2 Nanorod Arrays, Small, 2018, 14, e1703265 CrossRef .
M. A. Saucedo-Espinosa, A. LaLonde, A. Gencoglu, M. F. Romero-Creel, J. R. Dolas and B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, Dielectrophoretic manipulation of particle mixtures employing asymmetric insulating posts, Electrophoresis, 2016, 37, 282–290 CrossRef CAS .
A. LaLonde, M. F. Romero-Creel, M. A. Saucedo-Espinosa and B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, Isolation and enrichment of low abundant particles with insulator-based dielectrophoresis, Biomicrofluidics, 2015, 9, 51 CrossRef .
P. L. Zhou, H. B. Yu, W. G. Yang, Y. D. Wen, Z. D. Wang, W. J. Li and L. Q. Liu, Spatial Manipulation and Assembly of Nanoparticles by Atomic Force Microscopy Tip-Induced Dielectrophoresis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16715–16724 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, Z. H. Yang, Z. Y. Zhao, Y. W. Hu and J. P. Li, The assembly of carbon nanotubes by dielectrophoresis: Insights into the dielectrophoretic nanotube-nanotube interactions, Phys. E, 2014, 56, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Tune, A. J. Blanch, R. Krupke, B. S. Flavel and J. G. Shapter, Nanotube film metallicity and its effect on the performance of carbon nanotube-silicon solar cells, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1479–1487 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Wang, B. Singh, J. H. Park, S. Rathi, I. Y. Lee, S. Maeng, H. I. Joh, C. H. Lee and G. H. Kim, Dielectrophoresis of graphene oxide nanostructures for hydrogen gas sensor at room temperature, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 194, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Wang, S. Rathi, B. Singh, I. Lee, S. Maeng, H. I. Joh and G. H. Kim, Dielectrophoretic assembly of Pt nanoparticle-reduced graphene oxide nanohybrid for highly-sensitive multiple gas sensor, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 755–761 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Sun, Y. K. Ren, L. K. Hou, Y. Tao, W. Y. Liu, T. Y. Jiang and H. Y. Jiang, Continuous Particle Trapping, Switching, and Sorting Utilizing a Combination of Dielectrophoresis and Alternating Current Electrothermal Flow, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 5729–5738 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Yang, A Review of Multifunctions of Dielectrophoresis in Biosensors and Biochips for Bacteria Detection, Anal. Lett., 2012, 45, 187–201 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Sang, Q. L. Feng, A. Q. Jian, H. M. Li, J. L. Ji, Q. Q. Duan, W. D. Zhang and T. Wang, Portable microsystem integrates multifunctional dielectrophoresis manipulations and a surface stress biosensor to detect red blood cells for hemolytic anemia, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and G. Yossifon, Combining dielectrophoresis and concentration polarization-based preconcentration to enhance bead-based immunoassay sensitivity, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9436–9443 RSC .
S. Rashidi, H. Bafekr, M. S. Valipour and J. A. Esfahani, A review on the application, simulation, and experiment of the electrokinetic mixers, Chem. Eng. Process., 2018, 126, 108–122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, P. Durkin, J. Li, T. L. Toth and X. He, Label-Free On-Chip Selective Extraction of Cell-Aggregate-Laden Microcapsules from Oil into Aqueous Solution with Optical Sensor and Dielectrophoresis, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 410–417 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sia and L. J. Kricka, Microfluidics and point-of-care testing, Lab Chip, 2008, 8, 1982–1983 RSC .
W. Waheed, A. Alazzam, A. N. Al-Khateeb and E. Abu-Nada, Multiple Particle Manipulation under Dielectrophoresis Effect: Modeling and Experiments, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 3016–3028 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Lin, G. Y. Luo, W. X. Du, T. T. Kong, C. K. Liu and Z. Liu, Recent Advances in Microfluidic Platforms Applied in Cancer Metastasis: Circulating Tumor Cells’ (CTCs) Isolation and Tumor-On-A-Chip, Small, 2020, 16, e1903899 CrossRef .
P. R. C. Gascoyne, J. Noshari, T. J. Anderson and F. F. Becker, Isolation of rare cells from cell mixtures by dielectrophoresis, Electrophoresis, 2009, 30, 1388–1398 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Nguyen and C. P. Jen, Impedance detection integrated with dielectrophoresis enrichment platform for lung circulating tumor cells in a microfluidic channel, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 121, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Zhang, T. Y. Zheng and R. Zhu, Characterization of single-cell biophysical properties and cell type classification using dielectrophoresis model reduction method, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 304, 127326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takeuchi, K. Nagasaka, M. Yoshida, Y. Kawata, Y. Miyagawa, S. Tago, H. Hiraike, O. Wada-Hiraike, K. Oda, Y. Osuga, T. Fujii, T. Ayabe, S. H. Kim and T. Fujii, On-chip immunofluorescence analysis of single cervical cells using an electroactive microwell array with barrier for cervical screening, Biomicrofluidics, 2019, 13, 044107 CrossRef .
R. Hoque, H. Mostafid and M. P. Hughes, Rapid, Low-Cost Dielectrophoretic Diagnosis of Bladder Cancer in a Clinical Setting, IEEE J. Transl. Eng. Health Med., 2020, 8, 1 Search PubMed .
H. J. Kim, D. Park, S. Y. Baek, S. H. Yang, Y. Kim, S. M. Lim, J. Kim and K. S. Hwang, Dielectrophoresis-based filtration effect and detection of amyloid beta in plasma for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 128, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
E. Iswardy, T. C. Tsai, I. F. Cheng, T. C. Ho, G. C. Perng and H. C. Chang, A bead-based immunofluorescence-assay on a microfluidic dielectrophoresis platform for rapid dengue virus detection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 95, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .
P. Han, S. Yosinski, Z. A. Kobos, R. Chaudhury, J. S. Lee, T. M. Fahmy and M. A. Reed, Continuous Label-Free Electronic Discrimination of T Cells by Activation State, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8646–8657 CrossRef CAS .
M. Di Trapani, N. Manaresi and G. Medoro, DEPArray™ system: An automatic image-based sorter for isolation of pure circulating tumor cells, Cytometry, Part A, 2018, 93, 1260–1266 CrossRef CAS .
C. Paolillo, Z. Mu, G. Rossi, M. J. Schiewer, T. Nguyen, L. Austin, E. Capoluongo, K. Knudsen, M. Cristofanilli and P. Fortina, Detection of Activating Estrogen Receptor Gene (ESR1) Mutations in Single Circulating Tumor Cells, Clin. Cancer Res., 2017, 23, 6086–6093 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pailler, V. Faugeroux, M. Oulhen, L. Mezquita, M. Laporte, A. Honore, Y. Lecluse, P. Queffelec, M. NgoCamus, C. Nicotra, J. Remon, L. Lacroix, D. Planchard, L. Friboulet, B. Besse and F. Farace, Acquired Resistance Mutations to ALK Inhibitors Identified by Single Circulating Tumor Cell Sequencing in ALK-Rearranged Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer, Clin. Cancer Res., 2019, 25, 6671–6682 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Duarte, L. Menze, G. N. Abdelrasoul, S. Yosinski, Z. Kobos, R. Stuermer, M. Reed, J. Yang, X. S. Li and J. Chen, Single ascospore detection for the forecasting of Sclerotinia stem rot of canola, Lab Chip, 2020, 20, 3644–3652 RSC .
M. H. Mohammadi, R. Obregon, S. Ahadian, J. Ramon-Azcon and M. Radisic, Engineered Muscle Tissues for Disease Modeling and Drug Screening Applications, Curr. Pharm. Des., 2017, 23, 2991–3004 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Yang, F. C. Chuang, C. K. Chen, M. H. Lee, S. W. Chen, T. L. Su and Y. C. Yang, A high-performance micromixer using three-dimensional Tesla structures for bio-applications, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 263, 444–451 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Chen, D. Gao, Y. W. Wang, S. Lin and Y. Y. Jiang, A novel 3D breast-cancer-on-chip platform for therapeutic evaluation of drug delivery systems, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1036, 97–106 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Dunne, T. Iyyanki, J. Hubenak and A. B. Mathur, Characterization of dielectrophoresis-aligned nanofibrous silk fibroin-chitosan scaffold and its interactions with endothelial cells for tissue engineering applications, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 3630–3640 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Song, G. Q. Li, X. Y. Zu, Z. Du, L. Y. Liu and Z. G. Hu, The Fabrication and Application Mechanism of Microfluidic Systems for High Throughput Biomedical Screening: A Review, Micromachines, 2020, 11, 297 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, K. L. Ho and S. K. Fan, Liver microsystems in vitro for drug response, J. Biomed. Sci., 2019, 26, 88 CrossRef .
C. C. Chen, Y. S. Chan, Y. H. Fang, Y. M. Wang and C. Y. Lee, Rapid Portable Electrical Biosensing Design With Dielectrophoresis and Its Application for Cardiac Biomarker Detection, IEEE Sens. J., 2020, 20, 8981–8989 CAS .
D. D. Galvan, V. Parekh, E. Liu, E. L. Liu and Q. M. Yu, Sensitive Bacterial Detection via Dielectrophoretic-Enhanced Mass Transport Using Surface-Plasmon-Resonance Biosensors, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 14635–14642 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kumar, W. J. Wang, J. C. Ortiz-Marquez, M. Catalano, M. Gray, N. Biglari, K. Hikari, X. Ling, J. M. Gao, T. van Opijnen and K. S. Burch, Dielectrophoresis assisted rapid, selective and single cell detection of antibiotic resistant bacteria with G-FETs, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 156, 112123 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, X. Y. Lou, T. Lu, C. Wang, J. Tang, F. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. W. Yang, Supramolecular Engineering of Efficient Artificial Light-Harvesting Systems from Cyanovinylene Chromophores and Pillar[5]arene-Based Polymer Hosts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4593–4604 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Xia, L. Wang, M. Wu, X. Sang, K. Wan, X. Zhang, X. Liu and G. Wei, Peptide-Engineered Fluorescent Nanomaterials: Structure Design, Function Tailoring, and Biomedical Applications, Small, 2021, e2005578,  DOI:10.1002/smll.202005578. .
J. Zhang, Y. Jiang, X. Xia, J. Wu, R. Almeida, S. Eda and H. C. Qi, An on-site, highly specific immunosensor for Escherichia coli detection in field milk samples from mastitis-affected dairy cattle, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 165, 112366 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Fernandez, B. J. Sanghavi, V. Farmehini, J. L. Chavez, J. Hagen, N. Kelley-Loughnane, C. F. Chou and N. S. Swami, Aptamer-functionalized graphene-gold nanocomposites for label-free detection of dielectrophoretic-enriched neuropeptide Y, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 72, 144–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barik, X. S. Chen, L. J. Maher, A. E. Warrington, M. Rodiguez, S. H. Oh and N. J. Wittenberg, Nanogap dielectrophoresis combined with buffer exchange for detecting protein binding to trapped bioparticles, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 125829 Search PubMed .
N. Yoshida and A. C. F. Perry, Piezo-actuated mouse intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), Nat. Protoc., 2007, 2, 296–304 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Simerly, D. Takahashi, E. Jacoby, C. Castro, C. Hartnett, L. Hewitson, C. Navara and G. Schatten, Fertilization and Cleavage Axes Differ In Primates Conceived By Conventional (IVF) Versus Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI), Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 15282 CrossRef .
G. Becattini, L. S. Mattos and D. G. Caldwell, A Fully Automated System for Adherent Cells Microinjection, IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., 2014, 18, 83–93 Search PubMed .

          J. Park, S. H. Jung, Y. H. Kim, B. Kim and K. I. Lee, An integrated bio cell processor for single embryo cell manipulation, in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots & Systems,  2004 Search PubMed .
N. Tsukada, K. Ken-Ichi, M. Budiman, A. Yamamoto, T. Higuchi, M. Kobayashi, K. Sato, K. Oishi and K. Iida, Development of Automated Nuclear Transplantation System, J. Mamm. Ova Res., 2002, 18, 106–109 CrossRef .
B. Cetin and D. Q. Li, Dielectrophoresis in microfluidics technology, Electrophoresis, 2011, 32, 2410–2427 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Carey, K. L. Cotner, B. Li and L. L. Sohn, Developments in label-free microfluidic methods for single-cell analysis and sorting, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2019, 11, e1529 CrossRef .
A. Salari, M. Navi, T. Lijnse and C. Dalton, AC Electrothermal Effect in Microfluidics: A Review, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 762 CrossRef .
F. Zhang and D. Q. Li, A novel particle separation method based on induced-charge electro-osmotic flow and polarizability of dielectric particles, Electrophoresis, 2014, 35, 2922–2929 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yokokawa, Y. Manta, M. Namura, Y. Takizawa, N. C. H. Le and S. Sugiyama, Individual evaluation of DEP, EP and AC-EOF effects on lambda DNA molecules in a DNA concentrator, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 143, 769–775 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramos, H. Morgan, N. G. Green and A. Castellanos, Ac electrokinetics: a review of forces in microelectrode structures, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1998, 31, 2338–2353 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hakoda and Y. Hirota, Correlation between dielectric property by dielectrophoretic levitation and growth activity of cells exposed to electric field, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2013, 36, 1219–1227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, F. Du, M. Baune and J. Thoming, Predicting and eliminating Joule heating constraints in large dielectrophoretic IDE separators, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 137, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heeren, C. P. Luo, W. Henschel, M. Fleischer and D. P. Kern, Manipulation of micro- and nano-particles by electro-osmosis and dielectrophoresis, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 1706–1709 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sato, J. F. Yao, M. Sugawara and M. Takei, Numerical Study of Particle-Fluid Flow Under AC Electrokinetics in Electrode-Multilayered Microfluidic Device, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 66, 453–463 Search PubMed .
A. Salari and C. Dalton, Simultaneous Pumping and Mixing of Biological Fluids in a Double-Array Electrothermal Microfluidic Device, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 92 CrossRef .
R. H. Vafaie and H. B. Ghavifekr, Configurable ACET micro-manipulator for high conductive mediums by using a novel electrode engineering, Microsyst. Technol., 2017, 23, 1393–1403 CrossRef .
T. Lijnse, S. Cenaiko and C. Dalton, Numerical simulation of a tuneable reversible flow design for practical ACET devices, SN Appl. Sci., 2020, 2, 305 CrossRef .
H. Y. Geng, J. Feng, L. M. Stabryla and S. K. Cho, Dielectrowetting manipulation for digital microfluidics: creating, transporting, splitting, and merging of droplets, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 1060–1068 RSC .
Q. Vo, Y. Fujita, Y. Tagawa and T. Tran, Anisotropic behaviours of droplets impacting on dielectrowetting substrates, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 2621–2628 RSC .
H. Y. Geng and S. K. Cho, Dielectrowetting for Digital Microfluidics: Principle and Application. A Critical Review, Rev. Adhes. Adhes., 2017, 5, 268–302 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. J. Edwards, C. V. Brown, M. I. Newton and G. McHale, Dielectrowetting: The past, present and future, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 36, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
R. Renaudot, V. Agache, B. Daunay, P. Lambert, M. Kumemura, Y. Fouillet, D. Collard and H. Fujita, Optimization of Liquid DiElectroPhoresis (LDEP) Digital Microfluidic Transduction for Biomedical Applications, Micromachines, 2011, 2, 258–273 CrossRef .
R. Pethig, Y. Huang, X. B. Wang and J. P. H. Burt, Positive and negative dielectrophoretic collection of colloidal particles using interdigitated castellated microelectrodes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1992, 25, 881 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, M. Sonker and A. Ros, Dielectrophoresis: From Molecular to Micrometer-Scale Analytes, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 277–295 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Laux, F. F. Bier and R. Holzel, Electrode-based AC electrokinetics of proteins: A mini-review, Bioelectrochemistry, 2018, 120, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Yan Wang	Yan Wang received his PhD from the Center for Environmental Research and Sustainable Technology, University of Bremen, Germany, in 2016. From 2017, he worked as an associate professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of the Qingdao University, China. His research interests include novel separation techniques, nanomaterials, and microfluidics.
Xiaomin Liu	Xiaomin Liu received her PhD degree from the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. She worked in the Institute of Process Engineering of Chinese Academy of Sciences from 2008 to 2018. From 2018, she started working in Qingdao University as the group leader of “Simulation and Application of Green Mediums”. She won the “National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars” in 2017 and Young Taishan Scholars of Shandong province in 2019. She mainly engages in molecular designing and molecular simulation of new solvents and green mediums.
Gang Wei	Gang Wei is currently a full professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of the Qingdao University, China. From 2007–2011, he worked as Alexander-von-Humboldt Fellow at the Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, and from 2012–2019, he worked as a senior researcher and group leader at the University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include nanomaterials, two-dimensional materials, biomaterials, supramolecular self-assembly, and biosensors. He has published 140+ papers in the peer-reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 5900 times with an H-index of 47.

 	Fig. 1  Key impact factors and their relations (arrow lines) to the tailoring design of DEP platform, in which “+” denotes a positive relation and “−” means a negative relation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Charge distribution during cell interface polarization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 
FDEP = 2πεmr3Re[fCM(ω)]∇|Erms|2	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Common microelectrodes with various geometries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  DEP device with an ionic liquid electrode: (a) microfluidic channel system in the device; (b) scheme of the experimental device; (c) ionic liquid electrode and the main channel; (d) separation mechanism of particles and cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Flow channel design: (a) schematic diagram of the microchannel used for particle and droplet separation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Contraction channel structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017 IOP Publishing. (c) Insulating column array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Frequency-hopping DEP for size-based sorting of microparticles: (a) separation of 3 μm particles from 5 μm and 10 μm particles; (b) separation of 10 μm particles from 3 μm and 5 μm particles; (c) frequency dependent Re[fCM(ω)] factor for different sized particles; (d) experimental setup. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  The flow through a microfluidic device used for the isolation of EVs: (a) schematic diagram of the microfluidic device; (b) image of the sample flow and focusing flow region; (c) constriction region; (d) and (e) fluorescent images of BxPC-3 exosomes trapped near the constriction region at different flow rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

Cylindrical interdigitated electrodes (cIDE), titanium insulated by rutile; cross-flow channel with sheath flow	AC 200Veff, 200 kHz	Fractionation of polystyrene particles	4.7 mL min−1	DEP balances with gravity at the particle levitation direction, which reduces the DEP separation efficiency	
22

Two-pair interdigitated array (TPIDA) electrodes, Indium tin oxide (ITO); capillary-sized channel, PDMS	AC 12Vpp, 4 MHz	Single cell–cell pairing	100 μL min−1	The planar structured chip with limited space for specific cell trapping and pairing confines its applicability and throughput	
23

Interdigitated, castellated electrodes; polyacetate spacer with microscope cover slip	AC 5Vpp, 10 kHz	Separate viable and non-viable yeast cells	30 mL h−1	High cell separation efficiency can only be achieved at a considerably low concentration of injected suspensions due to a steric hinderance effect, which confines the sample throughput	
26

 
3D glass-like carbon-electrode array; 1.8 mm-wide, 3.2 cm-long channel	AC 20Vpp, 300 kHz	Separate live and dead human U937 monocyte cells	1–10 μL min−1	Separation efficiency lower than 40% at flow rate of 10 μL min−1; discontinuous separation operation of viable and nonviable monocytes	
30

Interdigitated electrodes with semi-3D structure, carbon; printed with dielectric paste (screen printing)	AC 10 V, 100 kHz,	Separate yeast cells and PS microspheres	0.1 mL h−1	DEP device designed only available for the separation of biological (erythrocytes) and nonbiological (PS) particles depending on pDEP and nDEP, respectively	
31

Liquid electrode, ionic liquid, [BMIM][PF6]; PDMS channel	AC 88Vrms, 100 kHz	Separate particles and human cells	50 μL h−1	Complicated electrode and flow channel design with confined particle separation space results in very limited sample throughput	
35

Liquid metal 3D microelectrodes, galinstan; PDMS channel	AC 15 V, 20 MHz	Trap WO3 nanoparticles	20 μL min−1	The fabrication technique for 3D microelectrodes induces non-uniformly distributed microstructures with unlike sizes and heights on the substrate, which may result in uneven DEP force being generated for particle manipulation	
36

Bipolar electrode; ITO electrode arrays; parallel channels, PDMS	AC 20Vpp, 1 MHz	Separate yeast cells and PS microbeads	0.1 mm s−1	The use of a 2D actuating electrode array embedded on the bottom of the microchannel restricts the DEP working area, leading to separation of cells at low throughput	
37

Embedded electrodes (rectangle); copper; with asymmetric orifices, PDMS	AC 0–8Vpp, 100 kHz	Tunable manipulation of particles and droplets	N/A	The microchannel composed of only one pair of asymmetric orifices in between the embedded electrode may confine the effective DEP working space to the vicinity of the small orifice, thereby reducing the sample throughput	
41

Platinum electrodes; channel with ridged microstructures	DC-biased, AC 50 V, 1 kHz	Continuous-flow particle trapping and sorting	N/A	The insulated constriction channel design with high constriction ratio may result in low sample throughput and particle clogging at high concentrations in this region	
53

Plate electrode; with insulating 3D posts, PDMS	DC-biased, AC 180Vpp at 2 kHz offset by 20 VDC	Selective bacterial trapping	100 μL h−1 and 108 cells per mL	A decrease in cell trapping selectivity in the pDEP regime at high frequencies due to device limitation	
54

Interdigitated electrodes, gold; parallel channels, PDMS	FH-DEP 20Vpp, 1 MHz, 85 kHz, 1 Hz	Sorting and enrichment of particles	40 μL h−1	The use of conventional 2D interdigitated electrodes with confined channel height can hardly achieve high-throughput particle sorting	
55

Virtual electrode; linear microfluidic PDMS channel	SAW-DEP 10 MHz	Separate viable/non-viable human stromal cells	104 cells per min	The frequency tunability of the SAW-DEP device is restricted by the wavelength dependence of the generated SAW	
56

Virtual electrode; T-shaped microchannel	ODEP 8 V, 3 MHz	Isolation of high-purity CD45neg/EpCAMneg Cells	Batch, 2000 cells per test	Current ODEP device is designed only available for batch testing in laboratory-scale analysis	
57

Interdigitaded ITO electrodes; PDMS channel	AC 0–11 V, 5 Hz.	Capture and release of magnetic beads	15 μL min−1	The proposed device uses a conventional interdigitated electrode by coupling with DEP and magnetic fields for particle sorting, but only tested for sample magnetically-tagged objects rather than real biological particles	
59

Interdigitated electrodes, Au, Cr; multi-orifice channel; PDMS	MOFF-DEP AC 10Vpp, 900 kHz	Separate breast cancer cells from blood samples	54–162 μL min−1	The MOFF-DEP device is capable of sorting cells at high flow rate, but limited with relatively low sample concentration due to unoptimized structure and operating parameters	
69


 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of partial label-free cell sorting: (a) hydrodynamic separation; (b) sonic separation; (c) dielectrophoretic separation; (d) optical tweezers separation; (e) magnetic separation; (f) microfiltration technique. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Staggered electrodes with a certain tilt angle to the microchannel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH. (c and d) Classification device of shrinkage structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the nanopipette DC-iEK device for recording the ion current and particle trajectory simultaneously. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2018 Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Top-view design layout of the oDEP device; (b) working mechanism of the continuous isolation and purification of cancer cells from the magnetic microbead-bound Jurkat cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2020 Frontiers Media S.A.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Enrichment of biomolecules due to the mutual effect of negative DEP and EP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Diagram of DEP-enriched particles in an iDEP device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The assembly principle of DEP cells in the chip. Liver cells (orange) and endothelial cells (green) are arranged like sinuses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2011 Springer. (b) Using DEP to deposit graphene oxide between microelectrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Three-dimensional schematic diagram of the microfluidic device; (b) particle behavior on the electrode: under specified conditions, particle switching and sorting occur simultaneously. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

Separation	Three cells (red blood cells, white blood cells, MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells)	When the potential is 9 V–12 V, it can separate cells and prevent fluid being mixed	4 μL h−1	
21

Red blood cells and polystyrene particles	The maximum separation efficiency is 97% for a particle-to-cell number ratio equal to 1:2000	2.4 μL min−1 (4.8 × 106 cells per min)	
74

DNA molecules	Sorting efficiencies up to 92%	1.3 μL h−1	
77

Yeast cells	The efficiency is 75% at an applied AC voltage of 200 V	0.1 mL min−1	
78

Polystyrene particles and yeast cells	The separation efficiency is almost 100%	up to 9 mL min−1	
79

Capture	Single circulating tumor cells	Enable high-throughput capture of rare cells and single-cell analysis	0.1 mL h−1 (device: 39.6 mm2)	
83

18.9 mL h−1 (device: 7500 mm2)
Nanodiamonds, nanobeads, and DNA	Efficiency is near 100% at voltages as low as 0.45 V	
	
84

Nanoparticles and exosomes	Can rapidly trap nanoparticles in the close proximity of a glass nanopipette's tip by applying 10 V cm−1 DC	0.1 mm s−1	
86

Purification	Circulating tumor cells (CTCs)	Further refine the purity of cancer cells (81.6–86.1%)	1.0 μL min−1	
89

Macrophages	The purity of macrophages reached higher than 99%	0.4 μL min−1	
90

Droplets	Purification can be performed at 90% efficiency	Up to 90 μm s−1	
91

Enrichment	Polystyrene particles	The enrichment of the particles is over 150 times	2.4 μL min−1	
73

Human neural stem and progenitor cells	Astrocyte-biased cells were successfully enriched from hNSPC cultures	3.5 μL min−1 (630000 cells per h)	
93

Prostate specific antigen (PSA) versus anti-mouse immunoglobulin antibodies	Selective enrichment of PSA and anti-mouse immunoglobulin (IgG) antibodies in the 4–6 MHz range	1 mg mL−1	
94

Bovine serum albumin protein	Trapped small proteins at a bias 5 V achieved 1800-fold enrichment of bovine serum albumin protein	180-fold per s	
95

Connection and positioning	Hepatocytes and endothelial cells	Assembled liver sinusoids to predict liver toxicity	20–100 μL min−1	
10

200 nm polystyrene nanoparticles	Polystyrene particles were assembled into 3D nanostructures of various sizes and shapes	2 μm s−1	
98

CNTs	Obtained different nanotube structures via DEP assembly	CNT concentration was 1 μg mL−1	
99

Pt nanoparticles, GO	Reduced graphene oxide gas sensors were fabricated	N/A	
102

Multifunctional integration	Silica, polystyrene, and droplet	Achieved functions: particle trapping, particle-beam switching, particle sorting (efficiency over 90%)	0.1–3 μL min−1	
103

Red blood cells	Separate and detect living/dead red cells for diagnosis of diseases	0.2 μL min−1	
105

Polystyrene particles	Enhanced detection signal and important for controlling particle location	>70 μm s−1	
106


 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of continuous label-free electronic discrimination of T cells by activation state. (b) Microfluidic device design and working principle of DEP cell separation and quantification process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Liver microsystems in vitro for drug responses, in which DEP is applied for cell micropatterning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2019 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 17  DEP-based biosensing system: (a) side view of the sensing microplatform with embedded electrodes in a nanoslit and (b) aptamer-functionalized Gr-AuNs microelectrodes utilized for dielectrophoretic focusing of NPY. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the nanogap platform designed for DEP trapping of bioparticles enabling subsequent protein detection. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

Disease diagnosis	Separate rare cells from cell mixtures	The separation efficiency for CTCs in small samples is more than 90%	To enlarge the DEP chamber for the isolation of clinical samples and to achieve rapid isolation at high efficiency by minimizing side effects such as cell–cell interactions and ion leakage	
112

Enrichment and detection of lung cancer cells (A549)	A549 cells are concentrated in the center area, and its enrichment rate is over 90%	To further enhance the efficiency of DEP microchips for CTC cell enrichment at high throughput and to improve the detection sensitivity and specificity of the device	
113

Remove the matrix factors larger than the target molecules	Effective diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease by detecting impedance changes in plasma	Optimal design of the interdigitated microelectrode sensor to enhance the sample processing speed (or sample concentration), allowing rapid quantification and detection of target molecules with high sensitivity	
117

Capture and detect dengue virus	Using immunoreaction achieved rapid detection of dengue virus (5 min)	To further explore the device toward the application of real clinical samples by enhancing specificity and detection limit	
118

Distinguish activated vs naive T cells	Achieve label-free separation of cells for disease diagnosis (0.2 μL min−1)	To address the trade-off between separation sensitivity and specificity via device performance optimization and to broaden the assay range of targets to differential activation states and various phenotypes	
119

Drug synthesis and screening	Manipulate the arrangement of nanofibers	A high percentage of the aligned area was obtained for the scaffold with a fine size of fibrils and enhanced elastic modulus	Deep studies on the effects of DEP on scaffold fabrication to guide the scaffold design and manufacture for specific application	
127

Drive liver cells to move and form cell clusters	Proposed an in vitro liver microsystem for high-throughput drug screening	Development of a multifunctional liver microsystem that is capable of constructing complex tissue and tuning the microfluidics, allowing in vitro study of drug responses	
129

Biosensing	Accelerate the enrichment of particles to be detected	Amplified signal response provides a rapid and economical detection solution	Enhancement of the specificity for the proposed sensor as the current design can detect various biomarkers that present pDEP effects	
130

Increase mass transport of E. coli	The introduction of DEP enables sensitive, rapid, and specific bacterial detection	To further modify the sensing surface with multi-functional coatings in combination with DEP to achieve specific detection at low detection limits	
131

Guide the binding of bacterial cells to G-FET	Reduced the detection limit (104 cells per mL) and detection time (5 min)	Detect the target bacterial quantitatively by improved design of the biosensor parameters	
132

Enrichment of E. coli	Achieved rapid (15 s), sensitive (775 cells per mL) on-site detection of E. coli	Tailoring design of the electrodes of the sensor chip to improve DEP bacterial capturing efficiency	
135

Cell position adjustment	Control the orientation of embryonic cells	Improved cell processing speed and survival rate	The coordination of the integrated function for multiple cell manipulation using the cell processor	
141

Rotate the mouse oocytes to a specific position	Rotated at 60 deg s−1 and achieved in vitro fertilization and nuclear transfer	To allow DEP operation of oocyte position adjustment in a continuous manner	
142


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
