Exploring the modulation mechanism of the LSPR effect of Cu periodic nanosphere arrays to promote the performance of TiO 2 photoelectrodes  - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QI01430G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QI01430G
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 729-742Exploring the modulation mechanism of the LSPR effect of Cu periodic nanosphere arrays to promote the performance of TiO2 photoelectrodes

        
          
            Guo-Ying 
            Yao
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Zong-Yan 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a
aFaculty of Materials Science and Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, P. R. China. E-mail: zzy@kust.edu.cn
bMOE Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, Lehn Institute of Functional Materials, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, Guangdong, China
Received 
      11th November 2021
    , Accepted 31st December 2021First published on 31st December 2021AbstractBased on the previous exploration of the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect of isolated Cu nanospheres to enhance the photoelectrochemical performance of TiO2 photoelectrodes, this work further arranged Cu nanospheres into periodic nanosphere arrays (PNAs). The enhancement mechanism of the photoelectrochemical performance caused by the related factors of PNAs (including the type and size of the periodic cell, deposition location, and the presence of Cu2O covering) was systematically analyzed by finite-difference time-domain simulation. We demonstrate that the deposition location of Cu PNAs is the most critical determinant, followed by the size of the periodic cell (i.e. the gap between Cu nanospheres): when a Cu PNA is immersed in a TiO2 photoelectrode to a certain depth, the coupling effect between Cu nanospheres is the most effective; when the gap is less than 50 nm, the multiple scattering effect results in a significant enhancement of light absorption in the range of 380–590 nm. Due to the different coupling effect and charge transfer mechanism, hexagonal Cu PNAs easily excite higher-order LSPR modes, resulting in prominent enhancement of the local interfacial electric field; square Cu PNAs are more likely to excite the low-order LSPR modes, resulting in only limited enhancement of the local interfacial electric field. The presence of Cu2O covering of Cu PNAs shields the coupling effect, resulting in the weakening or even disappearing of the above enhancement functions. These findings provide reference research cases and theoretical data for the further development and optimal design of Cu/TiO2 composite photoelectrodes.
1. Introduction
Due to the shortage of energy supply and the deteriorating environment, solar hydrogen production technologies, which can capture solar energy and convert it into chemical energy convenient for mass storage and transportation, have attracted extensive attention in recent years. Among them, photoelectrochemical (PEC) technology plays a pioneering role because it can obtain a large amount of hydrogen from water-splitting through artificial photosynthesis.1 In the past few decades, the TiO2-based photoanode has experienced a tremendous upsurge in water-splitting, since the groundbreaking work initiated by Fujishima and Honda in 1972.2 However, due to the inherent nature of a wide-band-gap semiconductor, it can only be driven by UV-light, a tiny fraction of solar energy (∼5%). This is the main reason why the theoretical upper limit on the solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of TiO2-based PEC devices is only 2.2%.3 Therefore, various modification strategies (e.g. metal or non-metal doping,4 cocatalyst loading,5 narrow-band-gap semiconductor combining,6 and so on) were used to promote TiO2-based PEC devices to absorb visible-light, as well as minimize the recombination of photo-generated electron–hole pairs. For example, the introduction of self-doping (such as Ti3+) can significantly enhance the visible-light absorption, achieving an STH efficiency of 1.27%;4a CdTe quantum dot-sensitized TiO2 nanotube array photoelectrodes can be driven by a sunlight wavelength below 600 nm, presenting 35 times improvement for the performance of a PEC device.7
In addition to material modification, the nano design of TiO2-based PEC devices is also a feasible strategy to realize efficient solar energy conversion.8 Compared with large-size bulk materials, low dimensional materials can significantly expand the light absorption range and enhance the light absorption intensity through quantum size effects. At the same time, the transport distance of photo-generated carriers in low dimensional materials is shorter, so they can reach the reaction site in a limited lifetime, which can obviously improve the quantum conversion efficiency of TiO2-based PEC devices.9 However, the size and/or morphology regulation is not the only design approach of nanomaterials. In fact, the utilization of special physical effects of nanomaterials can also expand the light absorption range and enhance the light absorption intensity, for example, the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect of metal nanoparticles and the multiple scattering effect (MSE) of periodic nanoarrays.10
When the time-dependent electromagnetic field of incident light acts on the metal nanoparticle, the surface free electrons will be excited and generate collective oscillations. If the collective oscillation frequency of surface free electrons is equal to that of the incident light, strong resonance absorption will be produced, accompanied by significant energy absorption. Through the selection of metal composition and the modulation of the size and morphology of nanoparticles, resonance absorption can occur in a specific spectral range (such as the visible or near-infrared region). Therefore, the LSPR effect of metal nanoparticles can be beyond the light absorption generated by electronic transition based on the band structure theory, and lead to a new optical absorption approach, which can significantly improve the absorption rate of incident sunlight of TiO2-based PEC devices.11 For example, the excitation of multiple LSPR modes of Ag nanoparticles leads to broad light-harvesting for a TiO2 nanowire-based PEC device;12 the plasmonic Au nanostructures can extend the photoactivity of a TiO2-based water-splitting composite (SiO2/Al2O3/TiO2/Au nano-island film) from the UV-region to the full solar spectrum;13 the deposited Cu (or Ag) nanoparticles on the TiO2 nanotube array-based photoelectrode extend the light-absorption region and enhance the STH efficiency with long-term stability, arising from the LSPR effects of Cu (or Ag) nanoparticles.14 Moreover, the LSPR effect can also promote the separation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs through hot electron injection and local electric field enhancement, which is also an important aspect of improving the STH efficiency of TiO2-based PEC devices.15
Most of the above literature studies focus on expanding the spectral response range of the PEC absorption layer by using the resonance absorption effect of LSPR. As we know, the photons incident on the surface of the PEC device will be reflected, absorbed, and transmitted simultaneously. If the PEC absorption layer is thick enough, the transmission phenomenon can be ignored (by the way, the increase of the absorber layer thickness will definitely lead to an increase of the photo-generated carrier transport distance, which will likewise increase the combination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs). However, the reflection phenomenon has to be considered, because if the reflectivity of the device surface is too high, the energy of the photons greater than the band gap value cannot be fully absorbed, reducing the final STH efficiency. One of the effective strategies to reduce reflectivity is to trap light on the device surface, and sparse periodic nanoparticle array (PNA) is the most commonly used design method.16 Compared with randomly arranged metal nanoparticles, the deposition of metal nanoparticles with controllable and monodisperse sizes as well as uniform distribution on the surface of TiO2-based photoelectrodes is essential to optimize and design the performance of both photocurrent and novel devices.9b,17 Xu et al. reported that the light absorption and photocatalytic H2 production of Pt nanospheres with uniform dispersion are higher than those of Pt nanospheres with obvious aggregation.18 Si nanowire array shows much stronger suppression of optical reflection than the porous Si and polished Si over a wide spectral bandwidth from 300 to 1000 nm, resulting in extreme photoactivity and efficacy as PEC devices.19 The periodic array of Ag/TiO2 core–shell nanowire structures enables strong LSPR, which improves the electron generation and photocatalytic activities of the TiO2 shell.20 In addition to reducing reflection, PNAs may produce a coupling effect, which provides a new opportunity to further improve the performance of PEC devices.21 A novel Al@TiO2 heterostructured film with periodically patterned morphology exhibits enhanced light absorption within UV-Vis wavelengths, in which a naturally formed Al2O3 ultra-thin layer shows plasmonic effects towards PEC water splitting and the periodical array extends the light absorption region.22 Furthermore, compared with the disordered nanoparticles, the LSPR effects of PNA can be more easily and accurately modulated by the periodic structural parameters.23 For example, by changing the Ag PNA specific area, the light absorption peak of the VO2 film can be varied from 630 to 730 nm.24
Although the LSPR effect of precious metal nanoparticles can significantly improve the performance of TiO2-based PEC devices, the advantages of low cost and unique intrinsic properties of transition metal nanoparticles cannot be ignored. For example, the LSPR effect of Cu nanoparticles increases the hydrogen evolution rate of SiTiO3 by 5 times as much as that of Au nanoparticles.25 In the previous work, we found that the LSPR resonance absorption peak of the Cu nanosphere can be moved out of the interband transition region by adjusting the relative position with the TiO2 sphere, in which the Cu/TiO2 embedding architecture improves the PEC performance most obviously.26 Therefore, Cu nanoarrays which were loaded, embedded and immersed in the TiO2 film are considered as lone Cu/TiO2 nanoparticle variants to discuss the practical performance observed in PEC devices in this work. Subsequently, we continued to study the influence of Cu2O covering on the LSPR effect in the Cu/TiO2 composite system, because the oxidation of Cu into Cu2O is very easy to occur.27 Based on these previous works, in order to further reveal the advantages and LSPR effects of Cu nanospheres in the Cu/TiO2 composite system, we designed and optimized the combination of a Cu PNA and a TiO2 photoelectrode by numerical simulation of a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method in this article. The different configurations, arrangements, and periodical parameters of Cu PNAs and the corresponding LSPR effects on the TiO2 photoelectrodes were systematically investigated in detail. Moreover, the oxidation of Cu PNAs was further considered. The purpose of the above exploration was to obtain an effective strategy to greatly improve the performance of TiO2-based PEC devices.
2. Computational method and details
Cu nanospheres (NSs) were arranged on an anatase TiO2 planar substrate with uniform hexagonal and square periodic arrays, respectively. The hexagonal and square periods are the most basic two-dimensional close-packed cells. Furthermore, these two PNA configurations are also the most studied in the published literature.28 So, they are studied as typical representatives of Cu PNAs in this work. Based on previous research, due to the optimal LSPR effects, Cu NSs with a radius of 25 nm were selected as research objects in this work. Periodic boundary conditions were set in the x and y directions parallel to the lateral direction of the TiO2 planar substrate. Therefore, the simulation dimension of Cu PNAs only needs to take the smallest repeating unit (i.e. primitive cell). In the normal z-direction of the substrate, eight perfect matching layers are set up in order to completely distinguish the incident light, reflected light, and transmitted light. In the simulation model, the region except for Cu NSs and the TiO2 substrate was set as air with a relative permittivity of 1. The simulation model was divided into finite elements by the adaptive method, and the minimum mesh size was set as 1 nm. The planar light source with a wavelength range from 300 to 1000 nm was placed parallel to the TiO2 substrate at a distance of 200 nm. Two monitors were placed at 100 and 300 nm above the TiO2 substrate to respectively collect the incident light and reflected light. Another monitor was placed at 300 nm below the TiO2 substrate to collect the transmitted light.
In this work, in order to quantitatively describe the effect of LSPR on the PEC performance of TiO2, three performance parameters: absorption enhancement factor (a(λ)), internal quantum efficiency (IQE), and efficient enhancement factor (IQECu/IQEbare) were introduced and defined. Eqn (1) defines the factor of a(λ), to measure the absorption enhancement of the TiO2 substrate, due to the presence of the LSPR effects of the Cu PNAs. (1)where Pabs(λ) and Pinc(λ) are the power of the absorbed light and incident light, respectively. Herein, IQE is defined as the integrated value of the absorption curve of the Cu PNAs on the TiO2 substrate at 1000 W m−2 under AM1.5 illumination, as shown in eqn (2). Eqn (3) further defines the efficiency enhancement factor, which can directly evaluate the enhancement effect of the Cu PNAs on the PEC performance of the TiO2 substrate. (2) (3)where h is Planck's constant, c is the light speed, IAM1.5 is the solar spectra of AM1.5, and PCu(λ) and Pbare(λ) are the light absorption spectra of the TiO2 substrate with and without Cu PNAs, respectively.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Cu PNAs deposited at different locations
In this subsection, we carefully compared the LSPR characteristics of the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs placed at four different typical locations of the TiO2 substrate, as described in the illustration of Fig. 1: “Model A” marks that Cu PNAs are loaded onto the TiO2 substrate, in which the lower part of Cu NSs is just tangent to the surface of the TiO2 substrate. “Model B” marks that Cu PNAs are embedded into the TiO2 substrate, in which the equator of the Cu NSs just coincides with the surface of the TiO2 substrate. Model A and Model B are the so-called loading form, which is the most common form of the LSPR effect of the metal nanoparticle. “Model C” marks that the Cu PNAs are completely embedded into the TiO2 substrate, in which the upper part of the Cu NSs is just tangent to the surface of the TiO2 substrate. “Model D” marks that Cu PNAs are submerged in the TiO2 substrate with a depth of 100 nm. Model C and Model D are similar to the core–shell configuration, which has remarkable synergistic effects such as protection of instable core materials, surface functionalization construction, and effective modulation of LSPR effects for the core metal, in isolated particles. Although they are not very common in the preparation of photoelectrodes, in order to systematically study the different deposition locations of the Cu PNAs and their possible effects, it is necessary to comprehensively simulate them. From Model A to Model D, this process can be exactly simulated by the practical process of Cu PNA deposition from the surface to the bulk of the TiO2 substrate.
 Fig. 1  Calculation of the absorption curve (a and b), the absorption enhancement curve, and the absorption enhancement value under simulated AM1.5 sunlight (c and d) of the Cu hexagonal nanoarray (left) and square nanoarray (right) with different configurations. The different colored arrows in the illustration indicate the positional relationship between the spherical center of the Cu nanospheres and TiO2 substrate. 

Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the light absorption spectra obtained by numerical simulation. The simulation absorption of pure TiO2 mainly located in the UV region (<400 nm) was consistent with the experimental data.29 The Cu PNAs on the TiO2 substrate at different locations show not only similar light absorption characteristics but also their special characteristics. (1) A strong absorption peak of 300–400 nm was generated by the semiconductor intrinsic absorption of the TiO2 substrate.29 The maximum absorption intensity of the TiO2 substrate for Model A and Model B is similar to pure TiO2, while there is an obvious rise in Model C and a slight rise in Model D because Model C is closer to the surface of the TiO2 substrate. Model C and Model D show that there is much more contact with the TiO2 substrate, showing stronger absorption than that of Model A and Model B. This phenomenon is ascribed to the plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer (PIRET) triggered by Cu LSPR, that is, a nonradiative energy transfer occurring between plasmonic nanoparticles and a nearby semiconductor.8,30 (2) In the range of 400–600 nm, Cu PNAs produce a new absorption peak, which is the overlapping absorption region between the intraband transitions and interband transitions of the Cu NPs. Among them, this absorption peak of Model D is particularly prominent. (3) In the range of 600–1000 nm, there are enhanced absorption bands, which are very beneficial for the TiO2 substrate to absorb visible and near-infrared light. According to the band structure of Cu, this absorption band can be ascribed to the intraband excitation of the Cu NSs.26 As Cu PNAs gradually sink into the interior of the TiO2 substrate, this phenomenon becomes more and more obvious. According to eqn (1), Fig. 1(c) and (d) quantitatively present the effect of the Cu PNAs enhancing the light absorption of the TiO2 substrate in Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. In the range of 300–400 nm, a(λ) is almost zero, indicating that the LSPR effect of Cu PNAs has not taken effect on the TiO2 substrate. When the incident light wave is larger than 400 nm, a(λ) increases with the increase of wavelength. In other words, the LSPR effect of the Cu PNAs is gradually enhanced. Among them, Model D had the most prominent LSPR effect, while Model A had the least significant LSPR effect. The inset histogram in Fig. 1(c) and (d) is the IQECu/IQEbare of different Cu PNAs at different locations on the TiO2 substrate, which is obtained according to eqn (2). Regardless of the Cu PNA arrangements, the IQECu/IQEbare is gradually enhanced as the Cu PNAs gradually sink into the TiO2 substrate, under AM1.5 illumination. The IQECu/IQEbare of Model D is about 50 times that of Model A in the hexagonal Cu PNAs, while this multiplier value is only about 25 times in the square Cu PNAs.
Compared with all the simulated results in Fig. 1, it is obvious that the periodic cell of Cu PNA is not the key factor affecting the LSPR effect for the light absorption enhancement at 600–1000 nm. In other words, when the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs are deposited at the same location, the varying tendency of the light absorption enhancement for the TiO2 substrate is consistent. There is a slight difference: the light absorption enhancement effect of Model A and Model B in the case of the square Cu PNA is more obvious than that in the case of the hexagonal Cu PNA; while Model C and Model D present the opposite effect. When the Cu NSs are exposed outside the TiO2 substrate, the light trapping effect caused by the multiple reflections of the Cu PNAs is dominant. In this case, the arrangement of the Cu NSs in the square cell is relatively sparse than that in the hexagonal cell, so the light absorption enhancement effect of Model A and Model is more obvious in the case of the square Cu PNA. When the Cu NSs completely sank into the TiO2 substrate, the Cu/TiO2 interface dominated the LSPR effect.26 In this case, the arrangement of the Cu NSs is more close in the hexagonal cell, and the resulting interface effect is more evident, so the light absorption enhancement of Model C and Model D is more obvious in the case of the hexagonal Cu PNA. In conclusion, due to the different locations of Cu PNA deposition, the ways to change and enhance the optical properties of TiO2 photoelectrodes are also different. Model A and Model B highlight the multiple reflections and absorption between the Cu NSs to enhance light absorption, while Model C and Model D undergo LSPR resonance absorption to enhance light absorption due to the change of charge transfer caused by the change of the dielectric environment. Thus, the Cu PNA enhances the light absorption of the TiO2 photoelectrode through the MSE mechanism.
Different from the periodic cell, the deposition location of the Cu PNAs, or the contact mode between the Cu PNAs and the TiO2 substrate, shows a very prominent modulatory capacity on the LSPR effect, which becomes the first key modulation factor found in this work. In Model A, the LSPR peak is not moved out from the interband transition region, making the LSPR effect weaker in the Vis-NIR range. Halas et al. reported that the interband transition of Cu would suppress the excitation of the LSPR effect of Cu NSs.31 The LSPR effect of Cu NSs is determined by the behavior of surface free electrons. In this work, the behavior of surface free electrons is affected by two key factors, one is the density of free electrons, and the other is the dielectric environment around the Cu NSs. In Model A, Cu NSs are just in contact with the TiO2 substrate, without an interface between them, so there is almost no electron transfer between them. Moreover, the TiO2 substrate does not change the dielectric environment of the Cu NSs that are surrounded by air medium. In this case, Cu NSs are only stimulated by the incident light to produce the above limited LSPR effect. However, after Cu NSs began to deposit into the TiO2 substrate, the Cu/TiO2 interface began to form between them, and electron transfer occurred through this interface. At the same time, the partial encapsulation of Cu NSs by TiO2 means that the dielectric environment of Cu NSs is partially changed. In this case, the LSPR effect of Cu NSs can be is effectively excited.26,32 Moreover, the resonance absorption peak gradually moves out of the interband transition region. For example, the red-shift of the absorption edge of Model B in the range of 600–700 nm. In Model C, Cu NSs are completely encapsulated by the TiO2 substrate, resulting in the more prominent red-shift. Based on our previous work,26,27 in Model D, there is a strong interaction between the Cu NSs and TiO2 substrate, as this configuration is not limited by the direction of the incident light, which leads to significant LSPR resonance absorption in the Visible-Near Infrared (Vis-NIR) region of Cu NSs, and the interband transition between 400 and 600 nm is also significantly changed. It is worth noting that the strong interaction between the Cu NSs and TiO2 substrate not only changes the LSPR effect of the Cu NSs, but also changes the intrinsic semiconductor light absorption characteristics of the TiO2 substrate. That is, the absorption edge of Model C shows a red-shift, while the absorption edge of Model D shows a blue-shift, in the wavelength range of 300–400 nm.
In the practical application of PEC to water splitting, two phenomena are easily ignored: (1) in Model A, Cu NSs are densely arranged on the surface of the TiO2 substrate, which will greatly weaken the intrinsic light absorption of the TiO2 substrate to a certain extent, and (2) Cu NSs can avoid being oxidized by the encapsulation of the TiO2 substrate, so as to exert a stable LSPR effect. Similar phenomena have been recognized as a Cu@Co core–shell nanostructure.33 In conclusion, the relative position of the Cu PNAs in the TiO2 substrate is the key factor to determine the stable LSPR effect. The case of Cu PNAs embedded at a certain depth in the TiO2 substrate represented by Model D has the optimal LSPR effect, which can play an important role in PEC water splitting devices.
As mentioned above, the direction of the polarization electric field generated by free electron oscillation in the Cu NSs is parallel to the surface of the TiO2 substrate. So, the cross-section electric field distribution parallel to the surface of the TiO2 substrate can accurately reflect the local electric field enhancement generated by the LSPR effect of the Cu PNAs. As shown in Fig. 1, the Cu PNAs deposited onto the TiO2 substrates will generate multiple LSPR resonance absorption peaks in the visible-NIR region, and in this work, we have selected only the maximum local electric field enhancement for comparison. As shown in Fig. 2, the local electric field enhancement generated by the square Cu PNA is weaker than that of the hexagonal Cu PNA at all locations, which is due to the quadrupole oscillations generated in the latter. In the case of square Cu PNAs, Model A has the strongest electric field enhancement; ∼25.3 for the square Cu PNA at a wavelength of 619 nm and ∼ 42.2 for the hexagonal Cu PNA at a wavelength of 752 nm. In the contact mode of Model A, the Cu NSs are closely connected to each other without other media, so that the free electrons can travel between the Cu NSs unhindered, resulting in a significant enhancement of the local electric field at the Cu NS connection. As Cu PNAs sink into the TiO2 substrate, the electric field enhancement is weakened in the case of Model B, because the air dielectric environment between the Cu NSs is partially replaced by the TiO2 substrate. From Model B to Model D, the local electric field enhancement generated by the Cu PNAs gradually becomes larger again, as the dielectric environment between the Cu NSs is gradually replaced by the TiO2 substrate. Finally, the local electric field enhancement of the square Cu PNAs reaches ∼22.2, while the local electric field enhancement of the hexagonal Cu PNAs reaches ∼30.1. Although the local electric field enhancement of Model D is not as large as that of Model A, the sufficient contact between the Cu NSs and TiO2 substrate can provide more channels for the rapid transfer of photo-generated carriers, which can obviously promote the separation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs in the TiO2 substrate; also the absorption of TiO2 could be enhanced by close Cu PNAs due to the PIRET effect. In general, the Cu PNAs sunk into the TiO2 substrate can effectively stimulate the LSPR effect: enhancing the light absorption of TiO2 in the UV and Vis-NIR region and enabling the effective separation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs under the strong local electric field intensity.34 The above effects are most prominent in Model D of the hexagonal Cu PNAs.
 Fig. 2  Simulation of the electric field enhancement distribution in the normal direction of incident light of the Cu square nanoarray and hexagonal nanoarray at different positions in the TiO2 substrate. 
3.2 Submerged Cu PNAs with different period sizes
In the analysis of the previous subsection, we found that Cu PNAs are fully immersed in the TiO2 substrate at a certain depth (i.e., Model D), and the LSPR effect it produces is the most favorable for the enhancement of the PEC performance of TiO2-based PEC devices. This subsection will further examine the effect of the period size (i.e., primitive cell) of the Cu PNAs on the LSPR effect based on the above findings. Because the radii of Cu NSs are fixed at 25 nm in this work, to give a more intuitive picture of the effect of the presence of gaps between the nanospheres, we use the “Space” or “S” labeled in Fig. 3 to define the Cu PNA period size. As shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), the trends of the light absorption spectra of the TiO2 substrates after the submerging of the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs are seen to be basically similar as the period size changes: (1) the changes of the PIRET effect on the intrinsic semiconductor light absorption of the TiO2 substrates are very distinct in a smaller period compared with the absorption intensity of pure TiO2 substrates. Only when the gap between Cu NSs is larger than 100 nm, there is a slight red shift of its absorption band edge. (2) The strong LSPR resonance absorption peak between 400 and 600 nm starts to weaken when the gap between the Cu NSs is larger than 10 nm, while this LSPR resonance absorption peak decreases sharply when the gap between the Cu NSs is larger than 50 nm; this LSPR resonance absorption peak almost disappears when the gap between the Cu NSs reaches 200 nm. (3) The LSPR resonance absorption peak located between 600 and 1000 nm and shifted out of the interband absorption region of the Cu NSs and gradually decreased with an increase of the gap, and the absorption band edge is first blue-shifted and then red-shifted.
 Fig. 3  Calculation of the absorption curve (a and b), the absorption enhancement curve and the absorption enhancement values simulated under AM1.5 sunlight (c and d) of the Cu hexagonal PNA (left panel) and square PNA (right panel) with different period sizes in the TiO2 substrate. 
The main reason for the above phenomenon is the shift of multipole effects, a drop of TiO2 absorption induced by the PIRET effect, and the gradual weakening of the light MSE between the Cu NSs all originated from the larger period with the Cu NSs. When the gap between the Cu NSs reaches 200 nm, the LSPR effect of the Cu PNAs is close to the LSPR effect of the isolated Cu NSs submerged in the TiO2 substrate.26 The main difference between the absorption curves of the hexagonal Cu PNAs and square Cu PNAs is reflected in the different intensities of the LSPR resonance absorption peaks in the 600–750 nm regions: i.e., the LSPR resonance absorption peaks of the square Cu PNAs are higher than those of the hexagonal Cu PNAs. This is due to the fact that the dipole effect between the Cu NSs has a more pronounced effect on the LSPR resonance absorption peak shifting out of the interband leap region of Cu than the quadrupole or octupole effect. From the light absorption enhancement curves in Fig. 3(c) and (d), the IQECu/IQEbare gradually decreases as the gap between the Cu NSs increases, especially the light absorption enhancement effect in the near-infrared region (700–1000 nm) is substantially weakened. The difference between the two is mainly reflected in the different magnitude of the light absorption enhancement effect weakening: the hexagonal Cu PNA shows a nearly linear decay, while the square Cu PNA shows a step-like segmental decay. This is because the hexagonal Cu PNA undergoes a process from octupole, to quadrupole, to the dipole, and finally to disappearance as the period increases, while the square Cu PNA undergoes a process from quadrupole, dipole to disappearance. The trends of the light absorption properties of the hexagonal Cu PNA and square Cu PNA with a period size are basically similar, which again indicates that for Cu PNAs at specific positions in the TiO2 substrate, the structure of the primitive is not the key factor for light absorption enhancement, and the gap size between the Cu NSs is the second key factor found in this work.
In the above subsections, we have found and discussed that the local electric field resonance modes generated by the excitation of the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs are different. Metal nanospheres can be viewed as aggregates of free electrons, and the LSPR effects produced by photoexcitation have multi-order resonance features, commonly dipole, quadrupole, and octupole oscillations.35 Venugopal et al. found that if nanoparticles are induced by the LSPR effect, a local electromagnetic field with inhomogeneous polarization and high-order resonance modes (such as quadrupole and octupole oscillations) will be excited, by studying the relationship between the size and morphology of nanoparticles and the width and positions of the resonance absorption peaks.36 Moreover, the presence of these high-order oscillatory modes red shifts the LSPR resonance absorption peaks.37 For metal NSs with radii much smaller than the wavelength of the incident light, the electromagnetic field exerted by the incident light can be said to be uniform throughout the metal NS, so that isolated individual metal NS do not undergo multi-order resonance. Moreover, some high-order resonance modes are prohibited for symmetric metal NS excited by linearly polarized light at normal incidence.38 However, it is possible to excite multi-order resonances by changing the period structure and size of the PNAs. This is because the change in the period structure and size can change the contact and interaction patterns between the metal NSs so that inhomogeneous polarized electromagnetic fields will be generated in specific directions when excited by incident light with a defined polarization direction.
In the comparison between the closely spaced (S = 0 nm) hexagonal Cu PNA and square Cu PNA with different configurations above, we have found that the modes of the local electric field are different: the hexagonal Cu PNA is excited with octupole oscillations, while the square Cu PNA is excited with quadrupole oscillations. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the period size change versus the local electric field enhancement for Model D. The results are similar to the phenomena observed by Venugopal et al.: as the Cu PNA period decreases (i.e., the gap between the Cu NSs decreases), the Cu NSs are excited to produce high-order resonance modes.36 This is because the period change of the Cu PNA makes the distribution of free electrons in the whole Cu PNA/TiO2 system change accordingly, resulting in different oscillation modes; multipole effects in the local electric field are more easily observed when the interactions and charge transfer between the Cu NSs are more pronounced. Therefore, with the gradual increase of the Cu PNA period size (i.e., the gap between the Cu NSs increase), it can be observed that the multipole resonance effect produced by the excitation of the Cu PNAs gradually decreases; the multipole resonance effect almost completely disappears when S = 50 nm, and the LSPR effect produced by the excitation of the Cu PNAs has been completely consistent with the LSPR effect produced by the isolated Cu NSs when S = 100 and 200 nm.
 Fig. 4  The strongest electric field enhancement distribution of the hexagonal and square Cu PNA with different spacing. 
In addition to the above-discussed resonance mode changes of the local electric field, the enhancement effect of the local electric field is also observed to be different from Fig. 4. In the hexagonal Cu PNAs, the local electric field between the Cu NSs is most pronounced when S = 2 nm, while in the square Cu PNAs, the local electric field between the Cu NSs is most pronounced when S = 8 nm. In other words, as the period size of the Cu PNAs increases, the enhancement effect of the local electric field shows a trend of first enhancing and then weakening. This simulation result indicates that the Cu PNAs do not excite stronger local electric fields as they are arranged more closely, but leave a certain gap to excite stronger local electric fields. To provide clearer details of the strongest local electric field enhancement, the local electric field enhancement distributions of the xy cross-section and xz cross-section corresponding to the strongest LSPR peaks for the hexagonal Cu PNAs with a gap of 2 nm and the square Cu PNAs with a gap of 8 nm, respectively, are shown in Fig. 4 and 5. This simulation presents a clear difference: the hexagonal Cu PNA has a prominent anisotropy in the z-direction (i.e., there is a significant difference in the local electric field enhancement above and below the Cu NSs along the incident light direction), while the anisotropy of the square Cu PNA in the z-direction is not significant. Since the Cu NSs are totally surrounded by the TiO2 substrate, the free electrons within them all move in a coherent manner in response to the charge polarization process on the particle surface, thus making the scattering in the forward and reverse directions to be equal. However, when the Cu NSs are arranged in a periodic array, the resonance modes generated by the excitation of Cu PNAs are different due to the different interactions and electron transfer between the Cu NSs, and thus some of the resonance modes in the Cu PNAs will enhance the backscattering, such as the quadrupole mode.39 For the hexagonal Cu PNAs, it is the quadrupole resonance mode that is generated by excitation at S = 2 nm, so the backscattering is significantly enhanced, which is detrimental to the light absorption of the TiO2 substrate. In spite of this, it should be emphasized that the adverse effect is limited because the local electric field enhancement above and below the Cu NSs does not differ by more than 1 in value. As for the square Cu PNAs, at S = 8 nm, it is excited and the dipole resonance mode is generated, and the backscattering is not obvious, so the effect on the light absorption of the TiO2 substrate is small.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of the local electric field enhancement of the hexagonal and square Cu PNA (with S = 2 or 8 nm respectively) from the parallel direction and the normal direction of incident light. 
3.3 Embedded Cu PNAs with Cu2O covering
The primary challenge for Cu nanoparticles is their chemical stability because they can be easily oxidized to Cu2O after exposure to oxidizing conditions to remove their metallic properties in the practical application of PEC to water splitting.40 Model A and Model B are necessary configurations to discuss the surface of Cu NSs oxidized into Cu2O covering. Our previously published work found the LSPR resonance absorption peak gradually shifts out of the interband transition region with the increase of Cu2O covering thickness, and the absorption intensity also increases significantly. At the same time, the presence of Cu2O covering provides new interfaces to enhance the fast transport of photo-generated carriers. Considering the different effects of Cu2O convering together, we found that Cu NS has the most significant potential to enhance the PEC performance of TiO2 photoelectrode when it is exposed to TiO2 substrates with a Cu2O covering thickness of 5 nm.27 On the other hand, when the Cu NSs are completely encapsulated by a TiO2 photoelectrode (i.e. Model C and Model D in Fig. 1), the oxidation process is difficult to occur. Therefore, in this subsection, we further discuss the effect of the presence of the Cu2O covering on the LSPR effect of Cu PNAs based on the above findings. The constructed model is shown in the inset in Fig. 6, which is based on “Model B” in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 6  Calculation of the absorption curve (a and b), absorption enhancement and simulated absorption enhancement values under AM1.5 sunlight (c and d) of the hexagonal and square Cu/Cu2O PNAs, which are embedded in the TiO2 substrate with different spacing. 
As shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), the presence of the Cu2O covering significantly changes the light absorption characteristics of the Cu PNA/TiO2 composite system, in comparison with the results of Model B in Fig. 1: (1) the light absorption curves of the hexagonal PNAs and square PNAs and their variations are almost identical except for the specific IQECu/IQEbare values. (2) The well-defined LSPR resonance absorption peak in the region of 600–750 nm is obviously red-shifted when the gap between the Cu NSs is smaller than 50 nm, while shows a distinctive blue-shift when the gap is larger than 50 nm. (3) Almost all the LSPR resonance absorption peaks in the wavelength region larger than 750 nm disappeared. (4) In the wavelength region above 400 nm, the light absorption curve weakens significantly overall when the Cu NS gap is greater than 50 nm. On the other hand, in comparison with the results of Model D in Fig. 3, the change in the LSPR effect caused by the change in the period size of the Cu PNAs is not prominent, even with the presence of Cu2O covering. These simulation results show that the Cu2O covering significantly weakens the coupling interaction, electron transfer, and scattering effect between the Cu NSs, which leads to the suppression of LSPR effects generated by the periodic factors in the Cu PNAs.
It is well known that Fano resonance is occasionally introduced in the single nanosphere, which is characterized by the splitting of the resonance peak to form double peaks, due to the asymmetry of the structure and the appropriate angle of incident light.41 In the published work, we also found that the presence of a certain thickness of Cu2O covering on the surface of Cu NS produces the Fano effect.27 However, there is no resonance peak splitting in the periodic Cu/Cu2O PNAs in the present work, which means that it is necessary to further manipulate the angle of the incident light or the configuration of Cu/Cu2O PNAs to explore the existence of Fano effects.
Compared to these two periodical structures, the absorption enhancement curve of the square PNAs is higher than that of the hexagonal PNA, as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). The manifested difference between the absorption enhancement curve of the oxidized and the non-oxidized Cu PNA is that the absorption enhancement caused by the LSPR effect does not increase linearly but shows a convex hull shape in the 700–1000 nm range. With the period increasing, the convex hull becomes smaller and smaller, until the space is 200 nm. The presence of the Cu2O covering does indeed weaken the LSPR effect of the Cu PNAs for the absorption enhancement, though the Cu2O covering also slightly enhances the absorption in the range of 400–550 nm due to its intrinsic absorption. As far as the large-period is concerned, the absorption enhancement is enhanced only in the range of 600–700 nm, which is similar to single Cu NSs. Judging from the absorption enhancement value (IQECu/IQEbare) of simulated sunlight, compared with the non-oxidized Cu PNA, it is reduced by half. Also Cu PNAs are observed to be compounding with TiO2 in a loading and embedding manner, which may affect the light absorption of the TiO2 substrate.
The maximum local electric field enhancement of the hexagonal and square PNAs is exciting when the space is 0 nm, as shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen from the xy cross-section of the electric field in the normal direction of the incident light that the hot spot appears in the contact area between Cu and Cu2O, showing that a dipole oscillation is triggered. This also shows that an individual LSPR peak from the absorption curve is derived from the dipole oscillation of the Cu/Cu2O PNA. The cross-section of the electric field along the incident light direction suggests that the presence of the Cu2O covering causes the Cu hexagonal PNA to respond to backscattering, which is observed by the color change of the electric field intensity. Moreover, the effect of enhancing the light absorption of TiO2 by forwarding scattering is also not observed. As opposed to the Cu hexagonal PNAs, the largest electric field generated by the Cu/Cu2O square PNAs is relatively strong in the same space, which is more than twice.
 Fig. 7  The strongest electric field enhancement distribution of the hexagonal and square Cu/Cu2O PNAs, which are embedded in the TiO2 substrate without spacing. 
For the direction of electron transfer, Park et al. used a photoconductive atomic force microscope to observe that the local photocurrent at the boundary of the gold nanoprism is higher than that inside the gold nanoprism, which is consistent with the electric field enhancement region at the boundary of the triangular gold nanoprism simulated by the FDTD method.42 Thereby, the hot electrons generated by the Cu core can be transferred to the semiconductor side through the hot spot. There are hot spots between Cu and Cu2O, which further shows that more electron transfer occurs at the Cu/Cu2O interface than at the Cu/TiO2 interface. In terms of the Cu/Cu2O square PNA, the hot spot appears in the region where the three phases of Cu, Cu2O, and TiO2 are in contact, as shown in Fig. 7. This may be due to the tendency of the Cu/Cu2O square PNA to trigger dipole oscillations, thus exciting only one of the generated LSPR resonance absorption peaks. Compared with the Cu/Cu2O interface, there are more bright spots on the Cu/TiO2 interface, indicating that there are more hot electron transfer channels in the Cu/TiO2 interface.
Regardless of the Cu/Cu2O hexagonal or square PNA, the Cu core is tightly wrapped by Cu2O and TiO2, so that the photo-generated holes generated by the Cu core are restricted to the Cu core and cannot be used for the catalytic reactions. Moreover, the photo-generated holes generated by TiO2 and Cu2O will also be transferred to the Cu core due to the built-in electric field and cannot be utilized. The rapid oxidation reaction may not occur in these special configurations. However, a rapid reduction reaction will occur, such as the decomposition of water and other catalytic reactions using electrons. Although there is a 10 nm-thickness Cu2O covering between the Cu NSs, which is destined to affect the excitation of Cu's LSPR effect, the presence of Cu2O covering can improve the light absorption around the wavelength of 500 nm and provide a new interface for the separation of photo-generated carriers and more reactive sites for the reduction reaction. Although the presence of Cu2O covering produces the above possible enhancement effect, the coupling effect of Cu PNA is weakened or even disappears because it shields the interaction between the Cu NSs, and therefore the oxidation of Cu PNAs should be avoided in practice.
3.4 Possible pathways for Cu PNAs to promote the PEC performance of the TiO2 photoelectrode
Compared with the LSPR effect of the isolated Cu NSs, the analysis of the above simulation can reveal that the LSPR effect produced by the Cu PNAs deposited on the TiO2 photoelectrode is significantly different, leading to the different pathway to promote the PEC performance of TiO2 photoelectrode. Thus, it is very necessary to further analyze the possible pathway and the underlying mechanism of Cu PNAs to enhance the PEC performance of TiO2 photoelectrodes. Compared to the simulation results (including the expansion of the spectral response range and the enhancement of the local electric field), we believe that depositing Cu PNA onto the TiO2 substrate at a certain depth of Model D is the optimal configuration to enhance the performance of TiO2 photoelectrodes. So, in this subsection, we address these photoelectrodes represented by Model B and Model D and provide the schematic diagram of the mechanism in Fig. 8, respectively.
 Fig. 8  The proposed promoting mechanism: (a) the absorption spectra of Model D with the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs; (b) the strongest local electric field of Model D; (c) the charge transfer of Model D as a photocathode; (d) the absorption spectra of Model B with no oxidation and oxidation; and (e) the charge transfer of Model B as a photocathode and (f) the charge transfer of Model B coated in Cu2O covering as a photocathode. 
In Fig. 8(a), the spectral response curves of different arrangements with special gaps were selected and compared. On the spectral response curves, it can be clearly seen that the light absorption of the Cu PNA/TiO2 composite photoelectrodes is divided into three well-defined regions: the intrinsic absorption of TiO2 that was enhanced by the PIERT effect dominates in the region of wavelengths less than 380 nm, the strong MSE between the Cu NSs dominates in the region of wavelengths 380–590 nm, and the LSPR resonance absorption of Cu NSs dominates in the region of wavelengths greater than 590 nm. In the first two regions, the effects of the periodic structure of the Cu PNA on light absorption are not significantly different, i.e., the light absorption curves and their variation patterns of the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs/TiO2 composite photoelectrodes are consistent. When the gap between the Cu NSs is larger than 50 nm, the MSE and LSPR effects are together significantly weakened and tend to be consistent with the light absorption characteristics of the isolated Cu NS/TiO2 composite photoelectrode. The LSPR effects of the hexagonal and square Cu PNA/TiO2 composite photoelectrodes differ in detail in the third region. Because the interactions and charge transport between the Cu NSs in the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs are different, it causes different high-order LSPR resonance modes. While the LSPR resonance absorption peak of the hexagonal Cu PNA/TiO2 composite photoelectrode is weak between 600 and 750 nm, the LSPR resonance absorption peak between 600 and 750 nm is well defined for the square Cu PNA/TiO2 composite photoelectrode. But hexagonal Cu PNAs excited higher LSPR modes than square Cu PNAs, and the hexagonal Cu PNA can maximally produce a local electric field enhancement of about 32 times, while the square Cu PNA can maximally produce a local electric field enhancement of about 18 times, as shown in Fig. 8b. The working principle of a PEC cell utilizing a Cu PNA immersed at a certain depth into the TiO2 photocathode is shown schematically in Fig. 8c. Solar light generates a large number of hot electrons and holes in the Cu PNA because of the LSPR effect. Then these hot electrons would overcome the Schottky barrier at the Cu/TiO2 interface which is about 0.57 eV and stay in the TiO2 photocathode together with photoelectrons with the valence of TiO2 and continuously participate in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2↑).26 The remaining hot holes and holes in the valence band of TiO2 conversely flow into the anode/photoanode where they react with the H2O molecule to drive the oxygen evolution reaction (OER, 2H2O + 4h+ → O2↑ + 4H+) under a negative bias voltage. Moreover, the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs will be more effective at a lower bias voltage due to the addition of the local electric field of Cu PNAs. And Cu PNAs were set in TiO2 inside, which would be able to avoid contact under oxidizing conditions, and also enhance conductivity between TiO2 and ITO, which is beneficial for rapidly transferring photoholes. Comparing the simulation results (including the expansion of the spectral response range and the enhancement of the local electric field), the deposition of Cu PNAs onto the TiO2 substrate at a certain depth of Model D is a promising configuration to enhance the HER performance as a photocathode.
In terms of Cu PNA exposure in air, the spectral response curve of Model B is different from Model D, one of the most obvious differences is that SE contribution has been disappeared in Fig. 8d. However, the Cu2O covering layer, which is coated in the Cu PNA, contributed to its intrinsic absorption in the SE region. Although the LSPR of the Cu PNA did not reach its limit in Model B, this configuration also has the potential as a photoanode in PEC cells due to the flowing direction of the photoelectrons. This transfer pathway for the photoelectrons can also be obtained by analyzing the different band structures as shown in Fig. 8e and f, respectively. If Cu PNA is able to maintain its metallic properties, Cu PNA and TiO2 would both be excited to photocarriers under solar light illumination, and the induced hot electrons by the LSPR effect of Cu can firstly transfer to the conduction band of TiO2 and then accompany with photoelectrons generated by the VB of TiO2 to the cathode where they react with H+ to carry through the HER under a positive bias voltage. The electrons flow away from Cu, which will inevitably cause Cu to be gradually oxidized in an oxidizing environment to form Cu2O or even CuO covering. The LSPR of the Cu PNA will dramatically weaken which is half the LSPR effect of the non-oxidized Cu PNA. The Cu PNA meanwhile served as a “charge transfer bridge” which can accept these photoelectrons that came from the VB of Cu2O under a positive bias voltage. If the number of electrons flowing away and the holes consumed at the Cu2O end can reach a balance, then the oxidation would be terminated, and the entire system will maintain a dynamic balance. Therefore, how to maintain the dynamic balance between the two is a great challenge to make use of the above effects.
4. Conclusions
Based on the previous exploration of the LSPR effect of isolated Cu nanospheres to enhance the PEC performance of TiO2, this work arranged Cu nanospheres into periodic arrays and used FDTD simulation to systematically analyze and compare their periodic structure, period size, deposition location in TiO2 photoelectrodes, and the presence of oxidized Cu2O covering on the surface. The modulation rule and underlying mechanisms of the Cu PNAs to promote the performance of TiO2 photoelectrodes were further revealed through in-depth studies of the optical absorption spectra, optical absorption enhancement, and local electric field enhancement. The simulation results show that the deposition location of the Cu PNA is the primary key factor, followed by the period size (i.e., the gap between the Cu nanospheres). The coupling effect of the periodic array is most effective when the Cu PNA is deposited at a certain depth in the TiO2 photoelectrode. When the gap between the Cu nanospheres is less than 50 nm, the light absorption enhancement due to the MSE is particularly prominent in the region of 380–590 nm, while the light absorption enhancement due to LSPR resonance absorption dominates in the wavelength region larger than 600 nm. The hexagonal Cu PNA favors the enhancement of light absorption in the NIR-IR region, but there is some backscattering in it; the square Cu PNA favors the enhancement of light absorption in the visible region, and there is no backscattering. Due to the different interactions and charge transfer between the Cu nanospheres, the hexagonal Cu PNAs are more likely to excite high-order LSPR modes and thus have a more pronounced enhancement of the local electric field at the interface, while the square Cu PNAs can only excite dipole LSPR modes and thus have a limited enhancement of the local electric field. The oxidized Cu2O covering on the surface will weaken the interaction between the Cu nanospheres and thus shield the coupling effect of the Cu PNAs, making the above phenomenon weaker or even disappear. Furthermore, the sinking of the Cu PNA into the TiO2 substrate at a certain depth is a promising configuration to enhance the HER performance as a photocathode, and the deposition of half of the Cu PNA onto the TiO2 substrate also has potential as a steady photoanode to participate in the OER. These findings provide reference research cases and theoretical data for the further development and optimal design of Cu/TiO2 composite photoelectrodes.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11964015).
References
X. Xia, J. H. Pan, X. Pan, L. Hu, J. Yao, Y. Ding, D. Wang, J. Ye and S. Dai, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 405 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347 RSC .

  (a) Z. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhu and P. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15637 RSC ; 
  (b) D. J. Mowbray, J. I. Martinez, J. M. G. Lastra, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 113, 12301 CrossRef .

  (a) M. Ye, J. Gong, Y. Lai, C. Lin and Z. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15720 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Ma and S. Gao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Xia, W. Wu, T. Yu, X. Xie, C. van Oversteeg, H. C. Gerritsen and C. de Mello Donega, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8350 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Pan, J. Zhang, X. Jia, Y.-H. Ma, X. Zhang, L. Wang and J.-J. Zou, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 253 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Gao, H.-B. Li, W.-T. Sun, Q. Chen, F.-Q. Tang and L.-M. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7531 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, P. Choudhary, A. Kumar, P. H. C. Camargo and V. Krishnan, Small, 2022, 18, 2101638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Yu, H. Liu, M. Zhu, Y. Li and W. Li, Small, 2021, 17, 1903378 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Tang, W. Qiu, S. Xiao, Y. Tong and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 660 RSC .

  (a) S.-S. Yi, X.-B. Zhang, B.-R. Wulan, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3128 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Mascaretti, A. Dutta, Š. Kment, V. M. Shalaev, A. Boltasseva, R. Zbořil and A. Naldoni, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805513 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-Y. Yao, Q.-L. Liu and Z.-Y. Zhao, Prog. Chem., 2019, 31, 516 Search PubMed .
T. G. Ulusoy Ghobadi, A. Ghobadi, F. Karadas and E. Ozbay, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Abed, M. AlMheiri, F. Alexander, N. S. Rajput, J. Viegas and M. Jouiad, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 180, 228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sang, S. Zhang and Y. Gao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 25486 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef CAS .
K. N'Konou, L. Peres and P. Torchio, Plasmonics, 2018, 13, 297 CrossRef .
W. Wang and L. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807275 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, M.-Y. Qi, L. Yuan, X. Fu, Z.-R. Tang, J. Gong and Y.-J. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Peng, X. Wang and S.-T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 163103 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J.-Y. Jung, Z. Guo, S.-W. Jee, H.-D. Um, K.-T. Park and J.-H. Lee, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Eom, J.-Y. Jung, Y. Shin, S. Kim, J.-H. Choi, E. Lee, J.-H. Jeong and I. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 226 RSC .

  (a) R. Tellez-Limon, F. Gardillou, V. Coello and R. Salas-Montiel, J. Opt., 2021, 23, 025801 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Guo, Z. Li, K. Marcus, S. Navarro, K. Liang, L. Zhou, P. D. Mani, S. J. Florczyk, K. R. Coffey, N. Orlovskaya, Y.-H. Sohn and Y. Yang, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 621 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S.-Q. Li, P. Guo, D. B. Buchholz, W. Zhou, Y. Hua, T. W. Odom, J. B. Ketterson, L. E. Ocola, K. Sakoda and R. P. H. Chang, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 163 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Shi, D. Franklin, S. Koul, A. Kushima and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 400 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. B. Ross, C. A. Mirkin and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 816 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Kim, J. Jeon, Y. Zhang, D. S. Wie, J. Hwang, S. J. Lee, D. E. Walker, D. C. Abeysinghe, A. Urbas, B. Xu, Z. Ku and C. H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, J. Li, Z. Xiong, L. Cao, Y. Fu and Z. Gao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110303 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, A. Fu, X. Chen, L. Liu, L. Ren, L. Tong and J. Ye, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 166 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Yao, Z.-Y. Zhao, Q.-L. Liu, X.-D. Dong and Q.-M. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 208, 110385 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Yao and Z.-Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8567 RSC .

  (a) A. K. Yagati, T. Lee, J. Min and J.-W. Choi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 40, 283 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Miao, W. Hu, Y. Jing, W. Luo, L. Liao, A. Pan, S. Wu, J. Cheng, X. Chen and W. Lu, Small, 2015, 11, 2392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Gellé, T. Jin, L. de la Garza, G. D. Price, L. V. Besteiro and A. Moores, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 986 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Ihara, M. Miyoshi, Y. Iriyama, O. Matsumoto and S. Sugihara, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 42, 403 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Tam, N. K. Grady and N. J. Halas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, M. Low, S. Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lai, W. Xiao, S. Yi-Wang, T. Song, B. Long, S. Yin, A. Ali and G. J. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 129295 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Lu, W. Xu, J. Ma, Y. Li, X. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7155 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Wu, W. Xu, X. Wen, Y. Zhong, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 345 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Sandu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 905 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. Qin, X.-T. Kong, Z. Wang, A. O. Govorov and U. R. Kortshagen, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2881 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Sannomiya, A. Konečná, T. Matsukata, Z. Thollar, T. Okamoto, F. J. García de Abajo and N. Yamamoto, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Venugopal, V. S. Gerasimov, A. E. Ershov, S. V. Karpov and S. P. Polyutov, Opt. Mater., 2017, 72, 397 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, A. Manivannan and S. Kasiviswanathan, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2012, 29, 3317 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, H. Yu, K. Ueno, A. Kubo, Y. Matsuo and H. Misawa, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Diukman and M. Orenstein, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2628 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. P. LaGrow, M. R. Ward, D. C. Lloyd, P. L. Gai and E. D. Boyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Marimuthu, J. Zhang and S. Linic, Science, 2013, 339, 1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) B. Luk'yanchuk, N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. T. Chong, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Chen, L. Shao, T. Ming, K. C. Woo, Y. C. Man, J. Wang and H.-Q. Lin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, H. Lee and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Calculation of the absorption curve (a and b), the absorption enhancement curve, and the absorption enhancement value under simulated AM1.5 sunlight (c and d) of the Cu hexagonal nanoarray (left) and square nanoarray (right) with different configurations. The different colored arrows in the illustration indicate the positional relationship between the spherical center of the Cu nanospheres and TiO2 substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  Simulation of the electric field enhancement distribution in the normal direction of incident light of the Cu square nanoarray and hexagonal nanoarray at different positions in the TiO2 substrate.	 

 	Fig. 3  Calculation of the absorption curve (a and b), the absorption enhancement curve and the absorption enhancement values simulated under AM1.5 sunlight (c and d) of the Cu hexagonal PNA (left panel) and square PNA (right panel) with different period sizes in the TiO2 substrate.	 

 	Fig. 4  The strongest electric field enhancement distribution of the hexagonal and square Cu PNA with different spacing.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of the local electric field enhancement of the hexagonal and square Cu PNA (with S = 2 or 8 nm respectively) from the parallel direction and the normal direction of incident light.	 

 	Fig. 6  Calculation of the absorption curve (a and b), absorption enhancement and simulated absorption enhancement values under AM1.5 sunlight (c and d) of the hexagonal and square Cu/Cu2O PNAs, which are embedded in the TiO2 substrate with different spacing.	 

 	Fig. 7  The strongest electric field enhancement distribution of the hexagonal and square Cu/Cu2O PNAs, which are embedded in the TiO2 substrate without spacing.	 

 	Fig. 8  The proposed promoting mechanism: (a) the absorption spectra of Model D with the hexagonal and square Cu PNAs; (b) the strongest local electric field of Model D; (c) the charge transfer of Model D as a photocathode; (d) the absorption spectra of Model B with no oxidation and oxidation; and (e) the charge transfer of Model B as a photocathode and (f) the charge transfer of Model B coated in Cu2O covering as a photocathode.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
