Si-based materials derived from biomass: synthesis and applications in electrochemical energy storage  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA06934H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA06934H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22123-22147Si-based materials derived from biomass: synthesis and applications in electrochemical energy storage

        
          
            Meijuan 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaotian 
            Guo
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Liu
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Huan 
            Pang
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, Jiangsu, P. R. China
bGuangling College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, Jiangsu, P. R. China
cCollaborative Innovation Center of Nonferrous Metals of Henan Province, Henan Key Laboratory of High Temperature Structural and Functional Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang 471023, P. R. China. E-mail: huanpangchem@hotmail.com; panghuan@yzu.edu.cn;  Web: http://huanpangchem.wix.com/advanced-material
Received 
      27th June 2019
    , Accepted 7th August 2019First published on 11th September 2019AbstractThe attractive theoretical specific capacity of silicon (Si) makes it a strong candidate for use in electrochemical energy storage materials. Si exists in organisms in the form of silicic acid or SiO2, which is converted into simple Si or SiOx (0 < x < 2) by a simple reduction reaction. The synthesis of nano/micro structure Si-based materials from biomass with a high Si content has become an ideal method for their conversion into functional materials. Thus, the recovery of value-added products such as rice husks (RHs) and diatoms for the development of a green and economical way for the valorization of biomass material wastes has gained significant attention. In this review, the synthesis of Si-based materials derived from biomass and their applications in the field of electrochemical energy storage were summarized and the effect of their morphology was emphasized. Finally, in view of the application prospects and challenges of the biomass-derived Si-based materials, appropriate improvement schemes were proposed and prospects for the future practical applications of these materials were discussed.Huan PangHuan Pang received his PhD degree from the Nanjing University in 2011. He is now a university distinguished professor at the Yangzhou University. From the past 10 years, his group has been engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially MOF-based materials. He is on the editorial board of FlatChem and is the managing editor of EnergyChem, Elsevier. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Energy Environ. Sci., and Advanced Materials with 7800 citations (h-index = 53). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.
1. Introduction
Since the early 21st century, energy and environmental issues have become increasingly serious. Many countries have devoted their scientific and technological strength and funds towards vigorously developing green energy. As high-performance electrochemical technologies are being currently developed, energy storage materials with high efficiencies and high densities have become a hotspot among researchers.1–8 In addition, some phenomena such as the overgrowth of algae and the burning of RHs and wheat straw are very common. The improper use and treatment of a large number of biomass materials have aggravated resource depletion and environmental pollution problems. The development and efficient utilization of biomass and its derivatives have become a hot topic in biofuels, electrocatalysis, and other fields. Li et al.9 chose low-cost lignocellulosic biomass (corn fibers, cotton stalks, soybean hulls, and sugarcane bagasse) fibers to produce n-butanol through microbial fermentation, which is a potential alternative fuel. The nitrogen-doped graphene-like mesoporous nanosheets synthesized from okara have been proven to be non-enzymatic electrochemical biosensors for vitamin C.10 Fontes-Candia et al.11 prepared superabsorbent food packaging bioactive cellulose-based aerogels derived from A. donax waste biomass via a simple freeze-drying method. Meanwhile, a growing number of efforts have been concentrated on the effective utilization of raw biomass materials for the extant applications in energy storage.12 Biomass mainly consists of animals, plants and microorganisms (Scheme 1a).13 As the core element of organisms is carbon, organisms are commonly used as the carbon source (such as ants,14 bacteria,15 and wisteria pod16) after activation and applied in the field of electrochemical energy storage. Wang et al.17 reviewed the application of biomass-derived renewable carbon materials in electrochemical energy storage with a detailed classification of biomass; the relevant research has attracted sustained interest. For instance, the coconut shell-derived activated carbon–sulfur composite synthesized by Manoj et al.18 delivered high capacity and excellent cycling stability. As an advanced electrode material for supercapacitors (SCs), the 3D porous graphitic carbon material derived from bamboo char synthesized by Gong et al.19 exhibited an excellent electrochemical performance. Interestingly, research indicates that substantial amounts of Si are also generally stored in biomass materials; for example, the content of silica (SiO2) in RHs is nearly 20 wt%.3
 Scheme 1  The brief content sketch of this review. 
Recently, Si has become a hot topic for researchers due to its two superior properties that are often neglected: a low working potential and high theoretical capacity (4200 mA h g−1).20,21 In addition, considerable natural abundance, environmental safety, and the above-mentioned advantages have improved the reliability of Si for use as an electrode material.22–24 Interestingly, the unique orderly, delicate and complex structures of organisms created by nature can be reproduced naturally but cannot be reproduced by the existing manufacturing technologies.25–28 Therefore, obtaining Si-based products will be a prevalent research trend.29 Using a biogenic SiO2 source instead of a traditional Si source to obtain pure Si and its derivative materials can significantly and comprehensively benefit the economy and environment.29
As an excellent semiconductor material, Si provides an ideal platform in the field of SCs. SiC nanomaterials have become promising electrode materials for SCs due to their high specific surface area and excellent thermal stability.30 Si nanowire arrays have a ultrahigh electrode surface area, which results in significant increase in capacitance density.31 Furthermore, core–shell SiNWs/PEDOT@PPy synthesized by Zhou et al.32 delivered specific capacitance of 106 mF cm−2. Si has also been used in LIB applications. However, in the process of alloying/dealloying Si with lithium, the equilibrium lithium–silicon alloy can achieve a maximum lithium–silicon concentration ratio (Li22Si5) when Si is completely lithified, which leads to the dramatic volume expansion of Si (>300%).33 Si is severely crushed by mechanical stress during charging and discharging, and the continuous formation of an unstable solid electrolyte interface (SEI)34–37 results in rapid capacity loss and poor cycling performance, thus greatly limiting the commercial applications of Si in LIBs.38,39 So far, a variety of measures have been taken to deal with these challenges. The first strategy involves adjusting the morphology of Si.40–43 Among these morphologies, some special and ingenious structures (such as porous structures and hollow structures) provide abundant voids, which can improve the mechanical strength, thus allowing these materials to adapt to volume changes.44 The natural and unique porous structures in biomass materials such as bamboo leaves, reed leaves, and RHs are highly desirable. Nano-crystallization can reduce the particle size, shorten the transport path of Li+ and electrons in the phase and alleviate the change in the absolute volume.45–49 Another effective strategy is to uniformly mix Si particles with active or inert materials.50–57 The formation of a composite means that the particles of the active materials are evenly dispersed in the lattice of inert or active materials that act either as a buffer, skeleton, dispersant, or conductive material. To maintain the integrity of the structure during charging and discharging, the composite should be devoted to ameliorating the mechanical strength and flexibility of the materials. Coatings can be used as soft media to flexibly adapt to volume collapse and improve the transfer motion performance.57 By coating a layer of carbon on the surface of the Si particles, the overall conductivity and particle dispersibility of Si can be improved. In addition, electrolytes cannot contact Si directly because of the carbon barrier.58–64 Furthermore, compared with ordinary carbon coatings, heteroatomic carbon materials have a better electron transfer rate. Due to the synergy between the heteroatoms and the carbon materials, the resulting heteroatomic carbon materials exhibit an improved SC electrochemical performance compared to single doped materials.65 In addition, compounding Si with metal oxides or performing the in situ growth of silicates on an SiO2/C substrate is also an effective method to improve the performance of Si-based materials.
To the best of our knowledge, only a few papers about Si-based materials for applications in energy storage have been published. For instance, Zhang et al.66 reviewed the recent progress in the preparation of porous Si and nano-Si for use as electrode materials in lithium-ion batteries using various Si precursors; they found that porous Si and nano-Si permit larger volume changes during rapid charge–discharge because of the advantages of pores and nanostructures. These Si precursors include bulk-sized Si (e.g., Si wafers and Si microparticles), SiO2 (e.g., natural plants, sand, etc.), gaseous Si-based sources (e.g., SiH4, Si2H6, etc.), liquid Si sources, and elemental Si. Shen67 reviewed the recent research progress in using RH-derived Si-based materials in energy and environmental functional materials from the perspective of synthesis and applications. RHs can be converted into biofuels by pyrolysis and gasification and can be further converted to renewable biofuels under the action of RH-derived catalysts. Similarly, Sun et al.68 emphatically introduced a unique three-dimensional layered porous structure of diatoms, summarized the development of the composite materials used in SCs, batteries, and solar cells, and introduced new concepts. As shown in Scheme 1, from the perspective of energy development, environmental protection, and full utilization of resources, this work reviews the synthesis of Si-based materials from biomass, which is used as an Si precursor, and the applications of these materials in electrochemical energy storage. Scheme 2 shows the recent research status of Si and its composites in electrical energy storage applications.
 Scheme 2  (a) Cylindrical diagrams for different kinds of Si-based materials derived from biomass for LIBs and SCs. (b) Percentage pie diagrams for Si-based materials derived from biomass in various electrochemical energy storage applications. 
2. Common Si-containing organisms
Biomass materials have been used as renewable resources since a long time. To this day, converting organisms into thermal energy via combustion and transforming these organisms into biofuels using the reprocessing technology are two of the most common techniques. A growing number of efforts have been devoted to the development and utilization of biomass-based materials and their derivatives.65,69,70 Some previous studies have shown the potential of some renewable natural by-products, such as RHs, bamboo leaves, sugarcane, and sage, for use as electrical energy storage materials.12,71–74 First, the common feature of these organisms is that they are rich in Si. Furthermore, after simple treatments, such as low-temperature calcination, the biomass inherits the original three-dimensional and multi-level structure, thus yielding materials with rich layered pores.75 Most of the reactions used to extract biomass to yield Si-based materials avoid high temperatures, and the most common method is a metal reduction reaction. The so-called metal thermal reduction process uses reducing metals, such as Mg and Al, as reducing agents; because it uses a low process temperature and the by-products are easy to remove, this method is widely used in the reduction of SiO2.43,76,77
Bamboo is considered as a “natural Si reservoir”3 and mainly consists of leaves and stems (Fig. 1a). The distribution of SiO2 in bamboo is not uniform; the content of SiO2 in bamboo increases from the roots to the leaves. Due to the differences in the geographical environments and varieties of bamboo, the content of biogenetic SiO2 in dried bamboo leaves is approximately 13–41 w%.78 As shown in Fig. 1b, bamboo leaves have fascinating biological structures, including complex nanostructures; these nanostructures include parallel vascular and fibrous bundles and tightly arranged bamboo cells.79 The 3D mesoporous C–SiO2 architectures obtained by the simple calcination of bamboo leaves maintain the native micro/nanostructures inherited from the wrinkles on the surface of bamboo leaves.65 Bamboo leaves are used as Si sources to manufacture silicate composites, which exhibit excellent latent capacities in SCs. Bamboo charcoal is rich in minerals and has pores and a specific surface area of more than 300 m2 g−1; thus, it has high adsorption capacity. Bamboo charcoal materials exhibit attractive porous properties. Fig. 1c shows the apparent 3D ordered pore structure (with pore size distribution of 20–30 μm) associated with microtubules.3
 Fig. 1  (a) Bamboo; (b) 3D mesoporous C–SiO2 architectures derived from bamboo leaves after calcination; (c) SEM images of Bamboo charcoal; (d) RHs; (e) nano-SiO2 derived from RHs; (f) SEM characterization of diatomite frustule fragments with unique geometries; (g) SEM images of sugarcane bagasse; (h) SEM images of 3D microstructure of SiO2 derived from reeds. (a) Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission.3 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (e) Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. (f) Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (h) Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. 
RHs are one of the most common residues in agricultural production and are also a renewable biomass Si source preferred by researchers (Fig. 1d).80 Statistics show that 1/6th of the annual global rice production (where the annual global rice produced amounts to 60 billion tons) accounts for RH production, and the output is increasing each year.81,82 Additionally, SiO2 accounts for ∼20 wt% of RHs.82 Traditionally, rice husk is treated by incineration or landfilling, which occupy large areas of fields, release large amounts of greenhouse gases, and greatly burden natural agricultural environments.83 Moreover, rice absorbs silicic acid from soil and converts it into SiO2 during natural rice growth. Hydrated amorphous SiO2 grows uniformly on the cell wall through natural deposition.76,84Fig. 1e confirms that the natural nanoscale porous structure is well maintained in RH-derived SiO2.85
Bioorganisms such as diatoms and sponges are experts in the use of a variety of cellular and biochemical processes to produce biological and species-specific SiO2 nanostructures that use biopolymers in environmental conditions.86 Single-cell algae diatoms are one of the most prominent creations of bio-fabricated 3D microstructures and have ordered nanopore and nanostructure patterns.87 Diatomaceous earth is mainly composed of ancient remains and its chemical composition mainly includes SiO2, which can be represented as SiO2·nH2O. Similar to that of an RH cell wall, amorphous SiO2 is also a major component of a diatom's cell wall, conferring the cell wall with notable transport, mechanical, and catalytic properties.86,88 A diatom consists of a series of diatom cell membranes with different morphologies. A typical diatom structure is a hexagonal honeycomb structure (Fig. 1f) as well as a slender palisade-like structure.89 The phytoliths formed by SiO2 in these organisms function as a layer that protects against potential biological and abiotic threats. The leaf sheath of bagasse has significantly different morphologies; for example, some phytoliths are bifoliate, while others have porous fiber morphologies (Fig. 1g).90Fig. 1h shows the 3D microstructure of reed leaf-derived SiO2 associated with microtubes (where the diameter is ∼3.0 μm) obtained via simple calcination.43
As shown in Scheme 1b, in addition to some reported biomass-derived Si sources (sugarcane, RHs, bamboo, horsetail, etc.) used in electrochemical energy storage, a number of potential Si sources remain to be discovered, including corn stalks,91 sponges,92 and cassava periderm.93
3. Synthesis of Si and its derivatives derived from biomass
The extraction and recombination of most biomass Si-based materials go through three processes. First, Si oxides are extracted from the selected Si-rich biomass by means of calcining, ball-milling, microwaving, etc. During calcination, the biomass materials can be removed, while the required SiO2 can be retained. Calcination is carried out in a certain atmosphere, which depends on the target product. To obtain single Si or SiOx, the reaction is usually carried out in air or in an O2 atmosphere. Gu et al.95 found that at the same pyrolysis temperature, the purity levels of nano-SiO2 prepared in a CO2/O2 atmosphere were higher than those of the material prepared in an N2/O2 atmosphere. The size of SiO2 NPs increases as the calcination temperature increases. The results show that the particle size is affected by the tendency of the sample to agglomerate, which may occur due to the Brownian motion.96,97 On the one hand, when the temperature used to pyrolyze RHs increases, the carbon content decreases, which improves the purity of SiO2. On the other hand, a very high temperature is not conducive for breaking the Si–C bond; thus, some carbons are retained and accordingly, the proportion of SiO2 NPs is reduced.98 This leads to the collapse of the biomass structure and the dissolution of SiO2, thus affecting the morphology and properties of the resulting material. Therefore, the choice of temperature is of great importance. Furquan et al.99 developed and ameliorated a fast and effective (only five minutes) method to obtain high-purity nano Si powder by microwave heating a mixture of sand and magnesium at 800 °C. Furthermore, a carbon-coated Si NP-electrochemically stripped graphene nanocomposite film was prepared by rapid microwave irradiation.100 Sustainable microwave-assisted synthesis (MAS) has attracted considerable attention for synthesizing Si because it is environmentally friendly, highly efficient, and energy saving.90 High-energy ball milling has been widely used to process synthetic powders because of its advantages of simplicity and high efficiency. Additionally, the surface area and volume of samples are regulated during ball milling.101 The nano/micro-structured Si obtained after ball milling showed a better electrochemical performance.102 For the first time, Kashyout et al.103 achieved all the architectures of a nano-porous Si powder by combining alkaline anisotropic chemical etching and ball milling techniques. Beyond that, the surface coating thickness could be readily manipulated by controlling the milling duration.102
Si is also extracted from SiO2 by means of metal thermal reduction and the metal reductants are superior to carbon as they can prevent Si products from being contaminated by carbon-related impurities at lower temperatures. Low-temperature reduction is beneficial because it is easier to operate and the large surface area of SiO2 particles is retained, making the product responsive to the subsequent leaching treatments. The effectiveness of porous Si depends largely on its surface area, pore diameter, pore volume, crystallinity, and morphology. The thermal reduction of metals has attracted considerable attention because of its ability to synthesize porous Si directly from cheap precursors; Lai et al.104 found that magnesium still exhibited an excellent reduction performance at its melting point and at higher temperatures. On the contrary, Al could only effectively reduce the SiO2 NPs above the melting point and at higher structural temperatures, but the resulting particles retained better morphology than the particles achieved using Mg as the reductant. Calcium cannot reduce SiO2. Due to the excellent conservation of structural features by the metallothermic reduction of frustules,105–107 the synthesis of Si-based materials using this method was investigated.87,108 Magnesium and aluminum are inexpensive, effective, convenient, and efficient for removing the by-products of reduction; thus, these elements are usually chosen as reducing agents.109 After the magnesiothermic reduction of Si, the extraction of Si from the products requires the removal of by-products, including unreduced SiO2, MgO, and Mg2SiO4. Most of the magnesium compounds are removed by HCl; unrefined Mg2SiO4 and unreduced SiO2 can be removed by a mixture of HF and CH3COOH109 and then washed with water or an alkaline solvent to achieve the desired pH.
Finally, Si was doped by hydrothermal and smearing methods to obtain the target product and then, SiO2 could be directly compounded.
3.1 Synthesis of Si derived from biomass

3.1.1 Synthesis of Si derived from biomass. 
Porous Si is usually prepared by the template method. The internal pores of Si can reserve space for volume expansion and relieve the mechanical stress inside the material. Porous Si materials have micropores, mesopores, macropores, hollow structures, pore-grade pore structures, etc. The type and distribution of pores, porosity, and pore size have a great influence on the material properties.
The preparation of porous Si electrode materials by the magnesiothermic reduction of bio-SiO2 is universal. The magnesiothermic reduction of porous SiO2 is a common method used to prepare porous Si anode materials. Shi et al.110 used RHs as the Si source to prepare porous Si, which maintained the primary intrinsic and unique nanostructure of RHs. The morphologies of the synthesized Si products can vary by changing the ramp rate of magnesiothermic reduction. When the ramp rate decreases from 5 °C min−1 to 1 °C min−1, the obtained Si-JHR-1 material, which has a diameter of approximately 20 nm (Fig. 2b), maintains fairly good structural integrity inherited from SiO2-JHR and has higher purity compared to Si-JHR-5 (Fig. 2a). In addition, as shown in Fig. 2c, the HRTEM image depicts a crystal spacing consistent with the Si (111) plane. The sample size can be controlled by purposefully changing the calcination temperature. Azadeh et al.29 successfully synthesized nanostructured porous Si that was extracted from an RH precursor by means of calcination and a magnesium thermal reaction. Different sized intermediates were synthesized via regulating the temperature of calcination and the yield of Si was up to 90%, which was substantially higher than the yield produced by other SiO2 sources. When the temperature was increased to 900 °C, the surface of the SiO2 particles melted because of the presence of some metal oxides (Fig. 2d). Therefore, an RHA-700-3 material with a diameter of approximately 10 nm was chosen as the next reactant and was prepared at 700 °C (Fig. 2e). In addition to conventional calcination treatments, the microwave-assisted metallothermic reduction (MW-MR) process combines the advantages of the two individual processes; it was used to further promote the development of a 3D bonded porous Si network and obtain high-quality samples with an aperture of 50–80 nm and wall thickness of ∼23 nm. The MW-MR technology has been used by Praneetha et al.90 First, SiO2 was extracted from the biomass waste (e.g., RHs, bagasse, and bamboo stalks) by a rapid microwave technology (within 30 min) and then, a metallothermic reduction process was adopted to prepare Si at 650 °C. Reductive gases were not introduced in the whole reduction process. From the comparison shown in Fig. 2f and g, it is obvious that the commercial Si fragments prepared by laser thermal decomposition do not display porous structures and the size distribution is 100–200 nm. However, SiRH prepared by MW-MR maintains an obvious 3D interconnected uniform porous network structure. Fig. 2h shows the simple process of magnesio-milling used to obtain RH-derived Si with porous morphology (with a pore size of 50–200 nm), as synthesized by Cho et al.111 According to Fig. 2i and j, the size of SiRH synthesized by this process is larger than that obtained from conventional calcination-assisted metallothermic reduction processes, which use relatively high temperatures.
 Fig. 2  (a) Flow chart for the preparation of nano-Si from porous SiO2 derived from RHs by magnesiothermic reduction. (b, c) SEM and HRTEM images of Si-JHR-5; (d) RHA-700-3; (e) higher magnification of HR-SEM micrographs of TR-Si. (f, g) SEM images of commercially agglomerated pristine Si and nanoporous Si derived from RHs via the MW-MR process. (h) A schematic diagram for Si production by the reduction of SiO2 obtained from RHs. (i, j) SEM and TEM images of SiRH; the top inset shows the lattice and the bottom inset shows the FFT pattern. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. (d, e) Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f, g) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (h, i, j) Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2 Synthesis of Si/carbon (Si/C) derived from biomass. 
Obviously, the organic carbon components of natural biomass containing Si are often destroyed in the process of crystallizing Si. Carbon-based materials can be flexible, have regular shapes, and are applicable in energy storage applications; thus, they are favored by researchers in the development and preparation of materials.112–115 Ordered mesoporous carbon has a channel width between 4 and 6 nm, a lower ion-transfer resistance, higher diffusion path (0.5–1 nm), and smaller particle size (1–2 nm) than activated carbon. Therefore, the carbon material obtained from either biomass or chemical sources can function as a modifier, which can be fully utilized in the modification of biomass-derived Si-based materials.116
The combination of Si and carbon can be divided into two parts. In one method, biomass is directly calcined with Si and the carbon elements derived from biomass materials. In the other method, these materials are prepared via coating and other means after successfully extracting Si from the biomass materials. Lin et al.116 reported the synthesis of a porous Si@C composite using bamboo leaves as both the Si and C sources via a simple baking treatment and molten salt strategy (Fig. 3a), which can be categorized into the first abovementioned category. Unlike other Si reactions, for instance, the reactions using high temperatures, the complete process was controlled at 450 °C, and the temperature (200 °C) during the molten AlCl3 reaction was stable enough to avoid the formation of highly stable SiC. Fig. 3b clearly exhibits the porous structure of micro-particles with an average pore size and pore volume of 7.2 nm and 0.065 cm3 g−1, respectively. Campbell et al.89 reported the simple synthesis of nano-silicon (nano-Si) via the efficient magnesiothermic reduction of SiO2-based frustules present in diatomaceous earth (diatomite, DE), and this step was followed by a CVC C-coating step to synthesize C-coated nano-Si; the first step in this process belongs to the second abovementioned category, while the carbon layer modification step belongs to the first category. Note that the larger Si NPs are covered with a well-defined amorphous oxide surface layer, as shown in Fig. 3c. The unique structure of the diatomite appears as a bright spot. Fig. 3d confirms that nano-Si retains the integrity of the frustule-like structure and remains orderly arranged in a hexagonal honeycomb shape with different-sized apertures. As can be seen in Fig. 3e, there is an obvious boundary between the carbon layer (with a thickness of ca. 5 nm) and the Si NP. The hollow structures are famous among researchers for their large surface areas119 and low densities. Additionally, these hollow structures are hard to obtain due to the difficulty in forming a stable interface. Gao et al.117 successfully synthesized Si hollow spheres via constructing a stable interface artificially derived from diatoms. Si nucleates gradually and grows on the carbon shell during reduction, thus forming core/shell nanostructures. Fig. 3f shows the hollow spheres with an Si–C–Si layer shell. Si hollow spheres with multiple layers can be obtained via a similar process (Fig. 3g) and this structure is depicted in Fig. 3h. Liu et al.44 reported the fabrication of a 3D porous Si-based anode derived from reed leaves via the traditional calcination-assisted magnesiothermic reduction process. Fig. 3i shows the folded and undulating microstructures of the calcined reed leaves. The inset shows the existence of abundant holes, and these holes occur because the region from which the biomass is obtained is rich in organisms that release large amounts of gases during calcination and remove the impurities by leaching with HCl. Additionally, Fig. 3j reveals that even the eventually as-prepared black carbon-coated Si retains the original skeleton morphology of the reed leaves. As can be seen in Fig. 3k, the 3D structure consists of 2D ordered nanosheets or nanonets with abundant pores. As shown in Fig. 3l, Wang et al.118 prepared SiO2 by the pyrolysis of dried bamboo leaves using a scalable method and then prepared ultrafine Si NPs (with a size of 5–8 nm) by the magnesiothermic reduction process using NaCl as the heat-clearing agent (to prevent SiO2 from melting and Si NPs from agglomerating at a high temperature); then, Si@C@RGO nanocomposites were prepared by further layer-by-layer assembly. Note that the Si NPs coated with carbon can be uniformly encapsulated in an RGO nanosheet network, as shown in Fig. 3m. Fig. 3n shows the encapsulation of the final product, which further confirms the successful formation of the Si@C/RGO nanocomposites.
 Fig. 3  (a) Process chart for synthesizing porous Si@C anode using bamboo leaves as Si and carbon sources; (b) TEM images of the porous Si@C composite; (c, d, e) TEM images with different magnifications of Si NPs with clear hexagonal honeycomb-shaped frustule-like structures inherited from diatoms; (f) TEM images of Si hollow spheres that are prepared by reducing C-coated SiO2 spheres, followed by acid etching; (g) TEM images of SiO2@C@SiO2@C after reduction; (h) the diagrammatic sketch of SiO2@C@SiO2@C; (i) high-magnification SEM image of the 3D highly porous and wrinkled hierarchical structure retained from reed leaves; (j, k) SEM images with different magnifications of the obtained 3D highly porous C-coated Si, where the inset shows the clear porous microstructure; (l) process diagram of extracting ultrafine Si NPs from dead bamboo leaves for preparing Si@C@RGO composites; (m, n) SEM and HR-TEM images of Si@C/RGO nanocomposites. (a, b) Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c, d, e) Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (f, g, h) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (i, j, k) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (l, m, n) Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Synthesis of other materials. 
MnO2 has attracted significant attention because it is environmentally friendly, naturally abundant, and inexpensive. Le et al.87 fabricated a unique 3D Si-diatom@MnO2 material via producing Si diatoms from diatomite (SiO2), followed by the deposition of MnO2 nanosheets (Fig. 4a). Before modification with MnO2, the diatom exhibited a uniform aperture size of ∼380 nm, and the distribution of the MnO2 nanosheets became denser as the hydrothermal time increased. Fig. 4b and c show the change in the morphology of Si-diatom@MnO2, which transitions from nanosheets to nanorods after a re-heating treatment. The SEM image of the Si-diatom@MnO2 nanorods (Fig. 4c) indicates the successful conversion of nanosheets (Fig. 4b) to nanorods via the heat treatment process. Additionally, it has been proven that Si can stay stable at such a high temperature.114 Choi et al.108 synthesized a macroporous Si/Al2O3 composite via a two-step metallothermic reaction; a schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 4d. Fig. 4e shows the porous structure of SiO2 with abundant pores; the pore diameter is 500 nm and the length is between 5 and 10 μm. Fig. 4f shows that the composite material of Si/Al2O3, which is synthesized by the thermite reaction of SiO2, maintains the integrity of the original porous structure. The morphology of Si–Al-7-3, which is composed of 70 wt% Si and 30 wt% of Al2O3, retains the original structure because of the exothermic reaction (Fig. 4g). In addition to metal oxides, graphene is also used in the Si matrix composites. Wong et al.120 synthesized a binder-free RH-based Si–graphene composite by using RHs as the Si source. Fig. 4h and i show that Si NPs are encapsulated in a carbon matrix, which ameliorates the interface contact between the two materials, and the crystallinity of the Si NPs is well preserved. The combination of Si-based materials and heteroatoms has become a trend. Zhang et al.80 first reported a simple electrospray method to successfully synthesize Si/nitrogen-doped carbon/carbon nanotube (SNCC) nano/micro hierarchical structured spheres using RHs as the Si source. Si NPs were first added to the carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to prepare the SNCC precursor, which was further carbonized during the electrospray process to obtain SNCC spheres (3.2 ± 0.8 μm), as shown in Fig. 4j. Fig. 4k and l vividly show that the Si NPs are inserted into CNTs while being uniformly wrapped in the substrate.
 Fig. 4  (a) The synthesis flow chart of Si-diatom@MnO2; the enlarged images describe the pore structure of the two morphologies. (b) SEM images of Si diatom@MnO2 nanosheets after 24 h and (c) Si diatom@MnO2 nanorods. (d) Flow diagram for the preparation of macroporous Si/Al2O3 composites (Si–Al-5-5). (e, f, g) SEM images of bare porous SiO2 particles, Si–Al-5-5 composite after aluminothermic reduction reaction, and Si–Al-7-3 with macroporous structure. (h, i) SEM and TEM images of the RH-Si NPs–rGO composite paper. (j) Chart for the carbonization process of SNCC precursor. (k, l) SEM and TEM images of SNCC spheres. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e, f, g) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (h, i) Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (j, k, l) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 

3.2 Synthesis of monox (SiOx) derived from biomass
SiO2 was obtained by calcining the biomass in a specific atmosphere (N2, Ar, CO2, etc.) for the first time and then reacted with a reducing agent to form SiOx.
Xu et al.79 extracted SiO2 from abandoned bamboo leaves and combined it with carbon to form 3D hierarchical porous SiO2–carbon nanocomposites (SiO2–C/NCs) by assembling SiO2–C nanosheets piece by piece. Fig. 5a shows the synthesis process and a structural schematic of the products. It is clear that the natural hierarchical porous structure derived from the bamboo leaves is well maintained in SiO2–C/NCs (Fig. 5b and c). Various types of the crystallographic phases of SiO2 have been synthesized by Nowak et al.121via the calcination of diatoms in a CO2 atmosphere at 900 °C. Fig. 5d shows SiO2 with regular square voids before milling. The inset demonstrates the abundant holes covering SiO2, which can significantly improve the active surface area. The preparation of this porous nanomaterial does not require a complicated process, which once again highlights the advantages of biomass materials. The images of SiO2 after milling show particles with sizes up to 5 μm, rectangular shapes, and cube-like structures. The milling technology is expected to enhance the active surface area (Fig. 5e).
 Fig. 5  (a) Flow chart for the preparation of SiO2–C/NCs. (b, c) SEM images of the 3D scalariform hierarchical porous structure of SiO2–C/NCs. (d, e) SEM images of carbonized diatoms before and after the milling procedure. (f) Schematic of the synthesis process of the SiOx/C composite. (g, h) SEM and TEM images of the SiOx/C composite. (i, j) SEM images of the SiO2 powder obtained from HCl-leached (h-silica) and water-rinsed (w-silica) rice husk. (k, l) SEM images with high magnification of h-silica and w-silica. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e) Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2017, Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry. (f, g, h) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (i, j, k, l) Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The selection of reductants is also an important condition for the reduction of SiO2 to obtain SiOx. Cui et al.124 chose Al as the reducing agent instead of Mg because Al does not react with Si, resulting in Si loss, and penetrates into the carbon matrix to react with SiO2. Ju et al.122 synthesized nano SiOx@C via two-step calcination, as shown in Fig. 5f. Step one involves the carbonization of RHs under 450 °C and step two involves the synthesis of SiOx/C under 900 °C. Fig. 5g shows no significant difference after second calcination, depicting that the material has a certain high temperature resistance. This advantage comes from the structural stability of biomass protoplasts. The enlarged TEM image of the SiOx/C composite, shown in Fig. 5h, illustrates that SiOx with a size in the range of 10–50 nm (as labelled with a red circle) is uniformly distributed on the carbon substrate (as labelled with a yellow circle).
The effect of solvent on the morphology and structure of the product was also investigated. Xing et al.123 treated the SiO2 powder extracted from RHs with hydrochloric acid (HCl) and deionized water; for simplicity, these SiO2 extractions are recorded as h-silica and w-silica, respectively. There is no obvious difference between the two types of SiO2 samples, as shown by the lower magnification SEM images (Fig. 5i and j), which both show corrugated and schistose structures. However, further magnification of the SEM images shows that SiO2 treated with hydrochloric acid has regular morphology and size distribution of approximately 25 microns (Fig. 5k), while the product treated with HCl is much larger than the product treated with water (Fig. 5l). In addition, the specific surface area of h-silica is 213.2 m2 g−1, while that of w-silica is only 4.2 m2 g−1.
3.3 Synthesis of silicate derived from biomass
Silicate is a type of compound composed of Si, oxygen, and other elements. Layered alkaline silicate is a kind of hydrated layer silicate composed of silicate layers having different thicknesses and charge-compensated alkaline cationic interlayers.125 Here, we introduced cobalt, nickel, zinc, and manganese silicates, explored the similarities and differences in their syntheses, and compared their morphologies.
As shown in Fig. 6a, Li et al.65 have successfully grown ultrathin Co2Si2O5(OH)4 microporous flakes having 3D architectures on mesoporous carbon frameworks by calcining and hydrothermally treating mesoporous carbon frameworks. In addition, nanoflowers assembled by ultrathin Co3Si2O5(OH)4 nanoflakes were uniformly grown on a 3D porous C–SiO2 substrate (Fig. 6b). The TEM images show that the nanoflakes have layered features. Additionally, the lamellar space between the layers is approximately 1.2 nm (Fig. 6c). Similarly, Wang et al.94 synthesized Ni3Si2O5(OH)4 with a layered structure by a similar calcination-assisted hydrothermal method using bamboo leaves as the precursor, as shown in Fig. 6d. Although both Co3Si2O5(OH)4 and Ni3Si2O5(OH)4 exhibit layered structures, Ni3Si2O5(OH)4 grows orderly on the base without clustering into flowers, and the thickness of the layers is larger than that of the Co3Si2O5(OH)4 layers (Fig. 6e). The TEM images show that C–NiSi-3 (where the Ni/Si ratio is 0.5/1) is composed of a hierarchical porous structure inherited from C–SiO2, in which the Ni3Si2O5(OH)4 layers uniformly grow on it (Fig. 6f). The length and width of the layers are about 150–250 nm and 130–230 nm, respectively. Zhang et al.75 explored the effect of the ratio of Zn to Si in the precursor on the species and morphology of the product by tuning the Zn/Si ratio. The results showed that no zinc silicate was found using a low Zn/Si ratio (Zn/Si = 0.5/1), while other metal zinc silicates and oxides were formed at higher Zn/Si ratios (Zn/Si = 3/1, 5/1). The peaks were in accordance with those of Zn4Si2O7(OH)2·H2O. The morphology changed from a small part of the flower-like structure to nanoparticles as the zinc ratio increased, and it was clear that Zn4Si2O7(OH)2·H2O NPs grew firmly and evenly on 3D porous C–SiO2 (Fig. 6g and h). Similarly, an Mn/Si ratio was selected by Wang et al.126 to synthesize zinc silicate-doped carbon (MnSi–C) derived from bamboo leaves. As shown in Fig. 6i, MnSiOx NPs are uniformly distributed on the substrate, and the size ranges from 100 to 200 nm. Furthermore, no obvious boundary appears between MnSiOx NPs and the substrate because of the evenly distributed Si element in the bamboo leaves (Fig. 6j).
 Fig. 6  (a) A simple composite graph. (b, c) SEM and TEM images of N,S co-doped 3D mesoporous C–Co3Si2O5(OH)4 architectures. (d) A simple composite graph of complex C–NiSi. (e, f) SEM and TEM images of C–NiSi-3. (g) The structural sketch of 3D C–ZnSi; (h) SEM image of 3D C–ZnSi with the Zn/Si ratio of 5/1. (i, j) SEM and TEM images of MnSi–C-3. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e, f) Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g, h) Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (i, j) Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Zhao et al.43 reported the fabrication of the 3D mesoporous architectures of SiO2 (P0), nickel silicate (P1), and cobalt silicate (P2) with reed leaves as the crude SiO2 source. Furthermore, both P1 and P2 inherited the 3D architecture of reed leaf-derived SiO2. The pore sizes of the three samples (P0, P1, and P3) were studied, and the results showed no significant difference (3.9 nm, 3.7 nm, and 3.3 nm, respectively).
It was found that bamboo leaves and reed leaves can generally be used as precursors for the synthesis of biomass-derived silicates. We speculate that the natural porous layered structure of bamboo leaves and reeds is suitable for the growth of silicates, such as cobalt silicate layers and nickel silicate layers, which grow into ordered structures on the C–SiO2 substrates. During the hydrothermal process, SiO2 in the substrate dissolves partially and the solvent provides another component of the crystals to synthesize silicate crystals that can be firmly fixed on the substrates.127
3.4 Summary
Biomass materials have unique structures that are hard to replicate. These structures generally have multiple layers, porous structures, and large active surface areas. At the same time, these structures maintain stability and show excellent high temperature resistance. In addition, carbon, nitrogen, and other elements are abundant in biomass. The intricate and well-bedded nano-SiO2 frameworks were fabricated using a biosilicification process;123 the fabrication process is economical and environmentally friendly, while the cost to commercially prepare nanomaterials is high.128
4. Applications
The electrochemical energy storage technology refers to the energy conversion technology, which stores energy in the form of chemical energy and appropriately converts it to electrical energy. The most common electrochemical energy storage systems are lead–acid batteries, LIBs, and SCs.
The transformation of different forms of energy has always been an important part of science and technology. Electrochemical energy storage devices convert chemical energy to electrical energy. Scientists are looking for renewable resources with improved energy efficiency, for instance, solar, hydro, wind, and tidal energy to meet both economic and environmental needs. However, because renewable energy relies heavily on natural conditions and lacks stability, it is particularly important to develop energy storage systems that can store these renewable resources. Among different energy storage devices, the advantages of high efficiency, diversity, and flexibility make electrochemical energy storage devices one of the most promising devices at present.128 Secondary batteries and SCs can directly and reversibly interconvert chemical energy and electrical energy. When the electrochemical potentials of two materials are different, the electrochemical energy storage device composed of the two materials can be constructed theoretically.
4.1 Biomass Si-based materials for lithium-ion batteries
With high energy density, long cycle life, and no memory effect, LIBs have won a space in the field of portable electronic equipment and power tools and have gradually expanded to the fields of electric bicycles, electric cars, and new energy storage systems.129
It is difficult for single-phase motor materials and even nanoscale electrode materials to simultaneously achieve high capacity, long cycle life, and good rate performance. Therefore, many researchers have turned their attention to two-phase or multi-phase core–shell structured electrode materials. The existence of a carbon layer can not only improve the conductivity but also prevent agglomeration, thus improving the electrochemical stability; however, this carbon layer can also minimize the volume expansion of the internal active material.
Traditionally, elemental Si is often used in metallurgy and the semiconductor industry.76 The poor cycling stability of bulk Si is a universal problem, which hinders the practical application of Si as the electrode material in LIBs. In view of this drawback, some papers have proposed the idea of transforming bulk Si into nano-Si,130 which can enhance the satisfactory damage tolerance of bulk Si during the charging and discharging processes.131 Due to the shortening of the diffusion path, materials with large surface areas exhibit highly efficient charging and discharging rates, and the polarization phenomenon can also be significantly improved.132–135 In addition, NPs can withstand rapid relaxation and therefore are more resistant to fracture. Nonetheless, this also produces some negative effects. For example, it promotes the formation of a passivation layer and SEI layer on the electrode surface, which causes an increase in capacity; thus, some kind of compromise needs to be found.130,131 A study on the misfit stress energy of some de-lithiated particles showed that the 10 nm particles exhibited an excellent cycling performance due to their good fracture resistance.136,137 The nanocrystallization of biomass-derived Si-based materials is easy and requires low amounts of energy, and the nano-scale morphology inherits the fine and unique structure found in the natural precursor in contrast to that of traditional Si-based materials.

Table 1 shows the recent research results of Si-based materials derived from biomass material extraction for LIBs.
Table 1 Biomass-derived Si-based materials for LIBs




Materials
Biomass source
Morphology
SSAa (m2 g−1)
CDb (C or mA g−1), ICEc or DCd/CCe (mA h g−1)
Specific current (C or mA g−1), CRf or Ch (mA h g−1)/CNg
Ref.





a SSA: specific surface area.
b CD: current density.
c ICE: initial Coulomb efficiency.
d DC: discharge capacity.
e CC: charge capacity.
f CR: capacity retention.
g CN: cycling number.
h C: capacity.






Si-based



Si
RHs
Porous NPs
245
C/50, 2790/—
C/2, 95%/200, C/2, 86%/300

76



Si/C
RHs
Nanoporous
—
C/50, 3518/—
C/5, 1997/200

90



Si/GNS
RHs
Nanoporous
—
C/5, —
C/5, 1290/200


Si/MWCNT
RHs
Nanoporous
—
C/5, —
C/5, 1166/200


h-Silicon
RHs
Mesoporous NPs
213.2
100, 3420/—
1000, 1220.2/100

123



4000, 1150.1/100


8000, 659.9/100


Si
RHs
Mesoporous NPs
45.2
C/50, 2681.3/1400.7
C/2, 64.5%/50

138



Si-JHR-5
RHs
Mesoporous
7.5
100, 2936/2565
200, 166/100

110



Si-JHR-3
12.6
100, 3026/2490
200, 661/100


Si-JHR-1
267
100, 3429/2294
200, 1311/100


Si
RHs
Interconnected porous
42
100, 84.8%
2000, 82.8%/200

111







Si–C



c-Si
RHs
Interconnected 3D porous wall
47.3
C/10, 84.2%
2000, 100%/200

85



Si@C
BLs
Porous
201
400, 1648/1080
2000, 99.9%/3700

116



Si⊂C
Reed leaves
3D porous hierarchical
224
C/2, 4000/2435
C/2, 95.5%/200

44



C-coated nanoSi
Diatoms
Frustule-like nanostructure
162.6
—
C/5, 80.7%/50

139



Si/C/Si
Diatom frustules
Hollow spheres
—
100, 3795.3/2744
1000, 79.8%/100

117



Si/C
RHs
3D porous NPs
198.8
100, 1256.1/617.8
100, 78%/200

140







Si-others



c-Si–graphite (1:9)
RHs
Mesoporous
—
500, 93.8%
500, 87.4%/100

141



Si/N–C/C
RHs
Nanotube spheres
78.5
100, 72%
500, 1031/100

80



Si@N–C
Horsetails
NPs
273.59
100, 1148/—
1000, 750/760

60



Si–rGO
RHs
NPs
—
1000, 70%
—

120



Si/Al2O3
Diatoms
Microporous


C/20, 85.5%
C/5, 86%/100

108



Si@C/RGO
BLs
Ultrafine NPs


210, 2678/2160
840, 1900/100

118



Si/C/RGO
RHs
Porous network
539.4
—
100, 760/80

142







SiO


x





C/SiO2
RHs
Microporous
1191.3
—
100, 1105/360

143



SiOx/C
RHs
Microporous


100, 3096.6/1394.7
100, 98.1%/200

90



SiOx/C
RHs
NPs
—
100, 998.5/466
100, 582.1/100

124



SiO2–C/NCs
BLs
3D hierarchical porous


200, 586.2/—
200, 294.7/180

79



C/SiO2
RHs
Porous
270
C/5, 611/325
C/5, 485/84

144



C–SiO2
Diatoms
Porous
—
—
18, 94%/80

145



Al2O3–C@SiO2
RHs
Porous NPs
—
—
100, 1390/260

128






4.1.1 Silicon (Si). 
The natural porous nano-Si derived from RHs was prepared by Liu et al.76 and exhibited sizes ranging from 10 to 40 nm. The unique structure could significantly adapt to volume changes and enhance the stability of the materials. Additionally, the nano-Si material obtained here exhibited comparable scalability with that of metallurgical-grade Si, long cycle life and high capacity at a temperature far below 2000 °C.76 The galvanostatic cycling image (Fig. 7a) shows that the nano-Si obtained from RHs still maintains 2200 mA h g−1 capacity, while the commercial metallurgical Si only maintains 500 mA h g−1 capacity after 100 cycles. This excellent battery performance can be assigned to the interconnected nano-porous channel structure inherited from RHs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Galvanostatic cycling of RH-derived nano-Si and commercial metallurgical-grade Si particles. (b) Comparison of the cycling performances of h-silicon and w-silicon. (c, d) The first cycle charge–discharge curves and cycling performance of the three Si-JRH samples. (e) The reversible capacity of SiRH in the first cycle at 100 mA g−1. (f) Coulombic efficiencies of SiRH. (a) Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c, d) Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. (e, f) Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The choice of washing solution also affects the morphology of the product and further produces different performances. As shown in Fig. 7b, Xing et al.123 found that h-silicon (obtained by HCl leaching) has high initial specific discharge capacity (3420.0 mA h g−1), and the theoretical capacity is 4200 mA h g−1; this can be because higher specific capacity leads to greater accessibility. Hence, this value is far larger than that for w-silicon (water leaching). In addition, from the perspective of rate capability, h-silicon is also competitive. The good performance of h-silicon can be boiled down to the thin Si wall. This wall shortens the diffusion path and thus accelerates the diffusion of Li+. Furthermore, the abundant pores are beneficial for electron transport, and the large specific surface area is propitious for providing more active sites.
The influence of ramp rate was evaluated by Shi et al.110 in the electrochemical performance experiment of Si-JRH. Compared to Si-JHR-3 and Si-JHR-5, Si-JHR-1 (where the ramp rate is set to 1 °C min−1) has higher initial specific discharge capacity and superior cycling stability due to its appreciable specific surface area and pore volume (Fig. 7c and d). However, a large specific surface area negatively affects the initial coulombic efficiency by exacerbating the formation of SEI films and expending large amounts of lithium.
Si is deemed to be a strong candidate for use in electrode materials due to its high specific capacity but it also suffers from large volume expansion. Partially unreduced SiO2 can significantly buffer volume expansion, thus increasing the cycle life though sacrificing specific capacity.111 Cho et al.111 obtained varying Si contents by changing the reaction volume and they tested the electrochemical performance of the resulting composites. According to Fig. 7e, the reversible capacities of the four SiRH samples in the first cycle at 100 mA g−1 exhibit a regular increase in accordance with the yield of Si in the composites (the sample denoted as SiRH-attrition has the maximum Si content). Moreover, the SiRH-attrition sample has the best capacity retention and coulombic efficiency (CE) compared to the three electrodes. The SiRH-pellet-thermal sample with the lowest Si yield has the lowest capacity retention and CE (Fig. 7f). However, the Si electrode tends to suffer from poor initial coulombic efficiency (ICE). The pre-lithiation scheme was introduced to conquer the initial active lithium loss.146 Notably, the reversibility and ICE value improved considerably (from 84.8% to 95.0%) after pre-lithiation.


4.1.2 Silicon/carbon (Si/C). 
There are two kinds of carbon sources in the Si–C composites. One is derived from the precursor, that is, the Si source is also the carbon source and the precursor retains the carbon skeleton after calcination and other steps. Carbon can also come from smearing and doping processes. Consequently, besides choosing the common carbon sources such as glucose and polydopamine, the original carbon elements from the Si-rich biomass can also be retained if needed.
Carbon and Si are evenly distributed in bamboo leaves. After an aluminothermic reduction, Lin et al.116 obtained porous Si@C composites with Si NPs evenly embedded in the carbon matrix. The carbon matrix could efficiently enhance the electrical conductivity and relieve the pressure of volume change and thus, the composite exhibited an excellent Li+ storage performance. Similarly, Yu et al.140 used RHs as both Si and carbon sources to prepare Si/C composites. Fig. 8a shows the advantage of carbon. The O/Si ratio increases with an increase in the reduction time. Si present in SiOx is beneficial for storing lithium ions. Lisowska-Oleksiak et al.145 chose red algae as the carbon source, and diatoms were chosen as a highly porous SiO2 source. Because of the formation of an SEI film, the cathodic current of second CV was higher than that of first CV. Correspondingly, the capacity value decreased significantly between the first and second cycles. Additionally, they found that the rate performance and capacity values were connected to the content of carbon particles in the electrodes.
 Fig. 8  (a) EIS of RH-Si/C and RH-Si. (b) Delithiation capacities of c-SiRH, c-Si NPs, and bare Si NPs during cycling. (c) SEM image of Si⊂C after 200 cycles at the rate of 0.5C. (d) Simple process flow chart of carbon coating on nano-Si. (e) ESR values based on EIS analysis (1–10 cycles). (a) Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (b) Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. (c) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (d, e) Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Conformal coating is a common and effective measure used to improve unsatisfactory conductivity and ameliorate the stability of SEI films.137,147,148 The development and formation of a stable SEI process are necessary to prolong the cycling life because the passivation of the active sites by an SEI layer contributes to the decomposition of electrolytes,149 thus inhibiting decomposition by blocking the electronic channels.150 The abundant functional groups on the surface of the carbon particles can enhance the chemical bonding of the SEI layer and promote electrolyte decomposition, thereby increasing irreversible capacity.151,152 Carbon precursors have a special role in preparing the carbon skeleton and in determining the final physical and chemical properties. Polydopamine was used to remedy the poor electronic conductivity of Si by Jung et al.85via coating. The dopamine coating has advantages that include a high rate of carbonization, shape retention, and accurate and controllable coating thickness.153 Obviously, the c-SiRH electrode exhibited a better cycling performance than Si NPs and c-Si NPs (Fig. 8b), which could also be attributed to the 3D interconnected porous structure derived from RHs. Glucose was used by Liu et al.44 as a clean and economical carbon source, and glucose molecules were easily adsorbed on the surface of porous Si. Furthermore, the ratio of Si to carbon can be regulated by controlling the glucose concentration and the 3D porous skeleton of Si⊂C is well preserved after 100 cycles (Fig. 8c). In addition, CVD is an effective method used to prepare coatings. CVD can be used to prepare highly pure and uniform carbon layers at low temperatures. As shown in Fig. 8d, Campbell et al.89 prepared nano-Si coated uniformly with carbon by the CVD technology and this product exhibited excellent stability within the first 10 cycles (Fig. 8e).


4.1.3 SiOx and its derivatives. 
SiOx has improved cycling stability compared with Si but it also has poor conductivity. SiO2 coated with disordered carbon via carbonizing RHs was synthesized by Cui et al.143 Although the carbonization rate increases with an increase in the temperature, a very high temperature may lead to morphology collapse, which has a negative impact on the electrochemical properties. As shown in Fig. 9a, S4 (obtained by carbonization at 650 °C) exhibits a cycling performance that is worse than that of S3 (obtained by carbonization at 600 °C). Experimental measures were taken by Wang et al.144 to evaluate the contribution of SiO2 to electrochemical properties. If carbon is the only active material, it is easy to calculate that the discharge capacity is 769 mA h g−1, demonstrating that SiO2 has electrochemical activity. Additionally, from the study by Nowak et al.,121 it was proven that the electrochemical process occurred in the SEI films and between the SEI interfaces of the SiO2 particles, and the existence of SiO2 played a positive role in the improvement of the cycle stability of the biomass material itself.
 Fig. 9  (a) Cycling performance of C/SiO2 electrodes. (b, c) The volume change of graphene and SiO2–carbon nanocomposite (SiO2–C/NCs) during lithium insertion/extraction. (d) EIS analysis of SiO2–C/NCs and graphite. (e) Growth mechanism diagram of hollow Si spheres. (f) Cycling performance of the Si hollow spheres. (g) SEM image of the hollow Si spheres after 100 cycles. (a) Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. (b, c, d) Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e, f, g) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The advantages of this particular structure derived from biomass, in comparison with that of graphene, were emphasized by Xu et al.79Fig. 9b and c depict the volume changes in graphene and the SiO2–carbon nanocomposite (SiO2–C/NCs) during lithium insertion/extraction. The 3D multi-porous interconnected cross-structure derived from bamboo leaves can effectively adapt to the volume changes and promote charge transfer, and these performances are better than those of simple layered graphene structures. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 9d, the charge transfer resistance of SiO2–C/NCs is smaller than that of graphene before cycling, and the value decreases from 137.5 Ω cm−1 to 111.5 Ω cm−1, thus revealing remarkable conductivity due to the activation of the carbon structure.
Hollow nanostructures have attracted great attention due to their low density, large surface area, and short charge transfer path.154 In the hollow SiO2 spheres prepared by Gao et al.,117 the porous carbon layer was coated with SiO2 inside and outside, and the SiO2 layer inside the carbon layer gradually became thicker (Fig. 9e). This special hollow sphere structure with a multi-layer coating has satisfactory cycling stability and shows retention of 79.8% after 200 cycles (while the reversible capacity is up to 1774 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1); also, the spherical shape is still retained (Fig. 9f and g).


4.1.4 Others. 
The results show that the combination of nitrogen-doped amorphous carbon and Si can also improve the long-term cycling stability of Si-based materials.3 He et al.60 extracted Si from horsetail and doped it with different nitrogen contents. The results showed that with the increase in the nitrogen content, the initial discharge capacity decreased and the cycling performance improved significantly.
CNT is a 1D material with good electrical properties and a large specific surface area; thus, it has attracted significant attention from researchers.155 The RH-derived Si NPs also suffer from a large volume expansion rate; research has demonstrated that the construction of a 3D system is conducive for the improvement in the stability of the structure and the formation of a stable SEI film.80 The 3D cross-linked network consisted of Si NPs and CNTs (SNCC spheres), and the SNCC spheres exhibited excellent electrochemical activities, making them an ideal anode material for LIBs. As shown in Fig. 10a, the Rct value of the SNCC spheres is 112 Ω, which is extremely lower than that of RH-Si (303 Ω) after cycling. Furthermore, Fig. 10b compares the equivalent circuit diagrams before and after cycling, and Rf is caused by the formation of SEI films.80
 Fig. 10  (a) The comparison of EIS between the RH-Si electrode before cycling and the SNCC electrode before and after cycling. (b) The equivalent circuit diagram of the SNCC electrode before and after cycling. (c) SEM image of graphite. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles. (e) Cycling performance of c-SiRH at the rates of 500, 700, 900, and 1100 mA h g−1 for 100 cycles of c-SiRH. (f) Discharge capacity versus cycle number for the Si, Si@C and Si@C/RGO anodes. (g) Process diagrams for the preparation of RH-P–Si/C/RGO. (h) The comparison of cycling performance between RH-P–Si/C/RGO, RH-P–Si/C, and RH-Si/C. (i, j) SEM images of the carbon-coated pure Si and Si–Al-7-3 after 100 cycles. (k) Cycle performances of the Si/Al2O3 composites. (a, b) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c, d, e) Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2017, Springer. (f) Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g, h) Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (i, j, k) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
As a typical 2D material, graphene is mainly composed of single-layer carbon atoms, and it can carry objects much heavier than its own weight. The theoretical surface area of graphene is large enough to reach 2630 m2 g−1. In addition, graphene also has good electrical conductivity, which can reach 106 S m−1. It is precisely because of these properties that graphene shows a great potential for its use in preparing composite electrode materials.156 Kim et al.141 reported the influence of the ratio of c-SiRH to graphene on the electrochemical properties. As shown in Fig. 10c, graphene has a smooth surface and uniform size (∼15 μm). Fig. 10d and e show that the specific capacity increases as the c-SiRH content increases, while the capacity retention shows the opposite trend. It can be inferred that SiRH contributes to the specific capacity and graphene improves the stability.
Reduced graphene oxide (RGO) has a single atomic layer and is prepared by the chemical oxidation of graphene. RGO contains more oxygen-containing functional groups and is therefore more active than graphene; thus, RGO has extensive applications in materials science.157–159 RGO was introduced by Wang et al.118 to remedy the unsatisfactory rate capacity of bamboo leaf-derived ultrafine Si NPs. Clearly, the capacity of Si@C/RGO decreased on increasing the current density, but it was always higher than that of the bamboo leaf-derived ultrafine Si NPs. Furthermore, the reversible capacity reached the initial value after 60 cycles, thus showing satisfactory reversibility and rate capability, which can be assigned to the existence of RGO (Fig. 10f).
Yu et al.142 explored the electrochemical effects of introducing activators and RGO into Si-based materials derived from RHs. First, the introduction of ZnCl2 produced massive pores, thus effectively mitigating volume expansion (Fig. 10g). Although RH-P–Si/C exhibited large initial capacity, the capacity retention rate was relatively low due to the introduction of an unstable pore structure in the activation step (Fig. 10h). Second, the existence of RGO reduced Sbet and Vpore and increased the pore size of RH-Si/C/RGO. RH-P–Si/C/RGO showed improved initial capacity and more stable cycle performance compared to RH-P–Si/C.
Metal oxide materials have good discharge activities and their theoretical discharge capacities are 2–3 times that of commercial carbon materials; therefore, metal oxides have high research significance.108 Poor conductivity seriously affects the rate performance of Si-based materials. The introduction of appropriate but less active metal oxides can effectively prevent the formation of SEI films, improve the conductivity of materials, and reduce the volume change of active materials, thus ensuring the structural stability of the electrode materials to some extent.160,161 Al2O3 was used as a reductant, and the formation of an Al2O3 layer could make an Si-based electrode adapt to large volume changes. Fig. 10i shows that the carbon-coated pure Si is subjected to severe volume expansion (up to 150%). Fig. 10j shows the SEM image of Si–Al-7-3 after 100 cycles, which distinctively exhibits that the original cylindrical structure containing mesopores is maintained well in Si–Al-7-3 (Si/Al2O3 contains 30 wt% Al2O3). The volume expansion improved on increasing the Al2O3 content in the Si/Al2O3 composites. Furthermore, both Si–Al-7-3 and Si–Al-5-5 showed excellent cycling performances because Al2O3 functions as a buffer layer when the volume changes; in addition, the excellent mechanical properties of Al2O3 are favorable for preserving the integrity of the structure (Fig. 10k). C/SiOx with SiOx NPs that were evenly distributed in a carbon matrix, synthesized by Cui et al.,122 exhibited excellent initial specific capacity (3096.6 mA h g−1) and maintained the capacity of 1230 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 100 mA g−1. Al@PCRH showed enhanced cycling stability (1390 mA h g−1 after 260 cycles at 100 mA g−1) when SiOx was simultaneously coated with carbon and 3 nm amorphous Al2O3 layers, and both the materials exhibited excellent rate performances.

4.2 Biomass Si-based materials for supercapacitors (SCs)
Compared with the traditional electrochemical batteries, SCs can be discharged and charged indefinitely without memory effects. At the same time, SCs also have obvious drawbacks, which include low energy density.162,163 The energy density of high-end and commercially available SCs is only approximately 1/25th of a lithium battery. Compared with a traditional capacitor, SCs have the following two advantages: (1) the charging and discharging distance is small, usually at the nanometre level; thus, it shows high specific capacitance. (2) The electrode material can be made up of a 3D material with a high specific surface area, which is advantageous for large capacitance.
Ultrathin flakes are potential materials for preparing supercapacitor electrodes from the perspective of specific capacitance and cycle life.65 Interestingly, in recent years, biomass derivatives have appeared as potential renewable energy materials as precursors for the electrode materials.164,165 Moreover, the sieving effects of the electrolyte ions and capacitances show that the existence of a mesoporous structure is beneficial for the electrochemical performance, while the biomass itself has a natural multi-layer porous structure.166 There are many types of composite materials containing metal elements and SiO2,167 and they are widely used.168–172 For example, Bai et al.173 reported the fabrication of manganese (Mn) SiO2 drapes and further tested the electrochemical properties of these materials to explore their potential for use as energy storage materials. In addition, biomass is rich in a variety of elements, such as nitrogen and sulfur, and co-doped Si–C composites tend to have better capacitance due to possible Faraday induction. The results for the Si-based materials derived from biomass material extraction for SCs are shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Biomass-derived Si-based materials for SCs




Materials
Biomass source
Morphology
SSAa (m2 g−1)
Capacity
CDb (mA g−1) CRc/CNd
Electrolyte
Ref.





a SSA: specific surface area.
b CD: current density.
c CR: capacity retention.
d CN: current number.
e RHs: rice husks.
f BLs: bamboo leaves.





Si diatom@MnO2
Diatoms
Nanosheet
41.9
0.5 A g−1, 341.5 F g−1
5 A g−1, 84.8%/2000
1 M Na2SO4

87



SiO2


RHs


3263
5 mV s−1, 330 F g−1
1 A g−1, 92%/2000
6.0 M KOH

174



N,S co-doped


BLs
Ultrathin nanoflakes
221
1 A g−1, 1600 F g−1
—
3.0 M KOH

65



C–Co3Si2O5(OH)4


N,S-doped
BLs
NPs
475
5 mV s−1, 450 mF cm−2
1 mA cm−2, 83%/10000
3.0 M KOH

75



C–Zn4Si2O7(OH)2·H2O


C–Ni3Si2O5(OH)4
BLs
Nanosheet
483.33
1 A g−1, 115.5 F g−1
1 A g−1, ∼100%/10000
3.0 M KOH

94



Co3Si2O5(OH)4
Reed leaves
Ultrathin nanoflakes
210.2
0.7 A g−1, 570 F g−1
—
6.0 M KOH

43



Ni3Si2O5(OH)4
282.5
0.7 A g−1, 887 F g−1
0.7 A g−1, 96.8%/2000
6.0 M KOH


C–MnSiOx
BLs
NPs
300.3
1 A g−1, 130.6 F g−1
1 A g−1, 85%/10000
3.0 M KOH

126



SiO2–MnO2
Diatoms
3D hierarchical porous
57.5
0.25 A g−1, 202.6 F g−1
1 A g−1, 95.92%/5000
1 M Na2SO4

175



NiO-modified diatomite
Diatoms
Moss-like
122.88
0.25 A g−1, 218.7 F g−1
3.0 A g−1, 90.61%/1000
1 M KOH

176



GO-DE@MnO2
Diatoms
Nanosheet
—
0.5 A g−1, 152.5 F g−1
2.0 A g−1, 83.3%/2000
1 M Na2SO4

177



Diatom@TiO2@MnO2
Diatoms
3D interconnected
29.96
0.2 A g−1, 231.2 F g−1
3.0 A g−1, 94.1%/2000
1 M Na2SO4

178





Some related studies have shown that biomass can provide natural SiO2, which can be used as a substrate to grow silicates or compounded with metal oxides to improve its testing performance for use as an electrode material in SCs.76,179
The influence of Si on the electrochemical properties has also been explored in the field of SCs. Zhang et al.180 investigated the effect of removing Si before or after pyrolysis on the electrochemical performance of the product. Fig. 11a indicates that the specific capacitance decreases to 223.9 F g−1 from 241.7 F g−1 after etching Si before the pyrolysis of Si. Conversely, when Si is removed before pyrolysis, the capacitance drops sharply to 186.6 F g−1, depicting improvement in the capacitive performance. Meanwhile, cycle stability is enhanced because the removal of Si reduces volume expansion.
 Fig. 11  (a) Specific capacitances of NPCMs with different processing steps at different potential scan rates. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of Si diatom@MnO2 nanorods and nanosheets. (c) Charge transfer process diagram of particles inserted into the composite. (d) Specific capacitances of P1 and P2 electrodes. (e) Schematic diagram of electron transport within the electrode. (f) EIS of P1 and P2 electrodes. (g) Probable growth mechanism of MnSiOx in MnSi–C-3. (h) GCD curves of MnSi–C-n and SiO2–C. (a) Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c, d, e, f) Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (g, h) Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
Transition metal elements are often used to improve the electrochemical properties.181–185 Transition metal oxide-based pseudo-capacitors exhibit higher specific capacitance because it is easier for these materials to provide various oxidation states in the effective redox charge transfer than carbon materials and conductive polymer materials. MnO2, which has high theoretical capacitance of ∼1370 F g−1, is a potential candidate for use in SCs owing to its satisfactory pseudo-capacitance. Zhang et al.175 showed the excellent electrochemical properties of hierarchical MnO2-modified diatomite synthesized by a one-pot method: the charge curve tended to be linear and to a certain extent was mirror symmetrical with the discharge curve. In addition, the hierarchical MnO2-modified diatomite exhibited an excellent rate performance. The initial capacity still remained 65% even at high current density. Similarly, Le et al.87 synthesized two types of Si-based manganese dioxide composites derived from diatoms with different electrochemical properties. As shown in Fig. 11b, the Si diatom@MnO2 nanosheets, with longer discharge times, have better electrochemical properties than the nanorods. This can be explained as follows: during the calcination of the nanosheets, the nanosheets fall off and aggregate, resulting in nanorods with a smaller specific surface area; the δ-MnO2 nanosheets are more widely spaced than the α-MnO2 nanorods.
Biomass silicates are usually synthesized via the hydrothermal decomposition of calcined bio-silicates and their respective metal salts, while silicates are mostly grown on porous biomass materials in the form of flakes, which protrude due to a larger specific surface area.
Layered cobalt and nickel compounds, such as Ni3Si2O5(OH)4, Co3O4 and NiO, have remarkable advantages, which include their fine redox reversibility and high activity; thus, they have gained significant attention in the field of pseudo-capacitors. Zhao et al.43 synthesized three-dimensional mesoporous Ni3Si2O5(OH)4 and Co3Si2O5(OH)4 derived from reeds. The diameters of the constituent tube-like structures were 3.1 μm and 4.5 μm, while the thicknesses of the tube wall were 300 nm and 320 nm. Furthermore, the porous structure shown in Fig. 11c provides the materials with a large specific surface area, which is propitious for ion diffusion and electron transport. P1 exhibits a smaller size and thinner tube thickness, leading to faster ion diffusion and shorter diffusion times compared to P2, thus showing excellent rate capability (Fig. 11d). Fig. 11e shows the electronic transport within the electrode and clearly shows that the resistance is due to the interface and the inherent low electronic conductivities of the active materials. Carbon coating is an effective measure to shorten the transmission path and reduce the resistance, and the nanoflakes of Ni3Si2O5(OH)4 (P1) can directly contact the carbon conductive agent, thus significantly reducing the interfacial resistance (Fig. 11f). It is well-known that heteroatom-doped carbon materials exhibit improved charge transfer rates due to synergistic effects compared with the Si-based materials single doped with elemental carbon.186,187 Zhang et al.126 proposed two mechanisms for the formation of manganese silicate, and the second mechanism was verified in their research (Fig. 11g). Although manganese silicate exhibits poor conductivity, the SC property of MnSi–C is better than that of SiO2–C, which can be mainly assigned to the fact that the SiO2–C substrate overcomes the problem of the poor conductivity of MnSi–C. Besides, the porous hierarchical structure of bamboo leaves is more conducive for the diffusion of electrolytes, and the formation of manganese silicate clusters effectively improves the specific capacitance (Fig. 11h).
4.3 Other applications
Solid polymer electrolytes, as an indispensable part, have attracted increasing attention in electrochemical energy storage. A PEO (polyethylene oxide)-based polymer electrolyte, which easily forms complexes with lithium salts, is conducive for high carrier mobility and good stability of chemical properties. Hence, it was chosen as the polymer electrolyte membrane by Dissanayake et al.188 There are two techniques to improve ionic conductivity. One is the addition of plasticizers with low molecular weights to form plasticized polymer electrolytes; the other is the introduction of dispersed nano-sized inorganic ceramic filler particles into polymer dielectrics to obtain nano-composite solid polymer electrolytes,189 which was adopted here. When SiO2 is used as the filler to prepare an electrolyte, it also provides an improved electrochemical performance at room temperature so that the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte increases by about 12 times. Furthermore, the enhancement in conductivity can mainly be attributed to the ions in the polymer electrolyte and the O2− and OH− groups on the surface of fillers interact with Li+ and provide abundant active sites for Li+ migration through transient H bonding. Dissanayake also discussed the influence of the amount of nano-fillers and found that due to the existence of the nano-fillers, the conductivity significantly improved; the samples with 10 wt% nano-SiO2 filler performed the best among the three samples (5%, 10%, and 15%). The ionic conductivity of the PEO-based polymer electrolytes improved by incorporating nano-inert fillers190,191 such as the industrial grade powders of Al2O3, TiO2, and SiO2. Due to the addition of the RHA nano-SiO2 filler, the conductivity exhibited an enhancement from 9.77 × 10−6 to 1.24 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 30 °C, which compared favourably in performance with the commercial nano-SiO2 filler; therefore, it can be considered as a substitute for several commercial nano-inert fillers.
4.4 Summary

Fig. 12a shows a variety of the abovementioned morphologies, which exert a tremendous impact on the electrochemical performance of materials. 1D nanomaterials have a direct current channel because of their singular structure; thus, the ion diffusion path is significantly reduced as the charging and discharging time is effectively shortened. In addition, this simple structure effectively limits mechanical degradation and alleviates volume expansion.192,193 Nanotubes and nanorods are common 1D materials.194–197 The hollow structure of the nanotubes endows these materials with considerable specific surface areas and excellent electrochemical performances.198,199 In addition, for highly conductive CNTs, it is easy to form a 3D staggered network, thus providing enough ion channels to facilitate the effective transport of active particles.200 For example, CNTs were introduced to construct 3D cross-linked networks with Si nanospheres, and these composites exhibited an enhanced electrochemical performance.80 1D materials can be obtained by the transformation of 2D materials. For instance, the Si-diatom@MnO2 nanorods were obtained from Si-diatom@MnO2via annealing in air and the same substances with different morphologies demonstrated differences in their electrochemical performances.87
Nanosheet structures have the advantages of having high mechanical flexibility and large specific surface area, which significantly increases the number of active sites.201–204 2D nanosheet materials are chemically or physically connected to form a 3D layered structure. This unique 3D structure combines the advantages of improved mechanical properties, fast ion diffusion, and fast charge transfer in channels.205 Additionally, the thickness of the sheet also affects the properties of the material. Electrons are constrained in ultrathin nanosheets, resulting in the materials having remarkable electronic properties and large specific surface areas due to their lateral sizes; these properties are extremely attractive for applications in SCs.206,207 The layered structure, which is attributed to silicates, can be seen in Fig. 6. Nanospheres have regular morphologies and excellent mechanical properties.208–211 The size of the SNCC spheres is much larger than that of the Si/C/Si nanospheres. This size difference occurs because the SNCC spheres (3.2 ± 0.8 μm) consist of RH-derived Si NPs (∼50 nm) intertwined with CNTs,212 while the Si/C/Si nanospheres are directly reduced from diatom-derived SiO2 nanospheres via an etching-reduction/nucleation-growth process.117 Additionally, the hollow structure is at the risk of structural collapse though it simultaneously provides a larger specific surface area. The carbon layer is introduced for protection to maintain the structural integrity.117 The effects of the calcination temperature and heating rate on the morphology of Si NPs were studied by Liu et al.76 and Shi et al.110 The results indicate that the specific surface area and pore volume of the RH-derived Si NPs decrease with the increase in the heating rate. In particular, Cho et al.111 further evaluated the effect of reaction volume on the feasibility of reducing SiO2, and it was obvious that the attrition-milling process with a volume of 10 L increased the specific surface area and pore volume. In Fig. 12b, the balance clearly describes the performance contribution of Si and SiOx in an electric energy storage reaction. Simply put, Si contributes to specific capacitance and SiOx improves stability.213–216 Aiming at the defect of the capacity attenuation of Si-based materials during the charge and discharge processes, several methods have been adopted and these methods include the nano-crystallization of Si-based materials (as the synthesis of biomass-derived nanomaterials is economical and convenient60,201,217,218), coating with a carbon layer, compounding with other substances (e.g., metal oxides, graphene, etc.), and converting the Si-based materials into silicates. In addition, adjusting the contents of Si and SiOx can alleviate the mechanical strain because SiOx contains relatively small amounts of active Si, and oxygen-containing compounds are formed during the discharge function as the buffer volume expands; this has been verified by Cho et al.111
 Fig. 12  (a) Morphology summary. (b) Contribution of Si and SiOx to the electrochemical properties. (c) Schematic diagram of Li+ transport between the Si-based particles with different sizes. (d) Morphological comparison after activation. 

Fig. 12c briefly describes the relationship between the Li+ transport efficiency and the Si NP size. Si NPs with smaller sizes form a thinner Si wall, which shortens the path travelled by Li+ during the process of insertion and de-insertion, thus improving the ion transport efficiency. For instance, Xing et al.123 obtained SiO2 NPs with uniform sizes of ∼25 nm via HCl leaching, while the size of the SiO2 NPs obtained via water rinsing was ten times larger.
As shown in Fig. 12d, porous morphology appears in the activated samples. ZnCl2 is often used as an activator for raw biomass materials for the following reasons: (1) ZnCl2 can swell and dissolve cellulose in the biomass materials, thus penetrating into the biomass and forming the pores.142 (2) At high temperatures, ZnCl2 promotes material dehydration without affecting the carbon in the material, thereby increasing the production of activated carbon.143,219 (3) Even at high temperatures, ZnCl2 does not react with SiO2. Additionally, the formation of voids is due to the removal of the activator after activation, which occupies space during the previous activation.220 It is also indicated that the formation of abundant pores via activation can effectively alleviate the volume expansion of Si. In addition, RH-P–C/SiO2 obtained after activation shows rougher and wrinkled surfaces.142
Generally speaking, four factors, namely, morphology, performance contribution of Si and SiOx in the electrode materials, particle size and transmission distance, and activation process have been proposed, which are also the key factors to improve the performance of Si-based materials in the field of electrochemical energy storage.
5. Conclusion and prospects
To summarize, this review is devoted to studying the process of extracting Si from biomass and remedying the defects in the electrochemical properties of biomass-derived Si-based materials by means of morphology control, doping and compounding with other materials. It is clear that biomass-derived Si-based materials have aroused wide interest in research, showing their irreplaceable status and great potential in the field of electrochemical energy storage.
Biomass materials as Si sources have the following advantages: (1) Biomass wastes such as RHs and bamboo leaves are transformed into electrical energy storage materials, which are economically green. While alleviating the pollution by agricultural wastes, the pressure of energy crisis is effectively reduced. (2) The natural and precise 3D hierarchical structure of biomass can be accurately reproduced by nature and partially retained during heat treatment. This unique structure not only adapts to the volume change of Si-based materials during charging and discharging, but also maintains the stability of the structure. These are conducive to form a stable SEI film, provide rich and coherent natural ion transport channels, and provide substrates for metal oxides, etc. to improve the capacity performance.44,221,222 (3) Biomass materials are usually rich in oxygen-containing groups such as OH− and O2−, thus providing abundant active sites. Biomass materials can also be used as carbon sources to synthesize Si–C composites in one step. Besides, nitrogen and sulphur are ubiquitous in biomass materials; thus, heteroatom-doped Si-based materials can be prepared in a straightforward manner without additional doping, which can improve the conductivity of the materials.223–227 (4) Compared with the traditional preparation technology of nanomaterials, the synthesis of biomass-derived nanomaterials is more attractive due to its simplicity, economy, and environmental protection.130,131
Nonetheless, there are still some problems that urgently need to be solved for the synthesis and application of biomass-derived materials. For example, the method of introducing heteroatoms in one step is simple and economical, but the content of heteroatoms is low. To increase the content of the target heteroatoms, the use of toxic chemical reagents is inevitable in processes such as amination and vulcanization. Second, the integrity of the three-dimensional fine structure of biomass is damaged in the calcination process. Moreover, known research is limited in practical applications. In this regard, the following improvement methods and related prospects should be considered: (1) Developing innovative biomass culture technology and purposefully introducing heteroatoms at the biomass growth stage without affecting the normal survival of the biomass to achieve a low content of heteroatoms as well as to use reagents that are less toxic than those used in the traditional methods. (2) To buffer the volume change of Si-based materials and the maintenance of structural integrity of the biomass materials, the reinforcement technology should be used reasonably at various stages (even at the biomass growth stage) to improve the overall structure of the biomass and to enhance its flexibility and stability. (3) Si present in biomass should be used either to extract SiO2 for further treatment or to functionalize it on the basis of retaining the biomass structure and other existing elements. Targeted and directional extraction technologies should be developed to improve the efficiency of materials. For example, in view of the growth of silicates on SiO2 substrates, theoretical models should be established to find the most suitable biomass materials for substrates and to improve and reinforce their structures. (4) Aimed at the limitation of practical applications, the development of an economical and green method should be carried out to put the extraction and energy storage of biomass Si-based materials in practical production and realize the industrialization and commercialization for these materials.
As renewable resources, biomass-derived Si-based materials are a major breakthrough to improve energy waste and shortages. Although the commercialization of biomass Si-based materials is facing many challenges, the current achievements are encouraging. Therefore, it is an irresistible trend to extract Si from biomass and use it for electrochemical energy storage. In addition, the use of biomass-derived materials should not be limited to electrical energy storage but can also be extended to electrocatalysis, biofuels, etc. The comprehensive utilization of biomass materials is more conducive for exploring the use value of renewable energy. In the process of synthesis, the advantages of biomass materials should be fully taken into account so that their utility is more valuable.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21671170, 21673203, and 21201010), the Top-notch Academic Programs Project of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (TAPP), Program for New Century Excellent Talents of the University in China (NCET-13-0645), Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (XKYCX17-038), the Six Talent Plan (2015-XCL-030), and Qinglan Project. We also acknowledge the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions and the technical support we received at the Testing Center of Yangzhou University.
References
D.-M. Chen, J.-Y. Tian, Z.-W. Wang, C.-S. Liu, M. Chen and M. Du, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10668–10671 RSC .
S.-S. Lee and C.-M. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, X. Cai, W. Chen, S. Yang, D. Xu, Y. Fang and X. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9930–9939 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, G. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Xu, C. Yao, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 422–446 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Zhang and F. Ren, Appl. Sci., 2017, 8, 22 CrossRef .
X. Wang, C. Yang, X. Xiong, G. Chen, M. Huang, J.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Liu and K. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 344–353 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 292–318 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, X. Li, Y. Li, M. Zheng and H. Pang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 40 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Du, T. Bao, J. Dong, M. Lin, H. Shim and S.-T. Yang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 289, 121749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sha, J. Liu, M. Sun, L. Li, J. Bai, Z. Hu and M. Zhou, Talanta, 2019, 200, 300–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fontes-Candia, E. Erboz, A. Martínez-Abad, A. López-Rubio and M. Martínez-Sanz, Food Hydrocolloids, 2019, 96, 151–160 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Schnepp and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5269–5273 RSC .
H. Zhou, T. Fan and D. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1344–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, C. Chen, D. Yu, L. Sun, C. Yang, H. Zhang, Y. Sun, F. Besenbacher and M. Yu, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Wei, H. Yang, Z. Ma, R. Ma, J. Zhou, Y. Yang, L. Peng, H. Fei, B. Lu and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4384–4390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra Sekhar, G. Nagaraju, B. Ramulu and J. S. Yu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1707–1720 RSC .
Z. Gao, Y. Zhang, N. Song and X. Li, Mater. Res. Lett., 2017, 5, 69–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manoj, C. Muhamed Ashraf, M. Jasna, K. M. Anilkumar, B. Jinisha, V. S. Pradeep and S. Jayalekshmi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 535, 287–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, D. Li, C. Luo, Q. Fu and C. Pan, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4132–4140 RSC .
N. Fukata, M. Mitome, Y. Bando, W. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, J. Stark, R. Saha, J. Parker and P. A. Kohl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8604–8610 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, S. Zhai, N. Liu, J. Lv, Z. Lei and Q. An, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2016, 42, 869–891 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. M. Angel, T. G. P. Vásquez, J. A. Junkes and D. Hotza, Quim. Nova, 2009, 32, 1110–1114 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rodríguez de Sensale, Cem. Concr. Compos., 2006, 28, 158–160 CrossRef .
V. H. Le, C. N. H. Thuc and H. H. Thuc, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 58 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Banerjee, S. Sen and H. N. Acharya, Mater. Sci. Eng., 1982, 52, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun and K. Gong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 40, 5861–5877 CrossRef .
V. B. Carmona, R. M. Oliveira, W. T. L. Silva, L. H. C. Mattoso and J. M. Marconcini, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 43, 291–296 CrossRef CAS .
M. Azadeh, C. Zamani, A. Ataie and J. Morante, Mater. Today Commun., 2018, 14, 141–150 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wu, K. Zhou, C. Y. Yue, J. Wei and Y. Pan, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 72, 1–60 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Q. Peng, X. Wang, L. Li, Y. Hu and S.-T. Lee, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 75–97 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Y. Zhou, M. Bao and X. Ni, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 236–243 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4966–4985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nara, T. Yokoshima, T. Momma and T. Osaka, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6500 RSC .
Z. J. Han, N. Yabuuchi, K. Shimomura, M. Murase, H. Yui and S. Komaba, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9014–9020 RSC .
W. J. Lee, T. H. Hwang, J. O. Hwang, H. W. Kim, J. Lim, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shim, T. H. Han, J. Y. Kim, J. W. Choi and S. O. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 621–626 RSC .
M. H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844–3847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerfi, P. Charest, M. Dontigny, J. Trottier, M. Lagacé, P. Hovington, A. Vijh and K. Zaghib, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5667–5673 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren and M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4009–4014 RSC .
E. Epstein, Ann. Appl. Biol., 2009, 155, 155–160 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Murugan, T. Muraliganth, P. J. Ferreira and A. Manthiram, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 946–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Li, C. Wei and H. Pang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400377 CrossRef .
J. Liu, P. Kopold, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9632–9636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kim, B. Y. Jang, J. S. Lee, J. S. Kim and S. Nahm, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fu, K. Zhang, R. P. Zaccaria, H. Huang, Y. Xia and Z. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 546–553 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, P. Zhao, H. Yang, B. Liu, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Cui, G. Yu, S. Zhang and C.-M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7016–7022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, Y. Liang, H. Tian, S. Zhang, Z. Meng and W.-Q. Han, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 8, 119–126 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, J. Deng, L. Liu, W. Si, S. Oswald, L. Xi, M. Kundu, G. Ma, T. Gemming, S. Baunack, F. Ding, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4527–4532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Du, D. Li, D. Shen, J. Yang, Z. Guo, H. K. Liu, A. A. Elzatahry and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6749–6755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jia, R. Kloepsch, X. He, J. P. Badillo, P. Gao, O. Fromm, T. Placke and M. Winter, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5683–5688 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M.-M. Titirici, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 120, 1669–1673 CrossRef .
C. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Chen, M. T. McDowell, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1042–1048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, X. Huang, G. Zhou, S. Cui, P. B. Hallac, J. Jiang, P. T. Hurley and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, H. Ji, L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4673–4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Yu, L. Pan, N. Liu, M. T. McDowell, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1943 CrossRef PubMed .
W. An, J. Fu, J. Su, L. Wang, X. Peng, K. Wu, Q. Chen, Y. Bi, B. Gao and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 345, 227–236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, X. Liu, L. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Teng, D. Yu, J. Sui and X. Wang, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 10338–10344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, G. Xu, C. Wang, L. Xu and K. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 264, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. He, L. He, P. Hu, W. Li, H. Yan, X. Peng, C. Huang and L. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4183–4189 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Zhao, J. He, C. Wang and J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4811–4815 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, J. Zhang, L. Xue, T. Huang and A. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10240–10243 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, Y. Xiang, L. Xu, H. Luo, B. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Han, W. Zhao, S. Chen, H. Chen, Q. Zhang, T. Zhu and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801718 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Ding, X. Xiao, J. Shao, J. Wei, H. Pang and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12774–12781 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. Liu, Q. Zhao, S. Dou, H. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Hu, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 4, 92–102 CrossRef .
Y. Shen, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 80, 453–466 CrossRef .
X. W. Sun, Y. X. Zhang and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8847–8859 RSC .
Z. Li, Z. Xu, X. Tan, H. Wang, C. M. B. Holt, T. Stephenson, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 871 RSC .
H. Wan, H. Xiong, X. Liu, G. Chen, N. Zhang, H. Wang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 7522–7527 RSC .
S. Zhang, M. Zheng, Z. Lin, N. Li, Y. Liu, B. Zhao, H. Pang, J. Cao, P. He and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15889–15896 RSC .
B. Campbell, R. Ionescu, Z. Favors, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, M. Lan, Y. Zhang, H. Bian, M.-F. Yuen, K. Ostrikov, J. Jiang, W. Zhang, Y. Y. Li and J. Lu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3029–3039 RSC .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, K. Cui, D. Karpuzov, X. Tan, A. Kohandehghan and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 941–955 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, Q. Wang and C. Meng, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 519–529 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, K. Huo, M. T. McDowell, J. Zhao and Y. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1919 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Q. Wang, J. Qu, Y. Liu, C. X. Gui, S. M. Hao, Y. Yu and Z. Z. Yu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16805–16811 RSC .
K. W. Kow, R. Yusoff, A. R. A. Aziz and E. C. Abdullah, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2014, 386, 76–84 CrossRef .
H. Xu, S. Zhang, W. He, X. Zhang, G. Yang, J. Zhang, X. Shi and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 1930–1937 RSC .
Y. C. Zhang, Y. You, S. Xin, Y. X. Yin, J. Zhang, P. Wang, X. sheng Zheng, F. F. Cao and Y. G. Guo, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, N. Kurata, X. Wei, Z. X. Wang, A. Wang, Q. Zhao, Y. Zhao, K. Liu, H. Lu, W. Li, Y. Guo, Y. Lu, C. Zhou, D. Fan, Q. Weng, C. Zhu, T. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Feng, H. Furuumi, T. Kubo, T. Miyabayashi, X. Yuan, Q. Xu, G. Dong, Q. Zhan, C. Li, A. Fujiyama, A. Toyoda, T. Lu, Q. Feng, Q. Qian, J. Li and B. Han, Nature, 2012, 490, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. Tuck, E. Pérez, I. T. Horváth, R. A. Sheldon and M. Poliakoff, Science, 2012, 337, 695–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, H. Sun, X. Wang, J. Sun, M. Niu and Z. Wen, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 74, 689–696 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Jian, K. Tamai, N. Yamaji, N. Mitani, S. Konishi, M. Katsuhara, M. Ishiguro, Y. Murata and M. Yano, Nature, 2006, 440, 688–691 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Jung, M.-H. Ryou, Y. J. Sung, S. B. Park and J. W. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 12229–12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gordon, D. Losic, M. A. Tiffany, S. S. Nagy and F. A. S. Sterrenburg, Trends Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 116–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. J. Le, T. Wang, D. N. H. Tran, F. Dong, Y. X. Zhang and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10856–10865 RSC .
D. Losic, J. G. Mitchell and N. H. Voelcker, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2947–2958 CrossRef CAS .
B. Campbell, R. Ionescu, M. Tolchin, K. Ahmed, Z. Favors, K. N. Bozhilov, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33050 CrossRef CAS .
S. Praneetha and A. V. Murugan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 224–236 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Taber, D. Shogren and G. Lu, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2002, 33, 1661–1670 CrossRef CAS .
M. López-Acosta, A. Leynaert, V. Coquille and M. Maldonado, Mar. Ecol.: Prog. Ser., 2018, 605, 111–123 CrossRef .
J. A. Adebisi, J. O. Agunsoye, S. A. Bello, F. O. Kolawole, M. M. Ramakokovhu, M. O. Daramola and S. B. Hassan, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2019, 10, 617–629 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, T. Hu and C. Meng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3396–3409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, J. Zhou, C. Yu, Z. Luo, Q. Wang and Z. Shi, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 65, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Alshatwi, J. Athinarayanan and V. S. Periasamy, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 47, 8–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Athinarayanan, V. S. Periasamy, M. Alhazmi, K. A. Alatiah and A. A. Alshatwi, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, J. Zhou, Z. Luo, Q. Wang and M. Ni, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 50, 540–549 CrossRef CAS .
M. Furquan, A. Raj Khatribail, S. Vijayalakshmi and S. Mitra, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 56–68 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim, D. Ko, J. Oh, J. Lee, T. Hwang, Y. Jeon, W. Hooch Antink and Y. Piao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15582–15590 RSC .
A. Kashyout, H. M. A. Soliman, M. Nabil and A. A. Bishara, Mater. Sci. Appl., 2013, 04, 79–87 CAS .
X. Zhou, S. Chen, H. Zhou, J. Tang, Y. Ren, T. Bai, J. Zhang and J. Yang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 268, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
A.-H. Kashyout and M. Nabil, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 216, 454–459 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lai, J. R. Thompson and M. Dasog, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 7913–7920 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, E. M. Ernst, S. Yoo and K. H. Sandhage, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 474–478 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, M. R. Weatherspoon, S. Shian, Y. Cai, P. D. Graham, S. M. Allan, G. Ahmad, M. B. Dickerson, B. C. Church, Z. Kang, H. W. Abernathy III, C. J. Summers, M. Liu and K. H. Sandhage, Nature, 2007, 446, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, S. M. Allan, K. H. Sandhage and F. M. Zalar, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2005–2010 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, T. Bok, J. Ryu, J.-I. Lee, J. Cho and S. Park, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barati, S. Sarder, A. McLean and R. Roy, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2011, 357, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, W. Wang, A. Wang, K. Yuan and Y. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 661, 27–37 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Cho, H. J. Kim, H. I. Lee, M. W. Seo, H. W. Ra, S. J. Yoon, T. Y. Mun, Y. K. Kim, J. H. Kim, B. H. Kim, J. W. Kook, C.-Y. Yoo, J. G. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7261–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 RSC .
Q.-H. Yang, P.-X. Hou, M. Unno, S. Yamauchi, R. Saito and T. Kyotani, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2465–2469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wan, Q. Wang, L. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, P. Chen and S.-H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8602–8609 RSC .
X. Qiao, S. Liao, G. Wang, R. Zheng, H. Song and X. Li, Carbon, 2016, 99, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lin, T. Xu, Y. Han, K. Shen, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 79890–79893 RSC .
P. Gao, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, D. Cen, G. Gao, Z. Bao, Y. Mei, Z. Di and G. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11481–11490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, B. Gao, C. Peng, X. Peng, J. Fu, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13840–13847 RSC .
K. Huang, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Zhang and S. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801430 Search PubMed .
D. P. Wong, R. Suriyaprabha, R. Yuvakumar, V. Rajendran, Y.-T. Chen, B.-J. Hwang, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13437–13441 RSC .
A. P. Nowak, A. Lisowska-Oleksiak, B. Wicikowska and M. Gazda, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ju, J. A. Tang, K. Zhu, Y. Meng, C. Wang, G. Chen, Y. Wei and Y. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 411–416 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xing, S. Tian, H. Tang, D. Losic and Z. Bao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 10145 RSC .
J. Cui, Y. Cui, S. Li, H. Sun, Z. Wen and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30239–30247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sirinakorn, K. Imwiset, S. Bureekaew and M. Ogawa, Appl. Clay Sci., 2018, 153, 187–197 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Jiang and C. Meng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 534, 142–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Okada, Chem. Rec., 2018, 18, 829–839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui and J. Sun, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 2018, 32, 1840081 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cui, L. Wang, X. Guo, E. Wang, Y. Yang, T. Wu, D. He, S. Liu and H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3874–3881 RSC .
J. R. Szczech and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 56–72 RSC .
T. Shen, Z. Yao, X. Xia, X. Wang, C. Gu and J. Tu, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 20, 1700591 CrossRef .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Grätzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909 RSC .
J. Ma, J. Wen, Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14896–14902 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mukherjee, R. Krishnan, T.-M. Lu and N. Koratkar, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 518–533 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Huggins and W. D. Nix, Ionics, 2000, 6, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, B. Liu, Y. Yao, P. Dong and S. Zhao, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., Mater. Sci. Ed., 2016, 31, 965–971 CrossRef CAS .
B. Campbell, R. Ionescu, M. Tolchin, K. Ahmed, Z. Favors, K. N. Bozhilov, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yu, H. Zhang, H. Qi, X. Gao, J. Liang and C. Liang, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 5439–5444 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, J. H. Choi and J. W. Choi, Nano Convergence, 2017, 4, 24 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yu, H. Zhang, H. Qi, J. Liang and C. Liang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 19811–19817 RSC .
J. Cui, F. Cheng, J. Lin, J. Yang, K. Jiang, Z. Wen and J. Sun, Powder Technol., 2017, 311, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Xue, B. Gao, P. Gao, C. Mou and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64744–64746 RSC .
A. Lisowska-Oleksiak, A. P. Nowak and B. Wicikowska, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40439–40443 RSC .
G. Wang, F. Li, D. Liu, D. Zheng, Y. Luo, D. Qu, T. Ding and D. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8699–8703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mishra, K. George and X.-D. Zhou, Carbon, 2018, 138, 419–426 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Wang, Q. He, J. Shi, Z. Zhang, X. Men, D. Yan and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5602–5610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, K. Sun, Q. Peng, B. Xu and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
J. Collins, G. Gourdin, M. Foster and D. Qu, Carbon, 2015, 92, 193–244 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, Q. Hu, S. Zhang, H. Tang, L. Li and H. Pang, Appl. Sci., 2017, 7, 1036 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Zheng, L. Jin, Y. Li, P. Geng, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800716 CrossRef .
R. Liu, S. M. Mahurin, C. Li, R. R. Unocic, J. C. Idrobo, H. Gao, S. J. Pennycook and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6799–6802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Yu, L. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501333 CrossRef .
X.-M. Liu, Z. Dong Huang, S. Woon Oh, B. Zhang, P.-C. Ma, M. M. F. Yuen and J.-K. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 121–144 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, J. Sun, Z. Yu, Y. Yin, S. Xin, S. Yu and Y. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707430 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dong, Y. Ma, D. Li, Y. Liu, W. Chen, X. Feng and J. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8682–8691 RSC .
C. Botas, D. Carriazo, W. Zhang, T. Rojo and G. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28800–28808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Zheng, H. Wu, H. Chen, L. Su, L. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Ren, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 609–617 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Wu, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 1948–1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, S. Li and J. Huang, Chem. Rec., 2019, tcr.201900030 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bu, T. Sun, Y. Cai, L. Du, O. Zhuo, L. Yang, Q. Wu, X. Wang and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700470 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Son, J. Ma, N. Kim, T. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Sung, S. Choi, G. Nam, H. Cho, Y. Yoo and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803480 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 445–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 373–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, Y. Liu, C. Xu, J. Zhu, X. Wei, L. Zhou, L. He, W. Yang and L. Mai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704561 CrossRef .
V. K. H. Bui, D. Park and Y.-C. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 757–772 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fang, S. Xuan, W. Jiang and X. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1902–1909 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-R. Lee, J. T. Soe, S. Zhang, J.-W. Ahn, M. B. Park and W.-S. Ahn, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 821–843 CrossRef CAS .
O. Oleksiienko, C. Wolkersdorfer and M. Sillanpää, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 570–585 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qiu, J. Jiang and L. Ai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 945–951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Wang, Y.-Y. Wang, X. Bai, H. Yang, J.-P. Han, N. Lun, Y.-X. Qi and Y.-J. Bai, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 105771–105779 RSC .
D. Liu, W. Zhang, H. Lin, Y. Li, H. Lu and Y. Wang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 112, 1190–1198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhang, M. Huang, F. Li, X. L. Wang and Z. Q. Wen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 449–456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhang, F. Li, M. Huang, Y. Xing, X. Gao, B. Li, Z. Y. Guo and Y. M. Guan, Mater. Lett., 2014, 120, 263–266 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Wen, M. Li, F. Li, S. J. Zhu, X. Y. Liu, Y. X. Zhang, T. Kumeria, D. Losic, Y. Gao, W. Zhang and S. X. He, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 936–942 RSC .
X. L. Guo, M. Kuang, F. Li, X. Y. Liu, Y. X. Zhang, F. Dong and D. Losic, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, J. Chen, K. Zhou and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2017–2020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, K. Tian, B.-H. Cheng and H. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6682–6691 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, S. Zheng, X. Hu, Z. Shao, M. Zheng and H. Pang, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3859–3865 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Q. Li, M. Yuan, X. Guo, S. Zheng and H. Pang, Chem.–Asian J., 2019, asia.201900361 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, Z. Shao, T. Han, M. Zheng and H. Pang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8986–8992 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, R. Zheng, M.-J. Sun, X. Cao, C.-X. Sun, C.-J. Cui, C.-S. Liu, J. Zhao and M. Du, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14637–14641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Liu, Z.-H. Zhang, M. Chen, H. Zhao, F.-H. Duan, D.-M. Chen, M.-H. Wang, S. Zhang and M. Du, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3941–3944 RSC .
Q. Wang, N. Tsumori, M. Kitta and Q. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 12041–12045 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Wei, Q. Li, S. Zheng, Y. Xu, P. Du, C. Chen, J. Zhao, H. Xue, Q. Xu and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800886 CrossRef .
M. A. K. L. Dissanayake, W. N. S. Rupasinghe, J. M. N. I. Jayasundara, P. Ekanayake, T. M. W. J. Bandara, S. N. Thalawala and V. A. Seneviratne, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 1775–1783 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lin, C. L. Hung, M. Venkateswarlu and B. J. Hwang, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 397–401 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. K. L. Dissanayake, P. A. R. D. Jayathilaka, R. S. P. Bokalawala, I. Albinsson and B.-E. Mellander, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, L. Persi, B. Scrosati, F. Serraino-Fiory, E. Plichta and M. Hendrickson, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2457–2461 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, X. Xiao, B. Li, P. Gu, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8155–8186 RSC .
Y. Shi, X. Pan, B. Li, M. Zhao and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 343, 427–446 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ming, J. Qiu, S. Zhang, M. Li, X. Zhu, L. Wang and J. Ming, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1165–1171 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Shin, H. M. Jeong, B. G. Kim, J. K. Kang and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2283–2288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Q. Liang, J. Li, Y. Zhuang, Y. He, B. Bai and X. Wang, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 882–890 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, C.-C. Hou, Z. Liu, H. Pang and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15393–15401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, R. Mao, X. Yang and J. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 74, 271–274 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, X. Shan, N. Li, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11252 RSC .
Q. Xiao, Y. Fan, X. Wang, R. A. Susantyoko and Q. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 655–661 RSC .
X. Guo, S. Zheng, G. Zhang, X. Xiao, X. Li, Y. Xu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 150–169 CrossRef .
H. Xia, Q. Xu and J. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 66 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Gu, C. Yan, S. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhao, H. Wang and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44463–44471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, T. Su, L. Xu, M. Liu and H.-B. Du, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4341–4344 RSC .
P. Lu, Y. Sun, H. Xiang, X. Liang and Y. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702434 CrossRef .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Li, X.-L. Wu, H.-Z. Sun, K. Wang, C.-Y. Fan, L.-L. Zhang, F.-M. Yang and J.-P. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3495–3501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Zeng, Y. Ren, C. Zeng, J. Gu, X. Feng and H. He, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, D. Guan, Q. Yu, L. Xu, Z. Zhuang, T. Zhu, D. Zhao, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 112–118 CrossRef .
Z. Song, D. Zhu, L. Li, T. Chen, H. Duan, Z. Wang, Y. Lv, W. Xiong, M. Liu and L. Gan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1177–1186 RSC .
Y.-C. Zhang, Y. You, S. Xin, Y.-X. Yin, J. Zhang, P. Wang, X. Zheng, F.-F. Cao and Y.-G. Guo, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shen, C. Huang, L. Gan, J. Liu, Z. Gong and M. Long, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7946–7954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, Z. Wang, P. Lu, M. Jiang, F. Shi, X. Song, Z. Zheng, X. Zhou, Y. Fu, G. Abdelbast, X. Xiao, Z. Liu, V. S. Battaglia, K. Zaghib and G. Liu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6704–6710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Lin, N. Du, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and D. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6101–6104 RSC .
Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M.-M. Titirici, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Zhao, J. Li, H. Jin, X. Yu, Y. Lei and S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803221 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Wu, H. W. Liang, B. C. Hu and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15646–15662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang and K. Qiu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 4057–4064 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Chiu and D. H. L. Ng, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 46, 102–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, K. Zhang, Z. Hu, Z. Tao, L. Mai, Y.-M. Kang, S.-L. Chou and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701415 CrossRef .
M. Zheng, H. Tang, L. Li, Q. Hu, L. Zhang, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700592 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fang, L. Jiao, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3019–3024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, G. Zeng, J. Chen, L. Bi, L. Dai and Z. Wen, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 393–402 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Y. X. Yin, J. Y. Li, S. H. Wang, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, R. He, K. T. Rim, T. Schiros, K. S. Kim, H. Zhou, C. Gutierrez, S. P. Chockalingam, C. J. Arguello, L. Palova, D. Nordlund, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman, T. F. Heinz, P. Kim, A. Pinczuk, G. W. Flynn and A. N. Pasupathy, Science, 2011, 333, 999–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Huan Pang	Huan Pang received his PhD degree from the Nanjing University in 2011. He is now a university distinguished professor at the Yangzhou University. From the past 10 years, his group has been engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially MOF-based materials. He is on the editorial board of FlatChem and is the managing editor of EnergyChem, Elsevier. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Energy Environ. Sci., and Advanced Materials with 7800 citations (h-index = 53). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.

 	Scheme 1  The brief content sketch of this review.	 

 	Scheme 2  (a) Cylindrical diagrams for different kinds of Si-based materials derived from biomass for LIBs and SCs. (b) Percentage pie diagrams for Si-based materials derived from biomass in various electrochemical energy storage applications.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Bamboo; (b) 3D mesoporous C–SiO2 architectures derived from bamboo leaves after calcination; (c) SEM images of Bamboo charcoal; (d) RHs; (e) nano-SiO2 derived from RHs; (f) SEM characterization of diatomite frustule fragments with unique geometries; (g) SEM images of sugarcane bagasse; (h) SEM images of 3D microstructure of SiO2 derived from reeds. (a) Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission.3 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (e) Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. (f) Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (h) Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Flow chart for the preparation of nano-Si from porous SiO2 derived from RHs by magnesiothermic reduction. (b, c) SEM and HRTEM images of Si-JHR-5; (d) RHA-700-3; (e) higher magnification of HR-SEM micrographs of TR-Si. (f, g) SEM images of commercially agglomerated pristine Si and nanoporous Si derived from RHs via the MW-MR process. (h) A schematic diagram for Si production by the reduction of SiO2 obtained from RHs. (i, j) SEM and TEM images of SiRH; the top inset shows the lattice and the bottom inset shows the FFT pattern. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. (d, e) Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f, g) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (h, i, j) Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Process chart for synthesizing porous Si@C anode using bamboo leaves as Si and carbon sources; (b) TEM images of the porous Si@C composite; (c, d, e) TEM images with different magnifications of Si NPs with clear hexagonal honeycomb-shaped frustule-like structures inherited from diatoms; (f) TEM images of Si hollow spheres that are prepared by reducing C-coated SiO2 spheres, followed by acid etching; (g) TEM images of SiO2@C@SiO2@C after reduction; (h) the diagrammatic sketch of SiO2@C@SiO2@C; (i) high-magnification SEM image of the 3D highly porous and wrinkled hierarchical structure retained from reed leaves; (j, k) SEM images with different magnifications of the obtained 3D highly porous C-coated Si, where the inset shows the clear porous microstructure; (l) process diagram of extracting ultrafine Si NPs from dead bamboo leaves for preparing Si@C@RGO composites; (m, n) SEM and HR-TEM images of Si@C/RGO nanocomposites. (a, b) Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c, d, e) Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (f, g, h) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (i, j, k) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (l, m, n) Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The synthesis flow chart of Si-diatom@MnO2; the enlarged images describe the pore structure of the two morphologies. (b) SEM images of Si diatom@MnO2 nanosheets after 24 h and (c) Si diatom@MnO2 nanorods. (d) Flow diagram for the preparation of macroporous Si/Al2O3 composites (Si–Al-5-5). (e, f, g) SEM images of bare porous SiO2 particles, Si–Al-5-5 composite after aluminothermic reduction reaction, and Si–Al-7-3 with macroporous structure. (h, i) SEM and TEM images of the RH-Si NPs–rGO composite paper. (j) Chart for the carbonization process of SNCC precursor. (k, l) SEM and TEM images of SNCC spheres. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e, f, g) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (h, i) Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (j, k, l) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Flow chart for the preparation of SiO2–C/NCs. (b, c) SEM images of the 3D scalariform hierarchical porous structure of SiO2–C/NCs. (d, e) SEM images of carbonized diatoms before and after the milling procedure. (f) Schematic of the synthesis process of the SiOx/C composite. (g, h) SEM and TEM images of the SiOx/C composite. (i, j) SEM images of the SiO2 powder obtained from HCl-leached (h-silica) and water-rinsed (w-silica) rice husk. (k, l) SEM images with high magnification of h-silica and w-silica. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e) Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2017, Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry. (f, g, h) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (i, j, k, l) Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A simple composite graph. (b, c) SEM and TEM images of N,S co-doped 3D mesoporous C–Co3Si2O5(OH)4 architectures. (d) A simple composite graph of complex C–NiSi. (e, f) SEM and TEM images of C–NiSi-3. (g) The structural sketch of 3D C–ZnSi; (h) SEM image of 3D C–ZnSi with the Zn/Si ratio of 5/1. (i, j) SEM and TEM images of MnSi–C-3. (a, b, c) Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e, f) Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g, h) Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (i, j) Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 



Si-based

Si	RHs	Porous NPs	245	C/50, 2790/—	C/2, 95%/200, C/2, 86%/300	
76

Si/C	RHs	Nanoporous	—	C/50, 3518/—	C/5, 1997/200	
90

Si/GNS	RHs	Nanoporous	—	C/5, —	C/5, 1290/200
Si/MWCNT	RHs	Nanoporous	—	C/5, —	C/5, 1166/200
h-Silicon	RHs	Mesoporous NPs	213.2	100, 3420/—	1000, 1220.2/100	
123

4000, 1150.1/100
8000, 659.9/100
Si	RHs	Mesoporous NPs	45.2	C/50, 2681.3/1400.7	C/2, 64.5%/50	
138

Si-JHR-5	RHs	Mesoporous	7.5	100, 2936/2565	200, 166/100	
110

Si-JHR-3	12.6	100, 3026/2490	200, 661/100
Si-JHR-1	267	100, 3429/2294	200, 1311/100
Si	RHs	Interconnected porous	42	100, 84.8%	2000, 82.8%/200	
111



Si–C

c-Si	RHs	Interconnected 3D porous wall	47.3	C/10, 84.2%	2000, 100%/200	
85

Si@C	BLs	Porous	201	400, 1648/1080	2000, 99.9%/3700	
116

Si⊂C	Reed leaves	3D porous hierarchical	224	C/2, 4000/2435	C/2, 95.5%/200	
44

C-coated nanoSi	Diatoms	Frustule-like nanostructure	162.6	—	C/5, 80.7%/50	
139

Si/C/Si	Diatom frustules	Hollow spheres	—	100, 3795.3/2744	1000, 79.8%/100	
117

Si/C	RHs	3D porous NPs	198.8	100, 1256.1/617.8	100, 78%/200	
140



Si-others

c-Si–graphite (1:9)	RHs	Mesoporous	—	500, 93.8%	500, 87.4%/100	
141

Si/N–C/C	RHs	Nanotube spheres	78.5	100, 72%	500, 1031/100	
80

Si@N–C	Horsetails	NPs	273.59	100, 1148/—	1000, 750/760	
60

Si–rGO	RHs	NPs	—	1000, 70%	—	
120

Si/Al2O3	Diatoms	Microporous	
	C/20, 85.5%	C/5, 86%/100	
108

Si@C/RGO	BLs	Ultrafine NPs	
	210, 2678/2160	840, 1900/100	
118

Si/C/RGO	RHs	Porous network	539.4	—	100, 760/80	
142



SiO


x



C/SiO2	RHs	Microporous	1191.3	—	100, 1105/360	
143

SiOx/C	RHs	Microporous	
	100, 3096.6/1394.7	100, 98.1%/200	
90

SiOx/C	RHs	NPs	—	100, 998.5/466	100, 582.1/100	
124

SiO2–C/NCs	BLs	3D hierarchical porous	
	200, 586.2/—	200, 294.7/180	
79

C/SiO2	RHs	Porous	270	C/5, 611/325	C/5, 485/84	
144

C–SiO2	Diatoms	Porous	—	—	18, 94%/80	
145

Al2O3–C@SiO2	RHs	Porous NPs	—	—	100, 1390/260	
128


 	Fig. 7  (a) Galvanostatic cycling of RH-derived nano-Si and commercial metallurgical-grade Si particles. (b) Comparison of the cycling performances of h-silicon and w-silicon. (c, d) The first cycle charge–discharge curves and cycling performance of the three Si-JRH samples. (e) The reversible capacity of SiRH in the first cycle at 100 mA g−1. (f) Coulombic efficiencies of SiRH. (a) Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c, d) Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. (e, f) Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) EIS of RH-Si/C and RH-Si. (b) Delithiation capacities of c-SiRH, c-Si NPs, and bare Si NPs during cycling. (c) SEM image of Si⊂C after 200 cycles at the rate of 0.5C. (d) Simple process flow chart of carbon coating on nano-Si. (e) ESR values based on EIS analysis (1–10 cycles). (a) Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (b) Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. (c) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (d, e) Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cycling performance of C/SiO2 electrodes. (b, c) The volume change of graphene and SiO2–carbon nanocomposite (SiO2–C/NCs) during lithium insertion/extraction. (d) EIS analysis of SiO2–C/NCs and graphite. (e) Growth mechanism diagram of hollow Si spheres. (f) Cycling performance of the Si hollow spheres. (g) SEM image of the hollow Si spheres after 100 cycles. (a) Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. (b, c, d) Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e, f, g) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The comparison of EIS between the RH-Si electrode before cycling and the SNCC electrode before and after cycling. (b) The equivalent circuit diagram of the SNCC electrode before and after cycling. (c) SEM image of graphite. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles. (e) Cycling performance of c-SiRH at the rates of 500, 700, 900, and 1100 mA h g−1 for 100 cycles of c-SiRH. (f) Discharge capacity versus cycle number for the Si, Si@C and Si@C/RGO anodes. (g) Process diagrams for the preparation of RH-P–Si/C/RGO. (h) The comparison of cycling performance between RH-P–Si/C/RGO, RH-P–Si/C, and RH-Si/C. (i, j) SEM images of the carbon-coated pure Si and Si–Al-7-3 after 100 cycles. (k) Cycle performances of the Si/Al2O3 composites. (a, b) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c, d, e) Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2017, Springer. (f) Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g, h) Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (i, j, k) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 


Si diatom@MnO2	Diatoms	Nanosheet	41.9	0.5 A g−1, 341.5 F g−1	5 A g−1, 84.8%/2000	1 M Na2SO4	
87

SiO2	

RHs	
	3263	5 mV s−1, 330 F g−1	1 A g−1, 92%/2000	6.0 M KOH	
174

N,S co-doped	

BLs	Ultrathin nanoflakes	221	1 A g−1, 1600 F g−1	—	3.0 M KOH	
65

C–Co3Si2O5(OH)4
N,S-doped	BLs	NPs	475	5 mV s−1, 450 mF cm−2	1 mA cm−2, 83%/10000	3.0 M KOH	
75

C–Zn4Si2O7(OH)2·H2O
C–Ni3Si2O5(OH)4	BLs	Nanosheet	483.33	1 A g−1, 115.5 F g−1	1 A g−1, ∼100%/10000	3.0 M KOH	
94

Co3Si2O5(OH)4	Reed leaves	Ultrathin nanoflakes	210.2	0.7 A g−1, 570 F g−1	—	6.0 M KOH	
43

Ni3Si2O5(OH)4	282.5	0.7 A g−1, 887 F g−1	0.7 A g−1, 96.8%/2000	6.0 M KOH
C–MnSiOx	BLs	NPs	300.3	1 A g−1, 130.6 F g−1	1 A g−1, 85%/10000	3.0 M KOH	
126

SiO2–MnO2	Diatoms	3D hierarchical porous	57.5	0.25 A g−1, 202.6 F g−1	1 A g−1, 95.92%/5000	1 M Na2SO4	
175

NiO-modified diatomite	Diatoms	Moss-like	122.88	0.25 A g−1, 218.7 F g−1	3.0 A g−1, 90.61%/1000	1 M KOH	
176

GO-DE@MnO2	Diatoms	Nanosheet	—	0.5 A g−1, 152.5 F g−1	2.0 A g−1, 83.3%/2000	1 M Na2SO4	
177

Diatom@TiO2@MnO2	Diatoms	3D interconnected	29.96	0.2 A g−1, 231.2 F g−1	3.0 A g−1, 94.1%/2000	1 M Na2SO4	
178


 	Fig. 11  (a) Specific capacitances of NPCMs with different processing steps at different potential scan rates. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of Si diatom@MnO2 nanorods and nanosheets. (c) Charge transfer process diagram of particles inserted into the composite. (d) Specific capacitances of P1 and P2 electrodes. (e) Schematic diagram of electron transport within the electrode. (f) EIS of P1 and P2 electrodes. (g) Probable growth mechanism of MnSiOx in MnSi–C-3. (h) GCD curves of MnSi–C-n and SiO2–C. (a) Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c, d, e, f) Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (g, h) Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Morphology summary. (b) Contribution of Si and SiOx to the electrochemical properties. (c) Schematic diagram of Li+ transport between the Si-based particles with different sizes. (d) Morphological comparison after activation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
