Elucidating the performance and unexpected stability of partially coated water-splitting silicon photoanodes   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE00980E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE00980E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2590-2599Elucidating the performance and unexpected stability of partially coated water-splitting silicon photoanodes†

        
          
            Kiseok 
            Oh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cristelle 
            Mériadec
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Benedikt 
            Lassalle-Kaiser
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Vincent 
            Dorcet
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bruno 
            Fabre
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Soraya 
            Ababou-Girard
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Loïc 
            Joanny
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Francis 
            Gouttefangeas
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Gabriel 
            Loget
          
        
      *a
aUniv Rennes, CNRS, ISCR (Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes)-UMR6226, F-35000 Rennes, France. E-mail: gabriel.loget@univ-rennes1.fr
bUniv Rennes, CNRS, IPR (Institut de Physique de Rennes)-UMR6251, F-35000 Rennes, France
cSynchrotron SOLEIL, L’Orme des Merisiers, Saint-Aubin, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
dUniv Rennes, CNRS, ScanMAT-CMEBA-UMS2001, F-35000 Rennes, France
Received 
      4th April 2018
    , Accepted 26th June 2018First published on 26th June 2018AbstractH2 is an ideal energy carrier because it has a high energy density, and it can be easily stored, transported, and readily used to power electrical devices. Like photosynthesis, where photons are converted into energy-rich molecules, sunlight energy can be converted into H2 and O2 using photoelectrochemical water splitting cells (PECs). Despite the fact that silicon is considered one of the most attractive semiconductors for manufacturing photoelectrodes, its use is currently limited by its low activity and its instability in aqueous solutions. Herein, we report on surprisingly stable Si-based photoanodes, fabricated by simple aqueous electrodeposition, which results in the partial (<20%) coating of the Si surface with dispersed Ni nanoparticles (NPs). We show that photoelectrochemical activation considerably improves their performance by generating a high-activity catalytic shell around the Ni NPs. In addition, we demonstrate the stability of the photoanodes under various conditions in highly corrosive alkaline solutions in operation and in inactivity. The protection in operation is explained by anodic passivation, which generates a stabilizing SiOx layer. In contrast, the stability when no polarization is applied is unexpected because most of the Si, highly prone to etching, is in contact with the very corrosive aqueous phase. The experimental data allow us to propose a mechanism explaining this effect.

Broader context
Hydrogen (H2) has long been considered an ideal energy carrier because it has a higher energy density per mass unit than gasoline and Li-ion batteries and can be readily used to provide energy to buildings and energy-intensive transportation systems. Like photosynthesis, where light is transformed into energy-rich molecules, sunlight energy can be converted into H2 and O2 using water-splitting photoelectrochemical cells (PECs). These systems are based on photoelectrodes, composed of semiconductor absorbers modified with co-catalysts, which improve the reduction and oxidation of water. In this process, oxidation is the less efficient reaction and a lot of effort is currently being made for the preparation of cheap and stable photoanodes. Silicon is one of the most attractive photoelectrode materials, nevertheless, using Si as a photoanode is highly challenging as it is particularly prone to deactivation by spontaneous oxidation and chemical etching. It has been admitted that the introduction of a conformal protecting coating is a prerequisite to fabricate Si-based photoanodes, but recent results suggest an anomalous stability for Si modified with inhomogeneous electrodeposited Ni nanoparticles. Here, we elucidate this phenomenon that breaks with common protection strategies and that could be highly important for designing stable and efficient Si photoelectrodes.

Introduction
The conversion of sunlight into H2 is a clean alternative to fossil fuels for producing energy on-site and on-demand.1 This process can be achieved by photoelectrochemical cells (PECs), devices composed of semiconductor (SC) absorbers, immersed in an aqueous electrolyte, which can convert solar energy in pure H2.2,3 Under sunlight irradiation PECs absorb photons and convert them into charge carriers that are driven at the solid–liquid interface to react with water, generating simultaneously pure H2 and O2.4–8 Several monolithic PECs have been reported and operated with reasonable conversion efficiencies9 but their practical use will only be conceivable when their cost is reduced and their stability is improved.3,9
To be used in PECs, light absorbers must have several physical properties, such as a short band gap to absorb a significant part of the solar spectrum, high carrier mobilities, and low recombination rates. In addition to meeting these criteria, silicon (Si) is nontoxic, abundant and widely used by the photovoltaic industry, which makes it the most attractive material for PEC manufacturing.10 Employing Si as a photoelectrode remains, however, a challenge for two main reasons. First, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) are sluggish at the Si–liquid interface and require considerable overpotentials to occur, therefore the immobilization of co-catalysts (cocats) at the Si surface is essential to increase the reaction kinetics and lower the energy input. This implies stringent constraints in terms of material cost as well as a precise surface engineering strategy to preserve the light absorption and energetics of the photoelectrode.10 Second, as the self-oxidation potential of Si (−0.99 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode NHE) is much more negative than the standard potential of O2/H2O (+1.23 V vs. NHE), the oxidation of Si into insulating SiOx is the main process occuring at Si photoanodes,11,12 which leads to their quasi-spontaneous deactivation when used for water splitting.13,14 In addition, the instability of this material is even more pronounced in alkaline media due to the well-known chemical etching that happens spontaneously on Si and Si oxides at ambient conditions.15–17 If these crucial issues have restrained the development of efficient Si-based photoanodes for the last decades, tremendous progress on photoanode protection has been recently achieved.13,14 Protection strategies imply in almost all cases the introduction of a conformal layer (e.g. TiO2, indium tin oxide or NiOx) on Si, deposited by vapor deposition18–23 or atomic layer deposition.24–30
A handful of recent reports by our group31 and others32–34 have demonstrated that, despite the notorious instability of Si in water, the OER can be performed for relatively long times (up to 40 h) in strongly alkaline media with Si photoanodes partially covered with Ni-31 or Co-based electrodeposits.32 This behavior is particularly surprising because in these cases the majority of the Si surface is in direct contact with the corrosive environment. Besides being intriguing from a fundamental point of view, this phenomenon may also be highly important for the manufacturing of Si-based PECs because it relies on low-cost electrodeposition, which can be readily up-scaled.35 Yet, it is crucial to understand this unexpected behavior that may lead to breakthroughs in protection strategies for photoelectrodes.36
On the other hand, while PECs are also subject to degradation mechanisms when electrolysis is not occurring (e.g. during the night), the stability of photoanodes is almost exclusively tested under operating conditions.37 The question of the stability of unpolarized photoelectrodes is particularly relevant in the case of low bandgap semiconductors in harsh environments, and Si photoanodes partially coated with nanoparticles (NPs) have only been studied under operation.31–34
Here, we report on high-activity Si photoanodes prepared by a simple low-cost process. We first study their photoelectrochemical activation, which considerably improves their performance. We demonstrate then that illumination, as well as operation, drastically affects their stability and we show that they can be exposed to alkaline electrolytes for long periods of time, even when inactive. Finally, based on electrochemical and electron microscopy data, we discuss the mechanisms that explain such a stability.
Results and discussion
High-performance n-Si photoanodes decorated with Ni or Co NPs are considered metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) junctions operating in the “pinch-off” regime38–40 (a scheme is shown in the inset of Fig. 1a). Herein, a large barrier height (ϕb) is imposed by the metal-free regions, where the SC surface states are passivated by the native oxide layer. Contrariwise, the metal induces a considerably lower ϕb in its vicinity by pinning the SC's Fermi level (Ef). It has been shown that when the characteristic size of the metal NP is smaller than the width of the space-charge layer (SCL), the minority carriers experience the high ϕb but not the low ϕb. This regime is extremely beneficial because it takes advantage of the metal-free regions to generate a high photovoltage and the metal–Si junction to create a low resistance pathway for photogenerated minority carriers, which are readily injected into the metal cocat for water oxidation. In this work, dispersed hemispherical Ni0 NPs were deposited on n-Si (100) by cathodic electrodeposition from an aqueous solution (see ESI† for more details). Our process led to an NP surface coverage of 18% (Fig. S1, ESI†) indicating that most of the Si surface was not covered by Ni. Nonetheless, as the modification took place under ambient conditions, the exposed Si surfaces were covered by a thin SiOx oxide layer.15
 Fig. 1  (a) LSVs recorded under AM 1.5G illumination for a photoanode before (blue) and after (red) activation. LSVs recorded in the dark and after electrochemical activation for a photoanode (black) and a sputtered Ni thin film (green). Inset: Scheme showing a cross-section of the pinched-off MIS photoanode under operation. (b) Evolution of j1.23V (red), jpa (black) and jmax (blue) during activation. (c) IPCE spectra recorded at +1.23 V (thick lines) and +2 V (thin line) for n-Si modified with Ni NPs before (blue) and after (red) activation. All curves were recorded in O2-saturated stirred 1 M NaOH at 100 mV s−1, except for the green LSV that was recorded at 20 mV s−1 (see Fig. S4a for more details, ESI†). 
The anodic behavior of such surfaces in 1 M NaOH (measured pH = 13.6) is shown by the linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) of Fig. 1a (Fig. S3a, ESI† presents the corresponding cyclic voltammograms (CVs)). Negligible currents were obtained in the dark whereas, under simulated sunlight, substantial oxidation photocurrents were measured. In all cases except for the freshly-prepared photoanode, a redox wave attributed to the NiIII/NiII redox couple first appeared,41,42 followed by a higher OER current accompanied by O2 bubble evolution, according to reaction (1): 4OH−(l) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 2H2O(l)(1)
Photoelectrochemical activation
Photoelectrochemical conditioning, achieved by imposing a hundred successive voltammetric cycles under illumination (Fig. S3b, ESI†), led to a gradual improvement of the photoanode performance. This can be noticed by comparing the LSV recorded at the first cycle (blue) with the one recorded at the hundredth cycle (red). In the following, we will refer to this process as activation. The activation of Ni surfaces and thin films has been previously reported40–42 but has not been thoroughly characterized on a SC surface in the nanoscale regime; we will investigate it on our system in the following. Activating by electrochemical cycling is particularly relevant here as it allows precise in situ measurements of several benchmark parameters at each successive cycle, namely: the light-limited photocurrent density (jmax), the photocurrent density at the standard potential (E0) of the O2/H2O couple (j1.23V) and the one at the NiIII/NiII oxidation peak (jpa).
The evolution of these parameters during activation is shown in Fig. 1b. First, one can observe that jpa, which was almost zero at first, gradually increased. As this redox wave corresponds to the oxidation of Ni(OH)2,41,42 it demonstrates that the activation process transformed part of the Ni0 NPs into redox active Ni(OH)2 species. During this wave, Ni(OH)2 was converted into NiOOH, according to reaction (2): NiII(OH)2(s) + OH−(l) + h+ → NiIIIOOH(s) + H2O(l)(2)NiOOH (in particular, its γ-phase) is commonly presented as the catalytically-active phase for the OER in Ni-based compounds,43,44 it is thus considered here as the cocat. After this redox wave, the OER photocurrent increased with a slope dependent on the reaction kinetics (Fig. 1a). The red curve of Fig. 1b shows a striking increase of j1.23V (>5 fold), demonstrating that the conversion efficiency was considerably improved by the activation. This effect was further confirmed by the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra recorded at +1.23 V (Fig. 1c). In addition, activation also increased jmax by 11%, as revealed by the blue curve of Fig. 1b. To sum up, activation led to photoanodes with jpa, j1.23V and jmax values of 1.12 ± 0.3, 7.8 ± 2.4 and 27.9 ± 3.9 mA cm−2, respectively, as based on measurements obtained on ten individual photoanodes. Fig. 1a also presents an LSV obtained for a sputtered, 100 nm-thick, Ni thin film (green curve), activated using the same procedure as described before (Fig. S4b, ESI†). The comparison between the green and the red curves indicates that the activated photoanode triggered the OER at an onset potential negatively shifted by 0.36 V (Fig. S9, ESI†) with respect to the non-photoactive Ni surface.
Several hypotheses can be drawn regarding the origin of the performance increase during activation: it could be induced by a variation of the energetics of the photoanode or by improved electrocatalysis at the cocat/electrolyte interface. In order to gain further insights into these aspects, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out. First, Mott–Schottky (MS) plots shown in Fig. 2a reveal that the flat band potential Efb did not change after the activation process, suggesting that the performance improvement was not induced by its shift. Additionally, the Nyquist plots show two semi-circles in the frequency range 120 kHz–0.1 Hz (Fig. 2b) with the diameter of the second semi-circle being strongly decreased after activation. These curves were reasonably fitted using the equivalent electrical circuit depicted in the inset,33,45 which includes the resistances and capacitances associated with the charge transfers processes at the cocat/electrolyte interface (R1, C1) and in the solid phase (R2, C2) as well as the solution resistance (Rs). The fits (Table S2, ESI†) revealed a considerable decrease of the charge transfer resistance R1 after activation (>3 fold) as well as an increase of C1 (6 fold). This behavior is well in line with improved hole transfer caused by the generation of the catalytic NiOOH–Ni(OH)2 phase at the Ni/electrolyte interface during activation.
 Fig. 2  (a) MS plots recorded at 2 kHz for an anode before (blue) and after (red) activation, squares are experimental points and lines are linear fits. (b) Nyquist plots recorded at +1.23 V under AM 1.5G illumination, disks are experimental points and lines are fits of the equivalent circuit shown in the inset. All curves were recorded in O2-saturated stirred 1 M NaOH. 
Characterization of activated photoanodes
The effect of activation was also investigated using scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM and TEM) as well as atomic force microscopy (AFM). SEM pictures of an as-deposited and an activated surface are shown in Fig. 3a, b and Fig. S2 (ESI†), respectively. Analysis of the size distribution (Fig. S6, ESI†) indicated that the Ni NPs before activation had an average diameter of 60 ± 36 nm. The NP height, measured on cross-sectional views such as the one in Fig. 3b, was 30 ± 8 nm, which was confirmed by AFM measurements (average NP height = 33 ± 9 nm, Fig. 3c and Fig. S12, ESI†). SEM did not allow us to observe a significant change of the geometrical parameters after activation, except for the NP mean diameter that increased by 5% (63 ± 42 nm, Fig. S6, ESI†), due to volume expansion associated with the oxidation of the Ni NPs.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM top view showing the surface of a photoanode before activation. (b) Corresponding SEM cross-sectional view. (c) Corresponding AFM image. (d) TEM and (e) HR TEM images of a single Ni NP electrodeposited on n-Si. (f) TEM and (g) HR TEM images obtained after activation of the surface, the external boundary of the NP shell is indicated by a dashed red line. 
In contrast, TEM gave clear information about the NP morphology. Fig. 3d and e shows a single Ni NP on Si after deposition. The Ni NPs were polycrystalline with a selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern corresponding to Ni0 (Fig. S15a, ESI†). High-resolution (HR) TEM observations revealed that the Si surface was coated with an amorphous layer of SiOx having a thickness of around 1 nm (Fig. 3e). After activation, the outer surface of the Ni NPs (i.e. the one exposed to the electrolyte) drastically changed. As shown in Fig. 3f and g (additional high-resolution TEM pictures are shown in Fig. S14, ESI†), all NPs were encapsulated by a ∼10 nm-thick rough and polycrystalline shell. The SAED pattern of an individual NP after activation (Fig. S15b, ESI†) shows three spots which confirm the presence of Ni0 and Ni(OH)2, indicating that the shell was composed of the Ni(OH)2 pre-catalytic phase that formed during activation, as previously assumed based on the electrochemical measurements (vide supra). In addition, this figure reveals two rings that may be ascribed to Ni(OH)2, and γ-NiOOH and/or NiO. While the presence of γ-NiOOH and NiO is uncertain, these phases could exist on the NPs, the first one, in the shell, as a product of reaction (2) and the latter one, at the interface between Ni0 and the shell.41
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on surfaces after preparation and after activation. The survey spectra (Fig. S16, ESI†) confirmed the presence of the expected elements: Si, O, and Ni as well as Na for the activated electrode, the latter being probably integrated into the NP shell during activation. Several regions of particular interest are reported in Fig. 4a. Before activation, the Ni 2p region exhibited the characteristic shape for Ni0 with 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks at respective binding energies of 853.8 and 871.3 eV, which is in good agreement with what has been reported for Ni0 thin films.46,47 After activation, the XPS signal changed considerably and could be fitted with four broad components at binding energies of 857.1, 863.2, 874.7 and 881.3 eV, values in good agreement with the Ni 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks and the satellite peaks commonly observed for Ni(OH)248 and NiOOH (these compounds can be hardly differentiated by XPS),49 which corroborate our electrochemical and TEM data. Only one Si 2p peak was detected on the as-prepared surface, at 98.8 eV, which corresponds to lattice Si. After activation, the intensity of this peak decreased and an additional one appeared at 102.5 eV, demonstrating the extension of the SiOx layer during electrochemical activation.50
 Fig. 4  (a) XPS spectra showing the Ni 2p, Si 2p, O 1s and Fe 2p regions, measured for the as-deposited (blue) and activated (red) photoanodes. The first three spectra were recorded with an Al source and the fourth one with an Mg source. Fits and Shirley backgrounds are represented by black thin lines. (b) XANES spectra at the nickel K-edge of the as-deposited (blue) and activated (red) samples and of the reference compounds metallic Ni0 (black dotted), Ni(OH)2 (black dashed) and γ-NiOOH (black dash-dotted). (c) Linear combination fitting of the activated sample showing the experimental data (red), the weighted spectra of the Ni0 (black dotted), Ni(OH)2 (black dashed) and γ-NiOOH (black dashed-dotted) references, the fit (green) and the residual difference (grey) between the experimental data and the fit. 
These measurements are in very good agreement with the evolution of the signals observed in the O 1s region, where a considerable increase of the peak at 532.9 eV was observed after activation. In addition, the O 1s broad peak could eventually be fitted with two components, the largest corresponding to SiOx and the second one, at 531.5 eV, to Ni(OH)2.48 Careful examination of the Fe 2p region was quite interesting, indeed, even if the four survey spectra of Fig. S16 did not indicate the presence of this element, we intentionally performed high count rate measurements with a Mg source (in order to avoid the Ni Auger peaks in the Fe 2p region), which revealed small peaks at 713.3 and 726.3 eV, demonstrating the presence of Fe on the surface. Fe was only observed after activation, which confirms that its incorporation originates from this treatment. Based on the XPS data, the Fe to Ni ratio in the NP shell was evaluated at 0.14. The presence of Fe in the catalytic phase is particularly relevant as it has been clearly documented that adventitious Fe incorporates in Ni(OH)2 and NiOOH during electrochemical experiments.51 Although the precise role of Fe in NiOOH catalysts is still under debate,52–54 it is known to have a considerable influence on the activity of Ni-based OER electrocatalysts.55,56
X-ray absorption near edge spectra (XANES) were recorded at the Ni K-edge on a sample after deposition and after electrochemical activation. Fig. 4b and c shows the XANES spectra of these two surfaces, together with reference samples. A first observation indicates that the sample before activation is very close to metallic Ni, while the one after activation presents features reminiscent of Ni oxides (the intense peak at 8350 eV). We performed linear combination fittings (Table S1, ESI†) on these two samples using the reference spectra shown in Fig. 4b. Although the as-deposited sample can be fit with a ca. 10% contribution of NiII, a contribution from one of the NiOOH phases is required to reproduce the spectrum of the sample after activation. Fig. 4c shows a fit that was obtained with a Ni0/Ni(OH)2/γ-NiOOH composition of 64:29:11. Although the figures of merit of the fits cannot rule out the presence of NiO and/or β-NiOOH, it is clear that contributions from both Ni(II) and Ni(III) components are required to reproduce the experimental spectrum.
To sum up, electrochemical data, and TEM, XPS and XANES measurements revealed that photoelectrochemical activation induced Si oxidation and generated a Ni(OH)2–NiOOH catalytic shell doped with Fe atoms over the Ni0 NPs.
Stability during operation
After having characterized our photoanodes and described the effect of electrochemical activation, we will now discuss their stability, first, in operation and, in the following section, under unbiased conditions.

Fig. 5a shows the chronoamperometry (CA) curves obtained for two activated photoanodes during prolonged electrolysis at different potentials. When the polarization was positive enough (+2.9 V), the photoanodes delivered the photocurrent density corresponding to jmax, as defined in Fig. 1, and operated with a quantitative OER faradaic efficiency (inset of Fig. 5a). The current was stable for several hours and the stability time (defined here as the time during which j remains >90% of the initial j) was 11 h. Performing the electrolysis with a smaller overpotential (at ) led to a more interesting situation that is presented in the red curve of Fig. 5a. The photoanode first delivered j1.23, then the photocurrent increased during the 8 first hours and, finally, decayed. In order to understand this phenomenon, LSVs were recorded at different electrolysis times, as shown in Fig. 5b. These curves demonstrate that the OER onset potential shifted negatively during the photocurrent rising period and that the surface was totally deactivated after 20 h of operation. The stability time was, in this case, 14 h, and the faradaic efficiency 92%.
 Fig. 5  (a) CAs curves recorded during prolonged photoelectrolysis for activated photoanodes that were held at +2.9 V (purple) and +1.23 V (red) and for a freshly hydrogenated n-Si surface at +1.23 V (black); the asterisk indicates when bubbles were removed from the surface and the colored arrows indicate when LSVs were performed. Inset: Corresponding OER faradaic efficiencies. (b) LSVs recorded under AM 1.5G illumination at t = 0, 1.7, 5 and 20 h during the photoelectrolysis at +1.23 V, as indicated by the colored arrows in Fig. 5a. (c) ABPE curves corresponding to the LSVs shown in Fig. 5b. 
In addition, the evolution of the photoanode performance over the electrolysis can be clearly observed in the applied bias photon-to-current efficiency curves (ABPE). According to Fig. 5c, the ABPE maximum, which was in all cases found between +1.1 and +1.2 V, varied from an initial value of 0.1% to 1% at 7 h. This considerable improvement is attributed to the in operando activation of the photoanode induced by the increase of the catalytic shells around the Ni NPs. This is confirmed by the increase of the charge under the NiIII/NiII oxidation wave, which varied from an initial value of 0.13 to 0.30 mC cm−2 at 5 h. The gradual deactivation of the photoanode is corroborated by the removal of the NPs that was clearly observed by SEM (Fig. 8b and Fig. S17, ESI†). Interestingly, the Si surface did not exhibit etching pits after such long electrolysis. Indeed, pits are supposed to develop as a result of the fast and spontaneous chemical etching when a Si surface is immersed in an alkaline solution,15 as described by the following reaction: Si(s) + 2H2O(l) + 2OH−(l) → SiO2(OH)22−(l) + 2H2(g)(3)The absence of etching during electrolysis can be ascribed to the anodic protection of the Si surface that we will describe in detail in the following.
Anodic passivation is clearly illustrated by the black CVs of Fig. 6 that shows the electrochemical behavior of bare Si undergoing alkaline etching in the electrolyte used for electrolysis. The anodic wave that appeared at the first cycle corresponds to the formation of an oxide layer which electrically passivated the surface,15 as revealed by the vanishing of current, obvious in the subsequent scans. This wave is characterized by the potential at which the current is maximum, i.e. the passivation potential (PP),17,57,58 here, +0.06 V as indicated in Fig. 6. Because the electrolysis of Fig. 5a was performed at potentials of more than 1 V positive from the PP, we can clearly state that the Si in operating photoanodes was coated by an anodic SiOx layer, in good agreement with the scheme presented in the inset of Fig. 1a. With the etching rate of anodic Si oxides being more than two orders of magnitude smaller than the one for Si in alkaline solutions,15 protection occurred during photoelectrolysis and the Si surface was preserved from chemical etching.
 Fig. 6  CVs recorded under illumination for an n-Si surface undergoing alkaline etching in 1 M NaOH (black) and an activated photoanode after the etching of SiOx (red). The positions of the OCP, the PP, and the Efb determined in Fig. 2a are indicated by arrows; the small arrows in the bottom left corner indicate the sweep direction. Inset: Schemes depicting the cross-section of the surfaces in the regions of potential indicated on the CVs. 
If anodic passivation can be quite efficient to protect Si-based photoanodes during operation, it is expected to be totally inefficient for non-polarized surfaces, i.e. at the open-circuit potential (OCP), because, in this case, the protective oxide is not renewed. Indeed, although SiOx etching is much slower than Si, SiOx is also subjected to alkaline etching,15 which should irremediably result in the exposure of the Si surface to the electrolyte and should cause its subsequent degradation following reaction (3).
Stability at the open-circuit potential
In order to investigate the stability of the photoanodes when not active for the OER, we studied their behavior under the same conditions as those used for electrolysis, except that they were unbiased (Fig. 7). We will first discuss the control experiments that are shown in Fig. 7b. The OCP of an oxide-free Si surface undergoing etching (black curve) was relatively stable with a value of −0.18 V, in good agreement with the one determined by the black CV of Fig. 6. In contrast, the OCP of a Si surface covered with a native SiOx layer (blue curve) first dropped and stabilized at −0.18 V after 0.6 h, when the oxide was fully removed and etching of bare Si started following reaction (3).
 Fig. 7  (a) Graphs showing the evolution of the OCP of activated photoanodes recorded: under illumination (red), under illumination with the photoelectrode being held at +2.9 V for 1 min after each CV (blue) and in the dark (black). CVs were recorded at the times indicated by the vertical dotted lines. Inset: Scheme depicting the cross-section of the surface at the times indicated in the left part of the red curve (the color code is the same as in Fig. 6). (b) Graphs showing the evolution of the OCP under illumination for an HF-treated n-Si surface (black), for a SiOx-covered n-Si surface (blue) and in the dark for an activated Ni thin film (green). (c) LSVs recorded under illumination at the times indicated by arrows during the OCP measurements in the red (top) and the black (bottom) curves of Fig. 7a. 
In the experiments of Fig. 7a, the OCP of freshly activated photoanodes was recorded as a function of time, CVs were regularly recorded in order to evaluate the photoanode performance and the experiments were stopped when they exhibited clear signs of degradation. One can note that the OCP variation always followed a similar trend after activation or after recording a CV: it decreased sharply to a minimum value of ∼0 V and quickly increased to a more stable value, thus leading to a dip followed by a plateau. This type of profile is generally controlled by the etching of the SiOx layer and OCP dips are commonly attributed to the dissolution of the Si/SiOx transition layer.58–61 In all cases, the first dip appeared around 1 h of immersion and the subsequent dips were recorded at an average time of 0.7 h after the CV. Ellipsometry measurements revealed that the thickness of the SiOx layer on an activated, Ni-free n-Si surface was 2.3 nm (surface conditioned with 100 CV cycles in 1 M NaOH under illumination). By considering this value as the thickness of the SiOx layer on the photoanodes after activation, 1 h of exposure to the 1 M NaOH solution would result in an etching rate of 6 × 10−4 nm s−1, which is in very good agreement with the reported values (anodic oxides are known to be etched at 1 × 10−3 nm s−1 in 2 M KOH).15,58 This confirms that the dip appearance was related to the dissolution of the last oxide layer. These sharp dips allowed us to know exactly when the Si was free of oxide and their recurrence after recording a CV confirmed that this measurement regenerated a SiOx layer (inset of Fig. 7a). It makes sense as the potential applied during the CV (up to +2.9 V) largely exceeded the PP (black CVs of Fig. 6). The fact that the SiOx film etched faster after a CV than after the activation suggests that the oxide layers generated by the latter process were thicker and/or denser.
The first experiment, shown by the red curve of Fig. 7a, was performed under constant illumination. Apart from the variations induced by SiOx dissolution (vide supra) the OCP was relatively stable with values between +0.2 and +0.1 V. These values match very well with the value of +0.17 V determined in the red CV of Fig. 6, which presents the electrochemical behavior of a photoanode after dissolution of the SiOx layer (recorded just after the appearance of a dip). The LSVs (Fig. 7c and Fig. S18, ESI†) indicate that the photoanode was stable during the first 23 h, started showing signs of degradation at 25 h and was totally damaged after 27 h. This behavior is striking since, in this case, the photoanode was not anodically protected and no SiOx preserved Si from chemical etching for more than 20 h. In order to further investigate this protective effect, activated photoanodes exposed for 30 h to the electrolyte under illumination were observed by SEM. It is remarkable to note in Fig. 8c and Fig. S19 (ESI†) that Si did not undergo etching, as no pits were observed (the differences in NP density and morphology will be discussed in the last part).
 Fig. 8  SEM pictures showing top views of activated photoanodes: (a) after activation, (b) after 20 h of photoelectrolysis in 1 M NaOH at +1.23 V, (c) after being immersed in 1 M NaOH for 30 h under illumination and (d) after the OCP measurements shown in the black curve of Fig. 7a. The scale bars equal 1 μm. 
In order to investigate how oxidation can affect the stability, another set of experiments was carried out, in the same way as previously, except that the surfaces were polarized at +2.9 V for 1 min after each CV (Fig. 7a, blue curve, CVs were recorded at the times indicated by dotted lines). Here, the OCP followed the same trend as previously, settled at +0.15 V after SiOx dissolution and we detected degradation at 22.3 h (Fig. S20, ESI†). This experiment confirms that the stability at the OCP is not improved by additional electrochemical oxidation, on the contrary, applying such a positive potential was found to deteriorate the stability time.
We now investigate the effect of illumination. In the last set of experiments (the black curve of Fig. 7a), we performed the same experiment as that shown by the red curve except that it was carried out in the dark. In this case, the first dip appeared at the same time as for the previous experiments, indicating that illumination did not affect the SiOx etching kinetics. However, after the first CV, the OCP dropped down and stabilized at −0.15 V, very close to the value for etching Si, as shown in Fig. 7b. This surface was observed with SEM (Fig. 8d and Fig. S21, ESI†), which clearly revealed pits on the Si surface as well as the detachment of the NPs in many areas, confirming that the electrode underwent alkaline etching after 4 h.
To sum up, this set of OCP experiments demonstrates that: (i) illuminated photoanodes do not degrade for more than 20 h, even when oxide-free Si is in contact with the alkaline solution, (ii) additional electrochemical oxidation of Si does not improve the stability and (iii) the surfaces are more prone to alkaline etching in the dark. The first two points clearly reveal that the protection mechanism taking place at the OCP is not related to the anodic protection occurring on operating photoanodes (vide supra) and the third point highlights the importance of illumination for surface stability.
Proposed mechanism for unbiased photoanodes
These results were unexpected and show that the behavior of our photoanodes is totally different from the one of Si in NaOH solutions, even though only 18% of the surface was initially covered by the Ni NPs. We attribute the resistance towards etching to a modification of the solution-exposed Si surface. It makes sense because it is well known that small modifications in Si characteristics (e.g. induced by the type of dopant or its density) can have a dramatic effect on the rate of alkaline etching.15 In our case, electroless deposition of Ni is thermodynamically possible as the standard potential of the Ni2+/Ni0 couple (−0.26 vs. NHE)62 is more positive than the self-oxidation potential of Si (−0.99 vs. NHE), therefore allowing the following overall reaction: 2Ni2+(l) + Si(s) + O2(g)→ 2Ni0(s) + SiO2(s)(4)This is comforted by several reports by Osaka et al. that have demonstrated the feasibility of electroless plating of Ni on Si in alkaline media.61,63 On the other hand, the OCP of Fig. 7a was always more positive than the Efb (Fig. 2a and 6), which means that the electrodes at the OCP during SiOx etching were in the depletion regime. This indicates that, in these conditions and under illumination, the photogenerated holes are directed to the solid–electrolyte interface where they can participate in oxidation reactions. Since the oxidation potential of Ni(OH)2 is very high (>0.8 V, as shown in Fig. 6), these holes should oxidize Ni0 rather than Ni(OH)2, thus, the two following reactions may occur: Ni0(s) + 2OH−(l) + 2h+ → NiII(OH)2(s)(5) Ni0(s) + 2h+ → Ni2+(l)(6)Given the high pH in solution and the low solubility product constant of Ni(OH)2 (Ks ∼ 10−16), the concentration of Ni2+ ions in solution must be very low.64 However, this is probably different at the photoelectrode interface. In particular, we believe that the rate of reaction (6) can be considerably increased by complexation of the Ni2+ ions by negatively charged species such as silicates. It is known that soluble silicates and their polymers are released during the etching of SiOx15 and Si16 and they should accumulate in the Helmholtz layer to compensate for the positive charge of the depleted Si, as shown in Fig. 9a. Note that several examples of metal cation–silicate complexes, soluble in alkaline solution, have been reported in the literature.65,66 Such a favorable local environment should enhance the rate of reaction (6), leading to local enrichment of Ni2+ ions over the uncovered surface. As soon as Si is free of oxide (at the dips in Fig. 7a), these Ni2+ ions can be deposited on Si following the electroless reaction (4). Obviously, the so-generated Si oxide is instantaneously etched and the deposited Ni0 is oxidized. This mechanism explains the illumination dependence of alkaline etching because no holes are generated in the dark, thus, reaction (6) cannot occur, inhibiting the Ni electroless deposition.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Schemes depicting the electroless deposition mechanism explaining the enhanced stability of the photoanodes at the OCP under illumination. (c) High magnification SEM picture showing the surface of a photoanode after activation. (d) High magnification SEM picture of the same photoanode after being exposed to 1 M NaOH under illumination for 15 h, for clarity 3 NPs are indicated by dashed circles. 
We expect this mechanism to generate a Ni submonolayer on the Si surface (Fig. 9b), that could considerably decrease the Si etching kinetics, explaining the enhanced stability at the OCP under illumination. This mechanism is well corroborated by SEM observations at high magnification (Fig. 9c and d) that revealed the difference in the morphology of the NPs present on an activated photoanode before and after immersion in the electrolyte at the OCP for 15 h under illumination. These images show clearly that the majority of the NPs shrunk by more than 75% of their initial volume, demonstrating their dissolution under illumination (additional SEM pictures are provided in Fig. S22 and S23, ESI†). In contrast, no clear change of the NP size could be observed for electrodes that underwent alkaline etching in the dark (Fig. 8d and Fig. S21, ESI†). These results confirm the dissolution of the Ni NPs under illumination (reaction (6)) and support the electroless deposition-based mechanism (overall eqn (4)).
Conclusions
We have reported on high-performance Si-based photoanodes, fabricated by a simple low-cost process only involving the aqueous electrodeposition of Ni NPs on n-Si. In spite of the notorious instability of Si in aqueous solutions and the fact that the Ni covers a very small part of the Si surface, these electrodes show striking performance for the OER in alkaline electrolytes. We have presented a deep investigation of the photoelectrochemical activation, which, by generating a high-activity Ni(OH)2–NiOOH catalytic shell around the Ni NPs, considerably improves the photoanode performance for the OER in alkaline media. In addition, we have studied the stability of these surfaces in operation and unbiased conditions. While the stability of operating photoanodes can be understood by anodic passivation, we showed that the stability at the OCP is dependent on illumination. Our findings allowed us to propose a mechanism, based on electroless deposition, explaining the resistance towards alkaline etching. While the stability of these electrodes is still far from that of the ones obtained with thin film deposition methods (e.g. sputtered NiOx),22 a great advantage of our method is that it is based on a very simple fabrication step that only requires the use of a potentiostat. Additional chemical protection methods based, for instance, on selectively stabilizing the Si and/or the Ni should rapidly lead to further improvement of stability. In addition, this method can be adapted to a p+–n buried junction in order to improve the photoconversion efficiency. The behavior of these photoelectrodes is highly intriguing and breaks with the common protection strategies based on conformal thin films. It thus opens up new opportunities that might lead to breakthrough advances in the field of photoelectrode protection.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is partly funded by ANR (project EASi-NANO, ANR-16-CE09-0001-01) and has also been supported by Rennes Métropole (AIS 16C402). Y. Leroux, S. Fryars and S. Tsareva are acknowledged for valuable discussions. We are grateful to Pr. Kwabena D. Bediako, University of California, Berkeley, for the synthesis of the NiOOH phases used as references for XAS measurements.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, S. Lewis and E. W. Mcfarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
A. Rothschild and H. Dotan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 45–51 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. Gerischer, in Solar Energy Conversion: Solid-State Physics Aspects, ed. B. O. Seraphin, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1979, pp. 115–172 Search PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber, S. Ardo, A. Berger, Y. Chen, R. Coridan, K. T. Fountaine, S. Haussener, S. Hu, R. Liu, N. S. Lewis, M. A. Modestino, M. M. Shaner, M. R. Singh, J. C. Stevens, K. Sun and K. Walczak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12974–12988 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
K. Sun, S. Shen, Y. Liang, P. E. Burrows, S. S. Mao and D. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8662–8719 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. S. Wrighton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1706–1710 CrossRef .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 82, 133–143 CrossRef .
S. Hu, N. S. Lewis, J. W. Ager, J. Yang, J. R. McKone and N. C. Strandwitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24201–24228 CrossRef .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .

          X. G. Zhang, Electrochemistry of Silicon and Its Oxide, Kluwer Academic,  2001 Search PubMed .
E. D. Palik, H. F. Gray and P. B. Klein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 956–959 CrossRef .
P. Allongue, V. Costa-Kieling and H. Gerischer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 1018–1026 CrossRef .
K. Jun, Y. S. Lee, T. Buonassisi and J. M. Jacobson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 423–427 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Cox, M. T. Winkler, J. J. H. Pijpers, T. Buonassisi and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 532–538 RSC .
B. Mei, A. A. Permyakova, R. Frydendal, D. Bae, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, O. Hansen, I. E. L. Stephens, P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3456–3461 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kenney, M. Gong, Y. Li, J. Z. Wu, J. Feng, M. Lanza and H. Dai, Science, 2013, 342, 836–840 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sun, F. H. Saadi, M. F. Lichterman, W. G. Hale, H.-P. Wang, X. Zhou, N. T. Plymale, S. T. Omelchenko, J.-H. He, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 3612–3617 Search PubMed .
B. Guo, A. Batool, G. Xie, R. Boddula, L. Tian, S. U. Jan and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1516–1521 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. P. Lawrence, K. W. Kemp, T. Ito, A. Walsh, C. E. D. Chidsey, P. K. Hurley and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 99–105 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Yang, S. Klaus, L. J. Lee, R. Woods-Robinson, J. Ma, Y. Lum, J. K. Cooper, F. M. Toma, L.-W. Wang, I. D. Sharp, A. T. Bell and J. W. Ager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9595–9603 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yao, R. Chen, J. Li, J. Han, W. Qin, H. Wang, J. Shi, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13664–13672 CrossRef PubMed .
I. A. Digdaya, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, B. J. Trześniewski, E. C. Garnett and W. A. Smith, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15968 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Santinacci, M. W. Diouf, M. K. S. Barr, B. Fabre, L. Joanny, F. Gouttefangeas and G. Loget, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24810–24818 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, G. She, C. Chen, S. Zhang, L. Mu, X. Guo and W. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8594–8598 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Loget, B. Fabre, S. Fryars, C. Mériadec and S. Ababou-Girard, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 569–573 CrossRef .
J. C. Hill, A. T. Landers and J. A. Switzer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1150–1155 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, P. Yang, S. Chen, M. Zhang and G. Shi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601805 CrossRef .
G. Xu, Z. Xu, Z. Shi, L. Pei, S. Yan, Z. Gu and Z. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2897–2903 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Dong, Y. J. Song, H. Yoon, G. H. Jung, K. Kim, S. Kim and J.-L. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700659 CrossRef .
K. Sun, N. L. Ritzert, J. John, H. Tan, W. Hale, J. Jiang, I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, K. M. Papadantonakis, T. P. Moffat, B. S. Brunschwig and N. Lewis, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 983–998 RSC .
T. Han, Y. Shi, X. Song, A. Mio, L. Valenti, F. Hui, S. Privitera, S. Lombardo and M. Lanza, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8053–8060 RSC .
R. T. Tung, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 13509–13523 CrossRef .
R. C. Rossi and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12303–12318 CrossRef .
F. A. L. Laskowski, M. R. Nellist, R. Venkatkarthick and S. W. Boettcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 570–579 RSC .
S. L. Medway, C. A. Lucas, A. Kowal, R. J. Nichols and D. Johnson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 587, 172–181 CrossRef .
D. S. Hall, C. Bock and B. R. MacDougall, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F235–F243 CrossRef .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Bediako, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, Y. Surendranath, J. Yano, V. K. Yachandra and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6801–6809 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Cai, H. Li, X. Shi and X. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1939–1946 CrossRef .
G. R. Conner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1978, 15, 343–347 CrossRef .
P. J. Grunthaner, F. J. Grunthaner and J. W. Mayer, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1980, 17, 924–929 CrossRef .
K. S. Kim and N. Winograd, Surf. Sci., 1974, 43, 625–643 CrossRef .
M. C. Biesinger, L. W. M. Lau, A. R. Gerson and R. S. C. Smart, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2434–2442 RSC .
X.-R. Yu and H. Hantsche, Surf. Interface Anal., 1993, 20, 555–558 CrossRef .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 313–318 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Li, D. K. Bediako, R. G. Hadt, D. Hayes, T. J. Kempa, F. von Cube, D. C. Bell, L. X. Chen and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 1486–1491 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Stevens, C. D. M. Trang, L. J. Enman, J. Deng and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11361–11364 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Corrigan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 377–384 CrossRef .
M. B. Stevens, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, M. R. Cosby, A. E. Vise, C. D. M. Trang and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 120–140 CrossRef .
E. D. Palik, O. J. Glembocki, I. J. Heard, P. S. Burno and L. Tenerz, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, 3291–3300 CrossRef .
J. W. Faust and E. D. Palik, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 1413–1420 CrossRef .
E. D. Palik, J. W. Faust, H. F. Gray and R. F. Greene, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2051–2059 CrossRef .
H. F. Okorn-Schmidt, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1999, 43, 326–351 Search PubMed .
D. Niwa, N. Takano, T. Yamada and T. Osaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 1295–1300 CrossRef .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
D. Niwa, T. Homma and T. Osaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9900–9904 CrossRef .
D. C. Silverman, Corrosion, 1981, 37, 546–548 CrossRef .
M. R. Anseau, J. P. Leung, N. Sahai and T. W. Swaddle, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 8023–8032 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Pokrovski, J. Schott, F. Farges and J.-L. Hazemann, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67, 3559–3573 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00980eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Broader context
Hydrogen (H2) has long been considered an ideal energy carrier because it has a higher energy density per mass unit than gasoline and Li-ion batteries and can be readily used to provide energy to buildings and energy-intensive transportation systems. Like photosynthesis, where light is transformed into energy-rich molecules, sunlight energy can be converted into H2 and O2 using water-splitting photoelectrochemical cells (PECs). These systems are based on photoelectrodes, composed of semiconductor absorbers modified with co-catalysts, which improve the reduction and oxidation of water. In this process, oxidation is the less efficient reaction and a lot of effort is currently being made for the preparation of cheap and stable photoanodes. Silicon is one of the most attractive photoelectrode materials, nevertheless, using Si as a photoanode is highly challenging as it is particularly prone to deactivation by spontaneous oxidation and chemical etching. It has been admitted that the introduction of a conformal protecting coating is a prerequisite to fabricate Si-based photoanodes, but recent results suggest an anomalous stability for Si modified with inhomogeneous electrodeposited Ni nanoparticles. Here, we elucidate this phenomenon that breaks with common protection strategies and that could be highly important for designing stable and efficient Si photoelectrodes.


 	Fig. 1  (a) LSVs recorded under AM 1.5G illumination for a photoanode before (blue) and after (red) activation. LSVs recorded in the dark and after electrochemical activation for a photoanode (black) and a sputtered Ni thin film (green). Inset: Scheme showing a cross-section of the pinched-off MIS photoanode under operation. (b) Evolution of j1.23V (red), jpa (black) and jmax (blue) during activation. (c) IPCE spectra recorded at +1.23 V (thick lines) and +2 V (thin line) for n-Si modified with Ni NPs before (blue) and after (red) activation. All curves were recorded in O2-saturated stirred 1 M NaOH at 100 mV s−1, except for the green LSV that was recorded at 20 mV s−1 (see Fig. S4a for more details, ESI†).	 
4OH−(l) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 2H2O(l)	(1)
NiII(OH)2(s) + OH−(l) + h+ → NiIIIOOH(s) + H2O(l)	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) MS plots recorded at 2 kHz for an anode before (blue) and after (red) activation, squares are experimental points and lines are linear fits. (b) Nyquist plots recorded at +1.23 V under AM 1.5G illumination, disks are experimental points and lines are fits of the equivalent circuit shown in the inset. All curves were recorded in O2-saturated stirred 1 M NaOH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM top view showing the surface of a photoanode before activation. (b) Corresponding SEM cross-sectional view. (c) Corresponding AFM image. (d) TEM and (e) HR TEM images of a single Ni NP electrodeposited on n-Si. (f) TEM and (g) HR TEM images obtained after activation of the surface, the external boundary of the NP shell is indicated by a dashed red line.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XPS spectra showing the Ni 2p, Si 2p, O 1s and Fe 2p regions, measured for the as-deposited (blue) and activated (red) photoanodes. The first three spectra were recorded with an Al source and the fourth one with an Mg source. Fits and Shirley backgrounds are represented by black thin lines. (b) XANES spectra at the nickel K-edge of the as-deposited (blue) and activated (red) samples and of the reference compounds metallic Ni0 (black dotted), Ni(OH)2 (black dashed) and γ-NiOOH (black dash-dotted). (c) Linear combination fitting of the activated sample showing the experimental data (red), the weighted spectra of the Ni0 (black dotted), Ni(OH)2 (black dashed) and γ-NiOOH (black dashed-dotted) references, the fit (green) and the residual difference (grey) between the experimental data and the fit.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) CAs curves recorded during prolonged photoelectrolysis for activated photoanodes that were held at +2.9 V (purple) and +1.23 V (red) and for a freshly hydrogenated n-Si surface at +1.23 V (black); the asterisk indicates when bubbles were removed from the surface and the colored arrows indicate when LSVs were performed. Inset: Corresponding OER faradaic efficiencies. (b) LSVs recorded under AM 1.5G illumination at t = 0, 1.7, 5 and 20 h during the photoelectrolysis at +1.23 V, as indicated by the colored arrows in Fig. 5a. (c) ABPE curves corresponding to the LSVs shown in Fig. 5b.	 
Si(s) + 2H2O(l) + 2OH−(l) → SiO2(OH)22−(l) + 2H2(g)	(3)

 	Fig. 6  CVs recorded under illumination for an n-Si surface undergoing alkaline etching in 1 M NaOH (black) and an activated photoanode after the etching of SiOx (red). The positions of the OCP, the PP, and the Efb determined in Fig. 2a are indicated by arrows; the small arrows in the bottom left corner indicate the sweep direction. Inset: Schemes depicting the cross-section of the surfaces in the regions of potential indicated on the CVs.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Graphs showing the evolution of the OCP of activated photoanodes recorded: under illumination (red), under illumination with the photoelectrode being held at +2.9 V for 1 min after each CV (blue) and in the dark (black). CVs were recorded at the times indicated by the vertical dotted lines. Inset: Scheme depicting the cross-section of the surface at the times indicated in the left part of the red curve (the color code is the same as in Fig. 6). (b) Graphs showing the evolution of the OCP under illumination for an HF-treated n-Si surface (black), for a SiOx-covered n-Si surface (blue) and in the dark for an activated Ni thin film (green). (c) LSVs recorded under illumination at the times indicated by arrows during the OCP measurements in the red (top) and the black (bottom) curves of Fig. 7a.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM pictures showing top views of activated photoanodes: (a) after activation, (b) after 20 h of photoelectrolysis in 1 M NaOH at +1.23 V, (c) after being immersed in 1 M NaOH for 30 h under illumination and (d) after the OCP measurements shown in the black curve of Fig. 7a. The scale bars equal 1 μm.	 
2Ni2+(l) + Si(s) + O2(g)→ 2Ni0(s) + SiO2(s)	(4)
Ni0(s) + 2OH−(l) + 2h+ → NiII(OH)2(s)	(5)
Ni0(s) + 2h+ → Ni2+(l)	(6)

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Schemes depicting the electroless deposition mechanism explaining the enhanced stability of the photoanodes at the OCP under illumination. (c) High magnification SEM picture showing the surface of a photoanode after activation. (d) High magnification SEM picture of the same photoanode after being exposed to 1 M NaOH under illumination for 15 h, for clarity 3 NPs are indicated by dashed circles.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00980e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
