Near-field thermal imaging of optically excited gold nanostructures: scaling principles for collective heating with heat dissipation into the surround ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR08349A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR08349A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 941-948Near-field thermal imaging of optically excited gold nanostructures: scaling principles for collective heating with heat dissipation into the surrounding medium†

        
          
            Susil 
            Baral‡
, 
      
        
          
            Ali 
            Rafiei Miandashti‡
 and 

        
          
            Hugh H. 
            Richardson
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701, USA. E-mail: richardh@ohio.edu;   Tel: +7405178488
Received 
      9th November 2017
    , Accepted 18th December 2017First published on 19th December 2017AbstractIn this paper, we introduce a new optical temperature and thermal imaging technique combining near-field microscopy and Er3+ photoluminescence thermometry. The tip aperture of 120 nm limits the spatial resolution of near-field thermal imaging. We use the technique with two different approaches towards local temperature measurement and thermal imaging. In the first approach, gold nanostructures on top of Al0.94Ga0.06N thin film embedded with Er3+ ions are optically excited through the SNOM tip with 532 nm CW laser to generate thermal images that have a Gaussian thermal profile because heating and probing are done through a single tip aperture. In the second approach, nanostructures on top of thermal sensor film of AlGaN:Er3+ ions deposited on a transparent sapphire substrate are excited with 532 nm CW laser through the substrate with a large spot size (FWHM ∼10 μm) and Er3+ emission from the film is collected in transmission mode through the SNOM tip. We use this approach to measure steady-state thermal profiles from optically excited different sized clusters made from 40 nm gold nanoparticles. This approach yields steady-state thermal profiles that have inverse distance temperature decay away from the cluster and we find that the maximum temperature change and temperature decay length into the surrounding medium (r½) scales with cluster radius.
Introduction
The spatial resolution of conventional optical imaging is proportional to the excitation wavelength of light and inversely proportional to the numerical aperture of objective. Because of this limitation, traditional far field measurements fail to provide spatial details from objects smaller than the diffraction limit.1 Optical temperature measurements are distorted because the local temperature of a sub-diffraction hot object is a convolution of the real temperature with the point spread function of the microscope. Far-field temperature images need scaling to convert the measured temperature to a local temperature.1–6 Numerous techniques have been developed in recent years that offer sub-diffraction measurements of structure and morphology, including the Nobel prize winning work on super-resolution microscopy and imaging7–9 however limited works have been reported on sub-diffraction temperature imaging.10 Scanning Near-Field Optical Microscopy (SNOM) is a sub-diffraction imaging technique where the diffraction limit of the light is broken by passing light through a sharp tip aperture placed a distance from the object that is smaller than the excitation wavelength.11 SNOM technique yield sub-diffraction images where spatial topological information is ascertained but added information such as local temperature is rare.10,12 Adding this extra dimension in near-field microscopy will make immediate contribution to many nanoscience and nanotechnology applications.
Strong absorption of electromagnetic radiation, enhanced by localized surface plasmons, coupled with high efficiency conversion into heat energy has been utilized in many applications in nanoscience and nanotechnology.13–16 Applications of photothermal heating of nanostructures has been demonstrated in solar steam generation,17,18 photothermal therapy,19–21 drug delivery,22–24 biological sensing,25–27 bioimaging,28 remote release of encapsulated materials,29 melting of strands of DNA,30 controlled manipulation of phase transitions of phospholipid membrane,31 localized activation of chemical processes,32,33 photovoltaic,34 micro and nano-electronics devices.35,36 Advancement in these technological areas is predicated on a fundamental understanding of how scaling laws affect heat generation, heat dissipation and temperature distributions (both transient and steady-state).
One basic question that needs to be understood is how the thermal profile into a medium changes when comparing the size of the heated object. Does the scale that temperature is dissipated into the surrounding medium changes between a point source to a larger sized structure such as a large cluster of nanoparticles, virus, transistor, cell, tumor or bodily organ such as heart or kidneys? The expected temperature distribution from a point source immersed in a medium of finite thermal conductivity falls off with inverse distance away from the point source.37 This behavior is observed in a theoretical thermal profile from a single 60 nm gold nanoparticle immersed in water where the distance outside of the nanoparticle decays to half of the maximum temperature in 30 nm.13,37 However, an ensemble of gold nanorods inside a HeLa cell has a thermal profile outside of the cell that decays to a half temperature in 5 μm.38 The extent that temperature changes outside the optically heated region is important in photothermal therapy where destruction of healthy tissues should be minimized outside the tumor. One strategy to minimize damage to normal tissues is to use temperature-feedback to adjust the heat generation over time.38 This strategy requires monitoring the temperature during heating. Although there have been some reports to measure the temperature below the diffraction limit of light using scanning quantum probe microscopy,10 this area of research still remains challenging.
Our approach to measure the local temperature of an optically excited gold nanostructure is to combine near-field microscopy with Er3+ photoluminescence thermometry. We show that this approach yields thermal images where the spatial temperature resolution is limited by the SNOM cantilever tip aperture and is able to measure the true local temperature from optically excited nanostructures. The SNOM aperture tip can also be used to collect the Er3+ ion photoluminescence from a large illumination area where the steady-state thermal profile of an optically excited nanoparticle cluster is imaged. We use this new approach to measure the steady-state thermal profiles from different sized clusters of 40 nm gold nanoparticles and show that the maximum temperature for the cluster scales with the size of the nanoparticle cluster. We measure the distance (r½) from the edge of a cluster to the point where the maximum temperature in the steady state thermal profile is reduced by a factor of 2 and find that there is a linear relationship with cluster radius. Finally, we are able to show that collective heating from a two-dimensional array of nanoparticles increases the total temperature change and scales with cluster size. We use a model that takes into account the shape of the cluster and collective heating to determine the average spacing between particles.
Results
Characterization of our near-field thermal measurement technique with topside illumination is shown in Fig. 1. The Er3+ photoluminescence is collected via SNOM tip and the resolution of the images is limited by the tip aperture of ∼120 nm. Nanostructures (lithographically fabricated nanostructures or drop-casted gold nanoparticles) on top of the thermal sensor film6 of Al0.94Ga0.06N embedded with Er3+ ions (∼270 nm thick) on a silicon substrate are optically excited with 532 nm CW laser through the SNOM cantilever tip from the top and the emission from the thermally coupled Er3+ energy levels is back collected through the tip mounted on 50× ultra long working distance objective (50×, NA 0.55) (Fig. 1a). Data collection and optical measurements are performed in a near-field contact mode of a Scanning Near-Field Optical Microscope (WITec α-SNOM300s). The emitted light from Erbium emission was collected by a 100 μm optical fiber, dispersed by a monochromator, detected by a CCD camera, and the emission spectrum at that pixel location stored in the computer. The temperature at that pixel location was calculated by taking a ratio of the digitally filtering the H and S Erbium bands, and extracting temperature from the ratio using a Boltzmann relationship (see Materials and methods section for more information). There is expected to be some heat dissipation from the gold clusters through the tip when the tip is in contact with the sample.39 The added cooling effect should change the maximum temperature measured compared to the case where the tip is not in contact with the sample. We believe that because all the samples were collected under nearly identical conditions, the cooling effect should be the same for each sample and there should be good consistently between samples. The absolute temperature should be lower but the distance for half temperature change is independent of the maximum temperature. Fig. 1b shows the representative Er3+ photoluminescence spectra at a hot spot and at a background position on the substrate. The Er3+ ions are excited with 532 nm laser resulting in 2H11/2 → 4I15/2 and the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 energy transitions in Er3+ photoluminescence spectrum (see Fig. 1b). The relative intensities of the 2H11/2 → 4I15/2 and the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 energy transitions are temperature dependent.40,41 The relative intensities are related by a Boltzmann factor  where (g1/g2) is the degeneracy factor for the upper state (2H11/2) compared to the lower state (4S3/2), ΔE is the energy difference between the two levels, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. At higher temperatures (the region with optically heated nanostructures), the emission intensity of the high energy Er3+ emission band (2H11/2 → 4I15/2) increases with respect to that of the low energy band (4S3/2 → 4I15/2). Energy diagram of Er3+ and the corresponding temperature dependent photoluminescence from Er3+ excited states to the ground state is presented in ESI, (Fig. S1†). Thermal images are constructed by integrating the Er3+ emission in each pixel location of the emission image, taking the ratio of the intensities of high energy to the low energy band (I1/I2) and applying the Boltzmann factor.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic optical setup for the near-field thermal measurement technique with 532 nm CW laser excitation through the SNOM tip. (b) Representative Er3+ photoluminescence spectra on various regions on the substrate. (c) Temperature-time spectrum of the optically heated gold nanoparticles spin-coated onto the sapphire substrate with thermal sensor film of AlGaN:Er3+ collected through the SNOM cantilever tip. (d) Plot of a local temperature change (K) as a function of the laser power into the tip (mW) for temperature-time spectrum shown in c. 

Fig. 1c shows the temperature-time spectrum of optically heated gold nanoparticles spin-coated onto the thermal sensor film collected through the SNOM cantilever tip. An optically heated hot spot is first located by performing a survey image scan. Once the position of the hot spot is located, a time spectrum is taken of the optically heated nanoparticles while the laser power is increased stepwise. The corresponding temperature change at each laser power is determined continuously from the Er3+ emission collected. In the temperature-time spectrum, the uncertainty in the temperature measurement is ∼1 K with an integration time of 0.2 s. This gives a noise floor of 0.45 K. Hz−1/2. The sensitivity of our temperature measurements is calculated from 1084/T2 equation where 1084 is the slope of our calibration curve. At low temperatures about 300 K, the sensitivity is 1.2 (% K−1).40
A plot of a local temperature change (ΔT) as a function of the laser power into the tip is shown in Fig. 1d and is generated from the temperature time spectrum shown in Fig. 1c. The plot shows a nearly linear relationship (small deviation at low laser power) between the local temperature change and the laser power.
The spatial resolution of near-field measurement technique is probed by scanning a 40 nm gold nanoparticles drop casted onto coverslip and AlGaN:Er3+ film on a sapphire coverslip. The image shown in Fig. 2a is produced from collecting the transmission of 532 nm CW laser (10 mW power) from the top through the SNOM cantilever. Fig. 2a shows the transmission image from the 532 nm laser from a small ensemble of 40 nm gold nanoparticle. Fig. 2b shows the corresponding 532 nm inverse of transmission profile. The spatial resolution of ∼140 nm is obtained as the Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) of a Gaussian function fitting to the scattering profile. Fig. 2c shows the scattering image of a line of gold nanoparticles generated by drop-casting 40 nm gold nanoparticles onto the AlGaN:Er3+ film on a sapphire substrate. Fig. 2d shows the corresponding scattering profile for the cross section (shown as dashed white line) drawn through the hot line on the near-field thermal image. The 532 nm scattering intensity profile is also fitted with Gaussian function with FWHM of ∼135 nm. Also the corresponding temperature images obtained from thermally coupled energy levels of Er3+ ions is shown in ESI (see S5a†). Importantly, in this image because the nanostructures and the film are not under constant illumination of 532 nm CW laser, and the laser is moving across the film along with the tip, this should not be considered as a steady state measurement.
 Fig. 2  Transmission and scattering images a and c and the corresponding profiles b, and d of the gold nanoparticles respectively. The transmission/scattering profiles show the spatial resolution of less than 150 nm for the dashed line drawn through the nanoparticles. 

Fig. 3a shows the thermal image of a lithographically fabricated gold nanodot and nanosnake (Fig. 3c) under near-field thermal measurement. The nanodot (200 nm diameter, 70 nm high) is excited through the tip with 532 nm CW laser (5 mW power into the tip). The near-field thermal image shows the hot-spot comparable to the true size of the nanodot. A SEM and AFM image of the nanodot with the same scale bar are shown in the inset. Fig. 3b shows the thermal profile drawn through the hot spot (white dashed line) of the thermal image shown in Fig. 3a. Fig. 3c shows the thermal image of a lithographically fabricated gold nanosnake under near-field thermal measurement with 532 nm CW laser (7.5 mW power into the tip) excitation through the SNOM tip. The near-field thermal image is comparable to the true size of the nanosnake. The SEM and AFM image of the nanosnake with the same scale bar are shown in the inset. Again, Fig. 3d is the thermal profile for a horizontal cross section (white dotted line) drawn through thermal image shown in Fig. 3c.
 Fig. 3  Thermal images and the corresponding thermal profiles of lithographically fabricated gold nanodot (a, b) and gold nanosnake (c, d) under near-field thermal imaging measurements with 532 nm CW laser excitation through the SNOM tip. The near field thermal images show the hot-spot comparable to the true size of the nanostructures (for comparison, SEM and AFM images of the nanodot and nanosnake with same scale bar are shown as inset inside the near-field thermal images). 
Previously our group observed an enhancement in the total photoluminescence for single 40 nm gold nanoparticles on the AlGaN:Er3+ film however, for larger gold nanoparticles we don't see any luminescence enhancement. From previous reports we also showed that gold nanoparticles did not change the spectral shape of energy levels. We would argue that, because of the spectral overlap between the plasmonic resonance and two closely distanced energy levels, if any interaction exists, the gold nanostructures would equally affect the H and S bands and it will not disturb the spectral shape of luminescence disproportionately and therefore luminescence thermometry stays reliable under this condition.45,46

Fig. 4a shows the schematic optical setup for the steady-state temperature measurement under near field technique with 532 nm CW excitation from the bottom using a large laser spot (FWHM ∼10 μm). The Er3+ emission is collected in transmission mode through the SNOM tip. Nanostructures on top of the thermal sensor film of transparent AlN:Er3+ on sapphire are optically excited with 532 nm CW laser from the bottom objective (20×, N.A. 0.2) with the focused spot size of FWHM ∼10 μm. The laser simultaneously excites the Er3+ and heats the gold nanoparticles/nanostructures under the area of illumination. The emission from the thermally coupled Er3+ energy levels is then collected in transmission mode through the SNOM cantilever tip (tip aperture ∼100 nm) mounted on a 50× ultra long working distance objective (50×, NA 0.55) coupled with CCD spectrograph via 100 μm optical fiber. Fig. 5b shows the intensity profile of a focused laser spot from the 532 nm CW laser. The FWHM of the spot size is approximately 10 μm and has a broad constant intensity region of about 6 μm. The large constant intensity excitation area compared to the small sampled area within the constant intensity region insures that steady state thermal images are collected with the SNOM tip. Fig. 4c shows the thermal image of a gold nanoparticle cluster created by drop-casting 40 nm diameter nanoparticles onto the thermal sensor film. The image is collected under constant laser excitation of 40 mW with a laser spot diameter of 10 μm. This gives a laser intensity of 5 × 108 W m−2. Fig. 4d shows the thermal profiles for the cross section shown for the dotted white line in Fig. 4c. On this profile we have labeled ΔTmax, Rc, r½, and a 1/r profile given by the equation,  for r ≥ Rc. In this profile r is a radial coordinate that starts at the edge of the cluster and proceeds outward. ΔTmax is the maximum temperature change, Rc is the cluster radius and r½ is the length from the edge of the cluster to ΔTmax/2. The diameter of the cluster is determined by measuring the length where ΔTmax is relatively constant and from one inflection point of the profile to the other (see ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic optical setup for the steady-state temperature measurement under near field technique. (b) Focused spot intensity profile of a bottom 532 nm CW laser (red) and thermal profile of gold nanoparticles shown in part c (black). The FWHM of the 532 nm spot is ∼10 μm and has a broad flat region of ∼6 μm with constant intensity. (c) Steady state thermal image of a cluster of gold nanoparticles drop-casted onto the thermal sensor film of AlGaN:Er3+ on sapphire glass substrate in near-field imaging mode. (d) Thermal profile for the vertical cross section (represented as dashed white line) drawn across the near-field thermal image shown in c. Rc is the radius of the cluster and r½ is the distance starting from the edge of the cluster towards a distance where the temperature reaches half of its maximum. In this figure r½ is about ∼110 nm. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Temperature change under optical excitation normalized by the excitation laser intensity (ΔTtotal/intensity) plotted as a function of a cluster radius (Rc) normalized by β parameter for a steady state measurements on a number of different sized clusters. (b) A plot of a distance at which the temperature goes to half the maximum temperature change, T = ΔTmax/2 (represented as r½ on a thermal profile shown in d versus the radius of a cluster (R) for a steady state measurements on a number of different sized clusters). 
We also tried to attain the steady state temperature profile under near field technique using two laser 532 and 980 nm excitation experiment. We adjusted the 980 nm laser to excite the gold nanorods drop casted on the surface of AlGaN:Er film on sapphire from bottom and 532 nm CW laser through SNOM tip from the top (see ESI S9†). This technique suffered from a few technical issues such as the heating effect of 980 nm on SNOM tip and temperature increase of nanostructures via 532 nm CW laser illumination. Further studies are required to decouple thermometry from the heating effect of 532 nm laser to distinguish smaller temperature changes (see S10†).
Discussion
Near-field microscopy is a sub-diffraction imaging technique where the diffraction limit of the light is broken by focusing the light through an aperture with a diameter less than the wavelength of light and collecting the evanescent wave from an optically excited sample. The maximum diffraction limited spatial resolution (d) that can be achieved under far-field measurements is , where λ is the wavelength of the light used and NA is the numerical aperture of the collection objective. For our measurements, the diffraction limit calculated using the above relation is ∼490 nm (λ = 532 nm, NA = 0.55). A higher numerical aperture lens (such as 1.0) can reduce this diffraction limited resolution to ∼270 nm. We have previously shown that for our microscope, the spatial resolution is dependent on the bore size of the optical collection fiber to the CCD camera42 and the numerical aperture of our objective. Smaller bore collection fiber reduce both the light transmission through the fiber and the spatial resolution. In a near-field measurement, the spatial resolution is limited by the size of the tip aperture.43 In our measurements, we excite (or collect emission from) the thermal sensor film through a near-field tip with aperture diameter of approximately 120 nm. The thermal spatial resolution of our measurement is expected to be more than 120 nm. Clusters of nanoparticles with size greater than 120 nm can be thermally imaged with spatial resolution comparable to the true size of the nanostructures because the tip is in contact with the sample and only the region under the tip is sampled.
For a nanometer sized hot spot where the heat dissipation can be characterized with spherical symmetry, the temperature change due to optical excitation is given by  where Cabs is the absorption cross section, I is the laser intensity, keff is the effective thermal conductivity given by , Reff is the effective radius for a particle with equal volume to that of a sphere and β (thermal-capacitance coefficient) is a parameter that depends on the aspect ratio of the nanostructure.44 For a spherical structure the aspect ratio and β are one. Non-spherical nanostructures have a thermal-capacitance coefficient greater than one because of increase heat dissipation into the surrounding due to increase surface to volume ratio compared to a sphere. The volume of a nanodisk (approximated as a cylinder with volume V = πr2lV) is used to calculate the effective radius . The absorption cross section for the lithographically prepared nanodisk shown in Fig. 3a is Cabs = 3.8 × 10−14 m2.6 The laser intensity absorbed by the nanodisk for a temperature change of 15 K (see Fig. 3b) is 3 × 108 W m−2 using the equation  with an aspect ratio for the nanodot of 2.86 and a β value of 1.1. This intensity gives a laser power through the tip of ∼4 μW if the laser spot size is the area of a circle with a tip radius of 60 nm (see ESI†).
The steady-state temperature measurements shown in Fig. 4 are made on a number of different sized clusters. The collective heating from a two-dimensional ensemble of gold nanoparticles with spacing between particle centers (Δ) is given by .37 In this equation,  is the maximum temperature change for a single gold nanoparticle with radius RAu, and NNP is the number of nanoparticles in the cluster given by  where Rc is the cluster radius and ρc is the ratio of the total two-dimensional area occupied by the nanoparticles to the total area of the nanoparticle cluster.45,46 This value changes with Rc but converges to  for an infinite sized container (cluster) with hexagonal packing. An average value for our clusters sizes with hexagonal close packing is ∼0.85. Substituting this for NNP and dividing by the laser intensity gives . Our two-dimensional clusters can be approximated as two-dimensional disks with height d and radius Rc. The maximum change in temperature in the disk can be approximated as  where β is a parameter that depends on the aspect ratio of the disk and takes into account more efficient heat release from a disk compared to a sphere.44 This equation combines collective heating from a two-dimensional ensemble of gold nanoparticles37 with temperature from an arbitrary shape such as a disk.44 The β parameter is calculated using β = exp(0.040 − 0.0124ln(x) + 0.0677ln2(x) − 0.00457ln3(x)) where x is 2Rc/d. Adding β to the collective heating for a two-dimensional ensemble gives a total temperature change for the two-dimensional ensemble that is expected to increase with Rc.

Fig. 5a plots ΔTtot/I with Rc where the total temperature change increases with Rc as expected. The slight bend in the curve is caused from changes in β because β depends upon aspect ratio that changes with cluster size. The solid red line is a theoretical fit to the data using  and using  as the fitting parameter. The best fit yields a value for Δ of 43 nm when ρc is 0.85. This value is reasonable consistent with a two-dimensional film of closed-pack particles where the average spacing should be 40 nm.

Fig. 5b shows that there is a linear relationship between r½ and cluster radius. The temperature profile far from the nanostructure should fall off as 1/r where r is the distance that starts at the edge of the nanostructure. The expected distance value at  (r½) is Rc. A plot of r½versus Rc should be linear with a slope of one and an intercept that goes through the origin. Fig. 5b shows this expected trend, as the slope is 1.03 ± 0.16 with a y intercept set to 0.

Fig. 5 shows how scaling of the thermal profile into a surrounding media is affected by the size of the nanostructure optically heated. For a single 40 nm diameter gold nanoparticle, the heating of the nanoparticle produces a local temperature profile outside of the nanoparticle that dissipates to half temperature within ∼20 nm. If, on the other hand, a large object, such as a 10 μm diameter cell, is filled with nanoparticles with an average distance that produces collective heating, then the temperature profile outside of the cell decays to a half temperature around 5 μm. Generally, if collective heating is occurring, then the maximum temperature change and temperature decay into the surrounding medium increases with the size of the heated object.
Conclusions
We introduce a new optical temperature measurement and thermal imaging technique combining near-field microscopy and Er3+ photoluminescence spectroscopy. We use the technique with two different approaches towards local temperature measurement and thermal imaging. In the first approach, gold nanostructures on top of Al0.94Ga0.06N thin film embedded with Er3+ ions are optically excited through the SNOM tip with 532 nm CW laser to generate thermal images with the spatial resolution of less than 200 nm. In the second approach, nanostructures on top of thermal sensor film of AlGaN:Er3+ deposited on a transparent sapphire substrate are excited with 532 nm CW laser through the substrate with a large spot size (FWHM ∼10 μm). The Er3+ emission from the film is collected in transmission mode through the SNOM tip. We measure the steady state temperature change under optical illumination for different sized clusters made from 40 nm diameter gold nanoparticles and find that the maximum temperature change and temperature decay length (r½) into the surrounding medium increases linearly with cluster radius. Based upon this observation, we can conclude that if a large cell is embedded with optical heaters with a distance between heaters that allows for collective heating, then the thermal profile outside of the cell decays with a decay constant that is dependent upon the size of the cell.
Materials and methods
Fabrication of gold nanostructures
The fabrication of the gold nanostructures has been described previously and only a brief description is presented here.4 The nanostructures are lithographically fabricated using conventional e-beam lithography with lift-off on a thin film of Al0.94Ga0.06N embedded with Er3+ ions on a silicon substrate. SEM images of the nanostructures shown in Fig. 3 are generated with a JEOL JSM-5300 Scanning Electron Microscope. The AFM images shown in Fig. 3 are generated with WITec α-SNOM300s during the contact mode near-field thermal measurements on the respective structures.
Preparation of gold nanoparticles sample
Dilute solutions (∼1010 particles per mL) of gold nanoparticles was first prepared using commercially purchased colloidal solution of 40 nm gold nanoparticles (BBInternational) with 18 MΩ water. The substrate (thin film of AlGaN:Er3+ on Sapphire) was first sonicated in acetone for 15 minutes, rinsed with 18 MΩ water and dried with N2 gas. The substrate was then exposed to O2 plasma (500 mTorr, 2 minutes) to make the surface hydrophilic. The cleaned substrate was placed on a clean silicon wafer on hot plate (temperature 50 °C) and the dilute solution of gold nanoparticles was drop casted onto the substrate. The hydrophilic nature of the substrate ensured the solution was spread over the substrate. The substrate was left in hot place until all the solvent (water) evaporated, and cleaned of any residual water or dust with N2 gas. The substrate was then placed under the microscope and thermal measurements were performed under near-field as explained in the succeeding section.
Optical measurements of temperature
The optical thermal measurements has been described in detail previously.6 We use a thin film (∼270 nm thick) of Al0.94Ga0.06N embedded with Er3+ ions on a silicon substrate as a thermal sensor film. The temperature is measured using the relative photoluminescence intensities of the 2H11/2 → 4I15/2 and the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 energy transitions of the Er3+ ions. The relative peak intensities are temperature dependent1,2 and are related by a Boltzmann factor (exp(−ΔE/kT)) where ΔE is the energy difference between the two levels, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature.
Data collection and optical measurements are performed in a near-field contact mode of a WITec α-SNOM300s using a CW Nd:YAG laser (532 nm wavelength). Data collection in air is done with OLYMPUS Ultra Long Working Distance Objective (50×/NA 0.5). The extra-long working distance allows accommodating inertial drive that holds the SNOM cantilever. The sample (nanostructures on thermal sensor film on Silicon) was first focused with the long working distance air objective (50×/NA 0.5) and the lithographic nanostructures of interest were located. The Z-position of the collection objective at focus was then set to zero on the microscope controller window in WITec ScanCtrl spectroscopy plus. The microscope stage was then moved up and the SNOM-cantilever was mounted to the inertial drive attached to the objective. The objective was then rotated into the working position and the cantilever was focused by moving the inertial drive in X, Y, Z directions with the help of inertial drive controller. The position of the cantilever was adjusted so that the excitation laser (532 nm CW) is pointing into the pyramid at the end of the cantilever. The excitation laser was then turned off. The beam deflection laser (in-built 980 nm) was turned on and focused onto the cantilever about 30–50 μm above the pyramid. The T-B and L-R adjustment screws on the front of the microscope were then turned and the sum signal was maximized (around 2.5 V). The L-R and T-B signal were then adjusted close to zero (within ±10 mV) to ensure that the reflected beam hits the segmented photodiode close to the center. On the feedback-module the set point, proportional gain and the integral gain were adjusted to about 0.2, 4.0, and 2.0 respectively to ensure the stage is fully extended. These adjustments and parameters are the ones specified by the manufacturer (WITec) for typical near-field measurements. After completing these adjustments, the microscope was moved down using the focus down button of the remote control until the cantilever was close to the sample. Once the Z-position of the collection objective approached less than 100 μm, the auto-approach start function was enabled which moves the microscope down until the cantilever contacts the sample. Once the cantilever is in contact with the sample, the display reads “Tip is in contact”. The microscope will then move further down until the Z-position display of the piezo-stage shows approximately 15 μm and the display reads “Final position reached”. Once the final position was reached, the excitation laser (532 nm CW) was turned on and the reflected emission from the sample was monitored by the CCD spectrograph connected to the microscope through 100 μm collection fiber. The emission was maximized by fine adjustment of the cantilever. Scans were then performed by moving the piezo-stage in X and Y directions under the tip. As the tip is in active feedback throughout the scan using the laser reflection off the tip with a 980 nm laser, topographical information of the sample is also collected by the segmented photodiode detector throughout the scan. Image spectrum and the corresponding photoluminescence spectrum were collected with CCD spectrograph throughout the scan. A temperature image (thermal image) is constructed from the photoluminescence spectra collected at each pixel location of the image by analyzing the relative peak intensities from the Er3+ emission. The temperature change is determined from the temperature image (thermal image) by drawing the cross section across the optically heated nanostructure (hot spot) and taking the difference in temperature between the hot spot and the background with no nanostructure (cold spot) which is basically at the room temperature.
Smoothing the transmission, scattering and thermal images
Due to the limited number pixels for every image obtained either from the transmission mode of the NSOM, reflected scattering and luminescence imaging, we used the shading interp function of the MATLAB to make images smoother and less pixelated. The original example of some of the images without interpolation is shown in the ESI (see S4†).
Estimation of diameter and radius (Rc) of a cluster of gold nanoparticles
The steady state measurements shown in Fig. 4 was performed on a clusters of 40 nm gold nanoparticles formed by drop casting the diluted colloidal solution of nanoparticles onto a thermal sensor film (AlGaN:Er3+) on Sapphire substrate. SEM imaging of the particles on Sapphire substrate was not feasible because of the charging issue. Because of this, a representative SEM image of a cluster of nanoparticles was taken on Silicon substrate and is shown in ESI (Fig. S2†). The representative measurements (images) show a 2-D cluster of close-packed nanoparticles with small void space is created by drop-casting dilute solution of colloidal nanoparticles on hydrophilic surface (created by plasma treatment).
The diameter of a cluster of nanoparticles used for steady state thermal measurements is estimated from the experimental thermal profile generated by drawing a cross section across the thermal image as represented in Fig. 4d. On this thermal profile, diameter of a cluster is the region (length) where ΔTmax is relatively constant and from one inflection point of the profile to the other. The radius (Rc) of a cluster is then half this length (diameter). The validity of this estimation scheme was compared and verified with AFM and relative intensity based measurements (see ESI†).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr Andrew Green and OSU center of Nanofabrication for their help in fabrication of the lithographic nanostructures. The authors acknowledge Hunter Lawson and Dr Martin Kordesch for SEM images. The authors also thank the Condensed Matter and Surface Sciences (CMSS) Program of Ohio University for the financial support to Susil Baral and Ali Rafiei Miandashti.
References
L. Martinez Maestro, Q. Zhang, X. Li, D. Jaque and M. Gu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105(18), 181110 CrossRef .
S. Baral, A. J. Green and H. H. Richardson, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(6), 6080–6089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baral, A. J. Green, M. Y. Livshits, A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(2), 1439–1448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Green, A. A. Alaulamie, S. Baral and H. H. Richardson, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(9), 4142–4147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Carlson, A. J. Green and H. H. Richardson, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(3), 1534–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Carlson, A. Khan and H. H. Richardson, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(3), 1061–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Betzig, G. H. Patterson, R. Sougrat, O. W. Lindwasser, S. Olenych, J. S. Bonifacino, M. W. Davidson, J. Lippincott-Schwartz and H. F. Hess, Science, 2006, 313(5793), 1642–1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hell and J. Wichmann, Opt. Lett., 1994, 19(11), 780–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Moerner and D. P. Fromm, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74(8), 3597–3619 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Tetienne, A. Lombard, D. A. Simpson, C. Ritchie, J. Lu, P. Mulvaney and L. C. L. Hollenberg, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(1), 326–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, Z. Liu, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7(11), 3360–3365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Aigouy, G. Tessier, M. Mortier and B. Charlot, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87(18), 184105 CrossRef .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2(1), 30–38 CrossRef .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111(6), 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(3), 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
V. Giannini, A. I. Fernandez-Dominguez, S. C. Heck and S. A. Maier, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111(6), 3888–3912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(1), 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Polman, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(1), 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. El-Sayed, X. H. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Cancer Lett., 2006, 239(1), 129–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100(23), 13549–13554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Lasers Med. Sci., 2008, 23(3), 217–228 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pissuwan, S. M. Valenzuela and M. B. Cortie, Trends Biotechnol., 2006, 24(2), 62–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, G. von Maltzahn, L. L. Ong, A. Centrone, T. A. Hatton, E. Ruoslahti, S. N. Bhatia and M. J. Sailor, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(8), 880–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Alkilany, L. B. Thompson, S. P. Boulos, P. N. Sisco and C. J. Murphy, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64(2), 190–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Alvarez-Puebla and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41(1), 43–51 RSC .
R. T. Hill, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2015, 7(2), 152–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7(6), 442–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Boyer, P. Tamarat, A. Maali, B. Lounis and M. Orrit, Science, 2002, 297(5584), 1160–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Skirtach, A. M. Javier, O. Kreft, K. Kohler, A. P. Alberola, H. Mohwald, W. J. Parak and G. B. Sukhorukov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45(28), 4612–4617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Stehr, C. Hrelescu, R. A. Sperling, G. Raschke, M. Wunderlich, A. Nichtl, D. Heindl, K. Kurzinger, W. J. Parak, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(2), 619–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Urban, M. Fedoruk, M. R. Horton, J. Radler, F. D. Stefani and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(8), 2903–2908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(7), 2426–2433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fasciani, C. J. B. Alejo, M. Grenier, J. C. Netto-Ferreira and J. C. Scaiano, Org. Lett., 2011, 13(2), 204–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9(10), 865–865 CrossRef CAS .
P. Muhlschlegel, H. J. Eisler, O. J. F. Martin, B. Hecht and D. W. Pohl, Science, 2005, 308(5728), 1607–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. S. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9(3), 193–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, W. Zhang, T. Skeini, H. Richardson, J. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2006, 1(1), 84–90 CrossRef .
P. Rodriguez-Sevilla, Y. H. Zhang, P. Haro-Gonzalez, F. Sanz-Rodriguez, F. Jaque, J. G. Sole, X. G. Liu and D. Jaque, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(12), 2421–2426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bon, N. Belaid, D. Lagrange, C. Bergaud, H. Rigneault, S. Monneret and G. Baffou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102(24) CrossRef CAS .
K. Gurumurugan, H. Chen, G. R. Harp, W. M. Jadwisienczak and H. J. Lozykowski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74(20), 3008–3010 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Garter and A. J. Steckl, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2002, 49(1), 48–54 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baral, S. C. Johnson, A. A. Alaulamie and H. H. Richardson, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2016, 122(4) CrossRef CAS .
B. Hecht, B. Sick, U. P. Wild, V. Deckert, R. Zenobi, O. J. F. Martin and D. W. Pohl, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112(18), 7761–7774 CrossRef CAS .
G. Baffou, R. Quidant and F. J. G. de Abajo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(2), 709–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Specht, The best known packings of equal circles in a circle (complete up to N = 2600). http://hydra.nat.uni-magdeburg.de/packing/cci/cci.html.
R. L. Graham, B. D. Lubachevsky, K. J. Nurmela and P. R. J. Ostergard, Discrete Math., 1998, 181(1–3), 139–154 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Energy level diagram of Er3+ embedded on AlGaN matrix, estimation of radius of a cluster of gold nanoparticles. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr08349a‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic optical setup for the near-field thermal measurement technique with 532 nm CW laser excitation through the SNOM tip. (b) Representative Er3+ photoluminescence spectra on various regions on the substrate. (c) Temperature-time spectrum of the optically heated gold nanoparticles spin-coated onto the sapphire substrate with thermal sensor film of AlGaN:Er3+ collected through the SNOM cantilever tip. (d) Plot of a local temperature change (K) as a function of the laser power into the tip (mW) for temperature-time spectrum shown in c.	 

 	Fig. 2  Transmission and scattering images a and c and the corresponding profiles b, and d of the gold nanoparticles respectively. The transmission/scattering profiles show the spatial resolution of less than 150 nm for the dashed line drawn through the nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 3  Thermal images and the corresponding thermal profiles of lithographically fabricated gold nanodot (a, b) and gold nanosnake (c, d) under near-field thermal imaging measurements with 532 nm CW laser excitation through the SNOM tip. The near field thermal images show the hot-spot comparable to the true size of the nanostructures (for comparison, SEM and AFM images of the nanodot and nanosnake with same scale bar are shown as inset inside the near-field thermal images).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic optical setup for the steady-state temperature measurement under near field technique. (b) Focused spot intensity profile of a bottom 532 nm CW laser (red) and thermal profile of gold nanoparticles shown in part c (black). The FWHM of the 532 nm spot is ∼10 μm and has a broad flat region of ∼6 μm with constant intensity. (c) Steady state thermal image of a cluster of gold nanoparticles drop-casted onto the thermal sensor film of AlGaN:Er3+ on sapphire glass substrate in near-field imaging mode. (d) Thermal profile for the vertical cross section (represented as dashed white line) drawn across the near-field thermal image shown in c. Rc is the radius of the cluster and r½ is the distance starting from the edge of the cluster towards a distance where the temperature reaches half of its maximum. In this figure r½ is about ∼110 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Temperature change under optical excitation normalized by the excitation laser intensity (ΔTtotal/intensity) plotted as a function of a cluster radius (Rc) normalized by β parameter for a steady state measurements on a number of different sized clusters. (b) A plot of a distance at which the temperature goes to half the maximum temperature change, T = ΔTmax/2 (represented as r½ on a thermal profile shown in d versus the radius of a cluster (R) for a steady state measurements on a number of different sized clusters).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Energy level diagram of Er3+ embedded on AlGaN matrix, estimation of radius of a cluster of gold nanoparticles. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr08349a
‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
