Recent advances and perspectives for solar-driven water splitting using particulate photocatalysts  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS01182K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS01182K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3561-3608Recent advances and perspectives for solar-driven water splitting using particulate photocatalysts

        
          
            Xiaoping 
            Tao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shengyang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Can 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Rengui 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Zhongshan Road 457, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: rgli@dicp.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Received 
      28th December 2021
    First published on 11th April 2022AbstractThe conversion and storage of solar energy to chemical energy via artificial photosynthesis holds significant potential for optimizing the energy situation and mitigating the global warming effect. Photocatalytic water splitting utilizing particulate semiconductors offers great potential for the production of renewable hydrogen, while this cross-road among biology, chemistry, and physics features a topic with fascinating interdisciplinary challenges. Progress in photocatalytic water splitting has been achieved in recent years, ranging from fundamental scientific research to pioneering scalable practical applications. In this review, we focus mainly on the recent advancements in terms of the development of new light-absorption materials, insights and strategies for photogenerated charge separation, and studies towards surface catalytic reactions and mechanisms. In particular, we emphasize several efficient charge separation strategies such as surface-phase junction, spatial charge separation between facets, and polarity-induced charge separation, and also discuss their unique properties including ferroelectric and photo-Dember effects on spatial charge separation. By integrating time- and space-resolved characterization techniques, critical issues in photocatalytic water splitting including photoinduced charge generation, separation and transfer, and catalytic reactions are analyzed and reviewed. In addition, photocatalysts with state-of-art efficiencies in the laboratory stage and pioneering scalable solar water splitting systems for hydrogen production using particulate photocatalysts are presented. Finally, some perspectives and outlooks on the future development of photocatalytic water splitting using particulate photocatalysts are proposed.
Xiaoping Tao
Xiaoping Tao received her Bachelor's Degree from Sichuan University in 2014 and PhD in Physical Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Can Li at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). She is currently working as a Postdoc in Shinshu University with Prof. Kazunari Domen. Her research interest is mainly focused on photo(electro)catalytic solar energy conversion.
Yue Zhao
Yue Zhao received his BS Degree in Chemistry from Xiamen University in 2013 and PhD Degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2020. He is currently working as a Postdoc with Prof. Rengui Li and Prof. Can Li in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis (SKLC) and the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL) at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). His work focuses on photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production.
Shengyang Wang
Shengyang Wang received his BS Degree in Applied Chemistry from Fudan University in 2011. Then, he joined Prof. Can Li's group at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP) and received his PhD Degree in plasmonic photocatalysis for water splitting in 2019. Currently, he continues his research work in the same group as an Assistant Researcher. His research interests focus on plasmon-based photocatalysis and solar thermal conversion.
Can Li
Can Li received his PhD (with Prof. Xiexian Guo and Prof. Takaharu Onishi) in Physical Chemistry from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 1989. He was promoted to Full Professor in 1993 and was a Visiting Professor at the Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris VI), Lehigh University, Liverpool University, and Queensland University. He carried OUT postdoctoral studies at Northwestern University in 1994-1996. Currently, he is head of the Solar Energy Research Division and the director of the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL). His research focuses on photo(electro)catalytic and electrolytic water splitting and CO2 reduction using renewable energy.
Rengui Li
Rengui Li received his PhD Degree from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. He worked as a Visiting Research Associate in Prof. K. Domen's group at the University of Tokyo in 2011 and Prof. Harry Atwater's group at California Institute of Technology from 2019 to 2020. In 2014, he began to work at the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis in DICP as an Associate Professor. Since 2018, he was promoted as a Full Professor at DICP. His research interest is mainly focused on photocatalytic solar energy conversion.
1. Introduction
Power consumption is projected to double by 2050 globally, and the ever-growing concerns regarding worldwide climate disruption define a grand challenge in developing renewable energy alternatives to replace fossil fuels.1–3 Energy harvested from sunlight offers a compelling approach to attenuating the carbon dioxide emission and secure a permanent energy supply for the future. As a clean and abundant energy source, energy from sunlight striking the earth in one hour (4.3 × 1020 J) is comparable to the average energy consumed on the planet per year (4.1 × 1020 J).4 Although the primary world energy consumption fell by 4.5% in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the contribution of solar utilization increased by a record 20%.5 As shown in Fig. 1, it is predicted that more than 50% of global power generation will come from renewable sources by 2035, most of which will be covered by solar energy,6 indicating an enormous untapped potential well beyond the present usage, which has triggered investigations focusing on economically feasible technologies for its conversion, storage, and utilization.
 Fig. 1  Global energy perspective from McKinsey and Company. The power generation mix is in thousand TWh.6 
The intermittent nature of solar energy necessitates an effective approach for its storage for later dispatch and distribution, where biology presents the most successful paradigm. Natural photosynthesis is conducted via multi-step cooperation among photosynthetic proteins, photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI) to yield carbohydrates from CO2 and H2O.7 Similarly, artificial photosynthesis by exploiting the principles of natural photosynthesis to achieve the capture and storage of solar energy in the form of chemicals (e.g., H2) has become one of the most promising and economical solutions for solar-to-chemical energy conversion (Fig. 2).8,9 Hydrogen energy not only provides power for domestic heating, vehicles, and fuel cell, but also serves as an energy carrier for reducing the worldwide CO2 emissions.10–12 Among the typical technologies available for solar-driven water splitting for hydrogen production including photocatalysis (PC), photoelectrocatalysis (PEC), photovoltage combined with electrocatalysis (PV-EC), etc., photocatalytic water splitting utilizing particle suspensions shows great competitiveness given its merits including low investment and simple equipment for potential scalable deployment. However, although presenting huge promises, photocatalytic water splitting using earth-abundant materials still remains a formidable challenge in promoting efficiency and understanding fundamental processes relevant to the reaction mechanism and kinetics and energetics at the electronic and molecular level.
 Fig. 2  Scheme of conversion from solar to chemical energy by natural photosynthesis and artificial photosynthesis. 
Great efforts have been witnessed in the past few decades since the work reported by Fujishima and Honda in 1972, which marked the beginning of a new era in heterogeneous photocatalysis.13 However, the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (STH) is still at the laboratory stage, leaving a huge gap for research in fundamental research and potential application. In this review, we highlight the recent advancements in particulate photocatalysis for solar-driven water splitting. Several main steps will be described in detail including the development of new-emerging light-absorption materials, investigations on charge separation process and studies towards catalytic reaction on the photocatalyst surfaces. By combining advanced space- and time-resolved characterization techniques with theoretical simulations, we elucidate the recent significant progress in understanding the intrinsic mechanisms in photogenerated charge separation and surface reaction kinetics. Finally, we briefly discuss the pioneering explorations on scalable hydrogen production via photocatalytic water splitting and give perspectives and outlook on the development of photocatalytic water splitting using particulate photocatalysts in the future.
2. Principles and mechanisms
The overall water splitting (OWS) reaction is referred to as the complete decomposition of water into stoichiometric H2 and O2. The occurrence of a specific chemical reaction is subject to constraints in both thermodynamics and kinetics. Thermodynamically, the OWS reaction is an energetically uphill and endothermic reaction with a Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) of 237 kJ mol−1 under the standard conditions at 298 K (shown in eqn (1)).8 H2O → H2 + 1/2O2, ΔG = 237 kJ mol−1(1)
Thus, an input energy with an equivalent of 1.23 eV in the system can drive the splitting of water molecules thermodynamically. In photocatalytic reactions, external energy in the form of sunlight irradiation injected into the reaction system serves as the energy source and provides the driving force for the following chemical reactions. In addition, to realize a photocatalytic water splitting reaction, the conduction band minimum (CBM) of semiconductor-based photocatalysts or the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of an organic complex photocatalyst should be located at a more negative position than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V relative to normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) at pH = 0), while the maximum of the valence band (VBM) or the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the photocatalyst should be more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V vs. NHE at pH = 0). However, in practice, considering the kinetically considerable overpotential, especially for the water oxidation reaction, the input energy required is normally much larger than the thermodynamically theoretical value for realizing the OWS reaction.14,15
Mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting
In heterogeneous photocatalysis, a typical process of photocatalytic water splitting reaction on semiconductor-based photocatalysts is schematically presented in Fig. 3, which mainly involves three steps, as follows:16 (i) photocatalysts are photoexcited by photons with an energy greater than their band gap to excite electrons to the conduction band, leaving holes in the valence band. (ii) The photogenerated electrons and holes overcome coulombic attraction and separate from each other, followed by their diffusion and transfer. (iii) The surviving photogenerated electrons and holes react with adsorbed species on the surface of the photocatalyst for reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively. Consequently, the overall efficiency of solar energy conversion is codetermined by the multiplication of efficiencies of the three above-mentioned processes. It should be emphasized that the processes of charge separation and surface catalytic reactions are not independent but synergistically correlated with each other, where the symbol “×” is used to indicate a convolution between charge separation and charge utilization (eqn (2)). η = ηLH·ηCS × ηCU(2)where ηLH is the efficiency of light harvesting; ηCS is the efficiency of charge separation and ηCU is the efficiency of charge utilization.
 Fig. 3  Mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting on a semiconductor-based photocatalyst. 
Photocatalysts with both narrow band gaps to harness as much solar light as possible and suitable band positions are prerequisites for photocatalytic water splitting.17 Nevertheless, narrowing the band gap tends to decrease the driving force for the following photogenerated charge separation and surface reactions. In addition, outstanding photocatalysts should be bestowed with superior charge separation property given that charge recombination occurs on a very fast timescale (ps–μs) and severely competes with photogenerated charge separation. Moreover, the capability of high-efficiency surface catalytic reaction is desirable due to the fact that catalytic reactions take place on a much slower timescale (μs–s) in comparison to charge generation (fs–ps) and separation (ps–μs),18,19 indicating the significance of long-lived charges and facilitated kinetics of surface reaction. It is worth noting that charge separation and catalytic reactions are not independent but synergistically correlated.20,21 A faster catalytic reaction will be conducive to more efficient charge separation and vice versa. For the photocatalytic OWS reaction, the amount of evolved H2 and O2 should be observed with a stoichiometric ratio of 2:1. The OWS reaction can be separated into two half reactions, as shown in eqn (3) and (4): 2H+ + 2e− → H2 (HER)(3) H2O + 2h+ → 1/2O2 (OER)(4)
Considering the harsh thermodynamic and kinetic constraints, sacrificial agents such as hole scavengers and electron acceptors are often employed for investigating the respective mechanisms of the H2 evolution reaction (HER) and O2 evolution reaction (OER), which cannot be called “overall water splitting (OWS)”. Photocatalytic HER or OER half-reactions evolving only H2 and O2, respectively, have a significantly smaller ΔG than 237 kJ mol−1 for the OWS or even negative ΔG.22,23 Notably, although the photocatalytic HER or OER half reaction is much easier than the OWS reaction to get apparently high photocatalytic activity, this is neither the goal nor the overall water splitting reaction. Nevertheless, the combination of value-added oxidation reactions by utilizing biomass-derived molecules as hole scavengers can be an alternative considering the relatively lower thermodynamic requirements than the water oxidation reaction. Biomass-derived organic compounds such as glycerol (biodiesel waste byproduct), glucose and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) (biomass-derived chemicals), methanol and ethanol (biomass fermentation), and urea (wastewater) can be applied in the photo-oxidation half reaction. Complex reactions including C–O-bond cleavage, selective oxidations, C–C coupling, and C–H activation may be involved and the rational design of photocatalysts is also desirable for selective biomass valorization and controllable generation of intermediates. More details about hydrogen production via photocatalytic biomass conversion have been discussed in the literature.24–27
2.1 Key evaluation factors in photocatalysis
The assessment and reporting of photocatalyst data in a standardized and accurate manner are vital in the field of photocatalysis. Photocatalytic activity evaluation of a certain photocatalyst is frequently illustrated in terms of amount of gases evolved (H2 and/or O2) in form of time courses. Several previous reviews have focused on the evaluation methods and equipment in detail.28–30 The gas evolution rate may be affected by various factors, including the light source (light intensity and emission spectrum), amount of photocatalyst, reaction temperature, pressure, and reactor configuration. The experimental details need to be clarified thoroughly to ensure reproducibility.31 The temperature and partial pressure of the photocatalytic system affect the reaction kinetically and thermodynamically, including the charge transport and surface catalytic reaction in terms of the activation energy and adsorption–desorption process. In practice, a water-cooling circulation system tends to be employed to maintain the testing temperature on the lab-scale. Also, increasing the amount of photocatalyst will not increase the gas evolution rate proportionally if photon absorption is saturated, and thus normalization of the evolved gas rate by photocatalyst weight should be seriously avoided, and the same deliberation is also needed when disclosing photocatalytic rates by normalizing the surface area.32 Therefore, the quantum efficiency and solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (STH) are recommended to report the efficiency of the photocatalytic OWS reaction.
Quantum efficiency, which is defined as the rate at which molecules undergo a given event per photons absorbed per unit time, is routinely utilized for determining the efficiency of reactant consumption, product generation, light emission, and various other photo-physiochemical processes occurring in photochemical reactions.33 In heterogeneous photocatalysis, the quantum efficiency is generally used to describe the percentage of reacted electrons relative to the total number of photons incident in the reaction system regardless of the difference in reactor geometry and polychromatic radiation.34 Here, it should be noted that the actual quantum efficiency should be the internal quantum efficiency (IQE), which is defined as the number of reacted electrons divided by the total number of absorbed photons in a certain period. However, given that it is practically impossible to measure the actual absorbed photons by photocatalysts due to light scattering, reflection, etc., calculation of the apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) has been chosen as an alternative by measuring incident photons, which is feasible using a detector such as a thermopile or Si photodiode. Given that the light intensity inside the irradiation area is usually not perfectly uniform, it is recommended to determine the number of photons by integrating the photon number obtained from the average photon flux in each domain.30 The terms AQE and IQE of the photocatalyst can be calculated using eqn (5) and (6). (5) (6)
The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency is another practical standard for measuring the performance of photocatalysts. Notably, the STH efficiency is only applied for the evaluation of photocatalytic OWS reactions. The STH efficiency can be calculated as follows: (7)where rH2 is the rate of hydrogen production (mmol s−1), Psun is energy flux of sunlight (mW cm−2), S is the area of the reactor (cm2), and ΔG is the gain in Gibbs free energy (J mol−1).
The precise determination of evolved gas rate, AQE, and STH affords the actual performance of photocatalysts in photocatalytic water splitting, which can serve as a reliable benchmark for comparing the performance of photocatalysts.
3. Advances in particulate photocatalytic water splitting
3.1 Light-harvesting semiconductors for photocatalytic water splitting
The absorption property of a semiconductor primarily determines the upper limit of the solar energy conversion efficiency. The semiconductors for photocatalytic OWS reactions should possess an appropriate bandgap to absorb the available solar flux, together with a band structure straddling the redox potentials of the HER and OER half-reactions. Given that UV light (λ < 400 nm) only covers less than 4% of the total solar spectrum and most light falls in the visible light (400–700 nm) and near infrared regions, it represents an enduring topic to exploit photocatalysts that enable visible light or near infrared light to be harnessed as much as possible.3

3.1.1 Band gap engineering of semiconductors. 
The light absorption property of semiconductor-based photocatalysts is intimately associated with their chemical compositions and crystal structures. Currently, most of photocatalysts for the OWS are metal oxides consisting of metal cations with electronic configurations of d0 (Ti4+, Zr4+, Nb5+, Ta5+, V5+, W6+ and Ce4+etc.) or d10 (Zn2+, In3+, Ga3+, Ge4+, Sn4+ and Sb5+etc.), of which the CBM is primarily contributed from the empty d or sp orbitals of the metal cations, while the VBM is mainly composed of O 2p orbitals.35 Alkali metals, alkaline earth metals and lanthanide elements normally participate in the construction of the crystal structure without dominating the edge of the band structure. It has been demonstrated that some metal cations with electrons in the s orbital such as Bi3+, Pb2+, Sn2+, Ag+ and Cu+ can take part in constituting band structures, producing a series of visible-light-photoactive semiconductors.36 In addition, metal-semiconductor hybrid photocatalysts based on the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect of plasmonic metals also offer candidates to tackle the limiting bandgaps and extend the light absorption ranges of traditional semiconductors.37
For the band engineering of semiconductors, several feasible strategies including VB modulation, CB modulation and simultaneous modulation of the CB and VB have been adopted (Fig. 4). For VB modulation, the substitution of oxygen with p-block atoms with a lower electronegativity (N, S, B, C, etc.) was demonstrated to be useful in typical (oxy)nitrides and (oxy)sulfides.3,14 For example, the VBMs of TaON and Ta3N5 show a significant shift to more negative potentials in contrast with that of Ta2O5,38 and DFT calculation revealed that the CBM of TaON is contributed from the Ta 5d orbitals similar to Ta2O5, whereas its VBM is comprised of hybridized N 2p and O 2p orbitals (Fig. 5a). Further nitridation treatment to completely replace oxygen by nitrogen will result in the formation of Ta3N5, realizing the absorption edge of visible light to above 650 nm. Furthermore, perovskite oxynitrides with narrow bandgaps, such as LaMON2 (M = Nb and Ta),39 LaMO2N (M = Ti and Zr),40 MM′O2N (M = Ca, Sr, and Ba, M′ = Nb and Ta)41,42 have also been widely explored. It has been suggested that the TaO6 octahedrons with shared corners and edges form a perovskite framework and are flexibly substituted and tolerant to the presence of diverse ion displacements and defects, and thus beneficial for the nitridation process.33 For example, the partial replacement of O2− by N3− in the crystalline matrix of YTaO4 with a bandgap energy of 3.8 eV can result in the formation of Y2Ta2O5N2 with an estimated bandgap energy of 2.2 eV (Fig. 5b).43 Light absorption in MgTa2O6−xNx gives an absorption edge at around 570 nm, which is shifted from that of the pristine MgTa2O6 with an absorption edge at 300 nm.44 Kudo et al. systematically explored the influence of doping metal ions in perovskite oxides on the light absorption properties and photocatalytic activity.45 Visible light-responsive photocatalytic activity can be realized by doping with transition metal cations in oxides acting as host materials due to the electron excitation from the donor levels created by the dopants to the conduction bands. However, the doping ions with various valence states tend to mismatch the charges of the host material, leading to the generation of defects or vacancies, acting as charge recombination sites. Co-doping of different metal ions has been demonstrated to be effective for controlling the valence states of dopants through charge compensation and relieving the severe recombination problem, such as co-doping with metal ions such as Cr3+/Ta5+, Cr3+/Sb5+ and Ni2+/Ta5+ can tune the light absorption properties and reduce the charge recombination in the sensitization of the SrTiO3 photocatalyst.14 Liu et al. reported the gradient co-doping of B–N in TiO2 with an extended absorption range by applying a pre-doped interstitial boron gradient to weaken the nearby Ti–O bond for easy substitution of oxygen with nitrogen.46 Consequently, the light absorption edge of the red TiO2 can be extended up to ca. 700 nm, which is mainly attributed to the high solubility of nitrogen for providing a raised VBM position. In addition to nitrogen doping, oxysulfides including Ln2Ti2S2O5 (Ln = Y, Pr, Nd, Sm, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho and Er) and La5Ti2MS5O7 (M = Ag and Cu), with light absorption up to 570 nm (M = Ag) and 650 nm (M = Cu), were also discovered to enable both the HER and OER half reactions.47–49 Particularly, Y2Ti2O5S2 photocatalysts were found to be capable of photocatalytic OWS under visible light.50
 Fig. 4  Band structure engineering. (a) Tuning of conduction band. (b) Tuning of valence band. (c) Tuning of conduction and valence bands. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Tuning valence band of Ta2O5, TaON, and Ta3N5 upon nitridation. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2003. (b) UV-visible spectra of YTaO4 and Y2Ta2O5N2. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Tuning conduction band of AgAlO2 to AgGaO2 for narrowing the band gap of the photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. (d) Band structure of In(OH)3, In(OH)ySz and In(OH)ySz:Zn. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2006. (e) Light absorption properties of bare GaN, ZnO, and GaN:ZnO solid-solution photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2005. (f) UV-visible diffuse reflection spectra of powder AgxAu1-x/TiO2 photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. 
In the case of CB engineering, the introduction of d-band cations with similar ionic radii but different electron configurations may impose a new energy level inside the band gap, leading to a change in the CB.51,52 Furthermore, the introduction of metal cations with empty sp orbitals has also been proven to be effective for tuning the CBM levels.53 As shown in Fig. 5c, the CBMs of AgMO2 (M = Al, Ga, and In) are composed of Ag 5s5p and M sp orbitals and its VBMs mainly consist of Ag 4d and O 2p orbitals. The CBM varies with a change in the composite M in the order of Al, Ga, and In, making continuous tuning of the band gaps of α-AgMO2 (M = Al, Ga, and In) and β-Ag1−xGaxO2 possible.54Fig. 5d shows that the substitution of OH− with S2− in In(OH)3 leads to a narrower band gap in In(OH)ySz and the doping of Zn2+ elevates the conduction band of In(OH)ySz:Zn because of the more negative energy level of Zn 4s4p compared with that of In 5s5p, realizing modulation of the thermodynamic driving force for photogenerated electrons.55
Simultaneously modulating the CB and VB levels of semiconductors by forming a solid solution can be possible via the use of pristine semiconductors with similar crystal structures to obtain a homogeneous new phase (Fig. 5e).56 ZnO:GaN is a representative visible light-responsive solid solution photocatalyst prepared from ZnO and GaN, both of which only absorb UV light. Its visible light absorption is due to the Zn-related acceptor level and/or p–d repulsion between Zn 3d and contribution of N 2p + O 2p to form a valence band. Similar strategies have been applied to obtain chalcogenides such as CuGaS2–AgGaS2,57 ZnS–CuGaS2,58 and ZnS–CuGaS2–CuInS,59 and new-emerging perovskite materials such as Cs3SbxBi1−xBr9 and CH3NH2SnxPb1−xBr3.60,61 The advantage of solid solutions lies in the possibility of continuous tuning the bandgaps of semiconductors by controlling the composition of different starting materials.
The construction of plasmonic metal–semiconductor composites presents a promising approach to extending the light-absorption range of photocatalysts owing to their typical merits of tunable electronic and optical properties.37 Generally, the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) represents a coherent collective oscillation of delocalized electrons in a localized region of metal nanostructures under an external electromagnetic field of incident light. LSPR induces high absorption and scattering cross-sections at the resonant frequency, which can be tuned by varying the composition, size, shape, aggregation state and surrounding electric environment of the plasmon metals, making a wide absorption range in the visible light region possible.62,63 The mechanisms of the photocatalytic process on metal–semiconductor hybrids have been described in many reviews and book chapters, where “hot-electron injection” was firstly reported for metal plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic activity in wide-band-gap semiconductors. Hot electrons generated from LSPR with sufficient momentum overcome the Schottky barrier at the interface between the metal and semiconductor, and inject into the CB of the semiconductor, leading to photosensitization of wide-band-gap semiconductors and extending the light-absorption range of semiconductors without band-gap limitations. As early as 1996, the Au/TiO2 photoelectrode was observed to exhibit an anodic photocurrent under visible light irradiation, showing its potential for plasmon-induced photocatalysis.64 Plasmonic coinage metals including Au, Ag, and Cu applied on the surface of semiconductors, including TiO2, CdS and SrTiO3, have been reported to broaden the absorption range of semiconductors, with further precise control of plasmonic metal nanostructures to manipulate their light absorption property. For example, by changing the geometry of nanoparticles such as rods, cubes, triangles, shells, and stars, one can control the light-harvesting properties of absorbers to cover most of the solar spectrum.62,65 Tatsuma et al. reported that in Au–Ag alloy/TiO2, an increase in the content of Ag in the alloy nanoparticles led to an increase in photon energy induced by the blue shift of the LSPR peak.66 This result was also verified in a recent study where the fabrication of Au–Ag alloy/TiO2 with the ability to selectively tune the LSPR wavelengths and d-band position exhibited a distinct light absorption increase and a superior photocatalytic water oxidation performance (Fig. 5f).67 Also, the aggregation states of the plasmonic structures can influence the generation of plasmon-induced charges. For instance, through the construction of the Au NPs/TiO2/Au film structure, strong light absorption (higher than 98%) could be achieved due to the strong coupling between the plasmon and cavity resonance, which is termed hot spots, where an intense enhancement in LSPR occurs.68 Recently, the accumulation of plasmon-coupling-induced holes at the interface of plasmonic Au nanoparticle dimer/TiO2 in the nanogap region was directly evidenced at the single particle level by the locally enhanced surface photovoltage.69 It was found that the density of spatially separated holes at the coupled Au nanoparticle dimer/TiO2 interface can be up to 6–7 times higher than that of dispersed Au nanoparticle/TiO2. This accumulation of plasmonic holes confined at the interface can significantly enhance the photocatalytic water oxidation. Overall, the multiple and flexible design of specific structures of plasmonic metal–semiconductor hybrids with different LSPR properties provide abundant possibilities for expanding the absorption range and performance of photocatalysts. In addition, some doped semiconductors with strong surface plasmon resonance have also been applied in visible-light-induced photocatalysis and their light absorption property could be well-adjusted to match the solar spectrum by controlling the degree of doping.70
In addition to experimental studies, theoretical calculations towards the intrinsic optical and thermodynamic properties of semiconductors provide a complementary approach to designing novel semiconductors for photocatalysis.71,72 Computational screening studies based on criteria including the bandgap, band position, driving force to overcome the kinetic overpotential and stability are filtered progressively, yielding a few candidate photocatalysts. Although variations between the theoretical and experimental results may occur due to the limitation of traditional semi-local density functional theory (DFT) methods, collaborations with more high-level methods can be applied for band structure calculations to experimentally evaluate candidates on a high-throughput scale, providing predictive directions for the design of photocatalysts and achieving insights into their structure–property relationship.


3.1.2 New-emerging visible light-responsive photocatalysts. 
Advances towards some emerging representative novel visible light-responsive photocatalysts will be included in this session. Oxysulfides, which are known for their splendid visible light absorption property, have triggered huge interests in the field of photocatalysis.47,73 Recently, the oxysulfide Y2Ti2O5S2, comprising alternating rock salt [Y2S2]2+ slabs and ReO3-type blocks formed by –(TiO2)–(O)–(TiO2)– layers, was found to possess a band gap of 1.9 eV and suitable band structure for water splitting.50 As shown in Fig. 6, the band structure reveals that the CBM of Y2Ti2O5S2 consists predominately of Ti 3d orbitals, while its VBM is composed of O 2p, S 3p and Y 3d orbitals. The hybridization between the S and O atoms according to the strong overlap of the S 3p and O 2p orbitals may improve the stability of Y2Ti2O5S2 against hole extraction for oxidation reactions. By loading IrO2 and Rh/Cr2O3 as oxidation and reduction cocatalysts, photocatalytic OWS into H2 and O2 in a stoichiometric ratio was achieved with an AQE of 0.36% at 420 nm.
 Fig. 6  (a) Crystal structure of Y2Ti2O5S2. (b) Schematic band structure diagram for Y2Ti2O5S2. (c) DOS for O (blue line), S (red line), Ti (orange line) and Y (light blue line). (d) Time course of OWS on Cr2O3/Rh/IrO2-modified Y2Ti2O5S2 in distilled water buffered by La2O3 (pH 8.5) under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G). Y2Ti2O5S2 was synthesized at 973 K. (e) Time course of OWS on Cr2O3/Rh/IrO2-modified Y2Ti2O5S2 in distilled water buffered by La2O3 (pH 8.5) under illumination from a xenon lamp (300 W, λ > 420 nm) for 20 h, with evacuation every 10 h (dashed line). Y2Ti2O5S2 was synthesized at 973 K. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. 
Bismuth-based oxyhalides in layered Sillén crystal structures constructed with slabs of halogen and [Bi2O2] are promising candidates due to their flexible and tunable band gaps.74 Their electronic structures confer CBMs mainly constructed with the Bi 6p orbital and VBMs from the hybridized orbitals between the np orbitals of the halide atoms and O 2p orbital, which can be adjusted by tuning the stoichiometric proportions of their different components.75 Layered bismuth-based perovskites, Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl and Br) in the Sillén–Aurivillius structure, have also emerged for photocatalytic water splitting.76 Similar types of semiconductors Bi4TaO8Cl and Bi4TaO8Br were also reported (Fig. 7a and b).77 The crystal structure of Bi4MO8X (M = Nb and Ta and X = Cl and Br) is made up of Aurivillius phases consisting of fluorite-related [Bi2O2]2+ slabs and [An−1BnO3n+1]2− perovskite slabs and Sillén phases of analogous fluorite-like [Bi2O2]2+ layers intergrown with halide layers [Xm]. In addition to visible light absorption, Bi4MO8X exhibits favorable CBM and VBM positions for the HER and OER thermodynamically. Given that halogen ions hardly contribute to the VBMs of Bi4MO8X owing to its highly dispersive O 2p orbitals, its photostability can be improved compared with the bismuth oxyhalides. Recent studies reported that Bi2MO4Cl (M = Y, La, and Bi) is a promising photocatalyst, possessing an inserting [MO2] layer in the [Bi2O2] layer, which is intimately correlated with the local symmetry at the Bi site (Fig. 7c and d).78 With different metal ions on the M site, the block of Bi2MO4Cl varies by Bi-O bond breaking. When the M site is occupied with yttrium (Y), Bi2YO4Cl is found to be capable of both OER and HER half reactions under visible light. Furthermore, the coupling of Bi2YO4Cl with SrTiO3:Rh resulted in the fabrication of a Z-scheme system for photocatalytic OWS to H2 and O2 with a stoichiometric ratio of 2:1. Fig. 8 systematically compares the different layered bismuth oxyhalides including BiOX, Bi4NbO8X, Bi2GdO4X, and SrBiO2X (X = Cl, Br, and I) containing various layer units including [Bi2O2], [X2], [X], [NbO4], [SrBiO2], and [Bi2GdO4].79 It has been proposed that the unusual occupation of the O orbitals at the VB of Bi4NbO8Cl comes from the small Madelung potential at the oxygen site in the [Bi2O2] layer, and the increase in oxygen density is due to the stacking of the [Bi2O2] and [NbO4] layers (without an intercalated halide layer), thus leading to an upward shift in the oxygen bands and regulation of the band structures.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of Bi3TaO7 and Bi4TaO8X (X = Cl and Br) synthesized with different methods. (b) DOS of Bi4TaOCl. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2018. (c) and (d) Photocatalytic water oxidation and reduction reaction on Bi2YO4Cl, Bi2LaO4Cl and Bi3O4Cl, respectively. (e) and (f) Schematic diagram and photocatalytic OWS activity on Z-scheme system constructed by coupling Bi2YO4Cl with SrTiO3:Rh. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
 Fig. 8  Crystal structures and corresponding band positions of (a) BiOX (X = Cl, Br, and I), (b) Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl and Br), (c) Bi2GdO4X (X = Cl and Br), and (d) SrBiO2X(X = Cl and Br). Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Halide perovskites have attracted significant attention due to their unique properties including tunable band structures, high carrier mobility, and long electron–hole diffusion lengths.80,81 Especially in perovskite solar cells, the photoelectric conversion efficiencies have witnessed a dramatic improvement from 3.8% to certified 25.5% within a short period. For the metal halide perovskite AMX3, where A represents an organic cation (e.g., CH3NH3+ [MA+]) or inorganic cation (e.g., Cs+), M is a multivalent metal cation (Pb2+, Sn2+, Ge2+, Sb3+, Bi3+, etc.), and X is a halogen anion (Cl−, Br−, and I−), its VBs is mainly composed of antibonding hybridization M-s and X-p orbitals and its CBs are mainly derived from the M-p orbitals. The flexible tuning of the photoelectric properties of halide perovskites can be achieved by substitution of the metal ion M and the halogen ion X, and modulation of the bond length and bond angle of the BX6 octahedral structure (Fig. 9).82,83 For instance, in Cs3Bi2Br9 with distorted BiBr6 octahedrons, half of the Bi–Br bonds are longer than the other half, and thus the bond angle between Br–Bi–Br is distorted, resulting in strong localization of the electron–hole pairs in the Bi center of the lattice and a large exciton binding energy. However, when Ag atoms are incorporated, the s orbital of Ag contributes to the valence band, leading to a raised VB level and narrowed band gap. Meanwhile, the distortion of the BiBr6 octahedrons is relieved with the formation of a regular octahedron, which can promote the delocalization of electron–hole pairs inside the crystal and tune the photoelectric properties.
 Fig. 9  (a) Changes in the energy band level of MAPbX3 with X-site substitution. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (b) Evolution of the crystal structure, (c) charge distribution of the VBM and CBM, and (d) emission spectra of Cs3Bi2Br9 and Cs2AgBiBr6. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020. 

3.2 Photogenerated charge separation
Upon photoexcitation, photogenerated electrons and holes need to separate and transfer to the surface for catalytic reactions. However, promoting the separation of photogenerated charges and inhibiting charge recombination are arguably challenging in photocatalysis.18,19 As shown in Fig. 3, the energetic photogenerated electrons and holes tend to recombine directly to release energy and decay to the ground state. Besides, the existing multiple defects in both the bulk and surface of photocatalysts can serve as recombination centers, further shortening the lifetime of photogenerated charges. Consequently, optimizing the crystallinity of photocatalysts to remove defects is usually adopted to decrease the probability of recombination.84,85 For example, Xiao et al. recently reported that the co-doping of Mg and Zr in single-crystalline Ta3N5 can realize the simultaneous tuning of defects and surface properties, resulting in a higher concentration of long-lived electrons and more efficient migration of electrons to surface of the cocatalysts.86 To date, numerous strategies have been proposed to promote the separation of photogenerated charges. In this section, we present an overview on these strategies combined with advanced space- and time-resolved characterization tools to try to reveal the intrinsic nature of energy and charges in spatio-temporal distribution and reaction dynamics during the photogenerated charge separation and transfer process in photocatalytic water splitting.

3.2.1 Heterojunctions. 
An opportunity to optimize photogenerated charge separation and transport lies in constructing multi-component heterojunctions with high-quality interfaces.87 Taking the p–n junction as an example, the difference in the concentration of holes and electrons at two sides of the p–n junction results in a diffusion current across the junction region, leaving extra holes and electrons on each side. The boundary region with a positive charge on the side of n-type semiconductor and negative charge on the side of the p-type semiconductor is called the depletion region, where a built-in electric field develops to induce the movement of electrons and holes to opposite directions.88 As shown in Fig. 10, photogenerated electrons prefer to migrate to the CB of the n-type semiconductor, while holes transfer to the VB of the p-type semiconductor, thus diminishing the probability of charge recombination and endowing photogenerated charges with longer lifetimes. As early as the 1970s, a photoelectrode coupled with n-TiO2 and p-GaP was found to be bestowed with a superior performance compared with single n-TiO2 or p-GaP.89,90 Dispersing p-type CaFe2O4 over a layered perovskite n-type PbBi2Nb1.9W0.1O9 to form a p–n junction interface resulted in a great enhancement in both photocatalytic activity and stability under visible light irradiation.91 Similar examples such as p-CaFe2O4/n-MgFe2O4,92 n-CdS/p-Cu7S4,93 n-CdS/p-AgGaS2,94 n-SrTiO3/p-Cu2O95 and n–p core–shell BiVO4@Bi2O396 were also found to exhibit efficient photogenerated charge separation in photocatalysis. Heterojunctions composited with different semiconductors including n–n junction and p–p junction have also been constructed considering the band alignment or Fermi level difference. There are numerous reports on the fabrication of composite photocatalysts with heterojunctions including TiO2/CdS,97,98 BiVO4/WO3,99,100 BiVO4/g-C3N4,101,102 α-Fe2O3/TiO2,103 SrTiO3/α-Fe2O3,104 and α-Fe2O3/WO3.105 The energy gradient at the interfaces of the junction region has been proven to drive electrons and holes to different sides of the heterojunction, resulting in promoted photogenerated charge separation. The challenge in the construction of heterojunctions lies in a guaranteed high-quality interface, which is decisive with respect to photogenerated charge trapping and recombination. Not only the energy band structure, but also the crystal structure depending on the detailed atomic configuration should be critically considered. During the fabrication of photoelectronic devices, integration strategies such as chemical epitaxial growth and physical vapor deposition are usually employed to afford composites with crystal structure matching and strong one-to-one chemical bonds, which are difficult to be applied in the fabrication of photocatalysts.106 One of the few successful examples is the in situ growth of Ta3N5 nanorods on lattice-matched KTaO3, resulting in minimum defects at the boundary.85 However, recently, heterojunctions based on van der Waals integration provide an alternative bond-free assembly approach without limitations upon lattice matching. For instance, Li et al. reported the fabrication of heterostructures with two-dimensional Bi12O17Cl2 and MoS2 monolayers, which demonstrated an enhanced built-in electric field for photogenerated charge separation.107 Advances in the synthesis of nanostructures permit the opportunity to fabricate heterojunctions via van der Waals integration with weak interaction, while possessing an excellent capability for charge separation and carrier mobility.106 Therefore, the interaction strength between the components of a heterojunction in relation to their influence on photogenerated charge separation and transfer requires further discussion and investigation.
 Fig. 10  Scheme of p-n junctions for photogenerated charge separation. 


3.2.2 Surface phase junction. 
Surface phase junctions are fabricated by taking advantage of polymorph semiconductors possessing different crystalline phases, which is also a common approach to enhancing the photogenerated charge separation. Despite sharing the same chemical composition, semiconductors crystalized in different phases possess varying coordination environments, thus resulting in different crystal structures and physiochemical properties. For instance, TiO2 with different phase structures including anatase, brookite, and rutile has been extensively studied. Interestingly, the highest activity appears on the sample with a mixture of anatase and rutile instead of pure phase. To determine the role of multiple crystalline phases in photocatalysis, their photocatalytic performances together with the phase transformation of anatase and rutile TiO2 were systematically investigated, both in the bulk and surface region.108 As shown in Fig. 11a, the photocatalytic H2 production on TiO2 with various compositions of anatase and rutile is closely related to its surface-phase structure, with the highest activity observed on TiO2 with mixed phases of anatase and rutile. These results suggest that the anatase/rutile phase junction characterized by XRD, UV and visible Raman spectra, and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (Fig. 11b) may offer a smooth path for photogenerated charge transfer and separation, thus promoting the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 photocatalysts with mixed phases. The TiO2 phase transformation from anatase to rutile was further found to be suppressed by the surface modification of Na2SO4.109 Besides, an enhanced charge separation and transfer process was also observed on the photoanode fabricated with an anatase/rutile phase junction, achieving about 3- and 9 times enhancement in photocurrent density compared to that of the anatase and rutile photoanodes, respectively.110 Correspondingly, as depicted by transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS), the TiO2 photoanode with an appropriate phase junction and interface also shows higher yields of long-lived holes under illumination than its counterparts, defining an enhanced charge separation and transfer process and potential of the surface phase junction in boosting photogenerated charge separation.
 Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic H2 evolution of rutile TiO2 loaded with increasing amount of anatase nanoparticles. (b) HRTEM of the surface phase junction formed between anatase and rutile. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2008. (c) Schematic band diagram of an n-type semiconductor with a depletion layer (space charge region-SCR) and negative charge trapped at surface states in the dark (black lines) and under illumination (orange lines). Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of using cross-section KPFM to obtain the energy band alignment of a rutile/anatase phase junction and the transfer direction of photogenerated electrons and holes at the interface of a TiO2 phase junction. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Given its unique feature and significant promotion of artificial photosynthesis, growing interests have been focused on exploring the intrinsic mechanism of photocatalytic enhancement induced by the surface phase junction, with the integration of characterization measurements and theoretical thermodynamic studies, mainly focusing on the energy band alignment thermodynamically and the charge transfer inside the phase junction.111 Theoretically, Liang et al. identified the mix-phase composed of anatase and rutile TiO2 with the most stable structure and investigated the interfacial electronic structures and level diagram of the energy band, resulting in the calculated VBM and CBM of rutile lying 0.52 and 0.22 eV above that of anatase, respectively.112 Similarly, Scanlon et al. also reported a staggered band alignment, in which both the VB and CB of rutile are higher than that of anatase.113 They calculated the electronic structures of bulk crystals, electrostatic analysis of the Ti and O environments, and absolute vacuum alignment from embedded crystals of anatase and rutile TiO2, respectively. The results revealed that anatase possesses a larger work function of ∼0.4 eV compared with rutile. Correspondingly, the X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) measurement on the TiO2 phase junction layer also showed a typical type II band alignment with rutile possessing a higher CBM. This type of band alignment has also been proven by the direct measurement of the surface potential profile, and the charge transfer over the surface phase junction was detected by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) and home-built spatially resolved surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SRSPS).114Fig. 11c illustrates the direct measurement of surface photovoltage (SPV) on an n-type semiconductor with upward band bending. The SPV value is determined by measuring the contact potential difference (CPD) before and after illumination and the process of photogenerated charge separation and transfer at the interface and surface regions can be imaged with nanometer resolution. It was found that the CPD of rutile is about 30 mV lower than that of anatase, suggesting that the surface work function of rutile is higher than anatase. Meanwhile, an internal built-in electric field with upward band bending from the anatase to rutile phase across the interface was detected, with an electric field intensity comparable to that of a heterojunction structure. The results clearly proved the vectorial photogenerated electron transfer from the rutile to anatase phase and provided a useful tool to directly depict the situation of photogenerated charge separation at the nanometer scale.
Similar to the TiO2 phase junction, it was found that gallium oxide (Ga2O3) with a tunable α–β phase junction showed enhanced photocatalytic water splitting activity compared with its pure phase counterparts (Fig. 12).115 An atomic-level surface phase junction was evidenced by HRTEM, showing a smooth and compact interface between α and β phase Ga2O3. The photocatalytic OWS activity of Ga2O3 with an α–β phase junction can be boosted to more than 8 times that of the pure phase. The presence of the α–β phase junction results in an ultrafast electron transfer process (∼3–6 ps) which is much faster than the recombination and trap process of individual phases. Furthermore, the lifetime of the long-lived photogenerated electrons in α–β Ga2O3 is apparently longer than that in any individual phase in the microsecond timescale, which is responsible for the enhanced photocatalytic water splitting activity. Additionally, the strain and lattice misfit at the interface junctions has been proven to enable significant tuning of the energy bands.116 A type-II band alignment in which a higher VB of 0.35 eV for α-Ga2O3 above that of β-Ga2O3 and a CB offset of 0.07 eV were demonstrated to provide the thermodynamic driving force for photogenerated charge separation. To date, various heterogeneous photocatalysts based on the surface phase junction have been widely reported including hexagonal/cubic-CdS,117 α/β phase Bi2O3,118 hexagonal/monoclinic BiPO4,119 α/β phase Bi4V2O11,120 and hexagonal/monoclinic–WO3,121 implying that the creation of a surface phase junction is a general strategy to achieve photogenerated charge separation. Furthermore, the fabrication of homophase junction between large and small particles with the same crystalline phase has also been found to be beneficial for photogenerated charge separation.122
 Fig. 12  (a) HRTEM of Ga2O3 phase junction. (b) Specific H2 and O2 evolution activities (normalized by specific surface area) of Ga2O3 samples prepared at different temperatures. (c) Normalized transient absorption decays at 850 nm of Ga2O3 samples excited by a 255 nm laser. (d) Normalized transient absorption decays of average mid-IR absorption of Ga2O3 samples excited at 266 nm. (e) Illustration of charge transfer across the α-β phase junction. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2012. 


3.2.3 Spatial charge separation between different facets. 
Although the construction of composite photocatalysts has been widely proven to promote charge separation and transfer, how to effectively separate the photogenerated charges on a single semiconductor photocatalyst is still challenging and attractive. Morphology engineering enabling flexible control of the crystallographic structure of photocatalysts on the nano/micro scale permits the rational and desirable exposure of specific facets, which has been demonstrated to be correlated with the reaction activity as a result of the different surface atomic arrangements and coordination environments at different facets, affording a promising and accessible approach to tuning the property of photogenerated charge separation on single crystalline photocatalysts.123 In 2008, a theoretical investigation on anatase TiO2 revealed the influence of surface-terminated non-metal atoms on the surface energy, where obtained anatase TiO2 exposed 47% of the {001} facet.124 Subsequent studies associated with TiO2 single crystals with different sizes and different ratios of facets increased and elucidated the intimate relationship between the exposed facets and photocatalytic activity; however, the intrinsic functional mechanism of photogenerated charge separation or surface reactions still remains unclear.125,126 A previous study found that bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) with dominant {010} facets showed a proportional increase in photocatalytic water oxidation activity with an increase in the ratio of {010} facets, which indicates that the photocatalytic activity of BiVO4 is closely related to its exposed facets (Fig. 13a–c).127 Following this finding, we experimentally demonstrated that the photogenerated spatial charge separation of electrons and holes can take place between different exposed facets of BiVO4.128 As shown in Fig. 13e–g, utilizing in situ photochemical reactions as probes, it was clearly observed that the photoreduction deposition of noble metals (Au, Pt, and Ag) occurs on the {010} facets of BiVO4 selectively, while the photooxidation deposition of metal oxides (MnOx and PbO2) primarily takes place on its {110} facets, which suggests that the photogenerated electrons and holes tend to separate spatially and prefer to locate on the {010} and {110} facets, respectively. Consonantly, single-particle fluorescence imaging utilizing p-aminophenyl fluorescein (APF) molecules as the oxidation probe,129 as shown in Fig. 13h, demonstrated that the bright fluorescence areas, due to the oxidation of APF molecules by photogenerated holes, only appeared on the {110} facets of BiVO4. This further confirmed the occurrence of the spatial separation of photogenerated electrons and holes between different facets of BiVO4, which is different from the traditional “junction” strategies between different semiconductors.
 Fig. 13  (a–c) Relationship between the exposure of the {040} crystal facet and the corresponding activity of photocatalytic O2 evolution. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2011. (d–i) Photogenerated charge separation between different facets of BiVO4 crystals. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2013. 
Given that the spatial charge separation of BiVO4 results in the separation of reduction and oxidation reactions, that is, {010} facets for the reduction reaction and {110} facets for the oxidation reaction, the reaction kinetics of the two half reactions can be tuned by varying the ratio of {010} to {110} facets. It was demonstrated that the surface ratio of {010} to {110} facets of BiVO4 consistently determines the balance of the reaction rates between the reduction and oxidation reactions, thus determining the overall reaction rate and the photocatalytic performance of BiVO4 photocatalysts.130 Therefore, it is a feasible solution to precisely control the charge separation and surface reactions by controlling the proportion of exposed facets, consequently optimizing the photocatalytic performance of single crystal photocatalysts. Hitherto, the spatial charge separation between different facets has been demonstrated on numerous semiconductors such as TiO2,131 Cu2O,132 Cu2WS4,133 and Bi2WO6,134 proving the universality of the spatial charge separation between different facets in heterogeneous photocatalysis (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Photogenerated charge separation between different facets of (a–c) rutile, reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016, (d–g) anatase, reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2015, and (h and i) Cu2O, reproduced from ref. 297 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013. 
Frequency-modulated spatial-resolved surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SRSPS) based on the illuminated Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was employed to investigate the origin of photogenerated charge separation between different facets of BiVO4.129 As shown in Fig. 15, the disparate dark-state surface potentials between the {010} and {110} facets indicate the different space charge regions beneath these two facets. Upon light irradiation, the surface potential of the whole crystal increased. Notably, the surface photovoltage (SPV) measured on the {110} facet showed a more intensive amplitude compared with that of the {010} facet, implying that the surface band bending induced by the built-in electric field beneath the surface charge region of the {110} facet is much more intense than that of the {010} facets. This is a strong support for the preferred accumulation of photogenerated holes on the {110} facets. This study verified that different facets of photocatalysts possess different built-in electric fields and surface band bending, which are responsible for the observed spatial charge separation between their different facets. In addition, it was theoretically predicted that the mobility of photogenerated electrons and holes is different along the same crystal axis orientation of BiVO4.135
 Fig. 15  (a) Dark-state surface potential images of a single BiVO4 crystal with exposed {010} and {011} facets. (b) KPFM image of a single BiVO4 crystal excited with modulated UV light. (c) Representative SRSPS obtained on the {010} and {011} facets. (d) Schematic showing the distribution of SCRs beneath the {010} and {011} facets of a BiVO4 crystal with two morphologies. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2015. 
The property of spatial charge separation closely depends on the different exposed facets and the crystal symmetry of the semiconductor. BiVO4 is a semiconductor with low symmetry point groups (C2, Cs, and C2h), which naturally result in the formation of anisotropic facets. However, for semiconductors with high symmetric structures, such as centrosymmetric-structured semiconductors, spatially separating the photogenerated charges on a semiconductor possessing high symmetry is difficult to realize. As shown in Fig. 16, when cubic-phase SrTiO3 nanocrystals were precisely controlled from isotropic facets (6-facet SrTiO3) to anisotropic facets (18-facet SrTiO3), a surprising phenomenon was observed that the photogenerated electrons and holes were separately distributed on the anisotropic facets of the 18-facet SrTiO3, but randomly dispersed on every facet of the 6-facet SrTiO3.136 This result suggests that spatial charge separation can indeed be achieved on a photocatalyst with high symmetry but requires the exposure of anisotropic facets by tailoring the morphology symmetry. The key to achieving spatial charge separation on a high symmetric semiconductor may be breaking of the intrinsic symmetry of its crystal structures. Through the construction of an unsymmetrical built-in electric field inside the semiconductor, combined with the selective deposition of cocatalysts, which is mentioned later, the photogenerated charge separation efficiency and the photocatalytic performance can be effectively enhanced.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of (a–f) 6-facet and (g–l) 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with photo-deposition of noble metals or metal oxides. SEM images of (m) 6-facet SrTiO3 and (n) 18-facet nanocrystals with simultaneous photo-deposition of Pt and Co3O4 as cocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the spatial charge separation between different facets, photocatalysts with specific morphologies also permit the unsymmetrical distribution of photogenerated charges. For instance, it has been found that the photogenerated electrons prefer transferring along the long axis of photocatalysts with one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures of rod, wire, belt and tube shapes.137,138 Besides, anisotropic transfer of photogenerated charges has also been observed on some nanostructures in two-dimensional (2D) nanostructures such as nanoplates and nanosheets, leading to spatial photogenerated charge separation between different crystallographic axes.139,140 However, to date, the intrinsic mechanism of spatial charge separation on photocatalysts with specific morphologies is still under debate. Crystal surfaces with different atomic arrangements and coordination together with the space charge region beneath the surface, and anisotropic transfer properties of photogenerated electrons and holes along different orientations may be responsible for this type of interesting phenomenon. Anyway, for the rational design and utilization of photocatalysts with a specific morphology, especially exposed with different facets, employing spatial charge separation, combined with the spatial separation of cocatalysts, has significant potential to realize the construction of artificial photocatalysts.


3.2.4 Polarity-induced charge separation. 
Polarization field engineering has emerged as an interesting tactic to achieve photogenerated charge separation in photocatalysis. Polarity is an intrinsic property of a material arising from its non-centrosymmetry, which is generally determined by its pristine crystallographic structure.141 The polarization electric field provides a direct driving force for enabling the distribution and migration of photogenerated charges.142,143 Engineering the intrinsic polarization fields of semiconductors based on symmetry breaking to directly induce or modulate their built-in electric field can be used to promote photogenerated charge separation. For example, Huang et al. disclosed that the surface hydroxylation of g-C3N4 could induce surface polarization for promoting charge separation and its photocatalytic H2 production activity.144 The calculation results indicated that the formation of H–O–CN after the surface hydroxylation of g-C3N4 can promote electron migration to the surface OH and accelerate the spatial charge separation owing to the enhanced polarization field. Furthermore, g-C3N4 with an atomically thin sheet-like structure has been proven to possess anomalous piezoelectricity, originating from the strong in-plane polarization along its a-axis, which provides a powerful electrochemical driving force for the water reduction reaction.145 Also, the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate of carbon nitrides has been found to be promoted by the introduction of alkali metals and their ionic salts in the reaction solution, which may be owing to the dielectric screening effects induced by charge dipoles in the vicinity of the semiconductor.146–148
Given that surface polarity can induce a substantial electric field in the surface region, investigations on how the surface polarity affects the photogenerated charge separation are of great interest. Li et al. fabricated uniform GaN nanorods oriented along the polar c-axis [0001] direction, with their polar surface (Ga-polar or N-polar) exposed perpendicular to the c-axis direction and nonpolar surface parallel to the c-axis direction (Fig. 17).149In situ photochemical probing experiments revealed that photogenerated electrons and holes could be spatially separated on the nonpolar and polar surface, respectively. The photogenerated charge separation efficiency was found to be enhanced significantly from ∼8% to more than 80% after co-exposing the polar and nonpolar surfaces. The reason for the spatial charge separation is presumably ascribed to the different built-in electric fields and the surface band bending induced by the surface polarity. The finding of spatial charge separation between the polar and nonpolar surface of GaN with an anisotropic polarization field addresses the significant effect of polarization field engineering of photocatalysts and indicates the potential of utilization of the polarization field for the enhancement of photogenerated charge separation in photocatalysis.
 Fig. 17  (a–j) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of GaN nanorod arrays with the photoreduction deposition of noble metals and photooxidation deposition of metal oxides. (k) 3D Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) potential images under dark condition. (l–m) Corresponding contact potential difference (CPD) and the change in CPD (ΔCPD) cross-sectional profiles under dark and illumination conditions. (n) Schematic representation of different band bending on the polar and nonpolar surfaces and the resulting spatial charge separation. (o) Illustration of GaN with Ga-polar surface and nonpolar surface, and the surface dipole moments. (p) Apparent quantum efficiency of photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on the GaN nanorod arrays and film deposited with Rh and CoOx. (q) Photocatalytic OWS on the GaN nanorod arrays without and with the Rh and CoOx cocatalysts. (r) Multi-cycles of photocatalytic OWS on the Rh-CoOx/GaN nanorod arrays. (s) Surface photovoltage (SPV) spectroscopy on the GaN nanorod arrays with cocatalysts. a.u. is arbitrary unit. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020. 


3.2.5 Ferroelectric effect. 
Ferroelectric semiconductors with a spontaneous polarization-induced internal electric field due to their spontaneous dipole moment have also attracted great attention.150 Recently, ferroelectric semiconductors such as PbTiO3,151 BaTiO3,152 SrBi4Ti4O15,153 and BiFeO3,154 have been demonstrated to be active photocatalysts. For instance, Park et al. reported that K0.5Na0.5NbO3 with a permanent polarization field presented photogenerated charges with a relative long lifetime. The ferroelectric polarization largely promotes the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes in the bulk and enhances the photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution.155 The employment of a ferroelectric material, Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT), instead of traditional semiconductors to construct a hybrid photoelectrode with nano-Au demonstrated effective charge transfer, with the ability to tune the photocurrent by changing the ferroelectric polarization in PZT.156 It has been reported that the internal polarization of a ferroelectric can induce spatial segregation of the oxidation and reduction reactions between facets with opposite polarization. For instance, the photooxidation of Pb2+ to PbO2 and the photoreduction of Ag+ to Ag demonstrated spatial charge separation on BaTiO3, BiFeO3, and other ferroelectrics.143 In addition, photogenerated charge separation with multi-electric fields at the nano/micrometer scale were also studied. As depicted in Fig. 18, according to spatially resolved surface photovoltage spectroscopy, the depolarization field in single-domain ferroelectric PbTiO3 is shown to be the main driving force for photogenerated charge separation, which can drive the electrons and holes to the positive and negative polarization facets, respectively.157 Moreover, the potential difference between the opposite polarization facets increases with an increase in the size of the particle along the polarization direction, leading to an increase in the charge separation ability of PbTiO3. This result indicates the potential of this driving force for charge separation and direct contributions to the enhancement of photocatalytic activity in ferroelectrics.
 Fig. 18  SPV of PTO particles and schematic of band bending. (a) AFM topography of PTO particle on ITO substrate. The polarization direction is along the 〈001〉 axis. (b) KPFM images of single PTO crystals on ITO substrates in the dark (upper image) and under irradiation with a UV-LED (lower image). Scale bar, 1 μm. (c) Crystal structure of Pdown and Pup perovskite ferroelectric PTO and ΔCPD of PTO particles (subtracting dark CPD from photoexcited CPD); magenta represents holes and red represents electrons. (d) Photodepolarization of MnOx on PTO surface. Selective deposition of MnOx particles is only on one of the two geometrically symmetric {001} facets of PTO particles. This selectively photo-deposition demonstrated the single domain property of PTO particles. (e) HRTEM image of an individual PTO nanoplate and the inset shows the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) electron diffraction pattern along the [001] zone axis. (f) Correlation between SPV value and PTO particle thickness. (g) PTO particle band bending diagrams with (left side) or without (right side) an internal field (depolarization field) through the hole particles along the 〈001〉 axis. (h) Schematic of ferroelectric polarization and depolarization field Edep. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020. 


3.2.6 Photo-Dember effect. 
The photo-Dember effect describes the formation of a charge dipole in the vicinity of a semiconductor surface after the ultra-fast photo-generation of charge carriers in semiconductor physics.158 As a result of the difference in mobility (or diffusion constants) between holes and electrons, the symmetry of the surface is broken, leading to the formation of a dipole in the direction perpendicular to the surface with effective charge separation. In addition to the charge separation and transfer induced by the conventional driving force, the charge separation induced by the diffusion of charge carriers has seldom been investigated. Taking the Cu2O photocatalyst as a prototype, it was found that the photogenerated charges can be separated effectively on a high-symmetry Cu2O photocatalyst under the irradiation of asymmetric light.159 As demonstrated in Fig. 19, the photogenerated holes and electrons could be transferred to the illuminated and shadow regions of the crystal, respectively, because of the intrinsic discrepancy between the mobility of electrons and holes, which is known as the photo-Dember effect. Further quantitative analysis concluded that the diffusion-controlled charge separation process resulting from the intrinsic discrepancy between the electron and hole mobilities could be stronger than that induced by the conventional built-in electric field. These results indicated that the SPV signals could be generated from both the drift and diffusion processes of photogenerated charges, while the diffusion SPV was found to be highly dependent on the length of charge transport. Furthermore, the phenomenon of charge separation by external light manipulation may be helpful for the controllable design and asymmetric assembly of co-catalysts on different regions of a photocatalyst to induce an additional directional driving force and stronger internal electric field to further promote photocatalytic charge separation.
 Fig. 19  Charge separation between the illuminated facet and shadow facet under asymmetric illumination. (a) Experimental set-up for SPV imaging of the Cu2O photocatalyst. Two light sources with a tunable light intensity and opposite irradiation direction were employed to perform the asymmetric photoexcitation. (b) Illustration of asymmetric-irradiation-induced illuminated and shadow regions on a typical cubic Cu2O particle grown along the (111) orientation. (c) and (d) Corresponding surface potential images in the dark state (c) and under illumination (d) (λ = 450 nm). (e) SPVM image of the particle obtained by subtracting the surface potential in the dark from the surface potential under illumination. (f) Surface potential values extracted across the dashed lines in (c) and (d). The dashed black line corresponds to the position of the edge between the illuminated facet and the shadow facet. (g) Amplitude of SPS acquired at the center of the illuminated facet (blue) and shadow facet (red). Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. 


3.2.7 Photogenerated charge separation in SPR-induced photocatalysts. 
Plasmon-excited electrons or holes can be injected from the plasmonic metal to the energy band of a neighboring semiconductor to drive chemical reactions including the water splitting reaction. For example, Silva et al. conducted the photocatalytic HER and OER half reactions on Au/TiO2 under visible irradiation in 2011.160 Also, in 2013, Mubeen et al. reported the visible light-driven overall water splitting reaction on an Au nanorod/TiO2 photocatalyst deposited with Pt nanoparticles and cobalt-based cocatalyst.161 However, the lifetime of hot carriers (fs–ps) is too short to match the surface catalytic reaction (μs–s), resulting in a critical problem on how to effectively prolong the longevity of LSPR-induced hot carriers. Combining plasmonic metal nanostructures with semiconductors to extract LSPR-induced hot carriers in semiconductors to realize spatial charge separation has been proven to be beneficial for efficiently collecting excited carriers to participate in the surface reactions. In hybrid photocatalytic systems, determining the process of photogenerated charge separation and transfer between the interface of the plasmonic metal and semiconductor is of great concern. It has been verified by ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopy that n-type TiO2 can considerably promote charge separation and inhibit the recombination of non-equilibrated charge carriers.162 Employing KPFM, Tatsuma et al. observed the transfer of photogenerated electrons from TiO2 to Au nanoparticles under UV irradiation, while from Au nanoparticles to TiO2 under visible irradiation.163 Taking Au/TiO2 as a plasmonic photocatalyst prototype, the mechanism of the photocatalytic OER was investigated in detail.164 The crystal phase of TiO2 was demonstrated to be associated with the photocatalytic activity, and by means of photo-deposition together with elemental mapping and KPFM, it was found that the plasmonic holes were mainly concentrated near the gold-semiconductor interface, which was further identified as the reaction site for plasmonic water oxidation. As shown in Fig. 20, photoreduced Cr2O3 was applied for the detection of the plasmonic electron accumulation sites, while photo-oxidized PbO2 was used for the verification of the plasmonic hole accumulation sites. Under visible light irradiation, Cr2O3 was mainly deposited on the surface of TiO2, indicating that the plasmonic electrons were transferred from Au to TiO2. In contrast, the photo-deposition of PbO2 mainly occurred at the interface between Au and TiO2, with an obvious decrease in photocatalytic activity for water oxidation, indicating that the interface where plasmonic hole aggregation occurs is the reaction site of water oxidation. KPFM based on a single Au particle also confirmed that plasmonic hot electrons were transferred to TiO2, while holes were distributed at the Au/TiO2 interface. Furthermore, the variation in the local charge density together with the polarization angle of incident light on the model photocatalyst Au/TiO2 was also investigated. It showed that the plasmon-induced SPV reached a plateau when the electric field vector direction of incident light is perpendicular to the interface between Au and TiO2, indicating that the LSPR-induced local charge density and photocatalytic activity can be dramatically enhanced under a suitable polarization angle.165
 Fig. 20  (a) and (b) HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping images of Au/TiO2 after photo-deposition of Cr2O3 and PbO2, respectively. (c) Plasmonic water oxidation performance of Au/TiO2 photocatalysts before and after photo-deposition. (d) KPFM images of Au/TiO2 in the dark and upon 532 nm illumination. (e) SPV profile across the Au/TiO2 particle by subtracting the potential under dark from that under 532 nm light irradiation. (f) Absorption spectrum (right axis) and action spectrum (left axis) of Au/rutile in plasmonic water oxidation. (g) Schematic illustration of water oxidation of plasmonic Au/TiO2 photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Optimization of the interface in plasmon metal/semiconductor systems presents a feasible way to manipulate photogenerated charge separation in SPR-induced photocatalysis. It has been demonstrated by transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) that the strong interaction between a plasmonic metal and semiconductor can induce direct electron transfer by interfacial electronic transitions with a fast rate and high quantum yield.166 For the Au/TiO2 photocatalyst, it was found that its water oxidation activity is associated with its interfacial interaction.167 The construction of different interfaces/surfaces with well-defined microstructures atomically has been proven to lead to different charge separation efficiencies and reaction kinetics.168 It was reported that the modulation of Al2O3 at the interface between Au and TiO2 can greatly prolong the lifetime of hot carriers and promote the spatial separation of hot carriers, as depicted by ultrafast time-resolved spectra and steady-state surface photovoltage (SPV) spectra.169 Defects at the interface may act as recombination centers for electrons with holes at the interface, thus influencing the charge utilization in SPR-induced photocatalysts.170 Strategies including the construction of heterojunctions,171 employing spatial charge separation between facets,172 ferroelectric effects,156 and modulation of metal nanostructures including surface ligands173,174 have also been applied to obtain plasmonic carriers with longer lifetimes and promote charge separation in LSPR-induced photocatalysts. Compared to hot electrons, the utilization of LSPR-induced hot holes with a short lifespan below the Fermi level of metals to drive the water oxidation reaction is much more challenging. Recently, the strategy of combining p-type semiconductors (GaN, NiO, etc.) with plasmonic Au nanoparticles to extract LSPR-induced hot holes to the valence band of semiconductors has been proposed. The Schottky-free architecture of Au nanoparticles and p-type NiO allows the efficient collection and transfer of hot holes and direct hot electron injection from plasmonic gold nanoparticles to the reactant.175 Also, according to the dynamic investigation, ultrafast (t < 200fs) hot-hole injection from Au nanoparticles into the valence band of p-type GaN was detected, which was observed to be capable of substantially altering the thermalization dynamics of hot electrons.176 These findings on the ultrafast dynamics of hot-carriers and exploration of strategies for promoting charge separation and transfer can advance our understanding of plasmon-induced photocatalytic systems and offer a thriving and promising research field for solar energy utilization.

3.3 Surface catalytic reactions for charge utilization
The final step of the photocatalytic process is the catalytic reaction occurring on the surface of the photocatalyst. The photocatalytic OWS reaction involves two half-reactions, i.e., photogeneration of electrons for the reduction of protons to generate H2, and holes for the oxidation of water to release O2 (Fig. 21a). However, OWS is particularly challenging considering the sluggish kinetic process of the exceptionally complex multiple proton-coupled electron transfer, rearrangement of multiple bonds, and finally the formation of an O–O bond in water oxidation reaction, which is regarded as the bottleneck of the whole reaction.15,177 The splitting of H2O is connected with an overpotential that cannot be neglected, which is the additional applied potential deviating from the thermodynamic requirements. In the context of catalysis, this overpotential can be converted a high activation barrier for the reaction. To promote the rate of the surface catalytic reaction, suitable cocatalysts are required to circumvent this key limitation by lowering the activation barrier (Fig. 21b). Cocatalysts generally serve as reaction sites to catalyze the surface reactions. In photocatalytic water splitting, both the HER and OER reactions require the corresponding cocatalysts. The rate-determining step of the entire reaction is usually determined by the half reaction with slower kinetics. Given that the photogenerated charges can be consumed quickly on the cocatalysts, the cocatalysts in photocatalysis not only can minimize the overpotential necessary to drive the catalytic reaction, but also promote the charge separation and transport driven by junctions/interfaces formed between cocatalysts and semiconductors.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic description of the functions of cocatalysts. (b) Intrinsic roles of dual-cocatalyst in lowering the activation energy in photocatalytic OWS. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. 
The commonly used reduction cocatalysts for hydrogen evolution include noble metals such as Pt, Au, Rh, and Ru, and some sulfides (MoS2) and phosphides (NixP),97,107,164,178–181 while the commonly used oxidation cocatalysts for water oxidation include metal oxides such as IrO2, RuO2, NiO, Mn3O4 and Co3O4, and some cobalt phosphates (CoPi) and cobalt borates (CoBi).50,77,182–185 In addition, some organic molecules with flexible structures have also been used as cocatalysts for photocatalysis, including Ru, Ir, Mn, Fe, Co-based complexes and hydrogenase compounds.186–191 The use of molecular cocatalysts into photocatalysis makes it easier to gain insights into the catalytic mechanisms and may provide guidance for exploring and developing robust heterogeneous cocatalysts. A simultaneous enhancement in both the proton reduction and water oxidation reactions can be realized by co-loading reduction and oxidation cocatalysts (dual-cocatalyst) on the surface of photocatalysts.20 Numerous studies have demonstrated significant improvements in photocatalytic water splitting owing to the synergistic effect of dual-cocatalysts, including the improvement in catalytic kinetics and photogenerated charge separation and injection, which indicate their huge potential in photocatalytic water splitting.
In this section, we will try to illustrate the intrinsic roles and mechanisms of cocatalysts and dual-cocatalysts. In-depth studies via the verification of the reaction intermediates and rate-determining step, and the catalytic processes involving photogenerated charge separation and transfer will also be included.

3.3.1 Roles of cocatalyst in photocatalysis. 
The functions of cocatalysts in the photocatalytic water splitting reaction mainly involve the promotion of charge separation and lowering of the kinetic barrier for surface catalytic reactions. Especially, the water oxidation reaction requiring a considerable overpotential and multi-steps involving four-electron and four-proton processes, generally dominates the activation energy and is deemed the bottleneck in photocatalytic water splitting. Cocatalysts in photocatalysis share some common characters with electrocatalysts.33 In electrocatalysis, the role of electrocatalysts is to lower the overpotential of a specific electrochemical reaction, which only involves the redox reactions taking place on two electrodes separately through direct electron transfer. Conversely, in photocatalysis, the photocatalyst particles can be regarded as an integrated micro-photoelectrochemical cell with redox reactions occurring on the surface of the same particle, on which reduction reaction sites (e.g., H2 evolution sites) are the cathodes and the oxidation reaction sites (e.g., O2 evolution sites) are the anodes. Fig. 22 schematically illustrates the roles of cocatalysts in the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) water oxidation reaction. In PEC water splitting, the presence of water oxidation electrocatalysts on the photoanode as cocatalysts is usually required to enhance the photocurrent density and causes a negative shift in the onset potential, which corresponds to the lowering of the overpotential. The following energy relations simplify the comparison between photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis. Photocatalysis: E ≥ ΔG + Ea(8) Photoelectrocatalysis: E ≥ ΔG + EAOP(9)where E is the minimum energy required for the water splitting reaction, ΔG is the Gibbs energy change of the objective reaction under standard conditions, and Ea and EAOP are the activation energy in photocatalysis and activation overpotential in the PEC process, respectively. In PEC water splitting, the activation overpotential is intrinsically associated with the activation energy in photocatalysis when applying the same semiconductor, that is, Ea ∼ EAOP. In the case of OWS, the activation energy should involve that of the two half reactions. Also, the activation energy of the OER half-reaction dominates the activation energy of the overall reaction for most photocatalyst systems. Accordingly, the cooperation of robust cocatalysts, especially oxidation cocatalysts is highly desirable.
 Fig. 22  Schematic description of the role of the oxidation cocatalyst in (a) photocatalytic water oxidation and (b) PEC water oxidation. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. 
In the case of the proton reduction reaction, most semiconductors cannot gain high activity towards H2 evolution without the assistance of a cocatalyst even in the presence of sacrificial electron donors. However, when loaded with a cocatalyst such as Pt, the photogenerated electrons with satisfactory high energy for the proton reduction reaction thermodynamically will transfer from the semiconductor to Pt and realize hydrogen evolution as a result of the kinetic activation of the protons on Pt. The proton reduction course generally goes through two steps with one catalytic intermediate, which is generally considered to be associated with the bond strength of M–H (M represents metal).71,192 Thus, neither too strong nor too weak binding of hydrogen to the surface is desirable. The so-called Sabatier principle based on density functional theory (DFT) can be employed to calculate the volcano plot, which shows that Pt on the peak of the volcano with the lowest activation energy for proton reduction is generally considered the most suitable cocatalyst for the HER. In addition, superior electrocatalysts are promising to act as efficient cocatalysts for the photocatalytic HER half reaction, providing potential candidates for photocatalytic proton reduction if only considering the resulting reaction sites and decrease in the kinetic overpotential.193 However, to achieve a suitable reduction cocatalyst, the interfacial matching between it and the photocatalyst should also be considered in terms of both crystal structure and energy alignment for high-efficiency charge separation and transfer, which will be discussed below.
Water oxidation cocatalysts are crucial for photocatalytic water splitting given the complexity and high potential required for oxidizing H2O. According to TAS studies, the water oxidation reaction occurs on a much slower timescale compared with the HER reaction.194 It is widely recognized that a suitable oxidation cocatalyst can significantly lower the overpotential of the kinetically sluggish water oxidation reaction, thus promoting the rate of the water oxidation reaction and the OWS reaction. In principle, the evolution of an O2 molecule requires a four-electron transfer, and therefore it is inevitable that the oxidation cocatalyst with enriched chemistry and variable valence states accumulates four oxidizing equivalents and grants access to a wide range of oxidation states with strong oxidizing power. In natural photosynthesis, the water oxidation center, CaMn4O5, advances from the ground state (S0) to the S4 state by accumulating four holes stepwise, and finally the central Mn atom in the high-valence state oxidizes H2O molecules to O2, as shown in Fig. 23a. Similarly, representative water oxidation cocatalysts usually possess metals with variable valence states.7,195 As shown in Fig. 23b and c, Co3O4 as a representative oxidation cocatalyst, has been found to possess a Co center recycling from CoII to CoIV for collecting photogenerated holes, and then returning to CoII again after oxidizing water and liberating O2.196 MnOx with a high degree of structural disorder was found to be with mixed valence character involving MnII, MnIII and MnIV, providing the required structural flexibility for H2O oxidation.197 Advanced characterization approaches promoted the definition of water oxidation cocatalysts with different geometric and electronic structures at different stages of the reaction. For example, the X-ray absorption technique can be employed to detect the catalyst materials associated with specific oxidation states, the metal–oxygen distance and structural distortions as the reaction proceeds. It has been suggested by X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) studies that holes prefer to localize on the metal site for CoO- and MnO-based water oxidation catalysts and create surface metal oxos (Co/Mn(III)O–Co/Mn(III) = O),198,199 while in the case of NiO-based catalysts, the holes tend to localize on an oxygen atom and create an oxyl radical (Ni(III)–O˙).200 According to the studies reported by Cuk et al., some of the most commonly used water oxidation catalysts composed of transition metal oxides such as CoOx, NiOx, and MnOx demonstrated similar electronic structures with an average metal oxidation state of 3 +, octahedral coordination, M–O distance of ∼1.9 Å, and M–M distance of ∼2.8 Å, which are closed to that of the Mn–oxide complex in natural photosynthesis.201 In addition, steady-state vibrational spectroscopy and time-resolved infrared spectroscopy have also been utilized for detecting the Co(IV)O radical of Co3O4,196 Ti–O˙ radical of SrTiO3,202 and Fe(IV)O radical of Fe2O3.203 Also, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) studies reported the observation of an RuO fragment radical in a molecular water oxidation catalyst.204 Consequently, the development and utilization of these strong characterization tools can provide important information and valuable insights into the fundamental structure–activity relationship in water oxidation cocatalysts, which is of great importance in searching for robust water oxidation catalysts for solar energy conversion.
 Fig. 23  (a) Multisite redox-levelling mechanism for the water oxidation reaction in the oxygen-evolving complex of photosystem II. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (b) Water oxidation mechanism of the slow Co3O4 surface site. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014. (c) Structure of the crystalline MnO precursor and the active MnOx catalyst. Right: Mn atoms in violet form a defect-rich layer of di-μ-oxido bridged MnIII,IV ions, where the MnII,III ions in green are not part of this layer and may interconnect layer fragments. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2013. 
The discovery of novel electrocatalysts has provided many candidates for water oxidation cocatalysts. The well-known electrocatalyst cobalt phosphate (CoPi) has been introduced as a cocatalyst on various photocatalysts including BiVO4,205,206 ZnO,207 WO3,208 and Fe2O3.198,209 It has been shown that the photocatalytic activity of O2 evolution on BiVO4 can be greatly enhanced by loading of CoPi. Also, applying CoPi on a BiVO4 photoanode resulted in a great reduction in the overpotential and enhancement in the photocurrent, indicating that less electric energy is required for PEC water oxidation and CoPi can serve as an efficient water oxidation cocatalyst. However, the two functions of cocatalysts, i.e., prohibiting photogenerated charge recombination and manipulating the catalytic reaction kinetics, are usually coupled. For example, Durrant et al. surveyed the carrier dynamics of CoPi/Fe2O3 by TAS and found that CoPi on Fe2O3 can increase the lifetime of holes in the photoanode and retard the recombination kinetics.210,211 A uniform distribution of NiFeOxHy as an OER cocatalyst on g-C3N4 with a good connection to the CN matrix resulted in fast charge separation and excellent hole extraction efficiency.212 Also, for the new-emerging single metal atom-incorporated photocatalysts, the comprehensive influences of single metal cocatalysts on not only changing the reaction pathway but also enhancing the charge transfer kinetics were proposed.213,214
As mentioned above, in addition to providing reactive sites, cocatalysts in photocatalysis can also play roles in extracting photogenerated charges and facilitating the charge injection from the semiconductor to adsorbed species, resulting in the inhibition of charge recombination and promotion of charge separation. A Schottky barrier or Ohmic contact is formed at the semiconductor/cocatalyst interface, which further influences the process of photogenerated charge separation and transfer across the interfacial region.215 For the electron-involving HER reaction, the commonly used cocatalysts are noble metals with large work functions.20 For an n-type semiconductor, as shown in Fig. 24a, when the work function of the metal (ϕm) is larger than that of the semiconductor (ϕS), free electrons will flow from the semiconductor to the metal until their Fermi levels are aligned. A Helmholtz double layer will be established at the interfacial region under equilibrium, with the negative charge at the metal site and positive charge at the semiconductor side attributed to the electrostatic induction. Due to the low concentration of free charge carriers in semiconductors, the electric field at the interface cannot be screened effectively in the semiconductor, which will result in a relatively higher concentration of free carriers in the bulk compared with the interface region. This is known as the depletion layer with continuous upward band bending. Also, the barrier formed at the metal/semiconductor interface is called the Schottky barrier. When the semiconductor is excited by photons, photogenerated electrons tend to transfer to the noble metal with a lower Fermi energy, and owing to the presence of a Schottky barrier, the reverse transfer is blocked, thus inhibiting the recombination and promoting the charge separation of photogenerated holes and electrons. Alternatively, the Schottky barrier also acts as an obstacle to avoid the transfer of electrons from the semiconductor to the metal. Therefore, the barrier height (ϕSB), which equals the work function of the metal and electron affinity of the semiconductor, determines the injection efficiency of photogenerated electrons, where the smaller the ϕSB, the higher the injection efficiency. However, if the Schottky barrier is not sufficient, the reverse transfer of electrons from the metal to the semiconductor will intensify. This asymmetric transfer has been proven using ultrafast TAS in a Pt/CdS nanorod system, in which the charge recombination process is much slower than that of interfacial electron transfer from the CdS nanorod to the Pt tip.216 Thus the construction of a Schottky barrier has been widely applied in the fabrication of cocatalysts to inhibit photogenerated charge recombination.164,217–219 When ϕm < ϕS in an n-type semiconductor, as shown in Fig. 24b, an Ohmic contact will be formed and electrons are inclined to transfer from the semiconductor to the metal, leading to the formation of an accumulation layer and facilitating the transfer of photogenerated electrons to the surface of the semiconductor. This strategy has been successfully applied in the fabrication of photoelectrodes such as Ti/BiVO4,220 Ta/BaTaO2N,221 and Ta/SrTiO3.222
 Fig. 24  Energy band diagrams of metal and n-type semiconductor contacts. Left: Schottky junction. Right: Ohmic contact. Evac, vacuum energy; Ec, energy of conduction band minimum; Ev, energy of valence band maximum; ϕm, metal work function; ϕS, semiconductor work function; and χs, electron affinity of the semiconductor. Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2012. 
For a typical semiconductor, the type contact constructed (Schottky junction or Ohmic contact) depends on which type of photogenerated carrier is preferred to be extracted. An Ohmic contact is favorable for the effective transport of the majority carriers, whereas a Schottky junction is beneficial for the injection of minority carriers and inhibiting photogenerated charge recombination simultaneously. For photocatalysis where redox reactions occur on the same particle, the situation of interfacial junction fabrication is more complicated. Comprehensive factors including band structure and crystal structure atomically, rate-determining steps and how to balance the reaction rates between the reduction and oxidation reactions should be considered overall in the choice of the cocatalyst, which calls for the rational design and controllable fabrication of cocatalysts and dual-cocatalysts.


3.3.2 Dual-cocatalysts. 
The photocatalytic OWS reaction involves both oxidation and reduction reactions, and thus considering both the oxidation and reduction half reactions is important. The rate-determining step of the overall reaction is decided by the half reaction with slower kinetics. It has been broadly recognized that the co-loading of a dual-cocatalyst on semiconductors can greatly improve their photocatalytic activity. A representative case illustrating the essential role of dual-cocatalysts is shown in Fig. 25.178 It can be seen that the photocatalytic activity towards H2 production on the CdS photocatalyst was remarkably enhanced with the cocatalyst loading of Pt or PdS. It is exciting to see that when the two cocatalyst, Pt and PdS, were co-loaded on CdS, the photocatalytic activity witnessed a significant enhancement by more than 300 times, corresponding to an AQE of 93% at 420 nm. The coexistence of PdS and Pt serving as the oxidation and reduction cocatalysts for promoting sulfite oxidation and proton reduction, respectively, was proven to be favorable for simultaneously accelerating the oxidation and reduction half reactions. GaN:ZnO is a representative photocatalyst capable of the visible light-driven OWS reaction. It was demonstrated that a GaN:ZnO photocatalyst with Rh/Cr2O3 acting as the HER cocatalyst and Mn3O4 serving as the OER cocatalyst showed significantly improved photocatalytic OWS activity.223 The dual-cocatalyst strategy has been widely recognized and applied given the synergetic effect of simultaneously promoting the oxidation and reduction reactions, which has great potential in the design and fabrication of photocatalysts.224,225
 Fig. 25  Schematic model of dual-cocatalyst systems for photocatalytic water splitting. (a) Pt-PdS/CdS. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009. (b)Rh/Cr2O3-Mn3O4/GaN:ZnO. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2010. 
The wrong deposition sites may cause severe charge recombination, e.g., reduction cocatalysts on the hole-accumulating sites and/or oxidation cocatalysts on the electron-accumulating sites. In most cases, the deposition of cocatalysts via the impregnation or adsorption method only results in their random distribution on the surface of photocatalysts. However, based on the spatial charge separation between the different facets of semiconductors, it is reasonable to rationally construct the oxidation and reduction cocatalysts on the hole- and hole-accumulating facets, respectively, to fully utilize the superiority of dual-cocatalysts.183 As shown in Fig. 26, when the reduction cocatalyst, Pt, and oxidation cocatalyst, Co3O4, were deposited randomly on the surface of BiVO4via the impregnation method, the photocatalytic performance was far from desirable. On the contrary, when Pt and Co3O4 were selectively deposited on the electron-accumulating {010} facet and the hole-accumulating {110} facet, respectively, the photocatalytic activity was enhanced significantly, indicating the remarkable synergetic effect of the dual-cocatalyst. In this case, photogenerated electrons and holes can be efficiently trapped by the reduction and oxidation cocatalysts on the different facets of the photocatalysts once transferred to the surface, respectively, thus realizing the spatial segregation of the oxidation and reduction half reactions and inhibiting photogenerated charge recombination to a great degree. This strategy of using spatial charge separation properties to rationally construct efficient dual-cocatalysts has been recognized to be useful in heterogenous photocatalysis. Similar phenomena were also observed on numerous photocatalysts including Cu2O,132 SrTiO3,135 and BiOX (X = Cl and Br).83 As an example, the selective deposition of reduction and oxidation cocatalysts on the different facets with the accumulation of photogenerated electrons and holes, respectively, in 18-facet SrTiO3 gave a 6-fold enhancement in the AQE compared with that of the 6-facet SrTiO3 with the random deposition of dual-cocatalysts, indicating the importance of the spatial separation of the oxidation and reduction half reactions.
 Fig. 26  Selective deposition of reduction and oxidation cocatalysts on different facets of BiVO4 single crystal. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Insights into the exact roles of spatially separated dual-cocatalysts on different facets of semiconductors were further explored.226 As shown in Fig. 27, the SPV signal measured at the {110} facet of BiVO4 increased after the selective deposition of the MnOx cocatalyst on the {110} facet, while the SPV signal of the {010} facet changed from positive to negative. After depositing the dual-cocatalyst, the SPV signal at the {110} facet remained positive but its intensity further increased by more than 10-fold. However, the SPV signal at the {010} facet changed from positive to negative, with the SPV signal value increasing by a factor of ∼20. Specifically, the surface band bending at the {110} and {010} facets of BiVO4 are upward and downward, respectively, resulting in a strong increase in the built-in potentials for the spatial separation of photogenerated electrons and holes for surface catalytic reactions. These results indicate that the spatial separation between the dual-cocatalyst not only can lead to a remarkable increase in the interfacial charge transfer on the corresponding facets, but also change the vectoral direction of built-in electric fields for spatial charge separation, together with enhanced photocatalytic activity. This perfectly explains the fact why the photocatalytic activity can be remarkably enhanced after spatially depositing dual-cocatalyst on different facets, providing in-depth understanding on the functional mechanism of cocatalysts in the photocatalytic process.
 Fig. 27  (a) AFM topology image of a BiVO4 single photocatalyst particle with facet-selective photo-deposited MnOx nanoparticle on the {011} facets and (b) SRSPS obtained on the {010} and {011} facets before and after facet-selective cocatalyst deposition. (c) Direction of the built-in electric field beneath the {010} facet changed, while the strength of the built-in electric fields beneath the two facets significantly increased. (d) Spatial distribution of the SPV signals of a single BiVO4 photocatalyst particle with selectively deposited MnOx and Pt cocatalyst at the {011} and {010} facets. (e) Maximum built-in electric field at the interface of up to 2.5 kV cm−1. (f) Schematic showing the changes in the vectors of the built-in electric field in the bare cocatalyst and in the dual-cocatalyst deposited on a BiVO4 single photocatalyst particle. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
In addition to the spatial charge separation-induced selective deposition of dual cocatalysts on different facets of single-crystal photocatalysts, semiconductors with versatile nanostructures also offer the chance for the spatially separated loading of oxidation and reduction cocatalysts. It has been reported that photogenerated electrons prefer to transfer along the direction of the CdS nanorod, thus leading to the selective photoreduction of Pt at the terminal of the nanorod, serving as the reduction cocatalyst. Conversely, the oxidation cocatalyst PdS would be loaded at the side face of the CdS nanorod, leading to the separate deposition of the dual cocatalysts, which was demonstrated to exhibit superior photogenerated charge separation compared with the randomly deposited sample.227 For photocatalysts with a hollow nanostructure, the selective deposition of dual cocatalysts on their inner and outer surfaces has also been applied for enhancing the charge separation and controlling the reverse reaction. For example, the separate deposition of Pt inside and IrO2 outside the Ta3N5 hollow sphere afforded selective trapping of photogenerated electrons and holes at the reduction and oxidation sites, respectively.228 Also, g-C3N4 with a hollow skeleton and the spatially separated loading of the oxidation cocatalyst Co3O4 inside and reduction cocatalyst Pt outside of its hollow sphere were proposed to promote the charge separation and inhibit the reverse reaction, leading to an enhanced photocatalytic OWS reaction.229 The controllable manipulation of the photocatalyst nanostructure makes the spatially separated loading of dual cocatalysts possible, which has been shown to be beneficial compared to the random case, thus providing an optional strategy for controlling and optimizing the loading of dual cocatalysts.
In photocatalytic reactions, the variation in the dual-cocatalyst species during the reaction process should not be neglected given that the high-energetic charges generated from photocatalysts may not only participate in the catalytic surface reactions with targeted reactants but also be involved in the probable reconstruction or self-optimization of dual-cocatalysts.230,231 On the typical NaTaO3 photocatalyst (Fig. 28a and b), it was proposed that the nanostep structure enables the separation of the H2 and O2 evolution reaction sites, that is, H2 is evolved on NiO particles loaded on the edge sites of NaTaO3, while O2 evolution occurs at the groove sites of the NaTaO3 particles.84 However, it was reported that the in situ formation of metallic Ni and NiO cocatalysts on the NiOx/NaTaO3 photocatalyst takes place during the photocatalytic process, as examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy and shown in Fig. 28c–e.232 It was found that at the beginning of the reaction, only the cocatalyst NiO firstly accepts photogenerated electrons to be partially reduced to metallic Ni, which explains the nonstoichiometric generation of H2 and O2 initially. As the irradiation time increases, the amount of pristine NiO and the transformed Ni gradually reach a balance on the surface of NaTaO3, tending to produce H2 and O2 in a stoichiometric ratio. Thus, the actual cocatalysts for OWS on NaTaO3 are metallic Ni and NiO, serving as the catalytic sites for the HER and OER, respectively. A similar redox variation between cocatalysts was also observed on other photocatalysts such as SrTiO3.233 The in situ variation in the redox species of the dual-cocatalyst indicated the elusive and complicated procedure occurring during photocatalysis. Thus, careful detection and identification of the intrinsic reactive sites are required to get a deep understanding of their role in photocatalysis.
 Fig. 28  (a) SEM images of NaTaO3:La(2%). (b) Mechanism of highly efficient photocatalytic water splitting over NiO/NaTaO3:La photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2003. (c) and (d) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy of NiOx cocatalyst on NaTiO3 before and after irradiation, respectively. (e) Scheme of the intrinsic roles of NiOx cocatalyst on NaTiO3. Reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. 


3.3.3 Mechanism of catalytic reactions. 
The reaction mechanism remains the subject of debate because the photocatalytic water-splitting reactions go through a complicated multistep process in which several factors are usually involved and hard to be decoupled and evaluated simultaneously. Thus, significant interest has been triggered to track the reaction intermediates and identify the rate-determining steps both experimentally and theoretically to achieve a unified understanding of the reaction mechanisms.15,71,177,201,234,235
Given that the surface catalytic HER and OER reactions in photocatalysis possess some similarity with electrocatalysis, the HER and OER reaction mechanisms in electrochemistry can be used as ref. 20 and 236. For the HER reaction, two possible mechanisms have been proposed in acid condition (eqn (10)–(12)).193 In the first mechanism, the adsorbed and activated hydrated proton (H3O+) on the surface accepts a photogenerated electron to give an adsorbed hydrogen atom and H2O molecule and the adsorbed hydrogen atom couples with another activated hydrated proton and accepts another photogenerated electron to release H2 and H2O (Volmer–Heyrovsky). In the other mechanism, after the absorption and activation step, two neighboring adsorbed hydrogen atoms directly couple and produce hydrogen (Volmer–Tafel). (10) (11) (12)
In general, noble metals afford active sites for the reduction of protons, but they may also act as activation sites for H2 and/or O2, leading to the severe reverse reaction of water formation. The reverse reaction in photocatalytic OWS principally refers to the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and re-formation of H2 and O2 into H2O (2H2 + O2 → 2H2O), which can deplete the photocatalytic activity notably, and thus should be avoided as much as possible. To suppress the reverse reaction, noble metals are coated with amorphous (oxy)-hydroxides such as Cr2O3, TiO2, Nb2O5, Ta2O5, SiO2, and MoOx, usually in the form of a core/shell structure, which has been proved to significantly inhibit the back reactions.237–240 Taking the ZnO:GaN photocatalyst as an example, a core/shell-structured cocatalyst, M/Cr2O3 (M = Rh, Pt, Pd, Ir, etc.), as shown in Fig. 29a, was fabricated, in which the Cr2O3 coating was only permeable to protons and the evolved hydrogen, not oxygen molecules, thus preventing the oxygen molecule-related reverse reaction.238,241 In addition, a layer of metal (Ti, Ta and Nb) oxy(hydroxide) and silicon oxyhydroxide covering the semiconductor surface was also developed to contribute similarly (Fig. 29b).242,243 Owing to the lattice flexibility of the amorphous layer, the oxygen could only permeate from the inside region with a higher oxygen partial pressure to the outer region with a lower partial pressure, while the opposite permeation was inhibited. Consequently, the oxygen molecule was selectively blocked from the activation sites, leading to the suppression of the reverse reaction and boosting of the OWS reaction. In the alkali system, the hydrogen evolution process is different, as shown in eqn (13)–(15): (13) (14) (15)
 Fig. 29  Schematic of the function of (a) Cr2O3 shell and (b) amorphous Ti, Ta, or Nb oxy(hydroxide) layers. Reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. 
The OER reaction is more demanding owing to the required four-electron transfer, making not only the geometric and electronic structure of the intermediates, but also the kinetic process difficult to clarify.177,244,245 Tang et al. studied the kinetics of photocatalytic water splitting on TiO2 by TAS and found that the maximum quantum yield of photocatalytic water oxidation on the TiO2 photocatalyst occurs at an illumination intensity of four photons per particle.194 This phenomenon probably indicates that four photons for each oxygen molecule are required for the production oxygen. However, more delicate experiments should be conducted to provide substantial support for the reaction kinetics, which represents an enduring but critical topic in mechanism research. Durrant et al. developed a population-based model, where the current density or the rate constant (kWO) can be proportional to the first, second, third or fourth power of the hole concentration at the surface depending on the reaction mechanism, J = kWO[h+]α, where α is the order of the reaction with respect to surface holes. They applied this model to explore the kinetics of water oxidation and electron extraction of several widely studied metal oxides.19 In the example of α-Fe2O3, third-order behavior was determined and attributed to three surface holes coming together to oxidize the dimeric metal oxide cluster, M(OH)–O–M(OH), corresponding to the rate-determining step of O–O bond formation by the nucleophilic attack of water on an Fe–oxide dimer cluster.246 Similar third-order behavior and the kinetics of water oxidation were found to follow the order of WO3 > TiO2 ≈ BiVO4 > α-Fe2O3, indicating that the highly oxidizing valence band position can lower the relative barrier by providing an enhanced thermodynamic driving force.246,247 Proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) is a fundamental characteristic in performing the four-electron oxidation of water in both natural and artificial photosynthesis.248,249 PCET leaves the total charge of a chemical species unchanged by synchronizing proton and electron-transfer events, while single-electron transfer without the loss of a proton will frequently result in charge accumulation and high-energy intermediates. Thus, the coupling transfer of electrons and protons may permit the accumulation of multiple redox equivalents and modulate reaction pathways and energetics in the water oxidation reaction. The possible reaction paths for the OER in acid solution are illustrated in eqn (16)–(21), as follows: (16) (17) (18) HO* → ˙HO + *(19) (20) (21) (22) HOO* → ˙HOO + *(23) O* + O* → O2 + 2*(24) (25) (26)
In these equations, the symbol * represents the adsorption site. The oxidation of water to oxygen involves two H2O molecules and a four-step electron transfer process. Due to the different active energies of a single step on different catalysts and various energies possessed by photogenerated charges, the four-electron transfer process in the water oxidation reaction can be limited and disrupted by any of the above-mentioned steps, leading to possible products such as hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) from the single-electron process (eqn (16) and (19)), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) from the double-electron process (eqn (16), (17), (19), (20) and (22)), and superoxide radical (OOH) from the three-electron process (eqn (16), (18), (21) and (23)), as shown in Fig. 30. Also, in alkali solution, water oxidation may go through the following paths: OH− + * → HO* + e−(27) HO* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−(28) HO* → O* + e− + H+(29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40)where the reactant changes from H2O to OH−. The detection of the reaction intermediates and oxygen species provides direct experimental evidence of the density and nature of the structurally identified species at the surface under the reaction conditions, which has become an important aspect for understanding the mechanism of photocatalytic water oxidation.201,235 For example, ˙OH released from the anatase TiO2 (101) surface was detected by the temperature-programmed desorption and time-off light methods, owing to the release of electrons and protons from the oxidized H2O molecule.250 Infrared (IR) characterization of the TiO2 photocatalyst showed the absorption bands of the superoxide radical (O2−) located at 1050–1200 cm−1 and 1005–1016 cm−1.251,252 Gratzl et al. observed the presence of ˙OOH on hydrated TiO2, which was assumed to be produced by three electrons and protons from water oxidation.253 Nørskov et al. predicted that on some typical photocatalysts such as TiO2, WO3 and BiVO4, photocatalytic water oxidation tends to produce H2O2via a two-electron step, while noble metal oxides such as IrO2 and RhO2 tend to go through a four-electron step, resulting in the production of O2.254 It was experimentally demonstrated that the photocatalytic water splitting on anatase and rutile TiO2 go through different intermediates kinetically, with the ˙OH radical observed for anatase and peroxy species detected for rutile TiO2. The different intermediates contribute to the different kinetics for the photocatalytic water splitting reaction on TiO2-based photocatalysts.255
 Fig. 30  Scheme of active oxygen species generated in the photocatalytic oxidation steps of the water and oxygen reduction process. 
Theoretical simulations of the complicated OER reaction pathways also provide insights into the photocatalytic water splitting mechanism.245,256 The most widely used four-step process for calculating the energetics in water oxidation was proposed by Nørskov et al.257,258 The reaction procedure involving one-electron transfer with one metal center, which directly depends on the applied potential, is primarily considered. Alternatively, the reaction process where oxygen molecules are formed via the direct recombination of two oxygen atoms is not included given the large activation barrier. Fig. 31 presents the surface structures with related free energies of the intermediates in the OER reaction on the rutile TiO2 (110) surface.259 It can be observed that an overpotential is required to make every step downhill. The rate-determining step, which should be defined as the step with the highest free energy change, is proven to be the step of water absorption to generate OH* (H2O + * → OH* + H+ + e−) and the most favored step is the last step of the oxidation of HOO* to O2 (HOO* → O2 + * + H+ + e−). Given that the redox potential difference between the valence band of the TiO2 surface and the O2 evolution redox potential (E(O2/H2O) = 1.23 V vs. NHE) is considered the driving force for the photocatalytic OER, the UVB of TiO2 can provide enough overpotential for the steps in the photocatalytic OER. This implies that the evolution of O2 on the surface of rutile TiO2 is thermodynamically favorable and kinetically allowed according to the calculation results, which is consistent with the experimental results. Notably, given the variety in the surface property of different photocatalytic systems, their rate-determining steps may be different.177 Thus, theoretical calculations by simulating surface structures and reaction processes together with advanced characterization techniques for the identification of the reactive intermediates will be instructive for providing a fundamental understanding of the intrinsic mechanisms of photocatalytic water splitting and cause the research community to focus on the key of photocatalytic water splitting.
 Fig. 31  Structures and free energies of the intermediates for oxygen evolution reaction on the rutile TiO2 (110) surface. Blue spheres, metal ions; red spheres, oxygen; and white spheres, hydrogen. Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008. 

4. Advances in photocatalytic overall water splitting (OWS)
Based on thoughtful modulation in terms of light absorption, photogenerated charge separation and transfer, as well as the surface catalytic reactions, tremendous progress has been made in photocatalytic OWS using particulate photocatalysts. Photocatalytic OWS can be roughly divided into two categories, namely, single photocatalysts and Z-scheme photocatalysts coupled with electronic redox mediators. The state-of-art photocatalysts for the photocatalytic OWS reaction are provided in Tables 1 and 2.
Table 1 Representative particulate one-step overall water-splitting systems




Photocatalyst
Absorption range/nm
Cocatalyst
Efficiency
Ref.




Ultraviolet light


TiO2
<385 nm
Pt/RuO2
QE: 30 ± 10% at 310 nm

267



SrTiO3:Al
<390 nm
Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH
AQE: 95.7% at 350 nm, 95.9% at 360 nm, 91.6% at 365 nm STH: 0.65%

163



La2Ti2O7:Ba
<385 nm
NiOx
QE: 35% (<360 nm)

268



Sr2Nb2O7
<300 nm
Ni
QE: 23% (<300 nm)

269



NaTaO3:La
<300 nm
NiO
AQE: 56% at 270 nm

80



Ga2O3:Zn
<280 nm
Rh2−yCryO3
AQY: 71% at 254 nm

270



Polytriazine imides
<400 nm
Pt/Co
AQY: 7.9% at 365 nm, 6.2% at 380 nm, 0.26% at 405 nm

244







Visible light


(Zn0.12Ga0.88)(N0.88O0.12)
<475 nm
Rh2−yCryO3
AQE: 5.9% at 420–440 nm

240



GaN:Mg/InGaN:Mg
<475 nm
Rh/Cr2O3
AQE: 12.3% at 400–475 nm, STH: 1.8%

271



ZrO2/TaON
<495 nm
RuOx/Cr2O3/IrO2
AQE: <0.1% at 420 nm

272



LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N
<600 nm
Rh2−yCryO3/TiO2/SiO2
AQE: 0.18% at 440 ± 30 nm

221



Ta3N5
<590 nm
Rh/Cr2O3
AQE: 2.2% at 320 nm, 0.22% at 420 nm, 0.024% at 500 nm, STH: 0.014%

41



BiYWO6
<470 nm
RuO2
AQE: 0.17% at 420 nm

273



BiVO4:In,Mo
<496 nm
RuO2
AQE: 3.2% at 420–800 nm

274



Y2Ti2O5S2
<650 nm
Rh/Cr2O3/IrO2
AQE: 0.36% at 420nm, 0.23% at 500, 0.05% at 600 nm, STH: 0.007%

46



g-C3N4
<440 nm
Pt/CoOx
AQE: 0.3% at 405 nm

275



g-C3N4 (nanosheet)
<410 nm
Co1-phosphide
QE: 3.6% at 420 nm, 2.2% at 500 nm and 0.35% at 580 nm

276



CDots-C3N4
<620 nm


AQE: 16% at 420 nm, STH: 2%

277





Table 2 Representative particulate Z-scheme overall water-splitting systems




HEP
OEP
Electron mediator
Efficiency
Ref.




Soluble electron mediator


Pt/SrTiO3(Cr,Ta) (<700 nm)
PtOx/WO3 (<450 nm)
IO3−/I−
AQE: 0.1% at 420 nm

278



Pt/ZrO2/TaON (<500 nm)
PtOx/WO3 (<600 nm)
IO3−/I−
AQE: 6.3% at 420 nm

249



Pt/MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON (<570 nm)
PtOx/WO3 (<600 nm)
IO3−/I−
AQE: 6.8% at 420 nm

250



IrO2/Sm2Ti2S2O5 (<590 nm); Pt/La5Ti2CuS5O7 (<650 nm); Rh/La6Ti2S8O5 (<630 nm)
PtOx/H-Cs-WO3 (<450 nm)
I3−/I−
STH: 0.003%

279



Dye-adsorbed Pt/H4Nb6O17 (<700 nm)
IrO2/PtOx/WO3 (<450 nm)
I3−/I−
AQE: 0.05% at 480 nm

280



Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)
BiVO4 (<520 nm)
Fe3+/Fe2+
AQE: 4.2% at 420 nm, STH: 0.1%

281



Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)
Bi4NbO8Cl (<498 nm)
Fe3+/Fe2+
AQE: 0.4% at 420 nm

72



RhyCr2–yO3/ZrO2/TaON (<530 nm)
Ir–FeCoOx/BiVO4 (<530 nm)
[Fe(CN)6]3−/4−
AQE: 12.3% at 420 ± 10 nm, STH: 0.6%

251,298



Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)
BiVO4 (<520 nm)
[Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ or [Co(phen)3]3+/2+
AQE: 2.1% at 420 nm

282



0.5 wt% Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)
Photosystem II (400–520 and 600–700 nm)
[Fe(CN)6]3−/4−
STH: 0.012%

258,283



Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)
PtOx/WO3 (<450 nm)
[SiW11O39MnIII(H2O)]5−/[SiW11O39MnII(H2O)]6−
AQE: 0.24% at 400 nm (H2 evolution)

284









AQE: 0.36% at 400 nm (O2 evolution)






Solid-state electron mediator


Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)
BiVO4 (<520 nm)
None
AQE: 1.7% at 420 nm, STH: 0.12%

253



Pt/g-C3N4 (nanosheet) (<450 nm)
Co(OH)2/B doped g-C3N4(nanosheet) (<900 nm)
None
STH: 1.16%

252



Ru/SrTiO3:La,Rh (<520 nm)
CoOx/Ta3N5 (<600 nm)
Ir
AQE: 1.1% at 420 nm, STH: 0.037%

285



Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)
BiVO4 (<520 nm)
RGO
AQE: 1.03% at 420 nm

286



ZnRh2O4 (<1030 nm)
Bi4V2O11 (<750 nm)
Ag
AQE: ∼0.003% at 740 nm

287



Pt/TiO2/CdS/(ZnSe)0.5(CuGa2.5Se4.25)0.5 (<720 nm)
BiVO4:Mo (<520 nm)
Au
AQE: 1.5% at 420 nm

257





4.1 Single photocatalysts for the OWS
For single photocatalysts to enable the OWS reaction, thermodynamically, it is required that the positions of their CB and VB cross the potential of proton reduction and water oxidation, and consequently most of them are UV light-responsive photocatalysts. For example, NaTaO3 with a band gap of ∼4 eV satisfies the above-mentioned thermodynamic requirement, but its severe recombination restricts its activity. Thus, the loading of NiO on NaTaO3:La with an ordered nanostep structure afforded spatial separation of the HER and OER reactive sites, showing high activity for photocatalytic water splitting with an AQE of 56% at 270 nm.84,260 SrTiO3 is a typical photocatalyst with a bandgap energy of 3.2 eV for the photocatalytic OWS reaction, which has attracted much attention. Studies towards doping with cations such as Na+ in Sr2+ and Ga3+ in Ti4+ in SrTiO3 were found to dramatically enhance the photocatalytic OWS activity by lowering the density of the trivalent Ti states.261 Further applying SrCl2 for flux treatments combined with external doping of Al resulted in an AQE of 30% at 360 nm in OWS, owing to the better doping and crystallinity induced by the flux-mediated doping approach.262 By further modification with MoOx on the surface, the Al-doped SrTiO3 synthesized by SrCl2 flux treatment gave an AQE of 69% thanks to the superior inhibition of the reverse reaction.240 Recently, using modified SrTiO3:Al by depositing Rh/Cr2O3 and CoOOH as HER and OER cocatalysts on different facets, the photocatalytic OWS reaction with an external quantum efficiency of up to 96%, which is equivalent to an internal quantum efficiency of almost unity at wavelengths between 350 and 360 nm, was successfully achieved.179 As shown by the results of the selected-area electron diffraction analysis in Fig. 32, the Rh/Cr2O3 cocatalyst deposited on the electron-attracting {100} facets serves as the reduction cocatalyst for hydrogen evolution, while the CoOOH cocatalyst mainly loaded on the hole-collecting {110} facets and neighboring facets mediates holes transfer. The phenomenon of anisotropic cocatalyst deposition on the different facets of the SrTiO3 particle is assumed to be due to the charge rectification effect inside the photocatalyst particle, which may be induced by the internal electric field originating from the work function distinction between different facets. Thus, by combining strategies including aluminum doping to suppress defects, flux treatment to optimize the crystallinity, facet engineering with high-performance cocatalyst deposition, and the Cr2O3 shell to prevent the reverse reaction, the photogenerated charges can go through multiple consecutive forward charge separation and transfer without any backward loss or recombination. The synergistic effects of multiple strategies indicate that the realization of OWS with high AQE requires the precise regulation of multiple successive processes ranging from charge generation to the surface catalytic reaction. Although only UV light can be utilized by the SrTiO3:Al photocatalyst, it is surprising that almost all the photogenerated holes and electrons migrate to the surface reactive sites and are utilized consecutively without any recombination, which provides strong motivation for fundamental research aimed at photocatalytic OWS based on particulate semiconductors.
 Fig. 32  (a) SEM images of SrTiO3:Al loaded with Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH. (b) and (c) TEM image of a particle and corresponding particle morphology and crystal orientation obtained from selected-area electron diffraction pattern. (d) Time course of H2 and O2 evolution on SrTiO3:Al loaded with various cocatalysts during photoirradiation. Left, loaded with Rh/Cr2O3 by two-step photo-deposition. Middle, loaded with Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH by three-step photo-deposition. Right, loaded with Rh-Cr oxide by co-impregnation. Solid lines are a guide for the eye. (e) Ultraviolet-visible diffuse reflectance spectrum of bare SrTiO3:Al (black solid line) and wavelength dependence of external quantum efficiency (EQE) during water splitting on Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH-loaded SrTiO3:Al (red symbols). Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. 
Most visible light-responsive photocatalysts for photocatalytic OWS mainly consist of (oxy)nitrides and oxysulfides. The representative GaN:ZnO loaded with Rh/Cr2O3 cocatalyst has been reported to exhibit stable OWS capability with an AQE of 5.9% at 420 nm.263,264 Other visible light-responsive oxynitride photocatalysts such as In1−xNixTaO4 and LaMgxTa1−xO1+3xN2−3x for OWS have also been explored.243,265 Tantalum nitride (Ta3N5) has been considered a promising candidate for photocatalytic water splitting as a result of its narrow bandgap energy of 2.1 eV and suitable band structure. However, obtaining simultaneous H2 and O2 generation over Ta3N5 is quite challenging due to the severe charge recombination at its defects. Domen et al. reported the fabrication of well-crystallized Ta3N5 nanorods grown on lattice-matched KTaO3 particles through nitridation, which are capable of the photocatalytic OWS reaction with a stoichiometric ratio of H2 and O2 under visible light irradiation.85Fig. 33 shows a single crystal Ta3N5 nanorod with a regular arrangement of atoms from the surface to the interior without any evident dislocations or grain boundaries, which is owing to the close match of the lattice spacings for KTaO3. With the loading of Rh/Cr2O3 as a cocatalyst, AQE values of 2.2% at 320 nm, 0.22% at 420 nm, and 0.024% at 500 nm were achieved for the photocatalytic OWS reaction. The achievement of OWS on the refined Ta3N5 single crystal proved the importance of crystallization optimization and removal of defects, which played critical roles in improving photogenerated charge separation. The Y2Ti2O5S2 oxysulfides is a promising photocatalyst with an absorption edge of up to 650 nm, which is reported to be capable of photocatalytic OWS.50 The simultaneous production of stoichiometric amounts of H2 and O2 could be realized on Y2Ti2O5S2 after loading IrO2 and Rh/Cr2O3 as cocatalysts, achieving AQYs of 0.36%, 0.23% and 0.05% at 420, 500 and 600 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 33  (a)–(d) Annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) images of Ta3N5/KTaO3. (e) Crystal structures of Ta3N5 and KTaO3 (d indicates the interplanar distance). (f)–(i) Colorized and magnified ADF-STEM of Ta3N5/KTaO3 with different nitridation times. (j) Time course of gas evolution during OWS over Rh/Cr2O3-modified Ta3N5/KTaO3 under simulated sunlight. The dashed lines represent the evacuation of the reaction system (Evac). (k) AQE as a function of the incident light wavelength for OWS over Rh/Cr2O3-modified Ta3N5/KTaO3. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. 
Besides, the typical polymeric semiconductors, carbon nitrides have also been widely explored.266 Wang et al. reported that the photocatalytic OWS could be realized on graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) loaded with Pt, PtOx, and CoOx with an AQE of 0.3% at 405 nm.267 In addition, a highly crystallized conjugated carbon nitride material, poly(triazine imide), modified with Pt and CoOx as co-catalysts was also found to be capable of photocatalytic OWS, yielding an AQE of 7.9% at 365 nm, which was further promoted to 12% recently.268,269 Although only irradiation with a wavelength below 400 nm can be used presently, their flexible crystal structure and physicochemical properties may permit more opportunities for this series of materials in photocatalytic water splitting.
4.2 Z-scheme photocatalysts for the OWS
Photosynthesis in nature employs redox relays to separate photogenerated charges spatially between photosystem II and photosystem I to obtain sufficient lifetimes to drive further reactions, constituting the so-called Z-scheme reaction pathway. Inspired by nature, mimicking the z-scheme process by coupling two photocatalysts (H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts) connected with shuttle mediators has been widely investigated to realize photocatalytic OWS reaction.270
Both the H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts are photoexcited in a Z-scheme water splitting system, which needs no simultaneous requirement for both proton reduction and water oxidation reactions thermodynamically. Generally, an electronic shuttle mediator is employed to operate the redox cycle between the H2-evolution photocatalyst and O2-evolution photocatalyst in a Z-scheme water-splitting system. On the H2-evolution photocatalyst, the photogenerated electrons reduce H2O to H2 and the photogenerated holes oxidize the shuttle mediators from low-valence to high-valence states. Alternatively, on the O2-evolution photocatalyst, the oxidized shuttle mediator is reduced by photogenerated electrons and the photogenerated holes oxidize H2O to O2. However, despite the relaxed thermodynamic criteria, approximately half the initial energy of the photoexcited states is lost in the Z-scheme system. Also, inevitable reverse reactions occur, including the reduction of the oxidative mediator ions on the H2-evolution photocatalyst and the oxidation of the reduced mediator ions on the O2-evolution photocatalyst, which usually result in a decrease in the charge utilization efficiency and suppression of the desired gas evolution. Thus, they should be inhibited when considering strategies for promoting charge separation and surface catalytic reactions of single photocatalysts for reference.
Sayama and coworkers reported the fabrication of a Z-scheme water splitting system for the first time, which was composed of a doped SrTiO3 photocatalyst as the H2-evolution photocatalyst and Pt–WO3 as the O2-evolution photocatalyst, with the I−/IO3− redox couple as the shuttle mediator.271 H2 and O2 were evolved in a stoichiometric ratio and the AQE was reported to be ca. 0.1% at 420 nm. Kudo et al. developed a Z-scheme water splitting system consisting of SrTrO3:Rh and BiVO4 as the H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts, respectively, without using an additional shuttle mediator, which was termed a solid-state Z-scheme system.272
Since then, numerous Z-scheme systems for OWS have been reported. For instance, Pt-loaded ZrO2/TaON and WO3 photocatalysts were coupled as H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts, respectively, with I−/IO3− acting as the redox mediator for Z-scheme OWS, exhibiting an AQE of 6.3% at 420 nm.273 By employing WO3 as the O2-evolution photocatalyst, I−/IO3− as a redox mediator, and the MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON photocatalyst as the H2-evolution photocatalyst, drastically improved photocatalytic OWS was achieved, producing a benchmark AQE of 6.8% at 420 nm.274 ZrO2/TaON as the H2-evolution photocatalyst and Au/CoOx/BiVO4 as the O2-evolution photocatalyst were combined using [Fe(CN)6]3−/[Fe(CN)6]4− as the redox mediator, achieving an AQE of 10.3% at 420 nm and STH of 0.5% (Fig. 34).275 Shen et al. reported the preparation of a solid-state Z-scheme system by coupling ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets with varying boron dopants and nitrogen defects acting as H2- and O2-evolution photocatalysts, where a polymeric heterostructure was achieved, leading to stoichiometric H2 and O2 evolution.276 Domen et al. developed Z-scheme photocatalyst sheets in which particles of H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts were embedded on a conductive layer, acting as an electron mediator.277 As shown in Fig. 35, the Z-scheme photocatalytic system composed of SrTiO3:La,Rh and BiVO4:Mo as the H2-evolution and O2-evolution photocatalysts, respectively, using Au as the electronic mediator displayed extremely high OWS activity with an AQE of above 30% at 420 nm and STH of above 1.0%. Besides, a plasmon-based solid Z-scheme photocatalytic system was also developed by combining visible-light responsive plasmonic photocatalysts (Au/TiO2) as the O2-evolution photocatalysts with an H2-evolution photocatalyst, i.e. SrTiO3:Rh. OWS with hydrogen and oxygen evolution in a stoichiometric ratio (2:1) could be achieved under visible light irradiation without using any redox mediator.278 Additionally, the Z-scheme has been demonstrated over various narrow bandgap photocatalysts including LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N and La5Ti2Cu0.9Ag0.1S5O7.279,280 Chen et al. assembled a Z-scheme OWS system by employing Pt-loaded TiO2/CdS-(ZnSe)0.5(CuGa2.5Se4.25)0.5, together with BiVO4:Mo and used Au as an electron mediator. The constructed CdS-(ZnSe)0.5(CuGa2.5Se4.25)0.5 boosted the charge separation and the coating of TiO2 inhibited the photocorrosion of CdS and suppressed the backward reaction, reaching an AQE of 1.5% at 420 nm.281
 Fig. 34  Z-Scheme OWS system consisting of BiVO4 as the OEP, ZrO2-modified TaON as the HEP, and [Fe(CN)6]3−/[Fe(CN)6]4− as a redox mediator. (a) Time course of Z-scheme OWS under optimized conditions in response to visible light. (b) AQY as a function of irradiation wavelength and DRS of the HEP and OEP. Reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 35  (a) Scheme of solid-state Z scheme OWS using SrTiO3:La, Rh as HEP, BiVO4:Mo as OEP and Au as the electronic shuttle. (b) Printed photocatalyst sheet. Photograph of the ink used for screen printing the photocatalyst sheet and photograph of a 10 × 10 cm SrTiO3:La, Rh/Au nanoparticle/BiVO4:Mo printed sheet. (c) Time course of the water splitting reaction using an Ru-modified SrTiO3:La, Rh/Au colloid/BiVO4:Mo printed sheet under simulated sunlight at 288 K and 5 kPa. The sample (6.25 cm2) was photo-deposited with RuCl3·3H2O (0.17 μmol). Reproduced from ref. 277 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2016. 
Bio-hybrid Z-scheme water splitting systems integrating photosystem II (PSII) with artificial photocatalysts have also been realized. A natural-artificial hybrid photosystem was assembled, as shown in Fig. 36, in which the PSII membrane fragments obtained from fresh spinach act as the water oxidation catalyst, semiconductor photocatalysts (including SrTiO3:Rh and ZrO2/TaON) as the hydrogen production photocatalyst, and [Fe(CN)6]3−/[Fe(CN)6]4− as the electron mediator.282,283 This hybrid system could achieve efficient OWS under sunlight irradiation, indicating the possibility to achieve efficient charge transfer between the bio-photosystem and the artificial semiconductor photocatalyst. Furthermore, a CdS-PSII hybrid PEC cell connected by an ordered multi-step electron transfer pathway comprising two redox shuttles, quinone/hydroquinone and [Fe(CN)6]3−/[Fe(CN)6]4−, coupled with a graphite-based galvanic cell was also proposed to be capable of OWS with an STH efficiency of 0.34%.284 The integration of a redox flow battery (RFB) in a Z-scheme water splitting system by constructing a biohybrid photosystem II (PSII)-ZrO2/TaON was found to be capable of further reducing the energy loss during the electron transfer process.285 Although these works are still on the lab-scale, the success of proof-of-concept experiments verifies the possible assembly of hybrid systems and also expands new avenues to achieve Z-scheme water splitting in the field of artificial photosynthesis.
 Fig. 36  (a) Scheme of biohybrid artificial photosynthesis. (b) Microscopy images of PSII-Ru/SrTiO3:Rh hybrid system. (c) Time course of OWS by the PSII-photocatalyst hybrid system. Reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014. 
The photocatalytic OWS reaction is a complicated process associated with multi-step and multi-aspect exchanges and transfers in terms of energy and mass, where any inefficient part will lead to the restriction of the whole reaction. Photocatalytic OWS studies on the lab-scale have focused on critical scientific problems including the development of novel materials, photogenerated charge separation and surface catalytic reactions, witnessing tremendous progress in the past few decades and providing fundamental support for the scalable application of solar energy utilization based on photocatalytic water splitting.
4.3 Scalable photocatalytic water splitting
Although photocatalytic water splitting has been considered as a potential method for scalable hydrogen production considering its simple and inexpensive equipment and manipulation, the state-of-the-art STH of particulate photocatalyst systems is still far from the industrial requirement.2,286 However, based on the development of principles achieved in the laboratory stage, researchers have already attempted to explore scalable solar water splitting to ascertain both the advantages and challenges in extended-scale photocatalytic water splitting systems for their future application.

4.3.1 Water splitting panel. 
In 2018, Domen et al. reported a panel-type reactor with a 1 × 1 m size based on an Al-doped SrTiO3 (SrTiO3:Al) photocatalyst, which was capable of splitting water with an AQY of 56% at 365 nm.287 The reactor of the water-splitting panel consisted of photocatalyst sheets and an outer frame with a water depth layer of 1 mm, where the particulate photocatalysts were fixed on a glass substrate by drop casting. Gas bubbles were generated upon exposure to natural sunlight, which readily moved upward and exited the panel through the gas outlet at the top of the reactor. An STH of approximately 0.4% at 288 K could be achieved, increasing to 0.6% at 331 K, which is comparable with the activity obtained from lab-scale trials. In a long-term experiment under simulated sunlight, the activity remained unchanged in the initial 150 h activity, which decreased by 36% after 1000 h of operation. Also, recently, extending the 1 m2 to an operation of a 100 m2 array panel reactor system was reported based on a modified SrTiO3:Al particulate photocatalyst, which achieved a maximum STH of 0.76% with the safe and durable production of hydrogen (Fig. 37).288 In this system, a gas-separating membrane unit was applied after the moist and gaseous oxyhydrogen product was collected and transported via tubes. The filter element comprised a bundle of hollow polyimide fibers, which were assembled in a stainless-steel cartridge, with permeability to hydrogen lower than that of water vapor but higher than that of oxygen. The membrane separation gave H2-enriched filtrate gas saturated with water vapor, with an H2 purity exceeding 94% on average, and accordingly the H2 recovery reached 73% without any sign of deterioration despite varying production rates of humid oxyhydrogen gas under different weather conditions. This investigation provided an advanced example for scalable solar water splitting for hydrogen production using a particulate photocatalyst and demonstrated that a safe and durable photocatalytic system up to a size of 100 m2 is feasible. From the view of techno-economics, the energy pay-back time strongly depends on the STH, lifetime, and cost of a water-splitting cell.287 Furthermore, gas separation is still a challenging issue in water splitting panels, where although membrane reactors have been applied, the problem of gas separation still exists in terms of separation efficiency and cost input. Alternatively, sealed scaled-up reactors aimed at avoiding any gas leakage may increase the technical difficulties in large-scale utilization, where the safety problem associated with the explosion of an H2 and O2 mixture is always difficult to address. Thus, to make this technology economically viable and practically useful, it is essential to focus on improving narrower-bandgap photocatalysts with higher STH efficiency and stability given the economical requirement of 5–10%, where efficient low-cost gas separation technologies and feasible reactors for safe, durable operation also call for further investigations to achieve large-scale water splitting panels.
 Fig. 37  (a) Photograph of a panel reactor unit (625 cm2). (b) Structure of the panel reactor unit viewed from the side. (c) Overhead view of the 100 m2 solar hydrogen production system consisting of 1600 panel reactor units and hut housing the gas separation facility (indicated by the yellow box). (d) Top: Accumulated amounts of moist oxyhydrogen feed, filtrate, and residue gases. The ratios of hydrogen and oxygen in the filtrate and residue gases excluding water vapor are notated along the curves, respectively. Bottom: Variations in solar illumination intensity (red) and the gas evolution rate in the water splitting panel reactor (grey). Reproduced from ref. 288 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. 


4.3.2 Hydrogen farm project (HFP). 
For the photocatalytic OWS reaction, the potential safety risk and additional energy consumed in the separation of the explosive H2/O2 gas mixture inhibit its scalable application despite the enormous efforts devoted to this. Thus, to overcome these challenges, we proposed and demonstrated a feasible approach called the “hydrogen farm project (HFP)”, which is principally analogous to photosynthesis in nature (Fig. 38) to bridge the original solar energy with target chemical energy on a large scale with high efficiency.289 In natural photosynthesis, the first step is the water oxidation reaction in PSII (without H2 evolution) to generate O2 and protons, with the energy stored in NADPH and ATP to take part in the carbon fixation process. In this process, oxygen gas evolved is directly released to the atmosphere and no gas separation or collection is required when solar energy is captured and stored for the subsequent chemical synthesis. Correspondingly, the first step of the HFP is to oxidize H2O on semiconductor photocatalysts to realize O2 production, and simultaneously store solar energy captured in specific mediators, such as the redox ions, turning from oxidized states to the corresponding reduced states. In this step, the system operating without sealing or gas collection is feasible for the large-scale capture and storage of solar energy. Subsequently, the collection of energy storage mediators and production of H2 occur via (photo)electrocatalysis, in which the redox shuttle mediators are oxidized. In addition, the solar energy captured in the energy storage mediators can be integrated with other reactions including CO2 reduction and N2 reduction, synthesizing liquid fuels or high-value-added chemicals. The advantage of the HFP is that no gas separation is required for scalable H2 production given that O2 is released into the air in a no-sealing system, leaving no concern about hidden dangers. Meanwhile, the sluggish water oxidation process is driven by the abundant solar energy, causing hydrogen production to be conducted at a relatively low overpotential in electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 38  Scheme of the hydrogen farm project (HFP). Reproduced from ref. 289 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020. 
High-efficiency photocatalysts for water oxidation in the presence of electron shuttle mediators are critical for the realization of HFP. Also, the suppression of the reverse oxidation reaction between the reduced shuttle mediators will be highly desired. As shown in Fig. 39, preliminary exploration based on the spatial charge separation between different facets of a decahedron BiVO4 photocatalyst with controllable exposed facet ratio of {110}/{010} achieved an AQE above 70% towards photocatalytic water oxidation with Fe3+/Fe2+ as the energy storage mediator, corresponding to an overall solar-to-hydrogen efficiency exceeding 1.8% for the HFP. It was found that the spatial separation of photogenerated electrons and holes between different facets of BiVO4 at the nano/micro scale afforded the spatial segregation of oxidation and reduction reaction on different facets, completely blocking the reverse reaction between the mediators via morphology tuning owing to the Coulomb repulsion interaction. The feasibility of utilizing the strategy of spatial charge separation to prevent the reverse reaction between shuttle ions in the HFP has also been employed in a Bi2WO6 photocatalyst recently.134 A scalable hydrogen farm demonstration with an area of 5–10 m2 using BiVO4 was also established outdoors under sunlight equipped with an automated scaled-up experimental setup for further optimizing the outdoor solar energy harvesting conditions (Fig. 39e).286 To reduce the impact of mass transport, a circular flow of reaction solution was employed and the concentration of converted Fe3+ ions during the photocatalytic reaction was monitored simultaneously.
 Fig. 39  (a) Time course of the conversion of Fe3+ on different BiVO4 photocatalysts. (b) Surface reaction process for decahedron BiVO4 crystal in Fe3+ solution. (c) Photocurrent density-time curve of carbon-modified amorphous silicon/amorphous germanium photoanode applied for ferrous oxidation reaction. (d) Electrocatalytic H2 evolution in ferrous solution with different bias. (e) Picture of the demonstration module for large-scale solar energy storage under sunlight irradiation (Dalian, China). Reproduced from ref. 289 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020. 
The HFP avoids the commixture of hydrogen and oxygen, providing a promising and practical approach for large-scale solar energy harvesting and solar hydrogen production using particulate photocatalysts. Given that the overall efficiency of the HFP is determined by the efficiency of the water oxidation photocatalyst and the redox potential of the electronic shuttle mediator, further expanding the light-absorption edge of water oxidation photocatalysts and reducing the redox potential of electronic shuttle mediators present opportunities to keep improving the STH efficiency of the HFP. Compared with the photocatalytic OWS on single photocatalysts or Z-scheme photocatalysts, there is no requirement for gas separation and the open reactor is applicable, while the excess energy required for carrying out hydrogen evolution in the presence of the electronic shuttle mediator seems to be a trade-off and should be thoroughly considered for scalable solar water splitting in the future.111


4.3.3. Techno-economic analysis of photocatalytic hydrogen production. 
Despite the existing advantages of particulate photocatalytic water splitting, due to its relatively low STH efficiency, the industrial application of solar water splitting using particulate photocatalysts is largely restricted its cost. Currently, the cost of hydrogen from renewable energy is about US$5 per kilogram. According to the goals presented by U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), technologies that enable the production of hydrogen at US$2per kg by 2025 and US$1 per kg by 2030 via net-zero-carbon pathways should be developed, making the cost of renewable hydrogen comparable to that produced from fossil fuels.290 Although the STH efficiencies of PEC and PV-EC hybrid systems have reached 4% and 20%, respectively, at the laboratory scale, the advantage of photocatalytic water splitting using particulate photocatalysts in terms of cost is still of great interest.291,292 Shaner et al. analyzed the process of the PV-EC approach and concluded that it is difficult to make it cost-competitive even considering that the STH value exceeds 20%, thus requiring a significant reduction in cost before being adopted by the market.293 According to the techno-economic analysis provided by Pinaud et al., the costs of hydrogen produced by PEC systems based on fixed planar and tracking concentrator arrays were estimated to be US$10.4 and US$4.0 kg−1, assuming STH values of 10% and 15% and an average lifetime of 10 years, respectively.294
Alternatively, for hydrogen production from solar water splitting using particulate photocatalysts, it has been estimated that cost of hydrogen produced via single- and dual-bed particle suspension systems will be US$1.6 and US$3.2 kg−1, assuming STH values of 10% and 5% and a lifetime of five years, respectively.294 Correspondingly, hydrogen production via solar water splitting using particulate photocatalysts holds the advantage of low capital costs over its counterparts. Also, there is no doubt that the cost will be further reduced if the STH efficiency and stability of the devices can be further improved. In the case of the allowable cost of photocatalytic water splitting systems, feasible evaluation was also estimated from the values of producing hydrogen and oxygen gases, as reported by Setoyama et al.295 Assuming the STH value of 10%, 3.0 g m−2 h−1 hydrogen can be evolved under full spectrum 1 sun incident irradiance (1000 W m−2). However, considering the practical solar irradiation (317 W m−2 for 7.6 hours), an assumed lifetime of 10 years, and an annual depreciation rate of 4%, the price of hydrogen and oxygen was estimated to be US$3.5 and US$0.1 kg−1, respectively, and the allowable cost for the system and devices was estimated to be US$136 m−2.296
Based on the pioneering examples for scalable photocatalytic hydrogen production on SrTiO3 and BiVO4 semiconductors, the cost of photocatalysts is almost negligible compared with the capital costs. In addition, the energy and cost consumed in the separation of H2/O2 gas products should also be considered. Solving the gas separation issue, while promising a reduction in costs and security risks is also challenging. To date, several types of equipment for scalable photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production have been discussed.2,294 Numerous obstacles still exist in balancing the energy efficiency, cost, stability and safety of the whole system; however, given the initial stage of industrial scale-up photocatalytic water splitting, there is still huge space for the rational design and optimization of photocatalytic water splitting systems using particulate photocatalysts.

5. Conclusions and Outlooks
Tremendous efforts have been devoted to the field of photocatalytic water splitting and significant advances have been witnessed in the past few decades. In this review, we highlighted the importance and regulated the evaluation approaches for the photocatalytic efficiency. Also, we summarized the recent advances in particulate photocatalytic water splitting in terms of newly developed absorption materials, photogenerated charge separation and transfer processes, and surface catalytic reactions. By elaborating the advanced characterization tools with time-spatial resolution and theoretical calculation, the intrinsic relations between the crystal and electronic structure of photocatalysts with their photocatalytic performance were discussed. Finally, we illustrated and compared the recent attempts to achieve scalable solar water splitting using particulate photocatalysts including water splitting panels and the hydrogen farm approach. Although the present STH efficiency is still far from the requirement for economic application, determining the key scientific problems behind the photocatalytic water splitting reaction is inevitably indispensable both in fundamental and industrial research. Focusing on the current challenges, the following outlooks should be addressed:
1. Achieving photocatalytic OWS on light-absorption photocatalysts with wide-range visible light harvesting capability, high efficiency and good stability remains challenging. Generally, an empirical approach has been employed by surveying feasible materials and optimizing their parameters under working conditions. However, understanding the electronic structure associated with absorption coefficients, carrier lifetime, mobility, and diffusion length is of great importance given that the intrinsic properties of bulk materials dominantly influence their performance. Considering these facts, the breakthrough in existing semiconductors and expansion of novel light-harvesting semiconductors with controllable absorption ranges and electronic structures should be further combined with theoretical understanding and systematic characterizations, revealing their intrinsic structure–function relationship. Accurate theoretical simulation, machine learning and high-throughput techniques for screening multiple compositions and structures should help in material prediction and synthetic methodology, providing predictive perspectives to narrow the search and promoting advanced synthetic strategies and technique(s) experimentally to obtain desirable semiconductors for photocatalytic water splitting.
2. The primary limitation in photocatalysis is the mismatch in timescale between photogenerated charge separation and surface catalytic reaction, resulting in the inevitable recombination of electrons and holes. The present strategies to achieve spatial charge separation, e.g., p–n junction, heterojunction, phase junction, and spatial charge separation between different facets have been well-recognized in photocatalysis owing to the modulation of band bending and the driving force induced by the built-in electric field in the spatial charge region. Other internal fields including surface polarity, ferroelectricity and photo-Dember effect can also facilitate photogenerated charge separation via local variations in material composition or crystallinity. However, novel strategies for efficient charge separation are still imperative to aid the design and fabrication of highly efficient photocatalytic systems. Furthermore, developing advanced in situ or operando spectroscopies to tract and image the photogenerated charge separation and charge-involved catalytic reactions with high temporal and spatial resolution are strongly desirable. By analyzing multi-dimensional scaling with high resolution together with theoretical understanding, it is hopeful that the behaviors of photogenerated charge separation within spanned timescales and intrinsic mechanism will be revealed and illustrated clearly, which will also be instructive to design efficient photocatalysts at the nanometer scale.
3. The dual-cocatalyst strategy has been widely used as a general strategy to promote both the HER and OER reactions in photocatalysis. The morphology, size, composition, distribution of the cocatalysts and their location sites should be considered comprehensively. Given that the OER is much more complicated than the HER, investigations on OER catalysts with fast water oxidation kinetics and ability to suppress surface recombination losses are essential. Mimicking the reactive structure and function of the PSII cluster for water oxidation in natural photosynthesis for biomimetic design will be a fascinating and promising topic. Moreover, revelation of the long-held secrets of reaction kinetics by means of cutting-edge temporal- and spatial-resolved spectroscopy, such as the advanced slow-transient absorption spectroscopy (slow-TAS) for monitoring the process of catalytic reaction, will be significant to depict the mechanism of photocatalysis. The combined use of multi-technique approaches can provide comprehensive information on the surface catalytic reaction mechanism from different views.
4. The scalable and direct production of hydrogen via solar driven water splitting using particulate photocatalysts is promising but challenging. Feasible systems and implementations should be developed to bridge the gap between the scientific frontier and practical technology. Critical issues including low STH efficiencies, H2/O2 gas separation technologies, and reverse reaction inhibition should be addressed prior to its large-scale application in the future. Water splitting panels have been proven to be viable device prototypes and alternative technology for potential industrial implementation. Advanced progress in effective and low-cost H2/O2 separation techniques and semiconductors with wide-range-absorption are anticipated in this field. Facing daunting challenges involving H2/O2 gas separation together with reverse reactions, the HFP has been presented as a practically accessible resolution with no requirement of gas separation given that the oxygen will be directly released into the atmosphere. However, promising photocatalyst candidates with a narrower band gap for water oxidation and novel electronic shuttle mediators with suitable redox potentials are required to further optimize the efficiency of the HFP. Besides, the additional energy consumed for H2 evolution in the presence of the electronic mediator should be considered in scalable applications. Meanwhile, other feasible designs and approaches are always desirable for scalable solar water splitting using particulate photocatalysts.
Opportunities and challenges coexist in the field of photocatalytic water splitting using particulate photocatalysts, which has been widely recognized as a promising solution for solar hydrogen production. However, the existing obstacles including light-harvesting mechanism, efficient charge separation strategies, efficient dual-cocatalysts and their rational assembly, and scalable challenges still need to be overcome. Researchers in this field need to devote unremitting efforts and persistence in the long run to promote solar water splitting from fundamental research to future industrial application. Also, overcoming the scientific obstacles and promoting the research progress of photocatalysis will drive the development of other related disciplines, and then lead to the emergence of new scientific problems and research fields. We hope that this review will provide useful insights and ideas to those interested in photocatalytic water splitting. It is strongly believed that continuous and extensive studies will lead to the achievement of high-efficient, stable, economic, and scalable photocatalyst systems for solar energy utilization in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFA1502300). This work was also conducted by the Fundamental Research Center of Artificial Photosynthesis (FReCAP), financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22088102). R. Li. acknowledges the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22090033) and Youth Innovation Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
References

          N. S. Lewis, G. Crabtree, A. J. Nozik, M. R. Wasielewski, P. Alivisatos, H. Kung, J. Tsao, E. Chandler, W. Walukiewicz, M. Spitler, R. Ellingson, R. Overend, J. Mazer, M. Gress, J. Horwitz, C. Ashton, B. Herndon, L. Shapard and R. M. Nault, Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization. Report of the Basic Energy Sciences Workshop on Solar Energy Utilization,  April 18–21, 2005 Search PubMed .
D. M. Fabian, S. Hu, N. Singh, F. A. Houle, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, F. E. Osterloh and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2825–2850 RSC .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
Bp Statistical Review of World Energy, 2021, https://www.bp.com/statisticalreview.
McKinsey & Company, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/oil-and-gas/our-insights/global-energy-perspective-2021.
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2216–2264 RSC .
J. Wang, G. Li, Z. Li, C. Tang, Z. Feng, H. An, H. Liu, T. Liu and C. Li, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701290 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Olah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 104–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
M. D. Karkas, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. Akermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863–12001 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 5–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, F. Fan, T. Dittrich and C. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8238–8262 RSC .
S. Corby, R. R. Rao, L. Steier and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 1136–1155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, J. Shi, Z. Wang and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 675–688 CrossRef .
M. Xiao, Z. Wang, M. Lyu, B. Luo, S. Wang, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1801369 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, N. Luo, C. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2022, 6, 197–214 CrossRef .
H. Luo, J. Barrio, N. Sunny, A. Li, L. Steier, N. Shah, I. E. L. Stephens and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101180 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, S. Xie, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, B. F. Sels and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shimura and H. Yoshida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2467–2481 RSC .
Z. Wang, T. Hisatomi, R. Li, K. Sayama, G. Liu, K. Domen, C. Li and L. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 344–359 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao and L. Piao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18312–18320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
J. M. Buriak, P. V. Kamat and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11815–11816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2016, 29, 158–167 CrossRef .
H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 9782–9783 CrossRef .
N. Serpone, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 104, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Inoue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 364–386 RSC .
A. Walsh, Y. Yan, M. N. Huda, M. M. Al-Jassim and S. H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 547–551 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, C. Han, X. Fu and Y. J. Xu, Chem, 2018, 4, 1832–1861 CAS .
W. J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798–1803 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Z. Wang, J. Song, J. Qu, T. Takata and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10666–10670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Moriya, T. Takata and K. Domen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1957–1969 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yamasita, T. Takata, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 172, 591–595 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, C. Katayama, Y. Moriya, T. Minegishi, M. Katayama, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3595–3599 RSC .
M. Liu, W. You, Z. Lei, G. Zhou, J. Yang, G. Wu, G. Ma, G. Luan, T. Takata, M. Hara, K. Domen and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2192–2193 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Qi, G. Liu, J. Yang, F. Zhang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14415–14417 RSC .
A. Kudo, R. Niishiro, A. Iwase and H. Kato, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. C. Yin, J. Wang, P. Niu, C. Zhen, Y. Xie and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9603–9610 RSC .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, T. Matsumura, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2637–2642 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, S. Okamura, J. Liu, Y. Shinohara, K. Ueda, T. Higashi, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3354–3362 RSC .
Q. Xiao, J. Xiao, J. J. M. Vequizo, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, S. Chen, Z. Pan, L. Lin, N. Shibata, A. Yamakata, T. Takata and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27485–27492 RSC .
Q. Wang, M. Nakabayashi, T. Hisatomi, S. Sun, S. Akiyama, Z. Wang, Z. Pan, X. Xiao, T. Watanabe, T. Yamada, N. Shibata, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 827–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13669–13679 CrossRef .
G. Liu, L. Wang, H. G. Yang, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 831–843 RSC .
S. Ouyang, N. Kikugawa, D. Chen, Z. Zou and J. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1560–1566 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ouyang and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7757–7763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, G. Ma, M. Liu, W. You, H. Yan, G. Wu, T. Takata, M. Hara, K. Domen and C. Li, J. Catal., 2006, 237, 322–329 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kaga, Y. Tsutsui, A. Nagane, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21815–21823 RSC .
T. Kato, Y. Hakari, S. Ikeda, Q. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1042–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hayashi, R. Niishiro, H. Ishihara, M. Yamaguchi, Q. Jia, Y. Kuang, T. Higashi, A. Iwase, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada, K. Domen and A. Kudo, Sustain. Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2016–2024 RSC .
M. Shi, H. Zhou, W. Tian, B. Yang, S. Yang, K. Han, R. Li and C. Li, Cell. Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100656 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mancini, P. Quadrelli, C. Milanese, M. Patrini, G. Guizzetti and L. Malavasi, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 8893–8895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Laser Photon. Rev., 2013, 7, 171–187 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhan, X. J. Chen, J. Yi, J. F. Li, D. Y. Wu and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 216–230 Search PubMed .
G. Zhao, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 277, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, D. Liu, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2132–2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishi, T. Torimoto and T. Tatsuma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4042–4046 RSC .
R. S. Haider, S. Wang, Y. Gao, A. S. Malik, N. Ta, H. Li, B. Zeng, M. Dupuis, F. Fan and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106189 CrossRef CAS .
H. Harutyunyan, A. B. F. Martinson, D. Rosenmann, L. K. Khorashad, L. V. Besteiro, A. O. Govorov and G. P. Wiederrecht, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 770–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, F. Cheng, W. Fang, X. Liu, S. Wang, W. Nie, R. Chen, S. Ye, J. Zhu, H. An, C. Fan, F. Fan and C. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwaa151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, F. Scotognella and L. Manna, Phys. Rep., 2017, 674, 1–52 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2401–2422 RSC .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13547–13553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, H. Huang, S. Yu, N. Tian and Y. Zhang, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 4477–4496 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ren, J. Liu, J. Liang, K. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Luo, Y. Huang, P. Liu and X. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 9706–9712 RSC .
H. Fujito, H. Kunioku, D. Kato, H. Suzuki, M. Higashi, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2082–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tao, Y. Zhao, L. Mu, S. Wang, R. Li and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1701392 CrossRef .
A. Nakada, D. Kato, R. Nelson, H. Takahira, M. Yabuuchi, M. Higashi, H. Suzuki, M. Kirsanova, N. Kakudou, C. Tassel, T. Yamamoto, C. M. Brown, R. Dronskowski, A. Saeki, A. Abakumov, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2491–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kato, K. Hongo, R. Maezono, M. Higashi, H. Kunioku, M. Yabuuchi, H. Suzuki, H. Okajima, C. Zhong, K. Nakano, R. Abe and H. Kageyama, J.
Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18725–18731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shi, R. Li and C. Li, EcoMat, 2021, 3, e12074,  DOI:10.1002/eom2.12074 .
Z. Xiao, Z. Song and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, J. Wei, M. Sato, H. Koike, Z. Z. Xie, Y.-Q. Li, K. Kanai, S. Kera, N. Ueno and J. X. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11526–11531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shi, G. Li, W. Tian, S. Jin, X. Tao, Y. Jiang, E. A. Pidko, R. Li and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Inoue, T. Hisatomi, R. Ishikawa, Q. Wang, T. Takata, S. Chen, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 756–763 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, J. J. M. Vequizo, T. Hisatomi, J. Rabeah, M. Nakabayashi, Z. Wang, Q. Xiao, H. Li, Z. Pan, M. Krause, N. Yin, G. Smith, N. Shibata, A. Brückner, A. Yamakata, T. Takata and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10059–10064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .

          https://wanda.fiu.edu/teaching/courses/Modern_lab_manual/pn_junction.html
        .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 150–153 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohashi, J. Mccann and J. O. M. Bockris, Nature, 1977, 266, 610–611 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, W. Choi and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4585–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, J. S. Jang, E. D. Jeong, O. S. Jung, Y. J. Suh and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5889–5891 RSC .
Z. Lian, M. Sakamoto, J. J. M. Vequizo, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, A. Yamakata, T. Nagai, K. Kimoto, Y. Kobayashi, N. Tamai and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2446–2450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Jang, D. W. Hwang and J. S. Lee, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 174–181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Z. He, K. Hu, B. Tang, J. Su, Y. Liu and X. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 753, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Guan, D. K. Ma, S. W. Hu, Y. J. Chen and S. M. Huang, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 800–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, K. Umekita, Y. Otsuka and S. Kuwabata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6852–6858 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Rao, L. Cai, C. Liu, I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, J. M. Weisse, P. Yang and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1099–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781–1787 RSC .
J. Safaei, H. Ullah, N. A. Mohamed, M. F. Mohamad Noh, M. F. Soh, A. A. Tahir, N. Ahmad Ludin, M. A. Ibrahim, W. N. R. Wan Isahak and M. A. Mat Teridi, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 234, 296–310 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Martin, P. J. T. Reardon, S. J. A. Moniz and J. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12568–12571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kment, F. Riboni, S. Pausova, L. Wang, L. Wang, H. Han, Z. Hubicka, J. Krysa, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716–3769 RSC .
J. Luo and P. A. Maggard, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 514–517 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. L. Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature, 2019, 567, 323–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, G. Zhan, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Feng, M. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1766–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, Q. Xu, X. Zong, D. Wang, G. Wu, X. Wang and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6345–6351 RSC .
A. Li, Z. Wang, H. Yin, S. Wang, P. Yan, B. Huang, X. Wang, R. Li, X. Zong, H. Han and C. Li, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6076–6082 RSC .
X. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21083–21096 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Ju, G. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Meng and W. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12885–12892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, J. Zhu, H. An, P. Yan, B. Huang, R. Chen, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1419–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Xu, M. Li, S. Shen, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Shi, H. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 13089–13092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Ju, X. Wang, W. Liang, Y. Zhao and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17005–17014 RSC .
Z. Ai, G. Zhao, Y. Zhong, Y. Shao, B. Huang, Y. Wu and X. Hao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 179–186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, C. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Zhou, S. Jiao and H. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 504–511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Lv, Q. Ling, D. Liu and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13041–13048 RSC .
C. Lv, G. Chen, J. Sun and Y. Zhou, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4782–4789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kang, J. Liang, F. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Lu and J. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 121, 110614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Y. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, F. Wang, C. Chen, C. Li, R. Li and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3242–3252 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luan, L. Jing, Y. Xie, X. Sun, Y. Feng and H. Fu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1378–1385 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. Jiang, X. Zong, Q. Xu, Y. Ma, G. Li and C. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1275–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, F. Fan, R. Chen, H. An, Z. Feng and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9111–9114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, R. Li, L. Mu and C. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 2923–2928 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, R. Li, Z. Li, A. Li, S. Wang, Z. Liang, S. Liao and C. Li, J. Catal., 2016, 337, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Tao, R. Chen, F. Fan and C. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14337–14341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, M. Liu, Z. Zhou, J. Zhou, Y. Sun and L. Guo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9695–9702 RSC .
A. Adenle, H. Zhou, X. Tao, Y. Zhao, M. Shi, B. Zeng, J. Qu, R. Li and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 11637–11640 RSC .
T. Liu, X. Zhou, M. Dupuis and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 23503–23510 RSC .
L. Mu, Y. Zhao, A. Li, S. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Liu, R. Chen, J. Zhu, F. Fan, R. Li and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2463 RSC .
Z. R. Tang, B. Han, C. Han and Y. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2387–2410 RSC .
J. Tian, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, R. I. Boughton and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6920–6937 RSC .
H. Cheng, B. Huang and Y. Dai, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2009–2026 RSC .
H. Wang, X. Zhang and Y. Xie, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2018, 130, 1–39 CrossRef .
S. Dunn, P. M. Jones and D. E. Gallardo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8724–8728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, H. Huang, L. Guo, Y. Zhang and T. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10061–10073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 24–42 RSC .
S. Yu, J. Li, Y. Zhang, M. Li, F. Dong, T. Zhang and H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 383–392 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, F. Chen, Y. Wang, N. Tian, T. Ma, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barrio, S. Barzilai, N. Karjule, P. Amo-Ochoa, F. Zamora and M. Shalom, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1868–1875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. A. Bartlett, J. M. Hook, I. Sergeyev, E. B. Clatworthy, A. F. Masters and T. Maschmeyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18987–18995 RSC .
I. F. Teixeira, N. V. Tarakina, I. F. Silva, N. López-Salas, A. Savateev and M. Antonietti, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2022, 2100429 CrossRef .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Shao, Y. Gao, F. Fan, J. Wang, J. Li, J. Yan, R. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 935–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Khan, M. A. Nadeem and H. Idriss, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2016, 71, 1–31 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Zhao and C. Li, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 463–472 RSC .
H. Huang, S. Tu, X. Du and Y. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 509, 113–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, W. Zheng, Z. Tao, L. Zhang, H. Luan, X. Sun and J. Han, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 883, 160743 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, C. W. Lee, M. G. Kang, S. Kim, H. J. Kim, J. E. Kwon, S. Y. Park, C. Y. Kang, K. S. Hong and K. T. Nam, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10408–10413 RSC .
Z. Wang, D. Cao, L. Wen, R. Xu, M. Obergfell, Y. Mi, Z. Zhan, N. Nasori, J. Demsar and Y. Lei, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Ye, H. Xie, J. Zhu, Q. Shi, N. Ta, R. Chen, Y. Gao, H. An, W. Nie, H. Jing, F. Fan and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Haase, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 247–276 Search PubMed .
R. Chen, S. Pang, H. An, J. Zhu, S. Ye, Y. Gao, F. Fan and C. Li, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 655–663 Search PubMed .
C. Gomes Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kazuma and T. Tatsuma, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400066 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Gao, S. Miao, T. Liu, L. Mu, R. Li, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11771–11778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, W. Nie, Q. Zhu, X. Wang, S. Wang, F. Fan and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18218–18223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, B. Zeng and C. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 1219–1227 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zeng, S. Wang, Z. Feng, Y. Xiao, M. Li, F. Hong, Y. Zhao, Z. Feng, R. Li and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2022, 91, 106638 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zeng, S. Wang, Y. Gao, G. Li, W. Tian, J. Meeprasert, H. Li, H. Xie, F. Fan, R. Li and C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005688 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Wang, F. Hong, Y. Gao, B. Zeng, R. S. Haider, F. Fan, J. Huang and C. Li, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 194702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, T. Senty, F. Meng, A. D. Bristow, A. Manivannan and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8438–8449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, X. Li, Q. Kong, R. Long, C. Wang, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3444–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, K. Liu, S. He, C. Gao and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6731–6736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, D. Liu, S. Mubeen, T. T. Chuong, M. Moskovits and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1114–1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Robatjazi, S. M. Bahauddin, C. Doiron and I. Thomann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6155–6161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tagliabue, J. S. DuChene, M. Abdellah, A. Habib, D. J. Gosztola, Y. Hattori, W. H. Cheng, K. Zheng, S. E. Canton, R. Sundararaman, J. Sá and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1312–1318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, C. Ding, M. Liu, A. Wang, Q. Huang and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata, J. Jiang, Y. Sakata, M. Nakabjayashi, N. Shibata, V. Nandal, K. Seki, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2020, 581, 411–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1513–1519 RSC .
Z. Sun, H. Zheng, J. Li and P. Du, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2668–2676 RSC .
L. Liu, Z. Ji, W. Zou, X. Gu, Y. Deng, F. Gao, C. Tang and L. Dong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2052–2061 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, H. Han, F. Zhang, D. Wang and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1369–1376 RSC .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 RSC .
C. Ding, J. Shi, D. Wang, Z. Wang, N. Wang, G. Liu, F. Xiong and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4589–4595 RSC .
L. Duan, F. Bozoglian, S. Mandal, B. Stewart, T. Privalov, A. Llobet and L. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 418–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, K. R. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Yan, S. Cao, Y. Ye, Q. Dong, X. Zhang, J. E. Thorne, L. Jin, K. L. Materna, A. Trimpalis, H. Bai, S. C. Fakra, X. Zhong, P. Wang, X. Pan, J. Guo, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista and D. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 2902–2907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. Chen, H. Dong, J. R. Shen, H. Dau and J. Zhao, Science, 2015, 348, 690–693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okamura, M. Kondo, R. Kuga, Y. Kurashige, T. Yanai, S. Hayami, V. K. K. Praneeth, M. Yoshida, K. Yoneda, S. Kawata and S. Masaoka, Nature, 2016, 530, 465–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Peters, W. N. Lanzilotta, B. J. Lemon and L. C. Seefeldt, Science, 1998, 282, 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Jian, C. Ye, X. Z. Wang, M. Wen, Z. J. Li, X. B. Li, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2083–2089 RSC .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. M. Siegbahn, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1871–1880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. de Respinis and H. Frei, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 362–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, I. Zaharieva, E. Baktash, J. Pfrommer, M. Schwarze, H. Dau and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13206–13210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202–4207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huynh, D. K. Bediako and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6002–6010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Bediako, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3662–3674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. van Oversteeg, H. Q. Doan, F. M. de Groot and T. Cuk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 102–125 RSC .
D. M. Herlihy, M. M. Waegele, X. Chen, C. D. Pemmaraju, D. Prendergast and T. Cuk, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 549–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zandi and T. W. Hamann, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 778–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Moonshiram, I. Alperovich, J. J. Concepcion, T. J. Meyer and Y. Pushkar, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 3765–3770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370–18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, R. Li, J. Zhu, J. Shi, J. Han, X. Zong and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5082–5089 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Jiang and R. Xu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 9945–9951 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hao, Z. Liu, Y. Li, M. Ruan and Z. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 16550–16559 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Carroll, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 577–584 RSC .
M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14868–14871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barroso, C. A. Mesa, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, T. Hisatomi, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15640–15645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Karjule, C. Singh, J. Barrio, J. Tzadikov, I. Liberman, M. Volokh, E. Palomares, I. Hod and M. Shalom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101724 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Ma, Q. Zhang and C. Su, Trans. Tianjin Univ., 2021, 27, 313–330 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Teng, Q. Zhang, H. Yang, K. Kato, W. Yang, Y. R. Lu, S. Liu, C. Wang, A. Yamakata, C. Su, B. Liu and T. Ohno, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Jr., Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, H. Zhu, Z. Liu, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10337–10340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, J. Ge, L. Wang, M. Gong, M. Deng, Q. Kong, L. Song, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5689–5695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Liow, D. Qi, B. Zhu, W. R. Leow, H. Wang, C. Xue, X. Chen and S. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3506–3512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, S. Wang, Z. Zhao, Z. Shi, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801214 CrossRef .
M. Zhong, T. Hisatomi, Y. Kuang, J. Zhao, M. Liu, A. Iwase, Q. Jia, H. Nishiyama, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, R. Niishiro, C. Katayama, H. Shibano, M. Katayama, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5053–5060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueda, T. Minegishi, J. Clune, M. Nakabayashi, T. Hisatomi, H. Nishiyama, M. Katayama, N. Shibata, J. Kubota, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2227–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ham, T. Minegishi, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5011–5014 RSC .
K. Maeda, A. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Setoyama, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4096–4099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Li and C. Li, in Advances in Catalysis, ed. C. Song, Academic Press,  2017, 60, pp. 1–57 Search PubMed .
A. Meng, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807660 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, S. Pang, T. Dittrich, Y. Gao, W. Nie, J. Cui, R. Chen, H. An, F. Fan and C. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6735–6741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Khan, X. Tao, Y. Zhao, B. Zeng, M. Shi, N. Ta, J. Li, X. Jin, R. Li and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15607–15614 RSC .
D. Wang, T. Hisatomi, T. Takata, C. Pan, M. Katayama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11252–11256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, X. N. Cao and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11512–11516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 5, 256–276 CAS .
X. Tao, W. Shi, B. Zeng, Y. Zhao, N. Ta, S. Wang, A. A. Adenle, R. Li and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5941–5948 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Wang, R. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Liang, H. Han, S. Liao and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2182–2191 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Townsend, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9543–9550 RSC .
Y. Gao, W. Nie, X. Wang, F. Fan and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1007–1021 RSC .
Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11302–11336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, K. Takanabe and K. Domen, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 95–108 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7806–7809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takata, C. Pan, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9627–9634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Bau and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7931–7940 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Chiang, H. Lyu, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, T. Takata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2782–2788 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 303–308 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, A. Ishikawa, J. Kubota, Y. Sakata, Y. Ikezawa and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10151–10157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724–761 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and A. Bieberle-Hutter, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1223–1242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Mesa, L. Francàs, K. R. Yang, P. Garrido-Barros, E. Pastor, Y. Ma, A. Kafizas, T. E. Rosser, M. T. Mayer, E. Reisner, M. Grätzel, V. S. Batista and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 82–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Corby, L. Francas, S. Selim, M. Sachs, C. Blackman, A. Kafizas and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16168–16177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Weinberg, C. J. Gagliardi, J. F. Hull, C. F. Murphy, C. A. Kent, B. C. Westlake, A. Paul, D. H. Ess, D. G. McCafferty and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4016–4093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tyburski, T. Liu, S. D. Glover and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 560–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Geng, X. Chen, W. Yang, Q. Guo, C. Xu, D. Dai and X. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 26807–26813 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, M. Zhou and L. Andrews, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6765–6808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Shao, P. Liu and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7408–7409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Howe and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 3906–3909 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siahrostami, G. L. Li, V. Viswanathan and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1157–1160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Li, Y. X. Weng, X. Zhou, X. L. Wang, Y. Mi, R. F. Chong, H. X. Han and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2377–2382 RSC .
A. V. Akimov, A. J. Neukirch and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4496–4565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Valdes, J. Brillet, M. Gratzel, H. Gudmundsdottir, H. A. Hansen, H. Jonsson, P. Klupfel, G. J. Kroes, F. Le Formal, I. C. Man, R. S. Martins, J. K. Norskov, J. Rossmeisl, K. Sivula, A. Vojvodic and M. Zach, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 49–70 RSC .
Á. Valdés, Z. W. Qu, G. J. Kroes, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9872–9879 CrossRef .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, Catal. Lett., 1999, 58, 153–155 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19386–19388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ham, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, Y. Moriya, Y. Sakata, A. Yamakata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3027–3033 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2008, 254, 198–204 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, Z. Yu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6164–6175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z. A. Lan, L. Lin, S. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3062–3066 RSC .
L. Lin, Z. Lin, J. Zhang, X. Cai, W. Lin, Z. Yu and X. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 649–655 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, C. Wei, H. Zhuzhang, J. Zhou, Z. Pan, W. Lin, Z. Yu, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 61, e202113389 Search PubMed .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486–1503 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, K. Mukasa, R. Abe, Y. Abe and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2416–2417 RSC .
Y. Sasaki, H. Nemoto, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17536–17542 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858–5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Qi, T. Hisatomi, Q. Ding, T. Asai, Z. Li, S. S. Ma, F. Zhang, K. Domen and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8498–8501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, Y. Zhao, Y. Gao, D. Li, Z. Li, F. Zhang and C. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 2393–2402 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Wang, C. L. Dong, Y. C. Huang, J. Chen, F. Xue, S. Shen and L. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Gao, Y. Qi, A. Li, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Catal., 2017, 354, 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, S. Chen, G. Ma, J. Liu, S. Nandy, T. Minegishi, M. Katayama and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1690–1696 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, S. Chen, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, A. Kudo and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7188–7196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. J. M. Vequizo, Z. Pan, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, L. Lin, Z. Wang, K. Kato, A. Yamakata, N. Shibata, T. Takata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10633–10641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. Chen, C. Li and W. Tian, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Qi, W. Wang, D. Li, Z. Li, Y. Xiao, G. Han, J. R. Shen and C. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 486–494 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Wang, C. Ding, Z. Wang, S. Liao and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 765–771 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Wang, S. Liao, M. Liu, Y. Qi, C. Ding and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 631–639 RSC .
R. Li and C. Li, Curr. Opin. Green Sust., 2021, 33, 100577 CrossRef .
Y. Goto, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, T. Higashi, K. Ishikiriyama, T. Maeda, Y. Sakata, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, M. Katayama, S. Akiyama, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, T. Takewaki, T. Setoyama, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2018, 2, 509–520 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Maehara, M. Yamaguchi, Y. Kuromiya, Y. Nagatsuma, H. Tokudome, S. Akiyama, T. Watanabe, R. Narushima, S. Okunaka, N. Shibata, T. Takata, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2021, 598, 304–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Ding, J. Zhu, W. Qin, X. Tao, F. Fan, R. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9653–9658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-production
        .
S. Ye, W. Shi, Y. Liu, D. Li, H. Yin, H. Chi, Y. Luo, N. Ta, F. Fan, X. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 12499–12508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H. J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
T. Setoyama, T. Takewaki, K. Domen and T. Tatsumi, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 509–527 RSC .
T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 387–399 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. Li, Q. Xu, H. Han and C. Li, Acta Phys. -Chim. Sin., 2013, 29, 1566–1571 CAS .
Y. Qi, J. Zhang, Y. Kong, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, D. Li, W. Liu, Y. Chen, T. Xie, J. Cui, C. Li, K. Domen and F. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Xiaoping Tao
	Xiaoping Tao received her Bachelor's Degree from Sichuan University in 2014 and PhD in Physical Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Can Li at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). She is currently working as a Postdoc in Shinshu University with Prof. Kazunari Domen. Her research interest is mainly focused on photo(electro)catalytic solar energy conversion.

Yue Zhao
	Yue Zhao received his BS Degree in Chemistry from Xiamen University in 2013 and PhD Degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2020. He is currently working as a Postdoc with Prof. Rengui Li and Prof. Can Li in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis (SKLC) and the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL) at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). His work focuses on photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production.

Shengyang Wang
	Shengyang Wang received his BS Degree in Applied Chemistry from Fudan University in 2011. Then, he joined Prof. Can Li's group at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP) and received his PhD Degree in plasmonic photocatalysis for water splitting in 2019. Currently, he continues his research work in the same group as an Assistant Researcher. His research interests focus on plasmon-based photocatalysis and solar thermal conversion.

Can Li
	Can Li received his PhD (with Prof. Xiexian Guo and Prof. Takaharu Onishi) in Physical Chemistry from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 1989. He was promoted to Full Professor in 1993 and was a Visiting Professor at the Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris VI), Lehigh University, Liverpool University, and Queensland University. He carried OUT postdoctoral studies at Northwestern University in 1994-1996. Currently, he is head of the Solar Energy Research Division and the director of the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL). His research focuses on photo(electro)catalytic and electrolytic water splitting and CO2 reduction using renewable energy.

Rengui Li
	Rengui Li received his PhD Degree from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. He worked as a Visiting Research Associate in Prof. K. Domen's group at the University of Tokyo in 2011 and Prof. Harry Atwater's group at California Institute of Technology from 2019 to 2020. In 2014, he began to work at the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis in DICP as an Associate Professor. Since 2018, he was promoted as a Full Professor at DICP. His research interest is mainly focused on photocatalytic solar energy conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Global energy perspective from McKinsey and Company. The power generation mix is in thousand TWh.6	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of conversion from solar to chemical energy by natural photosynthesis and artificial photosynthesis.	 
H2O → H2 + 1/2O2, ΔG = 237 kJ mol−1	(1)
η = ηLH·ηCS × ηCU	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting on a semiconductor-based photocatalyst.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (HER)	(3)
H2O + 2h+ → 1/2O2 (OER)	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 4  Band structure engineering. (a) Tuning of conduction band. (b) Tuning of valence band. (c) Tuning of conduction and valence bands.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Tuning valence band of Ta2O5, TaON, and Ta3N5 upon nitridation. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2003. (b) UV-visible spectra of YTaO4 and Y2Ta2O5N2. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Tuning conduction band of AgAlO2 to AgGaO2 for narrowing the band gap of the photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. (d) Band structure of In(OH)3, In(OH)ySz and In(OH)ySz:Zn. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2006. (e) Light absorption properties of bare GaN, ZnO, and GaN:ZnO solid-solution photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2005. (f) UV-visible diffuse reflection spectra of powder AgxAu1-x/TiO2 photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Crystal structure of Y2Ti2O5S2. (b) Schematic band structure diagram for Y2Ti2O5S2. (c) DOS for O (blue line), S (red line), Ti (orange line) and Y (light blue line). (d) Time course of OWS on Cr2O3/Rh/IrO2-modified Y2Ti2O5S2 in distilled water buffered by La2O3 (pH 8.5) under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G). Y2Ti2O5S2 was synthesized at 973 K. (e) Time course of OWS on Cr2O3/Rh/IrO2-modified Y2Ti2O5S2 in distilled water buffered by La2O3 (pH 8.5) under illumination from a xenon lamp (300 W, λ > 420 nm) for 20 h, with evacuation every 10 h (dashed line). Y2Ti2O5S2 was synthesized at 973 K. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of Bi3TaO7 and Bi4TaO8X (X = Cl and Br) synthesized with different methods. (b) DOS of Bi4TaOCl. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2018. (c) and (d) Photocatalytic water oxidation and reduction reaction on Bi2YO4Cl, Bi2LaO4Cl and Bi3O4Cl, respectively. (e) and (f) Schematic diagram and photocatalytic OWS activity on Z-scheme system constructed by coupling Bi2YO4Cl with SrTiO3:Rh. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 8  Crystal structures and corresponding band positions of (a) BiOX (X = Cl, Br, and I), (b) Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl and Br), (c) Bi2GdO4X (X = Cl and Br), and (d) SrBiO2X(X = Cl and Br). Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Changes in the energy band level of MAPbX3 with X-site substitution. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (b) Evolution of the crystal structure, (c) charge distribution of the VBM and CBM, and (d) emission spectra of Cs3Bi2Br9 and Cs2AgBiBr6. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  Scheme of p-n junctions for photogenerated charge separation.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic H2 evolution of rutile TiO2 loaded with increasing amount of anatase nanoparticles. (b) HRTEM of the surface phase junction formed between anatase and rutile. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2008. (c) Schematic band diagram of an n-type semiconductor with a depletion layer (space charge region-SCR) and negative charge trapped at surface states in the dark (black lines) and under illumination (orange lines). Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of using cross-section KPFM to obtain the energy band alignment of a rutile/anatase phase junction and the transfer direction of photogenerated electrons and holes at the interface of a TiO2 phase junction. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) HRTEM of Ga2O3 phase junction. (b) Specific H2 and O2 evolution activities (normalized by specific surface area) of Ga2O3 samples prepared at different temperatures. (c) Normalized transient absorption decays at 850 nm of Ga2O3 samples excited by a 255 nm laser. (d) Normalized transient absorption decays of average mid-IR absorption of Ga2O3 samples excited at 266 nm. (e) Illustration of charge transfer across the α-β phase junction. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–c) Relationship between the exposure of the {040} crystal facet and the corresponding activity of photocatalytic O2 evolution. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2011. (d–i) Photogenerated charge separation between different facets of BiVO4 crystals. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 14  Photogenerated charge separation between different facets of (a–c) rutile, reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016, (d–g) anatase, reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2015, and (h and i) Cu2O, reproduced from ref. 297 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Dark-state surface potential images of a single BiVO4 crystal with exposed {010} and {011} facets. (b) KPFM image of a single BiVO4 crystal excited with modulated UV light. (c) Representative SRSPS obtained on the {010} and {011} facets. (d) Schematic showing the distribution of SCRs beneath the {010} and {011} facets of a BiVO4 crystal with two morphologies. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of (a–f) 6-facet and (g–l) 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with photo-deposition of noble metals or metal oxides. SEM images of (m) 6-facet SrTiO3 and (n) 18-facet nanocrystals with simultaneous photo-deposition of Pt and Co3O4 as cocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a–j) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of GaN nanorod arrays with the photoreduction deposition of noble metals and photooxidation deposition of metal oxides. (k) 3D Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) potential images under dark condition. (l–m) Corresponding contact potential difference (CPD) and the change in CPD (ΔCPD) cross-sectional profiles under dark and illumination conditions. (n) Schematic representation of different band bending on the polar and nonpolar surfaces and the resulting spatial charge separation. (o) Illustration of GaN with Ga-polar surface and nonpolar surface, and the surface dipole moments. (p) Apparent quantum efficiency of photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on the GaN nanorod arrays and film deposited with Rh and CoOx. (q) Photocatalytic OWS on the GaN nanorod arrays without and with the Rh and CoOx cocatalysts. (r) Multi-cycles of photocatalytic OWS on the Rh-CoOx/GaN nanorod arrays. (s) Surface photovoltage (SPV) spectroscopy on the GaN nanorod arrays with cocatalysts. a.u. is arbitrary unit. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 18  SPV of PTO particles and schematic of band bending. (a) AFM topography of PTO particle on ITO substrate. The polarization direction is along the 〈001〉 axis. (b) KPFM images of single PTO crystals on ITO substrates in the dark (upper image) and under irradiation with a UV-LED (lower image). Scale bar, 1 μm. (c) Crystal structure of Pdown and Pup perovskite ferroelectric PTO and ΔCPD of PTO particles (subtracting dark CPD from photoexcited CPD); magenta represents holes and red represents electrons. (d) Photodepolarization of MnOx on PTO surface. Selective deposition of MnOx particles is only on one of the two geometrically symmetric {001} facets of PTO particles. This selectively photo-deposition demonstrated the single domain property of PTO particles. (e) HRTEM image of an individual PTO nanoplate and the inset shows the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) electron diffraction pattern along the [001] zone axis. (f) Correlation between SPV value and PTO particle thickness. (g) PTO particle band bending diagrams with (left side) or without (right side) an internal field (depolarization field) through the hole particles along the 〈001〉 axis. (h) Schematic of ferroelectric polarization and depolarization field Edep. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 19  Charge separation between the illuminated facet and shadow facet under asymmetric illumination. (a) Experimental set-up for SPV imaging of the Cu2O photocatalyst. Two light sources with a tunable light intensity and opposite irradiation direction were employed to perform the asymmetric photoexcitation. (b) Illustration of asymmetric-irradiation-induced illuminated and shadow regions on a typical cubic Cu2O particle grown along the (111) orientation. (c) and (d) Corresponding surface potential images in the dark state (c) and under illumination (d) (λ = 450 nm). (e) SPVM image of the particle obtained by subtracting the surface potential in the dark from the surface potential under illumination. (f) Surface potential values extracted across the dashed lines in (c) and (d). The dashed black line corresponds to the position of the edge between the illuminated facet and the shadow facet. (g) Amplitude of SPS acquired at the center of the illuminated facet (blue) and shadow facet (red). Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) and (b) HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping images of Au/TiO2 after photo-deposition of Cr2O3 and PbO2, respectively. (c) Plasmonic water oxidation performance of Au/TiO2 photocatalysts before and after photo-deposition. (d) KPFM images of Au/TiO2 in the dark and upon 532 nm illumination. (e) SPV profile across the Au/TiO2 particle by subtracting the potential under dark from that under 532 nm light irradiation. (f) Absorption spectrum (right axis) and action spectrum (left axis) of Au/rutile in plasmonic water oxidation. (g) Schematic illustration of water oxidation of plasmonic Au/TiO2 photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic description of the functions of cocatalysts. (b) Intrinsic roles of dual-cocatalyst in lowering the activation energy in photocatalytic OWS. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013.	 
Photocatalysis: E ≥ ΔG + Ea	(8)
Photoelectrocatalysis: E ≥ ΔG + EAOP	(9)

 	Fig. 22  Schematic description of the role of the oxidation cocatalyst in (a) photocatalytic water oxidation and (b) PEC water oxidation. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Multisite redox-levelling mechanism for the water oxidation reaction in the oxygen-evolving complex of photosystem II. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (b) Water oxidation mechanism of the slow Co3O4 surface site. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014. (c) Structure of the crystalline MnO precursor and the active MnOx catalyst. Right: Mn atoms in violet form a defect-rich layer of di-μ-oxido bridged MnIII,IV ions, where the MnII,III ions in green are not part of this layer and may interconnect layer fragments. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 24  Energy band diagrams of metal and n-type semiconductor contacts. Left: Schottky junction. Right: Ohmic contact. Evac, vacuum energy; Ec, energy of conduction band minimum; Ev, energy of valence band maximum; ϕm, metal work function; ϕS, semiconductor work function; and χs, electron affinity of the semiconductor. Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic model of dual-cocatalyst systems for photocatalytic water splitting. (a) Pt-PdS/CdS. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009. (b)Rh/Cr2O3-Mn3O4/GaN:ZnO. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 26  Selective deposition of reduction and oxidation cocatalysts on different facets of BiVO4 single crystal. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) AFM topology image of a BiVO4 single photocatalyst particle with facet-selective photo-deposited MnOx nanoparticle on the {011} facets and (b) SRSPS obtained on the {010} and {011} facets before and after facet-selective cocatalyst deposition. (c) Direction of the built-in electric field beneath the {010} facet changed, while the strength of the built-in electric fields beneath the two facets significantly increased. (d) Spatial distribution of the SPV signals of a single BiVO4 photocatalyst particle with selectively deposited MnOx and Pt cocatalyst at the {011} and {010} facets. (e) Maximum built-in electric field at the interface of up to 2.5 kV cm−1. (f) Schematic showing the changes in the vectors of the built-in electric field in the bare cocatalyst and in the dual-cocatalyst deposited on a BiVO4 single photocatalyst particle. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) SEM images of NaTaO3:La(2%). (b) Mechanism of highly efficient photocatalytic water splitting over NiO/NaTaO3:La photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2003. (c) and (d) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy of NiOx cocatalyst on NaTiO3 before and after irradiation, respectively. (e) Scheme of the intrinsic roles of NiOx cocatalyst on NaTiO3. Reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016.	 
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 29  Schematic of the function of (a) Cr2O3 shell and (b) amorphous Ti, Ta, or Nb oxy(hydroxide) layers. Reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015.	 
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
HO* → ˙HO + *	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
HOO* → ˙HOO + *	(23)
O* + O* → O2 + 2*	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
OH− + * → HO* + e−	(27)
HO* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−	(28)
HO* → O* + e− + H+	(29)
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
	(38)
	(39)
	(40)

 	Fig. 30  Scheme of active oxygen species generated in the photocatalytic oxidation steps of the water and oxygen reduction process.	 

 	Fig. 31  Structures and free energies of the intermediates for oxygen evolution reaction on the rutile TiO2 (110) surface. Blue spheres, metal ions; red spheres, oxygen; and white spheres, hydrogen. Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008.	 

Ultraviolet light
TiO2	<385 nm	Pt/RuO2	QE: 30 ± 10% at 310 nm	
267

SrTiO3:Al	<390 nm	Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH	AQE: 95.7% at 350 nm, 95.9% at 360 nm, 91.6% at 365 nm STH: 0.65%	
163

La2Ti2O7:Ba	<385 nm	NiOx	QE: 35% (<360 nm)	
268

Sr2Nb2O7	<300 nm	Ni	QE: 23% (<300 nm)	
269

NaTaO3:La	<300 nm	NiO	AQE: 56% at 270 nm	
80

Ga2O3:Zn	<280 nm	Rh2−yCryO3	AQY: 71% at 254 nm	
270

Polytriazine imides	<400 nm	Pt/Co	AQY: 7.9% at 365 nm, 6.2% at 380 nm, 0.26% at 405 nm	
244



Visible light
(Zn0.12Ga0.88)(N0.88O0.12)	<475 nm	Rh2−yCryO3	AQE: 5.9% at 420–440 nm	
240

GaN:Mg/InGaN:Mg	<475 nm	Rh/Cr2O3	AQE: 12.3% at 400–475 nm, STH: 1.8%	
271

ZrO2/TaON	<495 nm	RuOx/Cr2O3/IrO2	AQE: <0.1% at 420 nm	
272

LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N	<600 nm	Rh2−yCryO3/TiO2/SiO2	AQE: 0.18% at 440 ± 30 nm	
221

Ta3N5	<590 nm	Rh/Cr2O3	AQE: 2.2% at 320 nm, 0.22% at 420 nm, 0.024% at 500 nm, STH: 0.014%	
41

BiYWO6	<470 nm	RuO2	AQE: 0.17% at 420 nm	
273

BiVO4:In,Mo	<496 nm	RuO2	AQE: 3.2% at 420–800 nm	
274

Y2Ti2O5S2	<650 nm	Rh/Cr2O3/IrO2	AQE: 0.36% at 420nm, 0.23% at 500, 0.05% at 600 nm, STH: 0.007%	
46

g-C3N4	<440 nm	Pt/CoOx	AQE: 0.3% at 405 nm	
275

g-C3N4 (nanosheet)	<410 nm	Co1-phosphide	QE: 3.6% at 420 nm, 2.2% at 500 nm and 0.35% at 580 nm	
276

CDots-C3N4	<620 nm	
	AQE: 16% at 420 nm, STH: 2%	
277


Soluble electron mediator
Pt/SrTiO3(Cr,Ta) (<700 nm)	PtOx/WO3 (<450 nm)	IO3−/I−	AQE: 0.1% at 420 nm	
278

Pt/ZrO2/TaON (<500 nm)	PtOx/WO3 (<600 nm)	IO3−/I−	AQE: 6.3% at 420 nm	
249

Pt/MgTa2O6−xNy/TaON (<570 nm)	PtOx/WO3 (<600 nm)	IO3−/I−	AQE: 6.8% at 420 nm	
250

IrO2/Sm2Ti2S2O5 (<590 nm); Pt/La5Ti2CuS5O7 (<650 nm); Rh/La6Ti2S8O5 (<630 nm)	PtOx/H-Cs-WO3 (<450 nm)	I3−/I−	STH: 0.003%	
279

Dye-adsorbed Pt/H4Nb6O17 (<700 nm)	IrO2/PtOx/WO3 (<450 nm)	I3−/I−	AQE: 0.05% at 480 nm	
280

Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)	BiVO4 (<520 nm)	Fe3+/Fe2+	AQE: 4.2% at 420 nm, STH: 0.1%	
281

Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)	Bi4NbO8Cl (<498 nm)	Fe3+/Fe2+	AQE: 0.4% at 420 nm	
72

RhyCr2–yO3/ZrO2/TaON (<530 nm)	Ir–FeCoOx/BiVO4 (<530 nm)	[Fe(CN)6]3−/4−	AQE: 12.3% at 420 ± 10 nm, STH: 0.6%	
251,298

Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)	BiVO4 (<520 nm)	[Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ or [Co(phen)3]3+/2+	AQE: 2.1% at 420 nm	
282

0.5 wt% Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)	Photosystem II (400–520 and 600–700 nm)	[Fe(CN)6]3−/4−	STH: 0.012%	
258,283

Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)	PtOx/WO3 (<450 nm)	[SiW11O39MnIII(H2O)]5−/[SiW11O39MnII(H2O)]6−	AQE: 0.24% at 400 nm (H2 evolution)	
284


	
	
	AQE: 0.36% at 400 nm (O2 evolution)


Solid-state electron mediator
Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)	BiVO4 (<520 nm)	None	AQE: 1.7% at 420 nm, STH: 0.12%	
253

Pt/g-C3N4 (nanosheet) (<450 nm)	Co(OH)2/B doped g-C3N4(nanosheet) (<900 nm)	None	STH: 1.16%	
252

Ru/SrTiO3:La,Rh (<520 nm)	CoOx/Ta3N5 (<600 nm)	Ir	AQE: 1.1% at 420 nm, STH: 0.037%	
285

Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (<520 nm)	BiVO4 (<520 nm)	RGO	AQE: 1.03% at 420 nm	
286

ZnRh2O4 (<1030 nm)	Bi4V2O11 (<750 nm)	Ag	AQE: ∼0.003% at 740 nm	
287

Pt/TiO2/CdS/(ZnSe)0.5(CuGa2.5Se4.25)0.5 (<720 nm)	BiVO4:Mo (<520 nm)	Au	AQE: 1.5% at 420 nm	
257


 	Fig. 32  (a) SEM images of SrTiO3:Al loaded with Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH. (b) and (c) TEM image of a particle and corresponding particle morphology and crystal orientation obtained from selected-area electron diffraction pattern. (d) Time course of H2 and O2 evolution on SrTiO3:Al loaded with various cocatalysts during photoirradiation. Left, loaded with Rh/Cr2O3 by two-step photo-deposition. Middle, loaded with Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH by three-step photo-deposition. Right, loaded with Rh-Cr oxide by co-impregnation. Solid lines are a guide for the eye. (e) Ultraviolet-visible diffuse reflectance spectrum of bare SrTiO3:Al (black solid line) and wavelength dependence of external quantum efficiency (EQE) during water splitting on Rh/Cr2O3/CoOOH-loaded SrTiO3:Al (red symbols). Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a)–(d) Annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) images of Ta3N5/KTaO3. (e) Crystal structures of Ta3N5 and KTaO3 (d indicates the interplanar distance). (f)–(i) Colorized and magnified ADF-STEM of Ta3N5/KTaO3 with different nitridation times. (j) Time course of gas evolution during OWS over Rh/Cr2O3-modified Ta3N5/KTaO3 under simulated sunlight. The dashed lines represent the evacuation of the reaction system (Evac). (k) AQE as a function of the incident light wavelength for OWS over Rh/Cr2O3-modified Ta3N5/KTaO3. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 34  Z-Scheme OWS system consisting of BiVO4 as the OEP, ZrO2-modified TaON as the HEP, and [Fe(CN)6]3−/[Fe(CN)6]4− as a redox mediator. (a) Time course of Z-scheme OWS under optimized conditions in response to visible light. (b) AQY as a function of irradiation wavelength and DRS of the HEP and OEP. Reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Scheme of solid-state Z scheme OWS using SrTiO3:La, Rh as HEP, BiVO4:Mo as OEP and Au as the electronic shuttle. (b) Printed photocatalyst sheet. Photograph of the ink used for screen printing the photocatalyst sheet and photograph of a 10 × 10 cm SrTiO3:La, Rh/Au nanoparticle/BiVO4:Mo printed sheet. (c) Time course of the water splitting reaction using an Ru-modified SrTiO3:La, Rh/Au colloid/BiVO4:Mo printed sheet under simulated sunlight at 288 K and 5 kPa. The sample (6.25 cm2) was photo-deposited with RuCl3·3H2O (0.17 μmol). Reproduced from ref. 277 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Scheme of biohybrid artificial photosynthesis. (b) Microscopy images of PSII-Ru/SrTiO3:Rh hybrid system. (c) Time course of OWS by the PSII-photocatalyst hybrid system. Reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Photograph of a panel reactor unit (625 cm2). (b) Structure of the panel reactor unit viewed from the side. (c) Overhead view of the 100 m2 solar hydrogen production system consisting of 1600 panel reactor units and hut housing the gas separation facility (indicated by the yellow box). (d) Top: Accumulated amounts of moist oxyhydrogen feed, filtrate, and residue gases. The ratios of hydrogen and oxygen in the filtrate and residue gases excluding water vapor are notated along the curves, respectively. Bottom: Variations in solar illumination intensity (red) and the gas evolution rate in the water splitting panel reactor (grey). Reproduced from ref. 288 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 38  Scheme of the hydrogen farm project (HFP). Reproduced from ref. 289 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Time course of the conversion of Fe3+ on different BiVO4 photocatalysts. (b) Surface reaction process for decahedron BiVO4 crystal in Fe3+ solution. (c) Photocurrent density-time curve of carbon-modified amorphous silicon/amorphous germanium photoanode applied for ferrous oxidation reaction. (d) Electrocatalytic H2 evolution in ferrous solution with different bias. (e) Picture of the demonstration module for large-scale solar energy storage under sunlight irradiation (Dalian, China). Reproduced from ref. 289 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Copyright 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
