Methanol economy and net zero emissions: critical analysis of catalytic processes, reactors and technologies   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC02078A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC02078A
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 8361-8405Methanol economy and net zero emissions: critical analysis of catalytic processes, reactors and technologies†

        
          
            Ujjal 
            Mondal
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ganapati D. 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, Institute of Chemical Technology, Nathalal Parekh Marg, Mumbai-400019, India. E-mail: gdyadav@yahoo.com; gd.yadav@ictmumbai.edu.in;  Fax: +91-22-3361-1020;   Tel: +91-22-3361-2010/1111/2222
Received 
      11th June 2021
    , Accepted 24th August 2021First published on 24th August 2021AbstractThe overuse of fossil fuels has led to the disruption of balance of the carbon cycle: the transportation and electricity generation sectors are the greatest contributors. Among other greenhouse gases, CO2 is the leading contributor to global warming, and catalytic transformation of CO2 into fuels and chemicals by utilizing renewable energy is regarded as the most promising way towards alleviating CO2 emissions wherein green hydrogen will play a critical role. Methanol is a crucial compound for our modern economy as it is employed as a building block for synthesizing several chemical intermediates, hydrocarbons, energy storage media, solvents, and fuels. Many scientists predict that methanol will become a central participant in the worldwide economy landscape soon. Therefore, it is very necessary to improve and optimize the overall methanol synthesis process to cut down its cost to the level of fossil fuels. The methanol synthesis technology can be divided into three sub-processes, i.e., feed gas production including power plant emissions, advanced catalysis and reactor technology. The current paper has reviewed all three aspects and also discussed the kinetics and reaction mechanisms of methanol synthesis. Further research initiatives should focus on innovative CO2 capture technologies and CO2 refinery to mitigate climate change, dry reforming and biogas generation processes, membrane reactor technologies, and finally, adoption of renewable energy for (green) hydrogen production to reduce the cost of methanol and advance these innovative scientific concepts to promote societal acceptance. It will be in tune with the net-(carbon)-zero goal which has been advocated by the Paris Agreement of 2015 and recently echoed in the Leaders’ Summit on Climate in April 2021.Ujjal MondalUjjal Mondal earned his Ph.D. (2017) in Chemical Engineering from the National Institute of Technology, Rourkela. His Ph.D. dissertation was on the chemoselective reduction of nitroarenes by hydrogen sulphide using phase transfer catalysis. He was awarded a DS Kothari Postdoctoral Fellowship (DSKPDF), for 2017–2020 by the UGC to work under the guidance of Prof. G. D. Yadav in ICT Mumbai, where he has been involved in the development of multi-functional catalytic processes to utilize CO2 to produce renewable fuel, such as methanol and dimethyl ether (DME) in a continuous fixed bed reaction system, which has been patented. Currently he is involved in an industrial project for the DME technology.Ganapati D. YadavProfessor Ganapati D. Yadav, Ph.D. (Tech.) (Bombay), D.Sc. (Hon. Causa, DYPU, Kolhapur) and D.Eng. (Hon. Causa, NIT Agartala), Emeritus Professor of Eminence, Former Vice Chancellor and JC Bose National Fellow at the Institute of Chemical Technology, is one of the highly prolific and accomplished engineering-scientists in India, known for his contributions to education, research and innovation in Green Chemistry and Engineering, Catalysis, Chemical Engineering, Energy Engineering, Biotechnology, Nanotechnology, and Development of Clean and Green Technologies. He is an elected Fellow of the Indian National Science Academy, Indian Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Sciences, India, Indian National Academy of Engineering, and TWAS, and Fellow of RSC, IChemE (UK), IIChE, the Indian Chemical Society, and ISTE among others. His productivity is phenomenal: sole supervision of 104 Doctoral and 134 Master's theses, and 45 Post-doctoral fellows; author of 491 research papers, 113 granted patents and 3 books; with h-index 62, i10 index 307 and 14400+ citations. He was conferred with Padma Shri, the fourth highest civilian honour, by the President of India in 2016.
1. Introduction
1.1 Net zero emissions
Net-(carbon)-zero emissions by 2050 needs a radical change across the total economy, abandoning fossil fuels and other sources of emissions wherever feasible. For the rest, every ton of CO2 emitted must be met by a ton that should be removed from the atmosphere. Where does the methanol economy fit into this whole game? Due to the excessive population rise from the pre-industrial era along with technological advancements, the sustainability of the current high lifestyle entails a large amount of energy. Carbon-based energy has been primarily satisfied by fossil fuels such as oil, natural gas, and coal, having a limited supply which will be exhausted in the foreseeable future.1 Fossil resources also play an essential role as a source of raw materials needed to synthesize a broad array of consumer products. This supply chain can't run for eternity as all of these energy sources will diminish within three centuries.2 From the viewpoint of economics, importing fossil fuels worth billions of dollars is a waste of foreign exchange for all non-oil-producing countries. Carbon dioxide emitted from the energy sources can be converted into different products using hydrogen, the best being green hydrogen to meet the net-zero goal. Hydrogen is viewed as an “energy carrier”, and it is only produced by using energy from another source. The green hydrogen produced from a non-carbon source such as water splitting will be the best choice. There are some serious limitations of hydrogen utilization as an alternative to conventional fuels, such as the requirement of a large infrastructure as its energy density is low, frequent fluctuation and low controllability, and a demand for infrastructure modifications over the period. Therefore the conversion of H2 and CO2 into methanol is a better alternative to use hydrogen as energy and CO2 valorization.3,4 This approach of recycling captured CO2 from industrial flue gas into methanol is the heart of the “methanol economy”, which was previously proposed by Nobel Laureate George Olah. Methanol as a key commodity has become an essential part of the global economy. The demand for methanol has been growing (Fig. 1). From building blocks for plastics, paints, and organic solvents to clean fuels applied in fuel cells and combustion engines, 140 million metric tons of methanol were consumed in 2018, and this is predicted to reach 280 million tons in 2030.
 Fig. 1  Year to year basis growth of methanol demand in the world.5 
To reduce CO2 emissions, production of methanol is an excellent strategy. The life cycle assessment (LCA) of methanol in a circular economy is given in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  LCA analysis of the renewable methanol economy. Figure adopted ref. 6. 
Methanol is an alternative energy carrier because of the higher energy content of 726.3 kJ mol−1.7 The properties of methanol are given in Table 1, demonstrating its uniqueness as fuel and precursor for different chemicals. In addition, methanol can be used in conventional combustion engines without any major modification.8 The main idea is to replace gasoline with methanol as a fuel in the combustion engine although gasoline has a higher energy content of 64494.5 kJ kg−1 compared with 31806.7 kJ kg−1 for methanol. The octane number of methanol is 113, and therefore a 10:90 v/v% mixture of methanol:gasoline surges the octane number to 130. However, engines run on pure methanol can achieve efficiency close to 43%. Methanol engines can cover long ranges with a high velocity with 40% efficiency. Moreover, methanol is environmentally friendly as its combustion produces almost no harmful by-products like NOx or SOx.7 Due to its higher performance, lower emissions, and lower risk of flammability than gasoline, methanol is a better fuel alternative.8
Table 1 Physical properties of methanol9,10




Properties
Value





a To convert kPa to mmHg, multiply by 7.5.
b To convert J to cal, divide by 4.184.





Boiling point, °C
64.70


Critical temperature, °C
239.43


Critical pressure,a kPa
8096


Critical volume, mL mol−1
118


Critical value of compressibility factor
0.224


Heat of formation (liquid) at 25 °C,b kJ mol−1
−239.03


Free energy of formation (liquid) at 25 °C,b kJ mol−1
−166.81


Heat of fusion,b J g−1
103


Heat of vaporization at boiling point,b J g−1
1129


Heat of combustion (gross) at 25 °C,b J g−1
22662


Flammable limits in air, vol%




–Lower
6.0


–Upper
36


Autoignition temperature, °C
464


Flash point, closed cup, °C
11


Surface tension at 25 °C, mN m−1 (= dyn cm−1)
22.1


Specific heat of vapour at 25 °C,b J (g K)−1
1.370


Specific heat of liquid at 25 °C,b J (g K)−1
2.533


Vapour pressure at 25 °C, kPa
16.96


Solubility in water
Miscible


Density at 25 °C, g mL−1
0.7866


Refractive index, nD20
1.3284


Liquid viscosity at 25 °C, mPa.(= cP)
0.541


Dielectric constant at 25 °C
32.7


Thermal conductivity at 25 °C, W (m K)−1
0.202




1.2 Methanol uses
Methanol is being used as a building block material for the commercial production of ethylene, formaldehyde, acetic acid, aromatics, methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE), dimethyl carbonate (DMC), biodiesel, and other chemicals (Fig. 3). Among the emerging technologies related to gasoline synthesis from renewable sources, a process named “methanol to gasoline (MTG)” is highly appreciated. Methanol has been successfully catalytically converted to aromatics and olefinic hydrocarbons by a number of solid acid catalysts, i.e., zeolites, SAPO, etc. These catalysts are continuously perfected to produce a more selective range of alkenes for gasoline synthesis. Therefore, investment in key methanol technologies is essential from the perspective of the global economy.
 Fig. 3  Different usages of methanol in the chemical and energy industries.5 MTO: methanol to olefin, MTP: methanol to propylene, MMA: methyl methacrylate, MTBE: methyl tertiary butyl ether. 
The world is already experiencing the adverse effect of centuries of usage of fossil fuels as a huge amount of greenhouse gases have accumulated in the atmosphere, which ultimately resulted in the Paris Agreement in 2015 by UNFCCC members(L'accord de Paris), which is aimed at reducing the risk and impact of global warming by adopting two long-term temperature goals, i.e., (i) to check the global temperature rise well below 2 °C above the pre-industrial level, (ii) and to take more deliberate actions to limit the rise in temperature to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels. In order to achieve these goals, a 20/20/20 strategy was adopted, namely, a 20% decrease in CO2 emission, a rise in renewable energy market share by 20%, and a 20% increase in the efficiency of current technology.11
1.3 Production cost
Traditionally methanol is produced from fossil fuel-derived syngas, a mixture of CO, H2, and a small amount of CO2. Among all the anthropogenic greenhouse gases, CO2 is the most vital as it is largely responsible for global warming and climate change. Therefore, CO2 capture and utilization (CCU) is of great relevance to mitigate global warming. The cost of methanol by using fossil fuels given by the Methanol Institute varied between USD 400–500 per ton during May 2018–May 2021 (https://www.methanol.org/methanol-price-supply-demand/). With a lower feedstock cost range of up to USD 6 GJ−1, the cost of bio-methanol is estimated to be in the range of USD 320 to 770 ton−1 with the range affected by differences in the specific projects – including differences in CAPEX, OPEX and conversion efficiency (https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Jan/IRENA_Innovation_Renewable_Methanol_2021.pdf).
Methanol is going to be a very important chemical for future generations, and the scientific community is innovating new technologies for the cheaper production of methanol. Hence, this review focuses on all of the advancements in reactor technology and catalytic processes of methanol synthesis.
2. History and knowledge gap of methanol synthesis
Wood distillation was adopted by Robert Boyle in 1660 to synthesize methanol, although the chemical composition of methanol was discovered only after 1834 by Dumas and Peligot. Methanol was initially used for heating and lighting processes, but was eventually replaced by more economical fuels. The demand for methanol in the chemical industry grew significantly, and in 1905 Paul Sabatier was the first person to employ a metal-based catalyst for the hydrogenation of carbonaceous gases for methanol synthesis. After that, BASF in 1923 patented a novel process for the production of methanol from syngas, which was generated via the gasification of coal. This BASF technology required a high temperature (300–400 °C) and pressure (25–35 MPa) along with zinc/chromium oxide catalyst. Then, from 1927 for the next 45 years, this technology dominated the US market and Du Pont and the Commercial Solvents Corporation were the main producers of methanol.
In the 1940s, the Swiss company Lonza was able to synthesize methanol commercially from electrolytic hydrogen, and CO2 derived from Ca(NO3)2 plant. In 1966 when purer syngas was available (synthesized via the steam reforming of methane), a new copper/zinc-based catalyst was developed by Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), which was able to perform at a lower temperature (300 °C) and pressure (10 MPa). After a few years of research, Lurgi was able to further minimize the intensified reaction conditions to a lower temperature (230–250 °C) and pressure (4–5 MPa). Thereafter many advances have been made in this area, and now methanol production is more economical and energy-efficient.
Methanol production capacity has grown by about 110 million tons, produced in ∼90 production facilities all around the world. Due to the rapid economic growth achieved by China, it became the dominant country in terms of production and consumption of methanol.
Global consumption of methanol is currently valued at an average of 100 MMTA, and huge demand is predicted in the future12 (Fig. 4). In 2009, China started commercial supply of methanol-blended gasoline available at petrol (gasoline) stations with different standards, i.e., M85 (85% methanol and 15% gasoline), M100 (100% methanol), and M15 (15% methanol and 85% gasoline) for the use in internal combustion engines (ICE). However, some problems need to be resolved before pure methanol can be used in ICE, such as corrosion (leaching of aluminum, magnesium, and zinc) and cold engine start (inadequate supply of highly volatile matter inside the combustion chamber).
 Fig. 4  Methanol supply/demand data from 2016–2021.12 
3. Impact of methanol economy on the environment
Methanol is a sustainable energy source generated from a variety of traditional (natural gas, coal gasification, biomass) and renewable sources (industrial flue gases, carbon capture, and storage plants). In the molecular structure of methanol, there is no carbon–carbon bond; rather it is full of hydrogen, and therefore it is regarded as a cleaner fuel. Methanol is naturally produced by different natural phenomena like volcanic eruptions, vegetation, insects, microorganisms, animals, degradation of organic waste, etc. If methanol is accidentally spilled in the environment, it will eventually be degraded naturally by photodegradation or by micro-organisms, which can break methanol into CO2 and H2O in aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Aquatic species are hardly affected by exposure to diluted methanol if there is any accidental release of methanol into water bodies, which is very severe in the case of oil spillage. Kaviraj et al. have concluded that a concentration of 23–75 mg mL−1 is a no-observed-effect concentration (NOEC) for freshwater ecosystems.13
4. Systainable methanol synthesis
Methanol is proposed as a renewable and globally available regenerative carbon platform, which can be used primarily as a transportation fuel, liquid hydrogen carrier, and precursor for synthesizing more complex chemicals.14–16 The alternative route to fossil-fuel-based methanol production requires a “green” source of carbon. Hence, carbon sources like CO or (most likely) CO2, which are released from various industries to the atmosphere or could be taken directly from the atmosphere itself, and the source of H2 also must not be fossil fuel. Therefore, this also connects hydrogen and the potential hydrogen economy with the methanol economy. Both the C and H have to be sourced sustainably to use methanol as a strategic fuel or chemical intermediate. If the H2 is the energy source, it must be stored in an energy-dense form, i.e., methane, or ammonia, or methanol itself. Thus, methanol is merely a carrier for the (hopefully) green hydrogen, which is nothing but stored solar energy. Sustainable methanol synthesis requires hydrogen sourced from renewable electricity by electrolysis. CO2 should be sourced from coal-fired power stations, ammonia plants, steel and steel works, CCS units, or directly taken from the air itself. Thus, research topics like power-to-fuel or emission-to-liquid, where CO2 emissions can be utilized by using renewable energy, are investigated intensively, and already several pilot plants have been built.17–19
5. Methanol synthesis routes
Industrial implementation of any technology depends on the efficiency of the process, and presently most of the developing technologies related to methanol synthesis do not indicate enough development. Commercial synthesis of methanol can be easily categorized into three steps:
1. Syngas production from different materials
2. Conversion of syngas into methanol
3. Methanol recovery from the product steam by distillation.
In terms of raw materials for methanol synthesis, one of the most important aspects of methanol synthesis is the availability of feedstock at an economic level from cheap sources. Synthesis gas (CO, H2, and little CO2) is the most utilized feedstock for methanol synthesis, which is principally produced from reforming of abundantly available natural gas, or reforming or partial oxidation of different carbon-based materials (coal, petroleum coke, heavy oil, petroleum residue, etc.) and biomass-based materials. Therefore, the selection of raw materials is not only dependent on the long-term availability but also on the energy consumption, environmental aspect, and political influences.
Syngas from the respective source is categorized by a stoichiometric number, “S”. S is the ratio of the difference between the number of moles of H2 and CO2 and the total number of moles of CO and CO2. (1)
The value of S depicts the surplus or deficiency of hydrogen in the syngas mixture. CO2 is included in the stoichiometric term because, during methanol synthesis, H2 is also consumed by CO2via a reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) reaction. When S is a little greater than 2, it is regarded as most suitable for a commercially available catalyst for methanol synthesis as the availability of H2 with respect to CO and CO2 increases. This value of S depends on the raw material used for syngas synthesis; when it is produced from natural gas, then S achieves the value of 2.5 to 3.
5.1. Reactions involved in methanol synthesis from syngas

5.1.1. Coal and pet coke gasification process. 
Carbon-containing materials can be converted into syngas by the high-temperature gasification process. The feedstock for this process is commonly coke and petroleum coke, which reacts with steam and oxygen during gasification at high temperatures and pressures.20 India's estimated coal reserve is more than 9% of the world's total capacity. The majority of the coal is located in the country's eastern states of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odissa, and West Bengal, which account for approximately 70% of the total coal reserves in India. India is currently ranked second in the production as well as consumption of coal, only after China. India's 70% electricity demand is mitigated by thermal coal plants.
The major gasification reactions are shown below:
Gasification with oxygen: C + 0.5O2 ↔ CO ΔH = −123 kJ mol−1(2) C + O2 ↔ CO2 ΔH = −409 kJ mol−1(3)
Gasification with carbon dioxide: C + CO2 ↔ 2CO ΔH = +172 kJ mol−1(4)
Gasification with steam: C + H2O ↔ CO + H2 ΔH = +131.4 kJ mol−1(5)
Gasification with hydrogen: C + 2H2 ↔ CH4 ΔH = −75 kJ mol−1(6)
Methanation reaction: C + 3H2 ↔ CH4 + H2O ΔH = −206.1 kJ mol−1(7)
The gasification of coal leads to generate impurities like carbonyl sulfide, CO2, Cl+, and others, which should be removed before being employed in methanol synthesis. But the problem associated with the syngas generated from the coal gasification method is that the “S” value is much less than 2 (H2/CO ratio is 0.56). Water–gas shift (WGS) is a unit that is used to transform the CO to H2 ratio in syngas. It is a very efficient technique to adjust the CO to H2 ratio in the syngas.21 CO + H2Og ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1(8)
The feedstock coal is first ground and mixed with water to form a slurry; after that, it is pumped into the gasifier to react with oxygen at high temperature and high pressure.22,23


5.1.2 Biomass. 
Biomass is regarded as a renewable and carbon-neutral energy source because it liberates the same amount of carbon into the environment while generating energy as is accumulated during its lifespan.24 For instance, every year India generates approximately 142 million tons of agricultural and 59.7 million tons of forest biomass,25 and a huge percentage of this biomass remains unutilized and causes harm. Therefore, this huge resource can be utilized in the context of the country's energy security and ecological concerns. Many industrial wastes can be used as a source of biomass, such as black liquor produced in the pulp and paper industry. Thermo-chemical conversions can be adopted to convert dry biomass into a combustible gas called producer gas or synthesis gas. The generation of syngas from biomass is considered an attractive route to produce chemicals, biofuels, hydrogen, and electricity.26
Biomass gasification is a high-temperature (600 °C to 900 °C or higher) partial oxidation process of dry biomass in the presence of gasifying agents (i.e., air, oxygen, steam, CO2, or a mixture of these compounds), which results in the production of a low to medium heating value fuel gas called producer gas or syngas.27 This product gas generally contains CO, H2, CO2, CH4 and N2 in different concentrations. Usually, air is used as a gasifying agent for making producer gas, and it has a higher N2 concentration than CO, H2, CO2, and CH4 compared with syngas. The biomass gasification process is nothing but a combination of closely interlinked and complex thermochemical processes. Irrespective of the gasification reactor, this whole process can be outlined in four major steps, i.e., (1) moisture removal from potential biomass, (2) pyrolysis of the dried biomass, also called devolatilization, (3) partial oxidation of gases and/or char produced in the pyrolysis process, and (4) reduction or gasification of char (Fig. 5).28
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of biomass gasification to produce H2 and syngas. 
The required heat for the whole biomass gasification process is generated via two approaches; the first one is called an ‘allothermal’ or indirect process, where heat is provided to the gasifier from an external source. The second process is an autothermal or direct process, where exothermic combustion and partial combustion reactions are responsible for the automatic supply of heat inside the gasifier. There are over a hundred types of gasifier studied and patented to date, although gasifiers can largely be divided into two groups based on the bed position inside the reactor during gasification, i.e. (i) fixed bed or (ii) fluidized bed gasifier. The third type of gasifier developed is called the entrained flow gasifier, which is designed for finely divided feedstock particles (<0.1–0.4 mm) such as coal particles, but for application in the biomass gasification field, the biomass has to be converted into easily pulverized materials, i.e., char, pyrolysis oil, etc.29
Main chemical reactions involving biomass gasification are as follows:
Char combustion,
1. Partial combustion: C + 0.5O2 ↔ CO ΔH = −113 kJ mol−1(9)
2. Total combustion C + O2 ↔ CO2 ΔH = −394 kJ mol−1(10)
Char gasification,
3. Boudouard reaction: C + CO2 ↔ 2CO ΔH = +172 kJ mol−1(11)
4. Steam gasification: C + H2O ↔ CO + H2 ΔH = +131.4 kJ mol−1(12)
5. Hydrogen gasification: C + 2H2 ↔ CH4 ΔH = −75 kJ mol−1(13)
Homogeneous reactions,
6. Water–gas shift (WGS): CO + H2O ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1(14)
7. CO oxidation: CO + 0.5O2 ↔ CO2 ΔH = −283 kJ mol−1(15)
8. H2 oxidation: H2 + 0.5O2 ↔ H2O ΔH = −242 kJ mol−1(16)
9. Methanation: CO + 3H2 ↔ CH4 + H2O = ΔH = −206 kJ mol−1(17)
10. CH4 oxidation: CH4 + 2O2 ↔ CO2 + 2H2O ΔH = −83 kJ mol−1(18)


5.1.3 Natural gas-based process. 
Natural gas is one of the most crucial and as well as cheapest feedstocks available for syngas synthesis.30 Reforming of natural gas involves catalytic chemical reactions, which mainly convert the main constituent of natural gas, methane, into a mixture of H2 and CO. The reforming of methane is accomplished through exothermic or endothermic reactions depending on the chemical route that is selected. The most common synthesis routes are (i) steam reforming (SRM), (ii) partial oxidation (POX), (iii) auto thermal reforming (ATR), and (iv) dry reforming of methane (DRM). Before any of these processes proceed, natural gas has to be passed through a desulfurization unit for removal of any sulfur species present, otherwise it can deactivate the catalyst rapidly (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the natural gas-based process to produce H2 and syngas. 
(i) Partial oxidation (POX) process:
In this process, a sub-stoichiometric fuel–air mixture is partially combusted at high temperatures (1200–1500 °C) in a reformer.31 This partial oxidation process is exothermic, and it requires a very little amount of energy to commence the reaction. Therefore, this process is regarded as more economical than other processes. But the main drawback of this process is the use of expensive and pure explosive oxygen. A highly secured facility is required to carry out partial oxidation reactions as both reagents of this process, CH4 and O2, can cause explosions.32 CH4 + 0.5O2 ↔ CO + 2H2 ΔH = −36 kJ mol−1(19)
(ii) Steam methane reforming (SMR):
Steam methane reforming (SMR) is a syngas synthesis process wherein, in the presence of a metal-based catalyst, steam and methane react in a reformer at a temperature range of 800–900 °C and moderate pressure of 3 MPa.33 Apart from the main reaction, the water–gas shift (WGS) reaction occurs where CO reacts further with steam to produce more hydrogen. Therefore, in SMR, the H2:CO ratio becomes close to 3. SMR is the most widely accepted syngas-producing method and contributes a total of 50% of total syngas production from natural gas globally. SMR is an endothermic process that requires a very high temperature, and therefore this process becomes very expensive. SMR technology is a process where the H2:CO ratio in the produced syngas is very high; therefore, this process is not suitable for the Fischer–Tropsch process for higher hydrocarbon synthesis because the presence of a high concentration of hydrogen suppresses the growth of hydrocarbon chains. CH4 + H2O ↔ CO + 3H2 ΔH = +206.1 kJ mol−1(20) CO + H2Og ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1(21)
(iii) Auto thermal reforming (ATR):
This reforming process is a very old technique of syngas synthesis from natural gas, and presently very few commercial plants are working with this technique. The fraction of the gaseous reactants introduced into the reactor determines the H2:CO ratio in the produced syngas in the ATR process. The H2:CO ratio is generally between 1 and 2.34 During this process, firstly natural gas is mixed with oxygen and stream and then led into the combustion chamber to ignite at 650–1050 °C. The ATR process enjoys the benefits of a combination of the advantages of the POX and SRM processes. Similar to the POX process, no external heating is required as partial oxidation of methane takes place in the single ATR chamber. The infrastructure is very simple, and it cost considerably less than SRM. CH4 + 0.5O2 ↔ CO + 2H2 ΔH = −36 kJ mol−1(22) CH4 + H2O ↔ CO + 3H2 ΔH = +206.1 kJ mol−1(23) CO + H2Og ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1(24) 2CO ↔ CO2 + C ΔH = −172 kJ mol−1(25)
(iv) Dry methane reforming (DMR):
CO2 is abundant in nature, and it can replace steam in the natural gas reforming process. The production of syngas from waste CO2 and cheaply available natural gas by reforming is a promising technology for the future.35 Industrially the dry methane reforming (DMR) process is very important as the ratio of H2:CO achieved in this process is close to 1, which is very suitable for the Fischer–Tropsch process for the synthesis of liquid hydrocarbons with iron based catalysts. DMR is a little more endothermic compared with steam reforming, and this process is favoured in low pressures and higher temperatures.36 But the main drawback of DMR process is the formation of carbon on the catalyst surfaces via a RWGS reaction, which consumes H2 and produces CO. Therefore the development of a catalyst system incorporating suitable support that can dissociate CO2 into CO and O is necessary, as O species can react with deposited carbon to form gaseous products (CO and CO2).37 CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2Og ΔH = +41.2 kJ mol−1(26)
(v) Combined methane reforming:
The combination of dry reforming and steam reforming of methane has many advantages for industrial application and is beneficial for the environment. By this method, the two most important greenhouse gases, CO2 and CH4, can be utilized to produce useful chemicals. Another advantage of this combined process is that the H2:CO ratio of syngas is 2, which is very useful for processes like Fischer–Tropsch synthesis, methanol, and DME synthesis.38 (27)
Combination of partial oxidation (POX) and dry reforming of methane (DRM) is a mutually beneficial approach to nullify drawbacks of both technologies, i.e., the endothermic DRM process requires a high energy supply, and a highly exothermic MDR process generates hotspots in the reactor.39 Therefore, this combination of processes (CDPOX) has the following advantages: (i) proper energy utilization, (ii) the desired H2:CO ratio for further product synthesis, and (iii) a safer operational environment.

5.2 Methanol synthesis pathways

5.2.1 Syngas. 
Methanol synthesis from syngas (CO/CO2/H2) is a highly exothermic reaction, and therefore the thermal characteristics of the process need to be clearly studied in order to design efficient reactors and optimize operating parameters and catalyst performance. CO + 2H2 ↔ CH3OH ΔH = −90.64 kJ mol−1(28) (29) CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2Og ΔH = +41.2 kJ mol−1(30)
The above reactions (eqn (28) & (29)) are exothermic in nature and result in the reduction of the number of moles in the reactor. So, according to Le Chatelier's principle, this reaction can be accelerated in lower temperatures and higher pressures. Current methanol synthesis from syngas operates in the pressure range of 3–10 MPa, which is very similar to the syngas generation process through steam reforming. Therefore, the cost of syngas compression can be avoided. Eqn (30) is a reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) reaction that is mildly endothermic in nature. Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 (CZA) was the standard catalyst formulation in the industry from 1960, developed by ICI. This CZA combination showed better results than the previously used ZnO/Cr2O3 at a reduced temperature (<573 K) and pressure (10 MPa).
Methanol synthesis (MS) is a catalyst surface polymerization reaction, where CO is first hydrogenated to CHO and subsequently on further hydrogenation (CH2O, CH3O) converted to methanol. However, some studies have suggested that the CO2 formed by the WGS reaction is the main source of carbon for a faster hydrogenation reaction. According to their findings, first CO is oxygenated to CO2 by a WGS reaction, which is followed by sequential hydrogenation until the synthesis of formate monomers.40 Afterward, formate monomers are hydrogenated to methoxy monomers, and finally, methanol is formed by further hydrogenation (Scheme 1).41
 Scheme 1  Surface reaction of methanol synthesis from CO. 


5.2.2 Carbon dioxide. 
Saito et al. reported that the industrially popular Cu/ZnO-based catalyst for CO hydrogenation is also equally effective for CO2 hydrogenation for methanol synthesis among other developed catalysts.42 According to various studies on the mechanism of methanol synthesis, in the first step of methanol synthesis, the CO2/H2 gets activated on the catalyst surface and generates two intermediates, i.e., HCOO and COOH, which further lead to two separate pathways (Scheme 2). Pathway I involves hydrogenation of HCOO to methanol synthesis via the formation of a number of intermediates, i.e., dioxymethylene, formaldehyde. Pathway II proceeds through further hydrogenation of the carboxyl group (COOH) to methanol formation,130 although COOH can break down to produce CO at elevated temperatures.43 Therefore, catalyst selection and reaction conditions play an important role in selective CO2 to methanol conversion over CO. Liao et al. have conducted a DFT study and found that Zn-enriched Pd@Zn core–shell bimetallic catalysts can effectively stabilize the HCOO species on the catalyst surface than COOH, which results in the reduction of CO produced from the RWGS reaction.44
 Scheme 2  Surface reaction of methanol synthesis from CO2 (i) pathway I, (ii) pathway II, and (iii) RWGS. 


5.2.3 Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. 
The electrocatalytic CO2 reduction process has already generated wide interest among the research fraternity during the last decade for its unique ability to sustain a low-temperature redox cycle for conversion and energy storage. During electrochemical reduction of CO2 with water, electrode potentials are applied to produce electrons via the oxidation of water (OER) for reduction of CO2 to form a number of products, i.e., CO, methanol, formic acid, methane, ethanol, ethylene, and formaldehyde (eqn (31)–(41)); all the reduction potentials mentioned are relative to standard hydrogen electrode at pH 0, 1.0 bar, and 25 °C in aqueous solution. The CO2 electrolytic cell has a cathode for the reduction of CO2 (CO2-RR) and an anode for the oxidation of water in contact with an aqueous electrolyte separated by a membrane. When an external field is applied, oxygen evolution occurs at the anode side via water oxidation, and the generated electrons are conducted to the cathode via the external circuit where they can either combine with protons in the aqueous medium to produce hydrogen (HER) or reduce CO2 to produce hydrocarbons. The product selectivity can also be fine-tuned during electrochemical CO2 reduction by changing the electrocatalyst and by varying the applied electrode potential. CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH(l) E = −0.25 V(31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) 2H+ + 2e− → H2(g) E = +0.00 V(40) CO2(g) + e− → CO2− + 4H2O(l) E = −1.900 V(41)
There are several advantages of the direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 over the traditional thermochemical hydrogenation of CO2 (using hydrogen produced from fossil fuel processing or water splitting). By combining CO2-RR in an aqueous medium and the electrochemical water splitting process, hydrogenation of CO2 can be accomplished in a single step, and this process does not require high reaction pressures to produce methanol and C2+ products. The electrochemical CO2 reduction process runs at near-ambient temperature and pressure, while the systems are quite compact and modular, making it a more affordable as well as easy to scale up than the thermal process. The reaction pathway of electrochemical reduction of CO2 is debated as there are many mechanisms and intermediates documented in the literature. However, according to the most accepted part, the reduction of CO2 begins with the formation of intermediate *COO−, which further undergoes a proton-coupled electron transfer or hydrogenation by surface hydride to form *COO− or reacts with a proton to form *COOH.45–47 *COOH is further reduced to form *CO, which is either desorbed to form CO or further converted to hydrocarbons or oxygenates. Here * denotes the adsorbed species. It was found that the adsorption strength of CO on the catalyst's active sites is the main determinant of the reaction pathway. When CO is weakly adsorbed on the catalyst surface (as on Au, Ag, or Zn), it will easily be desorbed to form the main product, and the strong adsorption of CO on the catalyst surface (as on Pd or Pt) leads to poisoning of the catalysts. Cu is found to have optimum CO adsorption strength among all the metals, exhibiting high selectivity for methane and methanol via CO2-RR. The solubility of CO2 in the aqueous electrolyte solution is poor, and it limits the mass transfer of CO2 from the bulk to the surface of the cathode, which determines the current density and productivity.48


5.2.3 Natural gas (CH4). 
It is elaborated in many studies that methanol synthesis from syngas is an exothermic process, and the set of reactions involved in the methanol synthesis are not feasible as the overall enthalpy is not favorable under standard conditions.49 CO2 can be used as an alternative in methane reforming reactions, as syngas is produced with an equimolar concentration of CO and H2. In comparison with the steam reforming reaction, the enthalpy variation of this dry reforming (CO2) reaction is higher and inefficient. The latter process requires a higher temperature (1000 °C), which leads to a disproportionality in CO and H2 concentrations and coke generation on the surface of the catalyst.50 Therefore, all these factors are not suitable for economic application in the industry. So, it is very clear from the above discussion that previous methanol synthesis approaches from methane are via the syngas synthesis route. There are lots of industrial findings that have been approved for methanol synthesis from methane based on the syngas route. However, this approach has some serious disadvantages such as high power consumption and a very expensive to build infrastructure, and difficulty of maintaining it. The process operation cost of the syngas route only constitutes 60–70% of the total methanol production cost.51 Therefore, the renewable liquid fuel methanol cannot compete with the traditional liquid fuels due to higher costs.
A more efficient, economical, and environmentally benign strategy needs to be adapted for the methanol synthesis process from natural gas. Several technologies have been extensively researched all around the world for the direct oxidation of methane to methanol. Among those, the direct methane oxidation to methanol (DMTM) route is most promising. This reaction is thermodynamically spontaneous at room temperature. However, among other oxidized products, the stability of methanol is low, which makes the process less selective. Direct methane oxidation to methanol under ambient reaction conditions is regarded as the “holy grail”, which will give the unlimited cheaper source of renewable energy.52 The C–H bond dissociation energy for methanol is 393 kJ mol−1, which is much less than that for the C–H bond of methane, i.e., 440 kJ mol−1.53 It suggests that methanol is comparatively easily oxidized into a stable form (CO and CO2) compared with oxidizing methane itself. These limitations of methanol synthesis via the DMTM route make it a not so feasible technique. According to the law of thermodynamics, methane can be oxidized into methanol at room temperature. Based on Gibbs free energy calculations, the highest methane conversion can be achieved after the reaction equilibrium attains 33%, although the methanol selectivity is only 5%.52
The partial oxidation of methane to methanol under a catalyst-free route involves more than 1000 elementary reaction steps with several reactive intermediates.54,55 According to Scheme 3, the required energy for the activation of methane is quite high, and the other reactions are also highly exothermic. Therefore, it is very difficult to cease the reaction beyond methanol synthesis, and the methanol selectivity gets compromised when a higher conversion of methane is attempted. The energy gap between the reactions in Scheme 3 suggests that these reactions can be controlled (reaction temperature, pressure, etc.) to synthesize methanol and formaldehyde individually. Prior studies on methane oxidation suggest that with the right combination of temperature and reaction pressure, the high methane pressure can prevent deep oxidation.56,57 Now, as the molecules of methanol and methane possess singlet ground states, so their oxidation by oxygen molecules is a formidable spin reaction. Therefore, employing a solid catalyst can activate the molecules and enhance the reaction rate. Methanol molecules have a higher dipole moment than methane, and therefore it gets adsorbed on the catalyst surface and further oxidized to CO and CO2.52 An additional methanol recovery steps are required where a polar solvent is employed to recover methanol from the reactor.
 Scheme 3  Enthalpy variation of the elementary reactions during methane and methanol oxidation. 
Kunkel et al.58 developed a novel dual-step chemo-/biocatalytic oxidation cascade process to convert biomethane into methanol and formaldehyde. The first step of the process involves methane oxidation to formaldehyde over a mesoporous VOx/SBA-15 catalyst. Then in the second step, the produced formaldehyde was disproportionated enzymatically into methanol and formic acid in an equimolar ratio by formaldehyde dismutase (FDM) enzyme, which was obtained from Pseudomonas putida. This dual-step chemo-/biocatalytic method showed higher productivity than methane monooxygenase (MNO), which is a direct methane conversion method.

6. Kinetics of methanol synthesis
6.1 Reaction pathway
Detailed knowledge of the reaction mechanism helps to gather the overall description of the process, which makes it easy to optimize the reaction and operate the plant economically. Kinetic modeling is essential for the successful design and process optimization of any reactor design. This current topic of review, i.e., methanol synthesis, contains many opinions regarding the reaction mechanism and kinetic models. Throughout the literature, we can find lots of studies that have been published on the kinetics of methanol synthesis from various gas feed compositions and reaction operating parameters. Therefore, none was able to draw any conclusion regarding the reaction kinetics and mechanism.
As was discussed in the previous sections, the carbon source for methanol synthesis (eqn (28) and (29)) can either be CO and/or CO2.59,60 The earlier kinetic models developed based on syngas feed have considered CO as a sole carbon source, and CO2 was regarded as a stable compound, which does not participate in the reaction. Afterward, other researchers have suggested that CO2 can also contribute to methanol synthesis, and therefore the CO2 hydrogenation reaction was included in the kinetic modeling.61 Based on the selection of carbon sources and reaction mechanisms, all the developed kinetic models reported in the literature can be categorized into four groups62 (Fig. 7). The first group, Type I, consists of the models developed by Graaf et al.,63 Takagawa et al.,64 and Seidel et al.,60 where both CO and CO2 were regarded as carbon sources, and the reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) (eqn (30)) reaction rate was included in the model. The second group, Type II, includes the works of McNeil et al.,61 Klier et al.,65 and Ma et al.66 Like Type I, the second group also considered the CO and CO2 hydrogenation reactions for kinetic modeling. However, they did not include the RWGS reaction, as they assumed that the CO2 could not directly be converted into CO during methanol synthesis. The Type III group consists of the developed kinetic models of Kubota et al.,67 Askgaard et al.,68 Skrzypek et al.69 and Vanden Bussche and Froment.70 All of them have considered the CO2 hydrogenation reaction, and through the RWGS reaction CO can be produced but may not take part in the methanol synthesis. The last group, Type IV, the mechanism adopted by Villa et al.,71 proposed that methanol is produced from CO only.
 Fig. 7  Four types of kinetic models in methanol synthesis based on reaction mechanism, reproduced from ref. 60, 63 and 64 for Type I; ref. 61, 65 and 66 for Type II; ref. 67–70 for Type III and ref. 71 for Type IV. The figure is modified from ref. 76. 
Other than kinetic models, others have reported many findings related to changes in catalyst morphology due to the variation of the feed gas composition.72 According to studies by Choi et al.73 on the Cu/ZnO catalyst, the surface is reduced or oxidized, wherein separate sites on the catalyst surface are responsible for CO and CO2 hydrogenation during methanol synthesis. The reduced catalyst, Cu–Zn, is more suitable for CO2 hydrogenation, and the catalyst in the oxidized state Cu–O–Zn is more dominant for CO hydrogenation. Kunkes et al. have investigated the source of CO during the CO2 hydrogenation reaction by thermodynamic isotope effects (TIE) and kinetic isotope effects (KIE).74 They concluded that CO is not generated from methanol decomposition. Instead, it is formed via the RWGS reaction. It was also concluded that methanol synthesis from CO2 does not occur via RWGS and CO hydrogenation reactions, and both the products (MeOH and CO) have different intermediates and as well as having different rate-determining steps (RDS). These theories are further supported by inelastic neutron cation studies, and it suggested that during CO/H2 feed composition the majority of catalyst surface intermediates are hydroxy and methoxy compounds, and in the case of CO2 as a carbon source, the presence of formate compounds is also noticed.75
6.2 Kinetics
Kinetic models were developed based on the rate expressions of all the elementary reactions and the respective reaction parameters ranges. Many microkinetic models have been proposed in the literature, which consist of adsorbed intermediates and as many as 50 elementary reactions. Most of them have considered Langmuir–Hinshelwood–Hougen–Watson (LHHW) or Eley–Rideal mechanisms and one or more rate-determining steps (RDS) for the development of kinetic modeling. In the case of the LHHW reaction, participating reactant atoms or species will get adsorbed first on the catalyst surface and then react to form products. For the Eley–Rideal mechanism, it begins with the adsorption of one atom or species on the catalyst active site, while the other participating reactant remains in the bulk phase, and after they collide with each other, and products are formed.
Throughout the last few decades, researchers have proposed many kinetic models based on different assumptions about reaction mechanisms and reaction parameters. Leonov et al. were the first to present a kinetic model of methanol synthesis catalyzed by a Cu–Zn–Al catalyst, although they did not include the effect of CO2 in the reaction feed.77 Later Villa et al. and Killar et al. developed models including the partial pressure of CO2, but the role of CO2 as a reactant was also omitted by them. The model developed by Villa et al. considered CO as a sole reactant and included a CO2 adsorption term in the model as CO2 gets strongly adsorbed on the catalyst surface at high concentrations. Takagawa and Ohsugi derived empirical rate expressions for all three-methanol synthesis models (eqn (1)–(3)) under a wide scale of operation parameters and included them in their kinetic model.64 Graaf et al.63 have included CO and CO2 hydrogenation reactions and WGS reactions into the model (Table S1†). A total of 48 reaction schemes were derived from the various elementary reactions, and then the model was statistically scrutinized for the best possible kinetic modeling. In 1990, they updated the set of reaction parameters for the kinetic model.78 For their real-life experiments, they have used a spinning basket reactor. Haldor Topsøe developed a commercial MK-101 catalyst. After 30 years also, many authors still use this kinetic model for their simulation studies.
Dybkjaer developed a rate expression for methanol synthesis based on the LHHW mechanism, where H2 is dissociated and adsorbed on one site on the catalyst surface and then reacts with adsorbed CO2 on a nearby active site of the catalyst to form methanol.79 According to this model, H2 and H2O are competing for the same active sites, and the carbonaceous gases (CO and CO2) are adsorbed on different active sites. McNeil et al. developed a rate expression for CO2 hydrogenation based on the available information on reaction mechanisms in the literature in contrast to empirical models based on experimental results.61 Skrzypek et al. experimentally observed that only CO2 is the dominant carbon source during methanol synthesis and included CO2 hydrogenation and the WGS reaction in their kinetic model.69
A kinetic model of methanol synthesis was developed by Vanden Bussche and Froment,70 assuming CO2 as the main reactant, and all the reactions were carried out in a fixed bed reactor catalyzed by ICI 51-2 commercial catalyst.70 In their proposed reaction mechanism, carbonate species were formed on the active site of the catalyst. They showed that the developed model successfully described the methanol formation rate at a wide range of temperature, pressure, feed gas composition, and beyond their parametric study. Kubota et al. also developed a kinetic model by assuming CO2 hydrogenation as a dominant reaction in methanol synthesis. They also compared their experimental yield data generated in the pilot plant study with the model-predicted data and found both were in good agreement.
Gas-phase thermodynamics and surface science studies were used by Askgaard et al.68 to evaluate kinetic parameters of the methanol synthesis kinetic model. After doing experiments under a wide range of reaction conditions, they found that the results were in good agreement with the fitted model.
In 2001, a kinetic model for liquid phase methanol synthesis was developed by Šetinc and Levec,80 and they demonstrated that methanol yield is proportional to the CO2 concentration and it does not depend on CO concentration. Rozovskii and Lin81 adopted two different approaches to developing theoretical kinetic models and fitted experimental results. In order to examine the applicability of their model, they have experimented with two feed gas compositions: one had more CO2 concentration, and the other one had more CO concentration. They reported that both the kinetic models were able to predict the reaction output when CO2-enriched gas feed was used but one of the kinetic models did not follow when a CO-enriched gas feed was used as a reaction mixture.
Lim et al.82 utilized Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/Zr2O3 for the catalytic conversion of a CO/CO2/H2 mixture to methanol. They considered all the 48 elementary reaction rates for kinetic modeling of the whole process and developed equations for each rate-limiting step. They concluded from the parametric studies that among all the elementary reactions: (i) for CO hydrogenation, the surface reactions of methoxy species are RDS, (ii) for CO2 hydrogenation, the formate species hydrogenation is the RDS, and (iii) formate intermediate generation is the RDS for the WGS reaction. Density functional theory (DFT) was used by Grabow and Mavrikaki for developing a microkinetic model to eliminate the uncertainties of the reaction mechanism and choice of active sites.
Henkel updated Graaf's kinetic model for methanol using two types of reactor systems, i.e., a micro fixed bed reactor and a Berty reactor, and did not include CO hydrogenation in his model. RWGS and CO2 hydrogenation reactions were included in the mechanism, and the kinetic expressions were taken from Graaf's kinetic model.62 Portha et al.83 developed kinetic expressions for methanol synthesis from a CO2/H2 mixture based on a dual-site LHHW mechanism adopted from Graaf et al.78 They found a good agreement between the model-predicted values and the experimental values in the range of operational parameters. In 2018 Seidel et al.60 proposed a kinetic model based on LHHW kinetics for methanol synthesis from a CO/CO2/H2 gas mixture in a differential CSTR of a micro-Berty Reactor84 using a Cu/Zn/Al2O3 conventional catalyst. They included CO and CO2 hydrogenation reactions on different active centers of the catalyst surface, and these active centers changed depending on the reaction conditions. The developed model showed good agreement with steady-state and dynamic data for a wide range of CO and CO2 compositions in the feed gas.
In 2014 Park et al. validated their developed kinetic model by doing experiments in a fixed bed reactor with a state of the art commercial Clariant catalyst.85 The kinetic model was based on the combination of Graaf's kinetic model and that developed by Chadwick et al.86 for DME synthesis. Park et al. further studied the work of Lim et al. and developed a kinetic model based on a three-site adsorption method (Cu+, Cu0, ZnO) of a commercial catalyst assuming typical RDS. In their model, they showed that both CO and CO2 take part in the methanol synthesis. The conversion of CO is influenced by the operating conditions (temperature, pressure, GHSV), but CO2 hydrogenation is marginally influenced by those factors due to the WGS reaction. In 2018 Park et al.87 developed a practical and low-cost microkinetic model for methanol synthesis from syngas over a Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst based on the 28 elementary step reactions involved in the CO hydrogenation, CO2 hydrogenation, and WSG reactions. A semiempirical method (UBI-QEP) and ab initio calculations (DFT) were applied to calculate the activation energies and heat of adsorption. The surface reaction of methoxy species (H3CO*) and dissociated hydrogen (H*) species was regarded as the RDS, and the proposed model was very effective and efficient to provide useful information on the operational aspects of catalytic reactions.
Nestler et al. proposed kinetic model-based experiments carried out in a fixed bed reactor.88 They later validated the developed model with the state-of-the-art models in the technologically relevant operating conditions and concluded that the developed model is more comparable with the model developed by Bussche and the Graaf kinetic model is less sensitive than other models. Recently Slotboom et al.76 have made a comparison between the kinetic models developed by Graff et al., Seidel et al.,60 Vanden Bussche and Froment,70 Villa et al.,71 and Ma et al.66 with the same dataset gathered from 234 experiments from two different reaction setups. They have shown that, irrespective of the catalyst and the reactor system (PFR or CSTR), a single kinetic model is enough to predict the reaction outcome. They found that the Graff et al. model fits well and is physically valid but does not satisfactorily predict outside the training dataset and it is the same issue with the kinetic model developed by Vanden Bussche and Froment.70 Seidel et al.60 explained how models can predict data well in terms of mean squared error analysis, although it is a complex method and has highly correlated parameters. Based on the recent literature findings of catalyst active centers and the kinetic model developed by Vanden Bussche and Froment,70 a new kinetic model was developed with six-parameters and it can predict the trends in the experimental data very well when compared with other regression models with more parameters.
7. Methanol synthesis reactors
Next-generation methanol reactor development is focused on higher-scale production where the process intensification principles are employed in order to keep the methanol synthesis process cost-competitive. As was discussed before, methanol synthesis is an exothermic process, and fewer moles of methanol are produced in the system in comparison with the number of gaseous reactant mixtures fed into the system. This phenomenon suggests that the whole methanol synthesis process is economical and efficient using low-temperature and high-pressure reaction conditions.89 With a commercial plant process, the main concern is that the heat removal from the reaction system is efficient for better economic and efficient plant operation as the excess temperature inside the reactor can influence the reaction rate and selectivity. This extra heat leads to the generation of many unwanted by-products and further increases the recycling rate requirement. Among the reactions involved in methanol synthesis, the WGS reaction, CO, and CO2 hydrogenation reactions are exothermic; therefore, a high reactor temperature results in a lower methanol conversion. Therefore, to get a higher methanol yield, the unreacted gas has to be recycled more frequently than for lower reactor temperatures, consequently increasing the recycling ratio. Before recycling the gas, firstly it has to be cooled to condense the product methanol, and then the reacted gas mixtures are replaced with fresh gaseous reactants. In the methanol production facilities, the raw product is a mixture of methanol, water, and some impurities. The by-products of the methanol synthesis include formaldehyde, dimethyl ether (DME), formic acid, and ketones.90–92 According to Dybkjær et al., in most cases, in normal reaction conditions (225 °C, 7.5 MPa) in traditional reactors, the carbon conversion cannot exceed the thermodynamic limit, which is approximately 60%.79 The current industrial-scale methanol synthesis process is classified according to the reaction pressure used: (1) high-pressure process (25–30 MPa), (2) medium pressure process (10–25 MPa), and (3) low-pressure process (5–10 MPa).
Two existing reactor technologies for methanol synthesis are gas phase and liquid phase technologies. Among the gas phase technologies adopted in industry or research labs, the methanol synthesis is carried out mainly in two types of reactors, i.e., adiabatic and isothermal reactors. In the case of liquid-phase synthesis of methanol, slurry reactors are used.
7.1. Adiabatic reactors
Adiabatic reactors are not provided with external cooling systems within their reaction zone. Various types of adiabatic reactors are operational, such as (i) multibed quench arrangement with direct cooling (ARC, lozenge, collect–mix–distribute (CMD)); and (ii) multibed configuration with heat transfer (indirect cooling). The basic configuration of methanol synthesis reactors is shown in Fig. 8. The adiabatic system combines fixed beds in a series with attached heat removal facilities in a single pressurized cell. In practice, up to five catalyst beds have been used in this quench configuration. This process is straightforward as some portion of the gaseous reactant is preheated and fed into the reactor from the top of the reactor for better conversion. To achieve high methanol selectivity and high reactant conversion, the excess heat generated in the reactor should be removed by cold feeding the rest of the reactants into the reactor by distributing the catalyst in the array of catalyst beds. Despite the simplicity of the quenching reactor, it suffers from nonuniform utilization of catalytic beds. The reactants fed from the top can only access all the catalyst beds, unlike the cold feed introduced in the mid section of the array of catalyst beds. The low cost of installation and the higher production capacity makes the adiabatic reactors more advantageous than the rest. But the high equilibrium temperatures result in very low per cycle conversions. Therefore, a high recycle ratio, high diluted reactant, and a large volume of catalyst are required for efficient operation. At present, the quench reactor technology is considered obsolete and not very suitable for higher capacity operations.
 Fig. 8  Basic configuration of the adiabatic methanol synthesis reactor. 
The low-pressure quench converter developed by Johnson Matthey (formerly known as ICI) is the most common methanol reactor system found in the industry.93,94 A single catalyst bed (Cu–Zn–Al2O3) is used for the conversion of syngas at 270 °C and a pressure range of 50–100 bar. Cooling gas is distributed into the catalyst through distributors, called lozenges, and it runs horizontally across the catalyst beds. Recycling of unconverted gases along with fresh reactants has eliminated the requirement of external heat addition and favored optimized reactor design. This type of reactor configuration is simple and reliable, and up to 3000 tons per day (TPD) reaction facilities can be established with this technology. Although excellent recovery and reuse of heat is one of the advantages of this type of converter, irregular flux distribution is a very common phenomenon due to variable void generation along the catalyst bed. A high recycle ratio is required for quench converters as the conversion is low.
A collect–mix–distribute reactor (CMD) design is proposed by Haldor Topsoe to modify the quenching reactor further. Haldor Topsoe and Kellogg (presently part of KBR) have offered the concept of a reactor system for higher capacities of 1000 TPD in a single line which are multi-stage adiabatic fixed bed reactors with inter-stage cooling provided.95 Each catalyst bed is accommodated in different reactors, and the reactors are separated by inter-cooling beams. Unlike the Johnson Matthey setup, in this process, the reactant gas mixture is fed in at the bottom of the reactor, and it passes through the first catalyst bed (Fig. 9). Then the gas exiting from the top of the catalyst bed is mixed with cold quench gas and supplied further to the second catalyst bed. This configuration allows the reactor to run at optimum temperature and produces a higher conversion per pass of reactant and prolonged catalyst life.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the Haldor Topsoe reactor. 
Kellogg, Brown and Root have designed converters featuring more than one adiabatic fixed bed reactor in series.96 Parts of catalyst layers are accommodated into different reactor vessels, and intercoolers are also provided between the reactors. This type of reactor system is a spherical geometry that requires a less complicated design for heat transfer and flow distribution (Fig. 10).97 The catalyst is loaded in between the external wall and the inner spherical shell of the reactor. The reactant flows radially from the outer sphere to the inner sphere through the catalyst layer, which results in a lower pressure drop and less investment for both process and reactor operations. Therefore, the kinetic driving force is increased for this kind of reactor setup, and the required catalyst volume is significantly less than for the simple quench reactor for similar yields. The requirement of less thick walls to construct this type of reactor makes the process setup, including reactor construction, susbstantially cheaper.98 Catalyst bed shrinkage is a common phenomenon during the reactor start-up, and the formation of voids in the bed is also very common. Therefore, it leads to irregular flow distribution through the reactor. To terminate the void formation, a very small quantity of catalyst (10% of total catalyst volume) is packed initially in the reactor. When the catalyst slips down, it occupies the voids in the catalyst bed. This reactor concept requires a very simple design of the heat exchanger and gas distributor. Kellogg, Brown and Root solutions have shown higher yields than any quench reactors, and kt also requires less recycling of reaction stream.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the Kellogg, Brown and Root reactor. The figure is reproduced from ref. 98. 
The Toyo Engineering Corporation (TEC), along with Mitsui Toatso Chemicals (MTC), jointly developed a multistage radial flow reactor with intermediate cooling using a bayonet boiler tube for methanol synthesis named multistage radial flow (MRF-Z®).99,100 This indirect cooling system is capable of keeping the reaction temperature close to the path of the maximum rate of the reaction curve (Fig. 11). Therefore, the optimal per-pass conversion can be achieved with 30% less catalyst volume employed in the concentric beds when compared with the quench converters for the same output. A heat recovery system is also employed to produce steam, which is used for generating syngas. The produced steam is equivalent to approximately 50% of the total steam required for steam reforming to generate syngas for methanol synthesis. The large-scale MRF-Z® reactor concept was first implemented in 1930, and a new, improved version of this type of reactor was built by TEC in China to convert acetylene off-gas into methanol. A 5000–6000 TPD capacity reactor can be made based upon the said reactor technology.101 The catalyst recovery and feeding are very simple for this type of reactor geometry. The pressure drop (<0.5 bar) across the catalyst bed in the MRF-Z® reactor is minimal because of the radial flow configuration, and it is ten times less than that experienced in the axial flow configuration.102 Easy scaleup is another advantage of this type of configuration, as only the reactor height needs to be increased without changing the reactor diameter. These modifications do not affect the pressure drop across the catalyst bed. At present the MRF-Z® reactor is employed in as many as six of TEC's methanol projects.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the Toyo MRF reactor. 
Casale, in collaboration with ICI, developed a quench-cooled converter, namely the Advance Reactor Concept (ARC) (Fig. 12).94 This type of reactor is generally introduced to modernize quench-lozenge technology-based reactors, and the upgrading can easily increase methanol output by 20% in comparison with quench technology. Unlike the adiabatic bed reactors, here the catalyst bed is separated into different sections by distribution plates. Therefore, the quench gas is very effectively distributed in the reactor via distribution plates.
 Fig. 12  ARC converter (Casale SA). The figure is reproduced from ref. 94. 
7.2 Isothermal reactor systems
The primary purpose of an isothermal reactor is to keep the reaction temperature at a controlled level through cooling and maintaining a quasi-isothermal process. Compared with the adiabatic reactors, the isothermal reactor reduces the reaction temperature by cooling the catalyst, reaction gas, and reactor. The heat removal is done indirectly by not diluting the reaction gas. The two most utilized technologies adopted for the isothermal reactors are (i) gas-assisted cooling (or gas-cooled reactor (GCR)), and (ii) heat removal through steam generation (boiling water reactor (BWR)). The main advantages of these types of reactor are the longer lifetime of the catalyst, the higher conversion due to the methanol selective reaction conditions, which are close to reaction equilibrium, and the energy recovered by steam generation that is used for syngas feed generation.
7.3 Quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactor
The most adopted reactor systems in the industry for methanol synthesis are the quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactors (SRF), which have replaced the first-generation quench-type reactors. The advantages of this SRF over the quench type are the higher utilization of active catalyst sites, efficient heat recovery, and temperature control. In the 1970s, Lurgi (now part of Air Liquide) was the first to introduce the SRF reactor into the industry for methanol synthesis.103 This fixed bed reactor's geometry is a shell and tube type, and the same configuration is also used for the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) reaction. The catalyst is loaded in the tube side, and feed gas flows in the axial direction through the catalyst-packed tubes, whereas cooling water is supplied in the reactor's shell side. Excess heat is recovered in the form of medium-pressure steam,104 and the reactor temperature is controlled by the pressure of steam. The steam is generated at 40–50 bar, and it is generally reused in the compression section or in the methanol distillation process. The typical SRF operating conditions are in the range of 230–265 °C and 5–10 MPa. This type of reactor can generate high methanol yields at low recycle ratios. Currently, similar technologies are offered by Haldor Topsoe105 and Johnson Matthey Davy technologies.93 The highest single-pass capacity of SRF reactor is limited to 1500–2200 TPD (this range purely depends on the syngas activity).102,105 Afterward, many reactor concepts were licensed by Linde, Methanol Casale, Toyo, and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries based on the quasi-isothermal fixed bed reactor technology and are discussed in the following.

7.3.1 Mega methanol reactor. 
In order to increase the methanol production capacity, Lurgi developed a two-stage converter system by combining two methanol reactors (the Lurgi combi-forming approach).100,106 The first reactor is operated at high temperature and high space velocities as the aim of this step is only the partial conversion of syngas to methanol (Fig. 13). The benefit of this step is the generation of high-pressure steam, which saves a lot of energy costs. After that, the partially converted syngas is directed towards the second reactor, which operates at a lower reaction rate. But here, the partially converted syngas is fed through the shell side of the second reactor, and fresh feed for the first reactor flows through the tubes in a counter-current manner. This arrangement of feed flow enables the preservation of the driving force for the reaction and efficient energy heat recovery to reduce production costs. Up to 3000 TPD plant capacity can be built in a single vessel, but more than that requires two separate converters.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the Lurgi mega reactor. 


7.3.2 Linde variobar process. 
This process is based on the coil-wound heat exchanger process, where helical tubes are inserted into the catalyst bed. Cooling or boiling water is passed through these coils, and this type of arrangement exhibits indirect heat exchange.107 The boiling water travels through the coils by natural draft to reach a steam dram placed at the reactor's top. This reactor geometry allows 50% more catalyst loading when compared with other reactors. The heating and cooling tubes help to reach the maximum possible reaction rate by maintaining the optimum temperature profile. This type of reactor configuration is applicable for both exothermic and endothermic reactions, which include liquid/liquid, gas/liquid, and gas/gas systems. Its main advantages are high yield, enhanced life of the catalyst, high selectivity, lower operation cost, and heat recovery. Due to the helical structure of the heat exchanger, the stress is minimized on the cooling tubes due to an uneven temperature in the catalyst bed. The heat transfer rate is more than that when the catalyst is placed in the straight tubes, like Lurgi's process, and this efficient heat transfer allows the process to operate in a minimum reaction volume. Therefore, fewer cooling areas are needed to run the process efficiently, making the construction of the reactor cheap. A methanol production capacity as high as 4000 TPD can be established with the Linde Variobar process (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the Linde Variobar process reactor. 


7.3.3 Mitsubishi Gas Chemical (MGC)/Mitsubishi Heavy Industry (MHI) super converter. 
This type of super converter was jointly developed by MGC and MHI. The reactor design includes the features and advantages of both the steam-raising tubular reactor and the gas cooling reactor by utilizing a double-tubular (or even triple tubular) configuration in a boiling water vessel.108 Initially, the fresh reaction mixture is fed upward through the inner tubes; then, it is directed to flow downwards and pass through the catalyst bed placed in the outer tube.109 While passing through the inner tube section, the reaction mixture is preheated, which helps to attain the desired temperature profile along the length of the catalyst bed with a higher temperature near the inlet (250–260 °C) that gradually declines at the outlet of the reactor (240–250 °C). Such temperature profile helps to attain high syngas conversion and methanol selectivity (approximately 14% methanol yield is achievable). The main advantages of MGC/MHI reactor geometry are safe operating conditions and highly stable mechanical stability (Fig. 15).110
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the Mitsubishi gas chemical reactor. 


7.3.4 Isothermal methanol converter (IMC). 
The isothermal methanol converter was developed by Casale SA. The excess heat of the reaction is extracted by a number of plates surrounding the catalyst, which provide an adequate heat exchange surface area. The cooling medium can be water, syngas, or some other fluids, and it flows inside those plates. Independent control of temperature of desired section of the reactor is made possible by changing the flow of the cooling fluid.111 As a result, this quasi-isothermal temperature profile can be modified to follow the maximum achievable reaction rate curve.112,113 The reactor construction is very simple and can be scaled up easily. The efficient heat recovery by generating steam makes the process more energy-efficient, and by changing the saturated steam pressure, the catalyst temperature can be set according to the process requirement. The other advantages of the IMC reactor are the easy reactor maintenance and that the handling of the catalyst loading/unloading is very easy; furthermore, due to the excellent reactor temperature control, the catalyst life is increased. The axial flow configuration of the process is preferred for upscaling the capacity up to 2000 TPD,114 and for higher capacities up to 8000–10000 TPD in a single reactor the axial–radial flow configuration is adopted.114,115 In the axial–radial configuration, the feed gas experiences a minute pressure drop of less than one bar as the gas has to cross one catalyst bed (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the isothermal methanol converter (IMC). 


7.3.5 Davy process technology. 
This is one of the advanced methanol synthesis technologies developed by Davy Process Technology (DPT), and now it has been acquired by Johnson Matthey (JM).116 JM is licensing a number of technologies related to methanol synthesis. They developed three different configurations of the converter:
(i) Axial steam-raising convertor (A-SRC): This reactor geometry is a simple shell-and-tube configuration with an axial counter-current flow. Pressurized syngas is introduced from the top of the A-SRC which moves downward through catalyst-packed pipes. For heat recovery purposes, water from the steam drum enters the base of the reactor and, by absorbing the excess heat of reaction, generates steam.
(ii) Radial steam-raising convertor (R-SRC): This is the alternative configuration where syngas flows radially across the catalyst beds placed in the shell side of the reactor. Heat recovery is made by the steam generation on the tube side of the reactor. This configuration is particularly very useful for large-scale methanol production.
(iii) Tube-cooled converter (TCC): In this configuration, the fresh feed gas is used to cool down the catalyst packed in the tubes. Heated syngas then flows downward through catalyst-packed tubes and transfers heat with the fresh feed flowing upward.

7.4 Gas-phase fluidized bed converters
In 1993, the Petroleum Endowment Centre and the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) in Japan started a project to reduce the process cost of methanol synthesis from syngas. They adopted and optimized a fluidized bed converter system where catalyst particles of 50–60 μm are fluidized by flowing fresh feed gas at a certain velocity from the bottom. Cooling pipes are also introduced to regulate the reaction temperature and heat recovery. The easy catalyst recovery allows the process to operate at stable and constant operating conditions.
7.5 Liquid phase technologies
The efficiency of the above gas-phase heterogeneous catalyzed process for methanol synthesis is not high enough. Also, the excess heat generated during the reaction of methanol synthesis from syngas creates numerous difficulties in the designing part of the process, negatively influences the process characteristics and causes rapid catalyst deactivation. To circumvent these difficulties, the traditional gas–solid catalyst process can be replaced by specially designed processes for the effective conduction of high exothermic reactions. The well-studied three-phase system, i.e., gas–liquid–solid, has been applied in methanol and DME synthesis in recent years.117,118 The most promising technologies employ fine solid catalysts (nanosized or ultrafine) suspended in the liquid phase in a slurry reactor. It is generally seen that a gas phase syngas conversion process requires a recycle ratio of 5:1 whereas a liquid phase process needs only a recycle ratio of 1:1 to 2:1.
During 1975 to 1978, the US Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), in cooperation with Chemical Systems, Inc., developed the early slurry technology for methanol synthesis,119 which was further improved by Air Products and Chemicals.120 The process involves an inert liquid phase, and marketed under the trademark LPMEOH. A different version of this technology has already been patented.119,121–124 US Department of Energy also lent financial support for further development during 1982–2003. To prepare the slurry, a fine heterogeneous catalyst of concentration of 10–30% is dispersed in the inert medium. Various commercially available catalysts have been used for the preparation of the slurry phase, such as ternary systems of different ratios of CuO–ZnO–Al2O3 (C302, BASF S3-85, BASF S3-86, ICI, BT-d) and quaternary systems of CuO–ZnOAl2O3/SiO2 (United Catalyst, EPJ-25) or CuO–ZnO–Al2O3/graphite (Haldor Topsoe, MK-101).125–129 The choice of the liquid dispersion medium is equally important as the physical properties of the medium determine the heat and mass transfer characteristics. The liquid phase also influences the reaction rate, catalyst stability, and even catalyst activation energy.130 The most appropriate dispersion phases are naphthenes and paraffins, whereas the list of inappropriate dispersion media includes aromatic hydrocarbons121,122 and naphthalene derivatives.131 Mineral oils with the combination of naphthenes and paraffins are the most used dispersion media for methanol synthesis. However, to improve the CO conversion further, the thermodynamic limitations need to be eliminated, and it is only possible by lowering the reaction temperature. But currently, no available catalyst can actively participate in methanol synthesis at this low temperature, but a change in reaction chemistry by involving an active dispersion medium that can take part in the reaction cycle can fulfil the purpose. In 1997, based on the LPMEOH technology, a commercial methanol facility at a rate of 300000 L per day (LPD) was built at Eastman Chemicals’ coal gasification complex (Kingsport, Tennessee, USA). The process can be operated in a continuous or discontinuous manner and an internal heat exchanger is provided to extract heat from the mineral oil to control reactor temperature.132
Roberts’ research group was the first to observe the effect of participation of the liquid dispersed phase in the reaction cycle of methanol synthesis.131,133 Different alcohols such as methanol, ethanol, butanol, etc., are the most preferred active liquid phases for methanol synthesis in a slurry reactor. Methanol is used as a dispersion medium or generated in situ from syngas and can take part in the reaction cycle, i.e., first carbonylation reaction (eqn (46)) to synthesize methyl formate, which is then hydrogenated in the next step producing two molecules of methanol.134–138 CH3OH + CO → HCOOCH3(46) HCOOCH3 + H2 → 2CH3OH(47)
In another approach of the three-phase process involving the active liquid phase, the methanol synthesis takes place through the formation of formic acid esters. The reaction cycle proceeds through the following steps; (i) formic acid formation from CO and H2, (ii) alkyl formate synthesis from the esterification reaction of formic acid and alcohol, (iii) again methanol synthesis by the hydrogenation of esters and release of one alcohol molecule, and (iv) the formation of CO2 and H2 by a water–gas shift reaction as given below: CO2 + H2 ↔ HCOOH(48) HCOOH + ROH ↔ HCOOR + H2O(49) HCOOR + 2H2 → CH3OH + ROH(50) CO + H2O → CO2 + H2(51)
The highest initial conversion of syngas during methanol synthesis is achieved through the methyl formate route, and the catalyst involved in this reaction path was shown to be stable under reaction conditions.139 By utilizing this embodiment, it was possible to achieve a five to six times higher yield of methanol from syngas than in the conventional gas-phase process.140 Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) in New York (USA) demonstrated a process for methanol synthesis through the methyl formate route under low temperature and low pressure (<5 MPa) reaction conditions. The process claimed to achieve 90% syngas conversion, and recycling of unreacted gas was not necessary. In 1998, AMOCO developed a mini-pilot plant at the Naperville R&D Center based on a low temperature and low-pressure reaction condition. But they encountered several problems such as the inefficient recovery of low-quality heat, higher operating costs due to catalyst poisoning, and the larger reactor size than fixed bed reactors due to low conversion. Pittsburg University also proposed a co-current slurry medium-based process based on the methyl formate route operating at low temperatures (100–200 °C). They achieved syngas conversion up to 90% with 98% methanol selectivity. At the optimized operation conditions (pressure 50 bar and temperature of 170 °C), methyl formate was the limiting reactant, and therefore the whole process was not considered for scaleup.
The coal-derived syngas is not suitable to be used as feedstock in gas-phase fixed-bed reactors as the H/C ratio is low, and this promotes coke generation on the catalyst surface.141 A trickle bed reactor (TBR) is proposed as a solution to this problem as it combines the advantages of both fixed bed reactors and slurry phase reactors. In the TBR configuration, the catalyst is kept as fixed bed style, but the gas–liquid stream flows in a co-current fashion through the catalyst bed. TBR reactors offer more significant heat removal, and the use of coal-based syngas is possible. The improved gas phase velocity is useful to enhance the production rate. The produced methanol is recovered by the liquid phase and taken out of the reaction system responsible for higher syngas conversion due to mass action law. However, the reaction modeling and scaling up are the only issues related to these TBR and slurry reactors.
Catalytic Advanced Technologies, USA, developed a combination of catalysts that was capable of converting methane directly into methanol.142 The proposed process was the liquid phase oxidative process where mercury(II) compounds as catalyst and concentrated sulphuric acid as an oxidant were used. The yield and selectivity of methanol were 50% and 85%, respectively. However, both the oxidant and the catalyst are not environmentally friendly. A new active, stable, and highly selective catalyst was developed, i.e., platinum complex ((2,2-bipyridimine)PtCl2) to convert methyl esters. By this method, 72% methane was converted to methyl-bisulfate, which is subsequently hydrolyzed to methanol and sulphuric acid.
Despite many advantages of the slurry technology, it suffers from some demerits, such as a higher rate of catalyst deactivation compared with the gas-phase process,143,144 carbon deposition on the catalyst surface by a Boudouard reaction, or via decomposition of the mineral oil-based liquid phase, and copper and alumina leaching.144
7.6 Membrane reactors
The in situ removal of the condensable products from the system, such as methanol and H2O, is necessary to increase the methanol yield, as by doing so, the equilibrium shifts towards the forward direction. The membrane reactor (MR) satisfies this requirement by selectively removing a few reaction products from the system. This process integration of the methanol synthesis and recovery makes room for further improvement in methanol yield and capital investment reduction.144 Water is a co-product of the methanol synthesis process and by installing a water-permeable membrane in the fixed bed reactor, the methanol yield increases. It also allows the reaction to operate at lower temperatures and pressures. This type of membrane process was demonstrated by Sea and Lee to produce methanol from CO2 and H2, where a silica/alumina composite-based membrane was used. They achieved 150% higher yield of methanol than the conventional reactors.145
Struis et al. were the first to suggest the application of MR in methanol synthesis in a Nafion membrane reactor at 0.43 MPa and 200 °C.146 The disadvantage of the Nafion membranes is their instability above 200 °C, which restricts their use in methanol synthesis. Recently more work has been published with zeolite-based membranes, and high-performance membranes are also manufactured for industrial purposes. In 2003, Menendez et al. published a patent on the use of a zeolite membrane reactor for the production of methanol from syngas.147 Being inorganic materials, zeolites can withstand a higher temperature than polymeric membranes. Gallucci et al. concluded from their methanol synthesis study that a zeolite membrane reactor provides a higher methanol yield than a conventional fixed bed reactor.148 Wang et al. investigated zeolite A and sodalite (SOD) membrane reactors for the selective removal of water from the product mixture of methanol, DME, and dimethyl carbonate synthesized from CO2 hydrogenation. They found a high separation factor in the temperature range of 125–200 °C.149 Raso et al. studied the separation of H2O from the H2O/H2/CO2 mixture in the methanol synthesis from CO2 and compared several zeolite membranes such as mordenite, zeolite A, zeolite T, Ti-chabazite, and chabazite. They found that zeolite A provides the best H2O separation.150 Gallucci et al. used a zeolite-based membrane reactor for methanol synthesis from CO2 and H2 to establish that MR showed a higher conversion of CO2 than a conventional reactor (Fig. 17).151
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic flow diagram of the experimental reaction system. (b) Scheme of the membrane reactor. (c) Scheme of the traditional reactor. Figure adapted from Gallucci et al. 2004.151 
Rahimpour et al.152 studied methanol synthesis coupled with the dehydrogenation of cyclohexane to benzene in a thermally coupled double-membrane reactor (TCDMR) in a co-current flow (Fig. 18). The TCDMR was fitted with two Pd/Ag membranes. One was for H2 permeation from the feed syngas side (inner tube) to the exothermic side and the other membrane was provided to separate pure hydrogen from the endothermic side. They also compared the performance of the TCDMR with a thermally coupled membrane reactor (TCMR, Fig. 19) and conventional reactor (CR) at identical operating conditions. The simulation results suggested that utilizing the TCDMR for methanol and pure hydrogen production is beneficial.
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the co-current operation in the thermally coupled double-membrane reactor (TCDMR). Figure adapted from Rahimpour et al.152 
 Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the co-current operation in the thermally coupled membrane reactor (TCMR). Figure adapted from ref. 152. 
7.7 Innovative reactor design
Due to the rise in methanol prices in the international market, it is highly recommended to enhance the performance of conventional methanol synthesis reactors. Wagialla et al. studied a fluidized-bed reactor to produce methanol and recorded a 30% jump in the methanol production rate.153 Rahimpour also adapted the two-stage methanol production process consisting of gas-cooled and water-cooled reactors for methanol synthesis. He reported a higher methanol yield along with prolonged catalyst life compared with single-stage water-cooled reactors.154
As discussed in previous sections, among two methanol synthesis routes from CO2, the indirect route mainly comprises three processes: synthesis gas preparation (reforming unit), methanol synthesis, and purification blocks. It is reported that the syngas preparation and compression section typically consume more than 50–60% of the total capital investments cost of methanol.155 This indirect methanol synthesis route is also called the CAMERE (carbon dioxide hydrogenation to methanol via a reverse water–gas shift reaction). This process was proposed because of low CO2 conversion over the traditional methanol synthesis catalyst (Cu/ZnO/Al2O3) during the direct synthesis process. Samimi et al.155 optimized and modeled the CAMERE process for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation. In the process, firstly, CO2 is hydrogenated to produce syngas via a RWGS reaction over a Ni/Al11O19 catalyst, and secondly the produced syngas is converted into methanol in another reactor. The inner tube of the methanol synthesis reactor was coated with a water perm-selective membrane for the removal of reaction-generated water molecules. A two-dimensional model was solved by finite-difference procedure to evaluate the performance of the CAMERE process. After comparing the results of the conventional route (syngas sourced from coal and natural gas) and the CAMERE process; the latter process achieved a 20.8% higher methanol production rate.
Mirvakili et al. studied the conventional gas-cooled reactor for methanol synthesis to investigate the formation of condensate inside the reactor.156 Mirvakili et al. used CFD to analyze the distribution of temperature and gas flow inside the reactor. They found that the unsuitable distribution of flow and temperature in the shell side of the gas-cooled reactor results in condensate formation. The condensate (methanol and water) leads to the deactivation of catalyst and reduction of process efficiency. To eliminate the problems associated with the gas-cooled reactors, Rahmatmand et al. proposed a novel reactor configuration called adiabatic and plate water-cooled reactors (APW) as an alternative to the two-stage conventional process consisting of water-cooled and gas-cooled reactors (Fig. 20).157 In the APW configuration, the gas-cooled reactor is replaced by two adiabatic reactors. In between the adiabatic reactors, a separator and a condenser are located, and the water-cooled reactor design is a plate heat exchanger that consists of three sections fitted with a different number of plates. The gas flow rate through each stage of the process is kept optimized to maintain the temperature and pressure in each section uniformly identical. The advantages of the APW reactor configurations are: low-pressure drop, high cooling capacity of the water-cooled reactor, higher conversion, improved catalyst life and elimination of condensate formation. They concluded that the APW configuration enhances the methanol production rate by 12.2% in comparison with conventional reactors.
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of adiabatic and plate water-cooled reactors (APW). The figure is adapted from Rahmatmand et al.157 
Keshavarz et al. proposed a novel configuration (NC) of Lurgi mega-methanol plants to increase methanol production (Fig. 21).158 They modified the gas-cooled reactor (2nd reactor in Fig. 13) of the conventional dual-type configuration of the Lurgi mega-methanol plant. In the NC's gas-cooled reactor, an empty section (mesh side) is added around each tube where methanol and water condensation occurs. The condensation occurs due to the heat removal by the cooling gas flowing in the gas-cooled second reactor. According to Le Chatelier's principle, removing water and methanol from the gaseous reaction mixture results in more methanol yield in the NC. Keshavarz et al. reported an increase in H2 and CO conversions of about 5% and 6.1%, respectively, using the NC, compared with the conventional configuration (CC). It means less gas recycling is required for the NC, and 11.5% less CO2 emission is reported for the NC. All of the above benefits of the NC make it an environmentally friendly configuration (Fig. 21) (Table 2).
 Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of the novel configuration (NC) of the second reactor of the Lurgi mega reactor. The figure is reproduced from ref. 158. 
Table 2 Comparison of different methanol synthesis reactors




Reactor
Company
Specifications
Operational parameters
Capacity (t per day)
Remarks
Ref.




Low-pressure quench converter
Johnson Matthey (formerly known as ICI)
• Adiabatic fixed bed quench type reactor
270 °C
3000
• High recycle ratio required as conversion is low

93 and 94




• Reaction mixture flow in a radial or axial direction
5–10 MPa










• Radial direction: complex internal design












• Axial direction: simple but large volume










Collect–mix–distribute reactor (CMD)
Haldor Topsoe
• Multi-stage adiabatic fixed bed reactor
290 °C
10000
• High conversion per pass of reactant

95 and 159






• Collect–mix–distribute reactor
5–10 MPa


• Prolonged catalyst life due to better temperature control








• Radial flow of gas mixture to catalyst bed and axial flow to quench










Kellogg, Brown and Root reactor
Kellogg, Brown and Root
• Adiabatic quench reactors in series


10000
• Very simple construction

96





• Spherical reactor geometry provides good heat distribution




• Highest yield among quench reactors

97





• Radial reactant flow of reaction mixture from outside to inner shell







98



Multistage radial flow (MRF-Z®)
Toyo Engineering Corporation (TEC) & Mitsui Toatso Chemicals (MTC)
• Multistage radial flow reactor
240–260
5000–6000
• Simple geometry

99 and 100




• Intermediate cooling using a bayonet boiler tube
10 MPa


• Easy scale up only by increasing reactor height

101





• Heat recovery by generating steam




• Good temperature control

102





• Radial flow of reaction gas mixture with concentric catalyst beds




• 30% smaller catalyst bed compared with a conventional quench reactor












• Low pressure drop




Advance reactor concept (ARC)
Casale, in collaboration with ICI
• Unlike the adiabatic bed reactor geometry
240–290
3000
• This upgrading can easily increase methanol output by 20% in comparison with quench technology

94





• Catalyst bed is separated into different sections by distribution plates
8–9 MPa








Single stage
Lurgi
• Single indirectly cooled reactor
255–270
1500–2200
• Energy efficient

103





• Quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactor (SRF)
5–10 MPa


• Easy to operate and maintain

104





• Shell and tube configuration with catalyst on the tube side







91





• Reaction mixture flow is axial










Mega methanol
Lurgi
• Combination of gas-cooled convertor (GCC) and steam raising converter (SRC)
220–270
5000–10000
• High conversion efficiency

100 and 106




• Catalyst is placed at the shell side
7.5 MPa


• Half recycle ratio compared with single-stage SRC






• Reaction mixture flow is axial




• Lower investment cost due to smaller SRC




Variobar
Linde
• Quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactors (SRF)
240–280
4000
• Efficient cooling

107 and 160 and 100




• Catalyst is placed at the shell side
8–10 MPa


• Reactor configuration is optimal for both exothermic and endothermic reactions






• Reaction mixture flow is axial




• High yield, enhanced life of the catalyst, high selectivity, lower operation cost, and heat recovery






• Helical tubes inserted through the catalyst bed










Super converter
MGC and MHI
• Combination of gas-cooled convertor (GCC) and steam raising converter (SRC)
190–270


• High syngas conversion and MeOH selectivity

108





• Double-walled tube and shell reactor
5.5–10 MPa


• Safe

109





• Feed-gas as coolant in inner tubes







110





• Boiling water as coolant on the shell side












• Reaction between inner and outer tube












• Reaction mixture flow is axial










Isothermal methanol converter (IMC)
Casale SA
• Quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactor (SRF)
225–280
7000–10000
• Energy efficient

111





• Catalyst is placed at the shell side
6.5–9 MPa


• Easy operation and maintenance of reactor

112 and 113




• A number of plates surrounding the catalyst remove heat




• Excellent catalyst life

114 and 115




• Reaction mixture flow is axial/radial




• Higher yield of MeOH




LPMEOH
Air Products and Chemicals
• Type of slurry reactor
215
235 (demo plant)
• Requires lower recycle ratio (1:1 to 1:2)

117 and 118




• Catalyst is placed in the shell side
3–5 MPa


• Can be run in continuous or batch manner

120





• Reaction mixture flow is axial







121 and 122




• Internal heat exchanger is provided to remove heat from the reaction medium










Membrane reactor
Under development by various researchers
• Integration of methanol synthesis and recovery process
200–240
Lab-scale experiments
• Methanol recovery improves methanol yield and capital investment reduction

145





• Methanol synthesis can be coupled with other product synthesis
0.5 MPa


• Economic process and further development is going on

146














147














152





8. Catalysis
8.1 Historical perspective
In the 1920s, BASF was the first company to develop a syngas-based methanol synthesis catalyst, i.e., ZnO–Cr2O3. The reaction was operated at very harsh operating conditions (temperature in the range of 300–400 °C and pressure in the range of 25–35 MPa). Later, ICI developed a technology to produce methanol under milder reaction conditions such as a temperature of 220–300 °C and a pressure of 5–10 MPa over Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 (CZA) catalyst, and since then, this ICI-developed process has dominated the industry.161–165 The alumina support of the Cu–Zn based catalyst has made it thermally stable. Later, several modified versions of the catalyst with different atomic ratios were adopted by other companies for the methanol synthesis process (see Table 3).
Table 3 Composition of various popular methanol synthesis CZA catalysts manufactured by different companies




Manufacturer
Cu (%)
Zn (%)
Al (%)
Other metals (%)




BASF
38.5
48.8
12.9




ICI
20–35
15–50
4–20
Mg


IFP
45–70
15–35
4–20
Zr (2–18)


Shell
71
24


Rare earth oxide (5)


Dupont
50
19
31




Süd Chemie
65
22
12




Haldor Topsoe MK-121
>55
21–25
8–10




United Catalyst
62
21
17






The CZA catalyst has a high vulnerability towards poisoning as copper is likely to be poisoned easily. Copper is very susceptible to chlorine and sulfur compounds. The sulfur species concentration in the syngas should be limited to less than 0.5 ppmv in the feed gas, and thus the presence of ZnO in the CZA catalyst further reduces the effect of sulfur poisoning. But a sulfur concentration above 0.8 wt% deactivates the catalyst permanently.90 Carbonyl sulfide (COS) is excluded from this limit as its presence does not poison the catalyst in the range of 0.6–9 ppm in the gas state. The CZA catalyst does not show COS adsorption or dissociation under methanol synthesis operating conditions.91 But the limit of chlorine content in any form in the feed gas should be less than 1 ppb as it spontaneously deactivates the catalyst through strongly reacting with Cu and additionally promotes sulfur poisoning.166 Other than chlorine and sulfur, water produced as a by-product in the methanol synthesis can prematurely deactivate the catalyst by oxidation of Cu species and ZnO agglomeration. Therefore, it promotes Cu crystallization and destroys the catalyst's matrix. Besides the poisoning of the catalyst, sintering of the Cu atoms occurs at higher temperatures, and copper crystals are formed. The maximum operating temperature of the Cu–ZnO-based catalysts is 300 °C.91 Therefore, depending on the above discussion, a highly active and selective catalyst must possess the following properties:
1. It should have higher ability to activate hydrogen.
2. It should activate the C–O bond of a CO2 or CO molecule without breaking the molecule (to avoid the undesirable methanation reaction route).
3. For the rate-limiting step (RDS), the activation energy must not be more than 15 kcal mol−1 for high conversion at 250 °C.
4. The stable catalyst must not show sintering and reducing properties under reaction conditions.
5. A very short life of intermediate metal methoxide is desirable to avoid surface poisoning.
6. The use of iron, alumina, nickel, and alkali metals should not be made to avoid side reactions and/or reduction in activity.164
Therefore, considering the catalytic kinetics and all the above properties for having a highly active and selective catalyst, Cu-based catalyst needs to be developed for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation. In general, methanol synthesis from CO2 is operated at 220–300 °C, 5–10 MPa, and depending on the catalyst activity, the selectivity, recycle ratio, and GHSV are varied.
Generally, the most common ingredients of excellent heterogeneous catalysts are an active phase, support, and promoters. The active phase is responsible for the reaction that takes place, and normally, transition metals and their oxides, carbides, sulfides, and nitrides are utilized to serve the purpose. The transition metals have low energy surface electronic states, and therefore they can easily accept or donate electrons only by breaking or forming weak bonds at the metal surface.167 A detailed discussion about the various catalysts utilized for methanol synthesis is discussed in the following.
8.2 Copper-based catalysts
In the last century, the participation of copper as a methanol synthesis catalyst has been investigated by different groups.168–173 Copper-based catalysts are the most active and selective catalysts for methanol synthesis via CO/CO2 hydrogenation. Several researchers claimed that without Cu, CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis is impossible.174 The metallic copper alone is not efficient in methanol synthesis from CO2 as it lags in selectivity, catalytic activity, and stability.175 Therefore, appropriate support is required for the generation and stabilization of the active catalyst phase and it plays a critical role in the interaction between the promoters and major components.
The commercial Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 (CZA) catalyst composition is generally 50–60% Cu, 20–40% ZnO and 10–20% of Al2O3. Al2O3 is a refractory oxide that acts as a structural promoter to provide mechanical stability and also uniformly distributes Cu nanoparticles (NPs) over pore walls. In most Cu-based catalysts, ZnO plays the role of both structural and electronic promoter.176 ZnO acts as a geometric spacer between the copper NPs and improves Cu dispersion.70 Strong interaction between Cu and ZnO also promotes metal dispersion. The interaction is responsible for enhancing the redox profile of the catalyst, which helps the catalyst perform better in methanol synthesis.177 ZnO also provides active sites for the spillover of hydrogen.178–180 ZnO modulates the electronic property, which is one of the reasons for higher metal support interaction (MSI). The lattice electron pair of ZnO actively participates in methanol synthesis.181 Tsang et al. investigated the morphology-dependent electronic interactions between the Cu NPs and the plate-like or rod-like ZnO.182,183 It was found from the EPR and XPX analysis that the plate-like ZnO contains more oxygen defects compared with rod-like ZnO, and at the Cu–ZnO interface, the Schottky–Mott junction promotes electron transfer from the conduction band of the ZnO surface to Cu. They found that among the catalysts they used for comparison, i.e., Cu/plate-ZnO/Al2O3 and Cu/rod-ZnO/Al2O3, the former catalyst gave higher methanol selectivity.149
Many researchers have studied the nature of the active sites present in the copper-based catalyst, such as cluster size, support effects, and oxidation state. The effect of the oxidation state of the copper species affects the reaction rate. Some researchers have reported that the ionic form of Cu+ is the active center for methanol synthesis.184,185 However, another group of researchers found a correlation between the rate of methanol synthesis and the measured Cu0 surface area. Yang et al. have studied the effect of Cu cluster size on the catalyst performance and the response operating conditions.186 They synthesized size-selected Cun catalyst (n = 3, 4, 20) on Al2O3 thin films by the mass-selected cluster deposition technique and found that the Cu4/Al2O3 produces the highest turnover rate for methanol synthesis and by only reducing one atom from Cu4, the Cu3 showed 50% less activity. Another study by the same research group found that ultrasmall Cu clusters, i.e., sub-nanometer Cu4 can perform a high rate of methanol synthesis at atmospheric conditions than larger size catalysts.187
The nature of the support, e.g., ZnO,188 CeO2,189 GaO2,190 ZrO2,187 and Cr2O3,42 also plays a vital role in methanol synthesis by stabilizing the Cu NPs with different oxidation states and cluster size. The supports are also involved in modulating the basicity of catalysts to enhance CO2 adsorption and other intermediates.191,192 The methanol synthesis rate is hugely dependent on the synergic effect between the metal (Cu) and the supporting oxide through forming a metal–oxide interface175 or transforming into a surface bimetallic alloy193 as the active centers (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  The role of oxygen vacancy and hydrogen spillover in methanol synthesis in Cu/ZnO catalyst. 
Kanai and co-workers explained that a few ZnO NPs migrated to the catalyst surface during the reaction and formed a Cu–Zn alloy.194,195 The Cu+ formed in the vicinity of ZnOx is referred to as the main active site for MeOH synthesis. Tisseraud and Le Valant tried to find active sites responsible for MeOH and CO synthesis.196–198 They concluded that the ZnO sites are responsible for CO formation and the ZnOx sites, formed at the interface of the Cu and ZnO by cross-diffusion of ZnO and Cu. So, the number of “contact points” in between the Cu and ZnO is directly correlated to the catalyst activity. Tisseraud et al. investigated the Cu–ZnO synergy in a coprecipitated catalyst to form the active sites responsible for methanol and CO synthesis in the CO2 hydrogenation reaction. Although the total CO2 conversion is correlated with the total number of chemisorbed hydrogens, the active sites for MeOH and CO formation are different. From the knowledge of structural activity analysis to block the active sites for CO formation, they synthesized a core–shell (Cu@ZnOx) and a nano-core–shell (Cu@ZnOx/ZnO) structure, concluding that the core–shell catalyst is the choice of catalyst structure when CO-free MeOH is the priority, and a nano-core–shell catalyst is 25 times more active than a standard core–shell catalyst.
Meanwhile, Al2O3, ZrO2, MgO, TiO2, and many other metal oxides were used as modifiers in the Cu–ZnO-based catalyst systems to improve the catalytic performance in CO2 to methanol synthesis.199,200 Hou et al. studied the CuZnAlZr catalyst for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation.201 They modified the precursor slurry by adding formaldehyde (FA) during the catalyst preparation by the co-precipitation method. They found that FA pre-activation results in Cu2+ reduction to Cu+ in the catalyst precursor, and after reduction of the calcined catalyst highly-dispersed very active Cu0 nanoparticles form, which possess very weak interaction between the metal and the supports. FA pre-activation also produces a highly crystallized semiconductor ZnO phase. The methanol space–time yield of the FA pre-activated CuZnAlZr catalyst was 25% more than the conventional catalyst. Angelo et al. studied the effect of different supports for (M = Al, Ce, Zr, Ce, CeZr) on CuZn catalyst (CuZnMOx) for methanol synthesis from CO2.202 All the catalysts were prepared by the sol–gel and co-precipitation method. After comparing all the catalysts, they found that the 30CuO–ZnO–ZrO2 prepared by the co-precipitation method showed the highest CO2 conversion (23%), with 33% of methanol selectivity at 5 MPa pressure, 280 °C, and 10000 h−1 GHSV.
Yang et al. developed ZrO2-doped CuZnO catalyst by a successive-precipitation method for hydrogenation of CO/CO2.203 They concluded that the active copper species were highly dispersed in the ZrO2-doped CuZnO catalyst, but it is in a very crystalline form in the CuZnO catalyst. The interaction between the copper species with other components in Zr–Cu/ZnO was stronger than that in CuZnO. They achieved the highest methanol yield of 0.22 g mL−1 h−1 with a selectivity of 60.45% at 250 °C. Si et al. prepared Cu–ZnO–CeO2 (CZCe) catalyst by a conventional co-precipitation method for syngas hydrogenation to methanol synthesis.204 They studied the effect of reversible redox metal oxide (ceria) on the distribution of the valence state of the active Cu species. The developed CZCe catalysts exhibited high catalytic performance with a methanol yield of 0.665 g g−1cat h−1 at 230 °C. It was concluded that the high performance of the catalysts was attributed to ceria doping, which also retuned the distribution/concentration of Cu+ and Cu0 species on the catalyst surface and retarded the conversion of Cuδ+(δ > 2) to Cu2+ in the process of the reaction.
The performance of the Cu–ZrO2 catalyst in methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation is well researched by several researchers.172,205–208 It was found that the methanol selectivity is higher for Cu–ZrO2 compared with Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 catalyst, as ZrO2 shows lower hydrophilicity.206 The Cu0–ZrO2 interfacial sites are regarded as the main active sites for the CO2 hydrogenation to methanol reaction, which are formed by the interaction between the metallic Cu NPs and Lewis acid sites (Zr4+).208–210 According to Tada et al., Cu–ZrO2 catalyst can limit the CO formation by suppressing the reverse water–gas shift reaction and methanol decomposition. They further researched the relationship between the Cu–ZrO2 catalyst preparation method and the performance of the catalyst. They found that amorphous ZrO2-supported copper nanoparticles (Cu/a-ZrO2) exhibited overall higher activity in methanol synthesis and selectivity of methanol, compared to Cu/ZrO2.205 The amorphous ZrO2 is responsible for suppressing methanol adsorption and reducing the decomposition of methanol to CO.211 Monoclinic ZrO2 (m-ZrO2) and tetragonal ZrO2 (t-ZrO2) are the different phases responsible for the variation in chemical properties of the ZrO2-based catalyst in the CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis process. Among them, the m-ZrO2 phase possesses a more significant number of Brønsted acid center groups (Zr-OH), stronger Lewis acidic centers (Zr4+ ions), and also stronger Lewis basic sites (O2− ions).212,213 The CO2 adsorption capacity is enhanced by the high number of oxygen vacancy sites on the m-ZrO2 surface, which is the main reason for the higher activity of Cu/m-ZrO2 than the Cu/t-ZrO2 phase.214 In contrast to this claim, Grabowski and his group concluded from their studies that the presence of oxygen vacancies helps to stabilize the unstable t-ZrO2 and Cu+ ion on the catalyst surface, which leads to the increment of methanol synthesis activity.215
Hutchings and coworkers216 studied different methanol synthesis catalysts, including Cu supported on Zn, Mn, Ce, or Mg oxides; the catalysts were produced by two methods, i.e., co-precipitation and supercritical anti-solvent (SAS) precipitation. The Cu–ZnO catalyst prepared by the co-precipitation method performed best under similar operating conditions and showed higher thermal and reactive stability than the rest of the catalyst variants. Uchijima's group194,195,217,218 studied the activity of different copper-based catalyst supports on various metal oxides, i.e., ZnO, Ga2O3, Cr2O3, ZrO2, SiO2, and Al2O3, in methanol synthesis. They concluded that the ratio of Cu+ to Cu0 on the surface of the catalyst is responsible for the specific methanol synthesis activity, and it varies with the metal oxide supports. Allam et al. studied binary (CuO–CeO2, ZnO–CeO2) and ternary catalysts (CuO–ZnO–CeO2, CuO–ZnO–Al2O3) to evaluate the influence of metal dispersion, spinel formation, and surface properties on CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis.219 They found that the catalyst prepared by the polyol method showed improved morphological properties such as a sponge-like shape for the CeO2-containing catalyst. Among all the catalysts, the ternary catalysts showed higher activity, and the CuO–ZnO–CeO2 catalyst achieved 20% CO2 conversion and 90% MeOH selectivity. CeO2 is regarded as the most important oxide that acts as a support in catalysts due to its redox ability. Many researchers have used CeO2 as a support in methanol synthesis.220,221 Graciani et al. concluded from their studies that the Cu–CeO2 interface was actively participating in the methanol synthesis.189 Ouyang et al. prepared three nanostructured Cu/CeO2 catalysts with different morphologies and applied them in CO2 to methanol synthesis, showing that the Cu/CeO2 nanorod catalyst showed the highest methanol yield of 1.9% at 240 °C and 2 MPa.222
Silica gels are also employed as catalyst supports for stabilizing the metal nanoparticles. Silica gels are capable of homogeneously distributing active centers and, therefore, transform into a well-dispersed catalyst. The surface hydroxyl groups of the silica gels provide an adequate number of anchor sites for metal species. Other than the anchor groups, the 3D structure and the porous structure are also favorable for adsorbing desorbing reactants and products during methanol synthesis. Chen et al. synthesized a methanol synthesis catalyst (re-CuZnO/SiO2) by a rotary-evaporation (re) assisted deposition–precipitation method.223 re-CuZnO/SiO2 catalyst showed the most stable methanol selectivity and long-term stability.
Karelovic et al. synthesized a SiO2 support Cu catalyst (Cu/SiO2) by water in oil microemulsions for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis at 230–270 °C and 8 bar total pressure.224 Jiang et al. used micro-spherical SiO2 produced by the spray-drying method as a support for the preparation of a series of Cu/ZnO-based catalysts. When metal loading was below 47.91 wt%, then Cu and Zn cations were well dispersed into the pores of the micro-spherical SiO2. Cu-ZnO/SiO2, with metal loading of 28.23 wt%, showed the highest methanol yield and catalyst stability.225
TiO2 is a typical example of an amphoteric oxide, and the chemical properties are similar to those of ZrO2. Bando et al. compared three Cu-based catalysts (Cu/Al2O3, Cu/SiO2, Cu/TiO2) prepared by the impregnation method for methanol synthesis;226 the TiO2-supported catalyst showed the highest turnover frequency. Zhang et al. also concluded that TiO2 and TiO2–SiO2 improve the CuO dispersion on the catalyst surface, and as a result, H2 adsorption is also enhanced.227 Liu et al. used TiO2-modified MgO to support Cu-based catalysts for methanol synthesis from CO2.228 They found that with an increase in MgO fraction, the Cu surface area increased initially and then declined. MgO loading is also responsible for the strength of moderate and strong basic sites over catalyst surfaces. With 1 wt% MgO loading, the catalyst showed optimum catalyst activity. Methanol selectivity was related to the surface basicity. Tao et al. used TiO2 as a support for Cu NPs for methanol synthesis from CO2 and studied the size effect of Cu NPs on the Cu/TiO2 interface by a computational approach.229 Kattel et al. also used DFT calculations combined with in situ diffuse reflectance FTIR (DRIFTS) to study the promoting effect of the Cu/TiO2 and Cu/ZrO2 interfaces on CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis.230 From both the DFT and experimental studies, it was concluded that, compared with TiO2, ZrO2 was more effective for methanol synthesis from CO2.
Baltanás et al. studied the interaction between the copper and gallia over a set of Cu (2%) loaded on Ga2O3, ZrO2, Ga2O3–ZrO2 catalysts, which were used in methanol synthesis from a mixture of CO2 and CO.231,232 The initial rate of methanol synthesis on Cu–ZrO2 was higher but it suffered 35% loss of activity after 50 h of on-stream reaction. In contrast, the gallated (Cu–Ga2O3, Cu-Ga2O3–ZrO2) catalysts showed higher stability.
Carbon nanotubes (CNT) are also being used as catalyst support for CO2 and CO hydrogenation as they possess a high aspect ratio (length/diameter), mechanical strength, specific surface area, rigidity, thermostability, electric conductivity, and adjustable surface chemistry.233–236 Zhang et al. studied metal-decorated CNT-promoted Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 and Co–Cu catalyst for CO/CO2 hydrogenation reactions, and observed a remarkable improvement in methanol selectivity.233,234 They further studied Pd–ZnO/CNTs catalyst for CO2 hydrogenation for methanol synthesis235 and concluded that the Pd–ZnO supported on the “Herringbone-type (h-type)” CNTs are more stable and active than those kept on “Parallel-type (p-type)” CNTs. According to many researchers, the surface carbon chemistry of CNTs influenced the catalyst particle size and metal–support interaction dramatically.236–238 The carbon surface of CNTs can accelerate H2O desorption because of its hydrophobic properties; when CNTs are functionalized with basic metals, it improves the CO2 and H2 adsorption properties of catalysts. Wang et al. researched Cu–ZrO2 supported on CNTs for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation.239 They studied the effect of various surface groups, i.e., oxygen-containing groups (acidic), nitrogen-containing groups (basic), and a few oxygen-containing groups (almost neutral), to understand the influence of carbon surface chemistry on methanol selectivity and CO2 conversion. They found that when the nitrogen-containing groups present on the CNTs are used as a support for the Cu–ZrO2 catalyst (CZ–CNY-3), several catalyst morphology changes were observed; for example, copper oxide dispersion was increased, low-temperature copper reduction was promoted, Cu crystal size reduction decreased, and adsorption of CO2 and H2 was enhanced. Shi et al. studied the synergic effect of nitrogen-doped CNT-supported Cu–Fe catalyst for syngas conversion to higher alcohol.240 They used N-CNT as a support as its basicity is beneficial for the chemisorption of CO, which promotes alcohol formation. The optimized catalyst 15-Cu1–Fe1/1.3N-CNT was found to achieve 68.8% selectivity to C2+–OH and 31.2% methanol selectivity. The catalyst without N doping (15Cu1–Fe1/CNT) showed 30.2% selectivity to C2+–OH and 69.8% selectivity to methanol at 2 MPa pressure, 220 °C and GHSV of 6000 mL g−1 h−1.
Reduced graphene oxides (rGO) are also applied as catalyst supports for Cu-based catalysts in methanol synthesis, as they provide high thermal stability (up to 450 °C) and a big theoretical surface area (2630 m2 g−1).241 With 10%CuZn/rGO catalyst, the highest space–time yield of MeOH of 424 mgMeOH gcat−1 h−1 was obtained, which is comparable to other metal oxide and carbonaceous supports.235,242 They concluded that rGO helps to improve metal dispersion and facilitates the dispersion of H2. Deerattrakul et al.243 studied N-doped r-GO-supported Cu–Zn catalyst (Cu–Zn/N-rGO) for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation to achieve a methanol yield of 591 mgMeOH gcat−1 h−1 at 250 °C and 1.5 MPa. Zhang et al.244 prepared a novel bimetallic CuZn-BTC coordination polymer catalyst (CCZB-3) via a unique “acidic etching self-assembly” method using ZIF-8 as a sacrificial template. CCZB-3 was used for methanol synthesis from CO2, to get excellent catalytic activity (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Schematic diagram of the CuZn–BTC formation mechanism prepared using ZIF-8 as a sacrificial template. Adopted from ref. 244. 
8.3 Noble metal-based catalysts

8.3.1 Pd-Based catalysts. 
Poutsma et al. were the pioneers of implementing Pd-based catalysts in methanol synthesis.245 In recent years there has been a considerable growth in interest in using Pd-based catalysts (especially Pd and Zn based) in both academia and industry.235,246–248 For methanol synthesis through CO/CO2 hydrogenation reactions, the supported Pd nanoparticles showed promising results as they provide enhanced activity and higher stability.245,249–252 Many researchers studied the synergic effect and metal–metal interaction of Pd and ZnO in methanol synthesis from CO2.246–248,251,252 The high activity of such catalysts was directly related to the formation of PdZn bimetallic alloy at a high reduction temperature (>500 °C) and the transfer of electrons from Pd to ZnO was responsible for the alloy formation.235,246–248,252 Many recent studies employed PdZn alloy supported on TiO2, ZnO, Al2O3 and carbon nanotubes prepared by various methods with different Pd loading for CO2 to methanol synthesis.235,246–248 Malik et al. studied the effect of Pd, Zn, PdZn alloy and Ca-doped PdZn supported on CeO2 support for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation253 to achieve 100% MeOH selectivity with 7.7% CO2 conversion at a temperature of 220 °C and 3 MPa pressure, wherein PdZn alloy was responsible for H2 dissociation and quick hydrogenation of the adsorbed carbonaceous species. Pd–CeO2 nanoparticles showed better CO hydrogenation activity to methanol formation than the Cu–ZnO catalyst.254 But when Pd–CeO2 based catalyst was applied for CO2 hydrogenation, lower activity than CO hydrogenation was reported.220 Liu et al. have demonstrated a highly selective Pd/ZnAl2O3 catalyst for syngas conversion to methanol synthesis.255 Lebarbier et al. developed a Pd/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst for the synthesis of methanol and dimethyl ether (DME) from syngas hydrogenation.256 The reaction was studied at 3.4–6.9 MPa, 250–380 °C, GHSV of 5000–18000 h−1 and a H2/CO feed molar ratio of 1, 2, and 3.
According to many scientists, the hydrogen spillover effect of Pd helps to activate the reactants during methanol synthesis,169 which further improved the reducibility of the Cu sites of Cu-based catalysts and also protected the Cu surface from re-oxidation.257 The highly reducible Cu site also accelerates CO2 activation as the electron-rich Cu site is more likely to interact with a carbon atom in CO2.258 Therefore, a number of Pd–Cu-based catalysts for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation are reported in the literature.171,259 Among them, Pd–Cu supported on SiO2 showed more significant catalytic activity than single metal Cu/SiO2 or Pd/SiO2 catalyst.260 Many researchers conclude that PdCu(111) is more active than Cu(111) in methanol synthesis as the former requires less activation energy for hydrogenation reactions through the RWGS reaction pathway.250 Choi et al. studied Cu/CeO2 and Pd–Cu/CeO2 catalyst for methanol synthesis from CO2 to find that Pd promotion generated a more reduced Cu site and CeO2 surface by donating electrons to CeO2 and Cu.173 Ma et al.261 studied methanol synthesis from sulfur-containing syngas over Pd/CeO2 catalyst which was found to be stable during the hydrogenation of sulfur-containing syngas. It was concluded from the characterization of the catalyst that the sulfur tolerance of Pd/CeO2 was due to the CeO2-assisted transformation of H2S to SOx.
Fujitani et al. reported a new Pd/Ga2O3 catalyst which showed higher activity and selectivity than other Cu/ZnO-based catalysts and supported Pd-based catalysts such as Pd/SiO2, Pd/Al2O3 and Pd/CeO2 per metal surface area or per mass basis.262,263 It was found that the addition of gallium oxide into Pd/SiO2 results in a dramatic increase in methanol selectivity up to 70% and as much as a 500-fold jump in TOF compared with unaltered Pd/SiO2 in methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation.264 Qu et al. adopted an innovative approach to investigate the strong metal–support interaction (SMSI) in Pd-promoted Ga2O3 catalyst.265 They found a significant SMSI between Pd and the (002) polar Ga2O3 surface, leading to high metal dispersion and higher electron transfer between metal and support. This leads to the formation of PdGax, which is highly active for methanol production.


8.3.2 Au-Based catalysts. 
Supported Au catalysts (particularly Au/ZnO) have shown higher MEOH selectivity than commercial Cu-based catalysts under similar reaction conditions.266,267 Although the catalytic activity for methanol synthesis of the noble metal mass-normalized is comparable to that of a Cu-based catalyst, the former gives higher selectivity; at 5 bar, it was 50% and could reach 70% at 50 bar hydrogen pressure. The high price of gold renders it impractical for commercial practices for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis. Still, a few instances of its promising and useful applications are reported, such as for small-scale processes with fluctuating reaction conditions, as experienced in renewable energy generation processes.267 Many researchers mention that both Cu-based and Au-based catalysts required Zn species to achieve high activity and selectivity.160,267,268 This means that a similar mechanism activates both Au/ZnO and Cu/ZnO catalysts. During reaction in a highly reductive atmosphere, partial reduction of ZnO occurs, which is followed by migration of ZnOx surface species on the Cu and Zu NPs, which results either in the formation of a CuZn/AuZn (surface) alloy respectively or the development of a ZnOx shell.188,191,196,268,269 Hartadi et al. studied MeOH synthesis via CO2/CO hydrogenation on a highly selective Au/ZnO catalyst at 5 bar and 240–300 °C.270 They observed that at 240 °C, CO2 was the preferred source of carbon. While the reaction temperature increased, the carbon source preference shifted from CO2 to CO. Pasupulety et al. carried out CO2 hydrogenation on a Au/Cu–Zn–Al catalyst.271 Among all the catalysts studied, 1Au/C4ZA (1 wt% Au as a promoter on Cu/Zn/Al= 4/1/1 molar ratio) exhibited the highest methanol yield of 16.6% at GHSV of 7000 h−1. The higher activity of the 1Au/C4ZA was due to (i) H2 spillover in Au/Cu–Zn–Al, (ii) higher adsorbance of reactant gases at the Cu–Au interface, and (iii) on the surface with a Cu/Au ratio of ∼5.
Strunk et al.272 prepared a Au/ZnO catalyst with Au loading of 1, 2 and 3 wt% by a colloidal deposition method and studied hydrogenation of CO2-free (CO + H2) and CO2-containing (CO + CO2 + H2) synthesis gas. It was concluded that oxygen vacancies in ZnO are among the active sites for methanol synthesis over Au/ZnO, and the presence of Au particles enhances the number of exposed oxygen vacancies at the interface region of ZnO.


8.3.3 Other noble metal-based catalysts. 
Köppel et al.273 and Baiker et al.274 have concluded from their studies on CO2 hydrogenation that MeOH selectivities on Cu/ZrO2 and Ag/ZrO2 are comparable. It is also reported by Froehlich et al.275 that Ag doping on the Cu/ZrO2 catalyst leads to the increase in methanol selectivity without affecting the CO2 conversion. According to Grabowski et al. the metallic Ag contributes to the RWGS, and Ag+ is responsible for MeOH formation on the catalyst surface.276 Pasupulety et al. studied the Ag supported on Ce–Zr mechanically mixed oxide prepared via wet impregnation and chelating methods for CO2 hydrogenation to MeOH synthesis. They found that the impregnated catalyst showed 70% methanol selectivity among the studied catalysts because of the presence of Ag2O on Ce–Zr.277
Pt is a very frequently used catalyst by the industry for important chemical reactions. On Pt(111), CO2 hydrogenation proceeds through the RWGS reaction.278,279 In contrast to Pt(111), the Pt NPs supported on oxides showed higher activity, which is associated with the SMSI.280,281 Kattel et al.282 carried out kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations and density functional theory (DFT) on Pt, Pt/SiO2 and Pt/TiO2 for analyzing the role of oxide support on the activity of Pt NPs in the CO2 hydrogenation to MEOH reaction. They reported that the enhanced activity of Pt/oxide over Pt is due to the synergy between Pt and oxide support at the Pt–oxide interface. Men et al.283 studied a Pt/film/In2O3 catalyst in a dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) plasma reactor for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol to get 37.0% CO2 conversion with 62.6% MeOH selectivity. Toyao et al.284 studied the same reaction catalyzed by Pt NPs loaded on MoOx/TiO2 support (Pt(3)/MoOx(30)/TiO2; where Pt is 3 wt% and MoOx is 30 wt%). They achieved 73.0% MeOH yield under mild reaction conditions (150 °C, pCO2 = 10 bar; pH2 = 50 bar) after 48 h of reaction in an autoclave reactor. From the in situ XAFS analysis, they concluded that the surface defect sites of the reduced MoOx species are responsible for the low temperature activity of the catalyst.

8.4 Metal–organic frameworks (MOF)
MOFs are a handy tool as a host material in catalysis because of their abundant metal sites and porous structure.285–287 Usually, MOFs are used to confine ultrasmall metal NPs inside the pores or crystal defects and as a result, numerous metal–support interfaces are formed which act as active catalyst centers.285,286,288 But the main drawback of MOFs is low stability under high pressure and high-temperature reaction conditions. Yaghi and Somorjai et al. studied CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis with an innovative MOF-based catalyst where the main actives sites were the interfacial sites between 18 nm Cu nanocrystals and Zr–oxide nodes of UiO-66 ((Zr6O4(OH)4(BDC)6), BDC = 1,4-benzene dicarboxylate).288 However, this catalyst was not stable enough as it was deactivated by as much as 50% after only 2 h of reaction, even at lower tempaerature of 175 °C. Liu et al.289 adopted in situ reconstruction of size-confined Cu@UiO-66 to develop a highly stable, active, selective Cu@ZrOx catalyst in the form of a 3D porous framework for methanol synthesis from a CO2 hydrogenation reaction and achieved 13.1% CO2 conversion with a MeOH yield of 796 g kgcat−1 h−1 at 260 °C and 4.5 MPa with the optimized catalyst (CU-0.5-300). Zeolite imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) is one of the popular materials used in CO2 hydrogenation.290,291 Li et al. designed a MOF-based catalyst where Pd NPs were embedded at the ZnO/ZIF-8 interface for CO2 hydrogenation to MeOH synthesis.292 The optimized Pd–Z@Z8-1 was the most active catalyst with a methanol yield of 12.1–19.8 g gPd−1 and methanol selectivity of 66–78% at 250–290 °C and 4.5 MPa.
8.5 Perovskite materials
In recent times, the perovskite ceramic oxides are becoming popular in the field of catalysis due to their unique structure, which can realize the fine dispersion of “metal-on-oxide” by reduction as well as the mixed-valence.293,294 A number of studies have been performed by Zhan et al. on the Cu-based catalysts synthesized from perovskite precursors for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation.295 Zhan et al. studied the activity of a La–Mn–Zn–Cu–O-based perovskite in CO2 hydrogenation for methanol synthesis.296 They found both LaMnO3 and La2CuO4 perovskite structures were dominant in the synthesized material, and more “metal-on oxide” defects can be realized by reduction. Both structures showed high performance in CO2 conversion and the higher MeOH selectivity was due to the formation of Cuα+, which was derived from the highly available defects of the perovskite structures. Zhan et al. synthesized perovskite precursor-derived doped La–M–Mn–Cu–O (M = Mg, Ce, Y, Zn) catalysts by the sol–gel method for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation.297 They found that with introduction of a fourth element into the perovskite structure more oxygen vacancies were generated and an abundant number of defects formed. Therefore, as a result lower-temperature adsorption and lower-reduction temperature properties are achieved in doped samples. Among all the catalyst derivatives, Zn-doped catalyst exhibited better activity, which may be due to the strength of the weak basic sites. These weak basic sites are a key factor for methanol selectivity and H2 adsorption on the catalyst surface.
8.6 Metal oxide-based catalysis
In2O3 is well established as a very active catalyst for its unique surface redox property.298–301 Many studies have demonstrated that during methanol synthesis through CO2 hydrogenation, In2O3 also acts as an inhibitor of RWGS reactions.302–304 Ye et al. carried out theoretical studies on In2O3 and concluded that In2O3 with oxygen deficiencies is a potential candidate for methanol synthesis via a formate (HCOO) reaction route.305,306 DFT calculations suggest that the oxygen vacancy sites of an In2O3 catalyst (at reaction conditions, Vo sites are formed on the surface of indium) are the main active sites for methanol synthesis via CO2 hydrogenation.307 These catalyst-surface-generated In2O3−x sites are responsible for CO2 activation and hydrogenation by stabilizing the intermediate compounds produced during the reaction, including formate (HCOO), dioxymethylene (H2COO), and H2CO species. Hydrogenation of H2CO gives methoxy species, which is also identified as a rate-determining step (RDS, Fig. 24).306–308 According to this mechanism, Vo sites are replenished during CO2 hydrogenation.
 Fig. 24  Proposed mechanism for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation on the Vo sites of In2O3 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 307. 
Sun et al. studied the In2O3 catalyst in methanol synthesis via CO2 hydrogenation (H2:CO2 = 3:1). MeOH yield reached its highest at 330 °C and 4 MPa. But other reported catalysts for the same reaction lose their activity and selectivity at this higher temperature.309 Martin et al. also documented a similar activity of In2O3 catalyst and achieved 100% methanol selectivity in a CO2 hydrogenation reaction (H2:CO2 = 4:1) at 300 °C and 50 bar.310 They found that other reaction parameters like pressure, temperature, GHSV, and CO2/H2 ratio significantly influence the catalytic performance of InO2. After an in-depth analysis of the chemical and physical properties of InO2, a mechanism of occurrence and disappearance of oxygen vacancies that serve as active sites during methanol synthesis has been predicted. They further explored that the oxygen vacancies can be modulated by co-feeding CO along with CO2 and also boosted by electronic interaction with zirconia carriers. Dou et al. carried out combined atomistic thermodynamics and DFT studies on InO2 catalysts for CO2 to MeOH reactions via a HCOOH route.300 The balance between the vacancies and surface oxygen atoms is essential to maintain higher performance for methanol synthesis on the surface of InO2(110).
In2O3 is also used in combination with other oxides,311,312 especially ZrO2 for its advantage over others.313,314 ZrO2 forms a solid solution with In2O3, and a strong electronic interaction between oxides is generated. This interaction improves CO2 adsorption as the available oxygen vacancies become optimum.315,316 Many scientists also studied the effect of the addition of metals to In2O3 catalysts for improving the hydrogenation ability of In2O3, such as gold,317,318 copper,319 cobalt,320 palladium,321,322 rhodium,323 nickel324 and platinum.325,326 They found that metals have strong interaction with In2O3, and a significant increase in catalyst performance was observed. Among those metals, Ni, Au, Rh, and Pt supported on In2O3 showed high selectivity towards the methanol in CO2 hydrogenation reactions. In2O3-supported Au catalyst produces the highest selectivity and activity for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation. With this catalyst, 100% methanol selectivity was achieved at a temperature below 225 °C. When the reaction temperature was increased to 300 °C the selectivity reduced to 67.8% with a space–time yield (STY) of MeOH of 0.47 gMeOH h−1 gcat−1.318 Lu et al. employed Au/In2O3–ZrO2 catalyst with a solid solution structure for CO2 to MeOH reaction and achieved 70.1% methanol selectivity with an STY of 0.59 gMeOH h−1 gcat−1 at 300 °C and 5 MPa.327
MnOx/m-Co3O4 and ZnO–ZrO2 are among other mixed oxide catalysts studied by many scientists for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis.328–330 Han et al. developed ZnO–ZrO2 solid solution catalyst with an ordered mesoporous structure using an ELISA method330 and found that at 320 °C and 5.5 MPa, 20% ZnO–ZrO2 catalyst showed a high methanol formation rate of 22.1 mmol h−1 gcat−1. ZnMbOx (Mb = Ca, Mg, Sc, Ti, V, Mn, Cr, Ga, Zr, Y, Cd, Sn, In, La, Ta, Pb) have been studied for the methanol synthesis reaction from CO2 hydrogenation, and most of them have shown higher methanol selectivity ZnO (29%), except ZnTaOx and ZnCrOx.331 This study showed that the CO2 conversion strongly depended on the type of Mb in ZnMbOx and among them, only ZnCrOx, ZnTiOx, ZnGaOx, ZnInOx and ZnZrOx displayed higher conversion of CO2 than ZnO (1.1%). Other than the ZnZrOx catalyst, the CdZrOx and Ga ZrOx catalysts also exhibited excellent catalytic activity, which proves the effectiveness of solid solution catalysts in CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. Zhan et al.332 studied MxOy–ZrO2 (M = Zn, Cu, or Cu) solid solutions for CO2 hydrogenation reactions. CuO–ZrO2, Co3O4–ZrO2 and ZnO–ZrO2 catalysts were found to be selective towards CH4, CO and methanol, respectively, during CO2 hydrogenation. Cao et al.333 reported that ZnO/t-ZrO2 catalyst with abundant oxygen vacancy synthesized by the micro reaction synthesis method exhibits excellent catalytic activity, thermal stability and recyclability.
8.7 Other catalysts
DFT studies on the Rh-doped Cu(111) surface with different doped-Rh atoms were carried out for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis.334 Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi (BEP) relationships were analyzed, and it was found that the highest activation barrier for the overall reaction was in the following order Cu(111) > Rh6Cu3(111) > Rh ML > Rh3Cu6(111). It was concluded that the overall MeOH synthesis is facilitated thermodynamically and kinetically on the surface of Rh3Cu6(111). Rh–In bimetallic catalyst has been studied by Li et al.335 for the CO2 hydrogenation reaction for a wide variety of H2/CO2 ratios. They found that Rh–In is very efficient in catalyzing methanol synthesis with a methanol yield of 1 gMeOH gcat−1 h−1, although it showed resistance towards RWGS reactions under H2-deficient gas flow.
Nguyen et al.336 studied methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation with different novel Ni–Ga-based catalysts, including Ni–Ga alloy, Ni–Ga/mesosilica, and Ni–Ga/mixed oxide prepared through metal melting, impregnation methods, and co-condensation–evaporation methods, respectively. The ordered mesoporous channels of the Ni–Ga/mesosilica catalyst had a good distribution of the δ-Ni5Ga3 active phase. Therefore, the Ni–Ga/mesosilica catalyst was able to generate good CO2 conversion with high stability. Paris et al.337 proposed a unique catalyst synthesis process, i.e. an aerosol-assisted sol–gel method to synthesize Ga- and Zn-doped mesoporous Cu/SiO2 catalyst with minimum waste generation. They studied the activity of this catalyst in a methanol synthesis reaction from CO2. The resultant catalyst was spherical, and mesostructured silica-based microparticles with highly dispersed Zn and Ga species; and Cu species are incorporated on the walls of metallosilicate materials. They achieved methanol productivity as high as 0.5 mmol of methanol per g of catalyst per hour at 280 °C.
Intermetallic compounds are important classes of catalysts because of their outstanding performance, and their activity is related to the combination of the constituent metals. The catalytically active sites are well-separated with uniform surroundings, and the covalent bonding between the metallic elements stabilizes the active sites.338 García-Trenco et al. studied CO2 to MeOH synthesis with a PdIn intermetallic catalyst339 to report maximum methanol formation rate and more than 90% methanol selectivity with 1:1 PdIn catalyst, and the results were 70% higher than that for the conventional Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst. Wu and Yang340 investigated the reaction pathways of methanol and CO formation in CO2 hydrogenation reactions over PdIn (110) and (210) with a combined DFT and microkinetic method. The reported MeOH formation pathway was via HCOO → HCOOH → H2COOH → CH2O + OH → CH3O + OH → CH3OH(g) + H2O(g) on all surfaces. Snider et al.341 studied the promotional effect of Pd on In2O3 with varying Pd: In ratios (0:1, 1:2,1:1, 2:1, 1:0) on CO2 methanol synthesis. They reported the highest catalytic activity (5.1 μmol MeOH per gInPds) and 61% methanol selectivity with In:Pd(2:1)/SiO2 at 300 °C and 40 bar. The in situ XAS characterization reported a synergistic effect between an In–Pd intermetallic compound and an indium oxide that could enhance the catalyst activity and methanol selectivity. A similar observation was made on the promotional effect in a non-precious metal-containing In–Ni/SiO2 system, suggesting that the promotional mechanism is translatable to other ally/oxide systems.
9. Future direction and conclusion
Net (carbon) zero is a grand plan of the nations of the world to contain the global temperature rise to less than 1.5 °C whereby CO2 emissions must be reduced from ∼35 gigatons today to less than 10 gigatons by using non-carbon renewable energy sources. Green hydrogen will play a massive role in converting C1 off-gases like CO2 into valuable chemicals and materials. A sustainable methanol economy refers to the combination of captured CO2 from various waste sources and cheap hydrogen by using renewable energy to produce methanol. It is also referred to as “liquid sunshine” and has a great potential to resolve energy crises and mitigate climate change. Throughout the last few decades, there has been progressive and competitive development of catalytic technologies for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol synthesis, leading to a futuristic carbon-neutral society by scavenging massive amounts of CO2 released into the environment by various industries. From the above discussion in the catalyst section, it is evident that preparation, geometry, chemical composition and nano-structural characteristics are the deciding factors for the catalyst activity in CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. Cu/ZnO-based catalysts are widely accepted because of their optimal activity/cost ratio. However, Cu/ZnO catalysts are still not well optimized to answer all the challenges associated with CO2 hydrogenation reactions, such as low-temperature activity, stability for longer reaction times and by-product formation.
From the foregoing discussion on the development of various heterogeneous catalysts (i.e., metals, metal oxides, MOFs, perovskite materials, alloys or intermetallic compounds) for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation, it is found that there is a high trend in the use of non-copper-based catalyst, which provides high activity and stability (Table 4). Many supported metal catalysts (Ga, Au, Pd, Pt, Ag) were highly selective towards methanol at a lower temperature depending on the type of support, preparation methods, and metal precursors. Indium alloys and IMCs have some advantages like tuneable electronic, chemical and geometric properties which make them unique. Still, the drawbacks are related to the ideal and uniform atomic ratios as these are easily affected by the metal composition and reduction conditions.
Table 4 Survey of different catalyst and reactor systems used in methanol synthesis




No.
Synthesis method
Catalyst
Temp. and pressure, °C
Reactor
Other essential factors
Conv./yield
Ref.




1
Micro-reaction synthesis
ZnO/t-ZrO2 hybrid oxides
320, 3
Fixed-bed micro-reactor
H2/CO2 = 3:1,
CO2 conversion rate, methanol selectivity, and methanol space–time yield (STY) = 9.2%, 93.1%, and 0.35 g MeOH h−1g−1 cat., resp.

333











GHSV = 12000 mL g−1 h−1






2
Impregnation
ZnOx/ZrO2
360, 2
Stainless-steel tubular reactor
CO2:H2:N2 = 3:1:1
CO2 conv. = 18%

348











Total flow rate = 75 mL min−1
MeOH selectivity = 75%




3
Co-precipitation
Cu/Zn/Zr/Al (atomic ratio) = 4:2:1:0.5
220 °C, 2.76 MPa
Fixed bed reactor
6 mL min−1 CO2, 18 mL min−1 H2, and 823 h−1 space velocity
CO2 conv. = 19%

349













MeOH selectivity = 65%




4.

In situ reconstruction of metal induced MOF
Cu@ZrOx catalyst with a 3D porous framework structure
260, 4.5
Fixed bed reactor
CO2/H2, 1/3 by volume, GHSV of 21600 mL gcat−1 h−1
CO2 conv. = 13.1%

289













MeOH selectivity = 78.8%














MeOH space–time yield = 796 g kgcat−1 h−1




5
Combination of strong electronic adsorption (SEA) and atomic layer deposition (ALD)
ZnO over-coated Cu/SiO2 (5Cu-1CyZn-30s)
250, 4
Fixed bed reactor
CO2/H2, 1/3 by volume; flow rate of 160 mL min−1
Reaction rate = 4.77 mmol g−1 h−1

350













MeOH selectivity = 10.1




6
Deposition precipitation
Pd/ZnO-xAl
250, 3
Fixed-bed micro-reactor
GHSV = 6000 mL h−1 g−1 with a feed (H2/CO2/N2 = 69/23/8)
CO2 conv. = 14.2%

351













MeOH yield = 7.3%














STY = 6.28 gMethanol h−1 g−1




7
Co-precipitaion followed by formaldehyde pre-activation
CuZnAlZr
250, 3
Fixed bed reactor
H2:CO2 = 3:1, gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) = 4000 h−1
CO2 conv. = 25.88%

201













MeOH selectivity = 49.17%




8
Incipient wetness impregnation
Cu/a-ZrO2
230, 1
FBR
CO2/H2/N2 = 1/3/1
MeOH production rate = 1.8 mmol h−1 gcat−1

352











Flow rate = 70 ml min−1
MeOH selectivity = 59%




9
Impregnation method
Ni–Ga/mesosillica catlyst
220, 3
FBR
H2:CO2 = 3:1; GHSV = 6000 h−1
CO2 conv. = 34%

336













MeOH selectivity = 41.4%
—


10
Co-precipitation
Cu–ZnO–CeO2 (5:4:1 molar ratio)






MeOH selec. = 48.6

190













MeOH yield = 0.057 mmol (g min)−1




11
Wet impregnation; chelating method
Ag/Ce–Zr
250, 3
FBR
H2:CO2 = 3:1; GHSV = 1800 h−1
CO2 conv. = 7%

45













MeOH selectivity = 70%














CO2 conv. = 8%














MeOH selectivity = 60%




12
Hydrothermal-impregnation
Pd–Zn@ZIF-8
220–290, 4.5
FBR
H2:CO2 = 3:1
MeOH selectivity = 66–78%

45











GHSV = 19200 mL h−1 g−1
MeOH yield = 12.1–19.8 g gPd−1 h−1




13
Co-precipitation
Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/ZrO2
170, 3
Autoclave
0.1 g mL−1 catalyst in reactor
MeOH yield = 6.4%

292



14
Impregnation
Pt1@MIL
150, 3.2
Slurry reactor
CO2:H2 = 1:3
MeOH selec. = 90.3%

353











DMF as solvent
TOF = 117 h−1




15
Co-precipitation
CuZnCeTi
235, 3
FBR
CO2:H2 = 1:3
MeOH yield = 4.1%

354











GHSV = 2000 mL (gcat h)−1






16
Rotary evaporation assisted deposition-precipitation
CuZnO/SiO2
250, 3
FBR
24 vol% CO2, 72 vol% H2 and 4 vol% Ar
CO2 conv. = 11.2

355













MeOH selec. = 35.5














MeOH yield = 4.06




17
Incipient wetness impregnation
In–Pd/SiO2
300, 4
FBR
CO2:H2 = 1:4
MeOH selec. = 60.1%

341











GHSV = 7500 cm3 h−1 gcat−1
Activity = 5.1 μmol MeOH/gInPdS




18
Co-precipitation
Cu–In–Zr–O
250, 2.5
FBR
GHSV = 18000 ml (gcat h)−1
CO2 conv. = 1.5%; MeOH selec. = 80%

356



19
Polyol
CuOZnOCeO2; CuOZnOAl2O3
240, 0.1
FBR
CO2:H2 = 1:9
CO2 conv. = 14

219













MeOH selec. = 86














CO2 conv. = 20














MeOH selec. = 90




20
Co-precipitation
CuO–ZnO–ZrO2–MxOy (M = Cr, Mo and W)
240, 3
FBR
23.5 vol% CO2, 64.5 vol% H2, and diluted by N2



357



21
Water-in-oil microemulsion method
Cu/SiO2
230–270, 0.8
FBR
CO2:H2 = 1:9



224











WHSV = 2000–4500 cm3 h−1 gcat−1






22
Co-precipitation method involving ultrasonic irritation
Cu–ZnO–ZrO2/Mg–Al (LDH)
250, 3
FBR
74.98% H2 and 25.02% CO2
CO2 conv. = 4.9%; MeOH selec. = 78.3%

358



23
Co-precipitation
Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/ZrO2
230, 3
FBR
(H2/CO2/N2/He = 59.5:14:4:balance;



359











GHSV = 60000 L kgcat−1 h−1






24
Spray drying–ammonia evaporation
Cu–ZnO/SiO2
220, 3
Continuous-flow slurry phase
WHSV = 2000 mL gcat−1 h−1 and H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3
CO2 conv. = 14.1%; MeOH selec. = 57.2%

225



25
Co-precipitation
CuO–ZnO–ZrO2–WO3
240, 3
FBR
(CO2/H2/N2 = 23.5/64.5/12, mole ratio);
CO2 conv. = 19.7%; MeOH selec. = 49.3%

360











GHSV = 2400 mL (h gcat)−1
MeOH yield = 9.7




26
Acidic etching self-assembly
CuZn–BTC
240, 4
FBR
H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, and WHSV = 1500 mL gcat−1 h−1
CO2 conv. = 20.5%; MeOH selec. = 56.4%

361



27
Chelating method
Ca-doped PdZn/CeO2
230, 3
FBR
H2:CO2 = 3:1, GHSV = 2400 mL g−1 h−1
CO2 conv 7.7%; MeOH selec. = 100%

253



28
Commercial
NaA (MR)
240, 0.7
Membrane reactor; FBR
H2/CO2 = 3; GHSV = 18000 L kgcat−1 h−1
STY = 343 gmethanol kgcat−1 h−1; MeOH selec. = 84%

362



Co-precipitation
CuO–ZnO–CeO2–Al2O3 (TR)
240, 0.5




STY = 296gmethanol kgcat−1 h−1; MeOH selec. = 73%




29
Flame spray pyrolysis
CuO–ZrO2
270, 2
FBR
CO2/H2/N2 = 1/3/1, W/F = 480 mgcat mL−1 s
TOF = 10.7 h−1

363













CO2 conv. = 5.9%; MeOH selec. = 45%




30
Commercial
Cu–ZnO–Al2O3
290, 8
FBR
CO2/H2 = 1:3, GHSV = 10000 h−1
CO2 conv. = 21.2%; MeOH yield = 18%

364



Polyol reduction
Pd/Cu–ZnO
270, 4.5
FBR
H2/CO2 = 3:1, gas flow = 36 mL min−1, catalyst mass = 0.2 g (GHSV = 10800)
CO2 conv. = 8%; MeOH selec. = 66%

180



31
Co-precipitation
Cu–ZnO–AlOOH
250, 3
FBR
H2/CO2 = 3:1, gas flow = 160 mL min−1, catalyst mass = 1.2 g (GHSV = 6000)
MeOH selec. = 55.9%

365













MeOH yield = 14.1%




32
Atomic layer deposition
Ni1Cu8/γ-Al2O3
250, 2
FBR
H2: CO2 = 3:1, 30 mL min−1
CO2 conv. = 6.4%; MeOH selec. = 58.8%

366













MeOH yield = 1.5%




33
Incipient wetness impregnation
CuZn/N-rGO
250, 1.5
FBR
GHSV = 2400 h−1
CO2 conv. = 30%

243













MeOH productivity = 591 mgMeOH gcat−1 h−1




34
Co-precipitation and incipient wetness impregnation
Ag/Cu–Zr
230, 1
FBR
CO2/H2/N2 = 1/3/1



206












W/Ftotal = 1000 mgcat s mL−1






35
Co-precipitation
Ni5Ga3
250, 5
FBR
CO2/H2 = 1/3
CO2 conv. = 95.7%

367













MeOH yield = 27.8% MeOH selec. = 47.6%




36
Co-precipitation and supercritical anti-solvent (SAS) precipitation
CuZn; CuMn;CuMg; CuCe
225, 2
FBR
CO2:H2:N2 = 20:60:20 molar%
CO2 conv. = 4.3%; MeOH selec. = 53%

216











GHSV of 1000 h−1






37
Core–shell
Cu/ZnO
320, 33.1
FBR
CO2/H2 = 1/3
CO2 conv. = 53%; MeOH selec. = 84%

368











GHSV = 4000 h−1






38
Incipient wetness impregnation
Cu/CeO2
240, 2
FBR
CO2/H2 = 1/3
MeOH yield = 1.9%

222











GHSV = 3 L h−1 gcat−1






39
Ammonia deposition-precipitation (ADP)
CuO/ZnO/Al2O3
240, 4
FBR
H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, and WHSV = 1500 mL gcat−1 h−1
CO2 conv. = 18.3%; MeOH selec. = 56.5%

369



40


Pd@Zn core–shell catalyst
210–270, 2
FBR
WHSV = 18000 mL h−1 g−1
MeOH selec. = 70%

44



41
Impregnation
Cu/MgO–TiO2
230, 3
FBR
CO2/H2 = 1/3
CO2 conv. = 5.2%; MeOH selec. = 37.9%

228











GHSV = 4800 h−1
MeOH yield = 1.9%




42
Controlled surface reactions (CSRs) and atomic layer deposition
Cu–Zr/SiO2


FBR
CO2/H2 = 1/3



370



43
Incipient wetness impregnation
Hierarchical meso-macroporous alumina supported copper catalysts
260, 3
FBR
CO2/H2 = 1/3
CO2 conv. = 10.5%; MeOH selec. = 30.3%

371











Cat. loading = 0.5 g














Flow rate = 60 ml min−1






44
Co-precipitation
Cu/ZnO@m-SiO2 (core–shell)
270, 5
FBR
H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3 (molar ratio)
CO2 conv. = 10.9%; MeOH selec. = 61.8%

372











WHSV = 6000 mL gcat−1 h−1
MeOH yield = 153.9 (g kgcat−1 h−1)




45
Co-precipitation
Cu/Zn/Al/Zr (hydrotalcite)
230, 5
FBR
GHSV = 8500 mL gcat−1 h−1
CO2 conv. = 18%; MeOH selec. = 68.4%

373











H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3
MeOH yield = 0.38 (g gcat−1 h−1)




46
Impregnation
In2O3/ZrO2 (9 wt% In)
300, 5
FBR
H2/CO2 = 4:1, and GHSV = 16000 h−1
STY MeOH = 0.33 4 g gcat−1 h−1

374



47
Precipitation and incipient wetness impregnation
Cu/a-ZrO2
260, 3
FBR
H2/CO2 = 4:1, and GHSV = 16000 h−1
CO2 conv. = 12%; MeOH selec. = 73%

172













STY MeOH = 80 (g kgcat−1 h−1)




48
Co-precipitation
Cu–Zn–Al–Zr
190, 5
FBR
H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, GHSV = 4000 h−1
CO2 conv. = 10%; MeOH selec. = 81.8%

375













STY MeOH = 0.087 (g gcat−1 h−1)




49
Spray drying
Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/ZrO2
250, 5;
FBR and slurry phase reactor
H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, and WHSV = 4000 mL gcat−1 h−1
CO2 conv. = 25.9%; MeOH selec. = 61.5%

376







220, 3


H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3
WTY MeOH = 218 (g kgcat−1 h−1)












WHSV = 2000 mL gcat−1 h−1
CO2 conv = 13.6%; MeOH selec. = 61.7%














WTY MeOH = 57.6 (g kgcat−1 h−1)




50
Micro-fluidic continuous coprecipitation
CuO–ZnO–ZrO2
280, 5
FBR
H2:CO2 (3.89:1)
STY = 486 gMeOH kgcata−1 h−1

377











GHSV = 10000 h−1






51
Calcination of commercial indium(III) oxide powders
In2O3
330, 4
Tubular micro-reactor
H2/CO2/N2 = 3/1/1, molar ratio
CO2 conv. = 7.13%; MeOH yield = 2.82%

309











WHSV = 15000 mL gcat−1 h−1








The selective hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol by employing heterogeneous catalysis utilizing green hydrogen from a non-carbon renewable source is the necessity of time. A huge amount of work has already been done in this area; still, a few inherent issues remain to be addressed, which put obstacles in the way of using it on large-scale industrial methanol synthesis from CO2. Here are the few issues which need to be addressed for making this technology more economical and industrially accepted.
(i) In heterogeneous catalysis, the nature of the active site and the interaction between the active components, i.e., promoters and supports, are the most important areas of research. By controlling the catalyst surface structure and chemical composition, the catalyst activity and selectivity can be fine-tuned. Also, the active component precursor and catalyst synthesis method also hugely affect the efficiency of the catalyst. The choice of support can substantially improve the catalyst activity by resisting Cu oxidation and ZnO agglomeration.68
(ii) CO2 activation requires a high temperature, but at a higher temperature, methanol selectivity is reduced due to the formation of CO via RWGS reactions. Therefore, a new catalyst system needs to be developed to activate CO2 at low temperatures and generate a higher methanol yield.
(iii) Significant efforts should be made to identify active sites, the formation of key intermediates, and the role of active sites to be carried out under reaction conditions. With the help of in situ XPS, in situ spectroscopy, and DFT calculation studies, understanding of the role of different active sites and reaction mechanisms of methanol synthesis from CO2 will become more accurate. In situ and operandi techniques (e.g., in situ XRD, in situ TEM, and in situ absorption techniques) with high accuracy should be employed to evaluate the true reaction kinetics, and a kinetic model should be developed which will help us to understand the structure–activity and reaction parameters with reference to methanol yield more closely.
(iv) Water is a common co-product in methanol synthesis reactions and water can deactivate the catalyst in reaction conditions. SOx gases are a very common impurity in CO2 derived from flue gas generated by burning biomass. The presence of sulfur-containing molecules can poison and sinter the catalyst under reaction conditions. The metal-containing catalyst is the most affected among all the researched catalysts for methanol generation. Therefore, a new generation of catalysts must be found that are hydrophobic in nature and can withstand water and sulfur. Recently, a few catalytic systems have shown improved water and sulfur poisoning resistance, such as In2O3,321,342 ZnO–ZrO2.343
One of the essential factors for a successful methanol synthesis plant is the expenditure control of the methanol production process to gain maximum profit. The cost of methanol is mainly dependent on the feedstock cost and capital cost. Therefore, mega-scale production of methanol (>3000 TPD) is one way to compete with the market. In this regard, reactor design and process optimization are among the significant factors for the industrial implementation of CO2 in the methanol process.
Until now, the steady-state model of fixed bed reactors has been extensively studied and it also provides scope for further refinements. The model prediction accuracy can be fine-tuned by the conversion of molar balances to mass balances. More studies have to be carried out to develop novel reactors such as slurry reactors and membrane reactors, shifting the thermodynamic equilibrium via in situ removal of water from the system. These approaches can greatly increase the methanol yield. There is a need for further development in the presently developed reaction systems, such as (i) integration of the methanol synthesis process with auto thermal reforming (ATR) synthesis gas technology; (ii) adopting an optimized algorithm on mega-scale plants which connects all the essential parts from feed gas generation to methanol synthesis and heat recovery (steam generation) to ensure a reduction in energy consumption and meeting of environmental regulations; and (iii) finding the optimal operation, including the amount of flue gas recycled to the ATR and/or methanol synthesis loop.
From the detailed discussion in the previous sections biomass, biogas, and industrial flue gas are the potential sources of feedstock for the future methanol industry. Therefore, we can imagine that the level of variables in the feedstock in terms of composition and operating conditions also have to be modified accordingly. So, the future development of reliable and simple dynamic models is necessary for predictive control and dynamic optimization of the methanol synthesis process for a wide variety of feedstock.
CO2 recycling to methanol synthesis is a great idea but with an expensive energy balance. There is a need for the adoption of renewable energy in this process. Renewable hydrogen is produced electrolytically (water splitting) and accounts for more than 4% of total hydrogen production. Hydrogen demand is continuously rising in methanol manufacturing, especially in countries where methanol is directly blended with fossil fuels, such as South Africa, China, Venezuela, and several Middle Eastern countries.344 Most of the hydrogen is produced from hydrocarbon processing in the petrochemical industry, usually by gasification of coal or natural gas reforming, which typically costs around <1 € kg−1 (ref. 345 and 346). The cost of hydrogen production mainly comes from the energy (heat and electricity) consumed during the process. Renewable energy is the cheapest option for hydrogen production, including geothermal, wind, hydropower and solar energy. Therefore, the best approach to consider is to produce hydrogen by renewable energy, preferably solar or wind, and use that hydrogen for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol synthesis. Several methods of hydrogen production are described in the literature and compared. For sustainable hydrogen production for ammonia synthesis, water electrolysis using wind and solar power is used, which provides a clue for methanol synthesis.347 In the future, thermochemical water splitting cycles such as Cu–Cl  could compete for cheap production of green hydrogen if they are coupled with solar energy as demonstrated in our lab in the ICT-OEC (Institute of Chemical Technology-ONGC Energy Centre) hydrogen production technology. The carbon dioxide refinery to produce a variety of fuels, chemicals and materials using green hydrogen for attaining the sustainable future will be a reality very soon.378 Methanol is part of this grand economic cycle. It is hoped that ultimately the net carbon zero goal will be achieved much before 2050.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict of interest is declared by the authors.
Acknowledgements
Ujjal Mondal got all the financial support as DSKPDF fellow of UGC. G. D. Yadav received support as R. T. Mody Distinguished Professor, Tata Chemicals Darbari Seth Distinguished Professor of Leadership and Innovation, and J. C. Bose National Fellow, DST, Govt. of India.
References
R. Kumar, A. K. Ghosh and P. Pal, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 698, 134169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, A. K. Ghosh and P. Pal, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 150, 545–557 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spadaro, M. Santoro, A. Palella and F. Arena, ChemEngineering, 2017, 1, 19 CrossRef .

          F. Arena, G. Mezzatesta, L. Spadaro and G. Trunfio, in Transformation and utilization of Carbon Dioxide, Springer,  2014, pp. 103–130 Search PubMed .

          M. Alvarado, The changing face of the global methanol industry, https://chemweek.com/CW/Document/80172/The-changing-face-of-the-global-methanol-industry.

          A. Sharma, Technology to achieve ‘Net Zero’, https://www.carbonclean.com/blog/reaching-net-zero, (accessed 13 April 2021).

          S. Zander, PhD Thesis, Technische Universität Berlin,  2012 .

          A. Bill, B. Eliasson, U. Kogelschatz and L.-M. Zhou, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  1998, vol. 114, pp. 541–544 Search PubMed .

          NFPA, Fire hazard properties of flammable liquids, gases, and volatile solids, National Fire Protection Association Quincy, Massachusetts,  1994 Search PubMed .
A. English, J. Rovner, J. Brown and S. Davies, Kirk-Othmer Encycl. Chem. Technol, 2000 Search PubMed .
The Paris Agreement, https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement, (accessed 5 May 2021).
Methanol supply/demand, https://www.methanol.org/methanol-price-supply-demand/, (accessed 1 May 2021).
A. Kaviraj, F. Bhunia and N. C. Saha, Int. J. Toxicol., 2004, 23, 55–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Cifre and O. Badr, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 519–527 CrossRef .
L. K. Rihko-Struckmann, A. Peschel, R. Hanke-Rauschenbach and K. Sundmacher, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 11073–11078 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jeong, K. I. Kim, T. H. Kim, C. H. Ko, H. C. Park and I. K. Song, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1296–1299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kauw, R. M. J. Benders and C. Visser, Energy, 2015, 90, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .

          D. P. Minh, A.-C. Roger, K. Parkhomenko, B. R. de Vasconcelos, K. Ro, D. Mahajan, L. Chen, S. Singh and D.-V. N. Vo, in Conversion of Carbon Dioxide into Hydrocarbons Vol. 2 Technology, Springer,  2020, pp. 111–157 Search PubMed .
M. Behrens, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14906–14908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. Yang and Y. Qian, Energy, 2019, 177, 304–318 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lv, L. Zhu, H. Li and B. Li, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 97, 346–355 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, X. Li, Q. Yang, W. Huang, P. Yu and D. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 1329–1342 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hotchkiss, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part A, 2003, 217, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. M. A. Malek, M. Hasanuzzaman and N. Abd Rahim, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2020, 22, 1229–1253 CrossRef .
M. Balat, M. Balat, E. Kırtay and H. Balat, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 3158–3168 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bisht and N. S. Thakur, Renewable Energy Focus, 2019, 28, 112–126 CrossRef .

          Y. Richardson, M. Drobek, A. Julbe, J. Blin and F. Pinta, in Recent advances in thermo-chemical conversion of biomass, Elsevier,  2015, pp. 213–250 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 866–876 CrossRef CAS .
G. Teixeira, L. Van de Steene, E. Martin, F. Gelix and S. Salvador, Fuel, 2012, 102, 514–524 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ghoneim, R. A. El-Salamony and S. A. El-Temtamy, World J. Eng. Technol., 2016, 4, 116 CrossRef .
M. H. Rafiq and J. E. Hustad, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 5428–5439 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Neiva and L. Gama, Brazilian J. Pet. Gas, 2010, 4(3), 119–127 CrossRef .
P. Samuel, Bull. Catal. Soc. India, 2003, 2, 82–99 Search PubMed .
C. Palm, P. Cremer, R. Peters and D. Stolten, J. Power Sources, 2002, 106, 231–237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hou, P. Chen, H. Fang, X. Zheng and T. Yashima, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 555–561 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. C. Luna and M. E. Iriarte, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 343, 10–15 CrossRef .
C. Pichas, P. Pomonis, D. Petrakis and A. Ladavos, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 386, 116–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, H. Wu, W. Yu, L. Mo, H. Lou and X. Zheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 839–843 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Múnera, C. Carrara, L. M. Cornaglia and E. A. Lombardo, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 161, 204–211 CrossRef .
O. Martin and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 3343–3352 RSC .
P. Forzatti, E. Tronconi and I. Pasquon, Catal. Rev., 1991, 33, 109–168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saito, Catal. Surv. Asia, 1998, 2, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Mims, C. H. F. Peden, J. Li and D. Mei, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 199–211 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liao, X.-P. Wu, J. Zheng, M. M.-J. Li, A. Kroner, Z. Zeng, X. Hong, Y. Yuan, X.-Q. Gong and S. C. E. Tsang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 270–280 RSC .
I. U. Din, M. S. Shaharun, M. A. Alotaibi, A. I. Alharthi and A. Naeem, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 20–33 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Whipple and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451–3458 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 3452–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, Y. Huang, M. Wu and Y. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1587–1604 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. da Silva, Fuel Process. Technol., 2016, 145, 42–61 CrossRef .
P. Tang, Q. Zhu, Z. Wu and D. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2580–2591 RSC .
M. He, Y. Sun and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9620–9633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schwarz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10096–10115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. He and Q. Zhu, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2003, 12, 81–89 CAS .
M. J. Brown and N. D. Parkyns, Catal. Today, 1991, 8, 305–335 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grundner, M. A. C. Markovits, G. Li, M. Tromp, E. A. Pidko, E. J. M. Hensen, A. Jentys, M. Sanchez-Sanchez and J. A. Lercher, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, N. Mota, M. Ojeda, S. Rojas, R. M. Navarro and J. L. G. Fierro, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Foulds and B. F. Gray, Fuel Process. Technol., 1995, 42, 129–150 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kunkel, D. Seeburg, T. Peppel, M. Stier and S. Wohlrab, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 2798 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, D. Willcox, M. Garland and H. H. Kung, J. Catal., 1985, 96, 251–260 CrossRef CAS .
C. Seidel, A. Jörke, B. Vollbrecht, A. Seidel-Morgenstern and A. Kienle, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2018, 175, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. McNeil, C. J. Schack and R. G. Rinker, Appl. Catal., 1989, 50, 265–285 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Henkel, PhD Thesis, Technische Universität München,  2011 .
G. H. Graaf, E. J. Stamhuis and A. Beenackers, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1988, 43, 3185–3195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takagawa and M. Ohsugi, J. Catal., 1987, 107, 161–172 CrossRef CAS .
K. Klier, V. Chatikavanij, R. G. Herman and G. W. Simmons, J. Catal., 1982, 74, 343–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, W. Ying and D. Fang, J. Coal Sci. Eng., 2009, 15, 98–103 CrossRef .
T. Kubota, I. Hayakawa, H. Mabuse, K. Mori, K. Ushikoshi, T. Watanabe and M. Saito, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 15, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Askgaard, J. K. Norskov, C. V. Ovesen and P. Stoltze, J. Catal., 1995, 156, 229–242 CrossRef CAS .
J. Skrzypek, M. Lachowska and H. Moroz, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1991, 46, 2809–2813 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Vanden Bussche and G. F. Froment, J. Catal., 1996, 161, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
P. Villa, P. Forzatti, G. Buzzi-Ferraris, G. Garone and I. Pasquon, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1985, 24, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Clausen, J. Schiøtz, L. Gråbæk, C. V. Ovesen, K. W. Jacobsen, J. K. Nørskov and H. Topsøe, Top. Catal., 1994, 1, 367–376 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, K. Futagami, T. Fujitani and J. Nakamura, Catal. Lett., 2001, 73, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Kunkes, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, R. Schlögl and M. Behrens, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kandemir, M. Friedrich, S. F. Parker, F. Studt, D. Lennon, R. Schlögl and M. Behrens, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17253–17258 RSC .
Y. Slotboom, M. J. Bos, J. Pieper, V. Vrieswijk, B. Likozar, S. R. A. Kersten and D. W. F. Brilman, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124181 CrossRef CAS .
V. E. Leonov, M. M. Karavaev, E. N. Tsybina and G. S. Petrishcheva, Kinet. Katal., 1973, 14, 970–975 CAS .
G. H. Graaf, H. Scholtens, E. J. Stamhuis and A. Beenackers, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1990, 45, 773–783 CrossRef CAS .

          I. B. Dybkjaer, in Chemical reactor design and technology, Springer,  1986, pp. 795–819 Search PubMed .
M. Šetinc and J. Levec, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2001, 56, 6081–6087 CrossRef .
A. Y. Rozovskii and G. I. Lin, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 137–150 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Lim, M.-J. Park, S.-H. Kang, H.-J. Chae, J. W. Bae and K.-W. Jun, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 10448–10455 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Portha, K. Parkhomenko, K. Kobl, A. C. Roger, S. Arab, J. M. Commenge and L. Falk, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 13133–13145 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Berty, Experiments in catalytic reaction engineering, Elsevier,  1999 Search PubMed .
N. Park, M.-J. Park, Y.-J. Lee, K.-S. Ha and K.-W. Jun, Fuel Process. Technol., 2014, 125, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Ng, D. Chadwick and B. A. Toseland, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1999, 54, 3587–3592 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, J. Cho, Y. Lee, M.-J. Park and W. B. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 8663–8673 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nestler, A. R. Schütze, M. Ouda, M. J. Hadrich, A. Schaadt, S. Bajohr and T. Kolb, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124881 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Basile and F. Dalena, Methanol: Science and Engineering, Elsevier,  2017 Search PubMed .

          M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt and H.-J. Wernicke, Methanol: the basic chemical and energy feedstock of the future, Springer,  2014, ch. 4.6 Search PubMed .
G. C. Chinchen, P. J. Denny, J. R. Jennings, M. S. Spencer and K. C. Waugh, Appl. Catal., 1988, 36, 1–65 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Palma, E. Meloni, C. Ruocco, M. Martino and A. Ricca, in Methanol, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 29–51 Search PubMed .
D. Sheldon, Johnson Matthey Technol. Rev., 2017, 61, 172–182 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bozzano and F. Manenti, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2016, 56, 71–105 CrossRef .

          J. A. Dumesic, Handbook of Heterogeneous catalysis, Wiley-VCH,  2008 Search PubMed .

          J. R. LeBlanc and R. V. Schneider, in Proceedings of the 1991 World Methanol Conference, Vancouver, BC, Canada,  1991 .

          U. Zardi and E. Comandini, US Pat., US4405562A,  1983 Search PubMed.
F. Hartig and F. J. Keil, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1993, 32, 424–437 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohsaki, K. Shoji, O. Okuda, Y. Kobayashi and H. Koshimizu, Chem. Econ. Eng. Rev., 1985, 17, 31–38 CAS .
P. J. A. Tijm, F. J. Waller and D. M. Brown, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 221, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .

          S. N. Narvi, Methanol production via Toyo process, https://ihsmarkit.com/products/chemical-technology-pep-reviews-methanol-production-via-toyo-2011.html, (accessed 20 May 2021).
K. Hirotani, H. Nakamura and K. Shoji, Catal. Surv. Asia, 1998, 2, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Dengel, Global E&C Solution, Buenos Aires, Argentina,  2013 Search PubMed .

          T. Wurzel, presented in part at DGMK/SCI conference: Synthesis gas chemistry, Dresden, Germany,  2006 .

          P. J. Dahl, T. S. Christensen, S. Winter-Madsen and S. M. King, in Nitrogen+Syngas International Proced Conference & Exhibition,  2014, pp. 2–3 .

          J. Haid and U. Koss, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  2001, vol. 136, pp. 399–404 Search PubMed .
M. Lembeck, Linde Rep. Sci. Technol., 1986, 5–8 Search PubMed .

          K. Kobayashi, H. Osora, H. Nagai and H. Ohira, US Pat., 7189379B2,  2007 Search PubMed .

          M. Katsutoshi and M. Kuwa, US Pat., 4938930A,  1990 Search PubMed .
W. B. Ellis, J. Ind. Ecol., 1999, 3, 192–195 CrossRef .

          F. Baratto, H. Rong and H. Anxin, presented in part at Casale Coal-Based Methanol Synloops, Barcelona, Spain,  2010 .

          P. L. Golosnichenko, S. M. Kononov, E. Filippi and N. Ringer, in World Methanol Conference, Phoenix, Arizona, USA,  2003 .

          E. Filippi, presented in part at 5th Iranian Petrochemical Forum, Tehran, Iran,  2003.

          I. Muscionico and P. Moreo, Jiu Tai Energy,  2013 .

          E. Filippi, Methanol Casale's Latest Converters: New Milestones for the Methanol Industry, Prague, Czech Republic,  2006 Search PubMed .
Davy process technology, http://www.davyprotech.com/what-we-do/%0Alicensed-processes-and-core-technologies/core-technologies/synthesis/%0Aspecification/, (accessed 28 December 2020).
U. Mondal and G. D. Yadav, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 32, 299–230 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mondal and G. D. Yadav, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 32, 321–338 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Khadzhiev, N. V. Kolesnichenko and N. N. Ezhova, Pet. Chem., 2016, 56, 77–95 CrossRef CAS .

          E. C. Heydorn, B. W. Diamond and R. D. Lilly, Final report, Vol. 2: Project performance and economics of Air Products and Chemicals,  2003 Search PubMed .

          R. L. Espino and T. S. Pletzke, US Pat., 3888896,  1975 Search PubMed .

          R. L. Espino and T. S. Pletzke, US Pat., 4031123A,  1977 Search PubMed .

          L. W. Bonnell and J. M. Pietrantonio, US Pat., 4628066,  1986 Search PubMed .

          R. L. Mednick and D. B. Blum, US Pat., 4567204A,  1986 Search PubMed .
S. Ledakowicz, M. Stelmachowski, A. Chacuk and W.-D. Deckwer, Chem. Eng. Process., 1992, 31, 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Chinchen, K. Mansfield and M. S. Spencer, CHEMTECH, 1990, 20, 692–699 CAS .
V. R. Parameswaran, M. R. Gogate, B. G. Lee and S. Lee, Fuel Sci. Technol. Int., 1991, 9, 695–744 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gusi, F. Trifiro, A. Vaccari and G. Del Piero, J. Catal., 1985, 94, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .

          H. A. Al-Adwani, A kinetic study of methanol synthesis in a slurry reactor using a CuO/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst, Texas A & M Univ., College Station, TX (United States),  1992 Search PubMed .
A. Cybulski, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 1994, 36, 557–615 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Roberts, M. A. Márquez and M. S. McCutchen, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Heydorn, B. Diamond and R. Lilly, Commercial-Scale Demonstration of the Liquid Phase Methanol (LPMEOH_) Process: Final Report. Prepared by Air Products Liquid Phase Conversion Company for the US DOE National Energy Technology Laboratory,  2003 Search PubMed .
G. W. Roberts, M. A. Márquez and C. A. Haney, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 183, 395–410 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, H. Song, D. Sun, S. Li, X. Yang, Y. Zhao, Z. Huang and Y. Wu, Fuel, 2003, 82, 233–239 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2006, 61, 1459–1469 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohyama, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 180, 217–225 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohyama and H. Kishida, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 172, 241–247 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. W. Tierney, Y. T. Shah and I. Wender, Fuel Process. Technol., 1989, 23, 149–167 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reubroycharoen, T. Vitidsant, Y. Yoneyama and N. Tsubaki, Catal. Today, 2004, 89, 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
Development of highly efficient methanol synthesis process with new catalysts, Spotlight // https:\\www.nssmc.%0Acom/en/tech/report/nsc/pdf/n9219.pdf.
J. Wang, R. G. Anthony and A. Akgerman, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2005, 29, 2474–2484 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Periana, D. J. Taube, S. Gamble, H. Taube, T. Satoh and H. Fujii, Science, 1998, 280, 560–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Kung, Catal. Today, 1992, 11, 443–453 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Lee, Methanol synthesis technology, CRC press,  1989 Search PubMed .
B. Sea and K.-H. Lee, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2003, 80, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
R. Struis, S. Stucki and M. Wiedorn, J. Membr. Sci., 1996, 113, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Menendez, E. Piera, J. Coronas and J. Santamaría, ES Pat., 2164544B1,  2003 Search PubMed .

          F. Gallucci, D. A. P. Tanaka, J. A. Medrano and J. L. V. Sole, in Current Trends and Future Developments on (Bio-) Membranes, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 235–260 Search PubMed .
A. Brunetti, M. Migliori, D. Cozza, E. Catizzone, G. Giordano and G. Barbieri, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 10471–10479 CrossRef CAS .
R. Raso, M. Tovar, J. Lasobras, J. Herguido, I. Kumakiri, S. Araki and M. Menéndez, Catal. Today, 2021, 364, 270–275 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gallucci, L. Paturzo and A. Basile, Chem. Eng. Process., 2004, 43, 1029–1036 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Rahimpour, F. Rahmani, M. Bayat and E. Pourazadi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 36, 284–298 CrossRef .
K. M. Wagialla and S. Elnashaie, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1991, 30, 2298–2308 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Rahimpour, Fuel Process. Technol., 2008, 89, 556–566 CrossRef CAS .
F. Samimi, D. Karimipourfard and M. R. Rahimpour, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2018, 140, 44–67 CrossRef .
A. Mirvakili and M. R. Rahimpour, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2015, 91, 1059–1070 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rahmatmand, M. R. Rahimpour and P. Keshavarz, Fuel Process. Technol., 2019, 193, 159–179 CrossRef CAS .
A. Keshavarz, A. Mirvakili, S. Chahibakhsh, A. Shariati and M. R. Rahimpour, Chem. Eng. Process., 2020, 158, 108176 CrossRef CAS .

          C. S. Nielsen, Topsøe methanol technology for coal based plants, http://www.topsoe.com/sites/default/files/topsoe_metha%0Anol_coal_based_plants.ashx_pdf, (accessed 20 May 2021).

          A. G. Linde
        , Company Website.

          S. Lee, J. G. Speight and S. K. Loyalka, Handbook of alternative fuel technologies, CRC Press,  2014 Search PubMed .
K. C. Waugh, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 51–75 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Nelson, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2007, 85, 127 CrossRef .
J. C. J. Bart and R. P. A. Sneeden, Catal. Today, 1987, 2, 1–124 CrossRef CAS .

          D. S. A. Simakov, Renewable synthetic fuels and chemicals from carbon dioxide: fundamentals, catalysis, design considerations and technological challenges, Springer,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. V. Twigg and M. S. Spencer, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 191–203 CrossRef CAS .

          G. A. Somorjai and Y. Li, Introduction to surface chemistry and catalysis, John Wiley & Sons,  2010 Search PubMed .
X. Dong, F. Li, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, J. Wang and Y. Tan, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 191, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Liu, J.-T. Liu, S.-Z. Liu, J. Li, Z.-H. Gao, Z.-J. Zuo and W. Huang, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Wang, B. Yang and L. Guo, Appl. Catal., A, 2019, 571, 51–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Díez-Ramírez, J. A. Díaz, P. Sánchez and F. Dorado, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 22, 71–80 CrossRef .
T. Witoon, J. Chalorngtham, P. Dumrongbunditkul, M. Chareonpanich and J. Limtrakul, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 293, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Choi, Y. H. Lee, D.-W. Lee, D.-J. Moon and K.-Y. Lee, Mol. Catal., 2017, 434, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ahouari, A. Soualah, A. Le Valant, L. Pinard, P. Magnoux and Y. Pouilloux, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2013, 110, 131–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guil-López, N. Mota, J. Llorente, E. Millán, B. Pawelec, J. L. G. Fierro and R. M. Navarro, Materials, 2019, 12(23), 3920 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Quan, J. Zhao, H. Li and J. Ren, Mol. Catal., 2021, 505, 111514 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arena, G. Italiano, K. Barbera, S. Bordiga, G. Bonura, L. Spadaro and F. Frusteri, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 350, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gesmanee and W. Koo-Amornpattana, Energy Procedia, 2017, 138, 739–744 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Fujimoto and Y. Yu, in Studies in Surface
Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  1993, vol. 77, pp. 393–396 Search PubMed .
B. Hu, Y. Yin, G. Liu, S. Chen, X. Hong and S. C. E. Tsang, J. Catal., 2018, 359, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Liu, G. Q. Lu, Z.-F. Yan and J. Beltramini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 6518–6530 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Meunier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4053–4054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liao, Y. Huang, J. Ge, W. Zheng, K. Tedsree, P. Collier, X. Hong and S. C. Tsang, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 2210–2213 CrossRef .
L. E. Y. Nonneman and V. Ponec, Catal. Lett., 1990, 7, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Szanyi and D. W. Goodman, Catal. Lett., 1991, 10, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, C. Liu, A. Halder, E. C. Tyo, A. B. F. Martinson, S. Seifert, P. Zapol, L. A. Curtiss and S. Vajda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 10406–10412 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arena, K. Barbera, G. Italiano, G. Bonura, L. Spadaro and F. Frusteri, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kühl, M. Hävecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr and B.-L. Kniep, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Graciani, K. Mudiyanselage, F. Xu, A. E. Baber, J. Evans, S. D. Senanayake, D. J. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek and J. F. Sanz, Science, 2014, 345, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ladera, F. J. Pérez-Alonso, J. M. González-Carballo, M. Ojeda, S. Rojas and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 241–248 CrossRef .
F. Studt, M. Behrens, E. L. Kunkes, N. Thomas, S. Zander, A. Tarasov, J. Schumann, E. Frei, J. B. Varley and F. Abild-Pedersen, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1105–1111 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. T. Van, L. C. Loc, N. Tri and H. T. Cuong, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 12, 405–415 CrossRef .
U. J. Etim, Y. Song and Z. Zhong, Front. Earth Sci., 2020, 8, 1–26 CrossRef .
Y. Kanai, T. Watanabe, T. Fujitani, M. Saito, J. Nakamura and T. Uchijima, Catal. Lett., 1994, 27, 67–78 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nakamura, T. Fujitani, T. Uchijima and J. Nakamura, Surf. Sci., 1998, 400, 387–400 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Valant, C. Comminges, C. Tisseraud, C. Canaff, L. Pinard and Y. Pouilloux, J. Catal., 2015, 324, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tisseraud, C. Comminges, S. Pronier, Y. Pouilloux and A. Le Valant, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 106–114 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tisseraud, C. Comminges, A. Habrioux, S. Pronier, Y. Pouilloux and A. Le Valant, Mol. Catal., 2018, 446, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, C. Xu, H. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Liu and J. Liu, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 28, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meng, Q. Zhang, G. Yang, R. Yang, Y. Yoneyama and N. Tsubaki, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 295, 160–166 CrossRef CAS .
X.-X. Hou, C.-H. Xu, Y.-L. Liu, J.-J. Li, X.-D. Hu, J. Liu, J.-Y. Liu and Q. Xu, J. Catal., 2019, 379, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
L. Angelo, K. Kobl, L. M. M. Tejada, Y. Zimmermann, K. Parkhomenko and A.-C. Roger, C. R. Chim., 2015, 18, 250–260 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z. Ma, N. Zhao, W. Wei, T. Hu and Y. Sun, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 222–227 CrossRef CAS .
C. Si, H. Ban, K. Chen, X. Wang, R. Cao, Q. Yi, Z. Qin, L. Shi, Z. Li and W. Cai, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 594, 117466 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tada, S. Kayamori, T. Honma, H. Kamei, A. Nariyuki, K. Kon, T. Toyao, K. Shimizu and S. Satokawa, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7809–7819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tada, F. Watanabe, K. Kiyota, N. Shimoda, R. Hayashi, M. Takahashi, A. Nariyuki, A. Igarashi and S. Satokawa, J. Catal., 2017, 351, 107–118 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ro, Y. Liu, M. R. Ball, D. H. K. Jackson, J. P. Chada, C. Sener, T. F. Kuech, R. J. Madon, G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7040–7050 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lam, K. Larmier, P. Wolf, S. Tada, O. V. Safonova and C. Copéret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10530–10535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Larmier, W. Liao, S. Tada, E. Lam, R. Verel, A. Bansode, A. Urakawa, A. Comas-Vives and C. Copéret, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Noh, E. Lam, J. L. Alfke, K. Larmier, K. Searles, P. Wolf and C. Copéret, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 968–972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tada, K. Oshima, Y. Noda, R. Kikuchi, M. Sohmiya, T. Honma and S. Satokawa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 19434–19445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, P. E. Boahene, Y. Hu, A. Dalai and H. Wang, Catalysts, 2019, 9(11), 922 CrossRef .
K. T. Jung and A. T. Bell, Catal. Lett., 2002, 80, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ye, W. Na, W. Gao and H. Wang, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1–13 Search PubMed .
K. Samson, M. Sliwa, R. P. Socha, K. Góra-Marek, D. Mucha, D. Rutkowska-Zbik, J. F. Paul, M. Ruggiero-Mikoajczyk, R. Grabowski and J. Soczyński, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3730–3741 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Hayward, P. J. Smith, S. A. Kondrat, M. Bowker and G. J. Hutchings, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1655–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nakamura, T. Uchijima, Y. Kanai and T. Fujitani, Catal. Today, 1996, 28, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nakamura, H. Nakano, T. Fujitani, T. Uchijima and J. Nakamura, Surf. Sci., 1998, 402, 92–95 CrossRef .
D. Allam, S. Bennici, L. Limousy and S. Hocine, C. R. Chim., 2019, 22, 227–237 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan and K. Fujimoto, J. Catal., 1994, 150, 217–220 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rodriguez, P. Liu, D. J. Stacchiola, S. D. Senanayake, M. G. White and J. G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6696–6706 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ouyang, W. Tan and B. Liu, Catal. Commun., 2017, 95, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, J. Yu, B. Liu, C. Si, H. Ban, W. Cai, C. Li, Z. Li and K. Fujimoto, J. Catal., 2019, 372, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karelovic, G. Galdames, J. C. Medina, C. Yévenes, Y. Barra and R. Jiménez, J. Catal., 2019, 369, 415–426 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, H. Yang, P. Gao, X. Li, J. Zhang, H. Liu, H. Wang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 642–651 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Bando, K. Sayama, H. Kusama, K. Okabe and H. Arakawa, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 165, 391–409 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, D. Li, S. Zhang, K. Wang and J. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16391 RSC .
C. Liu, X. Guo, Q. Guo, D. Mao, J. Yu and G. Lu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 425, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, Y. Li, X. Cai, H. Zhou, Y. Li, W. Lin, S. Huang, K. Ding, W. Chen and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24118–24132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kattel, B. Yan, Y. Yang, J. G. Chen and P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12440–12450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Fornero, P. B. Sanguineti, D. L. Chiavassa, A. L. Bonivardi and M. A. Baltanás, Catal. Today, 2013, 213, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Sanguineti, M. A. Baltanas and A. L. Bonivardi, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 504, 476–481 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, X.-L. Liang, H.-Y. Li, G.-D. Lin, P. Zhang and H.-B. Zhang, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lin, X. Liang, Z. Liu, J. Xie, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 47–59 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Liang, X. Dong, G.-D. Lin and H.-B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Q. Chen, Q. Ma, Y. Li and Z. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 356, 114–120 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, H. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Kang and S. Wang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 553–559 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, D. A. Bulushev, O. Y. Podyacheva, A. I. Boronin, L. S. Kibis, E. Y. Gerasimov, S. Beloshapkin, I. A. Seryak, Z. R. Ismagilov and J. R. H. Ross, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Wu, M. Fu and D. Ye, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 45320–45330 RSC .
X. Shi, H. Yu, S. Gao, X. Li, H. Fang, R. Li, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Liang and Y. Yuan, Fuel, 2017, 210, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
V. Deerattrakul, P. Dittanet, M. Sawangphruk and P. Kongkachuichay, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 16, 104–113 CrossRef CAS .

          H.-B. Zhang, X. Dong, G.-D. Lin, Y.-Z. Yuan, P. Zhang and K. R. Tsai, Utilization of Greenhouse Gases, ACS Publications,  2003, ch. 13, pp. 195–209 Search PubMed .
V. Deerattrakul, W. Limphirat and P. Kongkachuichay, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2017, 80, 495–502 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, P. Liao, H. Wang, J. Sun and P. Gao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 215, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Poutsma, L. F. Elek, P. A. Ibarbia, A. P. Risch and J. A. Rabo, J. Catal., 1978, 52, 157–168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X. Su, X. Liu, X. Pan, G. Pei, Y. Huang, X. Wang, T. Zhang and H. Geng, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 514, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bahruji, M. Bowker, G. Hutchings, N. Dimitratos, P. Wells, E. Gibson, W. Jones, C. Brookes, D. Morgan and G. Lalev, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 133–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Malik, S. F. Zaman, A. A. Al-Zahrani, M. A. Daous, H. Driss and L. A. Petrov, Bulg. Chem. Commun., 2018, 189 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Shen, M. Okumura, Y. Matsumura and M. Haruta, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 213, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. G. White and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iwasa, H. Suzuki, M. Terashita, M. Arai and N. Takezawa, Catal. Lett., 2004, 96, 75–78 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kim, J. S. Lee and D. L. Trimm, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 319–324 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Malik, S. F. Zaman, A. A. Al-Zahrani, M. A. Daous, H. Driss and L. A. Petrov, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 560, 42–53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumura, W.-J. Shen, Y. Ichihashi and M. Okumura, J. Catal., 2001, 197, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. Lin, S. Lin, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, S. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Zhang and S. Wan, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 58, 564–572 CrossRef .
V. M. Lebarbier, R. A. Dagle, L. Kovarik, J. A. Lizarazo-Adarme, D. L. King and D. R. Palo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2116–2127 RSC .
I. Melian-Cabrera, M. L. Granados and J. L. G. Fierro, Catal. Lett., 2002, 79, 165–170 CrossRef CAS .

          A. H. Liu, J. Gao and L. N. He, New Futur. Dev. Catal., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2013, pp. 81–147 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, F. Fan, Z. Jiang, X. Gao, J. Wei and T. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26287–26299 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, N. Koizumi, X. Guo and C. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170, 173–185 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Q. Ge, W. Li and H. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujitani, M. Saito, Y. Kanai, T. Watanabe, J. Nakamura and T. Uchijima, Appl. Catal., A, 1995, 125, L199–L202 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujitani and I. Nakamura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 75, 1393–1398 CrossRef CAS .

          A. L. Bonivardi, D. L. Chiavassa, C. A. Querini and M. A. Baltanás, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  2000, vol. 130, pp. 3747–3752 Search PubMed .
J. Qu, X. Zhou, F. Xu, X.-Q. Gong and S. C. E. Tsang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24452–24466 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hartadi, D. Widmann and R. J. Behm, J. Catal., 2016, 333, 238–250 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hartadi, D. Widmann and R. J. Behm, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 456–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-Y. Topsøe and H. Topsøe, Top. Catal., 1999, 8, 267–270 CrossRef .
S. Kuld, C. Conradsen, P. G. Moses, I. Chorkendorff and J. Sehested, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 6051–6055 CrossRef .
Y. Hartadi, D. Widmann and R. J. Behm, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 10781–10791 RSC .
N. Pasupulety, H. Driss, Y. A. Alhamed, A. A. Alzahrani, M. A. Daous and L. Petrov, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 504, 308–318 CrossRef CAS .
J. Strunk, K. Kaehler, X. Xia, M. Comotti, F. Schueth, T. Reinecke and M. Muhler, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 359, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Köppel, C. Stöcker and A. Baiker, J. Catal., 1998, 179, 515–527 CrossRef .

          A. Baiker, M. Kilo, M. Maciejewski, S. Menzi and A. Wokaun, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  1993, vol. 75, pp. 1257–1272 Search PubMed .
C. Froehlich, R. A. Köppel, A. Baiker, M. Kilo and A. Wokaun, Appl. Catal., A, 1993, 106, 275–293 CrossRef CAS .
R. Grabowski, J. Słoczyński, M. Sliwa, D. Mucha, R. P. Socha, M. Lachowska and J. Skrzypek, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 266–278 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pasupulety, H. Driss, M. R. A. Rafiqui, A. A. Al-Zahrani, M. A. Daous, A. M. Ali, S. F. Zaman and L. A. Petrov, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 3197–3204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, C. P. O'Grady, A. A. Peterson, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7114–7122 RSC .
K. Dhar and C. Cavallotti, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 8676–8688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Senanayake, J. A. Rodriguez and D. Stacchiola, Top. Catal., 2013, 56, 1488–1498 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bruix, J. A. Rodriguez, P. J. Ramírez, S. D. Senanayake, J. Evans, J. B. Park, D. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek and F. Illas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8968–8974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kattel, B. Yan, J. G. Chen and P. Liu, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 115–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Men, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, Z.-H. Luo, S. Shao, Y.-B. Li and Y.-X. Pan, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 200, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
T. Toyao, S. Kayamori, Z. Maeno, S. M. A. H. Siddiki and K. Shimizu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8187–8196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, H. García and F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4606–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341(6149) DOI:10.1126/science.1230444 .
Z. Li, T. M. Rayder, L. Luo, J. A. Byers and C.-K. Tsung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8082–8085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rungtaweevoranit, J. Baek, J. R. Araujo, B. S. Archanjo, K. M. Choi, O. M. Yaghi and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7645–7649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, X. Hong and G. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 93–102 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, Q. Xu and H.-L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4774–4808 RSC .
H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, G. Liu, D. Xu, X. Hong and S. C. E. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23878–23885 RSC .
W. Z. Yang, M. S. Fu, X. Q. Liu, H. Y. Zhu and X. M. Chen, Ceram. Int., 2011, 37, 2747–2753 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, J. Gao, W. Fang and Q. Li, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 2000–2003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, F. Li, P. Gao, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, F. Li, C. Xin, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 1177–1185 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, F. Li, P. Gao, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48888–48896 RSC .
V. Rodríguez-González, R. Zanella, L. A. Calzada and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8911–8917 CrossRef .
P. W. Park, C. S. Ragle, C. L. Boyer, M. Lou Balmer, M. Engelhard and D. McCready, J. Catal., 2002, 210, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dou, M. Zhang, Y. Chen and Y. Yu, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2018, 1126, 7–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Zhang, F. Ding, A. Zhang, X. Guo and C. Song, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1406–1423 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bielz, H. Lorenz, P. Amann, B. Klotzer and S. Penner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6622–6628 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umegaki, K. Kuratani, Y. Yamada, A. Ueda, N. Kuriyama, T. Kobayashi and Q. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 566–570 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lorenz, W. Jochum, B. Klötzer, M. Stöger-Pollach, S. Schwarz, K. Pfaller and S. Penner, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 347, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, C. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7817–7825 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, C. Liu, D. Mei and Q. Ge, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1296–1306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tsoukalou, P. M. Abdala, D. Stoian, X. Huang, M.-G. Willinger, A. Fedorov and C. R. Müller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13497–13505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Frei, M. Capdevila-Cortada, R. García-Muelas, C. Mondelli, N. López, J. A. Stewart, D. C. Ferré and J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 313–321 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, Z. Fan, J. Ye, J. Yan, Q. Ge, Y. Li, W. He, W. Yang and C. Liu, J. CO2 Util., 2015, 12, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
O. Martin, A. J. Martín, C. Mondelli, S. Mitchell, T. F. Segawa, R. Hauert, C. Drouilly, D. Curulla-Ferré and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6261–6265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dou, M. Zhang, Y. Chen and Y. Yu, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 3723–3731 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Chen, C. Cao, T. B. Chen, X. Ding, H. Huang, L. Shen, X. Cao, M. Zhu, J. Xu, J. Gao and Y. F. Han, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8785–8797 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, X. Nie, Y. Gong, C. M. Moran, J. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Chang, X. Guo, K. S. Walton and C. Song, J. Catal., 2020, 383, 283–296 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, C. Pei, R. Luo, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19523–19531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Frei, C. Mondelli, A. Cesarini, F. Krumeich, R. Hauert, J. A. Stewart, D. Curulla Ferré and J. Perez-Ramirez, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 1133–1145 CrossRef .
A. Tsoukalou, P. M. Abdala, A. Armutlulu, E. Willinger, A. Fedorov and C. R. Müller, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10060–10067 CrossRef .
N. Rui, K. Sun, C. Shen and C.-J. Liu, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 42, 101313 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rui, F. Zhang, K. Sun, Z. Liu, W. Xu, E. Stavitski, S. D. Senanayake, J. A. Rodriguez and C.-J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11307–11317 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, Q. Tan and D. Wu, AIChE J., 2019, 65, 1047–1058 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bavykina, I. Yarulina, A. J. Al Abdulghani, L. Gevers, M. N. Hedhili, X. Miao, A. R. Galilea, A. Pustovarenko, A. Dikhtiarenko and A. Cadiau, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 6910–6918 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Frei, C. Mondelli, R. García-Muelas, K. S. Kley, B. Puértolas, N. López, O. V. Safonova, J. A. Stewart, D. C. Ferré and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cai, J. Dai, W. Li, K. B. Tan, Z. Huang, G. Zhan, J. Huang and Q. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13275–13289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, K. Sun, X. Jia and C. Liu, Catal. Today, 2021, 365, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, K. Sun, J. Wang, C. Shen and C. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 409–415 CrossRef .
Z. Han, C. Tang, J. Wang, L. Li and C. Li, J. Catal., 2021, 394, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, N. Rui, Z. Zhang, Z. Sun, Q. Ge and C.-J. Liu, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 5059–5066 RSC .
Z. Lu, K. Sun, J. Wang, Z. Zhang and C. Liu, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 1360 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Li, G. Melaet, W. T. Ralston, K. An, C. Brooks, Y. Ye, Y. S. Liu, J. Zhu, J. Guo, S. Alayoglu and G. A. Somorjai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–5 CAS .
J. Wang, G. Li, Z. Li, C. Tang, Z. Feng, H. An, H. Liu, T. Liu and C. Li, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1–11 Search PubMed .
Z. Han, C. Tang, F. Sha, S. Tang, J. Wang and C. Li, J. Catal., 2021, 396, 242–250 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Tang, G. Li, Z. Han, Z. Li, H. Liu, F. Cheng and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10253–10259 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, J. Huang, X. Liu, D. Fu, J. Huang, Q. Li and G. Zhan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33263–33272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Yi, X. Wang, F. Liu, J. Cao and H. Pan, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 595, 117507 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, F. Fan, M. Bai, F. Xue, X. Ma, Z. Jiang and T. Fang, Mol. Catal., 2019, 466, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Li, H. Zou, J. Zheng, T. Wu, T. Chan, Y. Soo, X. Wu, X. Gong, T. Chen and K. Roy, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 16039–16046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. D. Nguyen, T. H. Dang, N. T. Dinh and H. H. D. Nguyen, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 85006 CrossRef .
C. Paris, A. Karelovic, R. Manrique, S. Le Bras, F. Devred and D. Debecker, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6409–6417 CAS .
M. Wencka, M. Hahne, A. Kocjan, S. Vrtnik, P. Koželj, D. Korže, Z. Jagličić, M. Sorić, P. Popčević and J. Ivkov, Intermetallics, 2014, 55, 56–65 CrossRef CAS .
A. García-Trenco, A. Regoutz, E. R. White, D. J. Payne, M. S. P. Shaffer and C. K. Williams, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 9–18 CrossRef .
P. Wu and B. Yang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 6102–6113 RSC .
J. L. Snider, V. Streibel, M. A. Hubert, T. S. Choksi, E. Valle, D. C. Upham, J. Schumann, M. S. Duyar, A. Gallo and F. Abild-Pedersen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3399–3412 CrossRef CAS .
O. Martin, A. J. Martín, C. Mondelli, S. Mitchell, T. F. Segawa, R. Hauert, C. Drouilly, D. Curulla-Ferré and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6261–6265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Li, Z. Li, C. Tang, Z. Feng, H. An, H. Liu, T. Liu and C. Li, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701290 CrossRef PubMed .
Hydrogen market outlook, https://ihsmarkit.com/products/hydrogen-chemical-economics-handbook.html, (accessed 28 May 2021).
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3, 65–73 CrossRef .
G. Iaquaniello, G. Centi, A. Salladini, E. Palo, S. Perathoner and L. Spadaccini, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 243, 611–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghavam, M. Vahdati, I. A. Wilson and P. Styring, Front. Energy Res., 2021, 9, 34 Search PubMed .
C. Temvuttirojn, Y. Poo-arporn, N. Chanlek, C. K. Cheng, C. C. Chong, J. Limtrakul and T. Witoon, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 5525–5535 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ren, X. Fan, Z. Shang, W. R. Shoemaker, L. Ma, T. Wu, S. Li, N. B. Klinghoffer, M. Yu and X. Liang, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 36, 82–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, P. E. Boahene, Y. Hu, A. Dalai and H. Wang, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 922 CrossRef .
J. Song, S. Liu, C. Yang, G. Wang, H. Tian, Z. Zhao, R. Mu and J. Gong, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tada, K. Oshima, Y. Noda, R. Kikuchi, M. Sohmiya, T. Honma and S. Satokawa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 19434–19445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shaharun, M. S. Shaharun, M. F. M. Shah and N. A. Amer, Sains Malays., 2018, 47, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, T. Wang and J. G. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 7922–7928 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, J. Yu and B. Liu, J. Catal., 2019, 372, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yao, X. Shen, Y. Pan and Z. Peng, J. Catal., 2019, 372, 74–85 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, D. Mao, X. Guo and J. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 4197–4207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Y. Men, F. Wu, Q. Zhao, R. Singh, P. Xiao, T. Du and P. A. Webley, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 29, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, C. Jeong, J. H. Baik and Y.-W. Suh, Catal. Today, 2020, 347, 70–78 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, D. Mao, X. Guo and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 456, 403–409 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, P. Liao, H. Wang, J. Sun and P. Gao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 215, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
T. Van Tran, N. Le-Phuc, T. H. Nguyen, T. T. Dang, P. T. Ngo and D. A. Nguyen, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2017, 16(4) DOI:10.1515/ijcre-2017-0046 .
S. Tada, K. Larmier, R. Büchel and C. Copéret, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2056–2060 RSC .
A. Zurbel, M. Kraft, S. Kavurucu-Schubert and M. Bertau, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2018, 90, 721–724 CrossRef CAS .
E. Choi, K. Song, S. An, K. Lee, M. Youn, K. Park, S. Jeong and H. Kim, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 35, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, M. Gong, K. Cao, Y. Zhang, J. Li and R. Chen, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 3772–3778 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Chiang, K. S. Lin and Y. G. Lin, Top. Catal., 2017, 60, 685–696 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Gaikwad, D. Koziej, M. Niederberger and A. Urakawa, in ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY, AMER CHEMICAL SOC, 1155 16TH ST, NW, WASHINGTON, DC 20036 USA,  2017, vol. 253 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Yang, P. Gao, H. Zhu, L. Zhong, H. Wang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 17, 263–272 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ro, Y. Liu, M. R. Ball, D. H. K. Jackson, J. P. Chada, C. Sener, T. F. Kuech, R. J. Madon, G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 12 Search PubMed .
N. Kanjanasoontorn, T. Permsirivanich, T. Numpilai, T. Witoon, N. Chanlek, M. Niamlaem, C. Warakulwit and J. Limtrakul, Catal. Lett., 2016, 146, 1943–1955 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, P. Gao, C. Zhang, L. Zhong, X. Li, S. Wang, H. Wang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2016, 84, 56–60 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, H. Yang, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Zhong, H. Wang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 16, 32–41 CrossRef CAS .
O. Martin, A. J. Martín, C. Mondelli, S. Mitchell, T. F. Segawa, R. Hauert, C. Drouilly, D. Curulla-Ferré and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6369–6373 CrossRef .
S. Xiao, Y. Zhang, P. Gao, L. Zhong, X. Li, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Today, 2017, 281, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhong, H. Wang, P. Gao, X. Li, S. Xiao, G. Ding, W. Wei and Y. Sun, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 15, 72–82 CrossRef CAS .
L. Angelo, M. Girleanu, O. Ersen, C. Serra, K. Parkhomenko and A.-C. Roger, Catal. Today, 2016, 270, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Yadav, G. D. Yadav and S. C. Patankar, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2020, 22, 1757–1774 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc02078aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Ujjal Mondal	Ujjal Mondal earned his Ph.D. (2017) in Chemical Engineering from the National Institute of Technology, Rourkela. His Ph.D. dissertation was on the chemoselective reduction of nitroarenes by hydrogen sulphide using phase transfer catalysis. He was awarded a DS Kothari Postdoctoral Fellowship (DSKPDF), for 2017–2020 by the UGC to work under the guidance of Prof. G. D. Yadav in ICT Mumbai, where he has been involved in the development of multi-functional catalytic processes to utilize CO2 to produce renewable fuel, such as methanol and dimethyl ether (DME) in a continuous fixed bed reaction system, which has been patented. Currently he is involved in an industrial project for the DME technology.
Ganapati D. Yadav	Professor Ganapati D. Yadav, Ph.D. (Tech.) (Bombay), D.Sc. (Hon. Causa, DYPU, Kolhapur) and D.Eng. (Hon. Causa, NIT Agartala), Emeritus Professor of Eminence, Former Vice Chancellor and JC Bose National Fellow at the Institute of Chemical Technology, is one of the highly prolific and accomplished engineering-scientists in India, known for his contributions to education, research and innovation in Green Chemistry and Engineering, Catalysis, Chemical Engineering, Energy Engineering, Biotechnology, Nanotechnology, and Development of Clean and Green Technologies. He is an elected Fellow of the Indian National Science Academy, Indian Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Sciences, India, Indian National Academy of Engineering, and TWAS, and Fellow of RSC, IChemE (UK), IIChE, the Indian Chemical Society, and ISTE among others. His productivity is phenomenal: sole supervision of 104 Doctoral and 134 Master's theses, and 45 Post-doctoral fellows; author of 491 research papers, 113 granted patents and 3 books; with h-index 62, i10 index 307 and 14400+ citations. He was conferred with Padma Shri, the fourth highest civilian honour, by the President of India in 2016.

 	Fig. 1  Year to year basis growth of methanol demand in the world.5	 

 	Fig. 2  LCA analysis of the renewable methanol economy. Figure adopted ref. 6.	 


Boiling point, °C	64.70
Critical temperature, °C	239.43
Critical pressure,a kPa	8096
Critical volume, mL mol−1	118
Critical value of compressibility factor	0.224
Heat of formation (liquid) at 25 °C,b kJ mol−1	−239.03
Free energy of formation (liquid) at 25 °C,b kJ mol−1	−166.81
Heat of fusion,b J g−1	103
Heat of vaporization at boiling point,b J g−1	1129
Heat of combustion (gross) at 25 °C,b J g−1	22662
Flammable limits in air, vol%	

–Lower	6.0
–Upper	36
Autoignition temperature, °C	464
Flash point, closed cup, °C	11
Surface tension at 25 °C, mN m−1 (= dyn cm−1)	22.1
Specific heat of vapour at 25 °C,b J (g K)−1	1.370
Specific heat of liquid at 25 °C,b J (g K)−1	2.533
Vapour pressure at 25 °C, kPa	16.96
Solubility in water	Miscible
Density at 25 °C, g mL−1	0.7866
Refractive index, nD20	1.3284
Liquid viscosity at 25 °C, mPa.(= cP)	0.541
Dielectric constant at 25 °C	32.7
Thermal conductivity at 25 °C, W (m K)−1	0.202

 	Fig. 3  Different usages of methanol in the chemical and energy industries.5 MTO: methanol to olefin, MTP: methanol to propylene, MMA: methyl methacrylate, MTBE: methyl tertiary butyl ether.	 

 	Fig. 4  Methanol supply/demand data from 2016–2021.12	 
	(1)
C + 0.5O2 ↔ CO ΔH = −123 kJ mol−1	(2)
C + O2 ↔ CO2 ΔH = −409 kJ mol−1	(3)
C + CO2 ↔ 2CO ΔH = +172 kJ mol−1	(4)
C + H2O ↔ CO + H2 ΔH = +131.4 kJ mol−1	(5)
C + 2H2 ↔ CH4 ΔH = −75 kJ mol−1	(6)
C + 3H2 ↔ CH4 + H2O ΔH = −206.1 kJ mol−1	(7)
CO + H2Og ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1	(8)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of biomass gasification to produce H2 and syngas.	 
C + 0.5O2 ↔ CO ΔH = −113 kJ mol−1	(9)
C + O2 ↔ CO2 ΔH = −394 kJ mol−1	(10)
C + CO2 ↔ 2CO ΔH = +172 kJ mol−1	(11)
C + H2O ↔ CO + H2 ΔH = +131.4 kJ mol−1	(12)
C + 2H2 ↔ CH4 ΔH = −75 kJ mol−1	(13)
CO + H2O ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1	(14)
CO + 0.5O2 ↔ CO2 ΔH = −283 kJ mol−1	(15)
H2 + 0.5O2 ↔ H2O ΔH = −242 kJ mol−1	(16)
CO + 3H2 ↔ CH4 + H2O = ΔH = −206 kJ mol−1	(17)
CH4 + 2O2 ↔ CO2 + 2H2O ΔH = −83 kJ mol−1	(18)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the natural gas-based process to produce H2 and syngas.	 
CH4 + 0.5O2 ↔ CO + 2H2 ΔH = −36 kJ mol−1	(19)
CH4 + H2O ↔ CO + 3H2 ΔH = +206.1 kJ mol−1	(20)
CO + H2Og ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1	(21)
CH4 + 0.5O2 ↔ CO + 2H2 ΔH = −36 kJ mol−1	(22)
CH4 + H2O ↔ CO + 3H2 ΔH = +206.1 kJ mol−1	(23)
CO + H2Og ↔ CO2 + H2 ΔH = −41.2 kJ mol−1	(24)
2CO ↔ CO2 + C ΔH = −172 kJ mol−1	(25)
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2Og ΔH = +41.2 kJ mol−1	(26)
	(27)
CO + 2H2 ↔ CH3OH ΔH = −90.64 kJ mol−1	(28)
	(29)
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2Og ΔH = +41.2 kJ mol−1	(30)

 	Scheme 1  Surface reaction of methanol synthesis from CO.	 

 	Scheme 2  Surface reaction of methanol synthesis from CO2 (i) pathway I, (ii) pathway II, and (iii) RWGS.	 
CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH(l) E = −0.25 V	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
	(38)
	(39)
2H+ + 2e− → H2(g) E = +0.00 V	(40)
CO2(g) + e− → CO2− + 4H2O(l) E = −1.900 V	(41)

 	Scheme 3  Enthalpy variation of the elementary reactions during methane and methanol oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 7  Four types of kinetic models in methanol synthesis based on reaction mechanism, reproduced from ref. 60, 63 and 64 for Type I; ref. 61, 65 and 66 for Type II; ref. 67–70 for Type III and ref. 71 for Type IV. The figure is modified from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 8  Basic configuration of the adiabatic methanol synthesis reactor.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the Haldor Topsoe reactor.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the Kellogg, Brown and Root reactor. The figure is reproduced from ref. 98.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the Toyo MRF reactor.	 

 	Fig. 12  ARC converter (Casale SA). The figure is reproduced from ref. 94.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the Lurgi mega reactor.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the Linde Variobar process reactor.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the Mitsubishi gas chemical reactor.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the isothermal methanol converter (IMC).	 
CH3OH + CO → HCOOCH3	(46)
HCOOCH3 + H2 → 2CH3OH	(47)
CO2 + H2 ↔ HCOOH	(48)
HCOOH + ROH ↔ HCOOR + H2O	(49)
HCOOR + 2H2 → CH3OH + ROH	(50)
CO + H2O → CO2 + H2	(51)

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic flow diagram of the experimental reaction system. (b) Scheme of the membrane reactor. (c) Scheme of the traditional reactor. Figure adapted from Gallucci et al. 2004.151	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the co-current operation in the thermally coupled double-membrane reactor (TCDMR). Figure adapted from Rahimpour et al.152	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the co-current operation in the thermally coupled membrane reactor (TCMR). Figure adapted from ref. 152.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of adiabatic and plate water-cooled reactors (APW). The figure is adapted from Rahmatmand et al.157	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of the novel configuration (NC) of the second reactor of the Lurgi mega reactor. The figure is reproduced from ref. 158.	 

Low-pressure quench converter	Johnson Matthey (formerly known as ICI)	• Adiabatic fixed bed quench type reactor	270 °C	3000	• High recycle ratio required as conversion is low	
93 and 94

	• Reaction mixture flow in a radial or axial direction	5–10 MPa	
	
	


	• Radial direction: complex internal design	
	
	
	


	• Axial direction: simple but large volume	
	
	
	

Collect–mix–distribute reactor (CMD)	Haldor Topsoe	• Multi-stage adiabatic fixed bed reactor	290 °C	10000	• High conversion per pass of reactant	
95 and 159

	
	• Collect–mix–distribute reactor	5–10 MPa	
	• Prolonged catalyst life due to better temperature control	


	
	• Radial flow of gas mixture to catalyst bed and axial flow to quench	
	
	
	

Kellogg, Brown and Root reactor	Kellogg, Brown and Root	• Adiabatic quench reactors in series	
	10000	• Very simple construction	
96


	• Spherical reactor geometry provides good heat distribution	
	
	• Highest yield among quench reactors	
97


	• Radial reactant flow of reaction mixture from outside to inner shell	
	
	
	
98

Multistage radial flow (MRF-Z®)	Toyo Engineering Corporation (TEC) & Mitsui Toatso Chemicals (MTC)	• Multistage radial flow reactor	240–260	5000–6000	• Simple geometry	
99 and 100

	• Intermediate cooling using a bayonet boiler tube	10 MPa	
	• Easy scale up only by increasing reactor height	
101


	• Heat recovery by generating steam	
	
	• Good temperature control	
102


	• Radial flow of reaction gas mixture with concentric catalyst beds	
	
	• 30% smaller catalyst bed compared with a conventional quench reactor	


	
	
	
	• Low pressure drop	

Advance reactor concept (ARC)	Casale, in collaboration with ICI	• Unlike the adiabatic bed reactor geometry	240–290	3000	• This upgrading can easily increase methanol output by 20% in comparison with quench technology	
94


	• Catalyst bed is separated into different sections by distribution plates	8–9 MPa	
	
	

Single stage	Lurgi	• Single indirectly cooled reactor	255–270	1500–2200	• Energy efficient	
103


	• Quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactor (SRF)	5–10 MPa	
	• Easy to operate and maintain	
104


	• Shell and tube configuration with catalyst on the tube side	
	
	
	
91


	• Reaction mixture flow is axial	
	
	
	

Mega methanol	Lurgi	• Combination of gas-cooled convertor (GCC) and steam raising converter (SRC)	220–270	5000–10000	• High conversion efficiency	
100 and 106

	• Catalyst is placed at the shell side	7.5 MPa	
	• Half recycle ratio compared with single-stage SRC	


	• Reaction mixture flow is axial	
	
	• Lower investment cost due to smaller SRC	

Variobar	Linde	• Quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactors (SRF)	240–280	4000	• Efficient cooling	
107 and 160 and 100

	• Catalyst is placed at the shell side	8–10 MPa	
	• Reactor configuration is optimal for both exothermic and endothermic reactions	


	• Reaction mixture flow is axial	
	
	• High yield, enhanced life of the catalyst, high selectivity, lower operation cost, and heat recovery	


	• Helical tubes inserted through the catalyst bed	
	
	
	

Super converter	MGC and MHI	• Combination of gas-cooled convertor (GCC) and steam raising converter (SRC)	190–270	
	• High syngas conversion and MeOH selectivity	
108


	• Double-walled tube and shell reactor	5.5–10 MPa	
	• Safe	
109


	• Feed-gas as coolant in inner tubes	
	
	
	
110


	• Boiling water as coolant on the shell side	
	
	
	


	• Reaction between inner and outer tube	
	
	
	


	• Reaction mixture flow is axial	
	
	
	

Isothermal methanol converter (IMC)	Casale SA	• Quasi-isothermal steam-raising fixed bed reactor (SRF)	225–280	7000–10000	• Energy efficient	
111


	• Catalyst is placed at the shell side	6.5–9 MPa	
	• Easy operation and maintenance of reactor	
112 and 113

	• A number of plates surrounding the catalyst remove heat	
	
	• Excellent catalyst life	
114 and 115

	• Reaction mixture flow is axial/radial	
	
	• Higher yield of MeOH	

LPMEOH	Air Products and Chemicals	• Type of slurry reactor	215	235 (demo plant)	• Requires lower recycle ratio (1:1 to 1:2)	
117 and 118

	• Catalyst is placed in the shell side	3–5 MPa	
	• Can be run in continuous or batch manner	
120


	• Reaction mixture flow is axial	
	
	
	
121 and 122

	• Internal heat exchanger is provided to remove heat from the reaction medium	
	
	
	

Membrane reactor	Under development by various researchers	• Integration of methanol synthesis and recovery process	200–240	Lab-scale experiments	• Methanol recovery improves methanol yield and capital investment reduction	
145


	• Methanol synthesis can be coupled with other product synthesis	0.5 MPa	
	• Economic process and further development is going on	
146


	
	
	
	
	
147


	
	
	
	
	
152


BASF	38.5	48.8	12.9	

ICI	20–35	15–50	4–20	Mg
IFP	45–70	15–35	4–20	Zr (2–18)
Shell	71	24	
	Rare earth oxide (5)
Dupont	50	19	31	

Süd Chemie	65	22	12	

Haldor Topsoe MK-121	>55	21–25	8–10	

United Catalyst	62	21	17	


 	Fig. 22  The role of oxygen vacancy and hydrogen spillover in methanol synthesis in Cu/ZnO catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic diagram of the CuZn–BTC formation mechanism prepared using ZIF-8 as a sacrificial template. Adopted from ref. 244.	 

 	Fig. 24  Proposed mechanism for methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation on the Vo sites of In2O3 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 307.	 

1	Micro-reaction synthesis	ZnO/t-ZrO2 hybrid oxides	320, 3	Fixed-bed micro-reactor	H2/CO2 = 3:1,	CO2 conversion rate, methanol selectivity, and methanol space–time yield (STY) = 9.2%, 93.1%, and 0.35 g MeOH h−1g−1 cat., resp.	
333


	
	
	
	GHSV = 12000 mL g−1 h−1	
	

2	Impregnation	ZnOx/ZrO2	360, 2	Stainless-steel tubular reactor	CO2:H2:N2 = 3:1:1	CO2 conv. = 18%	
348


	
	
	
	Total flow rate = 75 mL min−1	MeOH selectivity = 75%	

3	Co-precipitation	Cu/Zn/Zr/Al (atomic ratio) = 4:2:1:0.5	220 °C, 2.76 MPa	Fixed bed reactor	6 mL min−1 CO2, 18 mL min−1 H2, and 823 h−1 space velocity	CO2 conv. = 19%	
349


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selectivity = 65%	

4.	
In situ reconstruction of metal induced MOF	Cu@ZrOx catalyst with a 3D porous framework structure	260, 4.5	Fixed bed reactor	CO2/H2, 1/3 by volume, GHSV of 21600 mL gcat−1 h−1	CO2 conv. = 13.1%	
289


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selectivity = 78.8%	


	
	
	
	
	MeOH space–time yield = 796 g kgcat−1 h−1	

5	Combination of strong electronic adsorption (SEA) and atomic layer deposition (ALD)	ZnO over-coated Cu/SiO2 (5Cu-1CyZn-30s)	250, 4	Fixed bed reactor	CO2/H2, 1/3 by volume; flow rate of 160 mL min−1	Reaction rate = 4.77 mmol g−1 h−1	
350


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selectivity = 10.1	

6	Deposition precipitation	Pd/ZnO-xAl	250, 3	Fixed-bed micro-reactor	GHSV = 6000 mL h−1 g−1 with a feed (H2/CO2/N2 = 69/23/8)	CO2 conv. = 14.2%	
351


	
	
	
	
	MeOH yield = 7.3%	


	
	
	
	
	STY = 6.28 gMethanol h−1 g−1	

7	Co-precipitaion followed by formaldehyde pre-activation	CuZnAlZr	250, 3	Fixed bed reactor	H2:CO2 = 3:1, gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) = 4000 h−1	CO2 conv. = 25.88%	
201


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selectivity = 49.17%	

8	Incipient wetness impregnation	Cu/a-ZrO2	230, 1	FBR	CO2/H2/N2 = 1/3/1	MeOH production rate = 1.8 mmol h−1 gcat−1	
352


	
	
	
	Flow rate = 70 ml min−1	MeOH selectivity = 59%	

9	Impregnation method	Ni–Ga/mesosillica catlyst	220, 3	FBR	H2:CO2 = 3:1; GHSV = 6000 h−1	CO2 conv. = 34%	
336


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selectivity = 41.4%	—
10	Co-precipitation	Cu–ZnO–CeO2 (5:4:1 molar ratio)	
	
	
	MeOH selec. = 48.6	
190


	
	
	
	
	MeOH yield = 0.057 mmol (g min)−1	

11	Wet impregnation; chelating method	Ag/Ce–Zr	250, 3	FBR	H2:CO2 = 3:1; GHSV = 1800 h−1	CO2 conv. = 7%	
45


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selectivity = 70%	


	
	
	
	
	CO2 conv. = 8%	


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selectivity = 60%	

12	Hydrothermal-impregnation	Pd–Zn@ZIF-8	220–290, 4.5	FBR	H2:CO2 = 3:1	MeOH selectivity = 66–78%	
45


	
	
	
	GHSV = 19200 mL h−1 g−1	MeOH yield = 12.1–19.8 g gPd−1 h−1	

13	Co-precipitation	Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/ZrO2	170, 3	Autoclave	0.1 g mL−1 catalyst in reactor	MeOH yield = 6.4%	
292

14	Impregnation	Pt1@MIL	150, 3.2	Slurry reactor	CO2:H2 = 1:3	MeOH selec. = 90.3%	
353


	
	
	
	DMF as solvent	TOF = 117 h−1	

15	Co-precipitation	CuZnCeTi	235, 3	FBR	CO2:H2 = 1:3	MeOH yield = 4.1%	
354


	
	
	
	GHSV = 2000 mL (gcat h)−1	
	

16	Rotary evaporation assisted deposition-precipitation	CuZnO/SiO2	250, 3	FBR	24 vol% CO2, 72 vol% H2 and 4 vol% Ar	CO2 conv. = 11.2	
355


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selec. = 35.5	


	
	
	
	
	MeOH yield = 4.06	

17	Incipient wetness impregnation	In–Pd/SiO2	300, 4	FBR	CO2:H2 = 1:4	MeOH selec. = 60.1%	
341


	
	
	
	GHSV = 7500 cm3 h−1 gcat−1	Activity = 5.1 μmol MeOH/gInPdS	

18	Co-precipitation	Cu–In–Zr–O	250, 2.5	FBR	GHSV = 18000 ml (gcat h)−1	CO2 conv. = 1.5%; MeOH selec. = 80%	
356

19	Polyol	CuOZnOCeO2; CuOZnOAl2O3	240, 0.1	FBR	CO2:H2 = 1:9	CO2 conv. = 14	
219


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selec. = 86	


	
	
	
	
	CO2 conv. = 20	


	
	
	
	
	MeOH selec. = 90	

20	Co-precipitation	CuO–ZnO–ZrO2–MxOy (M = Cr, Mo and W)	240, 3	FBR	23.5 vol% CO2, 64.5 vol% H2, and diluted by N2	
	
357

21	Water-in-oil microemulsion method	Cu/SiO2	230–270, 0.8	FBR	CO2:H2 = 1:9	
	
224


	
	
	
	WHSV = 2000–4500 cm3 h−1 gcat−1	
	

22	Co-precipitation method involving ultrasonic irritation	Cu–ZnO–ZrO2/Mg–Al (LDH)	250, 3	FBR	74.98% H2 and 25.02% CO2	CO2 conv. = 4.9%; MeOH selec. = 78.3%	
358

23	Co-precipitation	Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/ZrO2	230, 3	FBR	(H2/CO2/N2/He = 59.5:14:4:balance;	
	
359


	
	
	
	GHSV = 60000 L kgcat−1 h−1	
	

24	Spray drying–ammonia evaporation	Cu–ZnO/SiO2	220, 3	Continuous-flow slurry phase	WHSV = 2000 mL gcat−1 h−1 and H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3	CO2 conv. = 14.1%; MeOH selec. = 57.2%	
225

25	Co-precipitation	CuO–ZnO–ZrO2–WO3	240, 3	FBR	(CO2/H2/N2 = 23.5/64.5/12, mole ratio);	CO2 conv. = 19.7%; MeOH selec. = 49.3%	
360


	
	
	
	GHSV = 2400 mL (h gcat)−1	MeOH yield = 9.7	

26	Acidic etching self-assembly	CuZn–BTC	240, 4	FBR	H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, and WHSV = 1500 mL gcat−1 h−1	CO2 conv. = 20.5%; MeOH selec. = 56.4%	
361

27	Chelating method	Ca-doped PdZn/CeO2	230, 3	FBR	H2:CO2 = 3:1, GHSV = 2400 mL g−1 h−1	CO2 conv 7.7%; MeOH selec. = 100%	
253

28	Commercial	NaA (MR)	240, 0.7	Membrane reactor; FBR	H2/CO2 = 3; GHSV = 18000 L kgcat−1 h−1	STY = 343 gmethanol kgcat−1 h−1; MeOH selec. = 84%	
362

Co-precipitation	CuO–ZnO–CeO2–Al2O3 (TR)	240, 0.5	
	
	STY = 296gmethanol kgcat−1 h−1; MeOH selec. = 73%	

29	Flame spray pyrolysis	CuO–ZrO2	270, 2	FBR	CO2/H2/N2 = 1/3/1, W/F = 480 mgcat mL−1 s	TOF = 10.7 h−1	
363


	
	
	
	
	CO2 conv. = 5.9%; MeOH selec. = 45%	

30	Commercial	Cu–ZnO–Al2O3	290, 8	FBR	CO2/H2 = 1:3, GHSV = 10000 h−1	CO2 conv. = 21.2%; MeOH yield = 18%	
364

Polyol reduction	Pd/Cu–ZnO	270, 4.5	FBR	H2/CO2 = 3:1, gas flow = 36 mL min−1, catalyst mass = 0.2 g (GHSV = 10800)	CO2 conv. = 8%; MeOH selec. = 66%	
180

31	Co-precipitation	Cu–ZnO–AlOOH	250, 3	FBR	H2/CO2 = 3:1, gas flow = 160 mL min−1, catalyst mass = 1.2 g (GHSV = 6000)	MeOH selec. = 55.9%	
365


	
	
	
	
	MeOH yield = 14.1%	

32	Atomic layer deposition	Ni1Cu8/γ-Al2O3	250, 2	FBR	H2: CO2 = 3:1, 30 mL min−1	CO2 conv. = 6.4%; MeOH selec. = 58.8%	
366


	
	
	
	
	MeOH yield = 1.5%	

33	Incipient wetness impregnation	CuZn/N-rGO	250, 1.5	FBR	GHSV = 2400 h−1	CO2 conv. = 30%	
243


	
	
	
	
	MeOH productivity = 591 mgMeOH gcat−1 h−1	

34	Co-precipitation and incipient wetness impregnation	Ag/Cu–Zr	230, 1	FBR	CO2/H2/N2 = 1/3/1	
	
206


	
	
	
	
W/Ftotal = 1000 mgcat s mL−1	
	

35	Co-precipitation	Ni5Ga3	250, 5	FBR	CO2/H2 = 1/3	CO2 conv. = 95.7%	
367


	
	
	
	
	MeOH yield = 27.8% MeOH selec. = 47.6%	

36	Co-precipitation and supercritical anti-solvent (SAS) precipitation	CuZn; CuMn;CuMg; CuCe	225, 2	FBR	CO2:H2:N2 = 20:60:20 molar%	CO2 conv. = 4.3%; MeOH selec. = 53%	
216


	
	
	
	GHSV of 1000 h−1	
	

37	Core–shell	Cu/ZnO	320, 33.1	FBR	CO2/H2 = 1/3	CO2 conv. = 53%; MeOH selec. = 84%	
368


	
	
	
	GHSV = 4000 h−1	
	

38	Incipient wetness impregnation	Cu/CeO2	240, 2	FBR	CO2/H2 = 1/3	MeOH yield = 1.9%	
222


	
	
	
	GHSV = 3 L h−1 gcat−1	
	

39	Ammonia deposition-precipitation (ADP)	CuO/ZnO/Al2O3	240, 4	FBR	H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, and WHSV = 1500 mL gcat−1 h−1	CO2 conv. = 18.3%; MeOH selec. = 56.5%	
369

40	
	Pd@Zn core–shell catalyst	210–270, 2	FBR	WHSV = 18000 mL h−1 g−1	MeOH selec. = 70%	
44

41	Impregnation	Cu/MgO–TiO2	230, 3	FBR	CO2/H2 = 1/3	CO2 conv. = 5.2%; MeOH selec. = 37.9%	
228


	
	
	
	GHSV = 4800 h−1	MeOH yield = 1.9%	

42	Controlled surface reactions (CSRs) and atomic layer deposition	Cu–Zr/SiO2	
	FBR	CO2/H2 = 1/3	
	
370

43	Incipient wetness impregnation	Hierarchical meso-macroporous alumina supported copper catalysts	260, 3	FBR	CO2/H2 = 1/3	CO2 conv. = 10.5%; MeOH selec. = 30.3%	
371


	
	
	
	Cat. loading = 0.5 g	
	


	
	
	
	Flow rate = 60 ml min−1	
	

44	Co-precipitation	Cu/ZnO@m-SiO2 (core–shell)	270, 5	FBR	H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3 (molar ratio)	CO2 conv. = 10.9%; MeOH selec. = 61.8%	
372


	
	
	
	WHSV = 6000 mL gcat−1 h−1	MeOH yield = 153.9 (g kgcat−1 h−1)	

45	Co-precipitation	Cu/Zn/Al/Zr (hydrotalcite)	230, 5	FBR	GHSV = 8500 mL gcat−1 h−1	CO2 conv. = 18%; MeOH selec. = 68.4%	
373


	
	
	
	H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3	MeOH yield = 0.38 (g gcat−1 h−1)	

46	Impregnation	In2O3/ZrO2 (9 wt% In)	300, 5	FBR	H2/CO2 = 4:1, and GHSV = 16000 h−1	STY MeOH = 0.33 4 g gcat−1 h−1	
374

47	Precipitation and incipient wetness impregnation	Cu/a-ZrO2	260, 3	FBR	H2/CO2 = 4:1, and GHSV = 16000 h−1	CO2 conv. = 12%; MeOH selec. = 73%	
172


	
	
	
	
	STY MeOH = 80 (g kgcat−1 h−1)	

48	Co-precipitation	Cu–Zn–Al–Zr	190, 5	FBR	H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, GHSV = 4000 h−1	CO2 conv. = 10%; MeOH selec. = 81.8%	
375


	
	
	
	
	STY MeOH = 0.087 (g gcat−1 h−1)	

49	Spray drying	Cu/ZnO/Al2O3/ZrO2	250, 5;	FBR and slurry phase reactor	H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3, and WHSV = 4000 mL gcat−1 h−1	CO2 conv. = 25.9%; MeOH selec. = 61.5%	
376


	
	220, 3	
	H2/CO2/N2 = 73/24/3	WTY MeOH = 218 (g kgcat−1 h−1)	


	
	
	
	WHSV = 2000 mL gcat−1 h−1	CO2 conv = 13.6%; MeOH selec. = 61.7%	


	
	
	
	
	WTY MeOH = 57.6 (g kgcat−1 h−1)	

50	Micro-fluidic continuous coprecipitation	CuO–ZnO–ZrO2	280, 5	FBR	H2:CO2 (3.89:1)	STY = 486 gMeOH kgcata−1 h−1	
377


	
	
	
	GHSV = 10000 h−1	
	

51	Calcination of commercial indium(III) oxide powders	In2O3	330, 4	Tubular micro-reactor	H2/CO2/N2 = 3/1/1, molar ratio	CO2 conv. = 7.13%; MeOH yield = 2.82%	
309


	
	
	
	WHSV = 15000 mL gcat−1 h−1	
	

Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc02078a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
