Trends and challenges for microporous polymers  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00071E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00071E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3302-3321Trends and challenges for microporous polymers

        
          
            Nicolas 
            Chaoui
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Matthias 
            Trunk
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Dawson
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Johannes 
            Schmidt
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Arne 
            Thomas
          
          
        
      *a
aTechnische Universität Berlin, Department of Chemistry, Functional Materials, Hardenbergstr. 40, 10623 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: arne.thomas@tu-berlin.de
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Sheffield, Brook Hill, Sheffield, S3 7HF, UK
Received 
      29th January 2017
    First published on 19th April 2017AbstractMicroporous polymers are covalently bound, entirely organic materials which possess very high surface areas. These materials have been intensively studied within recent years and various interesting properties and possible applications have been discovered and described. This review article starts with the question, what makes microporous polymers special and are there certain features which differentiate them from other microporous materials? Indeed, there are some special structural and functional features found in microporous polymers which make them really unique and merit further exploration. We focus here on microporous polymers which are solution-processable, can be produced as thin films on electrodes by oxidative polymerizations, are π-conjugated organic semiconductors, or which provide the possibility to introduce and exploit distinct functional groups in an otherwise non-functional highly porous environment. Emerging applications for these microporous polymers which make explicit use of these unique features are further presented.
Nicolas Chaoui
Nicolas Chaoui studied chemistry at the Technische Universität Berlin. After completing a diploma thesis in the department of organic chemistry he joined the group of Prof. Arne Thomas for his PhD studies where he is currently working on charged microporous polymers and their application in gas storage and catalysis.
Matthias Trunk
Matthias Trunk received his BSc in Chemistry and Biochemistry in 2010 and his MSc in Chemistry in 2012 from Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München. In 2013 he joined the group of Prof. Dr Arne Thomas where he is currently working on his PhD project. He is interested in developing novel microporous polymer networks for gas storage and catalytic applications.
Robert Dawson
Dr Robert Dawson is a Lecturer in Polymer Chemistry at the University of Sheffield. He received his MChem in Chemistry from the University of Liverpool in 2006 and completed his PhD with Prof. Andrew I. Cooper at the same institution graduating in 2010. This was followed by a further two years in the group as a post-doctoral researcher. In 2012 he moved to the Technical University of Berlin as a Marie Curie Intra-European Fellow in the group of Prof. Arne Thomas. He returned to the UK in 2014 working at the University of Bath before moving to Sheffield in 2015.
Johannes Schmidt
Dr Johannes Schmidt studied chemistry at Philipps-University of Marburg and graduated in 2007. He received his PhD at Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces and University of Potsdam in 2010. As a PostDoc he joined Prof. Dr Arne Thomas at TU Berlin were he holds his current position as research coordinator. His research is focused on porous materials and their potential in (photo)catalysis, gas storage/separation and energy applications.
Arne Thomas
Arne Thomas studied chemistry in Gieβen, Marburg and Edinburgh and received his PhD from MPI for Colloid and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany. After a postdoctoral stay at the University of California, Santa Barbara, as an AvH fellow, he rejoined the MPI for Colloids and Interfaces as a group leader. In 2009 he became a Professor at the Technische Universität Berlin where he is leading the department of Functional Materials. His research focuses on porous materials – from mesoporous inorganic materials to microporous organic frameworks.
1. Introduction
Microporous polymers are a new class within the versatile family of microporous materials, i.e. materials with pores of diameters below 2 nm and consequently very high surface areas. However, at this point the similarities to other members of this family, i.e. metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), zeolites, and activated charcoal, end as microporous polymers exist with very different structural features, ranging from highly crosslinked networks (Microporous Polymer Networks, MPNs) to linear contorted polymers (Polymers of Intrinsic Microporosity, PIMs). In contrast to almost all other microporous materials, microporous polymers are exclusively built up from organic matter connected by covalent bonds.1,2 The only other type of materials bearing this property are COFs, which unite crystallinity and fully covalent bonds but bring their own set of caveats to the table, which are not discussed here.3 Whereas COFs are so far always produced via condensation reactions, the synthetic concepts to prepare microporous polymers are highly diverse and range from metal catalyzed couplings to metal-free condensation reactions. The generation of microporosity and sometimes astonishingly high surface areas in such polymers stems from the stable, covalent connection of rigid, contorted molecules, with at least two but most often three and more functional and polymerizable groups. Such molecules are often and also hereafter named “tectons”. Polymerizations of such tectons yield polymers with highly contorted structures. Space-efficient packing of polymer chains is effectively precluded within these structures creating a large free volume seen as microporosity. When more than two functional groups can be polymerized on the tecton, highly crosslinked structures are created which hinder packing of the polymer backbone even more, yielding accessible surface areas often well in excess of 1000 m2 g−1.
Within the last 10 years the field of microporous polymers has proliferated tremendously and thus the question has to be asked, what makes these materials unique and distinguishes them from other well-developed microporous materials. Chemical and thermal stability along with the possibility to introduce organic functionalities and π-conjugated backbones into high surface area materials have been frequently claimed as major advantages of microporous polymers compared to other microporous materials. However, we think it is advisable not to be too general in defining the distinct features and beneficial properties of microporous polymers. Especially when named as advantages in comparison to other microporous materials such general statements might fail entirely. It is undeniable that a zeolite has a much higher thermal stability than any organic matter, that the number of chemical functionalities introduced into MOFs is currently outnumbering the ones in microporous polymers by far, and that no conjugated polymer will reach conductivities found in carbonaceous materials. Indeed, it is rather the ability to combine different properties, which makes microporous polymers special and a highly interesting complement to conventional microporous materials. In this review we will try to carve out the very special and unique properties of microporous polymers and how they can be exploited for novel and emerging applications. To set the stage before describing the most prominent and important works published in this area, at first a critical view on structure, synthesis, properties and functionalities of microporous polymers will be undertaken.
1.1 Synthesis and structure

Synthetic methods. 
A first distinct advantage of microporous polymers lies in the plethora of synthesis methods available to create them. This allows a large variety of functional groups to be exploited for polymerization reactions and thus an even larger toolbox of monomers or tectons is available for creating high surface area materials. Polymerization towards microporous polymers can be carried out at low to very high temperatures, in all conceivable solvents, in reaction times from seconds to hours and days, with various reactants and catalysts or without any catalysts at all.
Synthetic protocols which can be used for the generation of microporous polymers are highly diverse and range from metal-catalyzed or -mediated (Sonogashira,4,5 Suzuki,6 Yamamoto,7 Buchwald–Hartwig,8 Eglinton,9 Heck10) to click-type reactions,11 acid or base-catalyzed polycondensation reactions (formation of polyamides,12 -imides,13–15 -benzimidazoles,16,17 -dioxanes,18 -boroxines and boronate esters,19 -imines20,21 -aminals,22 azo-bridged compounds23–25 and many others26–29), oxidative couplings,30–33 trimerizations34–36 or Friedel–Crafts type couplings.37,38 Several comprehensive review articles are available in which all known polymerization methods to create microporous polymers are listed.2,39–42
The great variety of synthesis conditions not only allows the usage of differentially functionalized monomers, but much more importantly to find appropriate reaction conditions tolerating any given functional group which is planned to be introduced into the network, i.e. synthesis can be carried out with high chemical orthogonality.
A further important point for several applications is that very cheap and scalable synthetic methods exist to create high surface area, functional microporous polymers. As an example, with the scale required for a carbon capture material, many microporous materials and other polymers are not an option as they are prohibitively expensive due to their requirement for expensive group 10 metal catalysts. Catalyst-free polycondensations or Friedel–Crafts synthesis routes are therefore valuable alternative synthetic routes. Microporous polymers containing benzimidazole16,17 or triazine linkages43 are an example with high CO2 uptakes which can be synthesized without the need for a catalyst. Networks synthesized from both dichloromethyl monomers44 and those using an external crosslinker45 by Friedel–Crafts reactions were shown to have high uptakes particularly at higher pressures used for pre-combustion capture. These materials can also be synthesized from functional tectons to increase the heats of adsorption. Alcohol groups were particularly successful in this respect as amines are more difficult to incorporate.46,47


The challenge of amorphicity. 
Microporous polymers are generated by covalent attachment of rigid and contorted organic molecules. The synthetic concept to connect these tectons by strong covalent bonds impedes reversible bond formation, which yields one inherent drawback of microporous polymers, which is their total amorphicity. Of course, several reversible covalent bond formations have been described in the literature and have been used for the generation of crystalline COFs.3 Such COFs can be seen as subclass of microporous polymers or as a class of microporous materials on their own; nevertheless, here we will concentrate on the larger family of amorphous microporous polymers, even though COFs will not be entirely neglected in this review. The absence of crystallinity or ordered structures within microporous polymers is actually no drawback for most applications, except for those regarding molecular sieving or size-selective catalysis, where the exact determination of pore sizes is mandatory. Otherwise high surface areas and small pores are required for the most common applications, e.g. gas storage and separation, catalysis and also for newly emerging applications such as thermal insulators, in organic electronics, photocatalysis, or energy storage. For none of these applications can a plausible reason be found, as to why an amorphous material should have a lower performance than an ordered one and sometimes even the absence of crystallinity might be advantageous, for example considering anisotropic transport phenomena in some ordered porous materials.
However, it cannot be denied that the amorphous nature of microporous polymers is a significant challenge when it comes to design, characterization and prediction of properties of these materials. While the structures of zeolites, MOFs and COFs can be in principle comprehensively elucidated from XRD measurements, this is not possible for microporous polymers.
Instead, various other analytical methods have to be used to approach the structure of the materials. NMR and IR spectroscopy are important tools to analyze the chemical structure of the backbone; however, as known for solid and amorphous materials, extensive peak broadening is often observed which renders peak assignments rather difficult. Nitrogen sorption is of course an irreplaceable method for any porous material, but even for this technique some obstacles occur when analyzing amorphous microporous materials as no distinct pore sizes can be expected. Furthermore, many microporous polymers show their organic nature in these measurements as they display some amount of flexibility, which is seen in a steady increase in nitrogen adsorption even at higher relative pressures and often a very broad hysteresis is observed, which are both – sometimes wrongly – assigned to additional mesoporosity. Finally, so far no reliable models exist for a pore size distribution analysis of these rather soft materials, which show some amount of swelling during gas sorption measurements.48
Furthermore, for crystalline materials it is possible, simply speaking, to design the structure, porosity and pore size of the material on the drawing board. For example the organic linker size in a MOF defines the diameter of the pores and thus the size of the unit cell, giving rise to beautiful examples of isoreticular frameworks.49 In contrast, in microporous polymers it has been observed that the increase of linear linkers between tectons rather reduces micropore volume and overall surface area,4 which might be due to increased flexibility and bending of the linkers to reduce the surface area or enhanced intercalation of polymer chains. Of course in MOFs and COFs interpenetration is also possible, especially when moving to longer struts, thus changing the properties of these materials as well. Moreover, polymerization degrees and defects within structures, which should all have a large impact on the observed surface area and porosity, are hard to determine by analytical tools for the reasons given above. The probably most realistic picture of the structure of microporous polymers are currently provided by Trewin and co-workers via simulation of the network generation process (Fig. 1).50 Looking at such models, which are backed up by XRD measurements showing no sign of crystallinity for MPNs, it can of course be questioned if it is really supportive that novel MPNs are often presented with an “idealized”, i.e. crystalline structure and discussed in terms of long range order and topologies. Some design rules have been suggested by considering such idealized crystalline structures, however how much such artificial unit cells have in common with the real structures is more than questionable.
 Fig. 1  Model of PAF-1 a microporous polymer network built by Yamamoto-homocoupling of tetrakis(4-bromophenyl)methane. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 


Creating high surface areas. 
Despite this, some common principles for creating high surface area microporous polymers can be derived by screening the large amount of available literature and materials already reported.
– High polymerization degrees: polymerization methods, like Yamamoto or Sonogashira–Hagihara couplings, which yield linear polymers with high molecular weights, are also highly suitable to generate high surface area microporous polymers. Thus it is the functional groups used on the monomers which ultimately influence the obtained surface area. As example iodine vs. bromine functionalized monomers give different results in networks derived by metal-catalyzed couplings.
– High amount of crosslinking: when more functional, polymerizable groups are available at the tecton a higher crosslinking degree of the network is possible which rigidifies the material to maintain high surface areas.
– Reducing flexibility: as mentioned, increasing the strut length between tectons often leads to reduction of accessible surface area. Thus if the tectons cannot be connected directly, short and rigid co-monomers have to be used. Indeed the introduction of just one group with higher flexibility and rotational freedom, say a methylene –CH2– group within the linker can yield total collapse of the surface area.
– 3D vs. 2D: the highest surface areas in microporous polymers have been observed when using tectons with a three-dimensional structure, i.e. orientation of the functional groups. Tetraphenylmethane-derived tectons are for example a very good choice when looking to increase the surface area of a network.
– Non-covalent interactions: further interactions between polymer chains, like hydrogen bonding, can yield a more space efficient packing and can reduce the available surface area.


Processing microporous polymers. 
Most microporous polymers share the drawback of other microporous materials when it comes to shaping, morphology control, and processing. As predominantly highly crosslinked polymers, these materials are not meltable or soluble in any solvent and the generation of thin films, membranes or molds is a formidable challenge. As for MOFs, microporous polymers have been grown from functionalized surfaces to generate thin films51–53 or mixed with other polymers to create mixed membranes.54,55 However, if these techniques can be converted into a feasible technology is so far questionable. Again, in this respect some microporous polymers exhibit unique features, which make their technologically relevant processing possible. At first many microporous polymer networks were prepared by oxidative polymerizations. Tectons functionalized with thiophene or carbazole moieties can be directly polymerized on electrodes to create compact but still microporous thin films.56 As polymers of these types (e.g. derived from polythiophene or -carbazole) are interesting for applications in organic electronics or energy devices, their direct placement on electrodes as thin films is of great interest.
One class of microporous polymers can even be directly processed from solution: so-called polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs) consist of unbranched, stiff but contorted polymer chains.18,57 Such PIMs are therefore highly soluble in many common organic solvents. However, in the solid state, their rigid and contorted structure avoids efficient packing of the polymer chains, yielding a high free volume ultimately seen in permanent microporosity. Free-standing films and membranes of PIMs have been prepared (Fig. 2).58 The concept of PIMs can be even further reduced to microporous cage compounds or molecular crystals.59–64
 Fig. 2  Free standing membrane and chemical structure of the microporous polymer PIM-1. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 

1.2 Properties and function

Chemical functionality. 
The main and most important property of microporous polymers is their high surface area and microporosity. As microporous polymers consist exclusively of light elements, gravimetric surface areas can reach extremely high values, which are so far just excelled by some MOFs and can reach values of several thousand m2 g−1. So far the highest surface area of a purely organic microporous polymer has been reached by PPN-4 with a BET surface area of 6461 m2 g−1 which is synthesized by connecting tetraphenylsilane tectons via Yamamoto coupling.65 However, given that some activated carbons and especially MOFs can reach ultrahigh surface areas as well,66 so far this property is not a unique feature. High permanent surface areas are interesting for applications in gas storage, separation and catalysis, but actually useless when the surface area is not further functionalized in a certain and defined way. Here, microporous polymers provide some intriguing possibilities and this is, strangely enough, especially because it is possible to prepare microporous polymers which display no distinct functionality at all. PAF-1,67 or the structurally identical PPN-6,68 is a polymer featuring a backbone which is composed of biphenyls connected by a sp3-hybridized quaternary carbon atom, thus no special chemical functionality can be identified. However, PAF-1 can be equipped with a variety of functional groups, which can thus be seen as the only sites interacting strongly with molecules entering the porous system. This allows a highly defined tuning of for example adsorption enthalpies for different gases. Functional groups, such as amines, hydroxyls, fluoros and carboxylic acids have been found to increase the enthalpies of adsorption of CO2 with the acid groups yielding the highest increase.69 As an example, PPN-6 was post-synthetically modified with sulfonic acids and its lithium salt showed an increase of over 160% for these modified networks over the parent network.70 Further modifications using amines were also reported, again showing significant increases in the uptakes especially at 0.15 bar which corresponds to the amount of CO2 in a typical flue gas stream.68 Another intriguing example is that lithium doping of the otherwise non-functional PAF-1 can be carried out, which is only possible due to the high chemical stability of these networks. Binding energies of up to 9 kJ mol−1 in 5 wt% lithium doped PAF-1 resulting in a 22% increase in hydrogen uptake have been reported.71
In summary, the performance of a rather isolated functional group, bound to a permanent large surface, which itself has no special functionality can be investigated. In catalysis such a material is called an “innocent support” and often desired when the performance of a specific supported active site should be examined, as any further influence of the support on the reaction or interaction with the active site can be neglected. Using the right synthetic methods, such groups can be the sole functional sites within the material and e.g. no metal node and clusters or surface hydroxy groups have to be further considered.


Catalytic properties and stability. 
The synthetic schemes towards microporous polymers enable the intriguing possibility to bridge the gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis by using molecular catalysts as building blocks for the generation of highly microporous networks,1,40 without the need for an additional porous support. This concept enables the introduction of the highest amount of catalytic active sites per surface area and mass of material.
The main routes to use microporous polymers in catalysis are the immobilization of molecular catalysts as supporting part of the network72,73 or just attached to a stable network structure. A related and quite elegant approach is the immobilization of organic ligands within the network structure, which are, after formation of the network, loaded with the respective metal catalyst.36,74,75 Such an approach can yield supported metal–organic catalysts with coordinatively unsaturated metal sites homogeneously distributed over the entire surface area. Recently, another concept has been presented, in which a molecular catalyst is not immobilized by covalent bonds within the network, but by electrostatic (Coulombic) forces. Here novel ionic MPNs are applied, but the catalytic active compounds are the counterions within the micropores, yielding an intriguing intermediate between molecular and solid immobilized catalysts.76 The latter approach will be described in more detail in a later chapter about the field of permanently charged MPNs. Finally, MPNs have been used as classical supports for the immobilization of metal or metal oxide nanoparticles. Here the advantages over conventional porous oxides or carbons are not too obvious, however especially regarding particle stability, functional MPNs, mainly with heteroatoms within their backbone have shown significant improvements over inorganic supports.77,78 Furthermore, conjugated microporous polymers have come into focus of catalysis research, especially for photocatalysis.79 This point will also be discussed in more detail later. Excellent and comprehensive reviews on the use of microporous polymers for catalytic applications were recently published by Rose40 and Zhang and Ying.80
While microporous polymers certainly provide fascinating opportunities for catalytic applications some challenges remain, which are so far not or just rarely considered in the literature. It is understandable that initial works applying microporous polymers in catalysis use more or less conventional and well-studied molecular catalysts for immobilization. However, in these cases just the facile recyclability of these catalysts can be seen as the main advantage. Whether this alone will make microporous polymers interesting for realistic applications is debatable, as it is for molecular catalysts immobilized on other porous supports.81 However, further advantages of the immobilization of molecular catalysts in MPNs can probably be identified and might become an interesting future research direction. For example catalysts immobilized in microporous polymers might be applicable at conditions where the pure molecular catalyst cannot be used. In the simplest case, a catalytic reaction can be carried out in solvents were the molecular catalyst is not soluble.76
Even more intriguing would be to make use of the non-functional, inert environment of the pore walls of some microporous polymers for confining and thus stabilizing highly reactive catalytic species, which as single molecules cannot easily be handled at ambient conditions and natural environment.
As mentioned before, the chemical robustness of microporous polymers is often mentioned, but not often exploited by applying them at indeed harsher reaction conditions.82 Actually, in many papers thermal stabilities are stated (often >300 °C) which would make many MPNs promising materials even for catalytic gas phase reactions. These thermal stabilities are however mostly derived from TGA measurements, often under inert gas, and thus have not much in common with the realistic environment and requirements on catalysts for gas phase reactions at elevated temperatures.
In this respect it is noticeable that microporous polymers are so far exclusively used for catalysis in the liquid phase. One remarkable exception is a covalent triazine framework which has been used as support for Ru nanoparticles and tested for gas phase ammonia decomposition up to 723 K by Chen and co-workers (Fig. 3).83 In the liquid phase however, polymers which maintain a high surface area in the gas phase are not naturally the best choice. Also a polymer network with an immobilized molecular catalyst which shows no surface area at all under dry conditions might swell in solution yielding unhindered access to the catalytically active sites. More courage in using microporous polymers under challenging catalytic conditions would therefore be desirable. In this respect it is important to note that it has been frequently reported that thermal or oxidation stabilities of microporous polymer networks can be enhanced, for example by increasing the cross-linking density38 or introducing inorganic building blocks84,85 or heteroatoms15,86,87 into the frameworks. Many important catalytic gas phase reactions are carried out within temperature windows of 250–400 °C and it should be possible to design microporous polymers to stay stable at these temperatures.
 Fig. 3  Top: Chemical structure of CTF-1 and bottom: ammonia decomposition reaction using 1–2 wt% Ru-loaded CTF-1 (dark spots) and CNTs (light spots), for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 


Electronic properties. 
A final intriguing feature of microporous polymers is the possibility to introduce electric conductivity. If microporous polymers are synthesized from entirely aromatic building blocks, such networks are distinguished by extended π-conjugation, found in so-called conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs).4,39 The extent of the π-conjugation depends on the structure of the aromatic core segments and linkers and their connection pattern, i.e. the π-topology, allowing to tune the electrical and optical properties of CMPs (Fig. 4).88 The π-conjugated structure renders such aromatic networks potential organic semiconductors.
 Fig. 4  Top: Synthetic routes to pyrene based CMPs. Bottom: Photographs and photoluminescence spectra of different CMPs under irradiation with UV light in bulk and dispersion in THF. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011. 
Such an extended π-conjugation is rarely found in MOFs and then only when the integrated metal allows an electronic interaction from linker to linker. This is also documented by the fact that for linear MOF analogues (i.e. metal organic main chain polymers) just a few materials with semiconducting properties are found, while the field of semiconducting conjugated polymers (the linear analogues of CMPs) has been emerging for several decades. The potential semiconducting properties of CMPs certainly opens a wide field of promising applications, namely in organic electronics, energy devices or photocatalysis. This is further supported as tectons used for the generation of CMPs have been also used to form 2D and 3D architectures of π-conjugated star-shaped molecules, which were subsequently applied to organic optoelectronic devices, ranging from OLEDs to solar cells.89,90 Furthermore, the permanent and stable porosity of CMPs enables a simple infiltration of a second phase91 (for example a dye, or a corresponding hole or electron conductor) to yield defined interpenetrating networks as bulk heterojunctions.


Scope of this review. 
Given all this, within this review we will try to further highlight the unique features of microporous polymers by means of different pre-eminent examples from the recent literature. It is not the aim of this review to give a conclusive overview on the whole field of microporous polymers, as excellent reviews on these materials have been published in recent years.1–3,39,40,42,56,57,92,93 On the contrary, we will try to identify some trends and worthwhile research directions within the field of microporous polymers. Within the following chapters we will concentrate on a special structural or functional feature of a certain class of microporous polymers and from there on develop new perspectives on emerging applications.
The first chapter will cover a unique property of some microporous polymers, highly unusual for all other microporous materials, that is, that soluble and solution-processable microporous polymers can be prepared. The second chapter will describe the field of π-conjugation within microporous polymers, yielding highly porous organic semiconductors, which are of high interest for organic electronics, but recently have also emerged in the field of photocatalysis. Finally, the controlled implementation of functional sites within microporous polymers will be covered. At first it will be shown how the simple introduction of elements other than carbon and hydrogen in microporous polymers can yield novel and unique properties, closing with the generation of permanently charged microporous networks.

2. Soluble microporous polymers
Common for most porous materials, regardless to the reaction route, is their accruement as insoluble powders. However, for most applications it is desirable to modify the texture/shape of the porous material post-synthetically without varying material properties, which is, except for pellet production, mostly impossible for porous powders. Therefore shape control during reaction is desired to obtain materials in certain forms. However, the problem of non-processability does not occur for soluble polymers that show porosity in the dry state, i.e. for the so-called polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs). These polymers create microporosity by inefficient packing due to kinks in the backbone structure but retain solubility in organic solvents and can thus be processed post-synthetically for example cast as films. In 2004 the first PIM (PIM-1), based on tetramethyl-1,1′-spirobisindane, was reported18 and up till now it is, together with its modifications, one of the PIMs with the best properties in terms of film building ability, stability, and flexibility.94–96 Beside spirobisindane other centers of contortion were integrated in the backbone of PIMs, e.g. triptycenes,97 spirobifluorenes12 or ethanoanthracenes (Fig. 5).98
 Fig. 5  Structures of spirobifluorene, ethanoanthracene and triptycene based PIMs. 
PIM-based films show very interesting properties in transport and separation of ions or gases. Membranes based on PIM-1 show excellent gas selectivity that lies above the Robeson upper bound of 2008, an empirical plot presenting a benchmark for membranes regarding their gas permeability and selectivity, other examples of PIMs even meet the requirements of the 2015 upper bound.99 Recently it was shown, that gas separation properties of such membranes can even be modulated in situ by introducing light responsive PIMs.100 However, one drawback of these systems is the enormous aging effect yielding that the performance cannot be sustained in long term experiments. Most probably a densification of chain packing occurs which leads to a decrease of free volume and gas permeability.101
To sustain the performance of the membranes over a longer period of time different approaches have been studied. One way to stabilize the polymer matrix is by introducing several different kinds of fillers to design mixed matrix membranes (MMMs). Main examples for fillers that are used for MMMs are porous materials like MOFs,102–104 carbon nitrides105 but also microporous polymer networks106–108 and related molecular fillers like organic cages.109 By introducing these fillers the aging effect can be enormously reduced which allows super glassy polymers to be revisited for commercial application in gas separations again. It is assumed that by adding an ultraporous additive, some chains of the glassy polymers are absorbed within the pores of the additive which is holding the chains in their open position (Fig. 6).106,107 Therefore the low density and permeability of the PIM is maintained over a longer period of time. To achieve a substantial stabilization of the membrane the compatibility of glassy polymer and filler, the surface chemistry, molecular structure and size and rigidity need to be controlled.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of effect of nanofillers on mixed matrix membranes. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
A second way to stabilize PIM membranes is by cross-linking of the polymer chains. This can be done via thermal processing,110,111 UV treatment,112 molecular or polymeric azides113,114 or complexation with multivalent metal ions.115 The resulting crosslinked polymers also show enhanced stability over a longer period of time.
Additionally PIMs can be strengthened by stiffening their backbone. One example reported is the incorporation of porous bowl structures like beta-cyclodextrin. The interactions between beta-cyclodextrin and PIM can also restrict chain movement and make ultrafine micropores difficult to collapse. Thus a greater resistance to physical aging than PIM membrane can be achieved.116 In 2013 McKeown et al. introduced a bridged bicyclic amine 2,8-dimethyl-6H,12H-5,11-methanodibenzo[b,f][1,5]diazocine, commonly called Tröger's base, as bridge between the contortion centers, which showed excellent permeation and selectivity in gas separation, while the long term stability could also be enhanced.98 Since then several studies on PIMs based on Tröger's bases have been published, showing the potential of this membranes for gas separation and ion-exchange.117–119 With the development and innovations in the field of soluble PIMs in the last couple of years, these polymers became interesting for commercial applications. For example, recently a PIM was commercialized as sensor in the visual lifetime indication of organic vapor filters.120
3. π-Conjugation in microporous polymers
3.1 Conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) for organic electronic devices
One unique feature of microporous polymers is that their backbone can be fully π-conjugated, so that they resemble porous organic semiconductors.4,39,88 Indeed, as one of the prerequisites for polymer networks to achieve high surface areas is a rigid backbone, direct coupling of aromatic moieties is a common method for generation of microporous polymers. Without counting exactly it can be estimated that the number of conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) far exceeds the ones which are not conjugated. Thus the here presented materials are rather the rule than the exception. The conjugated nature and semiconducting properties of CMPs together with their high surface area and porosity makes them interesting for a number of applications. As most of these CMPs show strong photoluminescence, optical sensing of molecules or metal ions entering the porous framework have been frequently exploited.121–127 Another obvious idea would be to use CMPs in organic electronic applications, drawing on the large work done on conjugated, semiconducting polymers for e.g. organic light-emitting diodes, solar cells or field effect transistors. Indeed, three-dimensional, branched or star-shaped conjugated molecules have been intensively investigated for such applications89 and these molecules are literally just one further covalent bond away from creating a CMP. Many tectons used for such molecules have later been applied to create CMPs, such as 1,3,5-substituted benzene, spirobifluorene, carbazole or triphenylamine moieties. However, it must be stated that CMPs have so far not made a breakthrough in organic electronics. The main reason here is the problem regarding processing of microporous polymer networks in general. Thin homogeneous films of the conjugated material are required for application in electronic devices but with some exceptions this cannot be achieved by the highly crosslinked and entirely insoluble polymer networks. The main challenge so far is therefore not the performance testing of CMPs but the generation of thin films on electrodes of these materials.
Thiophene- and carbazole-based building blocks are therefore interesting choices as these tectons can be electropolymerized to create thin films on electrodes.56,127 For the first reliable measurements of the surface areas of such films, which is hard to achieve as very low sample masses are naturally obtained, krypton sorption was used to determine a surface area of up to 1300 m2 g−1 in a carbazole based CMP film, which compares nicely to the surface area found in a related bulk material.127,128 These values could be even increased applying thiophene based monomers (>2000 m2 g−1).31 Notably, the surface area of such films depends strongly on the solvents in which the electropolymerization is carried out. Addition of boron trifluoride diethyl etherate (BFEE) to dichloromethane (DCM) yields the formation of films with optimized porosity. A review on the generation of thiophene and carbazole-based CMP films prepared by electropolymerization has been published by the Scherf group56 recently and thus just some highlights in applications of these films are repeated here. Both carbazole and thiophene-based thin films of CMPs have been applied for sensing applications, for example as electrochemical detectors or luminescent sensors for explosive nitroaromatic compounds (e.g. nitrobenzene, dinitrotoluene and trinitrotoluene), showing a significantly increased current response or a quenched luminescence compared to a reference electrode without film deposition.31,127–129 Furthermore CMP thin films derived from dithienothiophene by electropolymerization could be reversibly oxidized and reduced, yielding a pronounced electrochromic effect.130
CMP films from thiophene-based tectons have been further applied as hole conducting materials to create bulk heterojunctions with fullerenes incorporated into the pores and applied in a photovoltaic device (Fig. 7).131 CMP-fullerene blends, thus not as thin films, have also been prepared from low band-gap CMPs based on benzothiadiazole (BTZ) and thiophenebenzothiadiazole (TBT) functional groups. The polymers exhibit broad light absorption covering the whole visible light region and fluorescence quenching can be observed by incorporation of fullerenes exemplified for a donor–acceptor polymer with alternating BTZ and triphenylamine moieties.132 Ma and co-workers polymerized carbazole-based tectons for the generation of microporous films, which were subsequently used as anode interlayers in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and solar cells (OSCs).133 An OLED with the CMP interlayer showed a maximum luminous efficiency, which was 37% higher than in a comparable OLED without an interlayer. In OSCs power-conversion efficiencies of 8.42% have been reached vs. 5.68% for the OSC without an interlayer.134 Jiang et al. later built CMPs from carbazole-functionalized tris(2,3,5,6-tetramethylphenyl)borane (TPB) by electropolymerization, which acted as hole- and electron-selective electrode interlayers between the active layers and conducting electrodes that control the transport of charge carriers in and out of devices. The work function of these polymers could be tuned by ionic ligation on the central boron atom and further by electrooxidation, switching the networks from electron to hole conductors.135
 Fig. 7  Left: Device configuration of solar cells and charge separation process using thiophene based CMP with incorporated C60 as photoactive layers. Right: J–V curves of the solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. 
3.2 CMPs for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
Within the last few years the interest in the use of CMPs for photocatalytic applications has risen tremendously.79 First, the research on metal-free photocatalysts for water splitting has gained momentum with the discovery in 2009 that polymeric carbon nitride can act as a photocatalyst for hydrogen and oxygen generation from water.136 In the following years more than one thousand papers have appeared on the usage of polymeric carbon nitride for photocatalytic applications. It is thus more than understandable that researchers also started to consider other purely organic semiconductors for use in this application; and CMPs seem to be a particularly good choice in this respect. Another reason for the interest in applying CMPs for this application is even simpler – testing photocatalytic performance can be done with powders, i.e. the morphology in which CMPs are normally obtained after synthesis. Thus no further special preparations were required, the main challenge for application in electronic devices as seen above, and the powders prepared during bulk synthesis can be directly tested as dispersion in a photocatalytic reactor.
Polymeric carbon nitrides are prepared by thermal condensation of nitrogen-rich molecules such as cyanamide, dicyandiamide, melamine or urea at 550 °C. It is an organic semiconductor with an intense yellow color and a band gap of 2.7 eV allowing the use of parts of the visible spectrum for the generation of charge carriers.136,137 Soon after the first activity of photocatalytic hydrogen production was presented from bulk polymeric carbon nitride, a variety of optimizations were carried out to enhance its performance. Porous polymeric carbon nitrides have been prepared, which indeed showed largely enhanced photocatalytic activity.138–140 Porosity in these materials was generated mainly by hard templating, i.e. replication of nanostructures of silica for example.141 It should be noted however, that the explanation for the increased activity is not as simple as just being caused by the increased amount of active sites at an increased surface area, but also the higher amount of amine functionalities, increased charge carrier stability and an optimized packing of the polymer layers have been identified as playing a crucial role.142,143
In addition, very often co-monomers, e.g. with other heteroatoms than nitrogen have been added to the carbon nitride synthesis to tailor the band gap by the formation of copolymers or heteroatom-doped carbon nitrides.144–147 However, here the high temperatures needed for carbon nitride synthesis are a serious disadvantage as the chemical structure of organic substances can be difficult to control when heating to 550 °C for several hours. Indeed some of the suggested structures for heteroatom-doped carbon nitrides seem rather questionable and hard to be proven by analytical methods. In this respect CMPs are indeed an interesting opportunity, as they are prepared in solvents and at or near ambient temperature, so that in most cases it can be fully predicted which organic moieties are present in the conjugated backbone. Tailoring of band gaps and enhancing charge carrier mobility and lifetime seem indeed to be much more feasible in these materials.
The first report on microporous polymer networks used for photocatalytic hydrogen generation from water under visible light was motivated by the performance of polymeric carbon nitrides as the same organic moiety, namely a heptazine (C6N7) unit was applied as structure directing tecton. While in the polymeric carbon nitride these heptazines units are formed during a thermal reaction and are connected by secondary amines, in the heptazine based microporous polymers (HMPs) a trichloroheptazine was connected via diaminobenzene.148 The yellow precipitate showed a low surface area (185 m2 g−1) compared to other CMPs probably due to the flexibility of the secondary amines in the backbone which can interact with each other. Photocatalytic hydrogen production was achieved with HMP-1, however with relatively low values. The activity of HMPs could be largely increased by connecting the heptazine moieties with a donor–acceptor type structure using benzothiadiazole moieties within the linkers.149 This approach thus shows that the controlled synthesis of CMPs can indeed be used to tailor their electronic properties and thus photocatalytic performance.
In the meantime, Sprick et al. reported the application of other CMPs for photocatalytic hydrogen production and thus opened the field to the conventional CMPs prepared by metal-catalyzed coupling reactions. In this work conjugated microporous co-polymers were prepared by a Suzuki–Miyaura coupling, yielding variable amounts of benzene and pyrene moieties within the backbone. Thus it was possible to tailor the optical band gap of the microporous polymers continuously from 1.94–2.95 eV, shifting the absorption over the whole visible spectrum (Fig. 8). It was furthermore shown that this band gap tailoring had a crucial effect on the catalytic performance, going through a maximum at 2.3 eV.150 Following this work, several more CMPs have been suggested as interesting photocatalysts for hydrogen production, e.g. conjugated benzene and spirobifluorene,151 benzodiazole152 and triazine153-based networks.
 Fig. 8  Top: Continuous tuning of the photophysical properties of organic CMP based photocatalysts by statistical copolymerization via Suzuki–Miyaura polycondensation. Bottom: Photographs on top of CMPs imaged under irradiation with UV light and the UV-visible absorption and photoluminescence spectra at the bottom prove the fine tuning of band gap energy of the CMPs. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
An illustrative example to which level the tailoring of organic photocatalysts can possibly proceed was recently shown in the preparation of CMPs in which certain tectons as chromophores were connected with metal coordinating linkers, namely bipyridine (Fig. 9).154 The latter was thought to coordinate and stabilize the used palladium co-catalysts and indeed increasing its amount in the network has a beneficial effect on the photocatalytic performance. This work thus picks up an idea, developed in recent years in the field of homogeneous photocatalysis, i.e. covalent attachment of a photosensitizer to a hydrogen evolving catalyst, just that this concept is now transferred to highly porous solids.154
 Fig. 9  Top: Structures of monomers of PCP photocatalysts prepared by Suzuki polycondensation. Bottom: Photocatalytic hydrogen production rates of PCPs with different bpy contents. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Given all these promising examples what is still missing is a judgement on the photocatalytic performance. Hydrogen evolution values up to 164 μmol h−1 have been reported,154 but most published values are much lower and so it seems there is still much room for improvement when applying CMPs as photocatalysts. Nevertheless given that the famous polymeric carbon nitride started from 8 μmol H2 per h,136 a value which is already outperformed by several CMPs, and can now (a suitable up-scaled setup provided) produce approx. 100 ml (∼4500 μmol) h−1 of H2,155 the investigation of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution on CMPs is still a highly promising field and further improvements are to be expected before long.
A much bigger problem seems to be how to judge and compare the different reported activity values. The final value of interest is of course the overall amount of hydrogen which can be produced per time. However, especially this value is highly dependent on sample mass, reactor setup, light source and applied filters and many other parameters and it can be assumed that one and the same material would produce different values when tested in different labs, a problem which CMPs share with the entire field of photocatalysis.156 The often given amount of hydrogen per time and mass catalyst (mol h−1 g−1) just helps on the first glance, as hydrogen production and catalyst mass do not follow a linear relation. Apparent quantum yields as another possible value to compare catalytic performance bears the same problems and is often not measured with a reliable protocol.156
For further progress it is of course also essential to think about the properties a CMP should exhibit to be a good photocatalyst and which could be further optimized. At first, a suitable band gap is indispensable and also a considerable accessible surface area seems to be beneficial for CMP-based photocatalysts. But some additional points should be considered. At first, most CMPs are rather hydrophobic and even float on water. How should then protons reach and be reduced on the CMP surface? It is noticeable that in some reports not pure water, but mixtures of water and an organic solvent are used or that relatively large amounts of the sacrificial electron donor, as well an organic molecule, is added to observe hydrogen production. Whether such mixtures could also be applied in real applications is questionable. Surface polarity of CMPs might therefore be another important point to be considered. It should also be noted that beside the semiconductor very often a co-catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is needed, which usually consists of a noble metal. For some CMPs it was reported that they even work without any metal co-catalyst. In these cases the role of noble metal catalysts used in CMP synthesis, thus almost always present in the final CMP in small amounts,154 has to be better understood.
It must also be asked, if a permanent surface area is actually needed for observing high photocatalytic performance. So far there seems to be no relationship between BET surface area and hydrogen evolution. Indeed, also networks with low or even no apparent surface area can swell in solution, thus there is no reason why a network whose surface area was measured in vacuum should give a reliable conclusion on the accessible sites in the liquid-swollen state. Indeed, several linear or planarized, thus non-crosslinked and non-porous conjugated polymers have been recently shown to exhibit comparable or even better photocatalytic activities than their microporous network counterparts.152,157,158
It is thus slightly surprising that so far no single paper on gas phase photocatalysis, e.g. CO2 reduction has appeared as CMPs seem to be ideal candidates for such reactions. We anyhow predict that such a work on a photocatalytic gas phase reaction will appear soon.
3.3 CMPs for other photocatalytic reactions
While water splitting and selective CO2 reduction can be seen as the Holy Grail in photocatalysis, it should not be forgotten that there are various other chemical reactions for which a photocatalytic process would be highly beneficial. Consequently, CMPs have been also tested for other photocatalytic applications.159 Especially the ease of incorporation of photo-/electroactive organic moieties into the π-conjugated structures of CMPs allows tailoring the properties of these organic photocatalysts. In one of the first works regarding this application, thiadiazole-based CMPs have been used as heterogeneous photosensitizers for the generation of singlet oxygen within a continuous flow photoreactor.160 Phthalocyanine based CMPs are as well active in singlet oxygen generation.161 A CMP with benzodifuran moieties, formed via intramolecular cyclization after network formation, was as well used for the generation of singlet oxygen with subsequent oxidative conversion of amines into symmetrical imines. CMPs with BODIPY moieties have been applied for the selective oxidation of sulfides162 and thioxanthone based CMPs were used as photoinitiators to initiate free radical and cationic polymerizations of vinyl monomers and cyclic ethers.163 Even typical dyes such as rose bengal164 or photosensitizers such as Ru-165 or Ir-complexes166 have been immobilized in CMPs to generate efficient heterogeneous photocatalysts (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Immobilization of an Ir-photosensitizer into a microporous conjugated polycarbazole polymer via FeCl3-promoted oxidative coupling. The polymers proved to be active and recyclable as heterogeneous photocatalysts in the aza-Henry reaction. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
Furthermore, Zhang and co-workers have applied different CMPs for a range of organic reactions, for example the oxidation of amines and sulfides,167 photooxidative cyclizations,168 reduction of metal ions (Cr(VI)–Cr(III))169 as well as Suzuki type couplings.170,171 Another recent work showed the versatility of carbazole based CMPs in photocatalytic applications, as one single carbazole-based CMP was able to photocatalyze a range of reactions, including dehalogenation of phenacyl bromide, oxidative hydroxylation of arylboronic acids, alpha-alkylation of aldehydes, oxidative coupling of primary amines, aerobic dehydrogenation of nitrogen heterocycles, and selective oxidation of sulfide using molecular oxygen and visible light.172,173
4. Functional networks through incorporating main group elements in microporous polymers
As mentioned in the introduction, compared to other microporous materials, microporous polymers are unique in that they can exist as pure hydrocarbon materials and completely forgo the use of metals or heteroatoms. Therefore, the material surfaces are covered by π-electrons and highly aprotic hydrogen atoms. The overall absence of disruptive effects gives rise to a relatively even distribution of electron density throughout the polymer skeletons and largely unpolar surfaces, which only display weak interactions with guest molecules. Correspondingly, even the highest surface area porous polymers65,67 display relatively small uptake capacities regarding most gases compared to functionalized networks.174 As mentioned above, starting from these high surface area polymers, many postsynthetic modifications were explored to increase their affinity towards guest molecules,70,175 which consequently allows a precise evaluation of the effect of the respective functional groups.
Poly(aryleneethynylene) networks, a subclass of CMPs, are somewhat special in that they contain triple bonds which have localized high π-electron densities, which offers relatively strong interactions with guest molecules such as H2 and CO2 compared to polymers solely comprising benzene rings, but the strength of the interaction still lies in the realm of physisorption. Their eligibility for H2 sorption has been shown experimentally as well as computationally.5,9,176
Selective incorporation of heteroatoms can provide disruptions in the otherwise homogeneous electron density and have beneficial effects on gas sorption, depending on the nature of the adsorbate. Donor moieties with lone electron pairs such as phosphines or amines provide nucleophilic sites capable of strong interactions with electron-deficient moieties, e.g. CO2.68,177
Early attempts to create main group element-centered polymers were effected via nucleophilic substitution of main group element chlorides, affording the so-called element-organic frameworks (EOFs) with BET surface areas between 260 and 1050 m2 g−1.178–180 The step-wise nature of the polymerization reaction eventually leads to steric congestion around a significant part of the partially substituted main group element nodes upon which further reaction is precluded. Following this direct incorporation approach, Uptmoor et al. synthesized a tetrahedral tin-based monomer to generate a homocoupled CMP network following a reported procedure for the direct coupling of alkynes.181 This material was not studied for its gas uptake properties but was readily digested by acid treatment and, by analysis of the fragments, gave very detailed insights into the polymerization mechanism of PAE networks.182
In 2013 Zhang et al. polymerized tris(4-chlorophenyl)-phosphine to obtain polymeric triphenylphosphine, which could be oxidized to polymeric triphenylphosphine oxide.177 The networks exhibited BET surface areas of 1284 (PP-P) and 1353 m2 g−1 (PP-PO). Interestingly, the oxidized polymer displayed stronger affinity towards the adsorption of CO2 than the reduced form (3.83 vs. 2.46 mmol g−1). Furthermore, the incorporation of phosphorus atoms enabled efficient formation and deposition of Pd nanoparticles in the polymeric triphenylphosphine which yielded a functional Suzuki cross-coupling catalyst and showed the ability of these materials to serve as a support for catalytically active nanoparticles. Fritsch et al. used a conceptually similar material, which was synthesized based on the EOF approach, to obtain a microporous polymer network with a BET surface area of 458 m2 g−1.180 This material was used as a support for Pd and Rh to obtain a solid catalyst for transfer hydrogenation of cyclohexanone.
Recently, Trunk et al. synthesized a series of microporous polymer networks based on sterically demanding triphenylphosphine derivatives to lessen the nucleophilicity of the phosphorus lone pair and facilitate the use of the networks as basic components in semi-immobilized frustrated Lewis pairs (FLP), for the first time making the transition from this novel class of molecular catalysts to solid organic materials (Fig. 11).183 The ability of solid FLPs to cleave dihydrogen at ambient temperature and low pressure was demonstrated via isotope scrambling experiments.
 Fig. 11  Synthesis of a semi-immobilized frustrated Lewis pair (FLP) by impregnation of a triphenylphosphine based microporous polymer with tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Nitrogen containing porous polymers for the capture of CO2 are great in number and the subject of reviews of their own.184,185 The majority of materials incorporates amine functions either as aromatic (aniline-like) amino groups or triarylamine linkages. The binding affinity of amines to CO2 is greatly enhanced when the amine is not directly attached to an aromatic system but separated by a short, aliphatic spacer. Such systems are best accessed by postsynthetic modification since amines are strong ligands and tend to affect the polymerization when present in the monomer itself.68,175
Far less is known about the incorporation of electron acceptor moieties. Main group elements such as boron in their neutral form have empty orbitals and can accept lone pairs of donating adsorbates. This feature is especially interesting for optical or electronic properties as it allows for the transfer of electron density from neighbouring aromates or donor moieties. The group of Mu prepared a tris(tetramethylphenyl)borane containing polymer via alkyne homocoupling. Despite the incorporation of boron sites, the uptake capacity for CO2 was comparable with reported boron-containing COFs at the time.186 Suresh et al. coupled tris(tetramethylphenyl)borane via Sonogashira coupling with a biphenyl unit to obtain a microporous polymer network with a surface area of 390 m2 g−1 which could be used as a Lewis acidic sensor for the detection of fluoride ions.187 Moreover, combining donor and acceptor moieties within one material can yield interesting electronic properties for optical applications or sensing. The separate functionalities can be combined in one monomer to create an intrinsic function, which is then polymerized, or an alternating copolymerization of building blocks with contrasting functionality can polymerized to synergistically enhance each other, with an “emerging function”.188 In 2013, Feng et al.189 and Mu et al.186 were the first to couple tritopic, sterically demanding tris(tetramethylphenyl)borane and nitrogen containing monomers to form porous π-conjugated donor–acceptor polymers via Suzuki coupling and Sonogashira coupling, respectively. The resulting materials featured BET surface areas between 600 and 1300 m2 g−1 and displayed strong fluorescence properties as well as capability of fluoride collection.
Two years later, Mu et al. also coupled a less sterically encumbered tris(dimethylphenyl)borane building block to a triarylamine-based unit via Suzuki coupling.190 The resulting polymer exhibited a surface area of 950 m2 g−1. It was found to be a highly selective sensor towards fluoride over other common anions yet easily recyclable by stirring in THF solutions of BF3·OEt2 as fluoride scavenger (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Top: Synthesis of a boron and nitrogen-containing microporous network and bottom: photographs and photoluminescence spectra of THF suspensions of the polymer framework, showing the size-selective fluorescence quenching by fluoride anions. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. 
5. Microporous polymers with permanent ionic charges
Beside the introduction of heteroatoms, the presence of permanent ionic charges represents a versatile method to further introduce functionality into microporous polymers. Ionic metal organic frameworks (iMOFs) represent a crystalline class of charged microporous networks with many interesting applications and have been intensely investigated in recent years.191 These studies greatly motivate to design covalently bound microporous materials with permanent ionic charges.92 The incorporation of a positive or negative charge into the polymer backbone making the structure ionic can happen in several ways: (i) starting from already charged monomers or tectons which can be linked together to afford a charged scaffold, (ii) using neutral monomers which upon building further covalent bonds will lead to charged functional groups and generate an ionic backbone or (iii) synthesize a neutral porous network where a (permanent) charge is then introduced post-synthetically.
5.1 Cationic microporous polymers
One option to create permanently charged cationic networks is the introduction of phosphonium moieties as building blocks. By synthesizing tetrakis-(4-chlorophenyl)phosphonium Zhang et al. were able to generate a cationic microporous phosphonium network by the Yamamoto homo-coupling reaction.192 The polymer exhibited a SBET of 650 m2 g−1, however, magic angle spinning 31P solid state NMR revealed that many of the phosphonium linkages were cleaved during the reaction affording a phosphonium to phosphine ratio of approximately 3:2. The Br− containing cationic network was successfully employed as a catalyst for the conversion of 2-(phenoxymethyl)oxirane to the cyclic carbonate in the presence of CO2. By “diluting” the cationic charges within a MPN the first two cationic microporous networks were synthesized, in which the phosphorus moiety is entirely present as phosphonium cation. Tetrakis-(4-bromophenyl)phosphonium was polymerized in a Yamamoto copolymerization with tetrakis-(4-bromophenyl)methane and in a Sonogashira–Hagihara cross coupling with 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene to afford the cationic microporous polymers CPN-1-Br and CPN-2-Br with SBET of 1455 m2 g−1 and 540 m2 g−1.193 Here too, a simple anion exchange was performed to introduce chlorine counter anions resulting in a rise in SBET for CPN-1-Cl to 1540 m2 g−1. The investigated CO2 uptakes for the charged networks proved to increase by 40% compared to the uncharged microporous analog PAF-167 even though the SBET of the latter is by far the higher. In a different approach Zhang et al. were able to generate a series of cationic microporous polymers via Friedel–Crafts reactions of asymmetric phosphonium molecules with benzene,194 and Ma et al. used a tetrahedral phosphonium building block in a radical polymerization procedure with AIBN (azobisisobutyronitrile) to generate a polymer with a SBET of 758 m2 g−1 and with pores in the microporous as well as mesoporous range.195 Anion exchange was performed with this polymer introducing a highly active peroxotungstate anion [W2O11]2− into the cationic network as the balancing charge. The resulting material was proven to be a very active phase transfer catalyst for the catalytic epoxidation of olefins as well as for the oxidation of dibenzothiophene with equivalent H2O2.
Cationic phosphonium networks can also be generated by post functionalization. Recently Zhuang et al. have synthesized a porous non-ionic phosphine network through radical polymerization with AIBN.196 The network was then charged by generating phosphonium species through protonation of the phosphine moieties. Solid state 31P-NMR spectroscopy confirmed the completion of conversion and total lack of residual phosphine species.
A large number of cationic microporous polymers are composed of iminium linkages and in some cases can be of crystalline structure due to a reversible condensation bond-forming process. By condensation of a charged ethidium bromide building block Zhu et al. synthesized a cationic covalent organic framework EB-COF-X (X: counter anion),197 which after anion exchange with poyloxometallate (POM) anions PW12O403− exhibited high proton conductivities of 3.32 × 10−3 S cm−1 with a relative humidity of 97% making it comparable if not better than many of the proton conducting MOFs (Fig. 13). The generation of a positive charge into 2D sheets will lead to an exfoliation of the sheets due to electrostatic repulsion. Based on this strategy Banerjee et al. synthesized ionic covalent organic nanosheets (iCONs) by reacting a planar C3 symmetric cationic triaminoguanidinium halide TGX with 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol.198 The obtained materials exhibited low crystallinity with a major broad peak at 2θ = 27.3° indicating poor π–π stacking between the layers due to the loosely bound halogen anions and positive charge of the guanidinium units.
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of cationic ethidium bromide covalent organic frameworks (EB-COF) where polyoxometallates were introduced by anion exchange post-synthetically. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Imidazolium ions are a class of organic cations very often found in ionic liquids, thus a rich chemistry is already reported on their chemical modification and functionalization. Not surprisingly, imidazolium ions have been also frequently introduced into microporous polymers. For example, in 2009 Dai et al. showed that cationic microporous networks can be formed by performing a salt melt catalyzed trimerization of carbonitriles tethered on cationic imidazolium ionic liquid (IL) precursors.199 The obtained materials exhibit typical microporous behavior with a sharp increase at low relative pressures and SBET differing from 2 m2 g−1 to 814 m2 g−1 varying on the counteranion of the IL precursor later located inside the charged framework. The cationic structure exhibited very good capacity for adsorption of perrhenate anions ReO4− which can be directly related to the adsorption of the harmful Tc99 isotope. Starting from imidazolium cations Son et al. reported a cationic microporous polymer synthesized by a Sonogashira–Hagihara cross-coupling reaction of the tetrahedral building block tetrakis(4-ethynylphenyl)methane with the cationic 1,3-bis(2,6-diisopropyl-4-iodophenyl)imidazolium chloride.200 The network showed a good activity for the conversion of CO2 into cyclic carbonates with turn-over frequencies (TOF) ranging from 92–142 h−1. Similar imidazolium containing polymers were reported by Wang et al. where the imidazolium building blocks were incorporated inside the microporous backbone by either a palladium catalyzed Suzuki cross-coupling reaction or by a Yamamoto reaction with Ni(COD)2 as a reagent.201,202 The cationic networks proved to be effective for the adsorption and removal of Cr2O72− from water surpassing most other materials such as cationic MOFs or macroporous anion exchange resins.
Imidazolium ions were also incorporated in microporous polymers as intermediate structure to generate N-heterocyclic carbenes within the polymer backbone.200,203,204
Recently Coskun et al. reported a series of cationic microporous networks based on bipyridinium salts as monomers which were reacted into a porous polymer by a Sonogashira–Hagihara cross-coupling reaction with tetrakis(4-ethynylphenyl)methane.205 The porous cationic polymers exhibited a high affinity towards CO2 with isosteric heats of adsorption between 28.5 and 31.6 kJ mol−1 and good CO2/N2 selectivity. Additionally, the networks proved to be active as organocatalysts for the conversion of CO2 into cyclic carbonates. By using a similar cationic viologen monomer D’Alessandro et al. synthesized two charged microporous networks by Sonogashira–Hagihara cross coupling of 1,1′-bis(4-bromophenyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium chloride with either tris(p-ethynylphenyl)amine or 1,3,5-tris(4-ethynyl)benzene.206 By combining the electron accepting viologen with the electron donating triarylamine the obtained materials were donor–acceptor-polymers with differential electronic and physical properties in their distinct redox states. Depending on the redox state and therefore charge of the network the host guest properties can be altered having a visible impact on SBET, pore size and more interestingly on gas uptake properties of CO2 and H2 as well as CO2/N2 selectivity and isosteric heats of adsorption of CO2.
Porous organic polymers from triazatriangulenium salts (TAPOPs) were developed via oxidative polymerizations and showed interesting properties for optical sensing of gases.207 Recently Chen et al. reported a series of porous cationic frameworks (PCF) by crosslinking inorganic polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) units with different ratios of the non-ionic N-heterocycle 4,4′-bipyridine.208 The N2 sorption properties of the obtained materials indicated the presence of micro- as well as mesopores with SBET ranging between 448 and 942 m2 g−1. The materials were tested for anion exchange in which the Cl− anions present after synthesis were exchanged with the catalytically active polyoxometallate anions PMo10V2O405− (PMoV) resulting in a drop of SBET as well as of pore size and volume. The PMoV immobilized materials PMoV@PCIF were then successfully tested as efficient heterogeneous catalysts for the aerobic oxidation of benzene to phenol and the H2O2-mediated oxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanol and cyclohexanone (KA oil).
5.2 Anionic microporous polymers
In contrast to the cationic networks, anionic microporous polymers are much less frequent due to the lack of negatively charged building blocks available for a porous structure formation. Negatively charged porous networks can be considered as organic zeolites and therefore bear great potential for many applications such as catalysis, sensing or as solid electrolytes for modern battery applications. Weakly coordinating anions (WCAs) protrude as versatile molecules for the introduction of a negative charge into a porous network as they consist of organic anions where the negative charge is delocalized over non-nucleophilic, chemically robust moieties that lack an accessible basic site.209 Tetraarylborates consist of an anionic borate core while maintaining a three dimensional and rigid structure perfectly suited as a tecton for the formation of a microporous polymer. Based on this strategy Fischer et al. reported the synthesis of an anionic microporous polymer by reacting the WCA salt lithium tetrakis-(4-bromotetrafluorophenyl)borate with triethynylbenzene through a Sonogashira–Hagihara cross-coupling reaction (Fig. 14).76 The network exhibited a SBET of 890 m2 g−1 and it was possible to exchange metal cations inside the network post-synthetically by cation exchange where Li was exchanged with Na and effects on SBET could be observed. By introducing a catalytically active, cationic Mn–bipy complex the network could be applied for a catalytic epoxidation of styrene proving the viability of such a network for immobilizing molecular catalysts, this time not by covalent attachment of the catalyst to the polymer backbone but by Coulombic interaction with the anionically charged network. Similar microporous borate networks were investigated by Long et al. Here too, lithium cations were introduced inside the anionic polymers post-synthetically and the structures were tested for lithium conductivity showing promising potential for an application as solid electrolytes in lithium ion batteries (Fig. 14).210
 Fig. 14  Examples of anionic tetraarylborate based microporous polymers and their applications in catalysis (a), as single ion conducting solid electrolytes (b) and for iodine capture (c). Reproduced and adapted from ref. 76, 210 and 211 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013 and 2015; Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
In an analogous approach Zhu et al. reported the synthesis of anionic microporous borate based networks based on unfluorinated tetraphenylborate WCAs (Fig. 14).211 The negatively charged polymers exhibited moderate SBET ranging between 82 and 262 m2 g−1 and proved to be applicable for the capture of volatile iodine.
Apart from the Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling reaction other transformations are possible to generate anionic microporous structures. Dai et al. were able to generate an anionic PIM like structure based on tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)borate by reacting it with a highly contorted tetrahydroxy spirobisindane moiety in a mechanochemical procedure.212
WCAs such as the above mentioned tetraphenylborates represent a practical way to prepare anionic microporous systems from rigid anionic precursors. By using the Lewis acidic borane a negative charge is precluded but the possibility to build rigid and porous scaffolds still persists due to geometry of triphenylborane moieties. Lewis acidic boron centers appear very suitable for many applications such as chemical sensing or organic electronics. Furthermore, a borane inside the polymer backbone can be transformed into a negatively charged borate post-synthetically. Jiang et al. developed microporous polyborane carbazol films through electropolymerization.135 By ligating the borane centers with F− post-synthetically an anionic FPBC film was obtained and further functionalized through electro-oxidation. A similar strategy was very recently applied by Feng et al. generating a non-ionic borane network and afterwards ligating the boron centers with F− to obtain a permanently anionic microporous polymer. After loading the network with cobalt cations the network proved to be very active for homo-coupling reactions of Grignard magnesium aryl compounds.213
6. Conclusion
This review article presents some of the recent trends and challenges for the emerging materials class of microporous polymers. The topics described in this article are certainly chosen in a highly subjective manner; however we tried to mainly focus on identifying and describing the unique properties and advantages of microporous polymers. While high surface areas and chemical and thermal stabilities, based on the entirely covalent bonds, are probably the first features which come to mind when listing the advantages of microporous polymers, these properties can be also found in other microporous materials such as MOFs, activated charcoals or zeolites. However, the possibility to produce solvent processable microporous polymers or to generate thin films on electrodes by oxidative polymerizations, to make use of extended π-conjugated backbones in organic electronics or photocatalysis, to introduce distinct functional groups in an otherwise non-functional environment and finally to create weakly coordinating, i.e. permanently charged networks in which the counterions can be exchanged altering the overall properties of these materials – all this makes microporous polymers an exciting field for further research.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the European Research Council for funding the ERC Project ORGZEO (Grant No. 278593) and the DFG (Cluster of Excellence UniCat). The image used for the graphical abstract is reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014.
References
A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8328–8344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dawson, A. I. Cooper and D. J. Adams, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 530–563 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
J.-X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C. D. Wood, N. L. Campbell, H. Niu, C. Dickinson, A. Y. Ganin, M. J. Rosseinsky, Y. Z. Khimyak and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8574–8578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Trunk, A. Herrmann, H. Bildirir, A. Yassin, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7179–7183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Weber and A. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6334–6335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schmidt, M. Werner and A. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4426–4429 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, J. Weber and C. F. J. Faul, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8002–8005 RSC .
W. Lu, Z. Wei, D. Yuan, J. Tian, S. Fordham and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4589–4597 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, Z. Liang, J. Yu and R. Xu, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1932–1938 RSC .
O. Plietzsch, C. I. Schilling, T. Grab, S. L. Grage, A. S. Ulrich, A. Comotti, P. Sozzani, T. Muller and S. Bräse, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 1577–1581 RSC .
J. Weber, Q. Su, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1871–1876 CrossRef CAS .
J. Weber, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2880–2885 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Farha, A. M. Spokoyny, B. G. Hauser, Y.-S. Bae, S. E. Brown, R. Q. Snurr, C. A. Mirkin and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3033–3035 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, J. Weber and C. F. J. Faul, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2064–2073 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Rabbani, T. E. Reich, R. M. Kassab, K. T. Jackson and H. M. El-Kaderi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1141–1143 RSC .
M. G. Rabbani and H. M. El-Kaderi, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1511–1517 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Budd, B. S. Ghanem, S. Makhseed, N. B. McKeown, K. J. Msayib and C. E. Tattershall, Chem. Commun., 2004, 230–231 RSC .
A. P. Cote, A. Benin, N. Ockwig, M. O’Keeffe, A. Matzger and O. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Uribe-Romo, J. R. Hunt, H. Furukawa, C. Klöck, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4570–4571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M. V. Mane, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19524–19527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Schwab, B. Fassbender, H. W. Spiess, A. Thomas, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7216–7217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Buyukcakir, S. H. Je, J. Park, H. A. Patel, Y. Jung, C. T. Yavuz and A. Coskun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15320–15327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Ding and B.-H. Han, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 11863–11868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Patel, S. Hyun Je, J. Park, D. P. Chen, Y. Jung, C. T. Yavuz and A. Coskun, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1357–1364 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Melhi, X. Ding, Z.-W. Liu, C.-X. Cao and B.-H. Han, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 1529–1533 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Patel, F. Karadas, J. Byun, J. Park, E. Deniz, A. Canlier, Y. Jung, M. Atilhan and C. T. Yavuz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2270–2276 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Patel, D. Ko and C. T. Yavuz, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6729–6733 CrossRef CAS .
J. Byun, S.-H. Je, H. A. Patel, A. Coskun and C. T. Yavuz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12507–12512 CAS .
J. Schmidt, J. Weber, J. D. Epping, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 702–705 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palma-Cando, G. Brunklaus and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 6816–6824 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Sun, P.-F. Wang, H. Wang and B.-H. Han, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 5031–5038 RSC .
Q. Chen, M. Luo, P. Hammershøj, D. Zhou, Y. Han, B. W. Laursen, C.-G. Yan and B.-H. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6084–6087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kuhn, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3450–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, M. M. Wanderley and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 691–697 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, C. Wang, K. E. DeKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2056–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Preis, C. Widling, U. Scherf, S. Patil, G. Brunklaus, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2186–2189 RSC .
S. Xu, Y. Luo and B. Tan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 471–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, S. Jin, H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8012–8031 RSC .
M. Rose, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1166–1182 CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. Tang, M. Wu and Z. Zhou, Polym. Int., 2014, 63, 381–392 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiang and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2691–2718 CAS .
H. A. Patel, F. Karadas, A. Canlier, J. Park, E. Deniz, Y. Jung, M. Atilhan and C. T. Yavuz, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8431–8437 RSC .
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, (Ed.), Climate Change 2013 – The Physical Science Basis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014, vol. 53.
R. T. Woodward, L. A. Stevens, R. Dawson, M. Vijayaraghavan, T. Hasell, I. P. Silverwood, A. V. Ewing, T. Ratvijitvech, J. D. Exley, S. Y. Chong, F. Blanc, D. J. Adams, S. G. Kazarian, C. E. Snape, T. C. Drage and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9028–9035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dawson, L. A. Stevens, T. C. Drage, C. E. Snape, M. W. Smith, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10741–10744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dawson, T. Ratvijitvech, M. Corker, A. Laybourn, Y. Z. Khimyak, A. I. Cooper and D. J. Adams, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 2034–2038 RSC .
M. Thommes, K. Kaneko, A. V. Neimark, J. P. Olivier, F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, J. Rouquerol and K. S. W. Sing, Pure Appl. Chem., 2015, 87, 1051–1069 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eddaoudi, Science, 2002, 295, 469–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fayon and A. Trewin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16840–16847 RSC .
D. Becker, N. Heidary, M. Horch, U. Gernert, I. Zebger, J. Schmidt, A. Fischer and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4283–4286 RSC .
P. Lindemann, A. Schade, L. Monnereau, W. Feng, K. Batra, H. Gliemann, P. Levkin, S. Bräse, C. Wöll and M. Tsotsalas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6815–6818 CAS .
P. Lindemann, M. Tsotsalas, S. Shishatskiy, V. Abetz, P. Krolla-Sidenstein, C. Azucena, L. Monnereau, A. Beyer, A. Gölzhäuser, V. Mugnaini, H. Gliemann, S. Bräse and C. Wöll, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7189–7193 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, X. Zou, H. Ma, S. Meng and G. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3644–3648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Sekizkardes, V. A. Kusuma, G. Dahe, E. A. Roth, L. J. Hill, A. Marti, M. Macala, S. R. Venna and D. Hopkinson, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11768–11771 RSC .
A. Palma-Cando and U. Scherf, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 827–841 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. McKeown and P. M. Budd, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 675–683 RSC .
C. Li, A. L. Ward, S. E. Doris, T. A. Pascal, D. Prendergast and B. A. Helms, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5724–5729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tozawa, J. T. A. Jones, S. I. Swamy, S. Jiang, D. J. Adams, S. Shakespeare, R. Clowes, D. Bradshaw, T. Hasell, S. Y. Chong, C. Tang, S. Thompson, J. Parker, A. Trewin, J. Bacsa, A. M. Z. Slawin, A. Steiner and A. I. Cooper, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 973–978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Holst, A. Trewin and A. I. Cooper, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 915–920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mastalerz and I. M. Oppel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5252–5255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mastalerz, M. W. Schneider, I. M. Oppel and O. Presly, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1046–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, O. Presly, F. White, I. M. Oppel and M. Mastalerz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1516–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. McKeown, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10588–10597 RSC .
D. Yuan, W. Lu, D. Zhao and H.-C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3723–3725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Farha, I. Eryazici, N. C. Jeong, B. G. Hauser, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, R. Q. Snurr, S. T. Nguyen, A. Ö. Yazaydın and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15016–15021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ben, H. Ren, S. Ma, D. Cao, J. Lan, X. Jing, W. Wang, J. Xu, F. Deng, J. M. Simmons, S. Qiu and G. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9457–9460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, J. P. Sculley, D. Yuan, R. Krishna, Z. Wei and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7480–7484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dawson, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1173–1177 RSC .
W. Lu, D. Yuan, J. P. Sculley, D. Zhao, R. Krishna and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18126–18129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Konstas, J. W. Taylor, A. W. Thornton, C. M. Doherty, W. X. Lim, T. J. Bastow, D. F. Kennedy, C. D. Wood, B. J. Cox, J. M. Hill, A. J. Hill and M. R. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6639–6642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bleschke, J. Schmidt, D. S. Kundu, S. Blechert and A. Thomas, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 3101–3106 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Kundu, J. Schmidt, C. Bleschke, A. Thomas and S. Blechert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5456–5459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuan, D. White, A. Mason, B. Reprogle, M. S. Ferrandon, L. Yu and D.-J. Liu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 407–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-X. Jiang, C. Wang, A. Laybourn, T. Hasell, R. Clowes, Y. Z. Khimyak, J. Xiao, S. J. Higgins, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fischer, J. Schmidt, P. Strauch and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12174–12178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Chan-Thaw, A. Villa, L. Prati and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1052–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Chan-Thaw, A. Villa, G. M. Veith, K. Kailasam, L. A. Adamczyk, R. R. Unocic, L. Prati and A. Thomas, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 387–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15712–15727 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang and J. Y. Ying, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2681–2691 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hübner, J. G. de Vries and V. Farina, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 3–25 CrossRef .
R. Palkovits, M. Antonietti, P. Kuhn, A. Thomas and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6909–6912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chang, J. Guo, G. Wu, L. Liu, M. Zhang, T. He, P. Wang, P. Yu and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 3605–3610 RSC .
Z. Tian, J. Huang, Z. Zhang, G. Shao, A. Liu and S. Yuan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 234, 130–136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, H. Gao, W. Li, H. Bai, S. Wu, Y. Zeng, W. Cui, X. Zhou and L. Li, Polymer, 2016, 101, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Wei, C. Zhang and J.-X. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21185–21193 CAS .
P. Katekomol, J. Roeser, M. Bojdys, J. Weber and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1542–1548 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Jiang, A. Trewin, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1777–1781 RSC .
J. Roncali, P. Leriche and A. Cravino, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2045–2060 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, C.-Q. Ma and P. Bäuerle, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1141–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bildirir, J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 9543–9548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-K. Sun, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6627–6656 RSC .
Z. Chang, D.-S. Zhang, Q. Chen and X.-H. Bu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5430–5442 RSC .
N. B. McKeown and P. M. Budd, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 5163–5176 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. McKeown, ISRN Mater. Sci., 2012, 2012, 1–16 CrossRef .
Y. Zang, T. Aoki, M. Teraguchi, T. Kaneko, L. Ma and H. Jia, Polym. Rev., 2015, 55, 57–89 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carta, M. Croad, R. Malpass-Evans, J. C. Jansen, P. Bernardo, G. Clarizia, K. Friess, M. Lanč and N. B. McKeown, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3526–3531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Carta, R. Malpass-Evans, M. Croad, Y. Rogan, J. C. Jansen, P. Bernardo, F. Bazzarelli and N. B. McKeown, Science, 2013, 339, 303–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Swaidan, B. Ghanem and I. Pinnau, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 947–951 CrossRef CAS .
D. Becker, N. Konnertz, M. Böhning, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8523–8529 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ogieglo, B. Ghanem, X. Ma, I. Pinnau and M. Wessling, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 10403–10410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seoane, J. Coronas, I. Gascon, M. E. Benavides, O. Karvan, J. Caro, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2421–2454 RSC .
A. F. Bushell, M. P. Attfield, C. R. Mason, P. M. Budd, Y. Yampolskii, L. Starannikova, A. Rebrov, F. Bazzarelli, P. Bernardo, J. Carolus Jansen, M. Lanč, K. Friess, V. Shantarovich, V. Gustov and V. Isaeva, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 427, 48–62 CrossRef CAS .
M. Benzaqui, R. Semino, N. Menguy, F. Carn, T. Kundu, J.-M. Guigner, N. B. McKeown, K. J. Msayib, M. Carta, R. Malpass-Evans, C. Le Guillouzer, G. Clet, N. A. Ramsahye, C. Serre, G. Maurin and N. Steunou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27311–27321 CAS .
Z. Tian, S. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Ma, K. Cao, D. Peng, X. Wu, H. Wu and Z. Jiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 514, 15–24 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mitra, R. S. Bhavsar, D. J. Adams, P. M. Budd and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5581–5584 RSC .
C. H. Lau, K. Konstas, A. W. Thornton, A. C. Y. Liu, S. Mudie, D. F. Kennedy, S. C. Howard, A. J. Hill and M. R. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2669–2673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lau, P. T. Nguyen, M. R. Hill, A. W. Thornton, K. Konstas, C. M. Doherty, R. J. Mulder, L. Bourgeois, A. C. Y. Liu, D. J. Sprouster, J. P. Sullivan, T. J. Bastow, A. J. Hill, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5322–5326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Bushell, P. M. Budd, M. P. Attfield, J. T. A. Jones, T. Hasell, A. I. Cooper, P. Bernardo, F. Bazzarelli, G. Clarizia and J. C. Jansen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1253–1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Li, Y. Xiao, T.-S. Chung and S. Kawi, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1427–1437 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, S. Cao, R. H. Pritchard, B. Ghalei, S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, E. M. Terentjev, A. K. Cheetham and E. Sivaniah, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4813–4824 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. Liu, S. T. Wilson and D. A. Lesch, US Pat., 7758751,  2010 Search PubMed .
N. Du, M. M. D. Cin, I. Pinnau, A. Nicalek, G. P. Robertson and M. D. Guiver, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Khan, G. Bengtson, S. Shishatskiy, B. N. Gacal, M. Mushfequr Rahman, S. Neumann, V. Filiz and V. Abetz, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 4157–4166 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Q. Xie, X. Ding, J. Chen, M. Hua, X. Tan and Y. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 514, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Xiao, K.-S. Liao and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 523, 92–102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, R. Guo, R. Malpass-Evans, M. Carta, N. B. McKeown, M. D. Guiver, L. Wu and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11499–11502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Del Regno, A. Gonciaruk, L. Leay, M. Carta, M. Croad, R. Malpass-Evans, N. B. McKeown and F. R. Siperstein, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 16939–16950 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tocci, L. De Lorenzo, P. Bernardo, G. Clarizia, F. Bazzarelli, N. B. Mckeown, M. Carta, R. Malpass-Evans, K. Friess, K. Pilnáček, M. Lanč, Y. P. Yampolskii, L. Strarannikova, V. Shantarovich, M. Mauri and J. C. Jansen, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 7900–7916 CrossRef CAS .
PIM-1 is used ‘Organic Vap. Serv. Life Indic. Filters 6000i Ser. by 3MTM.
X. Liu, Y. Xu and D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8738–8741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Novotney and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Hu, Q. Chen, D. Zhou, J. Cao, Y.-J. He and B.-H. Han, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1124–1128 RSC .
E. Özdemir, D. Thirion and C. T. Yavuz, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 69010–69015 RSC .
L.-M. Tao, F. Niu, D. Zhang, T.-M. Wang and Q.-H. Wang, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2774–2777 RSC .
Y. Zhang, A. Sigen, Y. Zou, X. Luo, Z. Li, H. Xia, X. Liu and Y. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13422–13430 CAS .
A. Räupke, A. Palma-Cando, E. Shkura, P. Teckhausen, A. Polywka, P. Görrn, U. Scherf and T. Riedl, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29118–29124 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Palma-Cando and U. Scherf, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11127–11133 CAS .
A. Palma-Cando, E. Preis and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 8041–8047 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bildirir, I. Osken, T. Ozturk and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9306–9311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Qin, H. Xu, S. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Ma and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13594–13598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, R. Dawson, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5585–5590 RSC .
C. Gu, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Xue, S. Sun, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, H. Zhang, Y. Pan, Y. Lv, Y. Yang, F. Li, S. Zhang, F. Huang and Y. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3443–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Xue, S. Sun, C. Zhong, H. Zhang, Y. Lv, F. Li, F. Huang and Y. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301771 CrossRef .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Ma and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3049–3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Su, S. C. Mathew, G. Lipner, X. Fu, M. Antonietti, S. Blechert and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16299–16301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kailasam, J. D. Epping, A. Thomas, S. Losse and H. Junge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4668–4674 CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5300–5303 RSC .
A. Thomas, F. Goettmann and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 738–755 CrossRef CAS .
C. Merschjann, S. Tschierlei, T. Tyborski, K. Kailasam, S. Orthmann, D. Hollmann, T. Schedel-Niedrig, A. Thomas and S. Lochbrunner, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7993–7999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hollmann, M. Karnahl, S. Tschierlei, K. Kailasam, M. Schneider, J. Radnik, K. Grabow, U. Bentrup, H. Junge, M. Beller, S. Lochbrunner, A. Thomas and A. Brückner, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1727–1733 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Sun, K. Maeda, K. Domen, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 675–678 CAS .
S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3894–3901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Chen, S. Lin, L. Möhlmann, G. Dołęga, G. Lipner, M. Antonietti, S. Blechert and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3183–3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, X. Xia, Y. Wang and R. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15006–15012 RSC .
K. Kailasam, J. Schmidt, H. Bildirir, G. Zhang, S. Blechert, X. Wang and A. Thomas, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1008–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kailasam, M. B. Mesch, L. Möhlmann, M. Baar, S. Blechert, M. Schwarze, M. Schröder, R. Schomäcker, J. Senker and A. Thomas, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 744–750 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sprick, J.-X. Jiang, B. Bonillo, S. Ren, T. Ratvijitvech, P. Guiglion, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, M. Sachs, R. Clowes, J. R. Durrant, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10008–10011 RSC .
C. Yang, B. C. Ma, L. Zhang, S. Lin, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester, K. A. I. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9202–9206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhunia, D. Esquivel, S. Dey, R. Fernández-Terán, Y. Goto, S. Inagaki, P. Van Der Voort and C. Janiak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13450–13457 CAS .
L. Li, Z. Cai, Q. Wu, W.-Y. Lo, N. Zhang, L. X. Chen and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7681–7686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schröder, K. Kailasam, J. Borgmeyer, M. Neumann, A. Thomas, R. Schomäcker and M. Schwarze, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 1014–1017 CrossRef .
H. Kisch and D. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1907–1910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, R. Clowes, P. Guiglion, N. J. Brownbill, B. J. Slater, F. Blanc, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1792–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, R. G. Hadt, S. Yao, W.-Y. Lo, Z. Cai, Q. Wu, B. Pandit, L. X. Chen and L. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5394–5399 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Wong, J. M. Tobin, Z. Xu and F. Vilela, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18677–18686 CAS .
K. Zhang, D. Kopetzki, P. H. Seeberger, M. Antonietti and F. Vilela, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1432–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding and B.-H. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6536–6539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liras, M. Iglesias and F. Sánchez, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1666–1673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dadashi-Silab, H. Bildirir, R. Dawson, A. Thomas and Y. Yagci, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4607–4614 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Wu, J. Xiao, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8779–8783 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liras, M. Pintado-Sierra, M. Iglesias and F. Sánchez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17274–17278 CAS .
L. Pan, M.-Y. Xu, L.-J. Feng, Q. Chen, Y.-J. He and B.-H. Han, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2299–2307 RSC .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8177–8180 RSC .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghasimi, S. Prescher, Z. J. Wang, K. Landfester, J. Yuan and K. A. I. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 14757–14761 CrossRef .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18720–18724 CAS .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1921–1924 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, R. Tandiana, B. Tian, A. Sengupta, W. Tang, J. Su and K. P. Loh, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3594–3599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Zhang and J. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2250–2254 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dawson, A. I. Cooper and D. J. Adams, Polym. Int., 2013, 62, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Garibay, M. H. Weston, J. E. Mondloch, Y. J. Colón, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and S. T. Nguyen, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1515–1519 RSC .
X. Wu, R. Wang, H. Yang, W. Wang, W. Cai and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10724–10729 CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Yang and S. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10024–10029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rose, W. Böhlmann, M. Sabo and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2462–2464 RSC .
J. Fritsch, M. Rose, P. Wollmann, W. Böhlmann and S. Kaskel, Materials, 2010, 3, 2447–2462 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fritsch, F. Drache, G. Nickerl, W. Böhlmann and S. Kaskel, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 172, 167–173 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Jiang, F. Su, H. Niu, C. D. Wood, N. L. Campbell, Y. Z. Khimyak and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Commun., 2008, 486–488 RSC .
A. C. Uptmoor, J. Freudenberg, S. T. Schwäbel, F. Paulus, F. Rominger, F. Hinkel and U. H. F. Bunz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14673–14676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Trunk, J. F. Teichert and A. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3615–3618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li and Y. Zhao, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1680–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sakaushi and M. Antonietti, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 88, 386–398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, A. Sigen, H. Xia and Y. Mu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21267–21270 RSC .
V. M. Suresh, A. Bandyopadhyay, S. Roy, S. K. Pati and T. K. Maji, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10799–10804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Slater and A. I. Cooper, Science, 2015, 348, aaa8075 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, X. Zhuang, D. Wu, F. Zhang, D. Gehrig, F. Laquai and X. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13878–13884 CAS .
Z. Li, H. Li, H. Xia, X. Ding, X. Luo, X. Liu and Y. Mu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 17355–17362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Karmakar, A. V. Desai and S. K. Ghosh, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 313–341 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, S. Zhang and S. Li, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 2981–2988 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fischer, A. Schimanowitz, R. Dawson, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel and A. Thomas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11825–11829 CAS .
J. Wang, J. G. Wei Yang, G. Yi and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15708–15711 RSC .
Q. Sun, S. Ma, Z. Dai, X. Meng and F.-S. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23871–23875 CAS .
S. Han, Y. Feng, F. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Yao, W. Zhao, F. Qiu, L. Yang, Y. Yao, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3899–3906 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, B. Liu, B. Li, L. Zhang, Y.-G. Li, H.-Q. Tan, H.-Y. Zang and G. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5897–5903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mitra, S. Kandambeth, B. P. Biswal, A. Khayum M., C. K. Choudhury, M. Mehta, G. Kaur, S. Banerjee, A. Prabhune, S. Verma, S. Roy, U. K. Kharul and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2823–2828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee, H. Luo, G. A. Baker and S. Dai, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4756–4758 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Cho, H. S. Lee, J. Chun, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 917–919 RSC .
Y. Su, Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Li and R. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18904–18911 CAS .
H. Zhao, Y. Wang and R. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10871–10874 RSC .
M. Rose, A. Notzon, M. Heitbaum, G. Nickerl, S. Paasch, E. Brunner, F. Glorius and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4814–4816 RSC .
K. Thiel, R. Zehbe, J. Roeser, P. Strauch, S. Enthaler and A. Thomas, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1848–1856 RSC .
O. Buyukcakir, S. H. Je, D. S. Choi, S. N. Talapaneni, Y. Seo, Y. Jung, K. Polychronopoulou and A. Coskun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 934–937 RSC .
C. Hua, B. Chan, A. Rawal, F. Tuna, D. Collison, J. M. Hook and D. M. D’Alessandro, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2535–2544 RSC .
X.-M. Hu, Q. Chen, Z.-Y. Sui, Z.-Q. Zhao, N. Bovet, B. W. Laursen and B.-H. Han, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 90135–90143 RSC .
G. Chen, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, J. Li, S. Xue, Y. Liu, Q. Wang and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11236–11249 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Krossing and I. Raabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2066–2090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Van Humbeck, M. L. Aubrey, A. Alsbaiee, R. Ameloot, G. W. Coates, W. R. Dichtel and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5499–5505 RSC .
Z. Yan, Y. Yuan, Y. Tian, D. Zhang and G. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12733–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, X. Jiang, S. Wan and S. Dai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 12866–12870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, F. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Bi, D. Wu, Y. Yao, M. Wagner, R. Graf, M. R. Hansen, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15162–15168 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Nicolas Chaoui
	Nicolas Chaoui studied chemistry at the Technische Universität Berlin. After completing a diploma thesis in the department of organic chemistry he joined the group of Prof. Arne Thomas for his PhD studies where he is currently working on charged microporous polymers and their application in gas storage and catalysis.

Matthias Trunk
	Matthias Trunk received his BSc in Chemistry and Biochemistry in 2010 and his MSc in Chemistry in 2012 from Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München. In 2013 he joined the group of Prof. Dr Arne Thomas where he is currently working on his PhD project. He is interested in developing novel microporous polymer networks for gas storage and catalytic applications.

Robert Dawson
	Dr Robert Dawson is a Lecturer in Polymer Chemistry at the University of Sheffield. He received his MChem in Chemistry from the University of Liverpool in 2006 and completed his PhD with Prof. Andrew I. Cooper at the same institution graduating in 2010. This was followed by a further two years in the group as a post-doctoral researcher. In 2012 he moved to the Technical University of Berlin as a Marie Curie Intra-European Fellow in the group of Prof. Arne Thomas. He returned to the UK in 2014 working at the University of Bath before moving to Sheffield in 2015.

Johannes Schmidt
	Dr Johannes Schmidt studied chemistry at Philipps-University of Marburg and graduated in 2007. He received his PhD at Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces and University of Potsdam in 2010. As a PostDoc he joined Prof. Dr Arne Thomas at TU Berlin were he holds his current position as research coordinator. His research is focused on porous materials and their potential in (photo)catalysis, gas storage/separation and energy applications.

Arne Thomas
	Arne Thomas studied chemistry in Gieβen, Marburg and Edinburgh and received his PhD from MPI for Colloid and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany. After a postdoctoral stay at the University of California, Santa Barbara, as an AvH fellow, he rejoined the MPI for Colloids and Interfaces as a group leader. In 2009 he became a Professor at the Technische Universität Berlin where he is leading the department of Functional Materials. His research focuses on porous materials – from mesoporous inorganic materials to microporous organic frameworks.

 	Fig. 1  Model of PAF-1 a microporous polymer network built by Yamamoto-homocoupling of tetrakis(4-bromophenyl)methane. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 2  Free standing membrane and chemical structure of the microporous polymer PIM-1. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 3  Top: Chemical structure of CTF-1 and bottom: ammonia decomposition reaction using 1–2 wt% Ru-loaded CTF-1 (dark spots) and CNTs (light spots), for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top: Synthetic routes to pyrene based CMPs. Bottom: Photographs and photoluminescence spectra of different CMPs under irradiation with UV light in bulk and dispersion in THF. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structures of spirobifluorene, ethanoanthracene and triptycene based PIMs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of effect of nanofillers on mixed matrix membranes. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  Left: Device configuration of solar cells and charge separation process using thiophene based CMP with incorporated C60 as photoactive layers. Right: J–V curves of the solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 8  Top: Continuous tuning of the photophysical properties of organic CMP based photocatalysts by statistical copolymerization via Suzuki–Miyaura polycondensation. Bottom: Photographs on top of CMPs imaged under irradiation with UV light and the UV-visible absorption and photoluminescence spectra at the bottom prove the fine tuning of band gap energy of the CMPs. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 9  Top: Structures of monomers of PCP photocatalysts prepared by Suzuki polycondensation. Bottom: Photocatalytic hydrogen production rates of PCPs with different bpy contents. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  Immobilization of an Ir-photosensitizer into a microporous conjugated polycarbazole polymer via FeCl3-promoted oxidative coupling. The polymers proved to be active and recyclable as heterogeneous photocatalysts in the aza-Henry reaction. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis of a semi-immobilized frustrated Lewis pair (FLP) by impregnation of a triphenylphosphine based microporous polymer with tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  Top: Synthesis of a boron and nitrogen-containing microporous network and bottom: photographs and photoluminescence spectra of THF suspensions of the polymer framework, showing the size-selective fluorescence quenching by fluoride anions. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of cationic ethidium bromide covalent organic frameworks (EB-COF) where polyoxometallates were introduced by anion exchange post-synthetically. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 14  Examples of anionic tetraarylborate based microporous polymers and their applications in catalysis (a), as single ion conducting solid electrolytes (b) and for iodine capture (c). Reproduced and adapted from ref. 76, 210 and 211 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013 and 2015; Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
