Supramolecular gels ‘in action’   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B819218A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B819218A
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6649-6687Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSupramolecular gels ‘in action’†

        
          
            Supratim 
            Banerjee
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rajat K. 
            Das
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Uday 
            Maitra
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Organic Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012, India. E-mail: maitra@orgchem.iisc.ernet.in;  Fax: +91 (0)8023600529;   Tel: +91 (0)8023601968
Received 
      30th October 2008
    , Accepted 23rd April 2009First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      9th June 2009
    AbstractIn recent years, self-assembly has emerged as a powerful tool for the construction of functional nanostructures. Myriad applications of these nanoscale architectures, especially the supramolecular gels derived from low molecular mass compounds, in fields such as optoelectronics, light harvesting, organic–inorganic hybrid materials, tissue engineering and regenerative medicine are being envisaged. This review attempts to present a succinct overview of the current state of research on functional nano-scale systems—the design, synthesis and applications of self-assembled nanomaterials “engineered” to carry out precise functions, with an emphasis on supramolecular gel phase materials.Supratim BanerjeeSupratim Banerjee received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from the Jadavpur University, Kolkata in 2002. In the same year he joined the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore as an Integrated PhD student. Later in 2004, he joined the Department of Organic Chemistry in the same institute to carry out his Master's degree project under the supervision of Professor Uday Maitra and pursued research towards his PhD degree in the same lab. He has worked on supramolecular gels based on anthracene derivatives and bile acids. He spent five months (March–July, 2007) as a visiting student in Professor Jean-Pierre Desvergne's laboratory at the Université Bordeaux 1, France.Rajat K. DasRajat K. Das received his BSc degree in Chemistry from the Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India in 2003. In the same year, he joined the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, as an Integrated PhD student in the Chemical Sciences Division and subsequently joined Professor Uday Maitra's research group (in 2005) in the Department of Organic Chemistry, where he is currently pursuing his PhD work in the area of design, synthesis and applications of anthracene and pyrene based supramolecular organogelators.Uday MaitraUday Maitra completed BSc and MSc from Presidency College, Calcutta IIT Kanpur, respectively. His PhD work at Columbia University was done in Prof. Ronald Breslow's group. He also carried out postdoctoral work at the University of California, Berkeley, with Prof. Paul A. Bartlett. He has been at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore since 1989 where he is currently a Professor. His research interests include supramolecular chemistry, bile acid chemistry, and chemistry and physics of gels. He is also greatly interested in chemical education.
Introduction
Hierarchical growth of self-assembled structures is ubiquitous in nature. Whether it is the “double strand” of DNA or the triple helix of the structural protein collagen, the globular to fibrillar transition of the muscle protein actin or the intriguing structural features embedded in the tobacco mosaic virus, molecular recognition through self-complementary functions leading to complex superstructures has profound implications in life. The ease and efficiency with which nature constructs complex self-assembled architectures to carry out various biological processes has continuously provided inspiration towards the design and realization of engineered “materials” based on simple molecular building blocks.
In the present review, due to space limitations, we do not intend to discuss all aspects of self-assembled functional materials. Instead, we shall concentrate on the importance and scope of molecular gels for applications. In this context, we shall specifically deal with self-assembled gels based on low molecular mass compounds. The “solid phase” in these gels consists of a three dimensional fibrous network which is generated from the self-assembly of the gelator molecules through non-covalent interactions. The bulk phase, i.e., the solvent, is immobilized within this network. The advantage of these gels over their polymeric counterparts stems from the reversibility of these interactions, so that the gels can be broken, generally, by the application of “heat”, and are re-formed upon cooling the sol.
The newly “rediscovered” area of supramolecular gels has witnessed an enormous surge of activities in the past decade, owing to a growing interest in constructing nanomaterials that have potential applications in fields as diverse as optoelectronics, biomedicines, tissue engineering and light harvesting. Be it in wound healing, antimicrobial functions, as a matrix for cell proliferation, as a medium to carry out organic reactions with high specificity and selectivity, or as a sink to tap and funnel light energy, molecular self-assembly is being extensively utilized in “bottom up” nanofabrication to obtain smart materials that can perform the desired functions. A number of comprehensive reviews and a book on molecular gels have appeared in the literature, which have outlined the evolution of this field in terms of the fundamental understanding of the gelation processes, the design of new gelators,1 and towards their possible applications as functional materials.2 This article highlights some of the recent advances in the field of molecular gels in terms of the myriad functions that they can be made to execute.
Design and synthesis of self-assembling molecules leading to functional systems
To generate a nanostructure with a desired function, it is of paramount importance that the constituent molecular blocks be designed so as to contain all the required structural features. The subsequent self-assembly should then lead to the expression of the required functions. In other words, we need to have a programmed self-assembly process to achieve the material properties. The concept is schematically represented in Fig. 1. Several examples will be discussed in this review which will illustrate this principle.
 Fig. 1  A schematic representation of programmed self-assembly. The building block leads to pre-aggregates, and eventually to self-assembled fibrous network, exposing the functional motif on the surface of the nanofibers. 
One such example of self-assembling molecules is a peptide amphiphile (PA). There are several features that can be built in such a PA. For example, specific peptide sequences can be introduced to carry out specific biological functions after the self-assembly has occurred. The shape and the hydrophobic–hydrophilic balance in the molecule is another parameter that should influence the shape of the supramolecular assembly and consequently their functions. How these key parameters can be manipulated will be showcased in the following sections with prototype examples of the construction of bone-like composites and spinal cord repair materials through self-assembly of peptide nanofibers.
Another example demonstrating the principle of pre-programmed synthesis leading to various functions is the utilization of chiral diaminocyclohexane-based organogelators to produce chiral silica by the transcription of the gel fibers. This chiral silica was further exploited as a chiral template in asymmetric synthesis. These two examples highlight the point that the proper programming of the structure of the molecular building blocks is a vital aspect for the conception and realization of a wide variety of self-assembled materials with useful functions. From the next section onwards this principle will be further elaborated through a thorough discussion of various kinds of functional supramolecular gels.
1. Nanofibers of supramolecular gels as templates for the synthesis of inorganic nanostructures
The self-assembly of organic building blocks can generate a variety of supramolecular structures having diversity in size, shape, chemical composition and function as found in many natural and artificial systems. The transcription of these structures can lead to the development of novel inorganic materials. In the past different kinds of amphiphilic molecules have been utilized to create inorganic materials of varying morphologies.3 During the past decade, the use of SAFIN's of supramolecular gels as templates for the transcription of nanofibrous materials has also become one of the productive research fields. In this section, a few representative examples of gelators which have been used for this purpose are presented.
An early report of using an organogel as a template to make hollow silica was by Ono et al.4 Compound 1a was found to form gels in a number of organic solvents including tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). But when the polycondensation of TEOS was attempted in the presence of 1a, it did not result in the transcription of the organogel structure to the silica. So another cholesterol based gelator 1b (Chart 1), which resembled the structure of the conventional cationic surfactants generally used for such polycondensation reaction, was employed. The sol–gel polymerization of TEOS was carried out in an acetic acid gel of 1b. After removal of the solvent, the material was calcined to remove the organic template and SEM of the resulting material clearly showed the presence of fibrous silica with the tube edges containing cavities. TEM also revealed that the fibers had a tubular structure (Fig. 2) with inner diameter 10–200 nm. The electrostatic interacation between the oligomeric anionic silica and the cationic gel fibers was believed to be the reason for the successful transcription with 1b.
 Chart 1 
 Fig. 2  TEM image for the transcribed silica (after removal of the template by calcination). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The previous example illustrated that the presence of cationic charge on the gel fibers is a prerequisite for transcription but at the same time, the modification of the gelator structure by incorporating cationic groups led to reduced gelation ability in several instances. To circumvent this problem, Shinkai's group later designed another cholesterol based gelator (2, Chart 2) having a crown ether moiety capable of binding to metal ions.5 Compound 2 could be used for transcription in the presence of only K+ ions, but not with other cations (Li+, Na+, Rb+, Cs+). Following this report, many other examples appeared in the literature utilizing cholesterol/crown ether based organogelators for transcription.6
 Chart 2 
Though the organogelators discussed so far had the chiral cholesterol skeleton as the structural unit, they were unable to transcribe this chirality in the resulting inorganic fibers. But using organogelator (3, Chart 3) as template for the sol–gel polycondensation of TEOS, Shinkai's group was able to produce the novel “chiral spiral silica” in the presence of metal ions [The same reaction, carried out in the absence of metal salts showed a granular structure (similar to the conventional TEOS polycondensation in solution)].7 For example, the silica obtained in the presence of metal salts (AgNO3/CsClO4) showed a novel spiral structure with a right handed helical organization.
 Chart 3 
Jung et al. have demonstrated the formation of right- and left-handed chiral silica structures by transcription of organogel fibers of chiral diaminocyclohexane-based gelators.8 For the transcription process, mixtures of 4 and 6 (or 5 and 7, Chart 4) were used to maintain an adequate amount of cationic charge on the gel fibers. After sol–gel polymerization of TEOS, it was found that the mixture of 4/6 produced silica with left-handed helical structures whereas right-handed helical structures were obtained by using a mixture of 5/7 (Fig. 3).
 Chart 4 
 Fig. 3  SEM pictures of the silica obtained by sol–gel transcription in (A) left-handed 4 + 6 (1:1 wt %), and (B) right-handed 5 + 7 (1:1 wt %) organogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, The American Chemical Society. 
Shinkai's group reported the creation of lotus shaped hollow silica fibers using the organogels of sugar derivatives 8 and 10 (Chart 5).9 These two derivatives did not possess any cationic charge, but the amino group present in both of these derivatives played a crucial role by binding to TEOS and other intermediate species through hydrogen bonding during the polycondensation. The importance of the amino group was further supported by the fact that the sugar derivative 9, containing a nitro group gave rise to granular silica under the same polycondensation conditions.
 Chart 5 
A novel TiO2 material with macaroni like hollow-fiber structure was synthesized by Kobayashi et al. using the organogel fibers of compound 11 (Chart 6) as template.10 The sol–gel polymerization of titanium isopropoxide was carried out in the presence of 11 using either a base or an acid as the catalyst. The SEM of the dried samples showed the presence of fibrous aggregates of similar diameters (150–600 nm) in both cases (Fig. 4). However when the dried samples were calcined to remove the gelator, it was found that the fibrous structure was preserved in the sample made under basic conditions whereas it was lost in the sample prepared with an acid catalyst.
 Chart 6 
 Fig. 4  SEM images of the dried samples prepared under acidic (A) and basic (B) conditions and the calcined samples prepared under acidic (C) and basic (D) conditions made from a gel of 11. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10, The American Chemical Society. 
Cationic gemini surfactants (12 and 13, Chart 7) having chiral tartarate counter ions were reported to form gels in chlorinated and aromatic organic solvents.11 The gelators 12 and 13 were used to make helical silica fibrils by transcription in 1:1 pyridine–water. Interestingly, the helical shape and the handedness of the transcribed silica fibers could be controlled by varying the ee. For example, with a gel of pure 12 (100% ee), right handed helical fibrils were obtained (SEM) whereas with lower ee (50% or below), the formation of double stranded helical structures was observed.
 Chart 7 
Zhan et. al have reported the generation of both right- and left- handed silver nanohelices using the organogel fibers of a racemic gelator 2-acrylamide-dodecane-1-sulfonic acid (ADSA).12 The reduction of Ag(I) cations adsorbed on the gel of ADSA in chloroform was achieved with sodium borohydride and TEM images of the reultant material showed that opposite handed helices with widths of 100–200 nm were present. More interestingly, a single nanohelix with both handedness was also observed.
Sanchez and co-workers reported the preparation of double porous silica with pore sizes of two different length scales (nm and μm) using an organogelator 2,3-di-n-decyloxyanthracene (14, Chart 8).13 The transcription was most successful when tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS) was first hydrolyzed by an acid catalyst in MeOH–water, followed by the addition of DDOA to gelify the system and finally the addition of NH4OH to increase the pH to 12.6. The same molecule was also utilized later to make alumina-based porous materials having both meso and macroscale porosity.14
 Chart 8 
A templated synthesis of CuS nanofibers using the organogel of a dicholesterol derivative (15, Chart 9) possessing two binding sites for Cu2+ was reported by Lu's group.15 The interesting aspect of this templated synthesis was that depending on the sulfur source, CuS nanofibers of different morphologies could be obtained. Straight and bent helical fibers (with helical pitch of 100–200 nm) were obtained from butyl acetate and benzene–butanol gels, respectively by using H2S as the sulfur source whereas the use of thioacetamide gave rise to bent helical CuS nanofibers (with helical pitch of 50 nm) from gels in both the solvents (Fig. 5).
 Chart 9 
 Fig. 5  TEM micrographs of the CuS nanofibers using H2S sulfur source obtained from (a) butyl acetate gel and (b) benzene–butanol gel of 15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, The American Chemical Society. 
One limitation of using organogels as templates is that the necessary precursors that can be employed are restricted to metal alkoxides and this actually limits the number of metal oxides that can be synthesized by this template method. Metal salts can be used as precursors if hydrogels are employed as templates. Gundiah et al. have utilized this advantage of using the hydrogel fibers of a tripodal cholamide 16 (Chart 10) as templates to synthesize nanotubes of various metal oxides like SiO2, TiO2, ZrO2, ZnO, WO3 and also metal sulfates like ZnSO4 and BaSO4.16 Compound 16 forms gel in 20% (v/v) AcOH–water at low concentrations.17 So, the metal salt precursors were either added directly to the hot sol of gelator 16 in AcOH–water or pre-made solutions/gels of the precursors in some suitable solvents were added to the sol of 16 in AcOH–water. The TEM of the native gel showed that the fibers had diameters 8–10 nm and after calcination the nanotubes were also found to have diameters in this range (Fig. 6). This was also the first instance of synthesis of zirconia nanotubes using gel fibers as templates.
 Chart 10 
 Fig. 6  Low magnification TEM images of the ZnSO4 nanotubes obtained after removal of the gel fibers of 16. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A similar strategy with gelator 16 was again utilized for the preparation of nanotubes of CdS, ZnS and CuS from the corresponding metal acetates and Na2S.18 The nanotubes were polycrystalline in nature with inner diameters of ∼5 nm. Depending on the concentration of Zn(OAc)2, both ZnS nanotubes and nanorods were obtained (Fig. 7) whereas the formation of nanowires was also observed in case of CuS.
 Fig. 7  (a) and (b) TEM images showing nanotubes of ZnS obtained using 0.02 mmol of Zn(OAc)2, (c) and (d) nanorods of ZnS obtained using a higher concentration (0.04 mmol) of Zn(OAc)2 using 16. Insets are the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18, Elsevier. 
Stupp and co-workers demonstrated the self-assembly and mineralization of a peptide amphiphile (PA) to create a nanostructured composite material that resembles the structural orientation of collagen and hydroxyapatite (HA) observed in bone.19 Five key structural features (Fig. 8) were introduced in the peptide amphiphile such as a long hydrophobic alkyl tail (region 1), four cysteine residues (region 2) which can form disulfide bonds if oxidized, three glycine residues (region 3) as flexible linkers between the hydrophilic head group and more rigid cross-linked region, a phosphorylated serine residue (region 4) for interacting with calcium ions to direct the mineralization of hydroxyapatite and the cell adhesion ligand RGD (region 5). This peptide formed gels below pH 4 (>2.5 mg mL−1). The mineralization property of the PA nanofibers was investigated by directly coating the TEM grid with the PA solution, allowing it to self-assemble, oxidizing the cysteines and diffusing CaCl2 and Na2HPO4 into the film from opposite sides. Preferential alignment of crystallographic c axis of HA with PA long fiber axis was observed. So, the PA fibers were able to nucleate hydroxyapatite on their surfaces. This could be of interest in the design of materials for mineralized tissue repair.
 Fig. 8  (A) Chemical structure of the peptide amphiphile, highlighting five key structural features. (B) Molecular model of the PA showing the overall conical shape of the molecule going from the narrow hydrophobic tail to the bulkier peptide region. Color scheme: C, black; H, white; O, red; N, blue; P, cyan; S, yellow (C) Schematic showing the self-assembly of PA molecules into a cylindrical micelle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Stupp's group later reported the mineralization of CdS using the helical nanoribbons of a “dendron rodcoils” molecule.20 The TEM image of gels of this molecule in solvents like ethyl methacrylate (EMA) and 2-ethylhexyl methacrylate (EHMA) revealed the presence of twisted ribbons. The mineralization was done by adding a solution of cadmium nitrate in THF to the gels of this molecule in EMA/EHMA and exposing to hydrogen sulfide gas. The hydrophilic hydroxy region of this dendron acted initially as the binding site of the Cd2+ ions and also as a nucleation centre for the growth of CdS crystals after exposure to H2S gas.
Nakano's group has described the templated synthesis of fluorocarbon functionalized silica nanotubes by carrying out the sol–gel condensation of a mixture of TEOS and fluorocarbon functionalized triethoxysilanes (18a–d, Chart 11) in the presence of a semi-fluorinated organogelator (17).21 The presence of functionalized triethoxysilane was essential as the polycondensation of only TEOS resulted in the formation of granular silica. The fluoroalkyl chain length of the functionalized trialkoxysilane also played a role in transcription. Tubular silica structures were obtained with F6-TEOS, F8-TEOS and F10-TEOS whereas granular silica was obtained with F4-TEOS.
 Chart 11 
In this section, through several examples, it has been demonstrated that the synthesis of nanofibrous inorganic materials employing the fibrillar networks of supramolecular gels as templates is an efficient way to make different classes of materials (mainly oxide based but also of metals and chalcogenides) having a wide variety of morphologies (fibers, tubes, ribbons, helices, rods, etc.). However, to achieve a better control on the size and the morphologies of the nanomaterials, a deeper knowledge of the various complex interactions governing the transcription processes needs to be developed. We also hope that the transcribed inorganic structures will find use in nanotechnology in the coming years.
2. Gel–nanoparticle hybrid materials
The design of inorganic–organic hybrid materials using the matrix of supramolecular gels is another area closely related to templated synthesis. The tremendous interest in this type of materials in recent times stems from the fact that they are promising materials for potential applications in optics, electronics, ionics, mechanics, biology, fuel and solar cells, catalyst, sensors, etc.22 The basic criterion to develop materials for such applications is to organize the nanoparticles in two and three dimensional architectures. The supramolecular gel matrix has been used to synthesize and immobilize nanoparticles by modulating the gel structure with appropriated functionality. This section will highlight some examples of this kind of functionalized gels.
Simmons et al. have described the incorporation of nanoparticles into an organogel formed by the addition of 4-chlorophenol to a solution containing the reverse micellar aggregates of the well-known surfactant bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate (AOT, Chart 12).23 Superparamagnetic ferrite and semiconducting CdS nanoparticles were synthesized in AOT water-in-oil microemulsions, dried to remove the water and isooctane was added to reconstitute reverse micelles. Upon the addition of 1 equivalent of 4-chlorophenol (Chart 12) the system transformed into a gel, whose AFM images revealed the incorporation of nanoparticles into the fibers of the gel network.
 Chart 12 
Kimura et al. demonstrated the self-organization of gold nanoparticles into a network structure using organogelator 19a (Chart 13) containing two functional groups, a trans-1,2-bis (alkylamide)cyclohexane unit and two thiol groups.24 Octanethiol stabilized gold nanoparticles (having average diameter of 1.7 nm) were prepared separately and these octanethiol residues were then replaced by the thiol groups of the gelator by site-exchange reactions. The resulting gel–NPs hybrid was stable for more than a month. An interlocked 3D structure of fibrous aggregates consisting of individual Au NPs with diameters of 10–30 nm was observed from the TEM (Fig. 9). The fiber diameters are comparable to that of the organic fibers made from only 19a. The importance of the thiol groups in the stabilization of the nanoparticles was demonstrated by the fact that no fibrous aggregates were observed from the TEM image from a gel of structurally similar 19b lacking the thiol groups.
 Chart 13 
 Fig. 9  (a) TEM image and (b) magnified TEM image of fibrous aggregates of Au nanoparticles in the presence of 19a. (c) TEM image of aggregates of Au nanoparticles in the presence of 19b. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Wiley VCH. 
A dendritic organogelator 20 (Chart 14), containing a disulfide bridge, was utilized by Love et al. for the synthesis and stabilization of gold nanoparticles.25 For the preparation of the hybrid material, a solution of HAuCl4/n-(C8H17)4NBr in toluene was layered on a toluene gel of 20. After a few days the gel assumed a uniform yellow color and the excess of toluene was removed from the top of the gel. When this gel was irradiated with a 100 W mercury vapor lamp, the color of the gel initially changed from orange–yellow to colorless and then after a few hours from colorless to purple. This is consistent with the initial reduction of Au(III) to Au(I) and then to Au(0). The process was monitored with absorption spectroscopy and the final gel sample appeared to have a purple band running through the gel. TEM images revealed that the synthesized Au NPs had an average diameter of 13 nm. It was observed that when the gel was melted to form the sol, the purple nanoparticles separated from the medium to form a black precipitate. This indicated that the gel medium played a crucial role to prevent the aggregation of GNPs.
 Chart 14 
Banerjee and co-workers reported in situ formation and stabilization of gold and silver nanoparticles (GNPs and SNPs) within supramolecular gel networks of tripeptide based organogelators 21a, 21b and 21c (Chart 15).26 These tripeptides contained tyrosine residues which were utilized to reduce Ag(I) and Au(III) salts to generate SNPs and GNPs in the gel phase. Gelator 21a or 21b was added to HAuCl4 solution in toluene and heated above 100 °C. After cooling, a gel was obtained which retained the yellow color for several days. When triethylamine was added to this gel and heated to make a clear solution, the yellow color initially disappeared. But within a few minutes the solution turned violet and after 1 h it transformed into a gel. This indicates the formation of GNPs via the oxidation of the tyrosine residues. The authors also demonstrated the in situ formation of GNPs in a gel of peptide 21c in 1:1 MeOH–water.
 Chart 15 
A similar strategy has been employed recently by Mitra et al. to synthesize gold nanoparticles of different shapes in hydrogels of tryptophan containing peptide amphiphiles.27
The influence of capping agents to tune the morphological features and the viscoelastic properties of gel–Au nanoparticles composites has been demonstrated by Bhattacharya and co-workers.28 A fatty acid amide of L-alanine 22 (Chart 16) which formed stable gels in both aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons was used as the gel component to make the composites. Different sets of capping agents were used to investigate the gel–NP interaction. The Au NPs were based on n-alkanethiols (AuCm+2, m = 4, 6 and 10), a cholesterol based thiol (AuChol) and p-thiocresol (AuPhMe) and they had average diameter of 3–6 nm depending on the nature of the capping agent used. The incorporation of the NPs in the gel had a profound impact on the morphological features of the resulting composite as observed by SEM (Fig. 10). The native gel had fibrous assemblies whereas the incorporation of AuC12 resulted in the coalescing of the fibers. On the other hand “rolled-tubular” type and platelet-like aggregates were obtained in the case of AuChol and AuPhMe. The rheological characterization of composites revealed interesting viscoelastic properties (Fig. 11). The incorporation of alkanethiol and cholesterol thiol capped NPs improved the rigidity of the gel as revealed from the higher yield stress values of the gel composites. However incorporation of thiocresol based NPs in the gel network slightly decreased the rigidity of the resulting composite. So, the n-alkyl chain and the cholesteryl groups interdigitated better with the gel fibers compared to the thiocresol group and this led to mechanically more-rigid composites in those cases.
 Chart 16 
 Fig. 10  SEM images of xerogels of (a) 22, (b) 22-AuC12 composite, (c) 22-AuChol composite and d) 22-AuPhMe composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Wiley VCH. 
 Fig. 11  Plots of yield stress versus NP concentration. Inset: plots of storage modulus G′ and loss modulus G″ versus stress for a gel of 22 in toluene and a 22-AuC12 composite containing 2.17 wt% of NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Wiley VCH. 
Gelator 22 has recently been exploited to make gel–CNT composites by incorporating SWNTs, MWNTs and SWNTs functionalized with amides of different chain lengths (in order to achieve more solubility in organic solvents) such as hexadecyl, dodecyl, octyl and benzyl in the gel phase.29 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) study of the nanocomposites showed that the incorporation of pristine SWNTs did not change the thermal stability of the nanocomposites but functionalized SWNTs especially those with longer chains caused depression in the thermal stability of the composites compared to that of the native gel indicating a better chain interdigitation of the pendant functions of the nanotubes with the organogel fibers. That the functionalized SWNTs were more efficiently dispersed in the gel matrix than the pristine SWNTs was also evidenced by SEM of the nanocomposites (thickening of fibers in the former case and formation of clusters for the latter) and from the rheological experiments performed on the nanocomposites (higher rigidity in the former case compared to that of the latter). The nanocomposites were NIR responsive due to the characteristic van Hove transitions of the SWNTs in the NIR region and hence their gel–sol transition could be induced by NIR irradiation. The gel–nanocomposites in toluene upon NIR laser irradiation (1064 nm) at 20 °C underwent a gel-to-sol transition whereas the native gel of 22 did not show this melting behavior even after irradiating for a longer time. The functionalized SWNTs, being more homogeneously dispersed in the gel, showed faster gel-to-sol transition than the pristine SWNTs for the gel–CNT composites. This kind of NIR- responsive supramolecular gels may have important ramifications in the design of “smart” drug delivery systems, since, unlike UV, NIR radiation has no harmful effect on biological systems.
Another recent report of hybrid CNT–gel came from Srinivasan et al.30 The hybrid materials were made by dispersing CNTs (both SWNTs and MWNTs) in oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV) gels in nonpolar solvents. Interestingly, the gelation of the OPV derivatives (23a, 23b and 23c, Chart 17) in toluene was induced below their normal critical gelation concentration when the CNTs were dispersed. The hybrid gels were also found to be thermally more stable than the native gels. A similar trend was observed for their mechanical properties. From the rheological studies, it was found that the ratio of the storage modulus (G′) to the loss modulus (G″) was higher for the hybrid gels compared to the native gels, indicating the formation of a stronger solidlike network in the hybrid gels. These observations can be attributed to the strong π–π stacking interactions between the OPV moieties of the gelators and the carbon nanotubes.
 Chart 17 
In the context of these examples on CNT–gel hybrid materials, we must mention that SWNT dispersed gels of ionic liquids have emerged as interesting soft functional materials in recent years, largely due to the work of Aida and co-workers. This area will be covered in some detail when we discuss the gels of ionic liquids in general towards the end of this review (section 7.2.).
Maitra's group has utilized the already discussed tripodal cholamide 16 to make gel–nanoparticle hybrid material employing the structurally similar bile acid derived thiols (24a, 24b and 24c, Chart 18) as capping agents.31 The gold NPs were prepared by the reduction of HAuCl4 in MeOH by NaBH4 in the presence of steroidal thiols. The average sizes of 24a, 24b and 24c capped nanoparticles were found to be 3.5, 2.5 and 1.5 nm, respectively (TEM images of 24a-Au NP are shown in Fig. 12). There was a noticeable increase in stability of GNP dispersion in the gel compared to that in only 20% AcOH–water. For example, the GNP dispersions (>0.05 mg mL−1) in 20% AcOH–H2O were stable only for 5 h and then separated out from the medium whereas the composite was found to be stable for several months even with higher amount of doping (>2 mg mL−1) of GNPs, which underscores the importance of the gel network in obtaining a stable dispersion of nanoparticles. The thermal stability of the hybrid material was similar to that of the native gel although the melting of the gel resulted in the precipitation of the NPs from the medium.
 Chart 18 
 Fig. 12  TEM images of the NP–gel composites (GN) scanned separately at various levels of magnification (0.05 mg of 24a–Au NP in 1 mL of the 0.2% gel of 16). Scale bars: GN1, 200 nm; GN2, 100 nm; GN3, 20 nm; and GN4, 100 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, The American Chemical Society. 
Vemula et al. have demonstrated the in situ preparation and stabilization of gold nanoparticles in gels formed by monourea derivatives 25a–c (Chart 19).32 These derivatives formed gels in water and also in various organic solvents. The amino group of the urea moiety in the gelators was utilized to perform the twin role of the reducing as well as the capping agent. The GNP-embedded gels were pink in color and showed the appearance of surface plasmon band at 553 nm. The hybrid materials showed similar morphological features in SEM and TEM as observed for the native gel and were stable for several months.
 Chart 19 
The same group later described the in situ synthesis and stabilization of gold nanoparticles using gels of self-assembling systems based on vitamin C (ascorbic acid, Asc-A, known to reduce Au(III) to Au(0) to form gold nanoparticles) amphiphiles without using any external reducing/capping agents.33 They utilized the gels of three amphiphiles (Asc8, Asc12 and Asc18, Chart 20), which were synthesized using enzymatic catalysis.
 Chart 20 
Schenning's group has reported a composite material where gold nanoparticles were organized on π-conjugated oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV) tapes.34 Hybrid 26a/26b (Chart 21) was synthesized by mixing 26a and 26b–Au in toluene, heating the system above the gelation temperature of 26a and then cooling. From the TEM images of the hybrid materials, pairs of parallel rows of gold nanoparticles were visible on the tapes. The electronic communication between the 26a tapes and the bound 26b–Au particles was demonstrated by the observation that in the hybrid material the fluorescence of 26a was considerably quenched with a concomitant decrease in its lifetime.
 Chart 21 
The mineralization of silver nanoparticles in organogels of L-valine based oligopeptides (27a and 27b, Chart 22) was recently reported by Taubert and co-workers.35 Both oligopeptides (individually/mixtures of variable compositions) formed gels in n-butanol. The mineralization of silver nanoparticles was done by using DMF as the reducing agent. The shape and the size of the SNPs could be tuned by varying the amount of sulfur containing peptide 27b in the gel. Small spherical particles were obtained with higher proportion of 27b in the mixture whereas larger particles with more complex shapes (plate-like and raspberry-like) were obtained at lower content of 27b. XPS study of the adsorbed peptides on silver wafers clearly indicated that there was a strong interaction between the S atom of the thioether moiety of 27b with the silver and this was absent in peptide 27a. A similar conclusion was made from SERS studies.
 Chart 22 
It is clear from the examples discussed in this section that by introducing appropriate functionalities in the gelator structure, stabilization of nanoparticles in the gel matrix can be achieved. The major challenge though is to step to the next level where these hybrid materials can be used for real-life applications.
3. Functional hydrogels as biomaterials
3.1. Enzyme triggered hydrogelation of small molecules
The use of enzymes to initiate the self-assembly of small molecules leading to hydrogelation has important implications in developing novel biomaterials. The integration of self-assembly in water with intracellular enzymatic reactions opens up the possibility for the use of these hydrogels, for example, in drug delivery systems and screening of enzyme inhibitors. Application as biomaterials for wound healing can also be envisaged, since the supramolecular hydrogels, especially those crafted from amino acid derivatives, can be made biodegradable.
The general principle of enzymatic hydrogelation requires an enzyme to convert a precursor molecule to a hydrogelator (by catalysing a bond forming or a bond cleavage reaction). One of the first reports of enzyme catalysed supramolecular hydrogelation came from Xu's group, using commercially available Fmoc-tyrosine phosphate (28) as the precursor.36 When alkaline phosphatase was added to a weakly alkaline solution of 28, the phosphate group was cleaved converting 28 to more hydrophobic 29 (Scheme 1), which gelled water. This design integrated enzymatic dephosphorylation, an important biological reaction observed in many organisms, with hydrogelation.
 Scheme 1  Structure of the precursor (28) and the gelator (29) for phosphatase catalyzed hydrogelation 
This strategy was further utilized as a visual assay to screen inhibitors for the phosphatase enzyme.36 The inhibitor competes with the precursor 28 for binding to the active site of the enzyme, and thus prevents the hydrolysis of the phosphate, thereby preventing hydrogelation. From the visual detection of the sol–gel transition, the minimum inhibition concentration can be determined. In spite of being a semi-quantitative assay allowing only an approximate determination of the IC50 values, this is a useful protocol for a rapid and inexpensive initial screening of enzyme inhibitors. Since the phosphate ions cleaved from the precursor molecule 28 remain in the matrix of the hydrogel, this strategy (phosphatase catalysed hydrogelation) was further used by Schnepp et al. to utilize the hydrogel as a template for biomineralization (shown as a schematic in Fig. 13).37 When the phosphate containing hydrogel (from 29, which was derived from the precursor 28) was soaked in CaCl2 solution, the Ca2+ ions diffused into the gel and formed calcium phosphate, leading to a gel with well-defined mineralized fibers (Fig. 14). The association of calcium and phosphate with organic fibers was confirmed by energy-dispersive X-ray analysis. The mineralized hydrogel showed increased thermal stability, stiffness and yield stress, indicating that this protocol could be used to produce hybrid materials with improved thermal and mechanical properties.
 Fig. 13  A schematic representation of the principle of enzyme catalyzed hydrogelation, screening of enzyme inhibitors and biomineralization strategy. 
 Fig. 14  (a) High magnification SEM image of lightly mineralized supramolecular hydrogel of 29 showing discrete calcium phosphate nucleation sites across the fiber surface. (b) SEM image of an extensively mineralized hydrogel, showing the intact macroporous calcium phosphate network after disassembly of the gel matrix. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, Wiley VCH. 
An enzymatic hydrogelation catalysed by β-lactamase has been reported by Yang et al.38 β-Lactamase catalyses the opening up of the β-lactam ring in precursor 30, releasing hydrogelator 31, which self-assembles to form nanofibers leading to the gelation of water (Scheme 2). Importantly, 30 also responded to β-lactamases (CTX-M13, CTX-M14, SHV-1 and TEM-1) present in the lysates of E. coli, which were able to convert 30 to 31, leading to hydrogelation. Nitrocefin, a cephalosporin, is widely used in assaying the activity of β-lactamases. However, due to its low reporting threshold, systems having significant background activity may show a false positive on nitrocefin assay. In contrast, the gelation based assay reported here is less sensitive, and hence can be a reliable reporter for systems having significant background activity, which show a false positive on nitrocefin assay.
 Scheme 2  Structure of the precursor (30) and the gelator (31) for β-lactamase catalyzed hydrogelation 
The examples discussed so far used enzyme catalysed bond cleavage to reveal a hydrogelator. An alternative approach is to reverse the reaction, i.e., to form a hydrogelator through formation of a covalent bond. Toledano et al. used thermolysin to covalently link compounds 32 and 33 to form 34 (Scheme 3), which subsequently formed self-assembled nanofibers leading to hydrogelation.39
 Scheme 3  Structure of the precursors (32 and 33) and the gelator 34. 
Wang et al. have recently shown that an acid phosphatase (AP) can be self-immobilized in a supramolecular hydrogel derived from enzymatic hydrogelation, leading to a considerable enhancement of its catalytic activity.40 Precursors (28 and 35) were converted to their corresponding hydrogelators (29 and 36) using AP (Scheme 4). During the formation of the hydrogel network, the enzyme was entrapped into the hydrogel. TEM and AFM images indicated that the enzyme molecules were located on the surface or inside the fibers, suggesting a strong interaction between the enzyme and the nanofibers. CD analysis of the entrapped enzyme showed that the secondary structure was preserved in the gel network. This hydrogel immobilized enzyme displayed markedly improved catalytic activity (for the hydrolysis of A to B) in organic solvents compared to the free enzyme in water (Fig. 15). For example, the activity increased 100 fold in CHCl3. The amphiphilic gel nanofibers facilitated rapid mass transfer of the reactant and the product between the hydrogel and the organic environment. So, this work is significant in the context of carrying out efficient biotransformation in organic solvents. One more example of the enhanced catalytic activity of an enzyme entrapped in hydrogel will be taken up when we discuss gels as reaction media.
 Scheme 4  Acid phosphatase in the hydrogel catalyzes the conversion of A to B in organic media. The precursors 28 and 35 are converted to the hydrogelators 29 and 36 and the enzyme is immobilized in the resultant hydrogel. 
 Fig. 15  (A) The hydrolysis of A (10 mM) catalyzed by AP(gel) (20 μg L−1) in chloroform (●), toluene (▲) and n-octane (▼), and AP(free) in water (■). (B) The remaining activity of AP(gel) (●) and AP(free) (■) in water after incubation at 60 °C at various times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yang et al. extended the concept of enzymatic hydrogelation to encompass intracellular construction of artificial nanostructures.41 A soluble precursor esterase substrate 37 was employed, which diffused into the mammalian cells and got converted to the hydrogelator 38 by the endogenous esterase enzymes (Scheme 5). Compound 38 self-assembled inside the cells to form a hydrogel, leading to cell death. Interestingly, although NIH3T3 cells did not display any significant decrease in cell proliferation with increasing concentration of 37 even after 3 days, the MTT assay of HeLa cells showed severe decrease in cell growth under the same experimental condition. This observation was related to a higher level of expression of esterases in HeLa cells compared to NIH3T3 cells, leading to a quick build up of 38 in HeLa cells. This indicates that the formation kinetics of these intracellular nanofibers is greatly influenced by even a small difference in the expression of enzymes in different cell lines. So, this approach appears to have great potential in countering antimicrobial drug resistance and to cause cell death in a controlled way with good specificity.
 Scheme 5  The soluble precursor 37 gets converted to the hydrogelator 38 by the endogenous esterase enzymes in the mammalian cells. 
The examples discussed above illustrate that coupling the supramolecular hydrogelation process with various biological enzymatic processes has opened up new opportunities to regulate cell functions. Advancement in this field is likely to have major implications in the design of reliable assays for enzyme inhibitors, designing strategies to overcome antimicrobial drug resistance, in the context of biomineralization, or to carry out enzymatic reactions in organic media with high efficiency. The fabrication of self-assembled fibers inside cells to probe various cellular processes is complicated by the fact that the stimulus required (e.g., heat, pH change etc.) can affect the very processes that one wants to monitor. Enzymatic hydrogelation offers an easy solution to this problem.
3.2. Hydrogels in biomedicines

3.2.1. Hydrogels in drug delivery. 
Amphiphilic oligopeptide and sugar-based supramolecular hydrogels have considerable potential as smart drug delivery systems. They are biocompatible and biodegradable. Moreover, due to the reversible nature of the interactions holding the gel structure together, they can be designed to respond to various stimuli, like a change in pH, ionic strength, or the action of an enzyme to break the hydrogel structure and release the drug at specific targets.
van Bommel et al. have described a model two-stage drug delivery system based on a hydrogelator–drug conjugate.42 They used a cyclohexane trisamide gelling scaffold, to which a drug mimic was attached through a α-chymotrypsin labile linker to design hydrogelator 39 (Chart 23). In the hydrogel of 39, the enzyme susceptible linker is protected from the enzyme. However, when the gel is dissociated by a stimulus (pH or temperature), the enzyme can access and cleave the linker, resulting in the release of the “model drug”.
 Chart 23 
Bhuniya et al. designed (S)-(+)-ibuprofen based hydrogelator 40 (Chart 24) containing a dipeptide linkage.43 When carboxypeptidase Y was added to a colloidal buffered solution of 40, it was able to hydrolyse the gelator molecule, releasing the anti-inflammatory drug (S)-(+)-ibuprofen. The enzyme was also found capable of breaking the hydrogel of 40, demonstrating a general principle of drug release by triggering the collapse of a hydrogel through enzyme response.
 Chart 24 
Seo et al. have explored a biotin based hydrogel to entrap an ethynylpyrene labeled molecular beacon (S1), and have achieved its controlled release in response to a specific stimulus, e.g., pH change of the environment (Fig. 16).44 A molecular beacon is a fluorescently tagged oligonucleotide which can detect specific sequence in nucleic acids through a change in fluorescence. The oligonucleotide probe S1 was prepared by incorporating two pyrene-labelled phosphoramidite building blocks into the stem region of a hairpin oligonucleotide. The hairpin state, after the introduction of the fluorescent tag, showed a green fluorescence due to the stacking of the pyrene units. However, when this π-stacking interaction was disrupted by trapping the probe in a hydrogel of 41, the emission was blue shifted resulting in blue fluorescence. When the dissociation of the gel was triggered by a basic pH or through the enzymatic hydrolysis of the peptidic linkage, S1 was released into solution, leading to the restoration of the hairpin state with concomitant change of fluorescence from blue to green. Upon addition of the target complementary oligonucleotide (S2) to this solution, the hairpin state of S1 changed into a duplex due to binding with S2, and the emission again changed from green to blue due to the de-stacking of the pyrene units. This work introduces biotin based hydrogels as potential materials to carry oligonucleotide probes and related drugs to biological targets, whose release may be accomplished by physiological pH or enzyme trigger and visually monitored by a color change.
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of a pH or enzyme dependent gel–sol transition system incorporating S1. The parent hairpin state changes to an unfolded state in the gel of 41. On breaking the gel, the hairpin structure is restored. Upon binding with S2, it forms a duplex, again leading to the de-stacking of the pyrene units. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Vemula et al. have used the hydrophobic pockets inside the hydrogels derived from amygdaline based amphiphiles 42–44 to encapsulate curcumin (Scheme 6).45 There was no release of curcumin from the gel into water, but its release was effected by breaking the gel using a hydrolase enzyme at physiological temperature. The rate of curcumin release could be controlled by changing the enzyme concentration or temperature. It should be noted that these hydrogelators were themselves synthesized through enzyme catalysis from amygdaline, a naturally occurring glycoside found in many food plants.
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of the amygdalin-based amphiphiles. 
Zhou et al. have described pH responsive reversible volume shrinkage and swelling of a hydrogel based on N-acetylgalactosamine appended glutamate ester 45 by mixing with amphiphilic carboxylic acids 46a or 46b.46 An equimolar mixture of 45 and 46a/b produced a swelled hydrogel at neutral pH. When the pH was lowered by exposing the gel to HCl vapor, the gel excluded water and shrank to almost half of its original volume, and the originally transparent hydrogel turned opaque (Fig. 17a and 17b). The carboxylate ion in 46 probably causes inter-fiber repulsion, leading to swelling of the gel at neutral pH, whereas, the decreased osmotic pressure due to the release of the counterion and absence of the electrostatic repulsion at acidic pH results in gel shrinkage. Water soluble vitamins (for example, vitamins B1, B6 and B12) entrapped in the mixed hydrogel of 45 and 46b (1:1) could be released from the gel by lowering the pH of the medium. The process was quantitatively monitored as a function of time by absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 17c). However, when the same release experiments were performed with hydrophobic flavone derivatives like myricetin and quercetin, the efficiency of release was lower. This is because hydrophobic guests residing predominantly in the hydrophobic domains of the gel are not easily released into expelled water. This supramolecular copolymerization protocol has the potential to control drug release by two possible means: (a) by a pH trigger, and (b) by tailoring the amphiphilicity of the gel.
 Fig. 17  (a) and (b), pH–responsive volume phase transition of the mixed hydrogel (45/46b = 10:10) before and after shrinkage. (c) Time course of the release of vitamin B12 (●) and quercetin (▲) from the mixed hydrogel (45/46b = 1:1), due to pH triggered gel shrinkage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Wiley VCH. 
Kiyonaka et al. reported47 hydrogels based on N-acetylgalactosamine appended amino acids (47a–c) that showed reversible swelling and shrinkage as a function of temperature (Fig. 18). When these gels were heated, instead of showing normal gel-to-sol transition, the gels shrank and expelled water. Thermally controlled release of DNA from these gels was investigated by monitoring the absorbance of the solution at 254 nm. The release of DNA increased substantially as the temperature reached the phase transition temperature of the gel (Fig. 19a). The hydrophobic cavity of this gel was further utilized to effect the removal of bisphenol A, a hydrophobic water pollutant (Fig. 19b), from an aqueous solution (840 μM).
 Fig. 18  Structures of the hydrogelators (left), and thermally induced reversible shrinkage and swelling of the hydrogel of 47c (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, The American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 19  (a) Plots of release ratio of DNA versus temperature for the hydrogels (47a (blue), 47b (green) and 47c (red)). (b) Absorption spectra of the water polluted with bisphenol A before and after gel shrinkage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, The American Chemical Society. 
Karinaga et al. used a sugar based hydrogel for the inclusion and controlled release of DNA.48 When DNA was mixed with compound 48 (p–NO2 Glu) in equal or larger amount (in w/v %) in water, an opaque gel was formed. The presence of DNA in the gel fibers was confirmed by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy and fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 20a). Inclusion of DNA in the fibers was attributed to the hydrogen bonding interactions of the sugar hydroxyl groups (on the surface of the fibers) with the phosphate ester of DNA. Plasmid DNA included in the hydrogel of 48 showed less green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression ability than the naked DNA when added to E. coli T7 S30 extract solution, indicating that the DNA was insulated in the mixed gel (Fig. 20b). However, the normal expression rate of the complexed DNA could be fully recovered by the gradual addition of methyl-β-cyclodextrin. This is because methyl-β-cyclodextrin induces the gel-to-sol transition by complexing with the gelator, and probably sequestering the hydrophobic aromatic moiety in its cavity. This example demonstrates a simple yet effective protocol for the inclusion and controlled release of DNA from a hydrogel support.
 Fig. 20  (a) Comparison of TEM images (left) with fluorescence microscopy images (right) for the native gel and the composite gel (48 + DNA). The red fluorescence from ethidium bromide coincides with the fibers, indicating the inclusion of DNA into the fibers. (b) In vitro cell-free transcription/translation assay for 48 + pQBI 63 vector gels in E. coli T7 S30 extract solutions and DNA release test by adding methyl-β-cyclodextrin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, The American Chemical Society. 
Yang et al. used glucosamine, an aminosaccharide widely used to reduce pain for osteoarthritis patients, as a building block to design supramolecular hyrogelators 49 and 50 (Chart 25).49 The resultant hydrogels were biocompatible as indicated by the MTT assay of the HeLa cells (73.8% and 79.0% of the cells survived in the gels of 49 and 50, respectively, at 24 h). The hydrogel from 50 was tested for wound healing on a mouse model. Much faster wound healing and smaller scars were observed for mice treated with the gel compared to the controls. These results suggest that glucosamine retains its wound healing ability in the self-assembled nanofibers and have implications towards the development of biomaterials for wound healing.
 Chart 25 
Panda et al. have recently reported50 on a self-assembled hydrogel based on a dipeptide 51 (Chart 26) that contains an α,β-dehydrophenylalanine residue. Compound 51 formed a gel in acetate buffer at neutral pH. This gel was shown to entrap a variety of biologically relevant molecules, ranging from vitamins (e.g., ascorbic acid, riboflavin, vitamin B12), antibiotics (e.g., ampicillin), antimalarial, anticancer and antituberculosis drugs, to a polypeptide like insulin, and effect their continuous release into a layer of water placed on top of the gel. The molecules with smaller molecular weight had larger diffusion coefficient, implying that they are released faster from the gel. Due to the presence of free NH2 and CO2H at the N- and C-termini, the self-assembly process, and hence the drug release could be tuned by changing the salt concentration and pH. For example, the gel became progressively stronger as the salt concentration was increased, resulting in slower release of the encapsulated drug molecules. Similarly, a substantial increase in the diffusion coefficient of the drug was observed in acidic (pH = 2) and basic (pH = 10) media. The rigidity imparted to the peptide backbone by the unsaturation present in the phenylalanine residue rendered the gel stable to proteolytic degradation, as evidenced by unchanged peak area and the elution time in the analytical HPLC profile. Moreover, the hydrogel did not show any cytotoxicity in the cell viability assay with HeLa and L929 cells. Due to their biocompatibility and the tunability of the drug release from the gel matrix, these hydrogels are potential candidates as functional biomaterials.
 Chart 26 
The above examples illustrate the versatility of the sugar and oligopeptide based molecular building blocks for the design and application of hydrogelators as drug carriers, both in vitro and in vivo. Despite significant advances in this field, practical challenges need to be met before we begin to envisage any kind of biomedical applications. The specificity of the release systems is an important issue that needs further addressing. How the hydrogels generated from molecules containing enzyme labile functions will respond to the action of multiple enzymes in the cytosol needs detailed understanding, for which further studies will be required.


3.2.2. Hydrogels in regenerative medicine and tissue engineering. 
Self-assembled nanostructures can mimic an excellular matrix and support cell proliferation and differentiation, crucial for healing damaged tissues. Supramolecular hydrogels consisting of nanofibers from biocompatible molecules are attractive for such applications as they are biodegradable and non-cyctotoxic, the two vital requirements for applications in vivo. Hence, they are likely to play an important role in the field of regenerative medicines. In this section, a few representative examples are discussed to highlight the enormous progress this field has witnessed.
Holmes et al. have reported RAD16-I and RAD16-II (see Fig. 21) self-assembled peptide (sapeptide) scaffolds that support neurite outgrowth and synapse formation.51 These scaffolds consist of β-sheet oligopeptides containing periodic repeats of alternating ionic hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acid residues (arginine-alanine-aspartate sequence), which spontaneously self-assemble under physiological conditions, leading to the hydrogel scaffold. The scaffold consists of intertwined fibers, 10–20 nm in diameter (as revealed by high resolution SEM). This scaffold not only acts as a substrate for the neuronal cell attachment and differentiation, but also supports extensive neurite outgrowth and functional synapse formation between the attached cells. Scanning laser confocal microscopy images showed that the neurite growth closely follows the contours of the scaffold (Fig. 21a). A fluorescent lipophilic probe FM1-43 was used to selectively label the location of the active synapses. FM1-43 has a lipophilic tail that anchors the molecule into the cell membrane, and a positively charged ammonium head group that prevents the molecule from permeating the cell. Once the samples were stained with FM1-43, positions of the bright fluorescent spots indicated the positions of the individual synapses (Fig. 21b).
 Fig. 21  (a) Nerve growth factor (NGF) preprimed PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells attached to sepeptide scaffolds. The neurite growth takes place along the contour of the scaffold. (b) Primary rat hippocampal neurons form active synapses on peptide scaffolds. This confocal image shows bright green labelling indicating active synapse formation after FM1-43 incubation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, The National Academy of Sciences of the USA. 
Ulijn and co-workers have used supramolecular hydrogels derived from Fmoc based dipeptides as scaffolds for 3D-cell culture.52 Peptide 52 gelled water at a pH less than 4, whereas 53 formed hydrogel at a higher pH (< 8) (52 and 53 are shown in Chart 27). However, a 1:1 mixture of 52 and 53 was found to gel water at pH 7 (gel 54). Also, a stable hydrogel (gel 55) at neutral pH could be obtained by mixing 53 with Fmoc-Lys in 1:1 molar ratio. Gels 53, 54 and 55 were tested as scaffolds for retention and proliferation of phenotype bovine chondrocytes. In a typical experiment, the cells were incorporated into the gel by thorough mixing with the gel. Two photon fluorescence microscopy of the gel samples stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) revealed the cells were embedded in the gel matrix, confirming that the gel retained the cells. An MTT assay with the peptide gels over a seven day culture period showed a definite increase in the number of cells when measured on day 7 compared to day 1, indicating that the gel scaffold supported cell growth. Unlike gels 53 and 54, which showed similar cell growth profiles, gel 55 showed higher rate of cell proliferation and hence highest number of cells after 7 days, suggesting a possible role of the cationic Fmoc-Lys residues in chondrocyte cell proliferation.
 Chart 27 
Stupp and co-workers constructed self-assembled nanostructures that display heparin to proteins for cell signalling directed to angiogenesis.53 Peptide amphiphile 56 (Chart 28), which remains predominantly in the α-helical form in aqueous solution, adopts a β-sheet conformation in the presence of heparin, leading to cylindrical nanostructure formation and subsequent gelation of water. The negatively charged heparin screens the positive charge of 56 and triggers its self-aggregation. Because of its charge, the heparin is excluded from the hydrophobic interior of the gel and is presented on the surface of the nanofibers. When the nanofibers were doped with a PA containing a donor fluorophore that is exposed on the surface of the nanofibers and fluorescein-tagged heparin was used as an acceptor, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) with high efficiency was observed, indicating that heparin is indeed present on the exterior of the nanofiber surface. A hydrogel formed by mixing a dilute aqueous solution of 56 with an aqueous solution of heparin in the presence of the angiogenic growth factors FGF-2 and VEGF promoted significant neovascularisation response in a rat cornea angiogenesis assay, whereas the growth factors alone did not induce any detectable angiogenesis. The response was significantly higher than what was achieved with collagen gels in the presence of heparin and the growth factors. This was attributed to the rigidity of the self-assembled nanostructure over the polymer scaffold, which minimizes the Brownian motion opposing cell signalling and also reduces the entropic cost in the ligand–receptor binding.
 Chart 28 
In a clever exploitation of the interactions between peptide amphiphiles (PA) and biopolymers, Stupp's group has shown54 that when an aqueous solution of a peptide amphiphile (for example, 57) was brought in contact with an aqueous solution of hyaluronic acid (HA), a biopolymer present in human joints and cartilages, a solid membrane immediately formed at the interface of the two liquids, leading to flexible self-assembled sacs. The membrane is so flexible that it can be stretched from the interface of the liquids (Fig. 22b), but robust enough to withstand suturing to biological tissues (Fig. 22e and 22f). The authors showed that human stem cells encapsulated within these sacs can survive and differentiate. The sac membrane was shown to be permeable to proteins, facilitating sufficient nutrient diffusion in the culture medium for the viability and growth of the stem cells. This sac is also capable of self-repair, as was demonstrated by adding a drop of the PA solution into the macroscopic hole on the surface of the membrane, whereupon the PA solution interacted with the HA molecules inside the sac, leading to self-assembly and the eventual sealing of the hole.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram showing the formation of a closed sac. A sample of the denser negatively charged biopolymer (HA) solution is added on a positively charged PA solution. As the HA molecules sink into the PA solution, self-assembly proceeds at the liquid/liquid interface, until a closed sac is formed trapping the entire volume of the HA solution. (b) The membrane can be continuously stretched from the interface of HA and PA solutions. (c) A macroscopic tear (arrow) on the surface of a sac. (d) The sac has been repaired by sealing the tear (arrow) by adding a drop of the PA solution. (e) The sacs can withstand suturing, and (f) they can hold their weight without further tearing of the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a serious neurodegenerative condition which often leads to paralysis. This can be attributed to the formation of glial scars around the site of injury, which prevents the elongation of axons across the injury region, necessary to repair the damage. Therefore, the prevention of glial scar formation must be an essential component of any neuroregenerative technique that is used to treat injuries to the central nervous system. Mattiace et al. have chosen a negatively charged peptide amphiphile (PA) that can self-assemble into cylindrical nanofibers in the extracellular matrix of the injured spinal cord and present the laminine epitope IKVAV (isoleucine-lysine-valine-alanine-valine) to the cells in the spinal cord. Using a clip compression model of SCI (initial impact followed by persistent compression), they have shown that the injection of an aqueous solution of this peptide can significantly inhibit glial scar formation, reduce cell apoptosis and promote axon elongation in the event of a SCI in a mouse model.55,56 This work demonstrates the immense potential of self-assembled fibers displaying biological epitopes on the surface for controlling various cellular processes.
The durability of orthopaedic implants is limited by the stability and the sustainability of the cement or screw fixation. The design of implants that can promote bone ingrowth leading to osteointegration can help circumvent problems due to cement degradation or screw loosening. To this end, the use of porous metallic implants that can allow tissue growth and bone adhesion inside these pores has been suggested.57 Sargeant et al. have fabricated a bioactive hybrid bone implant material based on Ti-6Al-4V alloy.58 The alloy was foamed using solid state expansion of argon, to achieve an open porosity of 52%. A peptide amphiphile (PA) molecule 58 (Chart 29) was allowed to self-assemble from its solution and fill up the pores, rendering the matrix bioactive. SEM images of the PA–Ti hybrid clearly indicated that the PA molecules not only formed self-assembled nanofibers with high aspect ratio inside the macroscopic pores, but generated a thin layer on the outer surface of the foam as well, which is important since the exterior comes in direct contact with the host tissues. This nanofiber matrix was shown to assist mineralization of calcium phosphate phases with a Ca:P ratio of 1.71 ± 0.18 that corresponds to that of hydroxyapatite. An in vivo experiment conducted using a bone plug model in the diaphysis of the hind femurs of a Sprague Dawley rat revealed bone formation and neovascularisation around the implant, showing ample evidence of osteoconduction. The absence of neutrophils ruled out any cytotoxic response.
 Chart 29 
The examples discussed in this section clearly demonstrate the power of self-assembly and the increasingly important role it is poised to play in biomedicine. The recent burst of activities in this front is a testimony to that. Based on a suitable design strategy, small-peptide-amphiphile derived hydrogels have been shown to successfully mimic the extracellular matrix, and acting as a hub for cell differentiation and proliferation, thus playing a vital role in tissue repair and regeneration. Moreover, self-assembling peptides containing biologically active epitopes can be used to exert control over various cellular processes. We believe that this area of research at the interface of materials science and medicinal chemistry will continue to expand and advance. Indeed, the spectrum of applications of these hydrogels that can be envisaged in the field of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering is enormous and therefore needs continuous exploration to eventually transmit its benefits to human lives.

4. Sensing and responsive gels
Supramolecular gels are thermoreversible and this inherent property makes them thermoresponsive. Additionally, the incorporation of a receptor site or a photoresponsive group in the gelator molecule imparts sensitivity towards external stimuli such as chemicals or light. Azobenzene and anthracene units have been extensively used as the photoresponsive units whereas pH-responsiveness has been achieved by the introduction of acidic/basic sites in the gelator structure. The basic criterion however is that the supramolecular organization of the gelators must be influenced by the recognition events. The following examples will illustrate this point.
Shinkai and co-workers have designed several stimuli responsive gels by coupling chromophores to cholesterol based gelators.59 In one of these examples, the gel–sol transition of the gelator 59 (Chart 30) could be induced reversibly by irradiating lights of different wavelengths. The trans form of 59 gels n-butanol while the cis form does not. Thus, the irradiation of the gel of 59 at 330–380 nm results in gel-to-sol transition. The sol could be reverted back to the gel by irradiating with visible light (>460 nm) which induces the cis-to-trans isomerization.
 Chart 30 
The photoinduced dimerization of anthracene was exploited to trigger the gel–sol transition of a gel of n-decylammonium anthracene-9-carboxylate (60, Chart 31).60 The gel of this compound in cyclohexane could be transformed into a sol at 15 °C by irradiating with a mercury lamp as a result of the formation of dimerized product which was a non-gelator. Warming the sol (in the dark) to 30 °C dissociated the dimer and the gelator was regenerated as a precipitate. The gel could be reformed by heating the precipitate to sol and subsequently cooling the sol.
 Chart 31 
Pozzo et al. reported pH-sensitive organogels based on 2,3-di-n-alkoxyphenazines.61 The protonation of the basic sites of the phenazine moiety in these derivatives was exploited to make their gels pH-responsive. It was observed that the thermal stability of a gel of 61 (Chart 32) in acetonitrile increased till the addition of one equivalent of TFA but further addition of acid decreased the thermal stability. This was attributed to the fact that the hydrogen bonding between the nitrogen atoms and the ammonium centres in the monoprotonated species (in presence of one equivalent of acid) strengthened the gel but further protonation led to less soluble species. The reversibility of the process was demonstrated by the recovery of the initial thermal stability of the gel when ammonia was bubbled through the system.
 Chart 32 
Yoshimura et al. demonstrated the immobilization of artificial receptors in a hydrogel matrix of the glycosylated amino acid derivative 45 (Chart 33) for both sensing and discriminating phosphate derivatives such as phosphate ion, phosphate esters, ATP, etc.62 A PET type fluorescent chemosensor bis-Zn/Dpa-anthracene 62 in the hydrogel matrix showed fluorescence enhancement only upon the addition of phosphate derivatives whereas other ions such as sulfate, nitrate, acetate, azide, etc., did not exhibit any change. To distinguish between different phosphate derivatives, another chemosensor 63 having an environmentally sensitive dansyl chromophore was employed. It was found that upon addition of different phosphate derivatives, 63 got redistributed between the aqueous microcavity and hydrophobic fibers of the gel network depending on the nature of the phosphate derivatives. For example, hydrophilic ATP caused a red shift in the emission of 63 with reduced intensity whereas a blue shift with increased intensity was observed for hydrophobic phenyl phosphate, thus allowing the discrimination between different phosphate derivatives from both the wavelength shift and intensity change. This dynamic redistribution of the receptor upon guest binding was further utilized to design a FRET type molecular recognition chip by immobilizing a coumarin appended receptor 64a (FRET donor) and a hydrophobic styryl dye 64b (FRET acceptor) in the hydrogel matrix. Before addition of the phosphate derivatives, the receptor 64a was mainly localized in aqueous phase whereas 64b was fixed on the hydrophobic nanofibers. But upon addition of hydrophobic phosphate derivatives, the complexed receptor moved to a more hydrophobic domain which led to a shorter average distance between the donor and the acceptor and hence there was an increase in FRET. But FRET got suppressed upon binding to hydrophilic phosphate derivatives as it increased the average distance between the donor and the acceptor due to the transfer of the receptor to a more hydrophilic region.
 Chart 33 
A gallic acid based multiresponsive gelator 65 (Scheme 7) which formed gels in various organic solvents in the presence of silver triflate was reported by Liu et al.63 Various external stimuli were shown to induce the gel–sol transition by triggering the dissociation of the Ag-coordinated complex. For example, when ethanolic potassium iodide solution was added to the gel, the gel transformed into a sol and a pale yellow precipitate of silver iodide formed. But the addition of excess silver ion to this solution followed by the removal of the precipitate by filtration, resulted in the reformation of the gel (shown in Fig. 23). The gel–sol transition could also be induced by adding anions like bromide and chloride. The gel was also pH sensitive. At low pH, the protonation of pyridyl group led to the dissociation of the complex which triggered the gel–sol transition. On the other hand at high pH, the silver ion in the complex reacted with the hydroxide ion to form silver oxide and hence the gel transformed into a sol. The gel showed response to H2S (shown in Fig. 23) and NH3 gas by undergoing gel–sol transition when these gases were passed through the gel.
 Scheme 7  Gelator 65 and chemical structure of its Ag-coordinated complex 
 Fig. 23  Photographs of the response property of the Ag-coordinated complex gel before (a) and after the addition of potassium iodide (b) and H2S gas (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63, The American Chemical Society. 
Mukhopadhyay et al. have demonstrated the use of an organogel matrix of a naphthalene bisimide based gelator 66a for colorimetric sensing of different positional isomers of dihydroxynaphthalene which are known to be environmental pollutants present in water and soil.64 When the positional isomers of dihydroxynaphthalene (67a–g) were added (in a 1:1 mole ratio between the gelator and the naphthalene derivatives) in a cyclohexane gel of the gelator 66a, they generated visibly distinct colors (Fig. 24) due to the formation of charge transfer complexes with the gel matrix. The specificity of the recognition event in the gel was confirmed by performing the same studies in a structurally similar non-gelling compound 66b. The addition of the same isomers to 66b in solution (in same concentrations) generated much less-distinct and less-intense color changes which indicates the important role of the gel matrix. Another important point about this study was that it was performed in non-polar solvents where the dihydroxynaphthalenes were almost insoluble.
 Fig. 24  (A) The photograph depicts the spontaneous color changes of organogel 66a upon addition of positional isomers of dihydroxynaphthalene (67a–g): 66a (yellow), 66a·67a (deep purple), 66a·67b (green), 66a·67c (purple), 66a·67d (light brown), 66a·67e (reddish-orange), 66a·67f (bluish-green) and 66a·67g (orange). (B) The photograph shows the significantly reduced color changes in the solution state with nongelling compound 66b upon addition of dihydroxynaphthalenes (67a–g): 66b (colorless), 66b·67a (light violet), 66b·67b (colorless), 66b·67c (light purple), 66·67d (light purple), 66·67e (yellowish-orange), 66b·67f (yellowish-green) and 66b·67g (light yellow). Conditions: 1:1 complexes at 2.5 mM in 66a·67a–g in cyclohexane gel, 66b·67a, 66b·67d and 66b·67f in cyclohexane–CHCl3 (1:1), and 66b·67b, 66b·67c, 66b·67e and 66b·67g in cyclohexane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64, Wiley VCH. 
Due to space constraints, we have discussed only a few representative examples in this section. There are many other reports on responsive supramolecular gels in the literature.65 These examples demonstrate that the gel matrix could be used as sensors for external stimuli of different types and it has several advantages compared to the conventional solution phase sensors. This aspect of functional gels is exciting as they can be utilized as main components in molecular devices such as sensors and actuators.
5. Reactions in gel media
The prospect of carrying out reactions in the gel medium is attractive and has considerable potential. For one, doing reactions in a constrained environment can provide the advantage of specific interactions between the reactants, leading to better selectivity. Secondly, if the supramolecular gel network is chiral and the functions in the gelator molecule are tuned to facilitate specific reversible interactions with the chiral reactants, the gel network may act as a chiral template to carry out asymmetric reactions with high ee and de. This chiral gel network may also be used to template inorganic nanostructures that have potentials as heterogeneous asymmetric catalysts.
Koshima and co-workers reported possibly the first example of a photoreaction of the gelator molecules in the gel state.66 Benzophenone derivatives 68a–68c (Chart 34) containing alkylamides of different chain lengths gelled H-atom donor solvents like 2-propanol and 1,3,5-triisopropylbenzene. Irradiation of a 2-propanol gel of 68a afforded the corresponding pinacol as the main product. The reaction was much slower in the gel state (55 h) when compared to a control (solution of 68d in 2-propanol, 2 h). The restricted molecular mobility in the gel state was responsible for the slow kinetics of the reaction. The opaqueness of the gel leading to diffuse reflection of light could be another contributing factor. The scope of the photoreaction was also tested in a 1:1 gel of 68c with 69, a hydrogen donor gelator, in benzene. SEM image of this gel showed the coexistence of spherical aggregates of 68c and fine fibrous domain of 69, the respective microstructures observed in their individual gels. When this gel was subjected to photoreaction and the resulting precipitate was analyzed by SEM, no fine fibers could be observed, indicating the consumption of 69.
 Chart 34 
Galindo et al. have studied the quenching of anthracene fluorescence by amines in an organogel (see Scheme 8 and Fig. 25).67 A toluene gel (0.4% w/w) of macrocycle 70 was doped with anthracene (2 × 10−5 M). Triethylamine and 4-butylaniline were used as quenchers. The Stern–Volmer analysis of the emission (both steady state and time resolved) showed that the quenching constants (kq) were slightly higher in gel state than that in the solution state (in the absence of the gelator). The authors attributed this to an increased local concentration of the quencher due to “volume exclusion effect” of the gel network.
 Scheme 8  Fluorescence quenching of anthracene by amines in the toluene gel of 70. 
 Fig. 25  Fluorescence quenching of anthracene in toluene gel of 70: (a) without quencher, (b) in the presence of 4-butylaniline under excitation at 365 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67, Elsevier. 
Miravet et al. used a reactive supramolecular organogel as a scaffold to create new gels with superior thermal stability.68 Valine derived gelator 71 contained reactive 4-nitrophenyl carbamoyl groups, which could easily be substituted through facile nucleophilic reaction with primary amines (72a–72d) in its acetonitrile gel to provide bisurea gels of 73a–73d (Scheme 9). The new gels thus obtained were thermally much more robust (Tgel > 100 °C) as compared to the parent gel (Tgel 50–55 °C), due to the scope of stronger H-bonding interaction between the newly introduced urea functions. However, for amine 72e, as the reaction proceeded, the gel progressively broke down. This was explained by considering that the basic secondary amino group of the piperidine moiety captured the proton released in the reaction, resulting in charged species that made the gel unstable due to electrostatic repulsion.
 Scheme 9  The reactive p-nitrophenyl carbamoyl group in the gelator 71 is substituted by the reaction with primary amines 72a–d to obtain thermally more-robust gels of 73a–d. 
In an extension of this work, they tested the scope of the acetonitrile gel of 71 as a template for a macrocyclization reaction.69 When a mixture of the diamine 74 and Et3N in acetonitrile was placed on the top of the gel and the system was allowed to stand overnight, the gel underwent complete disintegration. Mass spectrometric analysis of the resulting insoluble material revealed the formation of a [1 + 1] cyclic component as the major product, whereas the [2 + 2] cyclic product expected to result from the templating effect of the gel was the minor product (Scheme 10). The kinetic studies with 1H NMR and subsequent control experiments suggested that the reaction did not take place in the aggregated phase. Instead, the gel from 71 acts as a separate phase that, as the reaction proceeds in the saturated solution, releases the monomer to maintain the equilibrium concentration of the reactive species (free 71). Hence, this supramolecular gel acted as a “controlled release system” of the reactive species in the solution.
 Scheme 10  The reaction of diamine 74 with 71 in its acetonitrile gel produces 75, [1 + 1] as the major product. The expected product 75, [2 + 2] is the minor product. 
Shinkai and his group reported the construction of helical inorganic silica using a chiral organogel network (based on 1,2-diaminocyclohexane derivatives) as template.8 This example has been covered when we discussed the use of supramolecular gels as templates for inorganic nanostructure synthesis. Both right and left handed silica could be obtained by this process. They have further explored the utility of this chiral silica in asymmetric synthesis.70 When the addition of diisopropylzinc to aldehyde 76 was carried out in the presence of this chiral silica, high enantioselectivity (upto 97%) was achieved (Scheme 11). Specifically, the use of left handed helical silica led to the preferential formation of the R-enantiomer. The opposite enantiomer could be obtained when right handed silica was used. This work demonstrated the scope of chiral inorganic materials (whose chirality is derived from a chiral organic gel template) in asymmetric catalysis.
 Scheme 11  The reaction of aldehyde 76 with diisopropyl zinc proceeds with very high degree of enantioselectivity in the presence of chiral silica. 
Recently, Diaz et al. reported a copper catalyzed azide–alkyne [3 + 2] cycloaddition reaction (CuAAC) as a means to stabilize the supramolecular organogel network,71 the first report of “click chemistry” in a supramolecular network. Organogelator 77, first reported by Hanabusa et al., was functionalized with alkyne and azide groups at the end of the hydrophobic side chain to give compounds 78 and 79. When the CuAAC reaction was performed in 19:1 MeCN:2,6-lutidine gels made from an equimolar mixture of 77 and 78 (or 79), in the presence of both dialkyne (82, 85) and diazide (80, 83) cross-linkers, gels with markedly increased thermal stability (by approximately 30 °C) were obtained (Scheme 12). However, when monofunctional “caps” (81, 84 and 86) were used, no such improvement of gel stability was observed. The strengthening of the gel structure was attributed to the covalent cross-linking of the non-covalent supramolecular network through triazole formation, which was confirmed from 1H NMR and MALDI-MS analysis of the cross-linked gels. Although several accounts of in situ stabilization of supramolecular gel networks had previously been reported, mostly post-polymerization of the gel fibers (containing polymerizable groups), these processes generate covalent polymers. The use of click chemistry in the present work shows a way to enhance the gel stability without sacrificing the thermoreversibility and preserving the overall structure of the supramolecular network, which underscores its utility.
 Scheme 12  Organogelators (77–79), cross-linkers (80, 82, 83 and 85) and caps (81, 84, 86); proposed H-bonding network in the gel and cross-linking through CuACC reaction. 
Bhat and Maitra have studied the photodimerization reaction of acenaphthylene (ACN) in micellar and hydrogel media (Scheme 13) based on neutral bile acids and cationic bile salt gelators.72 The main products of this reaction are syn and anti dimers. To carry out the reaction in gel media, hydrogelators 16 and 87–89 (Chart 35) were chosen.
 Scheme 13  Photodimerization reaction of acenaphthylene. 
 Chart 35 
ACN was loaded into the gel and the gel was irradiated at 350 nm for 12 h. The cyclobutane-1H NMR signal was used to estimate the product ratios. The anti to syn photodimer ratio was found to be greater in the gel state compared to the micellar solutions of the cationic bile salts (87 and 88) and the anionic bile salt 89, which was explained by the dynamic nature of micellar assemblies. The gel media provided a more “rigid” environment leading to a better selectivity of the products. However, the selectivity was less compared to the reactions reported in zeolites (pore diameter ∼13 Å).73 Interestingly, the product selectivity correlated with the rigidity of the gels. The mechanically strongest gel derived from 88 also showed the highest anti/syn ratio (11.0), whereas the ratio was the lowest (2.0) for the weakest gel (for 16).
Guler et al. have reported74 an example of supramolecular catalysis of ester hydrolysis on the surface of nanofibers formed by aggregation of the peptide amphiphile 90 (Chart 36). Compound 90 contains histidine residues in its peptide segment, which enable it to act as a mimic of the hydrolytic enzymes like esterase. This compound (>0.1 wt%) formed a hydrogel in water at pH > 6.5. The rate of hydrolysis of 2,4-dinitrophenyl acetate (DNPA) with 90 was found to be significantly higher (Fig. 26) than that with non-gelators 91, 92 and 93, and the non-supramolecular catalysts His-Omet and imidazole. Compound 90 forms cylindrical nanostructures by the hydrophobic collapse of its alkyl tails and β-sheet formation between its peptide segments. The high density of reactive sites on the nanofibers presented to the substrate and high internal order reducing the entropic loss due to catalyst–substrate binding explain the improved efficiency of this supramolecular catalyst. In contrast, compounds 91, 92 and 93 form polydisperse spherical aggregates, where the degree of internal order, and hence the density of the reactive sites, are certainly less, leading to diminished catalytic ability.
 Chart 36 
 Fig. 26  Observed rate increase for DNPA hydrolysis as the level of molecular organization in the catalytic particle is varied. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, The American Chemical Society. 
This section ends with an example where the use of supramolecular hydrogels as matrix to immobilize and improve the catalytic activity of enzymes has been explored. Enzymes often display substantially reduced activity in organic media compared to water, because of factors like substrate desolvation, reduced conformational flexibility etc. To circumvent this problem, Wang et al. immobilized methemoglobin (Hb) in the supramolecular hydrogel formed by the self-assembly of two amino acid derivatives 94 and 95.75 The similarity of the absorption and CD spectra obtained for the molecular gel bound Hb (Hb(I)), free Hb in water (Hb(U)) and a polymeric hydrogel bound Hb (Hb(III)) indicated that there is no structural difference between the gel bound enzyme and the free enzyme in water (Fig. 27a and 27c). The oxidation of pyrogallol by H2O2 was used as the model reaction. The activity of Hb(I) in toluene was found to be eight times that of Hb(U) in bulk water. Also, the initial rate of oxidation was much higher for Hb(I) compared to both Hb(U) and the polymeric gel immobilized enzyme Hb(III) (Fig. 27b). The observed superactivity of the supramolecular gel immobilized enzyme was attributed to the amphiphilicity of the nanofibers, which allows hydrophilic pyrogallol molecules to diffuse into the hydrogel and approach the enzyme. Also, the presence of diffuse nanoporous channels allows the products to smoothly leave the gel matrix, unlike in the polymeric gel matrix which consists of a randomly cross-linked network.
 Fig. 27  (a) Absorption spectra and (c) CD spectra of Hb(U), Hb(I) and Hb(III). (b) The reaction course in the first minute of pyrogallol (10 mM) and H2O2 (30 mM) catalyzed by Hb in various forms (0.1 g L−1) displays zero order kinetics and was used to calculate the initial rate. (d) The extended 15 min reaction course of (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The examples shown above are by no means exhaustive. A certain level of success has been achieved in carrying out chemical reactions in gel media with superior selectivity and specificity. However, for these self-assembled gels, loading of the reactants is a critical issue. Not only do we need to achieve cleaner and selective reactions, we also need to enhance the loading capacity of these gels so that they can qualify as practical substitutes and the media of choice over the reactions in solutions. On the other hand, relatively less effort has been directed towards performing asymmetric reactions in chiral gel media. This area is expected to receive increasing attention in the coming years.
6. Organogelators as light harvesting systems
The creation of artificial architectures to mimic photosynthesis, the natural light harvesting process, has been an active area of research. The understanding of the detailed mechanism of the energy transfer processes in a simple synthetic system is likely to lead to the development of organic based electronic and photonic devices. One of the key requirements for the energy transfer is the organization of the donor and acceptor chromophores and this can be achieved by using the gel matrix of a supramolecular system as the scaffold. Additionally, the energy transfer in the supramolecular gels can be controlled by changing the temperature. Hence, in recent years there have been many reports in the literature on excitation energy transfer in chromophore-containing gelators. We will discuss a few selected examples. For a more elaborate discussion, the readers are referred to a recent review by Ajayaghosh et al.76
One of the first reports of energy transfer in organogel medium was reported from Sagawa et al.77 Pyrene functionalized glutamate derivative 96 formed gels in benzene and cyclohexane whereas the porphyrin functionalized derivative 97 (Chart 37) did not form gel. In a gel of 96 containing 97, singlet-singlet energy migration from pyrene excimers to porphyrin was observed.
 Chart 37 
Nakashima et al. reported an efficient energy transfer from naphthalene chromophores to anthracene chromophores in hydrogels of cationic L-glutamate derivatives 100 and 101 (Chart 38).78 These glutamate derivatives formed hydrogels upon addition of equimolar amount of an anionic naphthalene derivative 98 to their aqueous dispersions. When the hydrogels were doped with a small amount of an anionic anthracene derivative 99, quenching of the naphthalene fluorescence was observed along with a concomitant increase of anthracene emission.
 Chart 38 
Shinkai and co-workers reported an interesting energy transfer phenomenon in an organogel of a 1,10-phenanthroline based gelator 102 (Chart 39) containing two cholesteryl units.79 The gel of this compound in 1-propanol was purple under UV light but upon the addition of TFA the color changed to greenish-yellow. On melting the gel, a blue colored sol was obtained. The observed variation in color on going from the gel-to-sol state is because of the efficient energy transfer operating selectively in the gel state. The unprotonated and the protonated forms of 102 emit at 396 nm and 530 nm, respectively and the fluorescence spectrum of the unprotonated form overlapped with the absorption spectrum of the protonated form. So, in the gel state, energy transfer occurred from the free gelator to the protonated form leading to the enhancement of the emission from the protonated form and hence the greenish-yellow color was observed. This energy transfer was not operative in the sol state and so it was blue under UV light.
 Chart 39 
An interesting energy transfer cascade in organogels of cholesterol appended perylene bisimide gelators (103a–d) was reported by Sugiyasu et al.80 The variable HOMO–LUMO gaps in the perylene derivatives were utilized to study the energy transfer in binary, ternary and quaternary gels formed by the mixture of these derivatives (Fig. 28). The spectral overlap between 103a and other derivatives decreases on going from 103b to 103d. So in binary gels, the energy transfer efficiency was maximum between 103a and 103b whereas 103a and 103d shows the least efficient energy transfer. However, the energy transfer was not observed in the solution state, which suggests the importance of chromophore organization in the gel state.
 Fig. 28  Fluorescence spectra of mixed perylene gels. The numbers in the inset denote the molar ratios for 103a/103b/103c/103d. The corresponding photographs of the mixed gels are also shown in the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, Wiley VCH. 
Del Guerzo et al. have demonstrated efficient energy transfer from 2,3-di-n-decyloxyanthracene (DDOA, 14) in its DMSO gel to various di-n-alkoxytetracene acceptors (DnOTs- 104, 105, 106, 107, Chart 40).81 The efficiency of the energy transfer process was found to be strongly dependent on the structural and chemical similarity of the doped tetracene derivatives with DDOA.
 Chart 40 
For example, the tetracene derivatives DDOT 107 and DHOT 106 were found to be very efficient quencher of DDOA emission (1 mol% of DDOT 107 could quench the DDOA emission completely) whereas DBOT 105 was much less efficient and the derivative 104 did not show quenching at all (Fig. 29 and 30). This observations suggest that the incorporation of tetracene occurs by replacing a DDOA molecule in its native structure in a way similar to that observed in tetracene doped anthracene co-crystals.
 Fig. 29  Emission spectra of doped DDOA (2.0 × 10−3 M) gels in DMSO at 293 K, λexc = 384 nm; (a) with increasing proportions of DDOT (mol%); (b) with 1 mol% of 5,12-DDOT, DBOT, DHOT and DDOT respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, The American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 30  Fluorescence confocal microscopy image (50 × 50 μm) of DDOA gel in DMSO at 298 K with 2 mol% of DDOT; λexc = 405 nm, 500 < λem <600 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, The American Chemical Society. 
The first example of light harvesting gels derived from oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV) has been reported by Ajayaghosh et al.82 When a cyclohexane–chloroform (16:1) gel of 108 was excited at 380 nm in the presence of Rhodamine B, energy transfer occurred selectively from the self-assembled species in the gel to the dye. Detailed studies on different OPV derivatives (108–110, Chart 41) revealed that the energy transfer was most efficient with the derivative 110 containing a carboxylic acid group. As the self-assembly process of OPVs was dependent on the temperature, the energy transfer could be thermally controlled and it was absent in the sol state. A large amount of the dye was required for this study because of the incompatibility of the cationic dye (due to its aggregation, a major portion of the dye was not in contact with the bulk of the gel matrix) with the non-polar solvents used for this study.
 Chart 41 
The same group later designed more efficient light harvesting gel systems by employing OPV derived acceptors which were more compatible with the donor self-assembly.83 OPVs 111–114 (Chart 42) with different HOMO–LUMO energy levels were studied in detail and it was found that energy transfer occurred efficiently between the gelling derivative 111 (donor) and the nongelling derivative 114. In a n-decane gel of 111, the addition of 2.62 mol% of 114 resulted in almost 90% quenching of the donor emission.
 Chart 42 
So we have seen that the proper organization of donor and acceptor in the supramolecular gel matrix results in efficient energy transfer, as demonstrated in all of the above discussed examples. These systems mimic natural light harvesting processes and are also promising for the design of electronic devices. However many practical problems, including long-term stability, will have to be addressed before real applications are envisaged.
7. Organic optoelectronics
The supramolecular approach towards creating organic nanostructures for optoelectronic applications has attracted much attention in recent years. In section 7.1, with some selected examples, we shall demonstrate how a suitable execution of this approach leads to the construction of 1D ordered assembly of electroactive molecules through non-covalent interactions to give conducting supramolecular materials. Apart from their favorable electronic and optical properties, a proper spatial positioning of these molecules is the key to having efficient electron mobility, which may find use in solar cells, light-emitting diodes, field-effect transistors, etc. The supramolecular polymers based on these semiconducting, π-conjugated molecules not only offer flexibility in terms of reversibility of the interactions associated with the formation of the assembly, but also have precise long range arrangements of the monomer units, which sometimes are missing in conducting polymers due to the defects incorporated during the polymerization process.
The role of ionic liquid based physical gels will be discussed in section 7.2, with an emphasis on the SWNT dispersed gels of ionic liquids, showcasing the utility of gel–nanotube hybrid materials in optoelectronic applications. In these gels, the electron conduction pathway is provided by the ionic liquid. The concluding section will discuss the scope of the supramolecular gels of liquid crystalline materials, where the templating effect of the liquid crystal leads to an ordered arrangement of the growing gel fibers, having wide implications in the design of electroactive materials.
7.1. Supramolecular gels based on electroactive molecules
There are several reports of the use of π-conjugated molecules like tetrathiafulvalene (TTF), thiophene and phthalocyanine which form electroactive nanofibers through self-assembly. Kitahara et al. reported on a TTF-based gelator 115 which formed self-supporting gels in various hydrocarbon solvents leading to one-dimensional alignment of these molecules in the nanofibers (demonstrated in the TEM image, Fig. 31b).84 Cyclic voltammetry of a dried hexane gel of 115, deposited on an ITO electrode, showed lower oxidation potential of the self-assembled fibers with respect to the non-assembled 115 in benzonitrile solution, due to the stabilization imparted to the assembly from the π–π stacking interactions. When the air dried gel was doped with I2, the self-assembled nanowires showed a near infrared (NIR) absorption band around 1750 nm (Fig. 31c), indicating the generation of a mixed valence-state. The creation of such mixed valence states has important implications in the construction of conducting nanofibers.
 Fig. 31  (a) A transparent gel of 115 obtained in hexane. (b) TEM image of the hexane xerogel shows highly aligned fibers. (c) NIR spectra of assembled 115 prepared from its hexane gel (1.0 g dm−3). Exposing the dried gel to I2 vapor causes the appearance of an absorption band around 850 nm (dimeric radical cation of the TTF gelator), while the band at 1750 nm signifies a mixed-valence state. This band gradually intensifies at the expense of the first band as I2 is progressively removed under vacuum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, The American Chemical Society. 
Amabilino and his group have recently designed an amide functionalized TTF-based gelator 116, which formed a supramolecular gel in hexane.85 The xerogel, when doped with I2 to create a mixed valence state for TTF moiety, showed a bulk conductivity of 3–5 × 10−3 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature. When the xerogel was progressively heated, a drastic drop in resistance occurred beyond 350 K, as a result of an irreversible phase transition (Fig. 32a), which was also confirmed by variable temperature ESR spectroscopy. The resistivity of the new phase (β phase) was found to be almost an order of magnitude less compared to the initial phase (α phase) at room temperature. Current-sensing AFM (CSAFM) images of this new phase showed alignment of nanofibers (Fig. 32b). The I–V response curves obtained from different regions of the image indicated metallic behavior in some bright areas, where a rapid saturation of the current was observed.
 Fig. 32  (a) The temperature dependence of the resistance of the I2 doped xerogel of 116. (b) Current-sensing AFM image of this doped xerogel (after annealing) showing aligned fibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, Wiley VCH. 
In an extension of this work86 they demonstrated that the superior conducting phase (β phase) could be accessed without the need of annealing by simply doping the hexane gel of 116 with 1 wt % of Au nanoparticles containing a capping agent that is structurally similar to the gelator (see Scheme 14). When this hybrid xerogel was doped with I2, it showed a conductivity of 10 S cm−1 (estimated from CSAFM measurements). A room temperature I–V sweep experiment showed metallic characteristics, indicating that the hybrid gel converts to the β-phase straightaway after doping with I2, without any need for a heat treatment.
 Scheme 14  The hybrid gel is obtained by doping the hexane gel of 116 with Au nanoparticles containing a structurally similar capping agent, differing only in the length of the side chain. 
Nolte and co-workers introduced TTF units into a crown ether appended phthalocyanine (Pc) building block to obtain compound 117a (Chart 43), which formed a gel when dioxane was slowly added to its chloroform solution.87 The TEM image showed the presence of bilayer tapes along with helical fibers (Fig. 33a and 33b), instead of the normally expected columnar stacks. The authors speculated that the initially formed bilayer structure scrolls into helical fibers (both right and left handed). When compound 117b (in DMSO) was doped with electron-deficient TCNQ, a charge–transfer complex was formed (TCNQ−/TTF+), the presence of which was indicated by a shift of the nitrile stretch (FT-IR). These helical assemblies have considerable potential as a conducting material, because they not only combine the favorable electronic features of TTF and Pc, but also open up the possibility to control the helicity of these scrolled structures, with important ramifications in their electroconductive behavior.
 Chart 43 
 Fig. 33  TEM image of a gel of 117a in CHCl3–dioxane, (a) thin Pc tapes, and (b) both left and right handed helical fibers which are nanometers wide and micrometers in length. Scale bar = 200 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Aida and co-workers have recently succeeded in achieving the formation of single handed nanocoils from the coassembly of hexabenzocoronene (HBC) derivatives 118 and 119.88 Racemic 118 has the propensity to form nanocoils (a mixture of right and left handed) from its CH2Cl2 solution on vapor diffusion of Et2O into the solution, through π-stacking of its HBC units. In contrast, compounds (S)-119 and (R)-119 form nanotubes or fibers. However, in a coassembly of 118 and (S) or (R)-119, the enantiomers of 119 are able to direct exclusive formation of single handed nanocoils in the mol fraction range of 20–50 mol% (“sergeants and soldiers” principle). For example, when 20 mol% of (S)-119 was doped into 118, the formation of left handed nanocoils was observed. Covalent stabilization of these self-assembled nanocoils by ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) using the second-generation Grubb’s catalyst produced polymerized nanocoils whose left-handed helicity was maintained even after polymerization (Fig. 34a). On doping with I2, the polymerized nanocoils exhibited an average conductivity of 1.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 with a linear I–V profile (Fig. 34b), whereas the non-polymerized nanocoils lost their structural integrity, as confirmed by SEM. This work demonstrates the construction of single handed nanocoils with a precise control of the morphology of the self-assembly. These thermodynamically labile aggregates were successfully stabilized thorough ROMP to obtain sufficient structural robustness for electrochemical doping, leading to π-conjugated electroconductive nanostructures.
 Fig. 34  (a) SEM image of an air-dried suspension of a polymerized coassembly formed from 118 with 20 mol% of (S)-119. (b) I–V profiles of the cast films of polymerized one-handed nanocoils from 118 and 20 mol% of 119. Dotted curves: before being doped with I2. Solid curves: after being doped with I2. Blue: left-handed nanocoils. Red: right-handed nanocoils. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Wiley VCH. 
A useful approach towards creating highly conjugated materials is to introduce a polymerizable unit into a gel derived from π-conjugated molecular building blocks. Post-gelation polymerization of this unit may lead to high effective conjugation length (ECL), producing materials with efficient electroconductive properties. Fujita et al. designed gelators containing a polymerizable diacetylene (DA) unit connected to 3,4,5-trialkoxybenzoic acid moieties through a flexible alkyl chain.89 Photopolymerization of the hexane gels of 120 and 121 (Chart 44) led to the development of red and blue colors, respectively, from the initially transparent gels. This difference in color was attributed to the difference in the ECL of these polymerized gels (10 mer for 120 and 25 mer for 121). The photopolymerized gel film of 121 on ITO electrode showed a lower threshold electric field (35 V μm−1) compared to that of 120 (50 V μm−1), since it had a higher ECL (Fig. 35). This example demonstrates a useful protocol that makes use of the supramolecular interactions to obtain highly ordered nanostructures, and then follows it up by polymerization of the nanofibers to obtain conducting polymers. The structure of the basic molecular unit can be modulated to control the ECL of the resulting polymer, and obtain superior field emission properties.
 Chart 44 
 Fig. 35  Field emission properties of the photopolymerized xerogels prepared from 120 (left) and 121 (right) on ITO electrodes (inset: photographs of the xerogel modified ITO electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, The American Chemical Society. 
Würthner and co-workers have reported on a perylene bisimide (PBI) based organogelator 122, which can gel several aliphatic and aromatic solvents at significantly low concentrations (< 0.2 wt%).90 The aggregation is driven by π–π stacking of the perylene chromophores reinforced by the intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions between the amide functions. AFM investigation of the gels showed the presence of well-defined helical fibrous aggregates (Fig. 36a). Slow cooling of an isotropic melt of compound 122 resulted in the formation of bundled fibers, with diameters in the micron range, which were visible under a polarizing optical microscope (Fig. 36b). Pulse-radiolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (PR-TRMC) experiment showed significantly higher charge-carrier mobility (0.052 cm2 V−1 s−1) than the liquid crystalline mesophases of the structurally related PBI compounds. The results suggest that this molecule is an efficient n-type semiconductor, and the highly ordered structures created from its self-assembly can find application in solar cells in the context of creating bulk p–n-heterojunctions.
 Fig. 36  (a) AFM height image of a film obtained from the spin coating of a diluted gel solution of 122 in toluene (1 × 10−4 M) on a mica substrate, showing the presence of both right (P) and left (M) handed fibers. The scale bar corresponds to 200 nm and the z scale is 10 nm. (b) Polarized optical microscopy image (cross polarizers) of 122 after cooling from the melt at a temperature of 228 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Shinkai and co-workers have recently reported orthogonal self-assembly of an oligothiophene based organogelator (123 or 124) and a perylene bisimide based organogelator (103) to form separate p-type and n-type stacks in a mixed organogel of the two compounds (Scheme 15).91 Both the compounds individually formed gels in chlorobenzene (the oligothiophenes 123 and 124 formed p-type stacks and the perylene bisimide 103 formed n-type stacks), the self-assembly being governed by the π–π stacking and hydrogen bonding interactions. The absorption and CD spectra of a mixed gel (123 and 103) formed in chlorobenzene were the summation of the individual spectra of the gelators obtained from their respective gels, indicating that the two compounds formed independent assemblies in the mixed gel. SEM investigation of these gels showed that the fiber diameters are similar (∼20 nm) in the mixed organogel when compared to the gels made from the individual gelators. This indicated the formation of separate p-type and n-type fibers, with p–n heterojunctions created at the nodal points of the fibers. Fluorescence studies of a mixed gel cast on an ITO electrode indicated energy transfer between the oligothiophene and perylene bisimide chromophores. Photoelectric current could be generated by irradiating this film with visible light, and the current could be reversibly turned on and off. Although Meijer and co-workers have recently been able to create p–n hereterojunctions through a supramolecular approach,92 this is the first example where the concept of orthogonal self-assembly has been successfully employed in supramolecular organogels.
 Scheme 15  The orthogonal self-assembly of oligothiophene (123 or 124) and perylene (103a) based organogelators creates separate n and p stacks in the mixed organogel, producing p–n heterojunction points. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, The American Chemical Society. 
Shirakawa et al. have shown that metallogels have potentials as field emission materials.93 They reported 3,4,5-tris(n-dodecyloxy)benzoylamide appended 8-quinolinol/metal(II)-chelate derivatives 125, 126 and 127 (Chart 45), which act as versatile gelators of both polar and non-polar organic solvents due to a synergistic operation of π–π stacking, hydrogen bonding and van der Waals interactions. SEM and TEM investigations showed that gels derived from all three gelators (with different metal centers) had fibers of similar shapes, which is expected since the coordination geometry around the metal remains the same (square planar), and since the self-assembly should be mainly governed by the organic ligands. The gels cast on ITO electrodes showed different threshold electric fields (90, 125 and 40 V μm−1 for 125, 126 and 127 gels respectively). These metallogels provided an easy handle to control the turn-on field values by changing the central metal atom, which would otherwise be difficult to achieve through synthetic manipulation.
 Chart 45 
7.2. Gels of ionic liquids
Physical gelation of ionic liquids by low molecular mass organic compounds is of current interest because of the many favorable properties of the ionic liquids. This makes these quasi solidified ionic liquids (physical gels) attractive replacements for organic electrolytes, which are generally volatile and flammable. Hanabusa et al. reported94 the gelation of a large number of ionic liquids by cyclodipeptides 128 and 129 (Chart 46). These gels showed high ionic conductivity and high thermal stability, with the melting point above 140 °C at a gelling concentration of 7% (w/v). The ionic conductivities of the gels from ionic liquids 130 and 131 formed by the gelator 128 were 4.75 and 3.61 mS cm−1, respectively. These values are quite similar to the conductivities of the neat ionic liquids, indicating that the presence of the gelator did not affect the ionic mobility of the ions present in the ionic liquid. Moreover, cyclic voltammetry of these gels showed that the gels are electrochemically stable over a wide potential range, underscoring their utility for electrochemical applications.
 Chart 46 
Aida and co-workers have recently observed that grinding a suspension of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT) with imidazolium based ionic liquids led to the formation of physical gels, the so called “bucky gels”.95 These gels have good potential for electrochemical applications since they simultaneously contain dispersed nanotubes (which are π-conjugated materials) and an electrolyte (the ionic liquid). These gels have been used in electric double layer capacitors,96 where the carbon nanotubes act as nanoelectrodes and the ionic liquid serves as an electrolyte. Aida's group reported the construction of a bucky gel based plastic actuator that works in air.97 The actuator was prepared by a layer by layer casting of the electrode (SWNT) and electrolyte (ionic liquid) components in a gelatinous mixture of 4-methyl-2-pentanone and a vinylidene difluoride hexafluoropropylene copolymer (PVdF(HFP)). On application of an electric potential, the actuator showed a bending motion towards the anode. Apart from these examples, facile chemical and electrochemical functionalization of SWNTs dispersed in the bucky gels have also been reported.98 Electroconductive polymers obtained from the bucky gels of polymerizable ionic liquids display large electrical conductivity.99
The examples discussed in the preceding paragraph give a brief overview of the extensive use of SWNT dispersed gels of ionic liquids as soft functional materials, particularly in the field of electrochemistry. For a comprehensive account of this subject, the readers are referred to a recent review by Fukushima and Aida.100
7.3. Liquid crystalline physical gels
Physical gels of liquid crystals represent an unusual anisotropic phase separated materials (containing liquid crystalline mesophase and the fibrous network of the gelator) and is an important class of compounds for electro-optic applications. A gelled liquid crystalline material can display two independent thermoreversible phase transitions: sol-to-gel transition, and isotropic-anisotropic phase transition of the liquid crystal. When the isotropic–anisotropic phase transition temperature (Tiso–lc) is higher than the sol–gel transition temperature (Tsol–gel), the LC phase can act as a template for the oriented growth of the gel fibers. Such ordered arrangement of fibers in the anisotropic phase leads to improved electro-optic response. For example, Kato and co-workers demonstrated that the nematic LC physical gels (having Tiso–lc > Tsol–gel) of 133 with 0.4 wt% of 132 (Chart 47) showed faster electro-optic response compared to the parent liquid crystals in twisted nematic cells.101 Kitamura et al. have reported the self-assembly of TTF based gelators in aromatic liquid crystals.102 These self-assembled fibers, after doping with I2, showed conductivity due to the formation of a mixed-valence state. Zhao and co-workers have reported on a fluorescent LC gel (0.5–2.0 wt% of the gelator 134 used to gel BL006, a nematic LC), whose fluorescence can be controlled by applying an electric field.103 In the field-off state, the LC domains in the gel are randomly oriented, leading to an inhomogeneous system with low optical transmittance, where the incident light can have many encounters with the gel fibers and can be harvested, leading to an intense photoluminescence. However, when an electric field is applied, the LC molecules align along the direction of the field, leading to the homogenization of the system. As a result, the optical transmittance of the medium increases, along with a decrease in photoluminescence intensity. The simple principle of electrical switching of photoluminescence discussed in this example may have important ramifications in display applications. In an extension of this work,104 they showed that the photoluminescence of quantum dots dispersed in LC gels can be controlled with an electric field in the manner described above (high intensity at field-off state and low intensity at field-on state). The reverse control could also be achieved by preparing a LC gel using a covalent polymer instead of a self-assembling gelator.
 Chart 47 
In this section, we have merely attempted to stress upon the importance of this field with a few representative examples. Interested readers can look up a recent review from Kato and co-workers, which has a detailed discussion on the development and applications of this class of soft materials.105
Conclusions
Despite a lack of complete understanding of the self-assembly process, gelators and gels have been manipulated in recent years in a variety of ways to design useful functional systems. The initial development took place in the templated synthesis of inorganic nanomaterials. After successfully employing different classes of supramolecular gels for this purpose, this knowledge was subsequently extended to make hybrid materials. Hybrid materials in which metal nanoparticles are stabilized/immobilized in the gel matrix by incorporating appropriate functionalities in the gel structure, are novel composites with interesting properties. The reversible gel–sol transition property of supramolecular gels has been utilized to make multiresponsive materials. In chromophore-containing gelators, the ordered arrangement of donor–acceptor pairs has been exploited to mimic natural light harvesting processes and this knowledge is likely to be useful for the development of nanodevices. In the area of supramolecular electronics the integration of electroactive motifs in the gelator structure has afforded materials suitable for optoelectronic applications. On the other hand, the use of biocompatible and biodegradable building blocks such as peptides and sugars in hydrogels has led to functional biomaterials with applications in areas such as drug delivery, screening of enzyme inhibitors and tissue engineering. These gels have been successfully utilized as scaffolds for cell growth and proliferation, opening new vistas in the field of regenerative medicine. Major advances in this field have reflected the practical utility of supramolecular gels and self-assembled nanostructures in general. For example, self-assembled sacs discussed earlier have been shown to encapsulate and support the growth of stem cells. This can be visualized as a miniaturized cell machinery with exciting prospects in cell therapy. Despite such encouraging advances, many practical challenges such as the stability of these systems in prolonged use remain to be addressed. For everyday application of hydrogels as drug delivery vehicles, key issues such as the response of these gels to a multienzyme environment encountered in human cells need deeper understanding. In order to achieve practically useful and functional materials, it is also important that the constituent molecules are constructed easily. The gel–nanoparticle hybrids have not yet graduated for real life applications, except for the exploration of ionic liquid–SWNT hybrid gels in electrochemical devices. The research exploring the use of supramolecular gels as reaction media is still in its infancy. We are still far from achieving the kind of selectivity and specificity in reactions such as photochemical and asymmetric transformations (using a chiral gel network as template) that will make these gels compete with reactions in isotropic media. Another challenge is to enhance the loading capacity of reactants in the gel matrix. We are certain, however, that this field will witness significant progress in the coming years leading to more practical applications.
Acknowledgements
The work on gels in our laboratory has been funded by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), the Indo-French Center for the Promotion of Advanced Research (IFCPAR) and the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR). The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi is thanked for the award of Research Fellowships to SB and RKD.
References
P. Terech and R. G. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 3133 CrossRef ; 
          Molecular Gels, Materials with Self-Assembled Fibrillar Networks, ed. R. G. Weiss and P. Terech, Springer,  2006 Search PubMed .
K. J. C. van Bommel, A. Friggeri and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 980 CrossRef ; N. M. Sangeetha and U. Maitra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 821 RSC ; Z. Yang and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2385 RSC ; A. Ajayaghosh and V. K. Praveen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 644 CrossRef CAS ; A. R. Hirst, B. Escuder, J. F. Miravet and D. K. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8002 CrossRef CAS ; M. Llusar and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 782 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kim, W. Zhang and T. J. Pinnavaia, Science, 1998, 282, 1302 CrossRef CAS ; Q. Huo, D. I. Margolese, U. Ciesla, P. Feng, T. E. Gier, P. Seiger, R. Leon, P. M. Petroff, F. Schüth and G. D. Stucky, Nature, 1994, 368, 317 CrossRef CAS ; D. D. Archibald and S. Mann, Nature, 1993, 364, 430 CrossRef CAS ; C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710 CrossRef CAS ; F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491 CrossRef CAS ; T. Shimizu, M. Masuda and H. Minamikawa, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1401 CrossRef CAS ; K. Sada, M. Takeuchi, N. Fujita, M. Namata and S. Shinkai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 415 RSC .
Y. Ono, K. Nakashima, M. Sano, Y. Kanekiyo, K. Inoue, J. Hojo and S. Shinkai, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1477 RSC .
Y. Ono, K. Nakashima, M. Sano, J. Hojo and S. Shinkai, Chem. Lett., 1999, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, Y. Ono and S. Shinkai, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 1643 CrossRef CAS ; J. H. Jung, H. Kobayashi, M. Masuda, T. Shimizu and S. Shinkai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8785 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, Y. Ono and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1862 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, Y. Ono, K. Hanabusa and S. Shinkai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5008 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, M. Amaike and S. Shinkai, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2343 RSC .
S. Kobayashi, K. Hanabusa, N. Hamasaki, M. Kimura, H. Shirai and S. Shinkai, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sugiyasu, S.-i. Tamaru, M. Takeuchi, D. Berthier, I. Huc, R. Oda and S. Shinkai, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1212 RSC .
C. Zhan, J. Wang, J. Yuan, H. Gong, Y. Liu and M. Liu, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 9440 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Clavier, J. L. Pozzo, H. Bouas-Laurent, C. Liere, C. Roux and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1725 RSC .
M. Llusar, L. Pidol, C. Roux, J. L. Pozzo and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 5124 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xue, R. Lu, D. Li, M. Jin, C. Tan, C. Bao, Z. Wang and Y. Zhao, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 11234 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gundiah, S. Mukhopadhyay, U. G. Tumkurkar, A. Govindaraj, U. Maitra and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2118 RSC .
U. Maitra, S. Mukhopadhyay, A. Sarkar, P. Rao and S. S. Indi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2281 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kalyanikutty, M. Nikhila, U. Maitra and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 432, 190 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hartgerink, E. Beniash and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2001, 294, 1684 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Sone, E. R. Zubarev and S. I. Stupp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1705 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamanaka, Y. Miyake, S. Akita and K. Nakano, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2072 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Shipway, E. Katz and I. Willner, ChemPhysChem, 2000, 1, 18 CrossRef CAS ; F. Remacle and R. D. Levine, ChemPhysChem, 2001, 2, 20 CrossRef CAS ; L.-L. Li, C.-J. Yang, W.-H. Chen and K.-J. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1505 CrossRef CAS ; B. Julián, R. Corberán, E. Cordoncillo, P. Escribano, B. Viana and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3337 RSC ; S. Roquet, A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, P. Frère and J. Roncali, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3459 CrossRef CAS ; K.-T. Wong, Y.-M. Chen, Y.-T. Lin, H.-C. Su and C.-c. Wu, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 5361 CrossRef CAS ; C. Sanchez, B. Julián, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559 RSC ; J. Yuan, M. Drechsler, Y. Xu, M. Zhang and A. H. E. Müller, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1547 CrossRef CAS .
B. Simmons, S. Li, V. T. John, G. L. McPherson, C. Taylor, D. K. Schwartz and K. Maskos, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1037 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kimura, S. Kobayashi., T. Kuroda, K. Hanabusa and H. Shirai, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 335 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Love, V. Chechik, D. K. Smith, K. Wilson, I. Ashworth and C. Brenman, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1971 RSC .
S. Ray, A. K. Das and A. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2816 RSC .
R. N. Mitra and P. K. Das, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8159 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharya, A. Srivastava and A. Pal, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2934 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pal, B. S. Chhikara, A. Govindaraj, S. Bhattacharya and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2593 RSC .
S. Srinivasan, S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5746 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhat and U. Maitra, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4224 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Vemula and G. John, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2218 RSC .
P. K. Vemula, U. Aslam, V. A. Mallia and G. John, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 138 CrossRef CAS .
J. van Herrikhuyzen, S. J. George, M. R. J. Vos, N. A. J. M. Sommerdjik, A. Ajayaghosh, S. C. J. Meskers and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1825 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mantion, A. G. Guex, A. Foelske, L. Mirolo, K. M. Fromm, M. Painsi and A. Taubert, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 606 RSC .
Z. Yang and B. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2424 RSC .
Z. A. C. Schnepp, R. Gonzalez-McQuire and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1869 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, P.-L. Ho, G. Liang, K. H. Chow, Q. Wang, Y. Cao, Z. Guo and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Toledano, R. J. Williams, V. Jayawarna and R. V. Ulijn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1070 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Gao, W. Ge, L. Wang and B. Xu, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 550 RSC .
Z. Yang, K. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Guo and B. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3152 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. C. van Bommel, M. C. A. Stuart, B. L. Feringa and J. van Esch, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2005, 3, 2917 RSC .
S. Bhuniya, Y. J. Seo and B. H. Kim, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 7153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Seo, S. Bhuniya and B. H. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1804 RSC .
P. K. Vemula, J. Li and G. John, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8932 CrossRef .
S.-L. Zhou, S. Matsumoto, H.-D. Tian, H. Yamane, A. Ojida, S. Kiyonaka and I. Hamachi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 1130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kiyonaka, K. Sugiyasu, S. Shinkai and I. Hamachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10954 CrossRef CAS .
R. Karinaga, Y. Jeong, S. Shinkai, K. Kaneko and K. Sakurai, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9398 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, G. Liang, M. Ma, A. S. Abbah, W. W. Lu and B. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2007, 843 RSC .
J. J. Panda, A. Mishra, A. Basu and V. S. Chauhan, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 2244 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Holmes, S. de Lacalle, X. Su, G. Liu, A. Rich and S. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 6728 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jayawarna, M. Ali, T. A. Jowitt, A. F. Miller, A. Saiani, J. E. Gough and R. V. Ulijn, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 611 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajangam, H. A. Behanna, M. J. Hui, X. Han, J. F. Hulvat, J. W. Lomasney and S. I. Stupp, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2086 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Capito, H. S. Azevedo, Y. S. Velichko, A. Mata and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2008, 319, 1812 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. T. Mattiace, V. Sahni, K. L. Niece, D. Birch, C. Czeisler, M. G. Fehlings, S. I. Stupp and J. A. Kessler, J. Neurosci., 2008, 28, 3814 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Silva, C. Czeisler, K. L. Niece, E. Beniash, D. A. Harrington, J. A. Kessler and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2004, 303, 1352 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Zardiackas, D. E. Parsell, L. D. Dillon, D. W. Mitchell, L. A. Nunnery and R. Poggie, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2001, 58, 180 CrossRef CAS ; R. A. Ayers, S. J. Simske, T. A. Bateman, A. Petkus, R. L. C. Sachdeva and V. E. Gyunter, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 1999, 45, 42 CrossRef CAS ; H. L. Li, S. M. Oppenheimer, S. I. Stupp, D. C. Dunand and L. C. Brinson, Mater. Trans., 2004, 45, 1124 CrossRef CAS ; S. Thelen, F. Barthelat and L. C. Brinson, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2004, 69A, 601 Search PubMed .
T. D. Sargeant, M. O. Guler, S. M. Oppenheimer, A. Mata, R. L. Satcher, D. C. Dunand and S. I. Stupp, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 161 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murata, M. Aoki, T. Nishi, A. Ikeda and S. Shinkai, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1991, 1715 RSC .
M. Ayabe, T. Kishida, N. Fujita, K. Sada and S. Shinkai, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 2744 RSC .
J. L. Pozzo, G. M. Clavier and J.-P. Desvergne, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2575 RSC .
I. Yoshimura, Y. Miyahara, N. Kasagi, H. Yamane, A. Ojida and I. Hamachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12204 CrossRef CAS ; S. Yamaguchi, I. Yoshimura, T. Kohira, S.-i. Tamaru and I. Hamachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11835 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Li and L. Wu, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8217 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mukhopadhyay, Y. Iwashita, M. Shirakawa, S.-i. Kawano, N. Fujita and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1592 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ahmed, X. Sallenave, F. Fages, G. Mieden-Gundert, W. M. Müller, U. Müller, F. Vögtle and J.-L. Pozzo, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7096 CrossRef CAS ; J. J. D. de Jong, L. N. Lucas, R. M. Kellogg, J. H. van Esch and B. L. Feringa, Science, 2004, 304, 278 CrossRef CAS ; S. R. Haines and R. G. Harrison, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2846 RSC ; J. B. Beck and S. J. Rowan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13922 CrossRef CAS ; K. Kuroiwa, T. Shibata, A. Takada, N. Nemoto and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2016 CrossRef CAS ; S.-i. Kawano, N. Fujita and S. Shinkai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8592 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Li, K. Liu, J. Liu, J. Peng, X. Feng and Y. Fang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7016 CrossRef CAS ; B. V. Shankar and A. Patnaik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9294 CrossRef CAS ; H. Yang, T. Yi, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. Wu, M. Xu, F. Li and C. Huang, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8224 CrossRef CAS .
H. Koshima, W. Matsusaka and H. Yu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 156, 83 CrossRef CAS .
F. Galindo, M. I. Burguete, R. Gavara and S. V. Luis, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 178, 57 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Miravet and B. Escuder, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 4791 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Miravet and B. Escuder, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 7321 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sato, K. Kadowaki, H. Urabe, J. H. Jung, Y. Ono, S. Shinkai and K. Soai, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 721 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Diaz, K. Rajagopal, E. Strable, J. Schneider and M. G. Finn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6056 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhat and U. Maitra, Molecules, 2007, 12, 2181 Search PubMed .
V. Ramamurthy, D. R. Corbin, C. V. Kumar and N. J. Turro, Tetrahedron Lett., 1990, 31, 47 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Guler and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12082 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Yang, L. Wang, M. Ma and B. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1032 RSC .
A. Ajayaghosh, V. K. Praveen and C. Vijaykumar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 109 RSC .
T. Sagawa, S. Fukugawa, T. Yamada and H. Ihara, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7223 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakashima and N. Kimizuka, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1113 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sugiyasu, N. Fujita, M. Tekeuchi, S. Yamada and S. Shinkai, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 895 RSC .
K. Sugiyasu, N. Fujita and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1229 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Guerzo, A. G. L. Olive, J. Reichwagen, H. Hopf and J.-P. Desvergne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17984 CrossRef .
A. Ajayaghosh, S. J. George and V. K. Praveen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 332 CrossRef CAS ; V. K. Praveen, S. J. George, R. Varghese, C. Vijayakumar and A. Ajayaghosh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7542 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ajayaghosh, V. K. Praveen, S. Srinivasan and R. Varghese, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 411 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kitahara, M. Shirakawa, S.-i. Kawano, U. Beginn, N. Fujita and S. Shinkai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14980 CrossRef CAS .
J. Puigmartí-Luis, V. Laukhin, Á.P. del Pino, J. Vidal-Gancedo, C. Rovira, E. Laukhina and D. B. Amabilino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Puigmartí-Luis, Á.P. del Pino, E. Laukhina, J. Esquena, V. Laukhin, C. Rovira, J. Vidal-Gancedo, A. G. Kanaras, R. J. Nichols, M. Brust and D. B. Amabilino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1861 CrossRef .
J. Sly, P. Kasák, E. Gomar-Nadal, C. Rovira, L. Górriz, P. Thordarson, D. B. Amabilino, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1255 RSC .
T. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, W. Jin, Y. Yamamoto, N. Ishii and T. Aida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1672 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fujita, Y. Sakamoto, M. Shirakawa, M. Ojima, A. Fujii, M. Ozaki and S. Shinkai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4134 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Li, V. Stepanenko, Z. Chen, P. Prins, L. D. A. Siebbeles and F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3871 RSC .
K. Sugiyasu, S.-i. Kawano, N. Fujita and S. Shinkai, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2863 CrossRef CAS .
F. Würthner, Z. Chen, F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Osswald, C. C. You, P. Jonkheijm, J. van Herrikhuyzen, A. P. H. J. Schenning, P. P. A. M. van der Schoot, E. W. Meijer, E. H. A. Beckers, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10611 CrossRef ; J. van Herrikhuyzen, A. Syamakumari, A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10021 CrossRef .
M. Shirakawa, N. Fujita, T. Tani, K. Kaneko, M. Ojima, A. Fujii, M. Ozaki and S. Shinkai, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hanabusa, H. Fukui, M. Suzuki and H. Shirai, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10383 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, Y. Ishimura, T. Yamamoto, T. Takigawa, N. Ishii and T. Aida, Science, 2003, 300, 2072 CrossRef CAS .
T. Katakabe, T. Kaneko, M. Watanabe, T. Fukushima and T. Aida, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1913 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima, K. Asaka, A. Kosaka and T. Aida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2410 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Price, J. L. Hudson and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14867 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Zhang, Y. Shen, J. Li, L. Niu, S. Dong and A. Ivaska, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4797 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, Y. Yamamoto, T. Aimiya, S. Notazawa, T. Takigawa, T. Inabe and T. Aida, Small, 2006, 2, 554 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima and T. Aida, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5048 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mizoshita, K. Hanabusa and T. Kato, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 392 CrossRef CAS ; N. Mizoshita, K. Hanabusa and T. Kato, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 313 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kitamura, S. Nakaso, N. Mizoshita, Y. Tochigi, T. Shimomura, M. Moriyama, K. Ito and T. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14769 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong, Y. Zhao, B.-K. An and S. Y. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1799 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6372 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kato, Y. Hirai, S. Nakaso and M. Moriyama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1857 RSC .

Footnote† Figures from cited journals have been reproduced with permission from the respective copyright holders.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
Supratim Banerjee	Supratim Banerjee received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from the Jadavpur University, Kolkata in 2002. In the same year he joined the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore as an Integrated PhD student. Later in 2004, he joined the Department of Organic Chemistry in the same institute to carry out his Master's degree project under the supervision of Professor Uday Maitra and pursued research towards his PhD degree in the same lab. He has worked on supramolecular gels based on anthracene derivatives and bile acids. He spent five months (March–July, 2007) as a visiting student in Professor Jean-Pierre Desvergne's laboratory at the Université Bordeaux 1, France.
Rajat K. Das	Rajat K. Das received his BSc degree in Chemistry from the Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India in 2003. In the same year, he joined the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, as an Integrated PhD student in the Chemical Sciences Division and subsequently joined Professor Uday Maitra's research group (in 2005) in the Department of Organic Chemistry, where he is currently pursuing his PhD work in the area of design, synthesis and applications of anthracene and pyrene based supramolecular organogelators.
Uday Maitra	Uday Maitra completed BSc and MSc from Presidency College, Calcutta IIT Kanpur, respectively. His PhD work at Columbia University was done in Prof. Ronald Breslow's group. He also carried out postdoctoral work at the University of California, Berkeley, with Prof. Paul A. Bartlett. He has been at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore since 1989 where he is currently a Professor. His research interests include supramolecular chemistry, bile acid chemistry, and chemistry and physics of gels. He is also greatly interested in chemical education.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic representation of programmed self-assembly. The building block leads to pre-aggregates, and eventually to self-assembled fibrous network, exposing the functional motif on the surface of the nanofibers.	 

 	Chart 1	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM image for the transcribed silica (after removal of the template by calcination). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Chart 2	 

 	Chart 3	 

 	Chart 4	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM pictures of the silica obtained by sol–gel transcription in (A) left-handed 4 + 6 (1:1 wt %), and (B) right-handed 5 + 7 (1:1 wt %) organogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 5	 

 	Chart 6	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of the dried samples prepared under acidic (A) and basic (B) conditions and the calcined samples prepared under acidic (C) and basic (D) conditions made from a gel of 11. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 7	 

 	Chart 8	 

 	Chart 9	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM micrographs of the CuS nanofibers using H2S sulfur source obtained from (a) butyl acetate gel and (b) benzene–butanol gel of 15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 10	 

 	Fig. 6  Low magnification TEM images of the ZnSO4 nanotubes obtained after removal of the gel fibers of 16. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) and (b) TEM images showing nanotubes of ZnS obtained using 0.02 mmol of Zn(OAc)2, (c) and (d) nanorods of ZnS obtained using a higher concentration (0.04 mmol) of Zn(OAc)2 using 16. Insets are the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Chemical structure of the peptide amphiphile, highlighting five key structural features. (B) Molecular model of the PA showing the overall conical shape of the molecule going from the narrow hydrophobic tail to the bulkier peptide region. Color scheme: C, black; H, white; O, red; N, blue; P, cyan; S, yellow (C) Schematic showing the self-assembly of PA molecules into a cylindrical micelle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Chart 11	 

 	Chart 12	 

 	Chart 13	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TEM image and (b) magnified TEM image of fibrous aggregates of Au nanoparticles in the presence of 19a. (c) TEM image of aggregates of Au nanoparticles in the presence of 19b. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Chart 14	 

 	Chart 15	 

 	Chart 16	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of xerogels of (a) 22, (b) 22-AuC12 composite, (c) 22-AuChol composite and d) 22-AuPhMe composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Plots of yield stress versus NP concentration. Inset: plots of storage modulus G′ and loss modulus G″ versus stress for a gel of 22 in toluene and a 22-AuC12 composite containing 2.17 wt% of NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Chart 17	 

 	Chart 18	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM images of the NP–gel composites (GN) scanned separately at various levels of magnification (0.05 mg of 24a–Au NP in 1 mL of the 0.2% gel of 16). Scale bars: GN1, 200 nm; GN2, 100 nm; GN3, 20 nm; and GN4, 100 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 19	 

 	Chart 20	 

 	Chart 21	 

 	Chart 22	 

 	Scheme 1  Structure of the precursor (28) and the gelator (29) for phosphatase catalyzed hydrogelation	 

 	Fig. 13  A schematic representation of the principle of enzyme catalyzed hydrogelation, screening of enzyme inhibitors and biomineralization strategy.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) High magnification SEM image of lightly mineralized supramolecular hydrogel of 29 showing discrete calcium phosphate nucleation sites across the fiber surface. (b) SEM image of an extensively mineralized hydrogel, showing the intact macroporous calcium phosphate network after disassembly of the gel matrix. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Scheme 2  Structure of the precursor (30) and the gelator (31) for β-lactamase catalyzed hydrogelation	 

 	Scheme 3  Structure of the precursors (32 and 33) and the gelator 34.	 

 	Scheme 4  Acid phosphatase in the hydrogel catalyzes the conversion of A to B in organic media. The precursors 28 and 35 are converted to the hydrogelators 29 and 36 and the enzyme is immobilized in the resultant hydrogel.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) The hydrolysis of A (10 mM) catalyzed by AP(gel) (20 μg L−1) in chloroform (●), toluene (▲) and n-octane (▼), and AP(free) in water (■). (B) The remaining activity of AP(gel) (●) and AP(free) (■) in water after incubation at 60 °C at various times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 5  The soluble precursor 37 gets converted to the hydrogelator 38 by the endogenous esterase enzymes in the mammalian cells.	 

 	Chart 23	 

 	Chart 24	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of a pH or enzyme dependent gel–sol transition system incorporating S1. The parent hairpin state changes to an unfolded state in the gel of 41. On breaking the gel, the hairpin structure is restored. Upon binding with S2, it forms a duplex, again leading to the de-stacking of the pyrene units. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of the amygdalin-based amphiphiles.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) and (b), pH–responsive volume phase transition of the mixed hydrogel (45/46b = 10:10) before and after shrinkage. (c) Time course of the release of vitamin B12 (●) and quercetin (▲) from the mixed hydrogel (45/46b = 1:1), due to pH triggered gel shrinkage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Structures of the hydrogelators (left), and thermally induced reversible shrinkage and swelling of the hydrogel of 47c (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Plots of release ratio of DNA versus temperature for the hydrogels (47a (blue), 47b (green) and 47c (red)). (b) Absorption spectra of the water polluted with bisphenol A before and after gel shrinkage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Comparison of TEM images (left) with fluorescence microscopy images (right) for the native gel and the composite gel (48 + DNA). The red fluorescence from ethidium bromide coincides with the fibers, indicating the inclusion of DNA into the fibers. (b) In vitro cell-free transcription/translation assay for 48 + pQBI 63 vector gels in E. coli T7 S30 extract solutions and DNA release test by adding methyl-β-cyclodextrin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 25	 

 	Chart 26	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Nerve growth factor (NGF) preprimed PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells attached to sepeptide scaffolds. The neurite growth takes place along the contour of the scaffold. (b) Primary rat hippocampal neurons form active synapses on peptide scaffolds. This confocal image shows bright green labelling indicating active synapse formation after FM1-43 incubation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, The National Academy of Sciences of the USA.	 

 	Chart 27	 

 	Chart 28	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram showing the formation of a closed sac. A sample of the denser negatively charged biopolymer (HA) solution is added on a positively charged PA solution. As the HA molecules sink into the PA solution, self-assembly proceeds at the liquid/liquid interface, until a closed sac is formed trapping the entire volume of the HA solution. (b) The membrane can be continuously stretched from the interface of HA and PA solutions. (c) A macroscopic tear (arrow) on the surface of a sac. (d) The sac has been repaired by sealing the tear (arrow) by adding a drop of the PA solution. (e) The sacs can withstand suturing, and (f) they can hold their weight without further tearing of the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Chart 29	 

 	Chart 30	 

 	Chart 31	 

 	Chart 32	 

 	Chart 33	 

 	Scheme 7  Gelator 65 and chemical structure of its Ag-coordinated complex	 

 	Fig. 23  Photographs of the response property of the Ag-coordinated complex gel before (a) and after the addition of potassium iodide (b) and H2S gas (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) The photograph depicts the spontaneous color changes of organogel 66a upon addition of positional isomers of dihydroxynaphthalene (67a–g): 66a (yellow), 66a·67a (deep purple), 66a·67b (green), 66a·67c (purple), 66a·67d (light brown), 66a·67e (reddish-orange), 66a·67f (bluish-green) and 66a·67g (orange). (B) The photograph shows the significantly reduced color changes in the solution state with nongelling compound 66b upon addition of dihydroxynaphthalenes (67a–g): 66b (colorless), 66b·67a (light violet), 66b·67b (colorless), 66b·67c (light purple), 66·67d (light purple), 66·67e (yellowish-orange), 66b·67f (yellowish-green) and 66b·67g (light yellow). Conditions: 1:1 complexes at 2.5 mM in 66a·67a–g in cyclohexane gel, 66b·67a, 66b·67d and 66b·67f in cyclohexane–CHCl3 (1:1), and 66b·67b, 66b·67c, 66b·67e and 66b·67g in cyclohexane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Chart 34	 

 	Scheme 8  Fluorescence quenching of anthracene by amines in the toluene gel of 70.	 

 	Fig. 25  Fluorescence quenching of anthracene in toluene gel of 70: (a) without quencher, (b) in the presence of 4-butylaniline under excitation at 365 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 9  The reactive p-nitrophenyl carbamoyl group in the gelator 71 is substituted by the reaction with primary amines 72a–d to obtain thermally more-robust gels of 73a–d.	 

 	Scheme 10  The reaction of diamine 74 with 71 in its acetonitrile gel produces 75, [1 + 1] as the major product. The expected product 75, [2 + 2] is the minor product.	 

 	Scheme 11  The reaction of aldehyde 76 with diisopropyl zinc proceeds with very high degree of enantioselectivity in the presence of chiral silica.	 

 	Scheme 12  Organogelators (77–79), cross-linkers (80, 82, 83 and 85) and caps (81, 84, 86); proposed H-bonding network in the gel and cross-linking through CuACC reaction.	 

 	Scheme 13  Photodimerization reaction of acenaphthylene.	 

 	Chart 35	 

 	Chart 36	 

 	Fig. 26  Observed rate increase for DNPA hydrolysis as the level of molecular organization in the catalytic particle is varied. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Absorption spectra and (c) CD spectra of Hb(U), Hb(I) and Hb(III). (b) The reaction course in the first minute of pyrogallol (10 mM) and H2O2 (30 mM) catalyzed by Hb in various forms (0.1 g L−1) displays zero order kinetics and was used to calculate the initial rate. (d) The extended 15 min reaction course of (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Chart 37	 

 	Chart 38	 

 	Chart 39	 

 	Fig. 28  Fluorescence spectra of mixed perylene gels. The numbers in the inset denote the molar ratios for 103a/103b/103c/103d. The corresponding photographs of the mixed gels are also shown in the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Chart 40	 

 	Fig. 29  Emission spectra of doped DDOA (2.0 × 10−3 M) gels in DMSO at 293 K, λexc = 384 nm; (a) with increasing proportions of DDOT (mol%); (b) with 1 mol% of 5,12-DDOT, DBOT, DHOT and DDOT respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Fluorescence confocal microscopy image (50 × 50 μm) of DDOA gel in DMSO at 298 K with 2 mol% of DDOT; λexc = 405 nm, 500 < λem <600 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 41	 

 	Chart 42	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) A transparent gel of 115 obtained in hexane. (b) TEM image of the hexane xerogel shows highly aligned fibers. (c) NIR spectra of assembled 115 prepared from its hexane gel (1.0 g dm−3). Exposing the dried gel to I2 vapor causes the appearance of an absorption band around 850 nm (dimeric radical cation of the TTF gelator), while the band at 1750 nm signifies a mixed-valence state. This band gradually intensifies at the expense of the first band as I2 is progressively removed under vacuum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) The temperature dependence of the resistance of the I2 doped xerogel of 116. (b) Current-sensing AFM image of this doped xerogel (after annealing) showing aligned fibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Scheme 14  The hybrid gel is obtained by doping the hexane gel of 116 with Au nanoparticles containing a structurally similar capping agent, differing only in the length of the side chain.	 

 	Chart 43	 

 	Fig. 33  TEM image of a gel of 117a in CHCl3–dioxane, (a) thin Pc tapes, and (b) both left and right handed helical fibers which are nanometers wide and micrometers in length. Scale bar = 200 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) SEM image of an air-dried suspension of a polymerized coassembly formed from 118 with 20 mol% of (S)-119. (b) I–V profiles of the cast films of polymerized one-handed nanocoils from 118 and 20 mol% of 119. Dotted curves: before being doped with I2. Solid curves: after being doped with I2. Blue: left-handed nanocoils. Red: right-handed nanocoils. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Chart 44	 

 	Fig. 35  Field emission properties of the photopolymerized xerogels prepared from 120 (left) and 121 (right) on ITO electrodes (inset: photographs of the xerogel modified ITO electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) AFM height image of a film obtained from the spin coating of a diluted gel solution of 122 in toluene (1 × 10−4 M) on a mica substrate, showing the presence of both right (P) and left (M) handed fibers. The scale bar corresponds to 200 nm and the z scale is 10 nm. (b) Polarized optical microscopy image (cross polarizers) of 122 after cooling from the melt at a temperature of 228 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 15  The orthogonal self-assembly of oligothiophene (123 or 124) and perylene (103a) based organogelators creates separate n and p stacks in the mixed organogel, producing p–n heterojunction points. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 45	 

 	Chart 46	 

 	Chart 47	 
Footnote
† Figures from cited journals have been reproduced with permission from the respective copyright holders.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
