Birnessite-type manganese oxides nanosheets with hole acceptor assisted photoelectrochemical activity in response to visible light   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM14355G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM14355G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2733-2739Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsBirnessite-type manganese oxides nanosheets with hole acceptor assisted photoelectrochemical activity in response to visible light†

        
          
            Yu-Kuei 
            Hsu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ying-Chu 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yan-Gu 
            Lin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Li-Chyong 
            Chen
          
        
      *bd and 

        
          
            Kuei-Hsien 
            Chen
          
        
      bc
aDepartment of Opto-Electronic Engineering, National Dong Hwa University, Hualien, Taiwan. E-mail: ykhsu@mail.ndhu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-3-8634180;   Tel: +886-3-8634196
bCenter for Condensed Matter Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. E-mail: chenlc@ntu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-2-2365-5404;   Tel: +886-2-33665249
cInstitute of Atomic and Molecular Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
dCenter for Emerging Materials and Advanced Devices, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Received 
      3rd September 2011
    , Accepted 21st November 2011First published on 20th December 2011AbstractA cost-effective and simple electroplating technique has been developed to prepare layered manganese oxide (MnO2) arrays as a promising material for solar hydrogen production and waste-water cleaning through photoelectrochemical (PEC) process. The microstructure of these MnO2 nanosheets can be referenced to Birnessite-type, as characterized by Raman spectra and transmission electron microscopy. The bandgap energy of the as-grown nanosheets determined from UV-vis spectroscopy is about 2.1 eV. Mott–Schottky plots show the flat band potential of the MnO2 nanosheets to be −0.01 V and a donor concentration of 4.68 × 1020 cm−3. Remarkable photocurrent in response to visible light is observed in the presence of hole acceptors, such as sodium formate and methanol, which efficiently suppress the recombination loss of electron–hole pairs from localized d–d transitions within manganese ion. Meanwhile, the transient photocurrent–time responses and the effect of different hole acceptors on PEC activity are studied with an increase of respective hole acceptor concentration, and the results reveal the critical role in the process of absorption and decomposition of the hole acceptor. Significantly, the MnO2 nanosheets exhibit an incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 7% in response to the monochromatic wavelength of 400 nm, which is comparable to that from hematite (α-Fe2O3). These results demonstrate the nanoporous MnO2 nanosheets have great potential in solar hydrogen applications and organic pollutant cleaning.
1. Introduction
Among the clean energy production methods, solar-powered water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen is one of the favorable options for conversion of solar energy into a “solar fuel”, since both water and sunlight are vastly abundant.1–4 In comparison to catalytic reforming of hydrocarbon fuels,5–9hydrogen generation from photoelectrochemical (PEC) water decomposition by solar illumination is much simpler and also more environmentally friendly. Recently, metal oxides and nitrides with excellent optoelectronic properties such as TiO2, ZnO, and GaN have all been investigated for water splitting; however, most of these reports only showed typical efficiencies of less than 1%.10–14 A major issue in using these materials is their inherently large bandgaps, and thus lack of absorption in the visible portion of the solar light spectrum. In order to reduce the bandgap of TiO2, ZnO, and GaN, extensive studies have been made by doping carbon and nitrogen as well as adding indium element.15–18 Unfortunately, these efforts often showed quite limited improvement in bandgap reduction at the expense of significant loss in crystallinity, resulting in large recombination losses. Exploring alternative materials with suitable bandgaps while meeting all the other criteria for PEC water splitting is crucial in the development of PEC cells with the efficiency required for commercialization.
In the last decade, manganese oxide clusters have been discovered as an essential component in the photosynthetic water oxidizing center, which is the only natural solar-powered system able to efficiently split water using visible light.19–22 Using the aforementioned water oxidizing center as blueprint for materials design, synthetic strategies to mimic the manganese oxide complex have attracted more attention; however, most of these studies have shown poor activity towards water splitting. Recently, an enhanced photo-response of layered manganese oxides (MnO2) with protonated vacancy defects has been demonstrated by a density functional theory study.23 Sakai et al. also reported the first observation of photocurrent generation by self-assembled MnO2 nanosheets on indium tin oxide (ITO) under visible light irradiation in nonaqueous electrolyte.24 Unfortunately, poor photocurrent was observed, presumably due to the following two factors, a strongly localized d–d transition and a high contact resistance. The former factor restrains the layer number of MnO2 owing to recombination loss of excited electron–hole pairs, whereas the latter one reduces carriers during transport. However, addition of an efficient hole acceptor in the electrolyte was reported to minimize direct charge recombination in rutile and polycrystalline TiO2 nanoparticles and films.25–28 In these cases, the hole acceptor strongly promoted the hydrogen evolution by its preferential photo-oxidation, as it acts as a hole capture. The mechanism of this promotion can be explained by rapid capture of the produced hole at the photoanode surface. Meanwhile, this rapid hole capture will bring about a reduction in the surface recombination loss, leading to the promotion of hydrogen evolution by electrons and avoiding photocorrosion of the electrode itself.
Here, direct-growth of nanoporous MnO2 nanosheets on ITO coated glass was carried out in a template-free manner to fabricate the photoelectrode. This direct-growth approach significantly reduces the interfacial resistance between the MnO2 nanosheets and the underlying conductive substrate. Meanwhile, it is desirable to fabricate these hierarchically structured MnO2 nanosheets on ITO conducting substrates by a cost-effective and simple electroplating technique. The resultant MnO2 nanosheets, when employed as a photo-electrode, deliver remarkable photocurrent in the presence of a hole acceptor. Furthermore, the effects of hole acceptors, using two different types over a range of concentrations, on the PEC activity of MnO2 nanosheets are also investigated.
2. Experimental
2.1 Fabrication of MnO2 nanosheets
The anodic deposition of MnO2 nanosheets was performed in a three-electrode electrochemical cell at room temperature. The cell is composed of a substrate, which is a conducting glass coated with ITO, as working electrode, a square platinum sheet as counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode in 3 M KCl solution. The ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned by sonication in acetone, ethanol, and distilled water for 30 min each. An aqueous solution of 0.1 M MnSO4·5H2O as the electrolyte was mixed with 0.1 M H2SO4 (used as the supporting electrolyte) for the electrodeposition. The exposed area of working electrode was 1 × 1 cm2. A potentio/galvanostat electrochemical workstation (Solartron 1470E) was used to deposit the nanostructures under galvanostatic conditions of 0.25 mA cm−2 for 60, 125, 250, 500 s, and then rinsed with distilled water.
2.2 Characterization of materials
The crystal structure and phase identification of the samples were performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer) with a monochromatized source of Cu-Kα1 radiation (λ = 0.15405 nm) at 1.6 kW (40 kV, 40 mA). Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM, JEOL-6700) and field-emission transmission electron microscopy (TEM JEOLJEM-2100) as well as HRTEM analyses were carried out to study the morphology, crystallinity, and sheet size of the samples. Raman spectra were measured using a LabRAM HR 800 system equipped with a HeNe laser (632.8 nm, 5 mW) and a long working-distance 50× objective. A spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer Lambda 35) was employed to record UV-vis absorption spectra for MnO2 nanosheets on ITO.
2.3 Photoelectrochemical measurements
The PEC measurements were carried out in 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution as electrolyte, using a conventional three-electrode system consisting of the MnO2 nanosheets on ITO electrode as the working electrode, square platinum sheet as the auxiliary electrode, and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode in 3 M KCl solution. All potentials reported in this article are with respect to that of Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl, 0.207 V vs.SHE) reference electrode. A 150 W Xe lamp was used as the excitation light source through a monochromator to obtain monochromatic light. The incident light was irradiated onto MnO2 nanosheet electrodes from the front face through the quartz window and the electrolyte unless noted otherwise.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Structural and optical characterization

Fig. 1a shows typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MnO2 films grown on anodic substrate under an externally applied current density of 0.25 mA cm−2 using MnSO4 as precursor in acidic solution. Uniform deposition on ITO substrate, which consisted of hierarchical nanosheets with sheet thickness of a few nm and width of about 60 nm, was observed. As two deposition periods were applied, while the resulting film maintained the sheet-like structure of uniform distribution, the width of each sheet further increased to around 120 nm (Fig. S1†). The tilted-angle and cross-section SEM images (Fig. 1b and inset) reveal an abruptly sharp interface between the ITO film and arrayed MnO2 nanosheets, in that there is no intermediate morphology or structure, such as a continuous film, at the interface between the ITO film and MnO2 nanosheets.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM top-view image of hierarchically structured nanosheets deposited on ITO by means of anodic electroplating at a current density of 0.25 mA cm−2 for 125 s. (b) SEM tilted-angle image of nanosheet arrays; inset, cross-section SEM image of nanosheet arrays. (c) Raman spectra of MnO2 nanosheet arrays. (d) TEM image of MnO2 nanosheets; inset, the corresponding SAED pattern. 
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. S2†) of the hierarchical nanosheets with different deposition periods did not display any visible diffraction peaks corresponding to MnO2; all of the strong diffraction peaks are associated with ITO. This indicates a lack of long-range order nature of MnO2 nanosheets.
However, Raman microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) indicated the presence of short-range order in these nanosheets, presumably as amorphous or nanocrystalline materials. Fig. 1c shows the Raman spectra of MnO2 nanosheets synthesized by anodic electroplating at various deposition times. Three major vibrational features corresponding to MnO2 can be identified at 500, 575 and 648 cm−1. The strong Raman band at 648 cm−1 can be attributed to the symmetric stretching vibration (Mn–O) of the MnO6 groups, while the second strong band located at 575 cm−1 is usually attributed to the (Mn–O) stretching vibration in the basal plane of the MnO6 sheet.29,30 From these vibrational features, a Birnessite-type MnO2 with layered structure can be concluded. From TEM micrographs and their corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns (SAED), as shown in Fig. 1d, their nanocrystalline nature can be confirmed. The d-spacings of (200), (110), (111) and (201) measured from the continuous ring patterns in SAED are consistent with the Birnessite-type MnO2 (JCPDS 42-1317).31
X-Ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS) is one of the most widely used techniques for analyzing the chemical states of the surface of elements. As shown in Fig. 2a, Mn 2p core level spectrum displays two peaks at binding energies of 653.8 eV and 642.2 eV, corresponding to the spin–orbit doublet attributed to the Mn 2p1/2 and Mn 2p3/2, respectively. The spin-energy separation of 11.6 eV indicates the formation of MnO2.32 Moreover, the binding energies of Mn 2p3/2 electrons for Mn3+ and Mn4+ states are reported to be 641.6 eV and 642.6 eV, respectively, which further confirms the composition of the deposit as MnO2.33Fig. 2b shows the O 1s spectrum of the MnO2 nanosheet/ITO electrode, which could be fitted into three main constituent peaks corresponding to different oxygen-containing species, viz. Mn–O–Mn bond at 529.5 eV, Mn–OH bond at 531.1 eV, and H–O–H bond at 533.9 eV. Based on the areas under these peaks, the atomic ratio of Mn to O is estimated to be 1:2.2. Notably, the 533.9 eV XPS peak corresponds to a water molecule (H–O–H), which confirms the MnO2 nanosheet to be in hydrated form.
 Fig. 2  
XPS spectra of (a) Mn 2p core level and (b) O 1s core level for MnO2 nanosheets (deposition time of 125 s). 

Fig. 3a displays UV-vis absorption spectra of MnO2 nanosheets prepared at various deposition times. Broad absorptions lie in the wavelength region from 300–700 nm with a distinct peak at around 390 nm, which is clearly observed in samples with a deposition time of 60 s. This absorption peak can be ascribed to the overlap of the d–d transitions of manganese ions in the octahedral site.34 With increasing deposition time, the absorbance becomes stronger and featureless due to increasing thickness of MnO2 nanosheets. Fig. S3† shows a relationship between the absorbance at the wavelengths of 450, 500 and 550 nm, and the charge delivered for electrodeposition. The observed linear relationships reveal the accumulation of Mn oxide with the same electronic state and also confirm intrinsic absorption from an increase of absorbance. Fig. 3b shows experimental data on the relationship between α1/2 and photon energy obtained from MnO2 nanosheets of 125 s deposition time with thickness of 100 nm. The stepped characteristic of intrinsic absorption edge of MnO2 nanosheets with an indirect energy gap is observed. The indirect optical absorption can be described by the following form:35 (1)where Ep is a given phonon energy which have the momentum required to take the electron from the valence-band maxima to the conduction-band minima. The quantities A and B are parameters containing the density-of-state effective masses of electrons and holes. kB is Boltzmann's constant. The energy Eg is just the band-gap energy minus an exciton binding energy. Thus, we obtained a photon energy Eg = 2.1 eV from the fitting curve using eqn (1). Excellent agreement between the experimental absorption coefficient and the theoretical fitting provides convincing evidence that the absorption band comes from the phonon-assisted transition to the exciton state. Fig. S4† indicates that the colors of MnO2 nanosheets on ITO substrate progressively become dark brown as a result of increased deposition time, and thus film thickness. Significantly, all the MnO2 nanosheets still present good optical transparency.
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra for MnO2 nanosheets on ITO substrate. The data was corrected by subtracting the optical absorption of the substrate. (b) Variation of the square root of absorption coefficient with photon energy for MnO2 nanosheets (deposition time of 125 s). 
3.2 Photoelectrochemical characterization
The photocurrent–time response of MnO2 nanosheets was determined by chronoamperometry, under a constant pre-pulse potential of 1 V vs.Ag/AgCl reference electrode, using hand chopped light. The responses of the MnO2 nanosheets in supporting electrolyte of 0.1 M Na2SO4 and in the presence of methanol as a hole acceptor, respectively, are shown in Fig. 4a. The difference in their baselines is caused by the electro-oxidation of methanol. It is worth noting that the photocurrent response in presence of a hole acceptor is one order of magnitude higher than that in the presence of only supporting electrolyte. The positive photocurrents correspond to a photo-oxidation process and indicate that MnO2 nanosheets have an n-type semiconducting nature as a photoanode. Since MnO2 is partially filled with d-levels, the photocurrent of MnO2 nanosheets involves d–d transition under light illumination. Because the d electrons are confined in central manganese ions, migration of the excited carriers into electrolyte is difficult, and the excited electrons are rapidly recombined with the holes, causing poor-efficiency water photoelectrolysis. However, with the presence of a hole acceptor in the electrolyte, direct charge carrier recombination in MnO2 nanosheets can be suppressed (Fig. 4b). Meanwhile, the generated proton can serve as a reactant at the cathode, allowing proton reduction to complete hydrogen generation. Higher photocurrent from the photo-oxidized methanol, compared to water photoelectrolysis, indicates high production rate of hydrogen. Fig. S5† shows the photocurrent–time response of MnO2 nanosheets prepared with various deposition times. In this case, obviously different baselines can be attributed to the pseudo-capacitive characteristic of MnO2 owing to different amount of deposits. After subtracting baselines, the comparison of photocurrents is shown in Fig. 4c. MnO2 nanosheets with 60 s and 125 s of deposition periods show fast rising time and the highest steady-state photocurrent can be achieved for samples prepared with 125 s deposition time. Strikingly, the responses of slow rising time are observed for samples with high MnO2 loading. This can be attributed to a sluggish kinetic reaction resulting from higher internal resistance owing to thicker MnO2 deposits. Therefore, the sample using 125 s deposition time has optimum conditions and is used for further discussions.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photocurrent–time behaviour of MnO2 nanosheets in supporting electrolyte of 0.1 M Na2SO4 with and without the presence of methanol (deposition time of 125 s). (b) Schematic illustratation of the process of hydrogen generation viaMnO2 nanosheets using methanol as hole acceptor. (c) Photocurrent–time behaviour of MnO2 nanosheets with different deposition times in the presence of methanol after subtracting baselines. 
In order to measure the spectral range of the photocurrent, long wavelength pass filters with different cut-off wavelengths were used. As depicted in Fig. 5, the MnO2 nanosheets generated a photocurrent in the presence of methanol when irradiated with different ranges of visible light via long wavelength pass filters of 400, 450, 500, 550, 600 and 650 nm, respectively. The longest cut-off wavelength still generating photocurrent is 600 nm, indicating that the photoelectric conversion occurred in response to visible light. The trend in the photocurrent response for the wavelength range of 300–600 nm closely matches the optical absorption feature of the MnO2 nanosheets, confirming that the observed photocurrent indeed arises from MnO2.
 Fig. 5  Photocurrents generated in an electrolyte of 0.1 M Na2SO4 with 5 M methanol (deposition time of 125 s) by using long wavelength pass filtered light in alternating periods of 30 s of light followed by 30 s of dark (labels under peaks specify filter cut-off wavelength, 275 nm is the cut-off of the pyrex glass electrochemical cell). 
Comparative photocurrent–time responses of MnO2 nanosheets in the presence of different hole acceptors, specifically methanol and sodium formate, are shown in the inset of Fig. 6a. For convenience, the difference in their baselines, caused by the electro-oxidation of respective hole acceptors, has been subtracted. Strikingly, the photocurrent in the presence of 0.1 M sodium formate is one order of magnitude higher than that of 0.1 M methanol. The response curve of photocurrent transient shows various interesting features. Especially, in the case of sodium formate, anodic and cathodic spikes appear at the time of light-on and light-off, respectively, with a cut-off wavelength at 275 nm. The anodic spike with the decay in the photocurrent indicates that the holes reaching the semiconductor surface undergo photo-oxidation with formate ion at the time of light-on; afterwards, the depletion boundary layer is rapidly formed to further limit the photocurrent under the diffusion control. In terms of cathodic spike, a back reaction of the conduction band electrons with holes trapped at the surface can be inferred.36 In contrast, with methanol only, no specific spike is observed, indicating the photo-oxidation process is of kinetic control. To further investigate the effects of hole acceptors on photocurrent response, the dependence of photocurrent in the presence of various concentrations of hole acceptors is shown in Fig. 6a. As seen from the data of sodium formate the photocurrent increases rapidly in the low concentration region, and then reaches saturation in the high concentration region. In the case of methanol, the trend of photocurrent shows a slow increase to the saturation region. To clarify the behaviors of photocurrent with respect to concentrations, Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetics, which is a simple and popular model for heterogeneous photochemical oxidations, is given by:37 (2)where k is the photo-oxidation rate constant, Kp is the adsorption equilibrium constant and Cm is the initial bulk concentration of the oxidizable species. Since the rate of a heterogeneous photo-chemical reaction is proportional to the surface concentration of photogenerated holes and electrons and, in the case of a positively biased semiconductor catalyst, the electrons flow through the external circuit, the resulting photocurrent density should be analogous to the reaction rate. Hence, eqn (2) can be written as:37 (3)where A, B and C are constants. Rearrangement of eqn (3) gives: (4)where A′ and B′ are constants. Therefore, the experimental data were further processed according to the Langmuir–Hinshelwood model and plotted as 1/Iphversus 1/Cm of various hole acceptors. Fig. 6b shows reasonable linearity fitting for the methanol case over a broad range of concentrations, but the same fitting is far from ideal for the data derived from the sodium formate case. This suggests that in the concentration range studied, the mechanism of photo-oxidized methanol can be adequately described by the expression holding for Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetics. This fact reflects the rate-limiting step of photo-oxidized methanol by the decomposition process. In contrast to the weak adsorption of methanol on MnO2 nanosheet surface, formate ion, HCOO−, exhibits stronger adsorption at the interface that further promotes fast photo-oxidation reaction and gives higher photocurrent efficiency due to inhibition of surface recombination processes. While a remarkable photocurrent of 130 μA cm−2 has been obtained, further increase in the concentration of sodium formate did not give more current. The reason for this saturation-like behavior could be caused by the concentration of photogenerated holes used for the photo-oxidation being too low for oxidation of formate ion in high concentration. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on such high photocurrent generation from MnO2 nanosheets in aqueous electrolyte.
 Fig. 6  (a) The dependence of the saturated photocurrent on sodium formate and methanol concentration; inset, comparison of photocurrent–time in the presence of methanol and sodium formate after subtracting baselines. (b) The plot of the reciprocal saturated photocurrent as a function of the reciprocal sodium formate and methanol concentration. 
The photocurrent action spectra (Fig. 7a), in which the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is plotted as a function of excitation wavelength, shows the onset wavelength for the photocurrent generation at around 520 nm, in the electrolyte with different hole acceptors. The IPCE for MnO2 nanosheet is approximately 7% under a monochromatic light of 400 nm at 1 V vs.Ag/AgCl reference electrode, which is comparable to that from hematite (α-Fe2O3).38,39 The IPCE spectra profiles in a wavelength range of 300–500 nm are similar to the result of the optical absorption feature of the MnO2 nanosheet. Furthermore, the gradual increase in the IPCE, η, with increasing photon energy is related to bandgap energy by the following equation:40 ηhv = A(L + W)(hv − Eg)m(5)where Eg is the bandgap energy while the exponent m equals 1/2 for a direct and 2 for an indirect electronic transition. W is the width of space charge layer. L is the diffusion length. Fig. 7b shows that eqn (5) with m = 2 is closely followed in a range of photon energies close to the absorption threshold indicating that the optical transition near the band gap is indirect. From the intercepts of the straight lines with the abscissa, the band gap energies for MnO2 nanosheets both in the presence of sodium formate and methanol are derived as 2.2 eV and 2.1 eV, respectively. Similar values are derived previously from optical absorption measurements.
 Fig. 7  (a) Photocurrent action spectrum for MnO2 nanosheets in the presence of sodium formate and methanol at 1 V vs.Ag/AgCl. (b) Variation of the square root of IPCE (η) times hv with photon energy for MnO2 nanosheets. 
To estimate the flat-band position for MnO2 nanosheet array, electrochemical impedance studies were carried out in the dark in the absence of a hole acceptor at a potential of 1 V vs.Ag/AgCl. Fig. 8 shows a Mott–Schottky type plot of data analyzed by using the CNLS fitting method based on an equivalent circuit, as shown in the inset. However, the Mott–Schottky equation relates the capacitance of the semiconductor to the carrier concentration (Nd) and the other constants such as the fundamental charge constant (e), dielectric constant (ε), vacuum permittivity (εo), and the flat-band potential (VFB):41 (6)
 Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky plot of MnO2 nanosheets; inset, equivalent circuit. 
Hence, plotting 1/C2versus V allows the estimation of the flat-band and surface carrier concentration, with the flat-band being the x-intercept and the carrier concentration calculated from the slope. The value of flat-band is located at −0.01 V vs.Ag/AgCl, which corresponds to a conduction band. Estimation of the donor concentrations shows that in the MnO2 nanosheets the concentration is 4.68 × 1020 cm−3. The high value of Nd can be attributed to the short-range ordered and hydrous nature of oxide films in agreement with the previous reports.42,43
4. Conclusions
Our strategy was to mimic essential components of the manganese oxide complex in the photosynthetic water oxidizing center. Using this water oxidizing center as a blueprint for materials design, hierarchically nanoporous sheet-like arrays of MnO2 with hydrous nature were grown on an anodic substrate by means of a cost-effective and simple electroplating technique. These nanosheets were homogeneous throughout the thickness of the entire film with large voids of nanometres in diameter that offer a large contact area with the electrolyte. Also, the direct-growth approach enables further reduction in the interfacial loss during electron transport. Based on Raman and electron microscopic studies, Birnessite-type features of MnO2 with hydrous and layered characteristics can be concluded. The bandgap energy, estimated at around 2.1 eV, of these nanosheets is suited for optimum utilization of solar light. Strikingly, a remarkably high photocurrent from the as-grown MnO2 nanosheets was demonstrated in the presence of a hole acceptor, which efficiently suppresses direct charge carrier recombination from localized d–d transitions of manganese ions. Most importantly, MnO2 nanosheets illustrated striking PEC activity in response to visible light with a high photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 7% at a monochromatic wavelength of 400 nm. Moreover, the transient photocurrent–time responses and the effect of different hole acceptors on the PEC response were discussed with various hole acceptor concentrations. The results showed that the reactant species plays a more important role in PEC activities, especially in interfacial interaction and decomposition of the hole acceptor. Our study suggests that the MnO2 nanosheets are promising for hydrogen generation and organic pollutant cleaning based on the PEC process.
Acknowledgements
This research was financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Asian Office of Aerospace Research and Development under AFOSR, the National Science Council, National Taiwan University, and Academia Sinica, Taiwan.
Notes and references
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. P. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1849 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 517 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, H. W. Tang, S. H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045106 CrossRef .
Y. G. Lin, Y. K. Hsu, S. Y. Chen, Y. K. Lin, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7586 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Lin, Y. H. Su, Y. H. Huang, C. J. Hsu, Y. K. Hsu, Y. G. Lin, K. H. Huang, S. Y. Chen, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9186 RSC .
Y. G. Lin, Y. K. Hsu, S. Y. Chen, Y. K. Lin, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10611 RSC .
Y. G. Lin, Y. K. Hsu, S. Y. Chen, Y. K. Lin, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 324 RSC .
C. C. Li, R. J. Lin, H. P. Lin, Y. K. Lin, Y. G. Lin, C. C. Chang, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1473 RSC .
Y. K. Hsu, Y. G. Lin and Y. C. Chen, Electrochem. Commun, 2011, 13, 1383 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ahn, S. Shet, T. Deutsch, C. S. Jiang, Y. Yan, M. Al-Jassim and J. Turner, J. Power Sources, 2008, 176, 387 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Basilio, Y. K. Hsu, W. H. Tu, C. H. Yen, G. M. Hsu, O. Chyan, Y. Chyan, J. S. Hwang, Y. T. Chen, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8118 RSC .
W. H. Tu, Y. K. Hsu, C. H. Yen, C. I Wu, J. S. Hwang, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 530 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Small, 2009, 5, 104 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2331 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aryal, B. N. Pantha, J. Li, J. Y. Lin and H. X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 052110 CrossRef .
Y. A. Shaban and S. U. M. Khan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Y. Lin and H. X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 162107 CrossRef .
M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 47, 7335 CrossRef .
Y. Pushkar, J. Yano, K. Sauer, A. Boussac and V. K. Yachandra, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 1879 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185 RSC .
K. D. Kwon, K. Refson and G. Sposito, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 146601 CrossRef .
N. Sakai, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9651 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Villarreal, R. Gómez, M. Neumann-Spallart, N. Alonso-Vante and P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 15172 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, Y. Fang, L. Liang, H. Ding, G. Shi and L. Jin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 610, 179 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mohapatra, K. S. Raja, V. K. Mahajan and M. Misra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11007 CAS .
W. Zhu, X. Liu, H. Liu, D. Tong, J. Yang and J. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12619 CrossRef CAS .
C. Julien, M. Massot, R. Baddour-Hadjean, S. Franger, S. Bach and J. P. Pereira-Ramos, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 159, 345 CrossRef .
Y. K. Hsu, Y. C. Chen, Y. G. Lin, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1252 RSC .
Y. C. Chen, Y. K. Hsu, Y. G. Lin, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toupin, T. Brousse and D. Bélanger, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakayama, S. Konoshi, H. Tagashira and K. Ogura, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 354 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Oh, T. W. Kim, K. M. Lee, M. S. Song, A. Y. Jee, S. T. Lim, H. W. Ha, M. Lee, J. H. Choy and S. J. Hwang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4437 CrossRef CAS .

          J. I. Pankove, in Optical Processes in Semiconductors, Dover Publishers, New York,  1971, Ch. 3 Search PubMed .
P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 3863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Georgieva, S. Armyanov, E. Valova, I. Poulios and S. Sotiropoulos, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 2076 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Formal, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099 CrossRef .
P. H. Borse, H. Jun, S. H. Choi, S. J. Hong and J. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 173103 CrossRef .
L. Kavan, M. Gratzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu and D. K. P. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2015 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Gassa, H. T. Mishima, B. A. L. de Mishima and J. R. Vilche, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 1717 CrossRef CAS .
E. Preisler, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1976, 6, 311 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm14355gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM top-view image of hierarchically structured nanosheets deposited on ITO by means of anodic electroplating at a current density of 0.25 mA cm−2 for 125 s. (b) SEM tilted-angle image of nanosheet arrays; inset, cross-section SEM image of nanosheet arrays. (c) Raman spectra of MnO2 nanosheet arrays. (d) TEM image of MnO2 nanosheets; inset, the corresponding SAED pattern.	 

 	Fig. 2  
XPS spectra of (a) Mn 2p core level and (b) O 1s core level for MnO2 nanosheets (deposition time of 125 s).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra for MnO2 nanosheets on ITO substrate. The data was corrected by subtracting the optical absorption of the substrate. (b) Variation of the square root of absorption coefficient with photon energy for MnO2 nanosheets (deposition time of 125 s).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photocurrent–time behaviour of MnO2 nanosheets in supporting electrolyte of 0.1 M Na2SO4 with and without the presence of methanol (deposition time of 125 s). (b) Schematic illustratation of the process of hydrogen generation viaMnO2 nanosheets using methanol as hole acceptor. (c) Photocurrent–time behaviour of MnO2 nanosheets with different deposition times in the presence of methanol after subtracting baselines.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photocurrents generated in an electrolyte of 0.1 M Na2SO4 with 5 M methanol (deposition time of 125 s) by using long wavelength pass filtered light in alternating periods of 30 s of light followed by 30 s of dark (labels under peaks specify filter cut-off wavelength, 275 nm is the cut-off of the pyrex glass electrochemical cell).	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  (a) The dependence of the saturated photocurrent on sodium formate and methanol concentration; inset, comparison of photocurrent–time in the presence of methanol and sodium formate after subtracting baselines. (b) The plot of the reciprocal saturated photocurrent as a function of the reciprocal sodium formate and methanol concentration.	 
ηhv = A(L + W)(hv − Eg)m	(5)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photocurrent action spectrum for MnO2 nanosheets in the presence of sodium formate and methanol at 1 V vs.Ag/AgCl. (b) Variation of the square root of IPCE (η) times hv with photon energy for MnO2 nanosheets.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky plot of MnO2 nanosheets; inset, equivalent circuit.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm14355g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
