From Ni-YSZ to sulfur -tolerant anode materials for SOFCs: electrochemical behavior, in situ characterization, modeling, and future perspectives  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01758F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01758F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4380-4409Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsFrom Ni-YSZ to sulfur-tolerant anode materials for SOFCs: electrochemical behavior, in situ characterization, modeling, and future perspectives

        
          
            Zhe 
            Cheng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jeng-Han 
            Wang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            YongMan 
            Choi‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. C. 
            Lin
          
        
      cd and 

        
          
            Meilin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ae
aCenter for Innovative Fuel Cell and Battery Technologies, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA. E-mail: meilin.liu@mse.gatech.edu;   Tel: +1-404-894-6114
bDepartment of Chemistry, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, 11677, Taiwan, ROC
cDepartment of Chemistry, Emory University, 1515 Dickey Drive, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA
dCenter for Interdisciplinary Molecular Science, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, 30010, Taiwan, ROC
eWorld Class University (WCU), UNIST, South Korea
Received 
      17th May 2011
    , Accepted 8th July 2011First published on 26th August 2011AbstractSolid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) offer great promise for the most efficient and cost-effective conversion to electricity of a wide variety of fuels such as hydrocarbons, coal gas, and gasified carbonaceous solids. However, the conventional Ni-YSZ (yttria-stabilized zirconia) anode is highly susceptible to deactivation (poisoning) by contaminants commonly encountered in readily available fuels, especially sulfur-containing compounds. Thus, one of the critical challenges facing the realization of fuel-flexible and cost-effective SOFC systems is the development of sulfur-tolerant anode materials. This perspective article aims at providing a comprehensive review of materials that have been studied as anodes for SOFCs, the electrochemical behavior of various anode materials in H2S-contaminated fuels, experimental methods for ex situ and in situ characterizations of species and phases formed on anode surfaces upon exposure to H2S-containing fuels, mechanisms for the interactions between H2S and anode surfaces as predicted from density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and possible strategies of minimizing or eliminating the effect of sulfur poisoning. While significant progress has been made in developing alternative anode materials with better sulfur tolerance, in probing and mapping electrode surface species relevant to sulfur poisoning, and in unraveling the mechanisms of H2S–anode interactions using both computational and experimental approaches, many challenges still remain to bridge the gaps between models at different scales or between theoretical predictions and experimental observations. An important new direction for future research is to develop a predictive multi-scale (from DFT to continuum) computational framework, through a rigorous validation at each scale by carefully-designed experiments performed under in situ conditions, for rational design of better sulfur-tolerant anode materials and structures for a new generation of SOFCs to be powered by readily available fuels.
Zhe Cheng
Zhe Cheng is a research scientist at the Central Research & Development Division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company in Wilmington, Delaware, USA. He received his BS from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China, and both MS and PhD from Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Zhe’s PhD advisor was Professor Meilin Liu, and his thesis focused on studying sulfur-anode interaction mechanisms and developing novel sulfur-tolerant anode materials for solid oxide fuel cells. His current research is on advanced electrode materials for lithium ion batteries and new metallization and passivation materials for silicon solar cells.
Jeng-Han Wang
Jeng-Han Wang obtained his PhD in Chemistry from Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. In 2008, he accepted an Assistant Professor position in the Chemistry Department at National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan. His research interests include the investigation of mechanisms for gas-surface interfacial reactions and understanding the fundamental chemistry of heterogeneous catalysts for the better design of novel materials. His current research activities focus on the reforming of carbon-containing feedstocks for hydrogen production.
Meilin Liu
Meilin Liu is a Regents' Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and Co-Director of the Center for Innovative Fuel Cell and Battery Technologies at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. He received his BS from South China University of Technology and MS and PhD from University of California at Berkeley. His research interests include in situ characterization and multi-scale modeling of charge and mass transfer along surfaces, across interfaces, and in membranes, thin films, and nanostructured electrodes, aiming at achieving rational design of materials and structures with unique functionalities for efficient energy storage and conversion.

Broader context
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) offer great prospects for the most efficient utilization of a wide variety of chemical fuels, from hydrocarbon fuels to carbonaceous solid fuels (such as coal, biomass, and municipal solid waste). For example, combined-heat-and-power systems based on SOFCs are twice as efficient as today's coal-fired power plants, potentially reducing CO2 emission by 50%. Before SOFCs can be widely adopted, however, several hurdles must be overcome: high cost, poor durability, and anode deactivation or degradation by contaminants, especially sulfur in a variety of readily available fuels. Even renewable hydrocarbon sources like biogas also contain sulfur contaminants. Thus, the development of sulfur-tolerant anode materials and structures represents a grand challenge facing the commercialization of economically competitive SOFCs. To date, extensive efforts have been devoted to gaining a profound understanding of the sulfur–anode interactions using both experimental and theoretical approaches and have led to discoveries of some promising alternative anode materials that display superior sulfur tolerance while maintaining high performance and ease of fabrication. These findings would not only advance the SOFC technology but also benefit research in other related areas like desulfurization catalysts for fuel processing and materials for corrosion inhibition in sulfur-containing environments.

1 Introduction
The demand for clean, secure, and sustainable energy sources has stimulated great interests in fuel cells, electrochemical devices that directly convert the energy of a chemical fuel to electricity. Among all types of fuel cells, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) offer great prospects for the most efficient utilization of various readily available carbon-containing fuels1–5 such as natural gas,6–9 gasified coal,10–14 and other solid carbonaceous fuels including municipal solid waste and biomass.15–17 For example, simulations have shown that SOFC systems run on natural gas or gasified coal can be much more efficient than today's combustion-based power generation systems, considerably reducing CO2 emission.5,18–24
Schematically shown in Fig. 1 is a single SOFC based on a solid oxide electrolyte that conducts oxygen ions and/or protons. The three key components of each individual cell include a gas impermeable layer of ceramic electrolyte, a porous anode where the fuel is electrochemically oxidized, and a porous cathode where the oxidant (usually oxygen from the air) is electrochemically reduced. The state-of-the-art SOFCs are based on yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) electrolyte and Ni-YSZ cermet anodes. The prevailing cathodes for commercial use are strontium-doped lanthanum manganese oxide (La1−xSrxMnO3−δ, LSM) or strontium-doped lanthanum cobalt-iron oxide (La1−xSrxCoyFe1−yO3−δ, LSCF).
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic for an SOFC single cell and (b) a cross-sectional view (SEM micrograph) of a single cell with a thin (∼12 μm) electrolyte. 
However, one crucial problem associated with using hydrocarbon fuels in SOFCs is that most of those fuels contain sulfur compounds to some extent, which are converted to gaseous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) upon reforming,8,17,25 and the current Ni-YSZ anodes for SOFCs as well as the reforming catalysts (if an external reforming is performed) are readily deactivated or poisoned by such sulfur contaminants. As a result, a desulfurization unit is usually added in typical SOFC systems before the reformer or the anode (in the case of internal reforming),5 as schematically shown in Fig. 2, which adds complexity and cost and decreases system efficiency. Furthermore, in the effort to lower the operating temperature (to 750 °C and below)26 so that cheaper metallic materials could be used for interconnection, researchers have found that the critical sulfur concentration at which sulfur poisoning becomes significant also decreases precipitously as the cell operating temperature is reduced (e.g., ∼0.05 parts-per-million, ppm, at 750 °C),27 making sulfur removal extremely demanding and sulfur poisoning a problem of even greater importance and urgency.
 Fig. 2  A simplified schematic for an SOFC system. 
In the past few decades, extensive efforts have been devoted to characterizing sulfur poisoning behavior of conventional Ni-YSZ cermet anodes, unraveling the mechanism of sulfur poisoning, and developing alternative anode materials with enhanced sulfur tolerance. This perspective article aims to provide a comprehensive review of the current understanding of sulfur–anode interactions under typical SOFC operating conditions. In Section 2, we start with a brief discussion of the general requirements for SOFC anode materials, the characteristics of the conventional Ni-YSZ cermet anodes, and the sulfur poisoning behavior of Ni-YSZ anodes. In Section 3, we then present the behavior of various alternative anode materials that have been explored for sulfur tolerance. In Section 4, we focus on in situ and ex situ characterizations of the interactions between anode materials and H2S as well as some new insights into the interpretation of the results. In Section 5, we summarize the current status in calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) for prediction of energetics, reaction sequence, and intermediates of the interactions between H2S and anode/electrolyte, Further, ab initio atomistic thermodynamics calculations are applied to rationalize the conditions that favor sulfur poisoning and/or regeneration and to identify the bulk and surface phases resulted from the poisoning process. These fundamental understandings are vital to revealing the atomistic mechanism for sulfur–anode interactions and have provided us with useful insights into the design of new sulfur-tolerant anode materials. In Section 6, we focus on a new approach to achieving sulfur tolerance using Ba(Ce1−xZrx)O3-based materials as the electrolyte phase in the cermet anode while keeping Ni as the primary electronic conductor and electro-catalyst. The hypotheses regarding sulfur removal reactions for such anodes are also provided. Finally, we provide in Section 7 some concluding remarks and future perspectives in the design of better anode materials for a new generation of SOFCs to be powered by readily available and renewable fuels.
2 Electrochemical behavior of the Ni-YSZ anode in sulfur-containing fuels
2.1. General requirements for SOFC anodes and properties of Ni-YSZ cermet anode
As discussed earlier in various review articles,28–34 the general requirements for SOFC anode materials include high electronic conductivity, excellent catalytic activity towards electro-oxidation of fuels, sufficient ionic conductivity to extend the active sites beyond the anode–electrolyte interfaces, suitable porosity to allow the fuel molecules to flow towards and reaction products away from the active sites, adequate durability and compatibility with other SOFC components during cell fabrication and operation, robust mechanical and thermal stability, easy fabrication, and low cost. In addition, other desirable (but may not yet be fully achieved) properties35 include tolerances to carbon deposition,36 sulfur poisoning,33,35 and re-oxidation.37
For SOFCs based on the YSZ electrolyte, porous metal-ceramic composites or cermets, especially Ni-YSZ cermets, are the most widely used anodes among many materials explored. The electrical conductivities of nickel metal, YSZ (in particular, 8 mol% yttria stabilized zirconia or 8YSZ), and a typical Ni-YSZ cermet (with a volume ratio of 8YSZ to Ni of 40:60 and a porosity of 30%) at elevated temperatures (e.g., 700–1000 °C) are on the order of ∼104 S cm−1, 10−2 to 10−1 S cm−1, and ∼102 to 103 S cm−1, respectively.35 In cell fabrication, the precursor of nickel, nickel oxide (NiO), is often co-fired with the YSZ electrolyte. The relatively low solubility of NiO in YSZ (∼2 to 5%)38 allows co-firing of the NiO-YSZ anode supported thin YSZ electrolyte at high temperatures (∼1450 °C). The catalytic activity of the Ni-YSZ anode toward oxidation of clean H2 is excellent, and at temperatures < ∼800 °C, anode polarization resistance decreases dramatically with increasing current density.39 YSZ, NiO, and Ni have average coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) of ∼11.0 × 10−6 K−1, ∼14.0 × 10−6 K−1, and ∼14.6 × 10−6 K−1, respectively, and a typical Ni-YSZ cermet anode has an average CTE of ∼12.5 × 10−6 K−1, which is a reasonable match with that for the 8YSZ electrolyte.40–42 (Note average CTE is used because the CTE for these materials usually varies slightly with temperature in the range of ∼20 to 1000 °C.) The mechanical strength of Ni-YSZ cermet is on the order of 100 MPa,28,43 which is about one half of that for dense YSZ.44 It is a reasonable value considering that the Ni-YSZ cermet anode in the reduced state usually has a porosity of ∼30% and a Ni to YSZ volume ratio from approximately 30:70 to 60:40.35 While the coarsening of Ni grains and associated performance degradation have been reported in the literature,32,45 commercial SOFC stacks based on Ni-YSZ cermet anodes, especially those with tubular structures, have successfully demonstrated stable operation for tens of thousands of hours with very little degradation at temperatures as high as 900–1000 °C,18,46–49 indicating that the stability for the Ni-YSZ cermet anode is adequate under SOFC operating conditions when the composition and microstructures are optimized.
2.2. Sulfur poisoning behavior of Ni-YSZ cermet anodes
Schematically illustrated in Fig. 3 is a typical experimental arrangement for electrochemical measurements of an electrolyte-supported SOFC button cell, which is commonly used for detailed investigation into the sulfur poisoning behavior of anode materials under different conditions. With properly positioned reference electrodes, the anodic polarization resistance and the degree of anode poisoning (or the increase in anode polarization resistance due to sulfur poisoning) can be determined from 3 (or 4)-electrode measurements using different electrochemical techniques like impedance spectroscopy. Alternative cell designs for proper positioning of reference electrodes are available elsewhere.50,51
 Fig. 3  Schematic for the electrochemical measurement system for an SOFC button cell with reference electrodes on both anode and cathode sides. 
Schematically shown in Fig. 4 are different sulfur poisoning behaviors observed for SOFCs with Ni-YSZ anodes upon exposure to hydrogen contaminated with low concentration (ppm level) H2S. In all cases, there is a rapid initial drop in power output upon exposure to ppm-level H2S, which is associated with a large and rapid increase in anode polarization resistance and has been the focus of most studies in the literature.27,35,52–61 In this section, we will provide a review of the sulfur poisoning behavior of conventional Ni-YSZ anodes with a focus on clarifying the effects of various factors on the observed initial rapid sulfur poisoning, including operating conditions (e.g., temperature and gas concentration), cell structures, and materials used. The mechanism for the initial rapid degradation due to sulfur poisoning will also be discussed based on observed electrochemical behavior and theoretical modeling. In addition, different behaviors have been observed for Ni-YSZ anodes after exposure to a sulfur-containing fuel for a long period of time, as schematically shown in Fig. 4. The behavior during long-term exposure, together with the regeneration process for Ni-YSZ anodes, will also be discussed at the end of this section.
 Fig. 4  Schematic for power output versus time for SOFCs with Ni-YSZ cermet anode showing sulfur poisoning with rapid initial degradation followed by different 2ndstage behaviors: (solid line) no 2ndstage slow degradation: power output saturates right after initial rapid degradation; (dotted line) a slow 2ndstage degradation followed by a steady state; (dashed line) a slow 2ndstage degradation showing no steady state after very long time (e.g., thousands of hours). 

2.2.1. Effects of operating temperature. 
•Normal operating temperatures (>∼650 °C). 
Operating temperature significantly influences the observed sulfur poisoning behavior of a Ni-YSZ anode. Typically, the observed relative drop in power output due to sulfur poisoning, ΔPr = (P − PS)/P (in which P and PS are power output before and after initial quick sulfur poisoning, respectively), increases with decreasing temperature (except when the cells operated at a temperature ≤∼650 °C as to be discussed later). For example, Singhal et al. observed that at a current density of 160 mA cm−2, 2 ppm H2S in the fuel led to a drop in cell voltage by 2% and 9% at 1000 °C and 900 °C, respectively.52 This is corroborated later by Matsuzaki and Yasuda's study on the anode interfacial resistance: under open circuit conditions, the anodic interfacial resistance increased by 18% and 72% at 1000 °C and 900 °C, respectively, upon exposure to 2 ppm H2S, while at 750 °C, 0.7 ppm H2S resulted in an increase in anode interfacial resistance by as much as 105%.27 Presented in Fig. 5 are the effects of temperature as well as pH2S/pH2 on the relative power output drop ΔPr due to sulfur poisoning for SOFC button cells reported by Zha et al.54
 Fig. 5  Relative power output drop due to sulfur poisoning, ΔPr, versus pH2S/pH2 at different temperatures for the electrolyte-supported SOFC button cell operated at a constant voltage of 0.7 V. Adopted from Zha et al.54 with modifications. 
•Complications at very low temperatures. 
As the cell operating temperature is reduced to ∼650 °C or lower, the observed apparent trend in relative power output drop due to sulfur poisoning ΔPr could change. For example, Zha et al. found that ΔPr actually became smaller with decreasing temperature for an electrolyte-supported button cell in a fuel with pH2S/pH2 = 1 ppm: 12% at 700 °C, 8% at 650 °C, and 6% at 600 °C.62 This appears opposite to the trend observed at 700 °C and above, as shown in Fig. 5: 4% at 900 °C, 8% at 800 °C, and 12% at 700 °C. Unfortunately, no additional information regarding anode/electrolyte interfacial impedance or polarization was available to pinpoint the exact cause of these trends.
The change in observed poisoning behavior with temperature at ∼650 °C and below is due most likely to the change in relative contribution of the anode to the total resistance of the cell. At higher temperatures, the relative increase in anode polarization resistance due to sulfur poisoning ΔRSpa_r = (RSpa − Rpa)/Rpa (in which Rpa and RSpa are anode polarization resistances before and after initial quick sulfur poisoning, respectively) has a greater impact on the total cell resistance51 and, thus, on the observed ΔPr. In contrast, at lower temperatures (e.g., ∼650 °C and below), although ΔRSpa_r might be larger due to (slightly) higher sulfur coverage on nickel,63–66 (see Section 5) the relative impact of anode sulfur poisoning on total cell resistance becomes less significant as cathode polarization contributes more to the total cell resistance,51,67 leading to the observed decrease in ΔPr.


2.2.2. Effects of H2S, H2, H2O, CO, and CO2 concentrations. 
•H2S. 
Since the equilibrium coverage of adsorbed sulfur on the nickel surface increases with the H2S concentration in the fuel at a given temperature,63–66 (see Section 5.2.1) the relative change in anode polarization resistance due to sulfur poisoning ΔRSpa_r increases with H2S concentration. Fig. 6 shows the data reported by Matsuzaki: at 900 °C, ΔRSpa_r increased first rapidly and then gradually as the pH2S/pH2 increased from 0.5 ppm to 8 ppm.27 Similar behavior was also observed in the relative drop in power output ΔPr, as seen in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 6  Relative increase in anode interfacial resistance, ΔRSpa_r, versus pH2S/pH2 for Ni-YSZ cermet anodes at 750 and 900 °C. Data from Matsuzaki and Yasuda.27 
A striking feature with H2S poisoning is the sensitivity of the Ni-YSZ anode towards the minuscule (sub ppm-level) concentration of H2S at intermediate to low temperatures. For example, Matsuzaki and Yasuda found that, at 750 °C, the polarization resistance for the Ni-YSZ cermet anode increased by ∼28% when the pH2S/pH2 was only 0.05 ppm, as shown in Fig. 6.27 Such high sensitivity at intermediate temperatures had also been observed by others under similar conditions. For example, at 750 °C with only 0.1 ppm H2S, Waldbillig et al. reported that the cell voltage dropped ∼10% at a constant current density of 500 mA cm−2,61 while Sprenkle et al. reported that the cell current density dropped by ∼30% at a constant voltage of 0.7 V.57,68
It should be noted that the apparent influence of H2S concentration on sulfur poisoning depends also on temperature. For example, at 900 °C, changing the sulfur concentration from 0.5 to 8 ppm led to an increase of ΔRSpa_r from 37% to 108%, as seen in Fig. 6.27 In contrast, our study shows that at 600 °C the change in ΔPr or total cell interfacial resistance was almost negligible when the pH2S/pH2 increased from 1 to 10 ppm.62 As discussed earlier in Section 2.2.1, such behavior is related to the relative contribution of the anode to the total resistance of the cell at different temperatures. It is also related to the intrinsic adsorption behavior of sulfur on nickel, as to be discussed later in Section 5.2.1.
•H2 and H2O. 
The effect of H2 concentration on sulfur poisoning behavior is not pronounced under typical operating conditions. For example, Li et al. found that increasing the H2 concentration from 27% to 53% has no observable effect on the sulfur poisoning behavior.69 On the other hand, at a low temperature of 600 °C, Lohsoontorn et al. observed that cells with the Ni-gadolinia doped ceria (GDC) anode underwent an obvious increase in anodic interfacial resistance when the H2 concentration was decreased from 97% to 9.7% and the poisoning became less reversible.70

Similarly, the effect of water vapor concentration on sulfur poisoning appears insignificant under typical operating conditions.54 On the other hand, Li et al. found that using a fuel with very high H2S concentration (pH2S/pH2 of 0.2% or 2000 ppm), higher water vapor concentration in the fuel seems to slow down the poisoning process and reduce the observed relative drop in power output due to sulfur poisoning (ΔPr): at 800 °C under a constant current density of 0.5 A cm−2, the cell voltage drop was 180 mV, 161 mV, and 108 mV when the fuel water vapor content was 0%, 3%, and 10%, respectively.71 It is also noted that in an experiment using Ni-YSZ as the catalyst for reforming (not under SOFC conditions), the presence of H2O in the fuel stream leads to enhanced SO2 desorption.72
•CO and CO2. 
CO may exert dramatic influence on the extent of sulfur poisoning only when the molar ratio of H2 to CO is very low.11,53,69,73 For example, Sasaki et al. found that for fuel mixtures of H2 and CO, the effect of CO concentration on ΔPr was relatively small until the H2 to CO ratio was 1 to 9 or lower and the shift reaction became ineffective due to sulfur poisoning, thus limiting the hydrogen supply.53 In addition, Li et al. found that the effect of CO was more significant in the regeneration process: cell performance recovered much slower in a H2–CO fuel mixture than in hydrogen upon removal of H2S.69
In contrast, CO2 concentration has no observable effect on sulfur poisoning. For example, the behavior of a Ni-YSZ anode running in a spent fuel consisting of 85% CO2, 10% CO, and 5% H2 at 1000 °C upon exposure to 50 ppm H2S73 appears similar to that observed in CO2-free fuels.
•Hydrocarbons. 
According to the study by Rasmussen and Hagen, in the presence of low concentration of light hydrocarbons like methane, the sulfur poisoning behavior for the Ni-YSZ anode is not significantly influenced, but the internal reforming activity is dramatically reduced.74 High concentration of hydrocarbon or heavy hydrocarbons (e.g., butane, octane, diesel, or kerosene) would make the reaction process much more complicated due to the complex natures of reforming and other associated reactions like thermal cracking and carbon deposition, and they are beyond the scope of this paper.
To summarize, of common gas species in the fuel, the H2S concentration, in particular pH2S/pH2, has the greatest impact on the observed sulfur poisoning behavior, while the concentration of other gaseous species only matters under certain, sometimes extreme, conditions.


2.2.3. Effects of anodic polarization (current density or voltage). 
•Observed effects on ΔPr and ΔRcell_r and related hypothesis. 
As to the influence of anodic polarization or current density/voltage on the observed sulfur poisoning behavior, the following are some common observations. First, the relationship between observed relative drop in cell power output due to sulfur poisoning ΔPr and cell current density/voltage depends on the operating conditions: under constant voltage (potentiostatic) conditions, ΔPr tends to decrease with increasing polarization (i.e., higher current density),54,55,57 while under constant current (galvanostatic) conditions, ΔPr tends to increase with increasing polarization (i.e., higher current density).52,55,57,61 The different trends in ΔPr with respect to anodic polarization observed under constant voltage versus constant current conditions have been explained by Cheng et al. using circuit analysis55 and by Sprenkle et al. via comparing the changes in I–V curves before and after sulfur poisoning.57 Second, the observed relative increase in total cell resistance due to sulfur poisoning, ΔRcell_r = (RScell − Rcell)/Rcell (in which Rcell and RScell are the total cell resistance before and after sulfur poisoning, respectively), tends to decrease with increasing polarization (i.e., higher cell current density or lower cell terminal voltage) no matter whether the measurement is carried out under constant voltage or constant current conditions.55
The above observation leads to the hypothesis that larger oxygen ion flux induced by higher current density may lead to increased electrochemical oxidation of sulfur species on the anode via the following reaction53–55 S* + 2O2− = SO2(g) + 4e−,(1)or S* + 2Oxo = SO2(g) + 2Vo˙˙ + 4e−.(2)where S* represents an adsorbed sulfur atom on the anode surface. The electrochemical oxidation of sulfur may diminish the degree of sulfur poisoning via reducing the sulfur surface coverage on the anode.
•Other different observations on ΔRSpa_r. 
However, it is noted that the observations made above are based on single cell tests using a two-electrode configuration so that the anodic interfacial resistance cannot be separated from the total cell resistance. For studies that actually separate anode polarization from cathode, the result seems to be quite different. For example, Primdahl and Mogensen found that at 1000 °C the relative increase in anode polarization resistance upon exposure to 35 ppm H2S, ΔRSpa_r did not change as the anodic current density was increased from zero (i.e., open circuit conditions) to 100 mA cm−2.75 One possibility is that the higher anodic current density did not impact the extent of sulfur poisoning under the conditions they investigated. Another speculation is that there may be some decrease in the degree of sulfur poisoning due to surface sulfur removal by the oxygen ions, but that was countered by a small increase in mass transfer resistance under the testing conditions. More careful electrochemical measurements or direct chemical identification are required to fully understand the implications.
•Non-linear behavior of interfacial polarization. 
It is well known that the polarization resistance of an electrode depends on the current or overpotential (η) except in the linear region near equilibrium, where the polarization resistance approaches the “charge transfer resistance” defined as j → 0 or η → 0. Clearly when the cell current density (j) is sufficiently small, it is linearly related to the anode overpotential (ηa) as follows:76 ηa = jRpa(3)where the anode polarization resistance (Rpa) is related to the anode exchange current density (j0) and the anodic and cathodic transference numbers (αa and αc) by (4)
Then, the anode polarization resistance before poisoning Rpa and after sulfur poisoning RSpa should have the following relationship: (5)if the anodic and cathodic transference numbers remain the same after sulfur poisoning. Under this assumption, the relative increase in anode polarization resistance due to sulfur poisoning, ΔRSpa_r, will be (6)
Therefore, ΔRSpa_r would be independent of anode polarization (current density or anode overpotential).
Similarly, the observed difference in cell terminal voltage before sulfur poisoning, U, and after sulfur poisoning, US, at the same current density should depend linearly on current as follows: ΔU = U − Us = ηSa − ηa = jRSpa − jRpa = j(RSpa − Rpa),(7)because the resistances of the cathode and the electrolyte are expected to remain constant. This has also been confirmed by experimental observation: Fig. 7 shows the current–voltage curves as well ΔU for cells before and after poisoning by H2S (pH2S/pH2 = 11.8 ppm) at 750 °C for an anode-supported button cell, and ΔU has good linear dependence on the current density with a linear correlation coefficient better than 0.999 when j < ∼78 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 7  Plots of cell voltage and the difference in anode overpotential ΔU = ηSa − ηaversus cell current density for an anode-supported SOFC button cell before and after H2S (pH2S/pH2 = 11.8 ppm) was introduced into the fuel stream of 50% H2/1.5% H2O/48.5% N2 at 750 °C. 
In contrast, in the Tafel region (without mass transfer limitation), the relationship between the anode overpotential ηa and anodic current density j can be described as follows, (8)where a is a constant that can be determined from experiments. Thus, the anode polarization resistance Rpa can be estimated as (9)
After sulfur poisoning, we have (10) (11)
Although a and aS are unknown, the following relationship holds for the anode polarization resistance before and after sulfur poisoning at a given current density: (12)
The relative change in anode polarization resistance is then given by, (13)
This expression implies that, in the Tafel region, ΔRSpa_rdecreases with current density regardless of the ratio of aS to a because jS0 < j0 < j. This is the nature of Tafel polarization; suggesting that a decrease in ΔRSpa_r with increasing current density does not necessarily mean that it is due to reduced degree of sulfur poisoning via reduced sulfur coverage.
In conclusion, these electrochemical measurements alone may not be able to provide critical insights into the effect of cell operating conditions (current or voltage) on the degree of sulfur poisoning. More careful electrochemical measurements on well-designed test cells alongside with direct chemical identification of surface species are required to gain insight into the mechanism of sulfur poisoning processes.
For simple electrochemical measurements, the anode polarization resistance under open circuit conditions (as determined from impedance spectroscopy) or anode exchange current density is the most direct representation of the degree of sulfur poisoning. Marina et al. reported that exchange current densities for SrxLa1−xTiO3 (LST)-based anodes obtained from impedance analysis under close to equilibrium conditions do match those extrapolated from polarization curves in the Tafel regions for different concentrations of H2S.77


2.2.4. Effects of anode structure. 
The anode structure or the content of Ni in the Ni-YSZ cermet anode will also influence the time it takes for the cell to reach a steady state after exposure to H2S. For example, for electrolyte-supported or cathode-supported cells with relatively thin anodes, the initial quick poisoning process completes in a relatively short period of time, sometimes just a few minutes.53,54 In contrast, for anode-supported cells with relatively thick anodes, the initial quick poisoning process may last for hours or even days, depending on the H2S concentration, the amount of available anode, and even the fuel flow rate and utilization. For example, in the study by Sprenkle et al. on anode-supported button cells as shown in Table 1, the time for the initial quick poisoning process to complete is 120 h, 20 h, and 2 h when the H2S concentration was 0.1 ppm, 1 ppm, and 10 ppm, respectively.57,61,68 Similar observation was also made by other researchers.62 The reason is easy to understand: the adsorption of sulfur on Ni (see Section 5) will propagate from the outer layer to the inner active layer of anode. Therefore, for a cell with a thick anode (∼500 μm) as in an anode-supported cell, it would take a longer time for all Ni surfaces to reach a steady state of sulfur coverage; in contrast, for a cell with a thin anode (∼30 μm), it would take less time for the Ni surfaces to reach a similar level of sulfur coverage.
Table 1 Summary of reported time (in hours) for the quick poisoning stage to finish for different SOFC button cells in different studies




Cell structure
References
Conditions
Time for quick poisoning to finish/hours



pH2S/pH2 (ppm)


0.1
1
10




Anode-supported cell
Cheng62
750 °C, 0.2 A cm−2
—
40
3.5


Waldbillig et al.61
750 °C, 0.5 A cm−2
200
30
—


Sprenkle et al.57,68
750 °C, 0.7 V
120
20
2


Yang et al.82
750 °C, 0.4 A cm−2


32
15


Electrolyte-supported cell
Zha
800 °C, 0.7 V
—
0.1
0.05






2.2.5. Effects of other cell components (i.e., electrolyte and cathode). 
Although only the polarization resistance of the anode is influenced by sulfur in the fuel, the electrolyte and cathode will have an indirect impact on the observed relative changes in cell power output ΔPr or in total cell resistance ΔRCell_r due to sulfur poisoning. For example, an anode-supported cell (with a thicker anode) shows a more severe drop in power output upon exposure to a sulfur-containing fuel than an electrolyte-supported cell (with a thinner anode). As the electrolyte or cathode resistances decrease (so that the total cell resistance is more dominated by the anode), ΔRCell_r would increase more due to the higher contribution of the anode polarization resistance, leading to larger ΔPr. An example of this is shown in Table 2 for anode-supported cells with the same anode and electrolyte, but with different cathode materials. As the cathode material is changed from LSM-based material to LSCF-based material, both ΔPr and ΔRCell_r usually increase due to the higher contribution of the anode to the total cell resistance as the LSCF cathode normally shows lower polarization resistance than LSM, especially under small bias conditions.
Table 2 Comparison of relative cell power output drop ΔPr and calculated relative cell internal resistance increase ΔRCell_r for anode-supported cells with different cathode materials upon exposure to different concentrations of H2S




Cathode material and cell current density
Relative power output drop ΔPr
Relative increase in total cell resistance ΔRCell_r


1 ppm
10 ppm
1 ppm
10 ppm




LSM, 200 mA cm−2
—
10.6%
—
37%


LSCF, 200 mA cm−2
7.9%
11.5%
60%
68%


LSM, 400 mA cm−2
10%
14.2%
27%
36%


LSCF, 400 mA cm−2
8.5%
13.0%
30%
54%






2.2.6. Mechanism of the initial quick sulfur poisoning. 
We would like to pause here and discuss briefly about the sulfur poisoning mechanism for the Ni-YSZ cermet anode based on results from electrochemical measurements. As stated, sulfur poisoning of the Ni-YSZ cermet anode is characterized by a rapid initial drop in power output upon exposure to sulfur-containing fuels. The subsequent slower degradation as observed in some studies is discussed in the next section. Thermodynamic analysis indicates that bulk sulfides (nickel sulfides in particular) would not form under the typical SOFC operating conditions when the H2S concentration is in the low ppm range. For example, at 750 °C, nickel sulfides like Ni3S2 do not form until pH2S/pH2 is higher than ∼3600 ppm, and the YSZ anode has been shown to be stable against H2S for up to the percentage level.78 In contrast, it is observed that the performance of a Ni-YSZ anode drops dramatically when the pH2S/pH2 is only 0.05 ppm at that temperature.27 This indicates that the degradation in performance (i.e., sulfur poisoning) in low concentrations of H2S under typical SOFC operating conditions is due not to formation of nickel sulfides but to adsorption of sulfur on the anode surface. This is also consistent with the observation that the rapid initial drops in performance come to completion within just a few minutes for thin anodes (∼30 μm).
Various analysis approaches have been explored to fit the experimental data into existing adsorption models. For example, Marina et al. measured exchange current density from polarization curves before (j0) and after sulfur poisoning jS0, and calculated the equilibrium surface coverage ratio of sulfur on anode θS assuming θS = 1 − jS0/j0.77 However, the data fitting for the Ni-YSZ anode to the Langmuir isotherm is inconclusive due to limited amount of data.
On the other hand, Hansen and Rostrup-Nielsen used a Temkin-like isotherm for describing sulfur adsorption59,60,64 (14)with a ΔH00 of 289 kJ mol−1, a ΔS0 of −19 J mol−1 K−1, and a α of 0.69. The equilibrium surface coverage could be calculated as (15)
Hansen fitted the relative drop in power output ΔPr data by Zha et al. and Cheng et al. with respect to calculated sulfur surface coverage θS and obtained a linear relationship. The intercept for zero ΔPr on the θS axis is ∼0.55 to 0.60 instead of zero.59
Because ΔPr is influenced by other factors such as electrolyte and cathode, an even more straightforward fitting is obtained by plotting the relative anode exchange current density jS0/j0versus sulfur surface coverage θS (calculated from the Temkin-like isotherm in eqn (15)), and the result is shown in Fig. 8 using data available in the literature. (Note jS0/j0 is calculated from relative change in anode polarization resistance under open circuit conditions mentioned in ref. 27 and 54.) This time, the relative exchange current density jS0/j0 decreases linearly from unity towards zero as the sulfur surface coverage θS increases from 0.5 towards 1. The deviation at high surface coverage may be attributed to the limitation of the Temkin model under that condition.60 It is interesting to note that, according to the fitting, the exchange current density is not impacted until the sulfur surface coverage is higher than ∼0.5.
 Fig. 8  Change of calculated relative exchange current density jS0/j0versus calculated sulfur surface coverage on Ni surface θS using data in the literature.27,54,77 


2.2.7. Long-term sulfur poisoning behavior. 

Table 3 summarizes different long-term sulfur poisoning behaviors reported for SOFCs with the Ni-YSZ anode over extended periods of time (i.e., hundreds of hours or even longer). As illustrated in Fig. 4, some studies show the cell power output reaches a steady state right after the initial quick poisoning stage. For example, in the study of Feduska and Isenberg, even though the initial pH2S/pH2 value was as high as 1000 ppm, no further performance degradation was observed in the next 800 h after the initial response reached a steady state in a few hours.73 A similar phenomenon (i.e., quick saturation of sulfur poisoning) was also observed by other researchers79–82 with much lower H2S concentration (e.g., 0.1 to 1 ppm).
Table 3 Summary of the studies involving long-term sulfur poisoning tests for solid oxide fuel cells




References
Cell/stack structure

T/°C
Fuel utilization (%)

j/mA cm−2

pH2S/pH2 (ppm)
Observations about the 2ndstage slow poisoning


Time/h
Reached saturation?





a Ni-GDC anode.
b Estimated fuel utilization value.
c Initial current density under constant voltage conditions.
d Using the Ceramabond® 552 sealant.
e Using the G-18 sealant.





Feduska and Isenberg73
7 cathode supported tubular cell stacks
1000
N/A
150
333–1000
Not observed for 800 h


Iritani et al.81
22 cathode supported tubular cell stacks
900
60%
200
1
Not observed for 530 h


Batawi et al.80
5-cell stack
950?
N/A
200
100
Not observed for 450 h


Maskalick et al.79,83
Single cathode supported tubular cell
1000
85%
350
0.1
Not observed for 500 h


1000, 1025
85%
350
1
1500
No


1000
N/A
350
5
450
No


Singhal et al.52
Cathode-supported?
1000
N/A
250
10
80
No


Trembly et al.11
Single electrolyte-supported cella
850
40%b
200
837
450
Yes


Sprenkle et al.57,68
Single anode-supported button cell
750
N/A
1100c
0.1, 1, 10
200
No


Zha et al.54
Single electrolyte-supported button cell
800
<5%b
250c
2
24
No


800
<5%b
250c
100
120
No


Yang et al.82
Single anode-supported button cell
750
<5%
200–800
1–10
1000d
No


750
<5%
200–400
1–11
Not observed for 3000 he


Hagen et al.84
Single anode-supported cell
850
<32%b
1000
15
500
No




However, some other studies show that, in addition to the initial quick poisoning effect, the cell power output continues to degrade with a much slower but still significant rate (usually in an almost linear way) for a long period of time. Zha et al.,54 Sprenkle et al.,57 and Ishikura et al.58 named this continued degradation 2ndstage slower poisoning. Within this category, there are also two different scenarios. Some studies show that the 2ndstage slower poisoning reaches saturation after some time,11 while others show continued degradation that lasts for hundreds or even thousands of hours without showing any signs of reaching saturation.52,54,61,82–84
It is not clear what causes such 2ndstage slower poisoning that lasts for a very long time. It would certainly be difficult to explain from the sulfur adsorption point of view. Bulk sulfidation of either Ni or YSZ also seems unlikely as they are thermodynamically unfavorable, especially for those studies using only low ppm of H2S.52,57,58,61,83 It is unlikely due to the degradation of other cell components since the drop in performance usually appears to be much more severe than those observed in fuels without sulfur.54,57,58 On the other hand, the study by Hagen and co-workers suggests that the loss of the Ni-percolation network near the anode–electrolyte interface was observed for the Ni-YSZ anode in H2S-containing fuels under large polarization conditions, which also display 2nd stage degradation for hundreds of hours.84
Recently, the study by Yang et al. shined some light upon the possible origins for the 2ndstage slower poisoning.82 Using anode-supported button cells with Ni-YSZ anode and LSCF cathode, Yang observed that button cells sealed with different sealants showed different 2ndstage behavior: for example, at 750 °C in a fuel with 1 ppm pH2S/pH2 under a constant current density of 200 mA cm−2, cells sealed with the Ceramabond® 552 (C552) sealant showed 2ndstage slow degradation that lasted for ∼1000 h without any signs of saturation. In contrast, cells sealed with the G-18 (from Pacific Northwest National Lab, PNNL) sealant seemed to reach saturation right after the quick poisoning stage and showed no 2ndstage slow degradation. This indicates that the previously reported 2ndstage slow degradation is unlikely the inherent behavior of a Ni-YSZ anode but rather associated with other complications. Two possible explanations are as follows. First, it is possible that the anodes were contaminated by some detrimental elements in the C552 sealant, which interact unfavorably with H2S, leading to continuous poisoning of the anode, while the G18 sealant does not have such detrimental elements. Second, the cathode performance may be adversely affected by a small leakage of H2S from the anode side through the C522 sealant while there was no leakage of H2S through the G18 sealant.


2.2.8. Reversibility of sulfur poisoning. 
Upon removal of H2S from the fuel, both complete recovery27,52–54,58,73,79,85,86 and partial recovery of power outputs11,54,58,61,81,87,88 have been observed. Cell failure is rare, but still observed sometimes.53,89 From a thermodynamic point of view, sulfur poisoning should be reversible when the concentration of sulfur in the fuel is sufficiently low. In reality, however, other factors such as contamination from other cell components (e.g., sealant) and microstructural changes (due to coarsening of porous electrodes) may also influence the observed electrochemical behavior. For example, it has been reported that terracing increases on nickel surface upon exposure to H2S-containing fuels.90 It is still not clear, however, how these microstructural changes influence the electrochemical poisoning behavior. Nevertheless, the general trend is that sulfur poisoning tends to be more reversible at a higher operating temperature, in a lower H2S concentration, and for a shorter period of exposure to H2S.

3 Behaviors of alternative anode materials in sulfur-containing fuels
Because of the vulnerability of Ni-YSZ cermet anodes to sulfur contaminants, various alternative materials or material combinations have been studied as potential SOFC anodes for improved sulfur tolerance. In this section, the alternative anode materials are summarized with a particular focus on their electrochemical behavior upon exposure to sulfur-containing fuels. Since a number of previous publications have described the detailed behavior of many individual materials,33–35,91 the focus of this section will be on the general features for different types of materials and our perspectives on these materials.
3.1. Ni-YSZ cermet anodes with incorporation of other materials
Because of the superior electrochemical performance of Ni-YSZ cermet anodes in sulfur-free fuels, various approaches have been explored to modify Ni-YSZ cermet anodes via incorporation of other materials in an effort to achieve improved sulfur tolerance while maintaining excellent performance. For example, Singhal et al. reported impregnation of Ni-YSZ cermets with various oxides including doped ceria and B-site doped strontium titanium oxide (SrTi1−xMxO3), as well as high surface area nickel and cobalt metal precursors.52 Later, Sasaki et al. studied the behavior of Ni-YSZ anodes in sulfur-containing fuels modified with different materials including CeO2, Y2O3, La2O3, MgO, Nb2O5, Sc2O3, ZrO2, TiO2, Ru, CaO, Co, and Al2O3 prepared by impregnation.53 Kurokawa et al.89 and Yun et al.92 also decorated Ni-YSZ cermet with CeO2 and/or samaria doped ceria (SDC) via an infiltration process, while Smith and McEvoy infiltrated pre-reduced porous Ni-YSZ cermet anode with ammonium metatungstate.93,94 Very recently, Marina et al. incorporated Sn and Sb into the Ni-YSZ anode through in situ vapor phase deposition.95
Unfortunately, except for a few selected cases, most of the modified Ni-YSZ anodes via incorporation of foreign materials still display the typical poisoning behavior when ppm-level H2S is introduced into the fuel stream.52,53,89,92 Although many of such modified Ni-YSZ anodes are claimed to have improved sulfur tolerance over the conventional Ni-YSZ anode (based on observation of a smaller relative drop in power output due to sulfur poisoning ΔPr), the rapid initial degradation seems to be still unavoidable. It appears that the insufficient sulfur tolerance for most of these modified Ni-YSZ anodes originates from the difficulties in depositing uniform coatings with proper coverage of the porous anode surfaces. On the other hand, electron pathways may be blocked when these materials form a continuous dense film on Ni. The challenge is how to enhance sulfur tolerance without affecting other useful properties of Ni-YSZ anodes by some innovative surface modification,96 as was done for enhancing tolerance to coking of Ni-YSZ anodes.2
In addition, alternative sulfur-tolerant anode materials like Sr0.8La0.2TiO3 (SLT)97 have also been used to replace the outer layer of a Ni-YSZ support for anode-supported cells. In a fuel with pH2S/pH2 of 100 ppm, such a modified cell still experienced a rapid initial voltage drop, but the 2ndstage slower poisoning as observed in the control cell with the Ni-YSZ anode support seems to be prevented. The rapid initial degradation indicates that the SLT anode support over the thin Ni-YSZ anode could not remove the sulfur in the fuel as an outer catalyst nor eliminate the sulfur adsorption on Ni, and the mechanism for preventing the long-term slow degradation is not clear.
3.2. Ni-based cermet anodes with YSZ replaced by other oxygen ion conductors
The YSZ phase in Ni-YSZ cermet anodes has been replaced by other oxygen ion conductors in an effort to enhance sulfur tolerance. For example, Sasaki and co-workers studied Ni-scandia stabilized zirconia (Ni-ScSZ) anode53 while others studied Ni-gadolinia doped ceria (Ni-GDC) anode.11,98–100 While the relative drops in power output ΔPr for SOFCs with Ni-SSZ or Ni-GDC anodes were reported less than those with Ni-YSZ anodes, the sulfur poisoning characteristics remain similar in many cases.
First, both Ni-SSZ and Ni-GDC anodes were still sensitive to the same low level of H2S as Ni-YSZ, as evidenced by the rapid drop in cell power output upon exposure to low ppm-level H2S contaminants.53,100 The anode polarization resistance also increased dramatically: for example, the interfacial resistance of a Ni-GDC anode increased from to 0.55 to 0.75 Ohm cm2 (36% increase) upon exposure to 5 ppm H2S at 800 °C.100 Similarly, the polarization resistance of a Ni-GDC anode increased dramatically upon exposure to 0.5 ppm H2S at 715 °C.101 (However, it was reported by Ouweltjes et al. that, at 900 °C, the Ni-GDC anode showed no poisoning effect by H2S of up to 9 ppm, although it is not clear what caused the difference in behavior.98,99)
Second, the observed ΔPr is still too large to be negligible although it maybe smaller than that for Ni-YSZ. In the study by Sasaki et al., 100 ppm H2S led to a ΔPr of ∼25% at 800 °C for the Ni-ScSZ anode at a current density of 200 mA cm−2. In fact, the observed difference in ΔPr for those anodes versus Ni-YSZ may have more correlations with cell fabrication and electrochemical testing conditions than intrinsic sulfur poisoning behavior.
Third, in terms of the poisoning mechanism, sulfur is still expected to adsorb at the nickel surface and along the triple phase boundary (TPB),102 which blocks the active sites for fuel oxidation (see Section 5). Faster oxygen ion conduction might enhance sulfur removal, but there is no viable mechanism for such anodes to significantly reduce or fully eliminate the sulfur poisoning process, given that it has been shown in Section 2.2.3 that increasing the cell current density under small bias conditions does not have much impact on the real extent of sulfur poisoning.
3.3. Cermet anodes with Ni replaced by other metals
Similarly, the Ni phase in Ni-YSZ cermet anodes can also be replaced by other metals that have lower affinity for sulfur. However, it is not trivial to find metals or alloys that have adequate catalytic activity and less affinity towards sulfur adsorption. For example, Singhal and others discussed the potential for cobalt and platinum52,103 as the metal phase in the cermet anode, and concluded that they are still subject to sulfur poisoning due to the high affinity of those metals for adsorbed sulfur.
On the other hand, it is well known that copper and silver have much less affinity for sulfur adsorption: the free energy change for sulfur adsorption on copper and silver is significantly more positive than those for sulfur adsorption on nickel and cobalt. (See the summary in references like ref. 65.) For example, the heat of sulfur adsorption (enthalpy) at a surface coverage of 0.5 (number of adsorbed sulfurs/number of saturated sulfurs per unit area = 0.5) is about −160 kJ mol−1 for Ni, while it is only about −80 kJ mol−1 for Cu. As a result, at a temperature of ∼750 °C the equilibrium pH2S/pH2 value for the same level of the sulfur surface coverage is ∼104times higher for sulfur on Cu than on Ni. (Assuming comparable entropy change for the dissociative adsorption process, then,  
Since the Ni-YSZ anode interfacial resistance starts to degrade when pH2S/pH2 is 0.05 ppm at 750 °C,27 the above calculation suggests that to reach a similar surface coverage of sulfur on Cu would require pH2S/pH2 of 0.05 × 104 = 500 ppm. This estimation correlates well with the experimental data reported by He et al. for a Cu-ceria-YSZ cermet anode prepared by infiltration of a YSZ anode skeleton first by Cu and then by CeO2 precursor solutions: the cell maintained stable power output until the pH2S/pH2 was increased to ∼450 ppm and above.104 It is interesting to note that He et al. also showed that cerium oxide starts to react with H2S at a concentration of 450 ppm H2S and above. The incorporation of ceria into the Cu-based anode is also reported to solve the problem of low catalytic activity for Cu.14,104,105 Unfortunately, some practical issues still remain for such Cu-ceria-YSZ cermet anodes with superior sulfur tolerance: the low melting point of Cu and copper oxides makes it difficult to fabricate anode-supported cells using conventional co-firing methods, and the relatively low cell performance and limited long-term stability hinder its practical application.
Another example in this category is the Ni–Mo alloy-based anode explored by Choi et al.106 Ni–Mo and Ni–Mo–CeO2 were infiltrated into YSZ scaffolds via wet-impregnation of Ni, Mo, and CeO2 precursors. Although the cells based on these anodes suffered from initial quick poisoning when 50 ppm H2S was introduced into the fuel stream, they showed an interesting feature: the cell power output actually increased gradually to the level before poisoning upon continued exposure to fuels with 50 ppm H2S for ∼6 days under a constant cell voltage of 0.5 V.
3.4. Conductive oxide anode materials
Anodes based on nickel-free conductive metal oxides are perceived to hold potential for solving the problems associated with Ni-based cermet anodes: susceptibility to deactivation by impurities like sulfur and destruction by re-oxidation and carbon deposition in hydrocarbon fuels. Accordingly, many metal oxides of different structures and compositions have been studied as potential SOFC anode materials for improved sulfur tolerance.33–35 For example, Marina et al. and Mukundan et al. studied perovskite-structured Sr1−xLaxTiO3 (LST, in particular x = 0.3–0.4),77,107–110 and Kurokawa et al. studied Y-doped SrTiO3.111 Winnick and co-workers112–116 and Cooper et al.117 studied perovskite-structured La1−xSrxVO3 (LSV, in particular, x = 0.3), while Danilovic et al. studied Ce0.9Sr0.1VOx (x = 3, 4) and its doped variations.118,119 Zha et al. studied perovskite-structured La1−xSrxCr1−yMnyO3 (LSCM, in particular, x = 0.25, y = 0.5)120 and pyrochlore-structured Gd2Ti2−xMoxO7 (in particular, x = 0.6).121,122 Huang et al. studied double-perovskite-structured Sr2Mg2−xMoxO6 (SMMO, in particular, x = 1),123,124 and Xiao et al. studied Sr2Fe4/3Mo2/3O6.125 Except for Sr2Mg2−xMoxO6 that uses La1−xSrxGa1−yMgyO3−δ (LSGM, in particular, x = 0.2, y = 0.17, δ = 0.185) electrolyte, all other studies are based on the YSZ electrolyte. Lu et al. studied combination of conductive oxide anode with impregnation of metal catalyst like Pd.126 Buffer layers (also referred to as interlayer) are commonly applied between anode and electrolyte because of their limited chemical and thermal compatibilities. For example, La0.4Ce0.6O2−δ and Ce0.8Gd0.2O2−δ interlayers are used for SMMO124 and LSCM127 anodes, respectively.
However, the number of studies on any single material is usually very limited and the conditions under which the materials are investigated (e.g., in terms of temperature, pH2S/pH2, and polarization) are very narrow, which make the evaluation of their true potential difficult. Because individual properties and behavior upon exposure to sulfur-containing fuels have been enumerated in earlier publications,33,35 they will not be repeated here. Instead, we would like to discuss some features that are commonly observed in these studies.

•Improved sulfur tolerance. 
It seems fair to state that many of those conductive oxide materials do display improved sulfur tolerance: the critical pH2S/pH2 ratio above which sulfur poisoning becomes significant is usually higher than for the Ni-YSZ anode. For example, La0.35Sr0.65TiO3–Ce1−yLayO2 composite anode shows no increase in anode polarization resistance when the pH2S/pH2 is 7.8 ppm at 750 °C,108 compared to ∼0.02 ppm for the Ni-YSZ anode.27 For La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.8Mn0.2O3 (LSCM) anode, at 1000 °C, 10 ppm H2S also does not cause noticeable sulfur poisoning,110 while 2 ppm H2S leads to poisoning for the Ni-YSZ anode.27
However, oxide anodes usually experience sulfur poisoning when higher concentration of H2S is present in the fuels. For the La0.35Sr0.65TiO3–Ce1−yLayO2 composite anode, at higher pH2S/pH2 concentrations like 30.9 ppm at 800 °C or 1055 ppm at 850 °C, it does show the typical sulfur poisoning behavior with a sharp drop in the cell power output and increase in the anode overpotential once H2S is introduced into the fuel.77,108,109 A similar case happens to the La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.8Mn0.2O3 (LSCM) and Sr2Fe4/3Mo2/3O6 anode: 100 ppm and higher H2S leads to dramatic increase in anode overpotential.110,120,125,128 Even for the highly promising Sr2MgMoO6−δ (SMMO) anode, the increase in anode overpotential is much more obvious when the H2S concentration is 50 ppm than 5 ppm.124
It is hypothesized that reduction of sulfur adsorption on oxide anode materials contributes to the enhanced sulfur tolerance. For example, Marina et al. showed that for La0.35Sr0.65TiO3–Ce1−yLayO2 anode at 850 °C, the calculated surface coverage by absorbed sulfur is only 0.5 at 75 ppm and 0.9 at 750 ppm.77 In comparison, for the Ni-YSZ anode, the sulfur surface coverage is already close to saturation at below 10 ppm.66 (Also see Section 5.)


•Sulfur-enhancement effect. 
As opposed to sulfur poisoning, studies also show some oxide anode materials actually display sulfur enhancement effect: i.e., cell electrochemical performance would increase upon exposure to very high concentration of H2S (in the percentage range) at high temperatures (e.g., 850–1000 °C). For example, Mukundan et al. reported that the cell power output increases for the La0.35Sr0.65TiO3–YSZ composite anode when 5000 ppm (0.5%) H2S was introduced into the fuel with a composition of 86.4% H2/3.6% H2O balanced by Ar at 1000 °C. Similarly, La0.7Sr0.3VO3 anode displays lower interfacial resistance in 3–10 vol% H2S balanced by H2 than in pure H2,114,115 and Gd2Ti1.4Mo0.6O7 (GTMO) displays a maximum powder density of 340 mW cm−2 in a fuel mixture of 10% H2S/90% H2, while Pmax in pure H2 is only 225 mA cm−2.122 The fundamental reason for such sulfur enhancement is not clear at this moment, but we hypothesize that the transition of the material's surface from oxide to a very thin (2D) layer of conductive sulfides upon exposure to the high concentration of H2S might contribute to the enhancement. Such hypothesis is consistent with the limited experimental evidence: for example, the presence of Raman peaks corresponding to MoS2 has been identified on the surface of GTMO anode after exposure to 10% H2S/90% H2, even though the bulk GTMO material remains intact according to X-ray diffraction (XRD).


•Seemingly conflicting data. 
There are also some seemingly conflicting results in the literature regarding the behavior of certain conductive oxide materials as alternative SOFC anodes in sulfur-containing fuels. For example, Marina et al. reported that the La0.35Sr0.65TiO3–Ce(La)O2 composite anode displays large drop in cell power output upon exposure to a fuel with pH2S/pH2 of 1055 ppm at 850 °C, while Mukundan et al. reported that a similar La0.35Sr0.65TiO3–YSZ composite anode did not show an increase in overpotential when pH2S/pH2 was 1000 ppm at 1000 °C; they reported an enhancement in performance when pH2S/pH2 was 5000 ppm. Another example is La0.7Sr0.3VO3: although sulfur enhancement was observed in 10% H2S/90% H2 at 950 °C by Aguilar et al.,114 the study by Peng et al. shows the addition of 0.5% H2S to H2 fuel causes the total cell interfacial resistance to increase dramatically at 800 °C.129 It is not clear whether such discrepancies are due to the nature of the sulfur–anode interactions in different regimes (in terms of H2S concentration and temperature) or due to some other unidentified difference in experiments.


•Drawbacks of conductive oxide anodes. 
The limitations of conductive oxide anodes include low electrical conductivity (compared with Ni), poor catalytic activity toward fuel oxidation, and inadequate compatibility with the electrolyte (or other cell components) at high temperatures during fabrication. These disadvantages severely hinder their applicability to practical applications.
The electrical conductivity for most of these conductive oxide anode materials is invariably lower than that of the Ni-YSZ anode, leading to high anode resistance and poor performance.130 For example, at 800 °C in fuel atmosphere (pO2 of ∼10−15 to 10−22 atm), anode bulk conductivity (i.e., with low porosity) is ∼1 S cm−1 for La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3120,127 and Gd2Ti1.4Mo0.6O7,122 ∼10 S cm−1 for Sr2MgMoO6−δ (SMMO),124 ∼10 to 100 S cm−1 for La0.35Sr0.65TiO3,107,131 and ∼100 S cm−1 for La0.7Sr0.3VO3.115 In lab experiments, such low conductivity still allows high power density since a metal mesh and paste (usually platinum or nickel) are normally applied above the anode as current collectors.35 In some cases, in fact, the platinum or nickel may penetrate into the porous anode, making it difficult to figure out the actual role of the platinum or nickel used as a current collector. In search for new alternative anode materials to replace Ni-YSZ, therefore, it is vital to ensure that the metal paste used as a current collector does not penetrate into the porous anode and come in close contact with the electrolyte. Otherwise, such current collectors may serve as part of the functional anode, thus complicating the observed sulfur–anode interactions. In real fuel cell stacks, the nickel mesh/paste may be used as current collectors; however, the reliability of this current collector is still questionable since the susceptibility of Ni to sulfur and other contaminants (like carbon) still remains. In particular, the low electrical conductivity of oxide anodes may pose an even greater problem if the anode-supported cell structure is to be adopted.
In addition, it is difficult for most of the ceramic anode materials to be adopted in the state-of-the-art SOFC fabrication processes based on the YSZ electrolyte, especially for an anode-supported cell structure that has the best performance and long-term stability. The difficulties originate usually from alternative anodes' limited physical, chemical, and/or thermal compatibility with the YSZ electrolyte during fabrication at high temperatures. For example, both La0.7Sr0.3VO3 and Gd2Ti1.4Mo0.6O7 anodes were processed in reducing atmosphere at elevated temperatures,115,122 which is not very compatible with current processes and pose challenges for the preparation of cathode materials.

3.5. Metal sulfide anode materials
Various metal sulfides have been studied as potential anode materials for SOFCs, particularly those targeted towards direct utilization of high concentration (e.g., on the percentage level or higher) of the H2S fuel.33–35,78,132–147 Although some of them seem to show decent performance in those high sulfur concentration fuels, there is little information on long-term stability of these materials, due partially to the highly poisonous and corrosive nature of H2S at high concentrations. Also, metal sulfides tend to decompose back to metals when the relative H2S concentration is low: For example, at 1000 K, Ni3S2 will decompose when pH2S/pH2 < ∼3 × 103 ppm (0.3%), while MoS2 with a higher melting point will decompose when pH2S/pH2 < 3 × 102 ppm. Such instability in fuels with low concentration of sulfur suggests that they may not be suitable for typical SOFCs to be powered by fuels with low concentration (tens of ppm or lower) of sulfur. Thus, metal sulfide anodes will not be discussed here in detail. Interested readers are referred to previous reviews and the cited references.
3.6. Electrochemical characterizations of sulfur–anode interactions
To conclude the sections on the behaviors for alternative sulfur tolerant anodes as well as conventional Ni-YSZ cermet anodes, we present our perspectives about cell configuration and techniques for electrochemical characterizations of SOFC button cells.

3.6.1. Cell configuration. 
The best cell configuration for evaluating sulfur–anode interactions is electrolyte-supported button cells with relatively thick electrolytes and properly positioned reference electrodes, as schematically shown in Fig. 3, which enables separation of the anode process from that of the cathode and real time monitoring of the anode performance. In contrast, it is very difficult to do the same on an anode-supported cell with an electrolyte thickness of only ∼10 μm.148,149 Attempts to do 3-electrode measurements on such a cell may result in substantial errors in estimation of half-cell overpotential unless the reference is placed in a very special way.51 Accordingly, for anode-supported cells, the relative changes in cell voltage or current density were measured to characterize indirectly the electrochemical behavior of the Ni-YSZ anode in H2S-containing fuels.
Symmetrical cells with two identical anodes are also employed in some studies.70 However, the interpretation of the data would be more complicated as cathodic reduction of water is involved in one of the electrodes. Without a reliable reference electrode, it would be difficult to correctly interpret the data and to gain insight into fuel cell operation.


3.6.2. Preferred electrochemical measurements. 
For mechanistic investigation of the anode–sulfur interactions or characterization of alternative anode materials, in our opinion, the most important measurement is impedance spectroscopy (IS), which can be acquired before and after exposure to sulfur poisoning. Preferably, the impedance spectra of the anode/electrolyte interface would be directly measured if the anode and the cathode could be separated via proper placement of a reference electrode using three- or four-electrode configuration. Even under a two-electrode configuration, impedance spectra are still informative. The change in impedance spectra provides valuable information about the impact of sulfur poisoning on both bulk resistance and anode (or cell) polarization resistance, which influence how sulfur–anode interactions are interpreted. Taking the Ni-YSZ cermet anode as an example, the initial quick poisoning by low concentration (ppm-level) H2S leads to large increase in anode interfacial resistance but not bulk resistance.27,54,55,58,100,150 This is in good agreement with the mechanism of sulfur adsorption on the nickel metal surface as the bulk resistance is determined by the electrolyte and the electrode ohmic resistance, which are not expected to change by a surface adsorption process. However, as stated, some researchers have also observed 2ndstage slow degradation after the rapid initial poisoning. In that case, cells tend to show small gradual increase in bulk resistance together with continued increase in anode (cell) interfacial resistance.58,84 A step further in sulfur poisoning is cell failure, which is accompanied by a very large increase in bulk resistance as well as interfacial resistance.58 Such information would help clarify the interaction process, and is less straightforward to obtain from other measurements like anode polarization curves (overpotential versus current density) even with a properly positioned reference electrode. Other benefits for impedance spectra include (i) the anode polarization resistance under open circuit conditions could be used to extract anode exchange current density, j0, which reflects the intrinsic change in electrode kinetics caused by sulfur poisoning as discussed before, and (ii) the frequency information embedded in impedance spectra could be used to shine light on the impact of sulfur on the individual processes like charge transfer and mass transfer.
In addition to impedance spectroscopy, other valuable cell performance measurements include measuring current–voltage (I–V) curves and continuous monitoring of cell power output versus time, preferably under constant current conditions (P–t). The I–V curves provide direct representation of cell performance and information about the impact of polarization on the observed powder output drop due to sulfur poisoning ΔPr,55,57 while continuous monitoring of cell power output provides information about the overall stability of the cell and real-time change in cell power output as H2S is introduced or removed from the fuel. Both the magnitude and the rate for the change in ΔPr would be of interest from a theoretical point of view. For example, the rate of degradation due to sulfur adsorption would, in principle, be much faster than that due to formation of bulk sulfides.
It is recognized that many new materials used as anodes have not yet been optimized for cell stability, and cells with those materials degrade in sulfur-free fuels. However, even in those cases, continuous monitoring of cell power output versus time is still valuable if the experiment could be kept short to within a few hours or tens of hours.
It is noted that neither I–V nor power output versus time (P–t) measurements should be used to replace impedance data and vice versa. This is because both I–V and P–t may be influenced by many factors other than the anode process. An extreme example is that even the Ni-YSZ anode would display a very small power output drop of 1% when it is tested under a small constant current density of ∼20 mA cm−2 exposed to 11 ppm H2S at 750 °C (see Fig. 7) while we know that 11 ppm H2S will cause the anode polarization resistance to more than double.27,54 Therefore, the authors would encourage future research to provide all above measurements (IS, I–V, and P–t), which would help clarify the reaction mechanism and compare data from different sources. Other electrochemical measurements that may appear in the literature for characterizing sulfur–anode interactions include anode polarization curves and monitoring of anode overpotential versus time, which also provide some useful information.


3.6.3. Proper representation of sulfur–anode interactions. 
In the SOFC literature, definitions such as sulfur poisoning or extent of sulfur poisoning are used and even compared often without being defined clearly. To avoid confusion, we recommend using the relative change in anode exchange current density or the relative change in anode polarization resistance under open circuit conditions as the most direct representation of the extent of sulfur poisoning due to their (relatively) intrinsic nature and independence of testing conditions.
Other measured quantities, such as relative voltage drop at a constant current or relative current drop at a constant voltage, may reflect in a certain way the changes in anode performance upon exposure to sulfur, but should be clearly stated and treated with care: although they do reflect sulfur poisoning, their values depend on other factors like cathode and electrolyte contributions and how the electrochemical measurements are conducted. Thus, it is not recommended to determine which anode is more or less sulfur tolerant based on the numbers like ΔPr due to sulfur poisoning for different anodes under different operating conditions.
Another important factor in terms of evaluating sulfur tolerance is the critical sulfur concentration at which sulfur poisoning obviously starts. It is realized that the critical value might be difficult to be determined in experiments. Therefore, reporting the sulfur poisoning behavior under the lowest sulfur concentration available is also desirable.

4 Chemical and microscopic characterizations
Various ex situ and in situ experimental techniques have been employed for characterization of chemical composition (surface species and new phases), morphology, and microstructure of anodes exposed to sulfur-containing fuels. This section will provide an overview of the techniques employed, the observations made, and the implications.
4.1. 
          Ex situ and in situ characterizations
In a typical ex situ measurement, the sample is characterized after it has been exposed to a sulfur-containing fuel at elevated temperatures or tested in a fuel cell under practical operating conditions. After exposure to H2S, the sample has to be cooled down to room temperature, taken out from the testing apparatus, and transferred into a characterization chamber for analyses. Typical characterization methods include X-ray diffraction (RXD) and X-ray adsorption spectroscopy (XAS), electron microscopy (SEM, TEM, and STEM), electron spectroscopy (EDX, XPS, AES, and EELS), low energy electron diffraction (LEED), mass spectrometry (MS), and vibrational spectroscopy (IR and Raman). For surface characterization, careful preservation of the sample surface in the process of transferring a sample from a testing apparatus (at high temperature in a fuel containing sulfur) to an analysis chamber is as important as the characterization itself because improper sample transfer may introduce artifacts. Since SOFCs are typically operated at high temperatures, it is impossible to preserve the exact same conditions (temperature and atmosphere) on the sample surface when the examination of the sample is performed at room temperature. Just cooling a Ni-YSZ sample from high temperature to room temperature in a H2S-containing fuel may create uncertainties or even erroneous information, as to be shown in the next section for Ni-YSZ anodes.
For in situ characterization, in contrast, the sample is placed in a temperature- and atmosphere-controllable chamber accessible to probing stimulus and signal detector of the characterization equipment. At elevated temperatures in a designated atmosphere, signals from a sample under electrochemical operation can be collected in real time. While electron microscopy and spectroscopy offer the highest spatial resolution and sensitivity in identification of structure, morphology, and composition of materials, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to apply these techniques for in situ characterization of the sulfur poisoning processes. The main challenge is the degree of vacuum required for electron-based techniques. Thus, the most powerful in situ techniques for the study of the sulfur poisoning process are vibrational spectroscopy (especially Raman) and X-ray analyses (XRD and XAS). Schematically shown in Fig. 9 is the arrangement used for the in situ Raman spectroscopy study of anode materials.56,62 The readers are also referred to the review by Pomfret et al.151 about other in situ characterization techniques used for SOFC anode studies.
 Fig. 9  Schematic for the in situ Raman microspectroscopy measurement system that is coupled with electrochemical measurement equipment. 
The advantages of in situ over ex situ characterization are obvious: it can provide first hand information on the interactions of sulfur species with anode materials under conditions similar to real SOFC operation, thus avoiding complications associated with sample transfer. Further and in particular, the most unique advantage of in situ characterization is the possibility for direct correlation between different measurements performed at the same time. For instance, surface species (e.g., reaction intermediates) or new phases identified by Raman spectroscopy may be linked directly to electrode polarization as determined from electrochemical measurements (e.g., impedance spectroscopy) and to the chemical environment the sample is experiencing as probed by mass spectrometry, thus providing valuable information vital to unraveling the mechanism of electrode reactions.
4.2. Microstructural and chemical changes during sulfur–anode interactions

4.2.1. Ni-YSZ cermet anodes. 

Table 4 summarizes studies on the characterization of Ni-YSZ cermet anodes upon exposure to H2S-containing fuels. The following observations are made. First, the interactions between H2S and Ni-YSZ anodes at typical SOFC operating temperatures (∼550 °C and above) in fuels with low ppm-level H2S do not lead to bulk nickel sulfide formation nor morphology changes. By using in situ Raman microspectroscopy, Cheng and Liu found that at ∼570 °C in a fuel with pH2S/pH2 of 100 ppm, no bulk nickel sulfides were identified on the Ni-YSZ surface, and no changes in surface morphology were observed even after a prolonged exposure.56 Such observation is consistent with the several carefully controlled ex situ experiments in which no bulk sulfides nor morphology changes have been detected.52,61,152 It is concluded that the nickel-YSZ cermet anode poisoning by low concentration H2S at elevated temperature (e.g., ≥∼550 °C) is not caused by bulk nickel sulfide formation. Instead, it is caused by rapid adsorption of elementary sulfur on the Ni surface, as evidenced from the observed fast poisoning process, the sensitivity to sub-ppm-level H2S (see Section 2.2.6),27 and from theoretical calculations, as to be discussed later in Section 5.66
Table 4 Summary of ex situ and in situ characterizations of anode materials after interactions with sulfur-containing fuels under various conditions




References
Anode
Technique

T/°C

pH2S/pH2 (ppm)

In situ or ex situ
Sample details
Observations




Singhal et al.52
Ni-YSZ
SEM/EDX, photometric
900–1000
10

Ex situ

After poisoning and regeneration
No sulfur observed after regeneration


Waldbillig et al.61
Ni-YSZ
SEM/EDX, EM/EDX
750
0.1–10

Ex situ

Cells fully poisoned and fully regenerated
No sulfur or additional bulk phases (other than Ni and YSZ) detected


Sasaki et al.53
Ni-YSZ, Ni-SSZ
XPS, SEM/EDX
800
5–100

Ex situ

After poisoning, the sample was rapidly cooled in N2
The presence of sulfur was identified by XPS, Ni oxidized to NiO for cells that suffered irreversible voltage drop


Trembly et al.11
Ni-GDC
SEM/EDX, XPS
750
590

Ex situ

After cell testing for 580 h in the fuel with H2S
Morphology change observed, the significant presence of sulfur (percentage level) was identified using EDX, 5–7% loss in Ni and 1–2% gain in sulfur as indicated by XPS


Dong et al.153,154
Ni-YSZ
Raman, SEM, XRD
727
100

Ex situ

After exposure for 120 h, the sample cooled with the furnace in the fuel with 100 ppm H2S
Bulk nickel sulfide phases identified using Raman spectroscopy and XRD and morphology associated with melted particles identified using SEM


Cheng et al.56,152
Ni-YSZ
SEM/EDX, XRD, Raman
800
100

Ex situ

After exposure for 2–48 h, the sample cooled in the fuel with 100 ppm H2S
Ni3S2, NiS, Ni3S4 identified by Raman spectroscopy, dramatic morphology change on Ni


Raman
200–570
100

In situ



No bulk nickel sulfide formation at ∼500 °C and above; bulk sulfides (e.g., Ni3S2) started to form at ∼430 °C and below accompanied with dramatic morphology changes


Ishikura et al.58
Ni-YSZ
SEM/EDX, Raman
900
5–20

Ex situ

Cell failed after sulfur poisoning, then sulfur was removed so that cell recovered partially
The significant sulfur presence was identified via EDX, local products appear melted


Lussier et al.86
Ni-YSZ
XAS, XPS
750
100–1500

Ex situ

Not clear
Ni chemical state of Ni, NiO, and nickel sulfide mixture, for failed sample, the insulating ring in center is depleted of Ni


Rasmussen and Hagen85
Ni-YSZ
SEM/EDX
850
2–100

Ex situ

Not clear
Short term exposure did not change nickel distribution, no nickel compounds found in post-test EDS


Li et al.71,88
Ni-YSZ
SEM/EDX, XRD
800
2000

Ex situ

After poisoning
Bulk nickel sulfides (NiS, Ni4S3) were detected


Zhang et al.100
Ni-YSZ and Ni-GDC
SEM/EDX
800
5–700

Ex situ

After poisoning and recovery, cooled with the furnace in N2
No sulfur detected in EDX, significant morphology change on Ni as well as GDC but not on YSZ




It has been reported that bulk nickel sulfides (e.g., Ni3S2) and/or dramatic morphology changes for the post-sulfur exposure samples were observed even though the sulfur concentration (pH2S/pH2) was on the order of hundreds of ppm or even lower.11,86,153,154 For example, Dong et al. identified bulk Ni3S2 and Ni3S4 on the Ni-YSZ cermet after exposure to the fuel with pH2S/pH2 of 100 ppm at 727 °C for 5 days and cooled down with the furnace in the same fuel.153,154 Similarly, Trembly et al. identified sulfur in the percentage level in the anode after testing in a fuel with pH2S/pH2 of 590 ppm at 750 °C.11
The discrepancy between the first two observations stems from the complications that occurred when the samples went through the changes in temperature and atmosphere during the sample transfer process, as has been clearly illustrated in the study by Cheng and Liu.56 In that study, for the ex situ characterization, Ni-YSZ cermet was exposed to a fuel with pH2S/pH2 = 100 ppm at 800 °C for different durations (2 to 48 h). Afterwards, the samples were then cooled down slowly (∼3 °C min−1) to room temperature with the samples being exposed to the same fuel (i.e., with pH2S/pH2 = 100 ppm during cooling), and various nickel sulfides (Ni3S2, NiS, Ni3S4, etc.) were identified on the sample surface accompanied with dramatic morphology changes. In contrast, if the sample, after exposure to the same H2S gas mixture at elevated temperature, was quenched down (at a cooling rate of ∼70 °C min−1 or faster) in the same fuel, no nickel sulfides could be detected.
This is expected from the bulk phase diagram for the Ni–H2S–H2 system. Taking the same example above, the equilibrium pH2S/pH2 concentration for Ni3S2 formation is ∼4.7 × 10−3 or 4700 ppm at 800 °C, implying that bulk Ni3S2 will not form at 800 °C in a fuel with pH2S/pH2 = 100 ppm (note that other sulfides like NiS and Ni3S4 have even higher equilibrium pH2S/pH2 value). However, after exposure at 800 °C, when the sample is cooled down slowly (e.g., ∼3 °C min−1) in the same fuel mixture (pH2S/pH2 = 100 ppm), the formation of Ni3S2 becomes energetically favorable when the temperature drops below ∼420 °C because the equilibrium pH2S/pH2 for Ni3S2 to form drops by orders of magnitude as the temperature is lowered: it is only ∼100 ppm at 420 °C, and further decreases rapidly to ∼10 ppm at 323 °C, and ∼0.3 ppm at 223 °C. The slow cooling makes sulfide formation possible when the reaction is thermodynamically favorable, which is accompanied by a dramatic morphology change.56 In comparison, if the sample is quenched, although the bulk sulfidation reaction is still energetically favorable, the extent of reaction could be small in a short period of time, which explains the absence of bulk sulfides in the other studies. In addition, if the sample is cooled down in a slightly reducing atmosphere or a truly inert atmosphere (e.g., N2 with pO2 < ∼10 ppm atm), extensive bulk sulfidation/oxidation may also be avoided.
It is advised that cooling the sample slowly in an “inert” atmosphere should be dealt with care because even the commercial ultra-high-purity (UHP) grade N2 or Ar still contains oxygen content on the ∼1 ppm level, and small leaking from air could easily cause the actual oxygen content to be orders of magnitude higher. When using UHP N2 in the anode chamber and air on the cathode side, an open circuit voltage of ∼0.06 to 0.07 V was recorded at 750 °C, corresponding to a pO2 value of ∼0.01 atm in the anode chamber. Therefore, when the anode chamber gas flow is switched from fuel gas to inert gas (e.g., UHP N2) and the sample cools down slowly, non-hermetic sealing makes the oxidation of Ni a clear possibility as the critical pO2 for NiO formation is as low as ∼1 × 10−16 atm at 1000 K and drops to ∼7 × 10−27 atm at 700 K. We believe that this may also explain the surface roughening but the absence of sulfur on Ni surface in the study by Zhang et al. for samples exposed to 5–700 ppm H2S at 800 °C and then recovered in H2 and cooled in N2.100
To date, only a few studies have successfully detected adsorbed sulfur species on the anode surface following sulfur poisoning using ex situ techniques.53 Direct in situ identification of adsorbed sulfur species on a Ni-YSZ anode surface exposed in a fuel with ppm-level H2S at elevated temperatures has not been successful.56 The characterization of sulfur–anode interactions at the TPB appears to be even more challenging given the complexity of the reaction and many species involved (Ni, YSZ, H2, H2O, H2S, and various adsorbed species and lattice defects like oxygen vacancies).
Finally, among various characterization techniques, Raman microspectroscopy is unique since it is highly sensitive to a wide range of nickel sulfides (e.g, Ni3S2, NiS, Ni3S4, and NiS2) with good spatial resolution down to ∼1 μm.56,62,152 As mentioned above, Raman spectroscopy can also be conveniently configured for in situ characterization and provides valuable information from monitoring sulfide phase formation and phase transformation at elevated temperatures in different atmospheres to probing and mapping species or reaction intermediates adsorbed on electrode surfaces. Fig. 10 shows the optical micrographs collected during the in situ Raman microspectroscopy experiment of a same region on the polished surface of a dense Ni-YSZ cermet before and after the formation of nickel sulfide during exposure to a fuel of 100 ppm H2S/H2 at 440 °C. Shown in Fig. 11 are the corresponding Raman spectra obtained from the Ni region of the sample under the same conditions. The characteristic peaks in the Raman spectrum (collected after sulfide formation) correspond to those for Ni3S2 predicted from DFT-based calculations155 (also see Section 5.3). This measurement suggests that Raman spectroscopy can be used to probe the formation of nickel sulfides under in situ conditions; it also implies that Raman spectroscopy may be used to validate predictions from DFT calculations. The combination of theoretical calculations and in situ Raman spectroscopy may provide valuable information vital to unraveling the mechanism of the interactions between H2S and the Ni-YSZ cermet under various conditions. This can be applied to the study of corrosion of nickel-bearing alloys in sulfur-containing atmospheres at high temperatures.
 Fig. 10  Optical microscopy images during in situ Raman microspectroscopy characterization of a same region on the polished surface of a dense Ni-YSZ cermet before (a) and after (b) the formation of the bulk Ni3S2 phase when the cermet was exposed to a fuel of 100 ppm H2S/H2 at ∼440 °C for 12 h152 (Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 111, 17997. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 11  Raman spectra taken in situ from the Ni region at 440 °C in a fuel of 100 ppm H2S/H2 before and after the formation of the bulk phase Ni3S2, as shown in Fig. 10152 (Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 111, 17997. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society). 


4.2.2. Alternative anodes. 
The microstructural and chemical studies on the interactions between sulfur and alternative anode materials are rather limited. In particular, Gd2Ti1.4Mo0.6O7 (GTMO) has been shown to display higher power output in 10% H2S/90% H2 than in pure H2.122 Although no bulk sulfide phase was identified from the GTMO powder after exposure to 10% H2S/90% H2 for 5 days at 950 °C using XRD, the presence of Raman peaks corresponding to MoS2 was identified on the surface of the GTMO anode after H2S exposure, indicating that transition of the material's surface from an oxide phase to a thin sulfide phase might occur that contributes to the enhanced electrochemical performance as described before.62 However, the explanation still needs to be verified by further studies. Synchrotron-based XRD and XAS would be ideally suited for probing the crystal structure, local atomistic arrangement, and electronic structure of conductive oxide electrodes under in situ conditions for fuel cell applications.

5 Understanding H2S–anode interaction mechanism using DFT-based calculations
With continuing advances in the development of algorithms and rapid reduction in CPU costs, computational chemistry156 plays a more and more important role in materials research.157–159 For rational design of SOFC electrode materials, first-principle-based calculations employing different modeling techniques160–162 have provided useful information that may not be readily obtained from experimental measurements. Among different computational techniques, DFT calculation is an effective approach for prediction of fundamental properties of materials and has offered important insights into sequences, mechanisms, and kinetics of electrode reactions on different crystallographic surfaces, with or without surface or bulk defects. This information is imperative to gaining a deeper understanding of the mechanism of elementary processes on the surfaces of SOFC electrodes.
While the conventional thermodynamics provides some useful insight into bulk phase stability163 it is inadequate for the processes occurring on electrode surfaces and interfaces relevant to sulfur poisoning. Applications of advanced computational tools, as illustrated in Fig. 12,160 can effectively guide us to rationally design sulfur-tolerant SOFC materials over a wide range of scales, from molecular to macroscopic levels.
 Fig. 12  Computational methods at different levels to design sulfur-tolerant SOFC anode materials. 
In this section, we will first review the study of Ni and H2S interactions using DFT-based calculations and the application of the same technique to exploring the sulfur tolerance of various alternative anode materials.66,164,165 Then we will consider the effects of temperature and pressure (using ab initio atomistic thermodynamics) in order to gain an in-depth understanding of the sulfur poisoning processes under ordinary SOFC operating conditions. These computations, along with the experimental observations discussed earlier, provided direct evidence to support the hypothesis that sulfur poisoning of a conventional Ni-YSZ anode exposed to low ppm H2S at elevated temperatures is due to adsorption of elemental sulfur on the Ni surface, not due to formation of nickel sulfide(s) as previously thought. They also helped us to understand many of the experimental observations presented in Sections 2, 3, 4, and 6. Finally, computational analysis of vibrational modes of surface species or new phases will be presented, which forms the scientific basis for peak assignment and for identification of reaction intermediates in spectroscopic experiments described in Section 4.
5.1. Understanding the sulfur-poisoning behavior in experiments

5.1.1. Reaction sequence and energetics for H2S–anode interactions. 

Fig. 13 illustrates the interaction between H2S and the Ni-YSZ anode at the macroscopic and molecular levels near the TPB (i.e., H2S-Ni-YSZ). To save computational time, the study was usually simplified as H2S interaction with a metallic anode surface or an electrolyte surface at the two-phase boundary (2PB) (i.e., H2S-Ni or H2S-YSZ). Earlier theoretical studies66,164 pointed out that sulfur poisoning observed in low concentration H2S at elevated temperatures is originated from the dissociation of sulfur-containing species and the adsorption of atomic sulfur (designated as S* here) on the anode surface. The strongly adsorbed S* species block active sites on the anode surface and thus increase the resistance to electrochemical oxidation of the fuel. In particular, Fig. 14 illustrates how a Ni-based anode surface can be constructed as an infinite slab with a proper vacuum space (∼15 Å) (Fig. 14(a)) using periodic DFT calculations, while having four types of active sites (i.e., atop, bridge, and three-fold fcc- and hcp-hollow sites) (Fig. 14(b)). As schematically illustrated in Fig. 14(c), the mechanism of S* formation can be ascribed as an interfacial reaction of adsorbed H2S* with the Ni surface via two elementary steps of S–H bond cleavages (i.e., H2S* → HS* + H* and HS* → H* + S*).
 Fig. 13  The interaction between H2S and Ni-YSZ cermet anodes at the macroscopic and molecular levels. 
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation of a slab model with a proper vacuum space for periodic DFT calculations. (b) Four active sites on a (111) plane. (c) Schematic energy profile of gas-phase H2S dissociation on Ni(111) forming atomic S* and H*. “*” denotes surface species. TS1 and TS2 are the transition states. 
In addition, dissociative adsorption of H2S on other metals (Fe, Pt, Pd, and Rh),164–171 Ni–Cu alloys,172 and oxides such as CeO2 was also examined.173,174 The associated energetic parameters (i.e., reaction energies (ΔE) and reaction barriers (Ea)) for the interaction between H2S and those materials have been obtained by DFT calculations, as summarized in Table 5.
Table 5 Activation barriers (Ea) and reaction energies (ΔE) in the units of eV for the two elementary steps of H2S* → HS* + H* and HS* → H* + S* in a H2S dissociative adsorption process






H2S* → HS* + H*
HS* → H* + S*



E
a

ΔE

E
a

ΔE




Pt(111)166
0.02
−0.90
0.04
−1.19


Pd(111)168
0.37
−1.25
0.04
−0.73


Rh(211)169
0.01
−1.50
0.32
−1.50


Fe(100)170
0.25
−1.30
0.28
−1.30


Fe(110)171
0.10
−1.50
0.11
−1.35


Ni(100)66
0.29
−1.56
0.45
−1.05


Ni(111)66
0.15
−0.98
0.11
−0.86


CeO2(111)174
0.08
−0.13
0.36
−1.08




Apart from ΔE and Ea for the individual reaction steps, another important parameter that can be obtained from DFT calculations is the adsorption energies (Eads) of adspecies. Eads is closely related to ΔE: higher exothermicity of an adsorption process is related to a smaller Eadsof the reactant and a greater Eadsof the product, as detailed in a previous work.175Table 6 summarizes calculated values for Eads of reactants, intermediates, and products from H2S interactions on selected metal and oxide surfaces.66,166,168–171 S* is strongly bound to the surfaces (Eads in the range of 5.14–6.60 eV), while HS* is less strongly bound (Eads in the range of 1.36–3.80 eV). H2S* is even more weakly bound (Eads in the range of 0.09–1.20 eV) than S* and HS* with values being less than half that of HS*. The result also shows that Eads's of H* are ranged from 2.70 to 3.20 eV. Thus, the high exothermicities of the two elementary steps of H2S dissociative adsorption on the surface are attributable to the stronger adsorption energies of the products (H* + HS* and H* + S*) and the relatively weak adsorption energies of the reactants (H2S* and HS*, respectively). Eads is also related to Ea: a strong adsorption, which is related to a high charge density distributed between a surface and an adsorbate, results in a lower charge density and weaker intra-molecular bonds within the adsorbate and, thus, reduces the dissociation barrier.175 Since the adsorption reaction, H2S(g) → S* + 2H*, involves only the S–H bond breaking steps, the lower Ea in Table 5 can be attributed to the stronger adsorptions of HS*, S*, and H*.
Table 6 Adsorption energies (Eads) of H2S*, HS*, S*, and H* in the units of eV






H2S*
HS*
S*
H*




Pt(111)166
0.90
3.00
5.14
—


Pd(111)168
0.71
3.02
5.15
—


Rh(211)169
1.00
3.69
6.00
2.86


Fe(100)170
0.50
3.60
6.00
2.70


Fe(110)171
1.20
3.80
5.80
3.20


Ni(100)66
0.83
3.72
5.96
2.84


Ni(111)66
0.67
2.95
5.14
2.91


CeO2(111)174
0.09–0.15
1.36–1.46
6.60
—




The above calculations clearly suggest that elemental sulfur strongly adsorbs on Ni surfaces with a large exothermic ΔE and a small barrier Ea. The adsorbed sulfur blocks the access of hydrogen to active reaction sites (e.g., TPBs), leading to a large drop in electrochemical activity, as described earlier in Section 2.2. The calculations also suggest that the adsorbed sulfur species exist primarily in the form of atomic sulfur instead of molecular H2S. The large exothermic ΔE and very small Ea further imply fast kinetics for sulfur adsorption and sluggish kinetics for sulfur removal, consistent with the experimental observation of the instant drop in performance upon exposure to H2S and a very slow recovery in performance after clean hydrogen is switched back, as described earlier. In addition, the similarity in ΔE and Ea for many alternative metals (e.g., Pt and Fe) explains why replacing Ni with these metals does not solve the problems of sulfur poisoning, which is also consistent with experimental observations as described in Section 3.3.


5.1.2. Physical and chemical effects on sulfur adsorption. 
Furthermore, we can analyze adsorption energies based on the intrinsic effect of surface morphology and electronic structures that are related, respectively, to the physical and chemical properties of materials. According to the adsorption-energy calculations of S* on Pt(111),166 Ni(111),66,172,176 and Cu(111),172 the strength of sulfur–metal bonds normally follows this order: three-fold-coordinated Eads (fcc and hcp sites) > two-fold-coordinated Eads (bridge sites) > one-fold-coordinated Eads (atop sites), as shown in Table 7. In addition, sulfur adsorption is stronger on surface defects like steps, kinks, or terraces with higher coordination numbers than those on the corresponding perfect surfaces. Based on the results, we conclude that the higher the coordination of an adsorption site, the stronger its sulfur adsorption energy. Such physical effect (or coordination effect) from the surface geometric configuration is independent of materials.177,178 Nevertheless, the results indicate that sulfur poisoning is not expected to be alleviated by changing physical features like surface morphology or grain orientations of metal catalysts in the anode.
Table 7 
E
ads of S* on Pt(111), Pd(111), Ni(111), and Cu(111) surfaces in the units of eV






Pt(111)166
Pd(111)168
Ni(111)66,172,176
Cu(111)172




FCC
5.14
5.15
5.44, 5.16, 5.14
4.36


HCP
4.97


5.42, 5.06
4.32


Bridge
4.47
5.21, 5.02
4.21


Atop
3.04
3.92, 3.62, 3.62
3.22




On the other hand, the chemical effect of a certain adsorption process depends on materials, which is examined using density of states (DOS) analyses, as detailed in the d-band theory.177,178 For example, Fig. 15(a) shows a DOS comparison of S* on Ni(111) and Cu(111) surfaces. The antibonding state of S* on Ni(111) with a higher energy relative to the Fermi level results in stronger adsorption, meaning that it is harder to excite electrons to the antibonding state with higher energy above the Fermi level for bond cleavage. In addition, the energy of the antibonding state corresponds to the DOS of metal surfaces. A downward shifted antibonding state relative to the Fermi level corresponds to the downward shifted and broader DOS of metals, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 15(b). Accordingly, the DOS of a metal with low energy and a broad distribution such as Cu(111) leads to a low antibonding state and weaker sulfur adsorption. The Eads prediction from the DOS analysis agrees well with the experimental observation65 that the adsorption enthalpy of S* on Ni surfaces is twice that on Cu surfaces, suggesting that Cu-based anodes would have much better tolerance to sulfur than Ni-based anodes for SOFCs, which is consistent with the experimental observation discussed in Section 3.3.
 Fig. 15  (a) DOS analysis of S* on Ni(111) and Cu(111) in red and blue curves, respectively. A circle represents the antibonding states around the Fermi level. (b) A scheme of the energies of bonding and antibonding states corresponded to those of metal d bands. 


5.1.3. Sulfur poisoning and approaches to achieve improved sulfur tolerance. 
•Alternative metals and Ni–M alloys. 
Based on the above analyses, the problem of sulfur poisoning for the Ni-YSZ anode can be attributed to the strong sulfur adsorption that blocks surface active sites, reduces the catalytic activity of neighboring sites, and results in the highly exothermic and low-barrier poisoning reaction. Therefore, minimizing the bond strength of S* by adjusting the DOS of metallic or alloy anodes seems one logical approach to enhancing sulfur tolerance, and the design rule for sulfur-tolerant anodes corresponds to the searching for a metal or alloy that has weak S* adsorption (low Eads) with low-energy and broad-distribution DOS. As stated in Section 3.3, this is not trivial. Many common alternative metal catalysts such as Fe, Rh, and Pt have strong sulfur adsorption (see Section 5.1.1) and are expected to be poisoned readily. The studies that show promises are those focusing on completely replacing (e.g., by Cu)14,104,164,179 or partially introducing relatively inert metals or alloys (e.g., Ni–Cu 172,180 and Ni–Sn 95,181 alloys) into anodes to weaken the interaction for S* and thus enhance their sulfur tolerance. However, a problem with these studies lies in the materials' inertness for sulfur adsorption, which usually also lowers their catalytic activities towards H2 fuel oxidation represented by hydrogen adsorption energies since the catalytic activities of materials towards the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and H2S dissociative adsorption usually have similar trends,177,178 indicating that cell performance is sacrificed to achieve sulfur tolerance.
In light of these limitations, theoretical studies on metal alloys have been carried out to find metal and alloy materials that do not compromise performance for sulfur tolerance. To construct a Ni-M alloy, one of the Ni atoms on the top-most layer was removed and replaced with three alloying metals such as 3d and 4d transition metals, as in (a) and (b) of Fig. 16. The defective structure may provide a more practical model than the perfect ones with one Ni and three transition metals. According to the comparison of Ni and Cu,172 the initial adsorption of H2S is correlated with sulfur tolerance, and weaker Eads for S* corresponds to better sulfur tolerance. Thus to evaluate sulfur tolerance of bimetallic Ni-M alloys, H2S adsorption energies on various metals were calculated and normalized relative to that on pure Ni(111). As shown in Fig. 16(c), the comparative study demonstrates that metals like V, Cr, Cu, Mo, Ru, Rh, Pd, and Ag have significantly lower sulfur adsorption energy, Eads, and their alloys with Ni are expected to be more sulfur-tolerant than pure Ni, while metals like Mn, Fe, Nb, and Tc have comparable Eads and Co has slightly higher Eads for sulfur adsorption, indicating comparable or even worse sulfur tolerance than Ni.
 Fig. 16  Top views of (a) an adsorbed hydrogen and (b) an adsorbed H2S on modified Ni(111) with various 3d and 4d metals (Ni-M). Solid gray balls (VNi) are Ni defects on the top-most layer. (c) Normalized adsorption energies relative to that on pure Ni(111) for H2S* (red diamonds) and H2* (blue triangles) on modified Ni(111) with various 3d and 4d transition metals. 
In addition to sulfur tolerance, a successful SOFC anode must also have high catalytic activity for fuel oxidation. Thus, we also calculated the dissociative adsorption energies of H2 as a descriptor of catalytic activity for HOR following the method in the literature.182 As displayed in Fig. 16(c), among the metals, Mo, Ru, and Rh have adsorption energy for H2 (i.e., catalytic activities) similar to Ni, while H2 adsorption energy on Ag and Cu is much less indicating lower activity towards H2 oxidation for those two metals.14 These results highlight the promise of applying DFT calculations for screening sulfur-tolerant anode materials. They also suggest that, among the metals and alloys studied, Ni–Mo alloy seems to be a good candidate because it exhibits lower sulfur adsorption energy (better sulfur tolerance) than the pure Ni yet comparable hydrogen adsorption energy (good catalytic activity towards H2 oxidation). This is confirmed by the experiment: as stated in Section 3.3, Ni-Mo-alloy based anodes showed improved sulfur tolerance over Ni-YSZ anodes.
•Electrolyte modification. 
Hypothetically, a second approach to enhance sulfur tolerance is to increase the activity of the electrolyte phase in the cermet anode for electrochemical oxidation of sulfur, as described by reaction (2) in Section 2. For the Ni-YSZ anode, S* on YSZ may be electrochemically oxidized to SO2, and release electrons. However, this reaction could be kinetically slow in the middle of a YSZ region due to limited electronic conductivity of YSZ; it should be more active at or near the TPBs. The rate of the electrochemical oxidation of S* on the surface of the ceramic phase in a Ni-ceramic anode may increase with the ionic and electronic conductivities of the ceramic phase. This may explain (at least in part) why the substitution of YSZ by other ceramic phases (e.g., GDC) showed different sulfur tolerances. Furthermore, when the oxygen conducting ceramic phase in the anode becomes more active in promoting the electrochemical oxidation of S* to SO2 (thus removes S* on the surface of the ceramic phase), S* on the metal surface may migrate (spill over) to the clean TPB region (due to a concentration gradient) and get oxidized and removed there, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 17. Then the overall poisoning might then be alleviated.
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of S* formation and the removal from the oxidation reaction with oxygen ions (O2−) from the electrolyte at the TPB. (a) Two grains of an electrolyte and an electrode are available with the gas-phase H2S and H2, impurity and fuel, respectively. (b) Two surfaces are saturated with S*. (c) S* on the TPB reacts with O2− transported from the cathode via the electrochemical oxidation reaction, producing SO2. (d) Accordingly, S* species on the high concentrated electrode grain diffuse to the low concentrated TPB. 
The activity of the oxygen conducting ceramic phases, different from that of metallic Ni, depends on the formation energy of oxygen defects (vacancies) while the sulfur adsorption energy Eads (S*) on the defects of most oxides seems to be similar (>6.50 eV). For example, the energies for forming defects in GDC, SSZ, and YSZ are 3.80, 5.80, and 7.80 eV, respectively, suggesting the activity of the electrolytes is in the order of GDC > SSZ > YSZ. On the experimental side, as stated in Section 3.2, cermet anodes like Ni-SSZ53 and Ni-GDC11,99,100 have been reported to have slightly better sulfur tolerance than Ni-YSZ (with less drop in power output as sulfur contaminants are introduced). However, the effect of the electrolyte phase on sulfur poisoning has not been carefully studied.
In addition to oxygen ion conductors like YSZ, proton conductors such as BaCeO3 are also considered. Table 8 compares energy for water dissociation and incorporation for proton ion (HO)O˙ (if applicable) formation on Ni, ZrO2, CeO2, and BaCeO3. The results reveal that the energy for water adsorption and subsequent incorporation to BaCeO3 and the formation of proton ions is significantly more favorable compared with those for ZrO2 and CeO2. How this will impact the sulfur tolerance and lead to the discovery of a new approach for improving anode sulfur tolerance are explained in Section 6.
Table 8 ΔE and Ea, in parentheses, in the units of eV of water dissociation on perfect and defective surfaces






Ni(111)
ZrO2(111)
CeO2(111)
BaCeO3(100)





Perfect surface



H2O(g) → H2O*
−0.33
−0.41
−0.31
−0.71


H2O* → H* + HO*
−0.11 (0.79)
−0.57 (0.51)
−0.06 (0.50)
−1.14 (0.11)


HO* → H* + O*
1.22 (1.45)
0.64 (0.40)
0.52 (0.71)
2.18 (0.39)



Defective surface



H2O + VO˙˙ → (H2O)O˙˙


−0.82
−0.64
−0.58


(H2O)O˙˙ + OxO → 2(HO)O˙


−0.32 (0.72)
−0.19 (0.71)
−1.29 (0.29)





5.2. 
          Ab initio atomistic thermodynamics calculations: sulfur-tolerance under ordinary SOFC operating conditions
From the discussion above, DFT calculations have been applied to elucidate the mechanism for sulfur adsorption processes and related energetics for Ni as well as alternative metals, alloys, and oxides, and the energies for defects formation in electrolyte phases. However, DFT prediction is only valid in vacuum at 0 K. For practical purposes, external effects from the environment such as operational temperatures and pressures should be taken into consideration to make the calculation more relevant to practical operation. This is achieved by applying the thermodynamic correction to DFT results, as described in this section.

5.2.1. A modified Ni–S phase diagram that captures sulfur surface adsorption. 
Temperature and pressure effects can be taken into consideration in the DFT results by applying the thermodynamic correction (in Gibbs free energy calculation), i.e., ab initio atomistic thermodynamics.183,184 The DFT-computed energy (EDFT) represents the Gibbs free energy at zero temperature in vacuum, or Helmholtz free energy (F(T)) at zero temperature, EDFT = G(0, 0) = F(0). Specifically, the relation between Gibbs free energy and an internal energy from DFT calculations can be expressed as follows.G(T, p) = G(0, 0) + G(0 → T, 0 → p0) + G(T, p0 → p) = EDFT + H(T, p0) + RTln (p/p0),where EDFT is directly computed from DFT, H(T, p0), which can be obtained from the thermodynamics database,185 is the standard enthalpy contributing from rotations, vibrations, and entropy at p0 = 1 atm, R is the ideal gas constant, and p/p0 is a pressure-dependent function from the Maxwell relation. At a given pressure and temperature, the Gibbs free energy can be obtained by adding the last two terms of thermodynamic corrections to the DFT internal energy.
This method has successfully delineated the environmental effects on sulfur poisoning66 and surface regeneration.186 For example, Fig. 18 shows the expanded phase diagram from the theoretical prediction for the Ni–S system to explain the poisoning behavior on the Ni-based anode. This diagram represents the most stable phases with the lowest Gibbs free energy as a function of temperature and pressure (pH2S/pH2). Compared with the traditional Ni–S phase diagram that includes only bulk phases like Ni and nickel sulfides (e.g., Ni3S2),187,188 this new phase diagram also includes a transition region between those two phases that represent sulfur adsorption on the nickel surface when exposed to a trace amount of H2S. The calculated phase diagram also agrees well with both experiments of sulfur adsorption on Ni catalysts63 and anode poisoning for SOFCs.27
 Fig. 18  S–Ni phase diagram calculated using ab initio atomistic thermodynamics. The three regions correspond to the phases of clean Ni, adsorbed sulfur S* on the nickel surface, and bulk Ni3S2. The experimental data are displayed in the black line, from Rosenqvist's bulk phase diagram,188 the open squares, from the experimental result of S* with different area coverages,63 and the purple squares, from the sulfur-tolerant experiment.27 
The importance of this calculated Ni–S phase diagram is that it specifies the stability region for the surface phase of S* on Ni, which plays a key role in sulfur poisoning, and it makes up for the limitation of experimental techniques that are having difficulty in observing the adsorbed S* species under real SOFC operating conditions (see Section 4.2). Most sulfur poisoning behaviors for the Ni-YSZ cermet anode as described above in Sections 2 and 4 can be well explained from this modified Ni–S phase diagram. For example, the pH2S/pH2 concentration at which sulfur poisoning occurs is significantly lower than that for bulk Ni3S2 phase formation. In electrochemical characterizations, sulfur poisoning becomes more severe when the ratio of pH2S/pH2 increases or the temperature decreases, and this is due to increased sulfur surface coverage. Furthermore, the calculated diagram also helps predict sulfur tolerance or critical sulfur concentration beyond which sulfur poisoning will become significant, which corresponds to the boundary between clean Ni and S* phases (the blue curve) in the diagram. At typical planar SOFC operating temperatures of 650–800 °C, the critical pH2S/pH2 that avoids poisoning is in the range of 0.7–35.7 ppb, which is difficult and/or costly to reach in H2 production. However, the diagram indicates that sulfur tolerance improves with increasing temperature: the required temperature for 1 ppm H2S tolerance is ∼950 °C, which is considered very high for SOFC operations, but is consistent with experimental observations.27
Sulfur tolerance could, in principle, be improved if the blue curve between clean Ni and S* on Ni surface could be lowered. According to Gibbs free energy calculations, this boundary corresponds to the three energetic parameters in the Ni–S system: EDFT, H(T, p0), and RTln (p/p0) which then correspond to Eads(S*), H(H2(g))–H(H2S(g)), and the partial pressure of sulfur contaminants (or pH2S/pH2), respectively. Since the latter two terms are related to the intrinsic properties of H2S (g), they cannot be adjusted. Therefore, the tolerance line can be lowered by reducing Eads(S*). Quantitatively, a drop of 0.1 eV (or 9.6 kJ mol−1) of Eads(S*) lowers the tolerance boundary by ∼50 K. For example, Eads(S*) on Cu(111) is about 1.3 eV (124.8 kJ mol−1) less than that on Ni(111), hence, the tolerance boundary on Cu(111) would be lowered by ∼650 K. This is consistent with the experimental observation, as detailed in Section 3.3: He et al. observed that at 973 K, the Cu-based anode displays sulfur tolerance in fuels with a H2S concentration of up to ∼450 ppm.104 In comparison, for the Ni-YSZ anode, to reach the sulfur tolerance of 500 ppm (log (pH2/pH2S) = 3.3) would correspond to a temperature of ∼1650 K as in Fig. 18, which is almost exactly ∼650 K higher than Cu.


5.2.2. Considerations for oxide materials. 
Another application of ab initio atomistic thermodynamics is for predicting the bulk phase stability of complex oxides in sulfur-containing fuels. For example, Fig. 19 plots the phase diagram of H2S(g) interacting with proton conducting oxides of BaCeO3 (BC, red line), BaCe0.8Y0.2O3−δ (BCY, blue line), and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3−δ (BZCY, black line). The region below the phase boundary corresponds to the clean ABO3-type oxide phase, while the region above the phase boundary corresponds to the situation when the ABO3-type structure is disrupted by the formation of sulfides like BaS and binary oxides.163,189 The results show that Zr doping dramatically stabilizes the oxide, and improves sulfur tolerance up to 100 ppm at 800 °C. It is comparable to the experimental result1 wherein the Ni–BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2−xYbxO3−δ anode sustained H2S exposure for up to 20 ppm at 750 °C. The slight over-estimation of H2S concentration compared to the experimental value might reflect the fact that Yb doping slightly increases the activity of the oxide, while sacrificing its stability. These computational results agree well with the description in Section 6 for the Ba(Ce1−xZrx)O3-based materials.
 Fig. 19  Calculated sulfide-oxide phase diagram. The red, blue, and black lines correspond to the boundaries between oxides of BaCeO3, BaCe0.8Y0.2O3−δ, and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3−δ and the corresponding sulfide phases, respectively, and can be represented as the sulfur tolerance of those three materials. 
To improve the bulk stability of oxide anodes (i.e., move up the boundary in the sulfide-oxide phase diagram in Fig. 19), the endothermicity of the transformation reaction from an oxide to a sulfide must be increased, i.e., the oxide phase should be less likely to react with sulfur contaminants forming sulfides. On the other hand, the oxide phase may need to attract sulfur contaminants to reduce the S* presence on metallic anodes, suggesting that the oxide should be highly active. Similar to the behavior in the design of heterogeneous catalysts, these two criteria may yield a volcano-shaped curve in searching for the best sulfur-tolerant metal/oxide cermets. Specifically, the catalytic activity and stability of suitable oxides correspond to Eads(S*) and ΔE of oxide to sulfide transformation, respectively. The high exothermicity of Eads(S*) indicates that S* can quickly form oxides, while the high endothermicity of ΔE corresponds to better bulk phase stability of oxides. Thus, the wider the range between Eads(S*) and ΔE is, the better is the sulfur tolerance of oxides.
This range between Eads(S*) and ΔE may be expanded further by incorporating the regeneration process of S* removal. This is plausible via adding a small amount of oxidants in the fuel to support the regeneration. However, aggressive oxidants like O2 are likely to react with the H2 fuel and form H2O. This redox reaction cannot release electrons to the outside circuit and it will diminish the cell's performance. Another problem in the regeneration is the overdosing with oxidants that causes oxide formation on metallic anodes, which degrades the anode structure and electrochemical performance. Therefore, a mild oxidant such as H2O is seen to be more feasible.186 While the processes of poisoning and regeneration occur simultaneously on the anode, S* may be removed by the co-existing oxidant of water immediately after its formation. Although S* still can be formed on a surface, it requires a relatively high concentration of sulfur contaminants as the adsorbed water consumes part of them. We can consider this phenomenon as one wherein the Eads(S*) is virtually reduced from the statistical viewpoint. Therefore, the boundary of clean Ni and S* in Fig. 18 is expected to pull down while that for oxide–sulfide in Fig. 19 is expected to move up so their sulfur tolerance can be improved. This constitutes one of the explanations why the sulfur tolerance can be dramatically enhanced by incorporating Ba(Ce1−xZrx)O3-based materials,1 with high water activity, which is detailed in Section 6.

5.3. Vibrational mode analysis
DFT-based calculations have also been applied to classify the vibrational modes at the Γ point from the crystal symmetry and calculate the corresponding vibrational frequencies from optimized crystal structures. This information is vital to understanding the results of in situ and ex situ vibrational spectroscopy characterizations, which are powerful experimental tools for the study of sulfur–anode interactions. As detailed in Section 4.2.1, spectroscopic techniques like in situ Raman spectroscopy are sensitive to a wide range of reaction species including various bulk nickel sulfides under cell operational conditions. However, the corresponding spectra of these species may be hard to find in the available database. Such much-needed spectroscopic information can be obtained from DFT calculations: the computationally analyzed vibrations can assist for the peak assignment and phase identification from the experimentally acquired spectra to better understand the fundamentals of sulfur–anode interactions.
A successful example of this approach has been shown in the identification of Ni3S2, which is an important bulk phase in sulfur–anode interactions and observed from the in situ (as well as ex situ) Raman spectroscopy56,152 (Section 4.1). This nickel-rich sulfide has not been clearly identified from previous spectroscopic works.190,191 On the other hand, our DFT calculation155 clearly classifies that the crystal phonons have 6 Raman active modes, 2A1 + 4E and helps identify the spectra obtained in our in situ sulfur-poisoning experiments.56,62,152 In addition, spectroscopic information of other important products related to the irreversible sulfur poisoning, such as NiS, Ni3S4, and NiS2, has also been extensively examined from the DFT calculations.155 These results clarify the experimental observations192–195 and provide valuable information to further understand sulfur–anode interactions.
6 Incorporation of Ba(Ce1−xZrx)O3-based materials in Ni-based cermet anode—a new approach to sulfur tolerance
It becomes clear from earlier discussions that most candidate sulfur-tolerant anode materials, which still exhibit some sensitivity even to low concentration (ppm level) of H2S, have essentially the same reaction pathway: hydrogen combines with oxygen ion (from the electrolyte) at the triple phase boundary (TPB) to form water at the same geometrical location. This is the case not only for a Ni-YSZ cermet anode but also for the cermet anodes with Ni being replaced by other metals (e.g., Cu) or YSZ being replaced by other oxygen ion conductors (e.g., GDC). The situation remains similar when the whole Ni-YSZ anode is replaced by an electronically conducting oxide (e.g., LST for up to 26 ppm H2S or SMMO for 5 ppm). However, the active reaction sites may broaden to zones near the TPB as the oxygen ion conductivity of the conducting metal oxide increases; the wider the reaction zone the higher the oxygen ion conductivity. The presence of adsorbed sulfur on anode surface would not only block the adsorption and transport of hydrogen on the nickel surface but also impede the formation and evolution of water molecules from the active sites.102 Sulfur tolerance is achieved probably through reduced adsorption of sulfur on anode surfaces, especially the metal surface for cermet anodes (e.g., Cu in Cu-ceria-YSZ anode) or the oxide surface for the anodes based on LST or SMMO.
Recently, a very different approach was adopted to achieve better sulfur tolerance: replacing the oxygen ion conductor YSZ in a Ni-YSZ cermet anode by a mixed ion conductor like BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2−xYbxO3 (BZCYYb),1 which allows transport of both proton and oxygen vacancy (or ion). This Ni-BZCYYb cermet anode showed superior sulfur tolerance at 750 °C for up to ∼20 ppm using a cell based on a BZCYYb electrolyte and up to ∼50 ppm using a cell based on samaria doped ceria (SDC) electrolyte. The high performance suggests that the nickel metal in the cermet anode functions as the catalyst and the primary electronic conductor, such high critical pH2S/pH2 value is two to three orders of magnitude higher than that for a conventional Ni-YSZ cermet anode under similar conditions.27 The displayed sulfur tolerance is also significantly better than the cermet anodes with YSZ replaced by other oxygen ion conductors of higher conductivity such as GDC and ScSZ,53,100 as described earlier in Section 3.2.
It is also interesting to note that the cell impedance for the Ni-BZCYYb/SDC/LSCF cell shows sulfur poisoning (i.e., increase in total cell interfacial resistance) under open circuit voltage conditions in dry H2 (i.e., without water vapor) but not in humidified H2. While the detailed mechanism for the enhanced sulfur tolerance of the Ni-BZCYYb anode is yet to be determined, it is hypothesized that dissociative adsorption of water on the surface of BZCYYb facilitates the oxidation of the adsorbed sulfur or H2S to SO2 at or near the active sites. As evident from many experimental observations and as stated earlier in Section 5.1.3, water adsorption on the surfaces of BaCeO3-based materials (e.g., BZCY or BZCYYb) appears much more energetically favorable than on the surface of ZrO2 or CeO2-based materials. To date, however, it is still not clear how water vapor would facilitate sulfur oxidation on the anode surface under fuel cell conditions. One possibility is the oxidation of adsorbed sulfur (S*) through combination with adsorbed water (H2O*) and lattice oxygen to form SO2 and proton ions (HO)o˙: S* + 4Oox + 2H2O* = SO2(g) + 4(HO)o˙ + 4e−(16)
This reaction is expected to be slow due to the large number of electrons and reaction species involved. Another simpler hypothetical reaction pathway is the direct reaction between adsorbed water (or related species like dissociated OH) and adsorbed sulfur to form SO2 S* + 2H2O* = SO2(g) + 2H2(g)(17)
As the surface coverage of S* can be relatively high (the S* is firmly adsorbed on the surface) while the concentration of SO2 is relatively low (it readily desorbed from the surface), the probability for SO2 and H2 to react and form H2S is relatively low. Finally, a third possibility is related to hydrogen incorporation into the BZCYYb phase, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 20. For the cell structure with Ni-BZCYYb anode and BZCYYb electrolyte, two anodic reaction pathways are at play. The first, designated as R1 here, is the anodic process leading to water generation, H2(g) + OOx → H2O(g) + VO˙˙ + 2e′.(18)
 Fig. 20  Schematic showing the two anodic reaction pathways for the Ni-BZCYYb/BZCYYb anode structure under SOFC operating conditions. R1 represents the water generation reaction of H2 + OOx → H2O + VO˙˙ + 2e′, which is significantly hindered by the adsorbed sulfur on the electrode surface because of the large size of water molecule that has to be released from the TPB; R2 represents the hydrogen incorporation reaction of H2 + 2OOx → 2(OH)O˙ + 2e−, which may not be affected much by the adsorbed sulfur on the surface because of the small size of hydrogen that is incorporated into the lattice. 
This reaction is identical to the dominating anodic reaction at the TPB for a Ni-YSZ cermet anode.102 The second reaction pathway, designated as R2 here, is the anodic process with hydrogen incorporation: H2(g) + 2OOx → 2(OH)O˙ + 2e−(19)
It is hypothesized that for the Ni-BZCYYb anode, water generation reaction R1 may be slowed down significantly due to the geometrical blockage of adsorbed sulfur on the Ni surface and near the TPBs: because the water molecule has relatively large size, the blockage effect of adsorbed sulfur will be large. On the other hand, hydrogen incorporation reaction R2 may not be impeded by the adsorbed sulfur because the size of hydrogen is very small; it might find its way to incorporate into the BZCYYb electrolyte near the TPB.
In contrast, reaction R1 is the only possible pathway for a Ni-YSZ anode since YSZ does not have proton conductivity and, as a result, the sulfur poisoning will be much more significant compared with the Ni-BZCYYb anode. Further experimental and theoretical studies are needed to clarify the exact mechanism for enhanced sulfur tolerance.
It is noted that similar sulfur tolerance has been observed in the dense Ni–BZCY composite membrane for hydrogen separation. The hydrogen permeation flux remained stable at 900 °C when the H2S concentration was 30 ppm.196 Thus, Ni cermet anodes with BZCY-based materials may also have similar sulfur tolerance. As reported elsewhere,1 a small amount of BaO spread to the surface of Ni grains in a Ni-BZCYYb cermet anode during processing at high temperatures may play a vital role in achieving the observed sulfur tolerance. In fact, when nano-sized BaO islands were created on the surface of the Ni grains in a Ni-YSZ cermet anode using a vapor phase deposition, the resistance to coking was dramatically enhanced.2 The nanostructured BaO/Ni interfaces seem to be very efficient for the water-mediated carbon removal; they also showed good sulfur tolerance while maintaining high performance.
One limitation of BZCY or BZCYYb-based materials is the possible chemical reaction with H2S. For example, BaS was formed when BZCY was exposed to H2 with 60 ppm H2S,196 consistent with the prediction shown in Fig. 19. Indeed, the Ni-BZCYYb anode experienced rapid deterioration upon exposure to 100 ppm H2S/H2.1 Finally, as discussed above, the sulfur tolerance of the BZCY or BZCYYb materials is associated with their ability to adsorb or absorb water. In addition, it is expected that increasing the Zr/Ce ratio may enhance the stability of the Ni-BZCY anode toward sulfur poisoning due to the reduced susceptibility towards reaction with H2S.
7 Concluding remarks and future prospects
•Sulfur poisoning of Ni-YSZ anode
The detrimental effect of hydrogen sulfide in the fuel stream for SOFCs is well known and the sulfur poisoning behavior of Ni-YSZ anodes has been extensively studied. Under typical SOFC operating conditions (with low concentration of sulfur contaminants), H2S quickly dissociates into hydrogen and elemental sulfur. It is the elemental sulfur that strongly adsorbs on the nickel surface and blocks the active sites for electrochemical oxidation of the fuel, leading to increased anode polarization or sulfur poisoning effect. This is supported by the experimental observation of an instant drop in fuel cell performance (or increase in anode polarization resistance) upon exposure of Ni-YSZ anodes to fuels containing H2S of concentrations well below those predicted for bulk nickel sulfides formation. It is also corroborated by the absence of bulk nickel sulfides on Ni-YSZ anodes in well-designed in situ and ex situ experiments under similar conditions.
The degree or extent of sulfur poisoning is best described by the change in exchange current density or the change in anode polarization resistance (under open circuit conditions) upon exposure to H2S because they are independent of bias conditions (i.e., current density or cell voltage). The factors that critically influence the degree of sulfur poisoning are H2S concentration (or the pH2S/pH2 ratio) and fuel cell operating temperature. Other factors that also influence the observed poisoning behavior include current density, cell voltage, the amount of nickel in the anode, test cell configuration, concentration of other gases (such as H2O, CO2, and CO), and the time of exposure, as revealed from various experiments and theoretical analysis.
The poisoning effect is reversible when the H2S concentration is below the critical value for formation of bulk nickel sulfides. Within this limit, the degradation in performance (or the change in anode polarization resistance) can be completely recovered when H2S is removed from the fuel, suggesting that the elemental sulfur on the Ni surface can be completely removed. It is noted, however, that the adsorption of sulfur on Ni is much faster than the removal of adsorbed sulfur (S*) from Ni surface. The rate of recovery (or sulfur removal) is faster at a higher operating temperature, in a lower H2S concentration, and for a shorter period of exposure to H2S. Once nickel sulfides are formed, however, it appears that the degradation in performance can no longer be completely recovered, even long after the removal of H2S from the fuel, and even though the nickel sulfides may be completely converted back to nickel metal, suggesting that the formation of nickel sulfides may have an irreparable effect on anode performance. Further, other factors like contamination from other cell components (e.g., sealant) and microstructural changes (due to coarsening of porous electrodes) may also induce irreversible effects on anode behavior.
•Alternative anode materials for sulfur tolerance
Various alternative anode materials and different combinations of them have been examined as sulfur-tolerant anodes for SOFCs. Among them, one prominent group is nickel-free conductive metal oxides, which are perceived to have the potential for solving the problems associated with Ni-based cermet anodes: susceptibility to poisoning by impurities like sulfur, destruction by re-oxidation, and deactivation by carbon deposition in hydrocarbon fuels. While many of them have showed excellent sulfur tolerance with electrolyte-supported cells, their applicability to practical high-performance cells is severely hindered by their low electrical conductivity, poor catalytic activity toward fuel oxidation, and limited compatibility with electrolyte (or other cell components) at high temperatures required for fabrication.
For anodes with Ni replaced by other metals, the main concern is poor performance due to low catalytic activity unless precious metals (e.g., Pt and Pd) are introduced by infiltration. The use of precious metals, however, may not be economically feasible for practical applications. For most metal sulfide based anodes, the main concern is their instability in clean hydrogen fuel.
Ni-BZCYYb cermet anode is unique in the sense that Ni is still active as the catalyst for efficient hydrogen oxidation and as electronic conductor in the anode for current collection. Its excellent sulfur tolerance may be associated with the ability of the BZCYYb material for dissociative adsorption of water, which effectively promotes the removal of adsorbed sulfur from the TPB and enhances the sulfur tolerance. BaO nano-islands are also found on the surfaces of Ni that is co-fired with BZCYYb, which may further facilitate dissociative adsorption of water at the BaO/Ni interfaces and thus promote sulfur removal from the surface of Ni.2
Finally, it is worth mentioning that for all sulfur tolerant anode materials (except probably bulk metal sulfides), there usually appears to be a critical sulfur concentration above which the degradation in cell performance becomes significant.
•Achieving sulfur tolerance through surface modification
Although many new anode materials with better sulfur tolerance have been developed, the adoption of these materials in fuel cells is often hindered by their limited compatibility with other cell components (especially at high temperatures required for fabrication), inadequate catalytic activity toward fuel oxidation, and/or insufficient conductivity for current collection. Accordingly, surface modification of Ni-YSZ cermet anodes with proper catalytic coatings remains an attractive option for dramatic enhancement of tolerance to contaminants without compromising performance. It is proven that Ni-YSZ offers the highest performance in clean hydrogen among all materials ever studied for SOFC anodes in addition to its excellent compatibility with the YSZ electrolyte for cost-effective fabrication of anode-supported cells. The best approach is to minimize its sensitivity to sulfur using a very thin catalytic coating that does not significantly affect its activity for hydrogen oxidation and excellent electronic conductivity. In particular, modification of the Ni-YSZ cermet anode by incorporation of oxides via infiltration is a promising route to achieving sulfur tolerance while maintaining high performance. It is important to note, however, that the performance of the infiltrated Ni-YSZ anodes depends critically on the detailed microstructure, composition, morphology, and distribution/dispersion of the catalytic coating on the surface of Ni/YSZ.
•Ex situ and in situ characterizations
The interactions between sulfur compounds and anode materials for SOFCs have been characterized using various ex situ and in situ characterization techniques. Ex situ characterizations should be performed with great care to avoid complications introduced during sample preparation and transfer because samples may undergo undesirable changes when they are transferred from the actual testing conditions to the analysis chamber for characterization (due to changes in temperature and atmosphere). In contrast, in situ characterizations may be used to directly probe and map surface species or new phases on electrode surface under practical operating conditions, offering valuable information about electrode surface processes in real time. In particular, in situ Raman microspectroscopy is proven unique because it has demonstrated high sensitivity to various bulk and surface species and phases (including sulfides) relevant to sulfur poisoning with reasonable spatial resolution. It can be used to probe and map surface molecular processes or incipient new phase formation relevant to electrode kinetics under practical fuel cell operating conditions. It has been successfully applied to study the (bulk) sulfides formation and related phase transformations, providing valuable information about fundamental mechanisms for the sulfur–anode interactions in SOFCs. Further, when combined with simultaneous electrochemical measurements (e.g., impedance spectroscopy), the surface species or phases identified using Raman spectroscopy can be directly correlated with electrochemical behavior and performance of the electrodes.
In addition, Raman measurements can also be used to validate DFT-based calculations. The vibrational mode frequencies can be calculated from the interaction forces between atoms when displacements are introduced. Comparison of the calculated frequencies with the measured ones from Raman spectroscopy enables the confirmation of the models used for DFT calculations.
•Theoretical calculations
While significant progress has been made in gaining insights into the mechanisms of the atomistic or molecular processes relevant to the interactions between H2S and anode surfaces, major challenges still remain to bridge the gaps between models at different scales or between theoretical predictions and experiments.197–203 One of the difficulties in application of DFT calculations to prediction of materials properties200,203 is related to the errors from the delocalization of electron density and static correlation, especially for materials containing metal ions with open shell d or f electrons. This may affect the calculations of reaction sequence and adsorption energy, but can be corrected by introducing fractional charges or spins to the system.200 In addition, DOS analysis of some oxides or sulfides with mixed electron distribution might produce fictitious band structures. This problem can be corrected using DFT + U theory with suitable intra-atomic parameters of Coulomb and exchange energies.203,204
Furthermore, to assure practically useful results from DFT-based predictions, design factors for the highly complicated electrochemical systems must be examined. One possible way is to apply the quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) methodology205 to model practical sizes with the TPBs; it consists of two input regions, chemically active and non-active ones, treated by the QM and MM approaches, respectively. Fig. 21 schematically illustrates the TPB divided into the two regions. The most active part of the TPB can be modeled using high-accuracy quantum chemical calculations, while the vicinity can be treated with low-cost MM approaches. The QM/MM approach will allow modeling and simulation of larger-scale models over longer times. After clarifying the mechanisms of the H2S interaction with anode surfaces at the TPB to design more sulfur-tolerant materials with high catalytic activity and durability, micro-kinetic modeling206 or kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC)207–209 simulations can be applied to explore the most probable reaction pathway. A prerequisite for making the most of kinetic simulations for these complex systems is to have a reliable prediction of the rate constant for each elementary step involved.210,211
 Fig. 21  Graphical illustration of the H2S interaction with Ni/YSZ divided into two regions for applying the QM/MM (quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics) methodology. 
Finally, an atomic force field approach may use parameters derived from DFT calculations and may be combined with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to study the time-dependent evolution and temperature-dependent properties of anode systems. These atomistic simulations may also provide input phenomenological parameters needed for larger-scale continuum modeling for electrochemical measurements such as impedance spectroscopy. Considerable efforts are still required to develop proper continuum (phenomenological kinetics and transport) models to directly link the predictions from DFT/MD calculations with material performance, to validate model structures, and to estimate material parameters from macroscopic measurements (e.g., catalytic and electrochemical properties). If successful, the local electrochemical response of an anode (governed by the thermodynamics and kinetics of the electrochemical reactions at the interfaces) may be linked to their global behavior by incorporating the effects of the nano- and microstructural geometry of the anode across length scales through a computational framework. These multi-scale modeling and simulation tools are imperative to achieving rational design of anode materials and structures with better sulfur tolerance and higher performance.
•Progress in desulfurization and anticipated sulfur content in typical fuels
Development in desulfurization of hydrocarbon fuels is important for SOFC research since most current SOFCs still use desulfurizer as a solution to sulfur poisoning. Recent progress in desulfurization is also very encouraging. For example, Toyota Motor Corporation and Aisin Seiki have announced successful demonstration of desulfurization unit capable of maintenance-free operation for up to 10 years.212 Thus, a review of the state-of-the-art desulfurization technology and related materials would be very useful to researchers in the area of SOFC anode research. Another question is the anticipated level of H2S that an SOFC anode should be able to tolerate. Realistically, it may be less practical to push the H2S tolerance level far beyond tens of ppm213–217 because today's clean natural gas for power generation usually contains sulfur of only up to ∼30 ppm and sulfur concentration in diesel and gasoline also drops to the low ppm level. In addition, high sulfur concentration poses severe corrosion and environmental concerns; even if new anode materials can tolerate higher concentration of H2S, the fuel cell exhaust containing sulfur compounds (SO2, H2S, etc.) still needs to be cleaned before being emitted to the air.
Acknowledgements
This material was based upon work supported as part of the HeteroFoaM Center, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES) under Award Number DE-SC0001061. The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of their past colleagues (Drs Shaowu Zha, Shizhong Wang, Jian Dong, Chendong Zuo, Songho Choi, and Mingfei Liu) to many experimental measurements and theoretical calculations summarized in this paper. ML acknowledges partial support from the WCU project at UNIST by the South Korean Government. JW, YC, and MCL acknowledge the use of computational resources from the National Center for High-Performance Computing, Taiwan, supported by INER.
References
L. Yang, S. Wang, K. Blinn, M. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Cheng and M. Liu, Science, 2009, 326, 126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Choi, W. Qin, H. Chen, K. Blinn, M. Liu, P. Liu, J. Bai, T. A. Tyson and M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 357 Search PubMed .

          R. M. Ormerod, in High Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: Fundamentals, Design and Applications, ed. S. C. Singhal and K. Kendall, Elsevier Ltd, Oxford, UK,  2003, ch. 12, pp. 333–361 Search PubMed .
Y. Yi, A. D. Rao, J. Brouwer and G. S. Samuelsen, J. Power Sources, 2005, 144, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hawkes, I. Staffell, D. Brett and N. Brandon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 729–744 RSC .
J. Weissbart and R. Ruka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1962, 109, 723–726 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Lee, R. F. Zabransky and W. J. Huber, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1990, 29, 766–773 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Dicks, J. Power Sources, 1996, 61, 113–124 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suzuki, T. Yamaguchi, K. Hamamoto, Y. Fujishiro, M. Awano and N. Sammes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 940–943 RSC .
T. Kivisaari, P. Björnbom, C. Sylwan, B. Jacquinot, D. Jansen and A. de Groot, Chem. Eng. J., 2004, 100, 167–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Trembly, A. I. Marquez, T. R. Ohrn and D. J. Bayless, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 263–273 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Williams, J. Strakey and W. Sudoval, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Gür, M. Homel and A. V. Virkar, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1085–1090 CrossRef .
R. Singh, F. Guzman, R. Khatri and S. S. C. Chuang, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 1176–1183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Staniforth and K. Kendall, J. Power Sources, 1998, 71, 275–277 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baron, N. Brandon, A. Atkinson, B. Steele and R. Rudkin, J. Power Sources, 2004, 126, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
P. Leone, A. Lanzini, M. Santarelli, M. Calì, F. Sagnelli, A. Boulanger, A. Scaletta and P. Zitella, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. F. van Gerwen, in High Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: Fundamentals, Design and Applications, ed. S. C. Singhal and K. Kendall, Elsevier Ltd, Oxford, UK,  2003, ch. 13, pp. 363–392 Search PubMed .

          T. Watanabe and S. Maeda, Science and Technology Trends Quarterly Review,  2007, pp. 65–78 Search PubMed .
R.-U. Dietrich, J. Oelze, A. Lindermeir, C. Spitta, M. Steffen, T. Küster, S. Chen, C. Schlitzberger and R. Leithner, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7152–7160 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nehter, J. B. Hansen and P. K. Larsen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7347–7354 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, P. V. Aravind, T. Woudstra, V. R. M. Cobas and A. H. M. Verkooijen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7277–7289 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Park, J.-H. Ahn and T. S. Kim, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 2976–2987 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Schroeder and P. Majumdar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 11308–11314 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Cayan, M. Zhi, S. R. Pakalapati, I. Celik, N. Wu and R. Gemmen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 595–602 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding and T. Hashida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1729–1731 RSC .
Y. Matsuzaki and I. Yasuda, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 132, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Q. Minh and T. Takahashi, Science and Technology of Ceramic Fuel Cells, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,  1995 Search PubMed .

          A. McEvoy, in High Temperature Solid Oxide Fuels Cells: Fundamentals, Design and Applications, ed. S. C. Singh and K. Kendall, Elsevier, Ltd, Oxford, UK,  2003, pp. 149–171 Search PubMed .
W. Z. Zhu and S. C. Deevi, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2003, 362, 228–239 CrossRef .
A. Atkinson, S. Barnett, R. J. Gorte, J. T. S. Irvine, A. J. McEvoy, M. Mogensen, S. C. Singhal and J. Vohs, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 17–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Jiang and S. H. Chan, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 4405–4439 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, X. Liu, J. Trembly and C. Johnson, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 289–298 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun and U. Stimming, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 247–260 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Cheng, J.-H. Wang and M. Liu, in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: Materials Properties and Performance, ed. J. W. Fergus, R. Hui, X. Li, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, CRC Press,  2009, pp. 73–129 Search PubMed .
S. McIntosh and R. J. Gorte, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4845–4866 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sarantaridis and A. Atkinson, Fuel Cells, 2007, 7, 246–258 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuzjukevics and S. Linderoth, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 93, 255–261 CrossRef CAS .
J. Van herle, R. Ihringer and A. J. McEvoy, ECS Trans., 1997, 97–40, 565–574 Search PubMed .
S. Majumdar, T. Claar and B. Flandermeyer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1986, 69, 628–633 CAS .
A. C. Müller, D. Herbstritt and E. Ivers-Tiffée, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 152–153, 537–542 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Radovic, E. Lara-Curzio, R. M. Trejo, H. Wang and W. D. Porter, Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings,  2008, 27-4, 79–85 Search PubMed .
J. H. Yu, G. W. Park, S. Lee and S. K. Woo, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 926–932 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Ishihara, N. M. Sammes and O. Yamamoto, in High Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: Fundamentals, Design and Applications, ed. S. C. Singhal and K. Kendall, Elsevier Ltd, Oxford, UK,  2003, ch. 4, pp. 83–117 Search PubMed .
N. Q. Minh, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 563–588 CAS .
H. Koide, Y. Someya, T. Yoshida and T. Maruyama, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 132, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. Glauche, T. Betz, S. Mosch, N. Trofimenko and M. Kusnezoff, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 411–419 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee, K. Haltiner, D. Klotzbach, J. Vordonis, A. Iyer, R. Kerr, V. Sprenkle, J. Y. Kim, K. Meinhardt, N. Canfield, J. Darsell, B. Kirby, T. K. Oh, G. Maupin, B. Voldrich and J. Bonnett, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 59–63 Search PubMed .

          J. Pierre, The Siemens Energy Coal Based SECA Program, http://www.netl.doe.gov/publications/proceedings/10/seca/Presentations/Pierre_Presentation.pdf.
S. Primdahl and M. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3409–3419 CAS .
I. Burmistrov and S. Bredikhin, Ionics, 2009, 15, 465–468 CrossRef CAS .

          S. C. Singhal, R. J. Ruka, J. E. Bauerle, and C. J. Spengler, Anode Development for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, Final Technical Report,  1986, The Department of Energy DOE/MC/22046-2371 (NITS Order No. DE87011136), Pittsburgh, PA Search PubMed.
K. Sasaki, K. Susuki, A. Iyoshi, M. Uchimura, N. Imamura, H. Kusaba, Y. Teraoka, H. Fuchino, K. Tsujimoto, Y. Uchida and N. Jingo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2023–A2029 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zha, Z. Cheng and M. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B201–B206 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, S. Zha and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 688–693 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng and M. Liu, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 925–935 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Sprenkle, J. Y. Kim, K. Meinhardt, C. Lu, L. Chick, N. Canfield, J. Bonnett, S. Mukerjee and S. Shaffer, presented in part at the The 31st International Cocoa Beach Conference & Exposition on Advanced Ceramics and Composites, Daytona Beach, FL,  2007.
A. Ishikura, S. Sakuno, N. Komiyama, H. Sasatsu, N. Masuyama, H. Itoh and K. Yasumoto, ECS Trans., 2007, 7, 845–850 Search PubMed .
J. B. Hansen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B178–B180 CrossRef CAS .

          J. B. Hansen and J. Rostrup-Nielsen, in Handbook of Fuel Cells, Volumes 5 & 6: Advances in Electrocatalysis, Materials, Diagnostics and Durability, ed. W. Vielstich, H. Yokokawa and H. A. Gasteiger, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2009, vol. 6, ch. 65, pp. 1–13 Search PubMed .

          D. Waldbillig, D. G. Ivey and A. Wood, Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Technologies, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Technologies, 1st edn,  2005, pp. 237–249 Search PubMed .

          Z. Cheng, Investigations into the Interactions between Sulfur and Anodes for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, http://hdl.handle.net/1853/22678.
J. G. McCarty and H. Wise, J. Chem. Phys., 1980, 72, 6332 CrossRef CAS .
I. Alstrup, J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen and S. Røen, Appl. Catal., 1981, 1, 303–314 Search PubMed .
C. H. Bartholomew, P. K. Agrawal and J. R. Katzer, Adv. Catal., 1982, 31, 135–242 CAS .
J.-H. Wang and M. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2212–2217 CrossRef CAS .
R. Barfod, A. Hagen, S. Ramousse, P. V. Hendriksen and M. Mogensen, Fuel Cells, 2006, 6, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukerjee, K. Haltiner, R. Kerr, L. Chick, V. Sprenkle, K. Meinhardt, C. Lu, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Weil, ECS Trans., 2007, 7, 59–65 Search PubMed .
T. S. Li, H. Miao, T. Chen, W. G. Wang and C. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B1383–B1388 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lohsoontorn, D. J. L. Brett and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 232–239 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Li and W. G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2066–2069 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lakshminarayanan and U. S. Ozkan, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 393, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feduska and A. O. Isenberg, J. Power Sources, 1983, 10, 89–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. B. Rasmussen and A. Hagen, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Primdahl and M. Mogensen, ECS Trans., 1999, 99–19, 530–540 Search PubMed .

          E. Ivers-Tiffée and A. V. Virkar, in High Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: Fundamentals, Design and Applications, ed. S. C. Singhal and K. Kendall, Elsevier Ltd, Oxford, UK,  2003, ch. 9, pp. 229–260 Search PubMed .

          O. A. Marina, L. R. Pedersen and J. W. Stevenson, Effect of sulfur and hydrocarbon fuels on titanate/ceria SOFC anodes, http://www.netl.doe.gov/publications/proceedings/05/SECA_PeerReview/pdf/Marina.PNNL%20Fri%20AM.pdf.
N. U. Pujare, K. W. Semkow and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 2639–2640 CrossRef CAS .

          DOE, DOE/MC/26355–92/C0062 (DE92040255), ed. N. J. Maskalick and E. R. Ray, Washington DC 1992.
E. Batawi, U. Weissen, A. Schuler, M. Keller and C. Voisard, ECS Trans., 2001, 2001–16, 140–147 Search PubMed .
J. Iritani, K. Kougami, N. Komiyama, K. Nagata, K. Ikeda and K. Tomida, ECS Trans., 2001, 2001–16, 63–71 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, Z. Cheng, M. Liu and L. Wilson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1804–1809 RSC .

          N. J. Maskalick, E. R. Ray and C. J. Spengler, in Third Annual Fuel Cells Contractors Review Meeting, ed. W. J. Huber, DOE, DOE/METC—91/6120 (DE 91002085), Washington, DC,  1992, pp. 116–108 Search PubMed .
A. Hagen, J. F. B. Rasmussen and K. Thydén, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7271–7276 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. B. Rasmussen and A. Hagen, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 534–541 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lussier, S. Sofie, J. Dvorak and Y. U. Idzerda, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 3945–3951 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Xia and V. I. Birss, ECS Trans., 2005, 2005–07, 1275–1283 Search PubMed .
T. S. Li, W. G. Wang, T. Chen, H. Miao and C. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7025–7032 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kurokawa, T. Z. Sholklapper, C. P. Jacobson, L. C. De Jonghe and S. J. Visco, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, B135–B138 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Ivey, E. Brightman and N. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6301–6311 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fergus, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1529–1541 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Yun, S. P. Yoon, S. Park, H. S. Kim and S. W. Nam, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 787–796 CrossRef CAS .
M. Smith and A. J. McEvoy, ECS Trans., 2005, 2005–07, 1437–1444 Search PubMed .
M. J. Smith and A. J. McEvoy, ECS Trans., 2007, 7, 373–380 Search PubMed .
O. A. Marina, C. A. Coyle, M. H. Engelhard and L. R. Pederson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B424–B429 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, D. Marrero-Lopez, M. Galvez-Sanchez, J. Canales-Vazquez, C. Savaniu and S. N. Savvin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1670–1681 RSC .
M. R. Pillai, I. Kim, D. M. Bierschenk and S. A. Barnett, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1086–1093 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ouweltjes, P. V. Aravind, N. Woudstra and G. Rietveld, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2006, 3, 495–498 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Aravind, J. P. Ouweltjes, N. Woudstra and G. Rietveld, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B24–B28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. P. Jiang, H. Q. He, X. Chen, J. Ma and X. C. Song, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 12359–12368 CrossRef CAS .
E. Brightman, D. G. Ivey, D. J. L. Brett and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7182–7187 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Bessler, M. Vogler, H. Stormer, D. Gerthsen, A. Utz, A. Weber and E. Ivers-Tiffee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13888–13903 RSC .
T. J. Kirk and J. Winnick, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 3494–3496 CAS .
H. P. He, R. J. Gorte and J. M. Vohs, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A279–A280 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, X. Ye and Z. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6201–6204 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Choi, Development of SOFC anodes resistant to sulfur poisoning and carbon deposition, http://hdl.handle.net/1853/26601.
O. A. Marina, N. L. Canfield and J. W. Stevenson, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 149, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .

          O. A. Marina and J. W. Stevenson, Development of ceramic composites as SOFC anodes, http://www.netl.doe.gov/publications/proceedings/03/seca-review/marina.pdf.

          O. A. Marina, Development of advanced SOFC anodes, http://www.netl.doe.gov/publications/proceedings/04/seca-wrkshp/PNNL%20-%20Marina.pdf.
R. Mukundan, E. L. Brosha and F. H. Garzon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A5–A7 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kurokawa, L. Yang, C. P. Jacobson, L. C. De Jonghe and S. J. Visco, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 510–518 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burke, S. Li, J. Winnick and M. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, D55–D60 CrossRef CAS .
L. Aguilar, S. W. Zha, S. W. Li, J. Winnick and M. Liu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A324–A326 CrossRef CAS .
L. Aguilar, S. W. Zha, Z. Cheng, J. Winnick and M. L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2004, 135, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, S. W. Zha, L. Aguilar and M. L. Liu, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 1921–1928 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, S. W. Zha, L. Aguilar, D. Wang, J. Winnick and M. L. Liu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A31–A33 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cooper, K. Channa, R. De Silva and D. J. Bayless, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1713–B1718 CrossRef CAS .
N. Danilovic, J.-L. Luo, K. T. Chuang and A. R. Sanger, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 247–257 CrossRef CAS .
N. Danilovic, J.-L. Luo, K. T. Chuang and A. R. Sanger, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 252–262 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Zha, P. Tsang, Z. Cheng and M. L. Liu, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 1844–1850 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Zha, Z. Cheng and M. L. Liu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A406–A408 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zha, Z. Cheng and M. Liu, ECS Trans., 2006, 1, 293–302 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Huang, R. I. Dass, Z. L. Xing and J. B. Goodenough, Science, 2006, 312, 254–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Huang, R. I. Dass, J. C. Denyszyn and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1266–A1272 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiao, Q. Liu, X. Dong, K. Huang and F. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 8071–8074 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Lu, J. H. Zhu, Z. Yang, G. Xia and J. W. Stevenson, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 381–384 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A252–A259 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Chen, Q. L. Liu, S. H. Chan, N. P. Brandon and K. A. Khor, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B1206–B1210 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, J. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 1032–1037 .
S. Wang, M. Liu and J. Winnick, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2001, 5, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
R. Moos and K. H. Hardtl, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
N. U. Pujare, K. J. Tsai and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 3662–3678 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yates and J. Winnick, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2841–2844 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Chuang, A. R. Sanger, S. V. Slavov and J. C. Donini, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, G. L. Wei, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1025–A1029 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Wei, M. Liu, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A463–A469 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, M. Liu, G. L. Wei and K. Chuang, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2003, 11, 245–248 Search PubMed .
J.-J. Chen, L. Zhong, G.-L. Wei and K. Chuang, J. S. China Univ. Tech., 2004, 32, 1–4 Search PubMed .
G. L. Wei, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A232–A237 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, J. Chen, G. Wei, J. Luo and K. Chuang, J. Chem. Ind. Eng., 2004, 55, 1732–1735 Search PubMed .
G. L. Wei, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2005, 8, 59–64 CAS .
L. Zhong, G.-L. Wei, J.-L. Luo and K. Chuang, Acta Scientiarum Natralium Universitatis Sunyatseni, 2005, 44, 61–65 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, J. Luo and K. T. Chuang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B523–B527 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vorontsov, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Chuang, J. Luo and A. R. Sanger, Chemical Industry and Chemical Engineering Quarterly, 2008, 14, 69–76 Search PubMed .
Z.-R. Xu, J.-L. Luo and K. T. Chuang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 458–462 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vorontsov, W. An, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
J. Winkler, P. V. Hendriksen, N. Bonanos and M. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1184–1192 CAS .
S. B. Adler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, E166–E172 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Dees, U. Balachandran, S. E. Dorris, J. J. Heiberger, C. C. McPheeters and J. J. Picciolo, ECS Trans., 1989, 89(11), 317–321 Search PubMed .
M. B. Pomfret, J. C. Owrutsky and R. A. Walker, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2010, 3, 151–174 Search PubMed .
Z. Cheng, H. Abernathy and M. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17997–18000 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, S. Zha and M. Liu, ECS Trans., 2005, 2005–07, 1284–1293 Search PubMed .
J. Dong, Z. Cheng, S. W. Zha and M. L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 461–465 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Wang, Z. Cheng, J.-L. Bredas and M. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 214705/214701–214705/214708 .

          F. Jensen, Introduction to Computational Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons Inc, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .

          J. H. Wang, Y. M. Choi and M. Liu, in Quantum Chemical Calculations of Surfaces and Interfaces of Materials, ed. V. A. Basiuk and P. Ugliengo, American Scientific Publishers, Los Angeles,  2008, ch. 14, pp. 289–304 Search PubMed .
Y. Choi, D. Mebane, J.-H. Wang and M. Liu, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 386–401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, M. C. Lin and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1441–1445 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Broadbelt and R. Q. Snurr, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 200, 23–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. Neurock, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 73–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, J. K. Nørskov and M. Mavrikakis, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2002, 53, 319–348 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, S. W. Zha and M. L. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1302–A1309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Choi, C. Compson, M. C. Lin and M. L. Liu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 421, 179–183 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Galea, E. S. Kadantsev and T. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14457–14468 CrossRef CAS .
A. Michaelides and P. Hu, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 8570–8574 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Alfonso, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 2758–2768 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Alfonso, A. V. Cugini and D. C. Sorescu, Catal. Today, 2005, 99, 315 CrossRef CAS .
B. McAllister and P. Hu, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 84709 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19140–19145 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, Surf. Sci., 2005, 583, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Choi, C. Compson, M. C. Lin and M. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 427, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
W.-F. Huang, H.-T. Chen and M. C. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20411–20420 CrossRef CAS .
H.-T. Chen, Y. Choi, M. Liu and M. C. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11117 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Huang, C.-H. Lin and J. H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9826 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Albenze and A. Shamsi, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 3202–3216 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 71 CAS .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, B. Hvolbak, F. Abild-Pedersen, I. Chorkendorff and C. H. Christensen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2163 RSC .
H. Kim, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2334–2335 RSC .
C. M. Grgicak, M. M. Pakulska, J. S. O'Brien and J. B. Giorgi, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 26 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rodriguez, S. Chaturvedi, T. Jirsak and J. Hrbek, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 4052 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Norskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 10240–10246 CrossRef CAS .
W.-X. Li, C. Stampfl and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 68, 165412 CrossRef .
S. Laursen and S. Linic, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 026101 CrossRef .

          NIST, http://webbook.nist.gov/.
J.-H. Wang and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 176, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
N. Barbouth and J. Oudar, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. C, 1969, 269, 1618 Search PubMed .
T. Rosenqvist, J. Iron Steel Inst., London, 1954, 176, 37 Search PubMed .
J. Li, J.-L. Luo, K. T. Chuang and A. R. Sanger, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3701–3707 CrossRef CAS .
U. S. Ozkan, L. Zhang, S. Ni and E. Moctezuma, Energy Fuels, 1994, 8, 830–838 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Bishop, P. S. Thomas and A. S. Ray, Mater. Res. Bull., 2000, 35, 1123–1128 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shen, D. Chen, K. Tang, C. An, Q. Yang and Y. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 173, 227–231 CrossRef CAS .
C. de las Heras and F. Agulló-Rueda, J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter, 2000, 12, 5317 CrossRef CAS .
E. Anastassakis and C. H. Perry, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64, 3604–3609 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suzuki, K. Uchinokura, T. Sekine and E. Matsuura, Solid State Commun., 1977, 23, 847–852 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, L. Bi, X. Wu, H. Gao, C. Chen and W. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fahrenkamp-Uppenbrink, P. Szuromi, J. Yeston and R. Coontz, Science, 2008, 321, 783 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Stone, Science, 2008, 321, 787–789 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Clary, Science, 2008, 321, 789–791 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sánchez and W. Yang, Science, 2008, 321, 792–794 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Kroes, Science, 2008, 321, 794–797 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Klein and W. Shinoda, Science, 2008, 321, 798–800 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Carter, Science, 2008, 321, 800–803 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Liechtenstein, V. I. Anisimov and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1995, 52, R5467 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin and D. Truhlar, Theor. Chem. Accounts: Theor. Comput. Model. Theor. Chim. Acta, 2007, 117, 185–199 Search PubMed .
A. A. Gokhale, S. Kandoi, J. P. Greeley, M. Mavrikakis and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 4679–4691 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lukkien, J. P. L. Segers, P. A. J. Hilbers, R. J. Gelten and A. P. J. Jansen, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1998, 58, 2598 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mei, M. Neurock and C. M. Smith, J. Catal., 2009, 268, 181–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi and P. Liu, Catal. Today, 2011, 165, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhu and M. C. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14481–14485 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Blaylock, T. Ogura, W. H. Green and G. J. O. Beran, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4898–4908 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www2.toyota.co.jp/en/news/10/09/0907.html, TMC, Aisin to Provide Improved Fuel Cells for Test Project.
D. Peterson and J. Winnick, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, L55–L56 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Peterson and J. Winnick, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1449–1454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, P. He, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .
P. He, M. Liu, J. L. Luo, A. R. Sanger and K. T. Chuang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A808–A814 CrossRef CAS .
D. Monder, K. Nandakumar and K. T. Chuang, ECS Trans., 2005, 2005–07, 837–844 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Current address: Central Research & Development, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Delaware 19880, USA.‡ Current address: Chemistry Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Zhe Cheng
	Zhe Cheng is a research scientist at the Central Research & Development Division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company in Wilmington, Delaware, USA. He received his BS from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China, and both MS and PhD from Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Zhe’s PhD advisor was Professor Meilin Liu, and his thesis focused on studying sulfur-anode interaction mechanisms and developing novel sulfur-tolerant anode materials for solid oxide fuel cells. His current research is on advanced electrode materials for lithium ion batteries and new metallization and passivation materials for silicon solar cells.

Jeng-Han Wang
	Jeng-Han Wang obtained his PhD in Chemistry from Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. In 2008, he accepted an Assistant Professor position in the Chemistry Department at National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan. His research interests include the investigation of mechanisms for gas-surface interfacial reactions and understanding the fundamental chemistry of heterogeneous catalysts for the better design of novel materials. His current research activities focus on the reforming of carbon-containing feedstocks for hydrogen production.

Meilin Liu
	Meilin Liu is a Regents' Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and Co-Director of the Center for Innovative Fuel Cell and Battery Technologies at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. He received his BS from South China University of Technology and MS and PhD from University of California at Berkeley. His research interests include in situ characterization and multi-scale modeling of charge and mass transfer along surfaces, across interfaces, and in membranes, thin films, and nanostructured electrodes, aiming at achieving rational design of materials and structures with unique functionalities for efficient energy storage and conversion.

Broader context
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) offer great prospects for the most efficient utilization of a wide variety of chemical fuels, from hydrocarbon fuels to carbonaceous solid fuels (such as coal, biomass, and municipal solid waste). For example, combined-heat-and-power systems based on SOFCs are twice as efficient as today's coal-fired power plants, potentially reducing CO2 emission by 50%. Before SOFCs can be widely adopted, however, several hurdles must be overcome: high cost, poor durability, and anode deactivation or degradation by contaminants, especially sulfur in a variety of readily available fuels. Even renewable hydrocarbon sources like biogas also contain sulfur contaminants. Thus, the development of sulfur-tolerant anode materials and structures represents a grand challenge facing the commercialization of economically competitive SOFCs. To date, extensive efforts have been devoted to gaining a profound understanding of the sulfur–anode interactions using both experimental and theoretical approaches and have led to discoveries of some promising alternative anode materials that display superior sulfur tolerance while maintaining high performance and ease of fabrication. These findings would not only advance the SOFC technology but also benefit research in other related areas like desulfurization catalysts for fuel processing and materials for corrosion inhibition in sulfur-containing environments.


 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic for an SOFC single cell and (b) a cross-sectional view (SEM micrograph) of a single cell with a thin (∼12 μm) electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 2  A simplified schematic for an SOFC system.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic for the electrochemical measurement system for an SOFC button cell with reference electrodes on both anode and cathode sides.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic for power output versus time for SOFCs with Ni-YSZ cermet anode showing sulfur poisoning with rapid initial degradation followed by different 2ndstage behaviors: (solid line) no 2ndstage slow degradation: power output saturates right after initial rapid degradation; (dotted line) a slow 2ndstage degradation followed by a steady state; (dashed line) a slow 2ndstage degradation showing no steady state after very long time (e.g., thousands of hours).	 

 	Fig. 5  Relative power output drop due to sulfur poisoning, ΔPr, versus pH2S/pH2 at different temperatures for the electrolyte-supported SOFC button cell operated at a constant voltage of 0.7 V. Adopted from Zha et al.54 with modifications.	 

 	Fig. 6  Relative increase in anode interfacial resistance, ΔRSpa_r, versus pH2S/pH2 for Ni-YSZ cermet anodes at 750 and 900 °C. Data from Matsuzaki and Yasuda.27	 
S* + 2O2− = SO2(g) + 4e−,	(1)
S* + 2Oxo = SO2(g) + 2Vo˙˙ + 4e−.	(2)
ηa = jRpa	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
ΔU = U − Us = ηSa − ηa = jRSpa − jRpa = j(RSpa − Rpa),	(7)

 	Fig. 7  Plots of cell voltage and the difference in anode overpotential ΔU = ηSa − ηaversus cell current density for an anode-supported SOFC button cell before and after H2S (pH2S/pH2 = 11.8 ppm) was introduced into the fuel stream of 50% H2/1.5% H2O/48.5% N2 at 750 °C.	 
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)



Anode-supported cell	Cheng62	750 °C, 0.2 A cm−2	—	40	3.5
Waldbillig et al.61	750 °C, 0.5 A cm−2	200	30	—
Sprenkle et al.57,68	750 °C, 0.7 V	120	20	2
Yang et al.82	750 °C, 0.4 A cm−2	
	32	15
Electrolyte-supported cell	Zha	800 °C, 0.7 V	—	0.1	0.05


LSM, 200 mA cm−2	—	10.6%	—	37%
LSCF, 200 mA cm−2	7.9%	11.5%	60%	68%
LSM, 400 mA cm−2	10%	14.2%	27%	36%
LSCF, 400 mA cm−2	8.5%	13.0%	30%	54%
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 8  Change of calculated relative exchange current density jS0/j0versus calculated sulfur surface coverage on Ni surface θS using data in the literature.27,54,77	 



Feduska and Isenberg73	7 cathode supported tubular cell stacks	1000	N/A	150	333–1000	Not observed for 800 h
Iritani et al.81	22 cathode supported tubular cell stacks	900	60%	200	1	Not observed for 530 h
Batawi et al.80	5-cell stack	950?	N/A	200	100	Not observed for 450 h
Maskalick et al.79,83	Single cathode supported tubular cell	1000	85%	350	0.1	Not observed for 500 h
1000, 1025	85%	350	1	1500	No
1000	N/A	350	5	450	No
Singhal et al.52	Cathode-supported?	1000	N/A	250	10	80	No
Trembly et al.11	Single electrolyte-supported cella	850	40%b	200	837	450	Yes
Sprenkle et al.57,68	Single anode-supported button cell	750	N/A	1100c	0.1, 1, 10	200	No
Zha et al.54	Single electrolyte-supported button cell	800	<5%b	250c	2	24	No
800	<5%b	250c	100	120	No
Yang et al.82	Single anode-supported button cell	750	<5%	200–800	1–10	1000d	No
750	<5%	200–400	1–11	Not observed for 3000 he
Hagen et al.84	Single anode-supported cell	850	<32%b	1000	15	500	No

 		 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic for the in situ Raman microspectroscopy measurement system that is coupled with electrochemical measurement equipment.	 

Singhal et al.52	Ni-YSZ	SEM/EDX, photometric	900–1000	10	
Ex situ
	After poisoning and regeneration	No sulfur observed after regeneration
Waldbillig et al.61	Ni-YSZ	SEM/EDX, EM/EDX	750	0.1–10	
Ex situ
	Cells fully poisoned and fully regenerated	No sulfur or additional bulk phases (other than Ni and YSZ) detected
Sasaki et al.53	Ni-YSZ, Ni-SSZ	XPS, SEM/EDX	800	5–100	
Ex situ
	After poisoning, the sample was rapidly cooled in N2	The presence of sulfur was identified by XPS, Ni oxidized to NiO for cells that suffered irreversible voltage drop
Trembly et al.11	Ni-GDC	SEM/EDX, XPS	750	590	
Ex situ
	After cell testing for 580 h in the fuel with H2S	Morphology change observed, the significant presence of sulfur (percentage level) was identified using EDX, 5–7% loss in Ni and 1–2% gain in sulfur as indicated by XPS
Dong et al.153,154	Ni-YSZ	Raman, SEM, XRD	727	100	
Ex situ
	After exposure for 120 h, the sample cooled with the furnace in the fuel with 100 ppm H2S	Bulk nickel sulfide phases identified using Raman spectroscopy and XRD and morphology associated with melted particles identified using SEM
Cheng et al.56,152	Ni-YSZ	SEM/EDX, XRD, Raman	800	100	
Ex situ
	After exposure for 2–48 h, the sample cooled in the fuel with 100 ppm H2S	Ni3S2, NiS, Ni3S4 identified by Raman spectroscopy, dramatic morphology change on Ni
Raman	200–570	100	
In situ
	
	No bulk nickel sulfide formation at ∼500 °C and above; bulk sulfides (e.g., Ni3S2) started to form at ∼430 °C and below accompanied with dramatic morphology changes
Ishikura et al.58	Ni-YSZ	SEM/EDX, Raman	900	5–20	
Ex situ
	Cell failed after sulfur poisoning, then sulfur was removed so that cell recovered partially	The significant sulfur presence was identified via EDX, local products appear melted
Lussier et al.86	Ni-YSZ	XAS, XPS	750	100–1500	
Ex situ
	Not clear	Ni chemical state of Ni, NiO, and nickel sulfide mixture, for failed sample, the insulating ring in center is depleted of Ni
Rasmussen and Hagen85	Ni-YSZ	SEM/EDX	850	2–100	
Ex situ
	Not clear	Short term exposure did not change nickel distribution, no nickel compounds found in post-test EDS
Li et al.71,88	Ni-YSZ	SEM/EDX, XRD	800	2000	
Ex situ
	After poisoning	Bulk nickel sulfides (NiS, Ni4S3) were detected
Zhang et al.100	Ni-YSZ and Ni-GDC	SEM/EDX	800	5–700	
Ex situ
	After poisoning and recovery, cooled with the furnace in N2	No sulfur detected in EDX, significant morphology change on Ni as well as GDC but not on YSZ

 	Fig. 10  Optical microscopy images during in situ Raman microspectroscopy characterization of a same region on the polished surface of a dense Ni-YSZ cermet before (a) and after (b) the formation of the bulk Ni3S2 phase when the cermet was exposed to a fuel of 100 ppm H2S/H2 at ∼440 °C for 12 h152 (Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 111, 17997. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  Raman spectra taken in situ from the Ni region at 440 °C in a fuel of 100 ppm H2S/H2 before and after the formation of the bulk phase Ni3S2, as shown in Fig. 10152 (Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 111, 17997. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  Computational methods at different levels to design sulfur-tolerant SOFC anode materials.	 

 	Fig. 13  The interaction between H2S and Ni-YSZ cermet anodes at the macroscopic and molecular levels.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation of a slab model with a proper vacuum space for periodic DFT calculations. (b) Four active sites on a (111) plane. (c) Schematic energy profile of gas-phase H2S dissociation on Ni(111) forming atomic S* and H*. “*” denotes surface species. TS1 and TS2 are the transition states.	 


Pt(111)166	0.02	−0.90	0.04	−1.19
Pd(111)168	0.37	−1.25	0.04	−0.73
Rh(211)169	0.01	−1.50	0.32	−1.50
Fe(100)170	0.25	−1.30	0.28	−1.30
Fe(110)171	0.10	−1.50	0.11	−1.35
Ni(100)66	0.29	−1.56	0.45	−1.05
Ni(111)66	0.15	−0.98	0.11	−0.86
CeO2(111)174	0.08	−0.13	0.36	−1.08

Pt(111)166	0.90	3.00	5.14	—
Pd(111)168	0.71	3.02	5.15	—
Rh(211)169	1.00	3.69	6.00	2.86
Fe(100)170	0.50	3.60	6.00	2.70
Fe(110)171	1.20	3.80	5.80	3.20
Ni(100)66	0.83	3.72	5.96	2.84
Ni(111)66	0.67	2.95	5.14	2.91
CeO2(111)174	0.09–0.15	1.36–1.46	6.60	—

FCC	5.14	5.15	5.44, 5.16, 5.14	4.36
HCP	4.97	
	5.42, 5.06	4.32
Bridge	4.47	5.21, 5.02	4.21
Atop	3.04	3.92, 3.62, 3.62	3.22

 	Fig. 15  (a) DOS analysis of S* on Ni(111) and Cu(111) in red and blue curves, respectively. A circle represents the antibonding states around the Fermi level. (b) A scheme of the energies of bonding and antibonding states corresponded to those of metal d bands.	 

 	Fig. 16  Top views of (a) an adsorbed hydrogen and (b) an adsorbed H2S on modified Ni(111) with various 3d and 4d metals (Ni-M). Solid gray balls (VNi) are Ni defects on the top-most layer. (c) Normalized adsorption energies relative to that on pure Ni(111) for H2S* (red diamonds) and H2* (blue triangles) on modified Ni(111) with various 3d and 4d transition metals.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of S* formation and the removal from the oxidation reaction with oxygen ions (O2−) from the electrolyte at the TPB. (a) Two grains of an electrolyte and an electrode are available with the gas-phase H2S and H2, impurity and fuel, respectively. (b) Two surfaces are saturated with S*. (c) S* on the TPB reacts with O2− transported from the cathode via the electrochemical oxidation reaction, producing SO2. (d) Accordingly, S* species on the high concentrated electrode grain diffuse to the low concentrated TPB.	 


Perfect surface

H2O(g) → H2O*	−0.33	−0.41	−0.31	−0.71
H2O* → H* + HO*	−0.11 (0.79)	−0.57 (0.51)	−0.06 (0.50)	−1.14 (0.11)
HO* → H* + O*	1.22 (1.45)	0.64 (0.40)	0.52 (0.71)	2.18 (0.39)

Defective surface

H2O + VO˙˙ → (H2O)O˙˙	
	−0.82	−0.64	−0.58
(H2O)O˙˙ + OxO → 2(HO)O˙	
	−0.32 (0.72)	−0.19 (0.71)	−1.29 (0.29)
G(T, p) = G(0, 0) + G(0 → T, 0 → p0) + G(T, p0 → p) = EDFT + H(T, p0) + RTln (p/p0),

 	Fig. 18  S–Ni phase diagram calculated using ab initio atomistic thermodynamics. The three regions correspond to the phases of clean Ni, adsorbed sulfur S* on the nickel surface, and bulk Ni3S2. The experimental data are displayed in the black line, from Rosenqvist's bulk phase diagram,188 the open squares, from the experimental result of S* with different area coverages,63 and the purple squares, from the sulfur-tolerant experiment.27	 

 	Fig. 19  Calculated sulfide-oxide phase diagram. The red, blue, and black lines correspond to the boundaries between oxides of BaCeO3, BaCe0.8Y0.2O3−δ, and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3−δ and the corresponding sulfide phases, respectively, and can be represented as the sulfur tolerance of those three materials.	 
S* + 4Oox + 2H2O* = SO2(g) + 4(HO)o˙ + 4e−	(16)
S* + 2H2O* = SO2(g) + 2H2(g)	(17)
H2(g) + OOx → H2O(g) + VO˙˙ + 2e′.	(18)

 	Fig. 20  Schematic showing the two anodic reaction pathways for the Ni-BZCYYb/BZCYYb anode structure under SOFC operating conditions. R1 represents the water generation reaction of H2 + OOx → H2O + VO˙˙ + 2e′, which is significantly hindered by the adsorbed sulfur on the electrode surface because of the large size of water molecule that has to be released from the TPB; R2 represents the hydrogen incorporation reaction of H2 + 2OOx → 2(OH)O˙ + 2e−, which may not be affected much by the adsorbed sulfur on the surface because of the small size of hydrogen that is incorporated into the lattice.	 
H2(g) + 2OOx → 2(OH)O˙ + 2e−	(19)

 	Fig. 21  Graphical illustration of the H2S interaction with Ni/YSZ divided into two regions for applying the QM/MM (quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics) methodology.	 
Footnotes
† Current address: Central Research & Development, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Delaware 19880, USA.
‡ Current address: Chemistry Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
