Insights into the evaporation behaviour of FAI: material degradation and consequences for perovskite solar cells   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SE00373B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SE00373B
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 3230-3239Insights into the evaporation behaviour of FAI: material degradation and consequences for perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Martin 
            Kroll
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Seren Dilara 
            Öz
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zongbao 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ran 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tim 
            Schramm
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tobias 
            Antrack
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yana 
            Vaynzof
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Selina 
            Olthof
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Karl 
            Leo
          
        
      *a
aIntegrated Centre for Applied Physics and Photonic Materials (IAPP), Centre for Advancing Electronics Dresden (CFAED), Technische Universität Dresden, Nöthnizerstraße 61, 01187, Dresden, Germany. E-mail: karl.leo@tu-dresden.de
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Cologne, Greinstraße 4-6, 50939 Cologne, Germany. E-mail: solthof@uni-koeln.de
Received 
      17th March 2022
    , Accepted 31st May 2022First published on 8th June 2022AbstractThermal co-evaporation is a promising method for large-scale uniform perovskite deposition. However, the optimisation of deposition parameters is an intricate process and often not reproducible between different laboratories. In this work, we look at the decomposition of formamidinium iodide (FAI) upon evaporation in high vacuum by tracking the composition of the residual gas with a mass spectrometer. We find that the precursor material degrades during the evaporation process into hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and sym-triazine (C3H3N3), leading to an increase in pressure, which is commonly observed during the deposition of FAI. Using optical characterisation as well as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy on co-deposited perovskite films, we demonstrate that this background pressure strongly affects the resulting film's stoichiometry. Using two different vacuum setups, we are able to show that significant changes are imposed, e.g. on the optimized co-evaporation rates by the specific vacuum chamber setup. Our results have important implications for the optimized evaporation of FA-based perovskites as they identify key issues related to the deposition of the FAI precursor.
Introduction
In the last decade, metal halide perovskites have become a promising candidate for the next generation of solar cells1 with their low fabrication cost,2 and exceptional optoelectronic properties, like the tunable bandgap,3 high absorption across a wide spectral range,4 low recombination5 and high charge carrier mobility.6,7 With record power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) continuously rising8 and new areas of application being developed,9 the interest of researchers is unbroken.
Among the many deposition methods for the fabrication of high-quality perovskite thin films, solution processing via spin coating is most widespread due to the relative ease of fabrication.10,11 However, one of the disadvantages of spin coating is the inability to process large scale samples, making it unsuitable for commercialisation. In contrast, vacuum deposition processes, such as co-evaporation, enables large scale applications as well as better control over layer thickness;12,13 the process furthermore eliminates possible issue related to solvent remaining in the final film. It has been shown that by vacuum deposition, smooth and densely packed uniform perovskite thin films can be achieved. It can therefore be considered a promising method, capable of reproducible mass production.14–19
In recent years, much effort has been devoted to develop robust procedures for the thermal evaporation of methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) thin films and solar cells. In these studies, it was revealed that the evaporation of the perovskite materials is challenging due to the difficulty in measuring the evaporation rate of the organic halide precursor methylammonium iodide (MAI).16,20 Researchers reported that either no rate was picked up by the quartz crystal monitor (QCM) or that it did not correlate well with the actual deposition.21 In 2019, Borchert et al. were able to show that the concentration of impurities within MAI changes the sticking co-efficient onto the QCM and influences the readout. Often high background pressures in the range of 10−5 to 10−4 mbar (ref. 22) are reported during MAI deposition, that likely are related to these impurities.21
While in the early years, MA+ was often used as A-site cation in perovskite-based devices (in particular MAPbI3), it has become clear that it is the source of severe instability. At elevated temperatures, methylamine (CH3NH3) leaves the crystal lattice, leaving behind lead iodide (PbI2) and metallic lead (Pb)16 and resulting in thermal instability problems for MAPbI3.23,24 Also, exposure to humidity is known to quickly degrade MAPbI3.25 Furthermore, for MAPbI3, it has been shown that under vacuum, MAI sublimes which leads to the formation of lead iodide and metallic lead as well.26
Due to its higher thermal stability, formamidinium (FA+) has emerged as a promising replacement for MA+ cations.15 While most studies use solution-processed films, also fully evaporated films, such as FAPbI3 or CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry, have been reported.27 In contrast to the studies on MAI, no issues with detecting the rate via QCM are reported, indicating that the sticking coefficient is significantly higher and also the background pressure seems to be lower, rather in the range of 10−5 to 10−6 mbar. Nonetheless, unusual co-deposit rates (i.e. diverting from molar ratios 1:1 of the precursors) seem to be common, and an excess amount of FAI seem to be needed.28 Furthermore, several studies have observed the degradation of FAI. Here, the first study about FAI cation degradation was reported by Stoumpos et al. in 2013,29 where they observed the formation of 1,3,5-sym-triazine (from here on referred to as triazine) along with NH3. Another study on the thermal degradation of FA-based cation was conducted by Schaefer et al., which revealed that during thermal decomposition of FA, hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and NH3 is generated.29–31 Additionally, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and mass spectrometry experiments have been reported on FAI and FAPbI3 by Perez et al.,30 which showed decomposition reaction pathways of FA+ resulting in the formation of NH3, HCN and triazine molecules.
FA-based perovskites are becoming increasingly popular, and fully evaporated perovskite layers can be expected to gain more and more relevance in the near future, in particular for large-area devices. Several demonstrations of high performance thermally evaporated FA-based perovskite solar cells have been shown in recent years, reaching a maximum efficiency of 20.4%.17 Despite these promising results, the thermal stability of formamidinium iodide (FAI) has come under scrutiny. Therefore, more insight is needed into the deposition behaviour of FAI in vacuum and the associated formation of the perovskite. Since small variations during the FAI deposition can already lead to significant differences in solar cell performance,27 it is crucial to understand what parameters play a role in the FAI deposition process and how the molecule is affected.
Therefore, we investigate the degradation of FAI in vacuum under thermal stress using a mass spectrometer. When FAI is used for the preparation of perovskite films such as FAPbI3 and FAxCs1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3, we find that its incorporation strongly depends on the background pressure of the evaporation chamber, which affects the mean free path of the evaporated molecules. This results in significant changes in optimal co-evaporation conditions in the two different vacuum chambers employed in this study. Our work shows that FAI evaporation is far from trivial, even though the rates can be monitored more easily than in the case of MAI.
Results and discussion
Perovskite characterisation and device optimisation
Thermal evaporation was used in this study with the intention to prepare FAxCs1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3 perovskite absorber layers for solar cell application. Here, the small amount of caesium bromide (CsBr) was incorporated to stabilize the α-phase of the perovskite since pure FAPbI3 is known to degrade to the non-photoactive delta phase rapidly.32 However, initial experiments showed that using the appropriate molar ratios of the precursors FAI, PbI2 and CsBr did not produce a perovskite film, meaning that the stoichiometry extracted from the rates detected by the QCMs and the final film stoichiometry in the film are different. As is commonly done in this field, the optimal co-evaporation rates were determined by optimizing the device performance. When incorporated as a 450 nm thick FAxCs1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3 perovskite active layer in a solar cell with inverted architecture, respectable photocurrent efficiencies (PCE) up to 15.6% have been achieved. Since, especially for evaporated films, the interfaces strongly affect the device performance, care has to be taken regarding what substrate material is used. In this study, we chose the unreactive PTAA as hole transport layer.33,34 The stack is completed by solution-processed PC61BM and BCP as electron transport layer and hole blocking layer, respectively. An evaporated silver back-contact finishes the device (see inlet Fig. 1a). The device structure, external quantum efficiency spectrum, and the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best-performing solar cell are displayed in Fig. 1. More details concerning the device fabrication procedure can be found in the experimental section.
 Fig. 1  Solar cell performance (a) external quantum efficiency of the device built with the optimal ratio of 1:6:0.26:1 of FAI:CsBr:PbI2, (b) j–V characteristic of the perovskite solar cell shown in (a). 
The optimized solar cell was prepared using molar ratios of 1.6:0.26:1 for the precursors FAI, CsBr and PbI2. This observation is surprising, considering that almost twice the expected amount of A-site cations had to be provided to form a well-performing perovskite film here.
Using a Tauc-plot evaluation, a bandgap of 1.63 eV can be extracted (see ESI, Fig. S1a†), which can be used to estimate the actual composition of the such-prepared perovskite film based on an extensive study of FAxCs1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3 compounds by Bush et al.35 We assume that Cs cannot form a volatile species, and therefore the evaporated fraction of 0.26 will be fully incorporated in the film. Indeed, the measured bandgap matches well with the one reported for FA0.7Cs0.3Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 composition in the mentioned paper. This indicates that approximately half of the FAI provided during co-evaporation is not being incorporated into the perovskite layer. In XRD measurements (see ESI Fig. S1b†), a pseudo-cubic lattice constant of 6.23 Å is found, which agrees well with previous reports for a similar composition.36 No separate phases associated with either FAI or δ-phase FAPbI3 could be detected. If impurity phases are present, they must be amorphous or appear at very low concentrations. However, a small excess of PbI2 is present. The observation that an excess amount of FAI needs to be provided during the evaporation of FA-based perovskites has also been reported by others, as discussed above.27,28
Evaporation behaviour of FAI
To understand the reason for the needed higher FAI deposition rate, we next investigated the evaporation behaviour of FAI in more detail, looking for possible impurities or degradation products that could affect the readout of the QCM.
As mentioned earlier, the thermal degradation of formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) and the precursor material formamidinium iodide (FAI) has previously been reported by Perez et al. based on simultaneous differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and mass spectrometry experiments.30 The authors found that upon heating, the ionic compound undergoes several reactions, summarized in Scheme 1. Firstly, in the case of deprotonation, formamidine and hydrogen iodide are formed (see Scheme 1a), which is a reversible reaction in chemical equilibrium. Starting from formamidine, two further reactions are possible. This molecule can separate into hydrogen cyanide and hydrogen iodide, which is also a reversible reaction (Scheme 1b). Finally, formamidine can form triazine and ammonia in a non-reversible reaction (Scheme 1c).
 Scheme 1  Degradation of formamidinium iodide: (a) (de)-protonation of FAI-salt, (b) equilibrium reaction from formamidine to hydrogen cyanide and hydrogen iodide, (c) reaction of formamidine to 1,3,5-sym-triazine and ammonia. 
The experiments by Perez et al.30 were performed under a helium atmosphere at ambient pressure, and under these conditions, the authors reported a degradation temperature of 260 °C. Similar DSC experiments performed in the course of this study under argon atmosphere are in good agreement with these results (ESI Fig. S2†).
However, it is of particular interest to identify how these processes are impacted by the typical thin-film preparation conditions, i.e. a high vacuum environment. Therefore, the background pressure of our evaporation chamber is monitored by a mass spectrometer while performing the evaporation procedures for FAI as typically done during our perovskite preparation. As detailed in the Experimental section, this evaporation procedure starts prior to the actual co-deposition, with heating of the crucible filled with fresh FAI until a rate of 1.6 Å s−1 is reached. This step is performed in order to degas the material and remove possible impurities related to the material synthesis.
Indeed, a significant increase in pressure is observed during this heat-out process, as is shown in Fig. 2a. During the preliminary heating of FAI, the pressure rises from the base pressure of approximately 5 × 10−7 mbar to above 1 × 10−4 mbar. The maximum pressure is achieved when the crucible temperature reaches 115 °C, after which the pressure drops again. This indicates that indeed there are impurities in the starting material that are removed by the degassing procedure. Around the same time at which the pressure begins to recover, the QCM close to the FAI source begins to detect a rate (see Fig. 2b). Upon further heating the pressure continues to decrease and the rates observed by the QCM increases. The preheating procedure is continued until the QCM measures the rate typically used for perovskite deposition, which is 1.6 Å s−1 here. This rate is retained for 10 min and by that time the pressure has stabilized at 1 × 10−5 mbar. After this point, the heating of the source is turned off and the material is cooled back to room temperature.
 Fig. 2  FAI heating out procedure: (a) pressure and source temperature during the heating of fresh formamidinium iodide, (b) rate observed with the QCM close to the FAI source during this process, (c) partial pressures of main FAI degradation products, extracted from the data shown in Fig. 3. 
To examine the species that leave the FAI source during the preheating process, the chamber atmosphere was monitored with a mass spectrometer, with the resultant mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) vs. time contour plot shown in Fig. 3. With increasing source temperature, a variety of signals can be observed. The most probable molecules that leave the material during the preheating process are organic solvents that were likely used to purify the FAI after the synthesis. With high certainty, the signals of methanol, ethanol, acetone and diethyl ether can be identified; their m/z ratios are listed in Table 1. The majority of these volatile solvents have left the material when the evaporation rate reaches 1.6 Å s−1 (in this experiment, around 850 s, compare Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 3  Contour plot produced by the mass spectrometer showing the measured m/z-ratios during the heating out process of fresh formamidinium iodide in a contour plot. The x-axis is identical to the one shown in Fig. 2. 
Table 1 List of m/z values of molecules detected in mass spectrometry measurements of Fig. 3





m/z
Likely molecule
Molecular formula




18
Water (residual)
H2O


32
Methanol
CH3OH


46
Ethanol
C2H5OH


58
Acetone
C3H6O


74
Diethyl ether
(C2H5)2O


172
Formamidinium iodide
CH4N2·I


27
Hydrogencyanide
HCN


44
Formamide
CH3N2


45
Formamidinium
CH4N2+


81
Triazine
C3H3N3


54
Triazine fragment
C2H2N2




No signal of formamidinium iodide (172 m/z) is observed during the thermal evaporation of FAI. Additional experiments using electrospray injected FAI (data not shown) yield a similar result. We conclude that the lack of the 172 m/z signal is due to the ionisation process taking place in the mass spectrometer, which breaks the ionic bond of the compound. Therefore, only the dissociated FA+ (45 m/z) and I− (127 m/z) species, as well as reaction products from Scheme 1a formamidine (44 m/z, FA) and hydrogen iodide (128 m/z, HI), can be detected (Fig. 2c and 3). In a study about MAI-degradation by Perez et al.,37 a similar lack of the intact molecule was observed for the corresponding ionized degradation products.
Besides the signatures of FA and HI, other products of reactions 1b and 1c, namely hydrogen cyanide and triazine, are also detected by the mass spectrometer as soon as a rate is observed at the QCM. Their respective partial pressures during the heating out procedure are plotted in Fig. 2c. Hydrogen cyanide and triazine are both degradation products of formamidine therefore as their signal increases, the absolute signal related to FA+-species decreases. This increase in degradation can be attributed to the increasing source temperature, which pushes the equilibrium of the reaction towards the products. Likely, the reaction is not only affected by temperature, temperature but also by an increase in the reactive surface are upon sublimation, meaning that more FA molecules become available for the reaction, which further increases the decomposition.
With the FAI degradation products being detected already at typical evaporation conditions around 125 °C, it is important to investigate the range of temperature in which evaporation of FAI is feasible. Therefore, the previously degassed FAI was first cooled back down to room temperature, after which the source was heated up again at a constant power until the material fully degraded around 200 °C. Again, the pressure, rate, and partial pressures in the chamber were measured and are shown in Fig. 4. The constant power input results in a nonlinear rise in temperature, as seen in Fig. 4a. In contrast to the initial degassing shown in Fig. 2, the pressure does not increase as significantly initially, and no signal of the solvents can be observed in the mass spectrometer (see ESI Fig. S3†). This indicates that the initial pressure increase indeed originated from residual solvent rather than from any additional degradation products created upon heating.
 Fig. 4  Degradation of FAI in vacuum upon heating to 220 °C. (a) Temperature of the crucible (red) and chamber pressure (blue). (b) Deposition rates detected by two QCMs located at different distances from the FAI source: the bottom quartz (orange) is close to the FAI source, while the top quartz (green) is close to the sample position. (c) Measured partial pressures of the degradation products, greyed-out area indicates the range where the mass spectrometer turned off due to a high background pressure. 
The FAI heating process shown in Fig. 4 can be separated into four regimes. The first regime (I) ranges from room temperature to ∼50 °C. Here, we observe a slow increase in pressure, which can be related to evaporation of the small amount of adsorbed water that has condensed at the cooled surfaces of the source and the close surroundings. When a temperature of 50 °C is reached, the water signal (18 m/z) is decreased.
In the second regime (II), in which the temperature of the source increases from 50 °C to ∼120 °C, the partial pressure related to triazine and cyanide starts to increase. This indicates that this temperature range is sufficiently high to initialize the reaction of formamidine to triazine. It is important to note that in this regime, no rate is seen by the QCM yet, and no increase in formamidine is detected (Fig. 4b and c). Simultaneously the signal of I+/HI increases gradually, which indicates that the reactions depicted in schemes b and c occur already in solid-state and that the related degradation products sublime in vacuum.
The third regime (III) is marked by the onset of a rate signal detected by the QCMs, which starts in this system at approximately 125 °C. With the beginning of FAI evaporation, the pressure as well as the formamidine signal increase. This is accompanied by an increase in degradation reactions, indicated by another increase of the partial pressure of triazine and cyanide.
This trend continues until a temperature of ∼195 °C is reached, which marks the beginning of severe thermal decomposition in regime (IV). Here the pressure quickly increases to approximately 10−3 mbar, forcing the mass spectrometer to turn off (grey shaded area in Fig. 4c). The rate quickly rises, reaching up to 32 Å s−1 for the bottom quartz before the source runs empty at approximately 210 °C (the deviations shown by the top quartz will be discussed in the next section). All signals detected before and after this point lead to the conclusion that here the material decomposes completely into triazine and hydrogen cyanide, and no further evaporation is possible.
All experiments shown in this section were done using FAI purchased from Sigma Aldrich and similar rises in partial pressures are observed when the experiment is repeated. Additional measurements performed on FAI from different suppliers are shown in the ESI Fig. S5† and yield comparable results.
Influence of the background atmosphere on the deposition of FA
From the results discussed above, we can conclude that for thermally evaporated FA-based perovskite layers, the source temperature of FAI has to be kept as low as possible for FAI deposition to avoid significant decomposition and minimize the formation of unwanted degradation products. Especially temperatures above 200 °C have to be avoided. The question remains, how the observation presented above are related to the initial question regarding the need for excess FAI for the thermal evaporation of perovskite films. If it was purely degradation in the crucible, both QCMs would still show the same signal, since both are exposed to the same stream of molecules coming from the crucible.
One possibility could be that some of the degradation products, in particular the triazine, is affecting the QCM readout but is not incorporated in the perovskite film. This would lead to an apparent higher rate of FAI and, therefore, a higher molar fraction in the co-deposition. To investigate this further, the degradation product triazine was purchased as pure material and loaded into the evaporation chamber. Upon pump down, the chamber pressure remained unusually high for several hours (∼10−2 mbar), indicating that the pure material sublimes at room temperature in high vacuum. After opening the chamber again, the crucible was indeed empty. Notably, no rate was detected on the QCM during the pump-down time, so the triazine is too volatile to produce a signal in the QCM here. It can, therefore, not be the reason for the higher molar ratio needed for perovskite preparation. In addition, after an FAI deposition, the bottom QCM and top QCM were investigated with XPS (see ESI Fig. S7†). The investigation showed no significant difference except for a considerably small N signal at lower binding energy, which does not explain the resulting higher evaporation rate of FAI molecules.
The results here rather indicate that the elevated chamber pressure during FAI evaporation is responsible. Initial indications came from our observation that it is nearly impossible to reliably calibrate the rate of this material. This so-called tooling involves looking at two QCMs, one close to the source and one at the sample position to determine a geometrical factor that describes the ratio of deposition seen by the two. The difficulty becomes obvious when looking at Fig. 4b, which shows the rate of QCMbottom (close to the FAI source) as well as QCMtop. While the two are in good agreement for the low-temperature/low-pressure region, the readout starts to deviate around 185 °C at a pressure of 7 × 10−5 mbar; here, the upper quartz starts to detect significantly less FAI. At pressures above 10−4 mbar, the upper QCM shows on average only 1/5th of the rate. Additional experiments of the pressure dependent tooling factor are illustrated in Fig. S7 in the ESI.†
This loss in signal must be related to the mean free path λFA of the evaporated FA+ species, which can be expressed by classical gas theory: (1)
The equation describes the average distance a molecule can travel before hitting one of the background gas molecules, which depends on the gas's partial pressure PFA as well as the radii r and masses M of the respective molecules. Based on Fig. 4c, we can assume triazine to make up the majority of the background pressure, therefore rgas = rtriazine and Mgas = Mtriazine. Using a chamber pressure of P = 1 × 10−5 mbar and an evaporation temperature around T = 400 K, as well as rFA = 253 pm,38rtriazine ≈ 3·rFA = 759 pm, MFA = 44 g mol−1 and Mtriazine = 81 g mol−1, a value for λFA in the order of 1m is found (see ESI Fig. S8†). In contrast to the previously published results for MAI by Abzieher et al.,39 where the authors found a free mean path of ∼1 cm in the pressure region of interest, the free mean path for FA in our experimental setting is significantly larger and well above the distance between source and sample. Therefore, FA-loss by scattering with the chamber atmosphere, as it is described by the classical gas theory, cannot explain the apparent loss of FA+. Based on this theory, PbI2 would exhibit a similar mean free path, both in the range of one meter (see ESI Fig. S8†).
Therefore, the underlying mechanism leading to FA+ loss is more complex and will only be discussed qualitatively here. First of all, only considering the measured background pressure underestimates the actual pressure above the FAI source: it will be considerably higher due to the shape of the evaporation cone, which is – in an ideal case – following the cosine law of emission. By calculating the molecular flux leaving the crucible and by considering the measured deposition rate, the local pressure can be estimated to be three orders of magnitude higher above the crucible than at the substrate (see ESI S6†). This leads to a shorter mean free path and therefore a high collision rate of FA+ molecules on the way to the substrate. The increased collision frequency not only leads to scattering but also promotes the formation of triazine, as described beforehand. An additional factor that will reduce the mean free path of the organic precursor compared to PbI2 is the fact that FA+ is evaporating as a charged species and is therefore affected by Coulomb repulsion, leading to potentially higher cross-sections during scattering than assumed for an ideal gas.
Finally, the average velocities of the different species coming out of the FAI source must be considered. Based on the average velocity in a classical gas (2)we can estimate FA = 475 m s−1, I− = 283 m s−1, triazine = 340 m s−1 and cyanide = 625 m s−1. The different evaporation velocities will increase the number of collisions between the different species above the source, which is not the case in a compound like PbI2 that evaporates as a single species.
The observed need for an excess amount of FAI during evaporation is therefore related to the fact that a significant fraction of FAI is not reaching the upper sample position, either due to scattering or triazine formation. This loss will depend on a variety of parameters, such as (i) the distance between source and sample, (ii) the position of the lower QCM, (iii) the background pressure, which is, for example, affected by the pumping system used on the chamber and (iv) the ratio of FA+ to the different species present, which was shown to depend on the source temperature (see Fig. 4c).
Further investigations into the deposition process and the perovskite formation were performed using a different high vacuum system (see Experimental section for details).
Secondly, this also allows valuable insight into which of the observations are transferable between setups. Notably, in this second setup, the optimized molar ratios of FAI and PbI2 for a FAPbI3 perovskite film deposition were 3.5:1, meaning that significantly higher rates of FAI (GreatCell Solar) were needed compared to the evaporation chamber discussed so far. This difference can be related to a larger source-sample distance and a different crucible geometry (see Experimental section), both of which led to the need for higher evaporation temperature. To achieve an FAI rate of 1.6 Å s−1 at the bottom QCM, a temperature of 192 °C was needed here, while such a rate was achieved already at 130 °C in the previous setup. This need for higher temperature in the second setup leads to the creation of more degradation products which in turn also increase the background pressure. This means that less FAI is reaching the sample position, and this apparent higher co-evaporation ratio of 3.5:1 is needed.
To confirm that the background pressure indeed affects the amount of FA+ incorporated in the perovskite film, XPS measurements were conducted on samples prepared in this second setup which allow the determination of the sample surface composition. For this, two samples were prepared using the previously optimized co-deposition of FAI:PbI2 of 3.5:1. One sample was prepared at the usual pressure associated with the deposition (here 9 × 10−6 mbar) while in the second case the chamber was partially filled with N2, resulting in a background pressure of 1 × 10−4 mbar. The core level signals of Pb4f7/2 and N1s are depicted in Fig. 5. While the intensity from the lead is quite comparable, the signal of nitrogen is significantly reduced in the case of higher background pressure. Here we can quantify that in the case of increased pressure, only 2/3 of the original FA+ species reaches the sample. Further, we want to stress that no degradation products are incorporated in the final film, as shown in Fig. S6 and S9 in the ESI.†
 Fig. 5  XPS core level peaks of Pb4f7/2 and N1s belonging to FAPbI3 films prepared at different chamber pressures: (a) co-evaporation of PbI2 and FAI at 9 × 10−6 mbar and (b) at 1 × 10−4 mbar. 
Similar behaviour was observed for FAxCs1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3 films prepared in the first vacuum system at pressures of 8 × 10−6 mbar, 1 × 10−5 mbar and 1 × 10−4 mbar. Because of the increased scattering of the organic compound, a CsBr-richer film is produced. This is proven by a bandgap shift of 0.05 eV and a stronger PbI2 excess in XRD measurements of these films (see ESI Fig. S10/S11†), which indicates the lack of organic cation salt. Important to notice is, that a difference is already measurable at a very low pressure change of 8 × 10−6 mbar to 1 × 10−5 mbar. This fluctuation can take place by various hard to control effects, like a variation in crucible filling of the organic cation salt and thus less degradation reaction or other contaminations in the vacuum system. Besides the change in stoichiometry, the film thickness is influenced since more material is lost on the way to the substrate. To compensate for this, the deposition time and with it the measured thickness has to be increased by 20% at pressures of 1 × 10−4 mbar compared to 8 × 10−6 mbar to prepare an equivalent film. For a high reproducible film deposition, the pressure during the deposition has to be controlled thoroughly, and pressure changes should be compensated by adjusting the deposition parameters.
Conclusion
In this work, we have investigated the evaporation behaviour of FAI. It was found that fresh FAI powder contains several impurities, which have to be removed by a controlled preheating of the material before sample preparation. Furthermore, several degradation reactions occur during the heating and evaporation of the material, and their fraction rapidly increases with source temperature. These degradation products lead to an increase in the background pressure in the vacuum deposition tool and apparently affect the ability of FAI to reach the sample position due to increased scattering and degradation product formation. Notably, we found no indication that these degradation products are incorporated in the final perovskite film. However, higher background pressures lead to lower incorporation of FAI into the film and make it necessary to evaporate an apparent excess amount of FAI relative to the metal halide during co-deposition (here around 1.6:1 and 3.5:1 for the two vacuum systems under investigation here). The different ratios needed for the formation of stoichiometric films make it clear that deposition recipes are not necessarily transferable between vacuum setups. The increasing fraction of degradation products with increasing temperature, as well as the observed complete degradation of the FAI around 200 °C, leads to the conclusion that for efficient perovskite production, the source temperature should be kept as low as possible, for example by reducing the source-sample distance, lowering the deposition rates, or by reducing the amount of material loaded in the source. For a constant and reproducible film stoichiometry, it is also necessary to ensure a constant pressure for all experiments and exact control of the process parameters over the course of an evaporation.
For future industrialisation, these findings are highly significant and must be considered when defining a stable process window, since in a large-scale setup likely higher evaporation rates and larger evaporation distances are needed to generate a high throughput.
Experimental section/methods
Vacuum deposition setup 1
The first deposition setup is a Mini-PeroVap deposition system fabricated by CreaPhys GmbH, Germany, located in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. The base pressure is 2 × 10−7 mbar. To avoid re-evaporation from the walls, it is employed with an inner shroud that is cooled to a temperature of ∼−12 °C. All internal parts of the chamber, like source bases, blinds and quartz crystal microbalances (QCM), are cooled to the same temperature. The substrate holder is held at room temperature during deposition. The system is evacuated with a HiPace80 turbo molecular pump and MVP 070-3C diaphragm pump (both Pfeifer Vacuum GmbH).
The evaporation source is an LTE-2 with a 2 ccm Al2O3 crucible from CreaPhys. The deposition rates and layer thicknesses are monitored by separate QCMs and readout with an SQC-310c rate monitor (Inficon). The temperatures, pressures and rates were tracked with the software SweepMe! (https://sweep-me.net). The distance between the FAI source and the sample is 18 cm, while the distance from the source to the bottom QCM is 8 cm.
Vacuum deposition setup 2
The second deposition setup is a custom design vacuum chamber with a base pressure of 8 × 10−8 mbar. The system is operated at room temperature and evacuated using a TMH261 turbo molecular pump (Pfeiffer Vacuum GmbH) and SC15D oil-free scroll vacuum pump (Leybold Vacuum GmbH). The evaporation source is an OME Effusion cell (Tectra) containing a 10cc quartz crucible. The FAI deposition is controlled by setting the source temperature via a PID controller. The deposited film thickness is monitored by a QCM (Inficon, SQM). The distance between the FAI source and the sample is 20 cm, while the distance from the source to the QCM is approximately 10 cm.
Materials
Pre-patterned ITO coated glass substrates were purchased from Yingkou Shangneng Photoelectric material CO., Ltd. PC61BM (99.5%) was purchased from Solenne BV and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) and bathocuproine (BCP) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received. CsBr and PbI2 were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received. FAI for solar cell production was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, if not specified otherwise, and used as described.
Device preparation
The pre-patterned ITO substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, ethanol and isopropanol, followed by 10 min oxygen plasma treatment. Directly after that, the samples were transferred to a nitrogen-filled glovebox, where PTAA (1.5 mg ml−1 in anhydrous toluene 99.8%) was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s and annealed for 30 s at 100 °C. Next, the samples were transferred to vacuum system 1. The system was evacuated to a base pressure of ∼5 × 10−7 mbar. The precursor materials were loaded in 2 ccm large Al2O3-crucibles. For every deposition, fresh FAI is used and prepared as described in Section 10. PbI2 and CsBr were used several times. For perovskite deposition, first CsBr was heated to 397 °C until a stable rate of 0.1 Å s−1 was observed, next PbI2 was heated to 290 °C until a stable rate of 0.6 Å s−1 was observed. Lastly, FAI was heated to approximately 130 °C to a rate of 1.6 Å s−1. For a 450 nm thick perovskite layer, 790 nm of FAI, 275 nm of PbI2 and 42 nm of CsBr as detected by the QCMs were co-evaporated, resulting in a molar ratio of 1.36:1:0.255 of the respective materials. After the perovskite deposition, PC61BM (20 mg ml−1 dissolved in anhydrous chlorobenzene, 99.8%) was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s followed by 10 min annealing at 100 °C. Next, BCP (0.5 mg ml−1 dissolved in anhydrous isopropanol, 99.5%) was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and finally, an 80 nm silver cathode was thermally evaporated in a Mantis evaporator with a base pressure of 1 × 10−7 mbar.
Mass spectrometer
The residual gas in the vacuum system was analyzed with an XT300M quadrupole RGA system from Extorr Inc. (USA), which was directly attached to the vacuum chamber. The masses of the molecules in the chamber atmosphere are scanned from m/z = 1 to 300, with a scan rate of 3 scans per minute.
Optoelectronic measurements
A Shimadzu UV-3100 spectrometer was used to measure the UV-Vis absorption spectra. The external quantum efficiency was measured from 400 nm to 900 nm with monochromatic light from a halogen lamp. It was calibrated with a NIST-traceable Si diode (Thorlabs). The j–V measurements were performed in ambient conditions under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight with 100 mW cm−2 irradiation (Abet Sun 3000 Class AAA solar simulator). The intensity was calibrated with a Si reference photodiode (NIST traceable, VLSI) and corrected by the spectral mismatch between the solar spectrum and the spectral response of the sample. The solar cells were scanned with a Keithley 2450 source measurement unit from 1.2 V to 0 V in steps of 0.025 V with a dwell time of 0.1 s. The pixel area was 4.5 mm2.
XRD
The X-ray diffraction measurements were obtained in ambient air with a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer, with a 1.6 kW Cu-Anode (λ = 1.5406 Å) and a Lynxeye-XE_T line detector in 1D-Mode. The measurement was performed in parallel beam geometry (goniometer radius 420 mm) with an incident slit width of 0.2 mm and a beam mask of 10 mm. The coupled θ/2θ-scan was measured from 5° to 45° with a step size of 0.02° and an integration time of 0.5 s per step. The measurement was background corrected with the Diffrac.Eva V4.3 software.
XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were performed in a custom design UHV system at a base pressure of 6 × 10−10 mbar using a hemispherical electron energy analyzer (Phoibos 100, Specs). For excitation, a non-monochromatic X-ray source was used with an Mg anode (hν = 1252.6 eV, probing depth = 10 nm) at a pass energy of 10 eV, and the energy resolution is 800 meV. The XPS peaks were fitted with the XPS Peak Fit 4.1 program.
Author contributions
Samples were prepared by M. K. and S. D. Ö. While T. A., T. S., and R. J. assisted with device fabrication and characterisation; M. K. and S. D. Ö. both performed mass spectrometry measurements. In addition, M. K. performed optical and XRD characterisation, S. D. Ö. did the XPS analysis, and Z. Z. performed SEM measurements. M. K. and S. O. conceptualized and coordinated the project and created the first paper draft. S. O., Y. V., and K. L. supervised the work and provided input regarding the interpretation of the data. All authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
M. K. thanks for the support by the DFG-project Phive-X (LE 747/64-1) and the EFRE-project (100341673). S. O. and S. D. Ö acknowledges support from the DFG for funding through the project MUJUPO (415231147). Z. Z. and R. J. are grateful for the financial support by the China Scholarship Council (Scholarship #201806750012 and #201806070145, respectively). Y. V. thanks the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for financial support within the framework of SPP 2196 Perovskite semiconductors: From fundamental properties to devices (Project <PERFECT PVs>, VA 991/3-1 and DE 830/22-1). The author thanks Dr Marcus Papmeyer for the DSC-measurements.
Notes and references
L. Schmidt-Mende, V. Dyakonov, S. Olthof, F. Ünlü, K. M. T. Lê, S. Mathur, A. D. Karabanov, D. C. Lupascu, L. M. Herz, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. Chernikov, D. A. Egger, O. Shargaieva, C. Cocchi, E. Unger, M. Saliba, M. M. Byranvand, M. Kroll, F. Nehm, K. Leo, A. Redinger, J. Höcker, T. Kirchartz, J. Warby, E. Gutierrez-Partida, D. Neher, M. Stolterfoht, U. Würfel, M. Unmüssig, J. Herterich, C. Baretzky, J. Mohanraj, M. Thelakkat, C. Maheu, W. Jaegermann, T. Mayer, J. Rieger, T. Fauster, D. Niesner, F. Yang, S. Albrecht, T. Riedl, A. Fakharuddin, M. Vasilopoulou, Y. Vaynzof, D. Moia, J. Maier, M. Franckevičius, V. Gulbinas, R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, B. P. Rand, N. Glück, T. Bein, F. Matteocci, L. A. Castriotta, A. Di Carlo, M. Scheffler and C. Draxl, APL Mater., 2021, 9, 109202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cai, Y. Wu, H. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Qiang and L. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600269 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S. J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F. J. Haug, J. H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Goetz, A. D. Taylor, F. Paulus and Y. Vaynzof, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910004 CrossRef CAS .
F. Paulus, C. Tyznik, O. D. Jurchescu and Y. Vaynzof, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101029 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng and L. Ding, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3233–3255 RSC .
K. P. Möllmann, M. Regehly and M. Vollmer, Opt. InfoBase Conf. Pap., 2019,(Pt F130), 1–9 Search PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, E. Bandiello, E. M. Hutter, M. Sessolo, K. Lederer, J. Blochwitz-Nimoth and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3456–3463 RSC .
M. J. Bækbo, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 29899–29908 RSC .
J. Borchert, R. L. Milot, J. B. Patel, C. L. Davies, A. D. Wright, L. Martínez Maestro, H. J. Snaith, L. M. Herz and M. B. Johnston, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2799–2804 CrossRef CAS .
J. Borchert, H. Boht, W. Fränzel, R. Csuk, R. Scheer and P. Pistor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19842–19849 RSC .
M. Roß, S. Severin, M. B. Stutz, P. Wagner, H. Köbler, M. Favin-Lévêque, A. Al-Ashouri, P. Korb, P. Tockhorn, A. Abate, B. Stannowski, B. Rech and S. Albrecht, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101460 CrossRef .
Y. Vaynzof, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2003073 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lohmann, J. B. Patel, M. U. Rothmann, C. Q. Xia, R. D. J. Oliver, L. M. Herz, H. J. Snaith and M. B. Johnston, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 710–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-S. Kim, L. Gil-Escrig, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 6852–6859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Borchert, I. Levchuk, L. C. Snoek, M. U. Rothmann, R. Haver, H. J. Snaith, C. J. Brabec, L. M. Herz and M. B. Johnston, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28851–28857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Erdenebileg, L. E. Scholz, A. Hofacker, C. Koerner and K. Leo, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1606–1611 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Leblanc, N. Mercier, M. Allain, J. Dittmer, T. Pauporté, V. Fernandez, F. Boucher, M. Kepenekian and C. Katan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20743–20751 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Toloueinia, H. Khassaf, A. Shirazi Amin, Z. M. Tobin, S. P. Alpay and S. L. Suib, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 8240–8248 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alberti, I. Deretzis, G. Pellegrino, C. Bongiorno, E. Smecca, G. Mannino, F. Giannazzo, G. G. Condorelli, N. Sakai, T. Miyasaka, C. Spinella and A. La Magna, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3064–3071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ji, Z. Zhang, C. Cho, Q. An, F. Paulus, M. Kroll, M. Löffler, F. Nehm, B. Rellinghaus, K. Leo and Y. Vaynzof, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7725–7733 RSC .
Y. H. Chiang, M. Anaya and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2498–2504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16912–16919 RSC .
F. C. Schaefer, I. Hechenbleikner, G. A. Peters and V. P. Wystrach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1959, 81(6), 1466–1470 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J. S. Park, S. H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abzieher, T. Feeney, F. Schackmar, Y. J. Donie, I. M. Hossain, J. A. Schwenzer, T. Hellmann, T. Mayer, M. Powalla and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(42), 2104482 CrossRef CAS .
N. Klipfel, C. Momblona, H. Kanda, N. Shibayama, Y. Nakamura, M. D. Mensi, C. Liu, C. Roldán-Carmona and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5(8), 2100191 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Bush, K. Frohna, R. Prasanna, R. E. Beal, T. Leijtens, S. A. Swifter and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, Z. Hawash, S. R. Raga, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3406–3410 RSC .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
T. Abzieher, T. Feeney, F. Schackmar, Y. J. Donie, I. M. Hossain, J. A. Schwenzer, T. Hellmann, T. Mayer, M. Powalla and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104482 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2se00373bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Solar cell performance (a) external quantum efficiency of the device built with the optimal ratio of 1:6:0.26:1 of FAI:CsBr:PbI2, (b) j–V characteristic of the perovskite solar cell shown in (a).	 

 	Scheme 1  Degradation of formamidinium iodide: (a) (de)-protonation of FAI-salt, (b) equilibrium reaction from formamidine to hydrogen cyanide and hydrogen iodide, (c) reaction of formamidine to 1,3,5-sym-triazine and ammonia.	 

 	Fig. 2  FAI heating out procedure: (a) pressure and source temperature during the heating of fresh formamidinium iodide, (b) rate observed with the QCM close to the FAI source during this process, (c) partial pressures of main FAI degradation products, extracted from the data shown in Fig. 3.	 

 	Fig. 3  Contour plot produced by the mass spectrometer showing the measured m/z-ratios during the heating out process of fresh formamidinium iodide in a contour plot. The x-axis is identical to the one shown in Fig. 2.	 

18	Water (residual)	H2O
32	Methanol	CH3OH
46	Ethanol	C2H5OH
58	Acetone	C3H6O
74	Diethyl ether	(C2H5)2O
172	Formamidinium iodide	CH4N2·I
27	Hydrogencyanide	HCN
44	Formamide	CH3N2
45	Formamidinium	CH4N2+
81	Triazine	C3H3N3
54	Triazine fragment	C2H2N2

 	Fig. 4  Degradation of FAI in vacuum upon heating to 220 °C. (a) Temperature of the crucible (red) and chamber pressure (blue). (b) Deposition rates detected by two QCMs located at different distances from the FAI source: the bottom quartz (orange) is close to the FAI source, while the top quartz (green) is close to the sample position. (c) Measured partial pressures of the degradation products, greyed-out area indicates the range where the mass spectrometer turned off due to a high background pressure.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  XPS core level peaks of Pb4f7/2 and N1s belonging to FAPbI3 films prepared at different chamber pressures: (a) co-evaporation of PbI2 and FAI at 9 × 10−6 mbar and (b) at 1 × 10−4 mbar.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2se00373b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
