Recent developments of truly stretchable thin film electronic and optoelectronic devices  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR09472H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR09472H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5764-5792Recent developments of truly stretchable thin film electronic and optoelectronic devices

        
          
            Juan 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhihe 
            Chi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhan 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojie 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michael S. 
            Arnold
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jiarui 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenguo 
            Chi
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Matthew P. 
            Aldred
          
          
        
      a
aPCFM Lab, GD HPPC Lab, Guangdong Engineering Technology Research Center for High-performance Organic and Polymer Photoelectric Functional Films, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Material and Technologies, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, PR China. E-mail: ceszy@mail.sysu.edu.cn; chizhg@mail.sysu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA. E-mail: michael.arnold@wisc.edu
Received 
      20th December 2017
    , Accepted 17th February 2018First published on 19th February 2018AbstractTruly stretchable electronics, wherein all components themselves permit elastic deformation as the whole devices are stretched, exhibit unique advantages over other strategies, such as simple fabrication process, high integrity of entire components and intimate integration with curvilinear surfaces. In contrast to the stretchable devices using stretchable interconnectors to integrate with rigid active devices, truly stretchable devices are realized with or without intentionally employing structural engineering (e.g. buckling), and the whole device can be bent, twisted, or stretched to meet the demands for practical applications, which are beyond the capability of conventional flexible devices that can only bend or twist. Recently, great achievements have been made toward truly stretchable electronics. Here, the contribution of this review is an effort to provide a panoramic view of the latest progress concerning truly stretchable electronic devices, of which we give special emphasis to three kinds of thin film electronic and optoelectronic devices: (1) thin film transistors, (2) electroluminescent devices (including organic light-emitting diodes, light-emitting electrochemical cells and perovskite light-emitting diodes), and (3) photovoltaics (including organic photovoltaics and perovskite solar cells). We systematically discuss the device design and fabrication strategies, the origin of device stretchability and the relationship between the electrical and mechanical behaviors of the devices. We hope that this review provides a clear outlook of these attractive stretchable devices for a broad range of scientists and attracts more researchers to devote their time to this interesting research field in both industry and academia, thus encouraging more intelligent lifestyles for human beings in the coming future.Juan ZhaoJuan Zhao received her BS degree in 2009 and PhD in 2015 from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. She conducted her PhD work as a joint PhD student at the University of Wisconsin–Madison (USA) from 2013 to 2015, and mainly worked on stretchable organic thin-film transistors under the guidance of Prof. Michael Arnold. She joined Sun Yat-sen University in 2016, and is currently an associate professor at the School of Chemistry. Her research is focused on the development of organic optoelectronic materials and devices.Zhihe Chi, Xiaojie Chen and Zhan Yang (from left to right)Zhihe Chi, Xiaojie Chen and Zhan Yang (from left to right) are students in the School of Chemistry at Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU). Zhihe Chi is an undergraduate student, and she is working on the fabrication of organic optoelectronic devices. Zhan Yang received his BS degree from SYSU in 2016 and is now a PhD student. His research is focused on the design and synthesis of organic optoelectronic materials. Xiaojie Chen received her BS degree from SYSU in 2017 and is now a graduate student. Her research is focused on the design and fabrication of organic optoelectronic devices.Michael S. ArnoldMichael S. Arnold is a professor of materials science and engineering at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. His work focuses on the growth, assembly, properties, and applications of low-dimensional materials including carbon nanotubes, graphene, and 2D materials.Yi ZhangYi Zhang received her BS degree in chemistry, with distinction, from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU, China) in 1997, and her PhD in chemistry and physics of polymer from SYSU in 2002. Then she joined the faculty at SYSU in 2002 as an assistant professor and is currently a full professor of chemistry in SYSU. In 2009–2010, she carried out one year research work in the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign as a visiting scholar. In 2017, she was awarded the Science and Technology Innovation Leading Talents of Guangdong Province. Her research is mainly focused on the development of organic/polymeric photoelectric materials and high-performance functional polyimide.Zhenguo ChiZhenguo Chi received his BS degree in chemistry (1991) from Hangzhou University (China) and his MS in chemistry and physics of polymer (1994) from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Science Academy. He obtained a PhD in 2003 from Sun Yat-sen University (China). In 2003–2006, he carried out his postdoctoral work in Fudan University (China) and Korea University (South Korea). In 2015–2016, he was an academic visitor at Durham University (UK). He is currently a full professor of physics and chemistry of materials at Sun Yat-sen University. His research is mainly focused on the development of organic/polymeric photoelectric materials and devices.Matthew P. AldredMatthew. P. Aldred was born in Bolton, UK in 1978. He obtained his BSc (1999) and PhD (2003) degrees from the University of Hull. During his PhD he worked on liquid crystal synthesis in the George Gray Laboratories, under the supervision of Prof. Stephen Kelly, for OLED applications. After two years working at Hull University for ZLX Ltd as a research chemist, he held numerous academic and industrial research positions, including Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (China), TexChem Polymers (Malaysia) and Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (China). Aldred is the co-author of around 50 research papers and numerous patents. He now resides in the UK and his research interests include organic synthesis, reactive mesogens, piezochromism, aggregation-induced emission and photochromism.
1. Introduction
Traditional electronic and optoelectronic devices are fabricated on rigid substrates that are usually brittle and undeformable. However, there is a growing demand for next-generation devices that can flex and stretch,1,2 in order to interface in new ways with people and other environments. Stretchable electronics promise to result in new classes of semiconductor logic,3,4 displays,5,6 photovoltaics,7,8 sensors,9 electronic skin,10 energy storage devices,11,12 supercapacitors13,14 and memory devices15 that can be deformed and stretched, and thus revolutionize the technology of the electronics industry. In light of the topic of this review and for clarity, it is important at this stage to define the term “stretchable.” Stretchable systems are not just flexible and need to do more than just bend. They must also operate under deformations that involve large changes in shape and potentially extreme changes in size. For example, a sensor attached to a human joint such as a knee will need to not only flex as the joint is bent but also undergo elongation and contraction, as well as twisting and other deformations.9 If the film thickness is much smaller than that of the substrate, a simple flexing motion induces a strain, ε, in a device that is dependent on the substrate thickness, d, and the bending radius, r, according to the relationship ε = d/2r.16 Since a typical substrate thickness is approximately 100–125 μm and a typical bending radius is larger than 1 mm, the induced strain in flexible devices is usually not more than a few percent. There are already a large number of demonstrations regarding electronic and optoelectronic devices that can operate under flexing. For instance, exceptionally flexible organic transistors constructed on 12.5 μm thick polyimide substrates have been fabricated that operate under a bending radius as small as 100 μm.17 However, even this tight bending radius produces a strain of only 6.25%. Ultra-flexible organic solar cells have been fabricated on 1.4 μm thick polyethylene terephthalate substrates and wrapped around a human hair with a radius of 35 μm, but even here the resulting strain is only 2%.18 Flexibility is often improved by placing the active layer of a device in the neutral mechanical plane, where the stress is minimized by thickness and modulus optimization.19,20
Flexible electronic products have been launched and will soon be commercialized, such as the YOUM flexible displays from Samsung.21 Devices like these, although exciting and potentially useful, do not constitute stretchable electronics. Even if a device is extremely flexible, this does not mean that it can be freely deformed. For example, a flat sheet of paper can be easily flexed (e.g. when it is folded); however, it is not easily elongated or freely deformed in other ways without tearing. In contrast, a thin sheet of rubber can be either flexed or repeatedly stretched or compressed and relaxed without permanent deformation. Therefore, for a device to be considered stretchable, it must accommodate not just bending but also elongation and compression. In stretchable devices, the strain, ε, is defined as the ratio of elongation compared to the initial length and is expressed as (L − L0)/L, where L0 is the length before stretching, and L is the length after stretching. Electronic devices are complex and made from multiple materials that are integrated together, each of which must be able to stretch without mechanical failure or functional loss. The overall stretchability of the device is often limited by the weakest component or interface. Moreover, stable device performance relies on maintaining high quality interfaces between all the materials as the entire device is deformed. Most practical applications for stretchable electronics require device operation under strains such as 20–30% strains induced by stretching on human elbows, or higher, which is more challenging than realizing devices that operate during flexing alone, with lower strains.
Although traditional silicon technology is an excellent electronics platform, the rigidity and tendency to fracture under strain of bulk wafers exclude it from being used as a platform for enabling stretchable electronics. Therefore, a change from traditional silicon-based device architectures is required for the realization of stretchable electronics. In contrast, thin film technology with thickness on the order of nanometers exhibits appealing properties. In particular, organic and polymer thin films have merits of synthetic diversity and multi-functionality. They can be fabricated using low-cost and mass production techniques like inkjet-printing and roll-to-roll fabrication and have good mechanical properties for allowing the devices to bend and stretch easily. Interestingly, truly stretchable devices are feasible by the combination of electronic material components that are themselves stretchable; however, very few electronic materials are intrinsically stretchable. It has been demonstrated that metals like gold (Au) and silver (Ag),22 and most common inorganic electronic materials like silicon and indium tin oxide (ITO)23,24 exhibit a fracture strain of around 2%. Even common semiconducting polymers like poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) undergo irreversible plastic deformation upon strains of >4%.25 Moreover, the substrates on which the devices are fabricated, such as poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) and poly(ethylene 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate) (PEN), will typically undergo irreversible plastic deformation for strains beyond 5%.26 Clearly, in order to make devices truly stretchable, new strategies are needed to overcome the inherent strain limitations of most electronic materials.
There are currently two prevailing strategies for creating stretchable devices. The first strategy is the employment of an island array-type architecture, specifically integrating rigid active device islands with stretchable interconnectors made of wavy metal lines.27,28 When the system is stretched the strain is confined to the stretchable interconnectors, which isolate the strain away from the rigid active device regions. By using this approach, Rogers et al. reported high-performance stretchable integrated circuits and stretchable inorganic light-emitting diode (LED) arrays,29–31 and Someya et al. developed stretchable organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) and organic light-emitting diode (OLED) arrays.32 However, the stretchability of the overall device array depends on the stretchability of the interconnectors between devices, not the devices themselves. We refer the reader to the several excellent review articles regarding this strategy.1,3,28,31 A second strategy is to create truly stretchable devices wherein all the active components are themselves stretchable, which is the focus of the review. In this system, the strain is distributed over the entire device system by taking advantage of the stretchability of the components or by introducing structural engineering (e.g. buckling) for the materials comprising the system. In general, when a film is deposited on a pre-stretched elastic substrate, releasing the pre-strain induces compressive forces on the film, which then buckles and twists out-of-plane upon tension with sinusoidal or wavy configurations, with the wavelengths and amplitudes depending primarily (but not exclusively) on the elastic properties of the film and substrate, as well as the thickness of the film, leading to a non-linear buckling response.31 Devices fabricated to be themselves stretchable have several advantages over island array-type architectures. Firstly, the entire substrate can be devoted to devices, which allows the scale-down of device dimensions. Secondly, the film growth and device fabrication processes are relatively simple by using standard processing techniques like solution processing. Most importantly, this strategy enables truly, fully stretchable electronic and optoelectronic devices, which can survive one-, two- and three-dimensional (1D, 2D and 3D) deformation by freely stretching, compressing, twisting, or crumpling, and can potentially meet the demands for more practical applications. The truly stretchable devices are also able to adhere to many surfaces like glass, plastic and even fabric, with stable operation under significant strain, and will enable convenient, portable, implantable, and wearable electronics.
A number of reviews have reported the advancement of flexible electronics,33–38 mainly dealing with materials processing techniques and layout strategies for flexible electrodes and flexible electronic devices. The reviews regarding stretchable electronic devices mainly emphasize the island array-type architectures.3,28 Up to the present day, there have been rare reviews primarily focused on truly stretchable electronic and optoelectronic devices,39,40 a field in which exciting progress has been made in the past few years and innovative applications are being realized. In this review, we give special emphasis on the latest development of three types of truly stretchable thin film electronic and optoelectronic devices: (1) thin film transistors (TFTs), (2) electroluminescent devices including OLEDs, light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs) and perovskite light-emitting diodes (PeLEDs), and (3) photovoltaics including organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and perovskite solar cells (PeSCs), wherein we discuss materials (substrates, electrodes, active materials, dielectric materials and interfaces), fabrication procedures (deposition, transfer and lithography), device performance (electrical and mechanical) with and without strains, and conclude with some thoughts and opportunities for future studies regarding stretchable electronics.
2. Stretchable electrodes
The electrode is an essential part of electronic and optoelectronic devices, so it is important and necessary to give a brief introduction on the development of stretchable electrodes prior to discussing stretchable devices. Although the widely utilized metallic materials and ITO electrodes are hardly flexible, these traditional electrode materials can be made more stretchable by being deposited as thin films onto, or embedded in, an elastic substrate. High stretchability is attainable through wavy architectures, which accommodate mechanical strain through deformation, while retaining acceptable conductivity. In addition to stretchability, the electrode must meet sheet resistance requirements. In general, conductors with relatively high resistance are acceptable in voltage-driven devices, for example 300–1500 Ω sq−1 for touch screens and 30–300 Ω sq−1 for liquid crystal displays (LCDs). For current-driven devices like OLEDs and OPVs, a low sheet resistance of 10–50 Ω sq−1 is required,41 where high transparency or transmittance (T) is also needed. For these applications, researchers have exploited novel electrode candidates, such as metal nanomaterials, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, and conductive polymers.
2.1 Metal nanomaterials for stretchable electrodes
Metal thin films have been popularly used in traditional electronics due to their high conductivity; however, their tendency to fracture limits the application for stretchable electronics because a freestanding film of metal generally exhibits very low fracture strains of <2%.42 When the metal thin films are deposited on elastic substrates, the stretchability can be highly improved.43,44 For example, an Ecoflex substrate supported gold thin film could be stretched up to a strain of 100% with a resistivity increase from 6.0 × 10−6 Ω at 0% strain to 9.6 × 10−6 Ω,44 while cracks are formed at higher strains. In comparison, networks of metallic nanowires offering high conductivity and stretchability as well as high transparency are one promising candidate that are applicable for current-driven devices like OLEDs.

2.1.1 Metal nanowires. 
Metal nanowires, such as silver nanowires (AgNWs) and copper nanowires (CuNWs), have advantages of high transparency and conductivity, inherent good mechanical strength and low-cost production technology.45–49 The metal NW films can effectively accommodate the strain by orienting the NWs along the stretching directions, while maintaining good electrical contacts between the NWs under a strain of >20%.50 Highly stretchable conductors have been fabricated by depositing the metal NW films on elastic substrates by virtue of the buckling strategy.50–53 For instance, in an AgNW conductor with an impressive stretchability of 460%,51 the buckled structures gradually flattened as the strain increased to a value of 300% pre-strain, and upon further strain, the AgNWs deformed by aligning themselves in the strain direction. Metal NW composite conductors have also been developed, achieving a low sheet resistance of 10–33 Ω sq−1, a high transmittance of 82–94% and a stretchability of 40–460%.54–60 The biggest challenge facing nanowire composite films is the contact resistance caused by wire–wire junctions, which can be solved by techniques like plasmonic welding61,62 and chemical soldering,63 which join the nanowire junctions together and reduce contact resistance.


2.1.2 Metal nanoparticles. 
Stretchable conductors have also been realized from zero-dimensional (0D) metal nanoparticles (NPs), such as CuNP-, AgNP- and AuNP-conductors with high stretchability.64–66 A stretchable CuNPs/PDMS conductor could be stretched up to a pre-strain of 300% while maintaining a conductivity of 1 × 105 S cm−1 as the buckles straightened to accommodate the strain.64 A highly stretchable AuNP/PU composite with 3D networks was fabricated by vacuum-assisted flocculation (VAF),66 showing a conductivity of 1.8 × 103 S cm−1 and allowing a maximum tensile strain of 486%. Stretchable conductors have also been made of metal nanofiber networks, such as a nanofiber web consisting of gold shell/polymer core composites,67 copper nanofibers,68 and silver shell/rubber core fibers.69 These fibrous webs can accommodate strain by the physical rearrangement of the nanofibers, contributing to excellent stretchability while maintaining considerable conductivity.

2.2 Carbon nanotubes for stretchable electrodes
CNTs show both excellent electrical conductivity and mechanical properties that make them an attractive candidate for an ITO-free conductor, especially in flexible and stretchable electronic devices. In contrast to metal nanowire conductors, which exhibit relatively high conductance, CNT-based conductors can meet the requirement for voltage-driven devices (e.g., capacitive touch screens and LCDs). Like metal nanowires, the buckling strategy by depositing CNTs onto pre-strained elastic substrates has also been popularly adopted in the fabrication of stretchable CNT conductors.70–72 Chen et al.70 reported a stretchable CNT conductor which could be stretched up to 140% with stable conductivity, Wang et al.71 reported CNT conductors which could accommodate a 200% parallel strain and 40% perpendicular strain with regard to the directions of pre-strains. Even without using pre-strained substrates, it is feasible to render CNT conducting films stretchable because the CNTs can easily form a network and will slide against each other to accommodate any strain.73–75 Also, stretchable CNT conductors have been realized by incorporating CNTs into elastic substrates,76–82 such as PDMS76 and PU.77,78 The buckled CNT structures formed after the first stretching/releasing cycle, and can be straightened during subsequent stretching, while the contact resistance between CNTs dominates the conduction behavior, rather than the resistance of individual CNTs. The contact resistance could be improved by thermal annealing,78 leading to a CNT composite film with a conductivity of 1000 S m−1 and a stretchability of 200% with negligible decrease in conductivity.
2.3 Graphene for stretchable electrodes
Graphene is an intriguing material for stretchable conducting films due to its excellent charge-carrier mobility, which has been reported to be as high as 44000–200000 cm2 V−1 s−1.83,84 Graphene also exhibits impressive strength and Young's modulus, such as an intrinsic strength of 130 GPa and Young's modulus of 1 TPa,85 and can sustain an elastic strain as high as 20%.86 In addition, the optical absorption of a single graphene layer is 2.3% across the ultraviolet and visible spectrum range, enabling highly transparent electrodes.87 Graphene's electrical response to strain is dependent on the number of layers. Single layer graphene exhibits a stretchability of 4.5% without rapid resistance increase, while in multi-layer graphene the stretchability can reach 30% due to interlayer sliding-induced strain relaxation.88 On the one hand, the ripples formed spontaneously in the graphene film during the growth process, which is due to the difference between the thermal expansion coefficients of graphene and the growth substrate (typically a metal such as copper or nickel), can be advantageous to open up the possibility for making stretchable graphene electrodes.89 On the other hand, similar to metal NW and CNT films, the buckling strategy is also applicable for improving the stretchability of graphene.90,91 Zang et al.91 demonstrated a stretchable graphene conducting film by transferring multi-layer graphene onto a PDMS substrate with unequal biaxial pre-strains of 10% and 500%. By releasing the pre-strains, the intersection of two orthogonal buckles gave rise to crumpled hierarchical structures. The crumpled graphene electrode could accommodate an extreme strain of 450% along the high pre-strain direction, with the optical transmittance increasing from 30% to 80% due to the crumpled graphene film unfolding during stretching.
2.4 Conductive polymers for stretchable electrodes
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is one of the most popular conductive polymers and has been explored to make flexible and stretchable conductors.92–95 The aim of using polymer conductors for applications in stretchable devices is to improve both conductivity and stretchability. Successful demonstrations towards stretchable PEDOT:PSS conductors have been reported by Bao et al.,92–94 wherein the buckling strategy was also employed. By depositing a semi-transparent PEDOT:PSS film with a sheet resistance of 750 Ω sq−1 at 95% transparency85 on a 50% pre-strained PDMS substrate, the resulted conductor could be stretched up to 50% strain. High-performance stretchable PEDOT:PSS composite conductors have also been reported, including reduced graphene oxide (R-GO)/PEDOT:PSS96 and AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS97 composites. By blending a nonvolatile surfactant (Triton X-100) into the PEDOT:PSS, the resulted composite conductor could enable a 10% stretchability with a freestanding film and a 50% stretchability when coated on a PDMS substrate.98
As learned above, many techniques regarding stretchable electrodes have been developed for applications in stretchable electronics. However, in any truly stretchable electronic device all the components must accommodate strain without failure. In the following sections, we will sequentially present recent developments of three kinds of truly stretchable electronic and optoelectronic devices, namely TFTs, LEDs and PVs, which have the potential to bring electrical, mechanical and industrial benefits to a wide range of new applications.
3. Stretchable thin film transistors
3.1 Introduction of TFTs
Transistors are a key active component in almost all modern electronics and are commonly used as switches to switch signals on and off for power supplies and logic gates in integrated circuits and amplifiers. Typically, TFT backplanes play an important role in LCDs and LED displays, sensors and radio frequency identification tags,99 as well as more exotic applications like electronic paper. OTFTs have been intensively investigated due to the advantages of organic semiconductor materials, such as low cost, flexibility, wide variety of materials, ease of fabrication and low deposition temperature. In contrast, conventional silicon technologies involve high temperature, high-vacuum deposition processes and sophisticated photolithographic patterning methods and also suffer the problem of brittleness. Stretchable OTFTs are ideal for flexible and stretchable applications.
A typical OTFT is a three-terminal device, which is composed of an organic semiconductor channel, a dielectric layer, and three electrodes (source, drain and gate), as shown in Fig. 1a. The source/drain electrodes are in direct contact with the semiconducting layer, while the dielectric layer works as an insulator to separate the semiconductor from the gate electrode, which controls the charge carrier density in the channel. An OTFT works like a faucet and it can be switched “on” or “off” by modulating the gate voltage (VG). When a voltage is applied to the gate electrode, charges are induced in the channel and accumulate at the semiconductor/dielectric interface, forming a conducting channel through the organic layer.100 If a voltage is applied between the source and drain (VDS), charge carriers will be injected from the source electrode into the semiconducting layer and transported through the channel to the drain electrode, resulting in current flow. High-performance OTFTs are characterized by high field-effect mobility (μ), high on/off ratio (ION/IOFF), and low threshold voltage (VT).101 Mobility is a measure of how easily the charge carriers move within the organic semiconductor. The development of novel organic semiconductors with high mobility is an efficient method to enhance device performance.102 The on/off ratio is the ratio of the source–drain current in the “on” state to the current in the “off” state. Engineering the metal/semiconductor interface can optimize carrier injection and improve the current flow.103,104 The threshold voltage is the voltage at which the device turns on. The exploration of dielectrics with high dielectric constant (κ) enables high charge density at the semiconductor/dielectric interface and decreases the operating voltage.105 These high-κ dielectrics also allow a thicker dielectric layer, which is beneficial to reduce leakage current. Other factors, such as leakage currents that flow through the semiconductor, the dielectric, and the total resistance including channel and contact resistance,106,107 should be minimized to enhance device performance.
 Fig. 1  Schematic device configurations of (a) a TFT, (b) an OLED, and (c) an OPV. 
3.2 Stretchable SWCNT-based TFTs
For most OTFTs, the substrate is not the bottleneck in stretchability, but rather the materials comprising the transistor itself, namely channel material, dielectrics and electrodes. The fabrication of stretchable electrodes was discussed in section 2, but many of the same methods can be adapted to create stretchable channel materials and dielectrics. Stretchable dielectrics are especially challenging because commonly used dielectric materials are generally stiff and non-deformable. Popular dielectric layers for flexible and stretchable transistors are ion gels, which can deform more or less continuously over a wide range of strains. TFTs incorporating an ion gel dielectric layer have been used to investigate methods for obtaining stretchable channel and electrode materials.
One such method is to incorporate wavy patterns, which are formed spontaneously or purposely, to make the transistor materials more stable against applied strains. Arnold et al.108 reported an array of stretchable TFTs using buckled single-wall carbon nanotube as the channel material, buckled metal films as electrodes, and ion gel as the dielectric. The fabrication process is shown in Fig. 2a. The SWNT networks were coated on a glass substrate by doctor-blading and transferred to a pre-stretched PDMS substrate. The nanotube film was buckled by releasing the strained PDMS. The CNT buckles were initially perpendicular to the pre-strain direction, and subsequently became parallel when the CNT film was re-stretched at 65% strain, as seen in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 2b). To generate buckled Au/chromium (Cr) electrodes, the substrate and film were re-stretched by 15% prior to deposition. Then, a flexible ion gel was drop-cast on the buckled electrodes to complete the transistor. Without strain, the mobility and on/off ratio of the TFTs were found to be 6.9 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3 × 104, respectively. As the strain gradually increased up to ∼50% (Fig. 2c), the devices maintained stable electrical characteristics. It was noted that the high interface quality between CNTs and electrodes remained up to a strain of 75%, due to their buckled structures that allowed the strain to relax through an accordion-like structure; however, at strains beyond 50% some cracks formed in the ion gel film and led to device degradation.
 Fig. 2  (a) The fabrication of buckled CNTs. (b) SEM images of released a CNT film and a buckled CNT film re-stretched to 65%. (c) On/off currents and mobility as a function of applied strain. Reproduced from ref. 108. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of a buckled ion gel dielectric and (e) on/off currents and mobility as a function of applied strain. Reproduced from ref. 109. Copyright 2015 American Institute of Physics. (f) Optical images at 0% and 67% biaxial elongation and (g) on/off currents and mobility as a function of applied strain for the biaxially stretchable transistors. Reproduced from ref. 110. Copyright 2017 American Institute of Physics. 
To solve the problem of cracks formed in the ion gel dielectric layer and improve the stretchability, Arnold et al. refined the fabrication process by further buckling the ion gel dielectric layer (Fig. 2d).109 The CNT film, S/D and gate electrodes and ion gel layer were sequentially deposited on a PDMS substrate with 90% pre-strain. When the substrate pre-strain was released, the SWNT film, Au/Cr electrodes and ion gel film were all buckled, and Fig. 2d illustrates the buckled ion gel dielectric. The TFTs could be elongated by 90% while maintaining an on/off ratio of >104 and a mobility of 5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 2e), and demonstrated invariant performance during 1000 stretching cycles at a strain of 70%. The failure of the TFTs elongated over 90% coincides with a delamination of the ion gel films from the PDMS substrates. It was suggested that the maximum elongation of the transistors was limited by the degree of pre-strain that could be accommodated by the PDMS substrates during fabrication. Compared to uniaxially (1D) stretchable devices, biaxially (2D) stretchable devices are more useful for practical applications associated with the human body and robotics that demand multidimensional stretchability, thus expanding the application scope of electronic devices. Recently, Arnold et al. also reported bi-axially stretchable transistors110 by sequentially coating the CNT film, S/D and gate electrodes and ion gel layer on a bi-axially pre-strained PDMS substrate with 67% biaxial pre-strain (Fig. 2f). When the transistor is first released from the 67% biaxial pre-strain to 0% the on-state current slightly increased from 32 to 35 μA and the mobility increased from 11.1 to 15.8 cm2 V−1 s−1, and then, as it was re-stretched from 0 to 67% biaxial pre-strain, the on-state current and the mobility decreased back to 30 μA and 13.5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2g. This suggested that the bi-axially stretchable transistors exhibited both high mechanical and electrical performance. The fabrication approaches reported by Arnold et al. are easy to enable highly stretchable TFTs, with the help of a simple buckling method. The stretchable CNT-based TFTs can exploit CNTs’ high current carrying capacity, outstanding mechanical resilience and excellent air and chemical stability. There is a high possibility to further increase the stretchability by the employment of elastomeric substrates with higher yield strain.
Pei et al.111 developed intrinsically stretchable TFTs using all solution-based printable processes, as shown in Fig. 3a. For the stretchable TFTs, a AgNW/PUA composite with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 was used as the stretchable transparent electrodes, SWCNTs with a density of nanotubes of 25 tubes per μm was the active channel material, and PU-co-polyethylene glycol (PU-co-PEG) with PU-co-PEG main chain and PEG side chain was employed as the elastomeric dielectric, showing a high dielectric constant (∼13 at 12 Hz) and a high optical transmittance (>90% at 550 nm). The stretchable TFTs had an initial average mobility of up to 27.0 cm2 V−1 s−1, and an average ION/IOFF of 7200 meeting the demand for the application of digital logic circuits (103–104). For mechanical performance (Fig. 3b and c), the stretchable TFT could withstand a strain of 50% along the channel length and width directions, while the mobility decreased from 32.7 to 16.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and from 28.2 to 15.0 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The mobility decrease is related to the decrease in capacitance of the dielectric copolymer with increasing strain, as the chain mobility of PEG in the dielectric polymer would be restricted under applied tensile strains, decreasing the dielectric constant. At the same time, the source–drain channel current is also decreased during stretching, which is mainly attributed to the increase in the contact resistance between the SWCNTs when stretched. The device fails when the strain is over 50% because of the tearing of the elastomeric dielectric. The stretchable TFT could also survive 500 stretching cycles between 0 and 20% strain with fair mobility. Moreover, the stretchable TFTs were successfully applied to drive a white-light emitting polymer-based OLED, with the brightness reducing from the original 196 cd m−2 at 0% strain to 63 cd m−2 at 30% strain. By using the lamination technique, Pei et al.112 further reported stretchable TFTs by using water-based AgNW ink/PUA as stretchable electrodes, SWCNTs as the channel and PU-co-PEG as the dielectric. The AgNW ink/PUA electrodes retained a high electrical conductivity of >10000 S cm−1 at a strain of 70%. The stretchable transistors exhibited an average mobility of 33.8 ± 3.7 cm2 V−1 s−1, which remained stabilized during 1000 cycles of wearing on/peeling off a glass tube with a 5 mm diameter.
 Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication process of the stretchable TFT. (b and c) ION, IOFF and mobility as a function of applied strain along the channel width and length directions, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 111. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
CNTs are multifunctional as both conductive electrodes and semiconductors, and their high field-effect mobility and large tensile modulus (≈1 TPa) enable good tolerance of mechanical forces. Bao et al.113 reported all-carbon stretchable transistors using CNT electrodes and semiconductor along with thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) dielectric and substrate. The device fabrication process is illustrated in Fig. 4a, in which the as prepared (unsorted) CNTs coated on a Si wafer were embedded in a TPU substrate forming the gate electrode, followed by the coating of a layer of TPU dielectric. Meanwhile, the as prepared CNTs coated on another Si wafer were patterned to form source and drain electrodes, followed by the deposition of the sorted CNT solution as the semiconductor. Then, the semiconductor/source–drain electrodes were transferred onto the gate dielectric/TPU substrate. The transistors showed an average ION/IOFF of 1.3 × 104 ± 3.4 × 103 and a mobility of 0.18 ± 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1. The devices could be stretched up to 100% strain parallel and perpendicular to the charge transport direction, while the ION and IOFF decreased by about 50% (Fig. 4b and c). While the electrical properties change during the first stretching cycle, they remain constant during subsequent stretching cycles. The devices could also survive 1000 stretching–releasing cycles between 0 and 100% with good transistor characteristics (Fig. 4d). On the one hand, this is related to the network structure of the CNTs that has little anisotropy before and after stretching to 100% compared to the thin-film organic semiconductors which exhibit extensive anisotropy. On the other hand, the buckling of the CNTs after cycling to 100% strain allows reversible stretching characteristics.
 Fig. 4  (a) Fabrication process flow for durable stretchable transistors. Normalized (b) ION and (c) IOFF for devices stretched in both the parallel and perpendicular directions. (d) Transfer curves for a device that was cycled to 100% strain for different cycles. Reproduced from ref. 113. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Ion gel receives widespread use as the dielectric in stretchable TFTs, due to the difficulty in achieving large-scale deformation of traditional dielectrics without cracking. For instance, aluminium oxide (Al2O3) shows a stretchability of only 0.475% at the ultimate tensile strength. In this sense, morphology change is needed so as to use it for the fabrication of stretchable TFTs. Lee et al.114 fabricated stretchable SWNT transistors (Fig. 5a) with a wrinkled aluminium oxide (Al2O3) film as the dielectric layer (Fig. 5b). The wrinkles were naturally formed during the transfer process and randomly oriented. The device showed a high on/off ratio of 105 together with a mobility of 40 cm2 V−1 s−1. The transistors were stretched both parallel and perpendicular to the channel (Fig. 5c and d), and the on/off ratio remained stable up to a strain of 20% and 1000 stretching cycles at 10% strain, while the mobility fluctuated and showed no significant decrease. A simulation model of uniaxially and randomly wrinkled Al2O3 film was investigated, and it suggested that the strain was localized in a wavy shape and the highest strain was located in the negative curvature regions. Thereby, the wrinkled Al2O3 dielectric layer could provide good mechanical strength and is beneficial to make truly stretchable OTFTs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the OTFT. (b) SEM image of a wrinkled Al2O3 film. Normalized on/off current and mobility as a function of strain along (c) the length direction and (d) the width direction. Reproduced from ref. 114. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
As seen, the CNT-based TFTs generally show high electrical performance, due to the intrinsic transport properties of the CNTs which ensure high on-currents. The device performance of these CNT-based TFTs is highly sensitive to the dielectric materials. Generally, the polymer dielectrics endow the TFTs with better stretchability while the inorganic dielectrics enable the TFTs with higher mobilities. With the help of the buckling strategy, the CNTs can enable the same high stretchability as the prestrain, thus facilitating the fabrication of highly stretchable CNT TFTs. However, there are still challenges for the CNT-TFTs, such as better control of material quality due to the as-synthesized CNTs containing a mixture of both metallic and semiconducting CNTs, room-temperature fabrication techniques enabling stretchable CNT transistors. There has also been concern regarding the contact resistance in the stretchable CNT TFTs limiting the ultimate performance, especially the resistance variation induced by the strain.
3.3 Stretchable polymer semiconductor-based TFTs
If materials comprising the substrate, dielectric, channel, and electrodes are all stretchable, TFTs that are intrinsically stretchable can be realized without resorting to more complicated fabrication techniques. Jeong et al.115 reported an entirely stretchable TFT on a poly(styrene-b-butadiene-b-styrene) (SBS) fibre substrate, as shown in Fig. 6a. They used stretchable Au nanosheet electrodes,44 P3HT nanofibers as the channel material, and polyelectrolyte gel as the gate dielectric. Due to the interpenetrating network formed between the ion-gel and the substrate, the device was firmly adhered on the substrate, which provided excellent mechanical properties. Without strain, the on/off ratio and mobility reached ∼106 and 23 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which were slightly reduced at a strain of 70%, but recovered after releasing the strain (Fig. 6b). After 1500 stretching cycles at a strain range of 0–70%, the device performance only slightly deteriorated, with the mobility still being as high as 18 cm2 V−1 s−1. These results demonstrated that stretchable OTFTs are possible by incorporating only components with intrinsic stretchability. Later, they reported a truly stretchable top-gated transistor using a P3HT nanofibrils/rubber composite as the semiconductor, in which the rubber was polystyrene-block-poly(ethylene-co-butylene)-block-polystyrene (SEBS).116 The nanofibril bundle assembly formed a network which was surface-embedded in the elastomer, and the bundle formation was the key to the stretchability of the P3HT nanofibrils. As for the local nanofibril parts of the bundles, the cracks were more likely to occur when the length direction of the parts was parallel rather than perpendicular to the stretching direction. For the stretchable transistors, stretchable Au nanosheet electrodes were the source and drain electrodes, a SEBS thin film was the stretchable dielectric, and eutectic gallium–indium (EGaIn) was the gate electrode. It was found that the in situ phase separation of the self-assembled P3HT nanofibril network bundles with indentation into the surface of the SEBS rubber matrix played the key role in enabling the transistors to be stretchable up to 50%, leading to mobility decrease from 0.6 to 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the low device performance was due to the poor dielectric property of the SEBS layer.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the transistor on an SBS substrate. (b) Transfer curves of the device obtained at different strains. Reproduced from ref. 115. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Generally, the cracks formed in the semiconducting channel material can degrade device performance. Interestingly, Bao et al.80 fabricated stretchable OTFTs by using the formation of micro-cracks which allowed the device to be programmed within a certain strain range, as crack formation accommodated strain while maintaining a percolating pathway. The stretchable OTFTs were fabricated by embedding the semiconductor between two elastomer layers to modify the deformation processes and suppress crack formation. The device structure is shown in Fig. 7a, where arc-discharge CNTs were embedded in the PU substrate as the source/drain electrodes, followed by a transferred P3HT film. Then, another layer of PU was spin-coated as the dielectric, and a drop-cast eutectic gallium–indium was used as the gate electrode. The device had an average mobility and on/off ratio of 0.034 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 591, respectively. The device could be stretched in the direction parallel and perpendicular to the channel up to a strain of 100%, during which the mobility decreased by 80% at 100% strain, as shown in Fig. 7b. At the same time, the on current experienced a similar decrease rate for both stretching directions, while the off current changed modestly with strain, as shown in Fig. 7c. When stretching cycles were applied, the on current showed a reversible change at low strains due to the formation of nanoscale cracks in P3HT, and an irreversible change at high strains (>50%) attributed to the onset of micro-cracks in P3HT. Nevertheless, the off current remained constant throughout the cycling test. As for the physical crosslinking PU elastomer used, it exhibits large mechanical hysteresis and causes large viscous deformation with increase in the number of cycles. Therefore, the strain-independent electrical behavior of the device is related to both the morphology change of P3HT and the viscous deformation of the substrate.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic structure of OTFTs. (b) Normalized mobility and (c) on and off currents for devices stretched parallel and perpendicular to the charge transport direction. Reproduced from ref. 80. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
Bao et al.117 designed a class of intrinsically stretchable semiconducting polymers (P1 to P4, Fig. 8a), wherein a non-covalent 2,6-pyridine dicarboxamide (PDCA) moiety was chosen to introduce hydrogen bonding within the flexible conjugated polymer backbone. Besides stretchability, the conjugated polymers exhibit a merit of healing ability enabled by the dynamic bonding. Through heat and solvent annealing treatments, the self-healing ability could promote polymer chain movement to reduce the size and density of nanocracks, and thus restore the damaged polymer films. When strain is applied, the non-covalent crosslinking moieties could undergo an energy dissipation mechanism through the breakage of the bonds, while retaining high charge transport abilities. Fully stretchable 5 × 5 OTFT arrays were fabricated: the CNT gate electrode was transferred onto the SEBS elastomer, followed by the transfer of the PDMS dielectric layer (1.8 μm) and the stretchable polymer layer (35 nm) onto the CNT/SEBS substrate, and then the PEDOT:PSS/CNT bilayer as the source and drain electrode was spray-coated onto the polymer layer; the device configuration is shown in Fig. 8b. The OTFTs exhibited an average mobility of 0.28 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a >105 on/off current ratio. When being strained up to 100% along the channel length and width directions, the mobility and on/off ratios were both linearly decreased, but could be recovered mostly to their initial values after releasing the strain (Fig. 8c and d). Moreover, stretching durability tests were performed at a 25% strain up to 500 cycles, and no noticeable decreases of the mobility and on/off ratios were observed. As seen, the results demonstrate the success of developing stretchable semiconducting polymers through chemical molecular design, facilitating the realization of truly stretchable TFTs. Nevertheless, the stretchable OTFTs exhibited relatively low mobilities compared to that fabricated on rigid Si substrates, attributed to a lower applied electric field with a thicker layer of dielectric on the devices.
 Fig. 8  (a) Chemical structures of the stretchable polymers. (b) Device configuration of the truly stretchable transistors. (c) Mobility and (d) on/off ratios of the transistors under parallel or perpendicular strains. Reproduced from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
In comparison with the CNT-based stretchable TFTs, the polymer-based devices generally show lower electrical performance with comparable mechanical performance, attributed to lower charge carrier mobility for polymer semiconductor materials such as P3HT. However, the polymer semiconductors have advantages of great variety and easy synthesis; thus the device performance would be potentially improved with the help of developing newly functional polymer semiconductors.
3.4 Stretchable graphene-based TFTs
Graphene has promising potential for applications in stretchable TFTs. Ahn et al.118 reported all-graphene-based TFTs supported on a PDMS substrate (Fig. 9a). Tri-layer graphene was obtained using layer-by-layer transfer to minimize the effects of adsorbates on the PDMS. The graphene was patterned as S/D electrodes and a channel by photolithography and oxygen plasma, and an ion gel dielectric and a PEDOT:PSS gate electrode were deposited using an aerosol jet printing technique. As shown in Fig. 9b, the TFTs achieved an initial average hole mobility of 1188 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of 422 cm2 V−1 s−1, and remained relatively stable up to 5% strain along the longitudinal direction of the channel. However, the device failed when the strain increased past 7% due to micro-cracks and defects generated in the graphene film. Trung et al.119 reported transparent and stretchable TFTs by utilizing PEDOT:PSS/PU dispersion as electrodes, an R-GO/PU nanocomposite as the channel layer and PU as the gate dielectric, which were deposited on PDMS substrates. Thus, all-elastomeric FETs array could be stretched up to a strain of 70%, in spite of low device performance. Interestingly, when the TFTs were used as a temperature sensor, it showed a high sensitivity of about 1.34% resistance change per °C, which was hardly changed after 10000 cycles of stretching at 30% strain. As for the graphene-based stretchable TFTs, on the one hand, they can achieve high field-effect mobility due to the excellent electron conductivity of graphene, which is dependent on the quality of the graphene. The high temperature resistance property of these graphene-based stretchable TFTs can broaden their application in electronics. On the other hand, the fact that graphene has a high Young's modulus poses challenges to achieve excellent mechanical performance of the graphene-based stretchable TFTs. In contrast to 1D CNTs, the cracks and defects are inclined to occur in the 2D graphene film when a high strain (>10%) is applied, thus limiting the stretchability of the graphene TFTs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Microscopy images of the graphene TFTs under a strain of 5%. (b) Normalized hole and electron mobility as a function of strain. Reproduced from ref. 118. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Stretchable molybdenum disulfide-based TFTs
Other stretchable semiconducting channel materials have been explored, including molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), which is a 2D material. Unlike graphene, MoS2 has a large intrinsic band gap of 1.8 eV, while reported MoS2 transistors can obtain an electron mobility of 200 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a high on/off ratio of 108,120 showing promising material properties for transistors. Stretchable MoS2 transistors have also been developed. Takenobu et al.121 reported stretchable rippled MoS2 transistors using ion gel as the dielectric (Fig. 10a). Ripples in the MoS2 film were spontaneously formed during transfer from the sapphire growth substrate to non-stretched PDMS. The MoS2 transistor exhibited an electron mobility of 1.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off ratio of 104. Relaxation of the MoS2 ripples allowed the device to be stretched to 5% strain without degradation (Fig. 10b). Beyond 5% strain, device performance began to decay due to the development of cracks in the MoS2 film. Further improvement of the device stretchability is anticipated by transferring the MoS2 film to a pre-strained PDMS substrate. Unlike 2D graphene without band gap, the large band gap of 2D MoS2 can endow its stretchable TFTs with high mobility and on/off ratio. However, crack formation also tends to occur in the MoS2 film under high strains; thus the MoS2-based stretchable TFTs could generally sustain a low strain (<5%) without performance degradation. It remains challenging to develop high-quality and large-area MoS2 through a low-cost fabrication procedure.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic depiction of a MoS2 TFT. Top-right: differential image of AFM; bottom-right: the topography of the ripple structure on the MoS2 film surface. (b) The dependence of normalized electron mobility and on/off ratio against strain. Reproduced from ref. 121. Copyright 2013 American Institute of Physics. 
3.6 Stretchable organic electrochemical transistors
Cicoira et al.122 reported stretchable organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) on PDMS. Parylene pattern transfer technique was proposed for patterning Au electrodes (source and drain) and orthogonal photolithography for organic electroactive materials (PEDOT:PSS); a polyacrylamide-based hydrogel containing sodium chloride was utilized as the stretchable electrolyte while a PEDOT:PSS film was used as the planar gate electrode. In order to enhance the stretchability of metal electrodes and PEDOT:PSS, the buckling strategy was adopted during the fabrication process for stretchable OECTs: (i) the PDMS substrate was pre-strained by 30%, (ii) Au was patterned via Parylene transfer and PEDOT:PSS was patterned via orthogonal photolithography on the PDMS substrate, (iii) stretchable OECTs were obtained by releasing the pre-strained PDMS, and (iv) PDMS was peeled off from the glass substrate. The as-prepared PEDOT:PSS and Au film showed smooth surface morphology and became buckled after releasing the pre-strained PDMS (inset of Fig. 11). The buckled PEDOT:PSS film functioned without degradation up to a strain of 30%, while the performance decreased at larger strains (≥45%) due to crack formation in the PEDOT:PSS film. As shown in Fig. 11, the transfer characteristics of the OECTs remained relatively stable up to a strain of 30% but deteriorated as the strain increased, which was related to the formation of cracks in the PEDOT:PSS film. Under multiple stretching cycles, the source–drain current was decreased, which could be caused by changes in the PEDOT:PSS morphology and the viscoelastic properties of the PDMS substrate. As PEDOT:PSS is a prototypical semiconductor used in OECTs, the buckling strategy effectively helps to improve the mechanical performance of the stretchable OECTs. These OECTs are excellent candidates for applications including logic circuits, sensors and displays, but still suffer from the problem of low performance, which could be improved, for example, by developing a high capacitance electrolyte with high stretchability as the gate dielectric layer.
 Fig. 11  Transfer characteristics of stretchable OECTs at 0%, 15%, and 30% strains. Inset: schematic of the stretchable OECT. Reproduced from ref. 122. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
3.7 Stretchable silicon-based TFTs
As the inorganic silicon semiconductors are brittle and typically fracture under a strain of 1%, the strategy of fabricating stretchable silicon-based TFTs is to create stretchable structures, namely silicon nanomaterials. Single-crystal inorganic semiconductors have been implemented as the channel material in stretchable transistors by Rogers et al.123,124 by implementing controlled buckling of the semiconductor. The silicon nanomaterial was patterned from a silicon wafer by photolithography and reactive ion etching, and then transferred to a pre-strained elastic substrate, leading to periodic, stretchable wavy structures in the nanomaterial upon releasing the pre-strain. This system could be either stretched or compressed, accommodating strains through changes in wavelengths and amplitudes. Stretchable metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors were fabricated using wavy silicon nanoribbons,123 where the transistor was completed before it was transferred onto a PDMS substrate. The stretchable transistor achieved an electron mobility of 100 cm2 V−1 s−1, and there was no electrical degradation when stretched or compressed to a strain of 9.9%. Similarly, stretchable transistors with wavy GaAs nanoribbons have also been reported,125 showing stable performance when stretched to a 4.7% strain, which is an impressive increase over the 2% fracture strain of GaAs. With the help of wavy silicon nanomaterials, stretchable silicon-based TFTs with high mobility can be achieved. However, the fabrication processes of silicon nanomaterials are very complicated and costly, which pose challenges to enable high-performance stretchable silicon-TFTs for practical applications.
In all, the success of stretchable TFTs is dependent on the availability of the materials and structures that can sustain applied strains. As gold is generally adopted as the source and drain electrodes in different kinds of stretchable TFTs, the device performance of these TFTs is highly related to the mechanical and electrical properties of the employed semiconducting and dielectric materials. In comparison, the CNT-based stretchable TFTs generally present both good mechanical and electrical performance related to the dielectric materials, and 2D stretchable TFTs are easily available by introducing the buckling structures for the CNTs. The polymer semiconductor-based stretchable TFTs exhibit relatively good mechanical performance but low electrical performance, while the graphene-, MoS2- and silicon nanomaterial-based stretchable TFTs tend to display high electrical performance but low stretchability due to the crack formation at high strains.
4. Stretchable electroluminescent devices
4.1 Introduction of OLEDs
An OLED is an attractive electroluminescent device, which exhibits advantages such as light weight, wide viewing angle, self-emissive, unique merit of flexibility, and so on. OLEDs have been considered as an alternative for the next-generation flat-panel displays and solid-state lighting, which could bring in smart, creative, and luxury sensations for human beings in the future. OLEDs are a source of light without glare issue, and can be potentially used as the backlight source for liquid crystal displays (LCDs). A classic OLED structure is like a sandwich, as shown in Fig. 1b, where a hole transporting layer (HTL), an emissive layer (EML), and an electron transporting layer (ETL) are sequentially sandwiched between an anode and a cathode.126 Generally, ITO coated on a glass substrate is used as the anode, metal materials with low work function are used as the cathode, and light emission is emitted from the transparent ITO side. When an electric current is applied to an OLED device, electrons are injected from the cathode and holes are injected from the anode. The electrons and holes travel through the ETL and HTL, respectively, towards the EML where they recombine and form excitons. Subsequently, the excitons rapidly relax back to the more stable ground state, accompanied by light emission. The OLED performance is characterized by power/current efficiency, and external quantum efficiency (ηEQE). The power/current efficiency is defined as the ratio of the luminous flux output of the device to the corresponding driving electrical power. The ηEQE is the ratio of photons emitted out of the device and the electrons injected into the device, given as ηEQE = γ × ηPL × ηS/T × ηOUT,127 where γ is the recombination efficiency, ηPL is the photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield of the emitter, ηS/T is the fraction of formed excitons that contribute to radiative transition, and ηOUT is the light out-coupling efficiency. Phosphorescent materials enable a maximum ηS/T of 100% since they can harvest both 25% singlet excitons and 75% triplet excitons. Conventional fluorescent materials only exhibit a maximum ηS/T of 25% because only 25% singlet excitons contribute to light emission.128 However, thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) materials have a maximum ηS/T of 100% due to the efficient utilization of triplet excitons for emission by transferring them to singlet excitons through a reversible intersystem crossing transition.129 Without out-coupling approaches, a theoretical maximum ηOUT of 20% is predicted for planar OLEDs.130,131 Therefore, the maximum ηEQE of conventional fluorescent OLEDs is limited to be 5%, while that of phosphorescent and TADF OLEDs is 20%, under the ideal conditions that both γ and ηPL reach unity. Without the out-coupling schemes, high EQEs beyond these limits have already been realized.132,133
Remarkable progress of OLEDs has been made in both academia and industry. White OLEDs with a high efficiency of 90 lm W−1 and potential 124 lm W−1 have been realized,134 which is comparable to that of fluorescent tubes (65–100 lm W−1) and higher than that of incandescent lights (15 lm W−1),135 which indicates that OLEDs are a good candidate for the next-generation lighting. With the employment of a microlens-array substrate, high efficiency white OLEDs with an impressive ηEQE of ∼50% and a long lifetime (LT50, lifetime of 50% luminance decay) of 100000 h at a luminance of 1000 cd m−2 were reported by Panasonic Corporation.136 High-quality white OLEDs with a color rendering index of >90137,138 and sunlight-like color-correlated temperature of 2300–8200 K139 were achieved by virtue of multiple emitters. Great progress has also been achieved in flexible OLEDs.140,141 For example, flexible white OLEDs based on graphene as the electrode show a power efficiency of 90 lm W−1 at 1000 cd m−2 and a bending radius of 0.5 cm, but it doesn't guarantee stretchability.141
4.2 Stretchable OLEDs
Stretchable OLEDs are fabricated using polymers or small organic molecules as their optically active element. The first truly stretchable OLEDs were demonstrated from polymer light-emitting devices (PLEDs) based on a red light-emitting polymer,142 using PEDOT:PSS with a sheet resistance of 135 Ω sq−1 as the anode. The ultra-thin PLED was fabricated on 1.4 μm thick PET foil, and then it was transferred to a PDMS coated glass support. The red PLED showed the highest luminance of 113 cd m−2 at a voltage of 9 V, along with an EQE of about 0.08%. The low device performance was probably attributed to a very thick emitting layer (225–300 nm) that resulted in aggregation caused quenching (ACQ) or to a non-optimized device structure. To make stretchable PLEDs, the ultra-thin PLEDs were peeled away from the PDMS/glass support and attached to a 100% pre-strained elastomer (3 M VHB) substrate. Upon relaxing the elastomer, the PLEDs formed a random network of folds to accommodate the compression strain, allowing the wrinkled PLEDs to show nearly the same electrical performance as in their flat state. As seen in Fig. 12a, the stretchable PLEDs could continuously operate over a tensile strain range of 0–100%, for example, when the PLEDs were stretched by 40%, the current–voltage curve hardly showed any variations in comparison with that of the non-stretched PLED (Fig. 12b). The sustainable strain was limited by the prestrain of the supporting elastomer rather than the PLED itself. This work presented the thinnest ultrathin PLEDs with a total thickness of only 2 mm, which also enabled a bending radii of 10 mm or smaller. The high degree of stretchability is encouraging and the electrical performance can be improved through the optimization of the device structure and development of high-efficiency light-emitting polymers.
 Fig. 12  (a) Images of the folded PLEDs being stretched from 0% to 100%. (b) Current–voltage curves of the PLEDs in the flat state and under 40% tensile strain. Reproduced from ref. 142. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
Pei et al.57 fabricated stretchable PLEDs by using semi-transparent GO-AgNW/PUA composite electrodes. The GO sheet was used to solder AgNW junctions and prevent disjointing or sliding of the nanowires against each other during deformation, thus dramatically reducing the inter-nanowire contact resistance. The transparent composite electrode could be stretched repeatedly to 40% strains. Stretchable PLEDs were fabricated by laminating a PEI/GO–AgNW/PUA electrode with a sheet resistance of 14 Ω sq−1, with PUA/GO–AgNW/PEDOT:PSS/EML, which consisted of a white light-emitting polymer and 1,3-bis[(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxidiazolyl]phenylene (OXD-7) with a ratio of 100:10. The device showed almost identical electrical performance from both sides, and a maximum current efficiency of 2.0 cd A−1 at a brightness of 571 cd m−2 together with CIE coordinates of (0.33, 0.34) at a brightness of 500 cd m−2 were obtained from one side of the device. As shown in Fig. 13a, a PLED with an area of 3 × 4 cm2 was driven at 14 V and it could be stretched up to 130% while the light remained uniformly distributed across the entire emissive area. For stretching cycle tests, Fig. 13b and c shows that the brightness decreases after 100 cycles between 0 and 40% strain, and the current efficiency was enhanced instead, which was likely due to reduced leakage current or the changing thickness of the EML and morphological change after stretching. For the successful application of stretchable OLEDs, it is of great importance to simultaneously realize both sufficient mechanical robustness and electrical performance. Despite the fact that planar films of brittle organic semiconductors tend to crack upon external strain, buckling strategy provides an effective method to address this problem.
 Fig. 13  (a) Optical photographs of a PLED driven at 14 V with specified strains. (b) Brightness–voltage and (c) current efficiency–brightness curves as a function of stretching cycles between 0–40% strain. Reproduced from ref. 57. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Sun et al.143 developed a laser-programmable process to fabricate stretchable small-molecule based OLEDs with an ordered-buckling profile. Firstly, top-emitting phosphorescent green OLEDs, in which the device configuration was given as Ag (80 nm)/MoO3 (3 nm)/NPB (40 nm)/mCP:Ir(ppy)3 (6 wt%, 20 nm)/TPBi(35 nm)/Ca (3 nm)/Ag (18 nm), were thermally evaporated on a polymer/Si substrate (Fig. 14a). Then, the OLED/polymer was peeled off from the Si substrate and transferred to a 120% pre-stretched elastomeric substrate with one-dimensional long-period gratings made by femtosecond laser ablation. The OLED/polymer film was attached to the top surface of the grating lines and was suspended above the grating grooves. Upon releasing the prestretched elastomeric substrate, ordered buckling only formed for the OLED parts attached above the grooves, as the compressive strain on the grating grooves was much larger than that on the grating lines. The stretchability was dependent on the width of the lines and grooves, and the strain was mainly imposed on the grating grooves where buckles rose up. When the released device was stretched, the buckles were gradually flattened (Fig. 14b and c). The as-received OLED without strain achieved a maximum current efficiency of 72.5 cd A−1, which was still as high as 70 cd A−1 at a strain of 70% (Fig. 14d and e). The OLED can also accommodate 15000 stretch–release cycles between 20% and 0% strain, while the luminance decreases by 16% and the current efficiency slightly enhances due to the decreased current density. During the cycles, the buckles were uniformly stretched with increasing strain and returned to the original profile once the strain was removed. This work demonstrated a simple method to make stretchable OLEDs using solution processing and even thermal evaporation, and it is also independent of the OLED component materials and structures.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of stretchable OLEDs. Photographs of the stretchable OLEDs based on a 120% pre-strained substrate at 5 V with 0% strain (b) and 70% strain (c). (d) Current density–luminance–driving voltage characteristics and (e) current efficiency–driving voltage characteristics of the devices under different strains. Reproduced from ref. 143. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
In contrast to 1D stretchability, 2D stretchable OLEDs are expected to broaden more applications. However, there is a shortage of 2D stretchable OLEDs with both high mechanical and electrical performances, due to the limitations on materials and structures from the physical and electrical damage caused by the complicated interactions of anisotropic stress in the 2D stretchable system. Recently, Sun et al.144 fabricated 2D stretchable OLEDs by using a similar buckling technique and device structure as mentioned in ref. 143. The ultrathin OLEDs were transferred to a biaxially pre-stretched elastic substrate with 100% pre-strain in both diagonal directions. 2D small molecule-based OLEDs were obtained after releasing the pre-strain, along with random buckles and complicated topology formed in the devices (Fig. 15a), due to the interaction of the orthogonal compressive stress on the ultrathin OLED when releasing the prestrain. The resulting 2D OLEDs achieved a maximum luminance of 8080 cd m−2 and a maximum current efficiency of 62.9 cd A−1 at a strain of 0%, and can bear a biaxial strain of 50% with a maximum luminance and current efficiency of 9699 cd m−2 and 79 cd A−1, respectively (Fig. 15b and c). Under 100 stretching–releasing cycles between 0 and 25% strain, the device efficiency remained stable with negligible fluctuation. The random networks of buckles formed within the devices are of great help to restrict the complicated interactions of anisotropic stress under 2D stretching, and thus contribute to good mechanical and electrical performance.
 Fig. 15  (a) Images of a 2D OLED operating at 5 V at strains of 0, 25, and 50%. (b) Current density–luminance–voltage curves and (c) current efficiency–voltage curves of 2D OLEDs with different strain values. Reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
As seen, by the utilization of the stretchable anode and cathode electrodes, high stretchability can be achieved in both polymer and small-molecule based OLEDs. Nevertheless, the electrical performance of the stretchable OLEDs such as luminance and EL efficiency is still far behind that of their rigid counterparts based on ITO electrodes, which have higher conductivity and transparency. Moreover, it would be more intriguing to develop white OLEDs by using organic emissive materials, considering potential applications of white OLEDs in solid-state lightings and flat-panel displays, along with backlights for LCDs.
4.3 Stretchable light-emitting electrochemical cells
Light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs), invented by Heeger et al.,145 are a family of electroluminescent devices. LECs have a similar sandwich structure as OLEDs; however, the EML is a mixture of an ionic conductor and an electronic conductor.146 Stretchable polymer-based LECs (PLECs) have been successfully fabricated147 based on an ionic transition metal complex (iTMC), ruthenium (Ru) complex (Ru(dtb-bpy)3(PF6)2), which worked as both an electronic and ionic conductor. The Ru complex with intrinsic stretchability was dispersed into the PDMS or PMMA matrix for the improvement of the elasticity, and sandwiched between a semi-transparent Au/PDMS anode without pre-strain and a soft EGaIn cathode,148 leading to stretchable PLECs (Fig. 16a). An example of the Ru/PDMS device demonstrating uniform emission during stretching is displayed in Fig. 16b. The average EQE values of the Ru/PDMS device and the Ru/PMMA device were 0.16% and 0.40%, respectively. For the stretching test, the Ru/PDMS device could be elongated up to 27% before failure, while that of the Ru/PMMA device was only 17%. In addition, the Ru/PDMS device showed increased stability over the Ru/PMMA device after 50 stretching cycles at a strain of 15% (Fig. 16c). In all, the Ru/PDMS device showed better mechanical performance, due to the better elastomeric nature of the PDMS matrix than that of the relatively brittle PMMA matrix. The stretchability of the Ru/PDMS device was limited by the Au/PDMS anode because the gold films typically lose conductivity at a strain range of 20–30% induced by crack formation. Thus, more stretchable electrodes such as CNTs or metal nanowires could be potentially employed.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of device structure. (b) Photograph of the Ru device during stretching. (c) Plot of total emitted energy vs. the number of strain cycles for Ru/PDMS (solid line) and Ru/PMMA (dotted line) devices. Reproduced from ref. 147. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
Pei et al.56 fabricated stretchable PLECs based on semi-transparent AgNWs/PUA composite electrodes, which were based on a thin silver nanowire (AgNW) network inlaid in the surface layer of the PUA matrix. The composite electrode can enable a high transmittance of 83% at 550 nm, good electrical conductivity with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1, high stretchability and smooth surface roughness. The EML consisted of a yellow light-emitting polymer (SuperYellow), ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate, and lithium trifluoromethane sulphonate, which was sandwiched between two semi-transparent composite electrodes. As a result, semi-transparent PLECs were obtained, in which the emission intensity from both sides of the devices showed almost identical luminance and efficiency. When the strain increased from 0% to 120%, the current density gradually decreased (Fig. 17a), due to the increased sheet resistance of the electrode. Meanwhile, the luminance increased up to a strain of 20% and then decreased rapidly at high strains beyond 40%, due to irreversible changes at large strains in the emissive and PEDOT layers. By the combined effects of decreased current density and reduced luminance, the current efficiency was firstly increased and then decreased (Fig. 17b). For instance, the efficiency was increased from the original 1.0 to 3.0 cd A−1 at a strain of 40%, which was ascribed to the balanced injection of electrons and holes, as evidenced from single-carrier devices. Moreover, the device could tolerate 1000 stretching–releasing cycles with strain values between 0 and 30% but with decreased electrical performance. The device displayed uniform emission across the entire emissive area, even under 120% strain (Fig. 17c). By using the same technique, a fully stretchable PLED array of 5 × 5 pixels was also fabricated, which functioned well when stretched or folded.
 Fig. 17  (a) Current density and luminance, and (b) current efficiency of a PLEC biased at 12 V as a function of strains. (c) Photographs of a PLEC biased at 14 V at 0% and 120% strains. Reproduced from ref. 56. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
Pei et al.79 demonstrated an intrinsically stretchable PLEC by using the stretchable SWNT/poly(tert-butylacrylate) (PtBA) composite electrodes. The emissive layer included a blue emissive polyfluorene copolymer (PF-B), an ionic conductor (poly(ethylene oxide) dimethacrylate ether (PEO-DMA)) and a salt (lithium trifluoromethane sulfonate (LiTf)), as shown in Fig. 18a. Subsequently, this was laminated between two SWNT–PtBA electrodes with a sheet resistance of 500 Ω sq−1. The PF-B is a stretchable polymer, which could accommodate strain by taking advantage of its polymeric structure and morphology. As shown in Fig. 18b, by increasing the strain from 0 to 45%, the luminance decreased from 45 to 18 cd m−2, while the current efficiency slightly increased from 0.76 to 0.87 cd A−1. It was also observed that the light emission from the 45% stretched devices was polarized, in which the light intensity along the stretching direction was higher than that in the perpendicular direction, which was in agreement with the alignment of the light-emitting polymer.
 Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structures of materials in the emissive layer. (b) Optical photographs of a PLED driven at 8 V with specified strains. Reproduced from ref. 79. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
Compared to traditional OLEDs, the LEC devices have merits of simpler device structure, wherein the polymer-based or iTMC-based EMLs are sandwiched between two electrodes, thus enabling easier device fabrication. Despite the fact that highly stretchable LECs can be constructed, there is a large room for improvement of the electrical performance. Given the fact that the fluorescent polymer dyes can only utilize a small fraction (25% singlet) of the total excitons for light emission, the phosphorescent dyes are expected to be incorporated in the EMLs for harvesting both singlet and triplet excitons.
4.4 Stretchable alternating-current electroluminescent devices
Alternating-current electroluminescent (ACEL) devices are an attractive type of electroluminescent device, wherein emissive layers which are generally composed of phosphor particles are sandwiched between two electrodes. The phosphor particles emit light when the medium around them is polarized with an alternating voltage.149 To enhance the stretchability of ACEL, ionic conductors exhibiting high transmittance and stretchability were popularly used as electrodes.150 The electrical conduction in the ionic conductors was enabled by mobile ions from lithium chloride, and the hydrogel based on a polymer network enabled high stretchability. Zinc sulfide (ZnS):Cu is a widely available ACEL material with well-studied emission behaviors,151,152 and the emission wavelength from ZnS is determined primarily by the doping activators.
Lee et al. reported stretchable ACEL devices that are composed of bottom and top ionic conductors with a sandwiched ZnS:Cu/Ecoflex emissive layer. Due to the ionic conductors delivering outstanding features of extremely high stretchability and transmittance compared to conventional electrodes, the ACEL devices show excellent mechanical performance. For instance, stretchable ACEL devices had an original maximum luminance of ∼95 cd m−2.152 As the strain increased, the emission intensity of the device was firstly increased and reached the maximum value at a strain of 280%, and then decreased when the strain was beyond 280% (Fig. 19a). When stretched up to 700% strain (Fig. 19b), the device luminance showed 30% degradation. The strain-dependent emission intensity was related to the luminance–voltage relation with two combined effects. Under increased strains, on the one hand, reducing the film thickness leads to an increase in the electrical field in the EML (contribute to increase device luminance); on the other hand, increasing the device area leads to a decline in the phosphor density in the polymer matrix (contribute to reduce device luminance). Also, Suo et al. reported stretchable ACEL using a ZnS/acrylic elastomer (VHB) as the emissive layer.153 The as-prepared devices showed an initial luminance of 9.4 cd m−2. Interestingly, the devices could be stretched up to a very high strain of 1500% with a luminance of 9.3 cd m−2 (Fig. 19c). As also seen from the ACEL devices, the ZnS:Cu/polymer composite layer provides excellent stretchability from the polymer matrix and sustained functionality of the emissive material. Therefore, the device stretchability can be easily improved by using other host polymers with higher stretchability for the emitting layer.
 Fig. 19  (a) Emission intensity of the device under different strains. (b) Photographs of the ACEL device under 0% and 700% strains. Reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (c) Stretchable ACEL device under 0% and 1500% strains. Reproduced from ref. 153. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
In contrast to stretchable OLEDs and LECs that require stretchable and conductive electrodes to enable the devices to operate at low voltages (<10 V), the stretchable ACEL devices show low dependence on the electrodes because they operate at high voltages. Thereby, extremely stretchable electrodes can be used to make highly stretchable ACEL devices. However, a drawback of the stretchable ACEL devices is the low electrical performance. The luminance is generally very low, at most a few hundred cd m−2. This may be due to the large surface area and surface defects of the submicron phosphor particles,154 while the luminance of the phosphors shows high dependence on the particle size.
4.5 Stretchable perovskite-based light-emitting diodes
Metal–halide-based perovskite materials benefiting from low cost and earth-abundance have attracted significant attention in recent years. The perovskites have simply tunable band gaps, offering excellent performance for optoelectronic applications, especially photovoltaics. In 2015 Lee et al.155 reported the first perovskite LEDs (PeLEDs) which had large area of 2 × 2 cm2 and achieved a current efficiency of over 42.9 cd A−1 with green-light emission, showing great potential as lighting devices. Although flexible PeLEDs have also been realized,156 stretchable PeLEDs are still challenging due to the large Young's modulus (∼12 GPa) and brittleness of typical perovskite materials.157
Recently, Yu et al.157 proposed a solution for this issue by using an organometal-halide-perovskite/polymer composite as the emissive layer. The polymer matrix served as a microscale elastic connector for the rigid and brittle perovskite and induced stretchability to the perovskite/polymer composite emissive layers which consisted of methylammonium lead tribromide (MAPbBr3) and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO). The surface morphology of the MAPbBr3/PEO composite was characterized by SEM (Fig. 20a–c) in order to test the compliance of the composite. It was observed that the composite thin film without strain showed a dense arrangement of perovskite crystals partially embedded into the PEO matrix (Fig. 20a), and the gaps between the crystals were filled by the polymer and a pin-hole-free film was obtained. When the composite was stretched by 30%, the polymer elongated along with the elastic substrate (Fig. 20b), leading to a reduction in perovskite density. However, at a strain of 50%, tearing of the polymer by the perovskite was observed (Fig. 20c). The PeLEDs were fabricated on a PDMS substrate by sandwiching the MAPbBr3/PEO composite emissive layer between a PEO-modified PEDOT:PSS anode with a sheet resistance of 140 Ω sq−1 and a transmittance of 82% at 550 nm wavelength and an eutectic indium–gallium (EInGa) cathode. The sheet resistance of the PEDOT:PSS/PEO composite electrode increased by a factor of 13% under a strain of 40%. The as-prepared PeLEDs had a turn-on voltage of 2.4 V, maximum brightness of 15960 cd m−2, and current efficiency of 2.7 cd A−1. The PeLEDs could survive a strain of 40% without device degradation (Fig. 20d and e), showing a maximum brightness of 7340 cd m−2 and a maximum current efficiency of 3.2 cd A−1 with fluctuations, and the efficiency enhancement was likely due to more balanced electron/hole recombination which was caused by reduced EML thickness in the stretched device. Nevertheless, the device efficiency gradually decreased with increasing stretching cycles. In general, the stretchable PeLEDs can achieve higher luminance (≥10000 cd m−2) than the other types of electroluminescent devices; however, the brittle property of the perovskite limits the device stretchability even though the perovskite is embedded into polymers. The stretchable PeLEDs are one of the most promising EL devices, considering the fact that the perovskite materials can overcome disadvantages such as complex synthesis, high cost and poor color purity of conventional organic emissive materials. However, the presence of metallic Ph atoms limits the device efficiency of PeLEDs. Given the fact that great attention has been paid to the development of this class of materials, the EL performance of stretchable PeLEDs has the potential to be highly improved. Thereafter, the PeLEDs will find their way into the display and lighting industry.
 Fig. 20  SEM images of an MAPbBr3/PEO composite film at (a) 0%, (b) 30% and (c) 50% strains. (d) Current efficiency of a PeLED under strains of 0–40%. (e) Photos of a lit PeLED under a 4 V biased voltage before (top) and after (bottom) stretching to 40% strain. Reproduced from ref. 157. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Overall, the stretchable OLED, LEC, ACEL and PeLED devices have merits of simple structures and easy fabrication. In contrast to the traditional rigid ones that rely on expensive high-temperature and high-vacuum processes, the stretchable EL devices are fabricated based on solution-processed techniques which are scalable and low-cost. It helps the EL devices for large-area applications and applications in more unprecedented areas. As for the electrical performance, the stretchable OLEDs and PeLEDs can afford high luminance (>10000 cd m−2) with the help of phosphorescent dyes and perovskite dyes, respectively. The stretchable LEC devices enable fair luminance (<500 cd m−2) because of the utilized fluorescent polymer dyes, while low luminance (<100 cd m−2) is usually observed in the stretchable ACEL devices. As for the mechanical performance, on the one hand, the buckling strategy endows the OLEDs with high stretchability, while the stretchability of the LECs is limited by the intrinsic property of the polymer light-emitting materials. On the other hand, highly stretchable ACEL and PeLED devices can be easily realized as the emitting materials are generally embedded into an extremely stretchable elastomeric matrix. As the stretchable OLEDs, LECs and PeLEDs work at low driving voltage, highly conductive and stretchable electrodes are of great need; although the ACEL devices require very high voltages, they have merits of simple fabrication process and high stretchability. All the stretchable EL devices suffer from the shortage of emitting materials with high intrinsic stretchability. To date, the development of stretchable electrodes has led to great improvement in stretchable EL devices. However, the electrical performance of most stretchable EL devices is still far from real implementation and the devices are not competitive with conventional rigid electroluminescent devices. In this regard, more studies on the improvement of electrical performance without sacrificing mechanical behaviors are urgently needed to reach the landmarks for different applications. For instance, the device performance required for display and lighting applications should be further improved to be such as a luminance of at least 100–200 cd m−2 for indoor applications, >500 cd m−2 desired for mobile applications, and a power efficiency >12 lm W−1 for replacing incandescent lights.
5. Stretchable photovoltaic devices
5.1 Introduction of photovoltaic devices
Photovoltaic technique is able to convert sunlight directly into electrical power. One of the most common photovoltaic devices is solar cells, which are a promising energy source due to the limited supply of fossil fuels. Although inorganic solar cells generally exhibit high efficiency, organic photovoltaic devices/organic solar cells (OPVs/OSCs) are more attractive for niche applications that require flexibility and integratability. Moreover, ultraviolet/infrared photodetectors, which can be operated in photovoltaic mode, are of great interest in many fields such as industry, biology, military, and astronomy.158 A typical OPV consists of an anode, a cathode, and organic photoactive layers inserted between the electrodes (Fig. 1c). The photoactive materials, including small molecules or polymeric materials, lead to a donor–acceptor (D–A) heterojunction that plays a key role in the physical processes of OPVs. There are two types of OPV configurations, planar heterojunction (PHJ) and bulk heterojunction (BHJ) devices.159 Given the fact that the excitons dissociate at the D/A interface, for the PHJ devices, this dissociation is limited to the planar D–A interface, while for the BHJ devices, the donor and acceptor materials are intimately blended, and the interpenetrating network of D/A is more beneficial for dissociating excitons.160 The OPVs work in four steps:161–163 (i) photoactive materials absorb sunlight followed by exciton formation, (ii) the excitons diffuse to the donor/acceptor interface, (iii) the excitons separate into free holes and electrons, (iv) the holes and electrons are collected at the cathode and anode, respectively, leading to a photocurrent. The power conversion efficiency (PCE), ηPCE, of the device can be expressed as ηPCE = Jsc × Voc × FF/Pin, where Jsc is the short-circuit current density, Voc is the open-circuit voltage, FF is the fill factor, and Pin is the incident light power.164Jsc is a current in the device without applying the voltage, Voc is a voltage at which point the current is zero, and FF is the ratio of the maximum output power to Jsc × Voc. It can be learned from the four working steps that the PCE can be improved by: (i) developing novel photoactive materials that have a wide spectral range of absorption, (ii) the donor and acceptor forming a bi-continuous network with penetrating pathways for electron and hole transport to the electrodes, with a domain size of about 10 nm that corresponds to the exciton diffusion length, thus facilitating exciton dissociation and charge-carrier transport, (iii) increasing the exciton dissociation efficiency, by mixing the donor and acceptor to form large D–A interfacial areas, and (iv) reducing energy barriers between the electrode/organic material interfaces so as to enhance charge-carrier extraction.
Highly efficient OPVs have been successfully achieved due to intensive research on material development and device optimization.165–168 For small-molecule based OPVs, the best PCE obtained was 9.3%169 for a single junction device and 11.1%170 for a multi-junction device, while for polymer OPVs, a high PCE of 9.2%171 was demonstrated for a single junction device and 10.6%172 for a tandem device. Moreover, Heliatek GmbH in 2013 announced a record PCE of 12% for a tandem device, placing OPVs in direct competition with amorphous silicon photovoltaics. Flexible OPVs have also been demonstrated using conductive PEDOT:PSS,173 carbon nanotube composite,174 graphene,175 and silver nanowires176 as the electrode. A high PCE of 5.9% was realized in an inverted OSC,176 which can tolerate a bending radius of 5 mm.
5.2 Stretchable organic photovoltaics
In 2011, Bao et al.93 demonstrated the first stretchable OPVs using a buckled PEDOT:PSS as the anode and EGaIn as the cathode. PEDOT:PSS, P3HT:PCBM and EGaIn were successively deposited on a 20% pre-strained PDMS substrate. After releasing the pre-strain, the released PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM films showed buckles perpendicular to the strain direction, and these buckles became parallel to the strain by re-stretching, as seen in Fig. 21a. As the strain increased from 0 to 22.2%, Isc and Voc were gradually increased, as shown in Fig. 21b. After the first full cycle of applied strain, the properties of the device remained approximately constant as a function of strain. The device could respond to 11 stretching cycles of 18.5% strain with stable performance, such as Jsc = 7.4 mA cm−2, Voc = 415 mV, FF = 0.38 and ηPCE = 1.2%, as shown in Fig. 21c. Beyond that, cracks were produced in the active layer. Although mechanical effects could influence the mechanism of charge transport in the materials, such as light absorption and the geometry of electric field due to changes in the amplitudes and wavelengths of the buckling, the fact that the photovoltaic properties are nearly independent of these effects is attractive. The same group fabricated similarly stretchable OPVs by using a conjugated polymer (DPPT-TT) as the donor in the PCBM blend.177 Optical micrographs revealed that minor cracks appeared for the PEDOT:PSS/DPPT-TT:PCBM film when 20% strain was applied to the device, indicating that the DPPT-TT exhibited higher fracture strain because of its lower elastic modulus, whereas large cracks extended along the PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM film at 16% strain. These devices are not competitive with the state-of-the-art OPV devices in terms of efficiency; thus studies on the improvement of the transparent electrode, the conjugated polymer, and device optimization are expected.
 Fig. 21  (a) Optical images of a PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM film being non-stretched and stretched, and photograph of this film on a pre-strained PDMS membrane. (b) I–V curves as a function of strain. (c) I–V curves as a function of stretching cycles. Reproduced from ref. 93. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
To make semiconducting materials with excellent elastic and electrical properties, one of the most impressive successes is a P3HT-block-polyethylene copolymer,178 which enabled an outstanding stretchability of 600% by optimizing the weight ratio between semiconducting P3HT and elastic polyethylene. Lipomi et al.179–181 reported a series of conjugated polymers with good balance of elastic property and photovoltaic behavior by modifying the chemical structure of the materials. They investigated the mechanical properties of a series of poly(3-alkylthiophenes) (P3AT) as a function of the length of the alkyl side chain.179 As shown in Fig. 22a, as the alkyl side chain increases, the ductility of both P3AT films and P3AT:PCBM blend increases, indicating reduced tensile modulus and brittleness. For example, as the alkyl chain increases from butyl (n = 4) to octyl (n = 8), the onset strain at which cracks appeared increased from 6 to 60% for the P3AT films, and from 4 to 45% for the P3AT:PCBM blends. Thus, the length of the alkyl side-chain plays a role in the tensile modulus, which could be partially understood through the thermal properties of the P3ATs. As reported, elevated melting temperature typically correlated with an increase in crystallinity and stiffness of the materials resulting from strong intermolecular forces. Thereafter, the increase in crystallinity could cause a dramatic increase in the tensile modulus. Stretchable organic solar cells with a structure of PEDOT:PSS/P3AT:PCBM/EGaIn were fabricated on non-strained PDMS substrates, using either P3HT or P3DDT as the P3AT copolymer. Without stretching, the P3HT device showed better performance than the P3DDT device due to the better electronic properties of P3HT. When 10% strain was applied, cracks were observed in the P3HT device (Fig. 22b), leading to a resistor-like electrical behavior. For the P3DDT device with 10% strain, no obvious cracks were observed (Fig. 22c), and Jsc slightly decreased while Voc was increased, leading to enhanced PCE. Thus, the increase of Voc was attributed to the possible disruption of the EGaIn electrode and likely better contact of the EGaIn with the surface of the organic semiconductor. To further improve the stretchability, the conventional polymer-fullerene active layer can be replaced with a combination of all-polymer donors and acceptors, because the polymer acceptors generally exhibit better mechanical strength and ductility than fullerenes.182
 Fig. 22  (a) Chemical structures of the P3AT semiconductors, and crack onset strains of the pure P3AT films and their blends with PCBM. Photographs of (b) P3HT:PCBM and (c) P3DDT:PCBM devices under 10% strain. Reproduced from ref. 179. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
Kaltenbrunner et al.18 reported an ultrathin and stretchable OPV by depositing P3HT:PCBM on PEDOT:PSS-coated 1.4 μm thick PET substrate foil, while Ca/Ag was the cathode. To enable stretchability, the entire solar cell was attached onto a 100 μm thick pre-stretched elastomer (3 M VHB 4905) substrate, and wrinkles were formed by releasing the pre-strain, as shown in Fig. 23a. The ultrathin device displayed excellent performance with Voc of 0.58 V, Jsc of 11.9 mA cm−2, FF of 61% and PCE of 4.2%, under one sun illumination. The higher device performance from this work than that of the previously stretchable ones was supposed to come from the difference in the cathode, which was a Ca/Ag double layer in this work, and EGaIn used in the other work. Ca has a lower work function (2.9 eV)183 compared to EGaIn (4.1–4.2 eV);148 meanwhile the conductivity of Ag (6.3 × 105 S cm−1) is much higher than that of EGaIn (3.4 × 104 S cm−1).148 Therefore, electron extraction was more efficient in the Ca/Ag-based devices. The as-prepared device with pre-strain showed a tensile strain of 400%, while the released device after compressing the as-prepared device by 80% demonstrated a tensile strain of 0%. As shown in Fig. 23b, the device remained a functional solar cell up to 80% strain. The reduced Isc and power was possibly caused by decreased incident area, although the micro-textures produced upon folding the device could bring about an enhancement of light harvesting, and the reduced FF may be from the increased resistivity of the electrodes. Noticeably, the device performance was almost recovered after re-stretching the device to its pre-compression state. When the device was attached to a biaxially pre-stretched elastomer, it could survive a biaxial compression of 50%. This approach for stretchable solar cells has distinct advantages. For instance, the fabrication processes were entirely planar, and are compatible with reel-to-reel processing. Meanwhile, adhesion to a pre-stretched elastomer was done in a single step after device fabrication. Therefore, it is advantageous for high throughput fabrication.
 Fig. 23  (a) Stretchable solar cell at 0% (left), 30% (middle) and 50% (right) compression strain. (b) Isc (red circle), FF (blue triangle), PCE (black diamond), Voc (green triangle) of the device as a function of compression/tensile strain. Reproduced from ref. 18. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
As opposed to polymer films, solar cells have been fabricated from stretchable fibers of polymers based on an elastic substrate and a spring-like structure.184 The fabrication process is shown in Fig. 24a; a titanium (Ti) wire was first wound onto a fiber substrate to produce a spring-like structure. Then, the aligned TiO2 nanotubes working as the electron transport layer were grown on the Ti spring, followed by the coating of 80 nm P3HT:PCBM and 100 nm PEDOT:PSS. Next, an elastic fiber was inserted into the coated Ti spring. Finally, an 18 nm layer of aligned MWCNT was wound onto the Ti spring. As seen in Fig. 24b, the PSC exhibits an original PCE of 1.23%, which was still as high as 1.19% after 100 stretching cycles at a strain of 30%, as the polymer layer remained uniform and continuous and the MWCNTs stayed well aligned after stretching. Meanwhile, the PCE decreased by 12% when stretched up to 40% strain, due to the rapid increase in the resistance of the MWCNT (Fig. 24c). However, the cell could not return to its initial state after releasing, because the deformation of the Ti spring was irreversible at a strain higher than 30%. The PSC failed at a strain of 80% due to broken MWCNTs. This fiber-shaped PSC could be woven into textiles and survive a strain of up to 30% with insignificant degradation, showing a promising application for wearable electronics.
 Fig. 24  (a) Fabrication process of fiber-shaped polymer solar cells. (b) The J–V curves of the PSC before and after 100 stretching cycles, and (c) PCE as a function of strain. η0 and η correspond to the PCE before and after stretching with different strains, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 184. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
In all, the molecular structures of the polymer materials play a role in determining the mechanical properties of a film, e.g. the size of the chain is a good predictor of softness, thus influencing the stretchability of the stretchable polymer-based photovoltaics. As cracks are likely to form in these polymers at high strains, the device stretchability is limited. Nevertheless, chemical engineering is proved to be an efficient way to address this problem. Meanwhile, these stretchable photovoltaic devices show considerable electrical performance, which are related to the conductivity of both polymer semiconductors and electrodes used. As the polymer semiconductors have merits of easy synthesis and large variety, there is a high possibility of optimizing the electrical and mechanical properties through chemical engineering, leading to high performance photovoltaic devices.
5.3 Stretchable perovskite solar cells
Perovskite solar cells (PeSCs) are a new class of photovoltaic devices, which are based organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials with a structure of ABX3, wherein A is an organic cation (e.g., CH3NH3+, CH(NH2)+), B is a metal cation (e.g., Pb2+, Sn2+) and X is an anion from the halide series (e.g., Cl−, Br− or I−). Since their first report in 2009,185 PeSCs have been receiving tremendous attention in academia, due to advantages of high absorption coefficient, tunable band gap, low material cost, abundant elemental constituents and so on. Also, the PCE has rapidly increased from 3.8% in 2009 to 22.1% in 2017.186 Similarly, flexible and stretchable PeSCs have also been developed,187–189 while the stretchable counterparts are promising for exploring innovative applications that require multidimensional deformability, such as conformability with biological tissues.
Kaltenbrunner et al.190 reported ultrathin, stretchable PeSCs based on methylammonium lead trihalide (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, MAPI) as the absorber layer. The schematic of the ultrathin solar cell (3 μm thick) is illustrated in Fig. 25a. Ultrathin 1.4 μm thick PET foil served as the substrate, and a layer of PEDOT:PSS with a sheet resistance of around 105 Ω sq−1 functioned as the transparent electrode, which was treated with DMSO to facilitate the deposition of pinhole-free perovskite films. The MAPI layer was coated on PEDOT:PSS in a printing-compatible manner by a one-step solution precursor deposition method. Then, the electron-transporting material was chosen to be N,N′-dimethyl-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic perylene diimide (PTCDI) or 6,6-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methylester (PCBM). Next, a layer of chromium was deposited followed by the formation of passive chromium(III) oxide (Cr2O3), which effectively shielded the top metal contacts (Au, Cu or Al) from detrimental reactions with oxidizing and halide-forming iodide species. Lastly, a 1 μm thick layer of PU resin was capped for mechanical protection. The resulting freestanding 3 μm thick perovskite arrays exhibited a high PCE of 12%. Firstly, stretchable perovskite solar cells were realized by transferring the ultrathin perovskite arrays onto a uniaxially pre-stretched acrylic elastomer (3 M VHB), and sinusoidal waves and localized high-aspect-ratio ridge wrinkles were formed after releasing the pre-strain. When linearly compressed up to 44%, the photovoltaic devices remained functional with stable Voc and FF but with gradually decreased Jsc. The devices could endure 100 cycles at 25% compression strain. Secondly, the ultrathin perovskite arrays were transferred onto a radially pre-strained elastomeric substrate, and a two-dimensionally strained random wrinkle network was formed with a complicated topology by relaxing the pre-strain (Fig. 25b), while the devices could be compressed by up to 44% with stabilized Voc and FF but reduced Jsc (Fig. 25c and d). The reduced Jsc is mainly due to the illuminated active area being shrunk by compression, whilst the network of wrinkles and folds was formed in the foil and acted as a light-trapping microstructure to increase the light absorption.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of the perovskite solar cell. (b) Photograph of the solar cells with 0% and 44% area compression. (c) I–V characteristics and (d) normalized performance values of the device when compressed: Voc (blue downward triangles), FF (green upward triangles) and Isc (red circles). Reproduced from ref. 190. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
Although the perovskite materials are rigid and have low fracture strains, the perovskite materials offer high efficiency and low-temperature solution-processed fabrication, and thus are compatible with most elastic substrates and feasible for stretchable solar cells. In comparison with the stretchable OPVs, the stretchable PeSCs show comparable electrical and mechanical performance. Although a high efficiency is likely to be obtained in stretchable perovskite solar cells, the bottleneck obstacles certainly remain including the toxicity issue of lead, device stability and so on. Given the fact that perovskite materials have rapidly emerged as a promising thin-film photovoltaic technology, great progress will be made toward stretchable PeSCs through developments with respect to molecular structures and device strategies.
5.4 Stretchable Si-based photovoltaic devices
Nanostructured silicon in the form of ribbons and wires are of interest for electronic and optoelectronic applications. The structures behave approximately with the mechanics of accordion bellows, in which strains are accommodated through changes in the amplitudes and wavelengths of the buckled geometries. Stretchable photovoltaic devices based on Si nanoribbons have also been fabricated.123 The device showed Jsc of 17 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.2 V and FF of 0.3 at an illumination intensity of 1 W cm−2. At reverse-biased state, the device functioned as a photodetector, showing a photoresponsivity of 35 mA W−1. The device could survive a tensile strain of 15.5% without performance degradation. Similar photodetectors based on GaAs ribbons had been reported,191 and the device could be stretched up to 44.4%, with increasing current. This was attributed to an increased effective area of buckled ribbons as they flattened, as the number of photons received by the photodetector increased during stretching. Further stretching the photodetector might lead to defect formation on the surface of the GaAs ribbons, leading to a decrease of the current. These results highlight the stretchable Si-based photovoltaic devices. However, compared to other types of photovoltaics, the Si-based photovoltaics have two main issues that need to be addressed. One is the complicated procedures for the ribbons involving high temperature, and the other is the high cost because a large number of high-quality silicon wafers is required.
Overall, the device performance of the stretchable photovoltaic devices is closely related to the fabrication processes and device structures with all the components. The material choices for both active layers and electrodes are of great significance. The active materials play important roles in determining the electrical and mechanical properties of the devices, and the processing conditions have a great influence on the mechanical properties. In comparison, the stretchable OPVs can enable a fair device efficiency (PCEs < 5%) and mechanical performance through the easy chemical modification of the semiconducting polymers, while the intrinsic stretchability of the polymers is very limited. The stretchable PeSCs are more likely to achieve high PCEs (>10%) due to the distinct electronic properties of the perovskite materials; nevertheless, there are drawbacks such as the low fraction strain of the perovskite materials and the toxicity issue of lead. The stretchable Si photovoltaics show considerable mechanical performance by using the buckling structures but relatively low electrical performance, along with high material cost. Although these stretchable photovoltaic devices have been realized, there is still a large room for performance improvement to reach typical commercialization efficiency (10–12%). Moreover, it remains a more difficult challenge to develop highly-efficient large-area stretchable photovoltaic devices, in which the device efficiencies lag behind that of the small-area photovoltaic devices.
6. Challenges and prospects
6.1 Challenges
Although great success has been achieved, stretchable electronic devices are still in their infancy and far away from commercial use. The mass production of stretchable electronics remains challenging. Regarding stretchable devices, simultaneous satisfaction of high electrical and mechanical performance is of great importance. As for electronic materials, preferential interest has given way to the optimization of electronic performance, while more focus is expected on the mechanical properties, such as elasticity, toughness and ductility. Meanwhile, a deep understanding of the interplay between the electronic and mechanical properties of the electronic materials is very helpful, which tend to be in competition. As a result, the electrical function of most stretchable devices is limited to ultimate strains (<120%), which are well below the ultimate strain of elastomers (such as 400–700% for silicones).192 Taking the electrodes for example, it is still challenging to simultaneously realize high optical transparency and electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical stretchability, especially for stretchable OLEDs and OPVs, because the majority of the existing electrodes are either transparent with poor stretchability (e.g., ITO), conductive with low transmittance (e.g., PEDOT:PSS), conductive with low stretchability (e.g., metal electrodes), or stretchable with low conductivity (e.g., metal nanowires and CNTs). With regard to stretchable OTFTs, there is a challenge to find a way to grow large-scale patterns of stretchable electrodes, as well as yielding reproducible micro-meter or even smaller channels and to pursue stretchable dielectrics. Considering the fact that most truly stretchable devices are constructed on elastomeric substrates, the wettability problem exists between the hydrophilic electrode and the hydrophobic elastomer. In addition, interface engineering work is in great need to prevent delamination and keep the device intact. Given the fact that most electronic materials in the devices are highly sensitive to oxygen and water, there is a shortage of encapsulation materials with excellent mechanical robustness and chemical stability. Moreover, developing 2D stretchable devices that are more useful for practical applications is still a challenging task because physical and electrical damages are more likely generated by the complicated interactions of anisotropic stress under 2D stretching than under 1D stretching.
Although challenges remain, studies on stretchable electronics can bring about future research in semiconductor materials, stretchable electrodes, device engineering, together with related mechanics for this system. In the long run, future attention should be paid to develop electronic materials with both high electrical and mechanical properties, to improve manufacturing processes and reliability, and to explore cost-effective and large-scalable production techniques such as printing and roll-to-roll techniques, which are stringent demands for commercial applications.
6.2 Prospects
Stretchable electronic devices will find an important place in the next-generation electronics technology. Stretchable electronic devices can be covered with arbitrary surfaces and movable parts, which are impossible for conventional rigid electronics; thus innovative applications are expected to emerge in the future. Stretchability enables conformal integrated circuits that are reversibly foldable and stretchable, enables wearable displays that could deliver information and even be transparent, enables energy storage and conversation devices that are applicable to curvilinear surfaces like building arches or car exteriors, enables biomedical systems that intimately integrate with the human body such as surgical implants, enables robotic systems with soft and mobile parts, and enables other applications that require portable, stretchable and deformable characteristics of the devices. During the preparation of this review, we have noted with great pleasure the publications of many excellent papers in various journals. As a compensation to the loss, we here provide the representative papers recently published by different research teams in the reference section for interested readers to retrieve.193–198 In light of the encouraging achievements to date, it is believed that stretchable electronics in time will come to shine in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC: 21672267, 51473185, 51603232, 61605253 and 51733010) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
Notes and references
D.-H. Kim, R. Ghaffari, N. Lu and J. A. Rogers, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 14, 113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 718 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nomura, H. Ohta, A. Takagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Nature, 2004, 432, 488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong, R.-H. Kim, P. Elvikis, M. Meitl, D.-H. Kim, J. Wu, J. Yoon, C.-J. Yu, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, P. Ferreira, X. Li, K. Choquette and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2009, 325, 977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314 CAS .
M. Manceau, D. Angmo, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 566 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Yomogida, A. Izadi-Najafabadi, D. N. Futaba and K. Hata, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Benight, C. Wang, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1961 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koo, K.-I. Park, S. H. Lee, M. Suh, D. Y. Jeon, J. W. Choi, K. Kang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-C. Chen, G. Shen, S. Sukcharoenchoke and C. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043113 CrossRef .
Y.-Z. Zhang, T. Cheng, Y. Wang, W.-Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, J.-D. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10493 CAS .
S.-J. Kim and J.-S. Lee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Suo, E. Y. Ma, H. Gleskova and S. Wagner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1177 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 1015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 770 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Kato, Y. Noguchi, T. Someya and T. Sakurai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 173502 CrossRef .
S. Lee, J.-Y. Kwon, D. Yoon, H. Cho, J. You, Y. T. Kang, D. Choi and W. Hwang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 256 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, C. Gao, J. Zhou, X. Li and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8799 RSC .
H. Huang and F. Spaepen, Acta Mater., 2000, 48, 3261 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ando, M. Shikida and K. Sato, Sens. Actuators, A, 2001, 93, 70 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, B. Cotterell and W. Wang, Eng. Fract. Mech., 2002, 69, 597 CrossRef .
B. Aronggaowa, Y. Toda, N. Ito, K. Shikinaka and T. Shimomura, Polymers, 2013, 5, 1325 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pegoretti, A. Guardini, C. Migliaresi and T. Ricco, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2000, 78, 1664 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Xu, H. Fu, J. Lee, J. Su, K.-C. Hwang, J. A. Rogers and Y. Huang, Soft Mater., 2013, 9, 8062 RSC .
B. K. Sharma and J.-H. Ahn, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600105 CrossRef .
D.-H. Kim, Z. Liu, Y.-S. Kim, J. Wu, J. Song, H.-S. Kim, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, Y. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Small, 2009, 5, 2841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-H. Kim, M.-H. Bae, D. G. Kim, H. Cheng, B. H. Kim, D.-H. Kim, M. Li, J. Wu, F. Du, H.-S. Kim, S. Kim, D. Estrada, S. W. Hong, Y. Huang, E. Pop and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4887 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, J. Kim, B. G. Hyun, S. Ji, S.-Y. Kim, S. Kim, B. W. An and J.-U. Park, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14577 RSC .
S. Yao and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Harris, A. L. Elias and H.-J. Chung, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 2771 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, W.-Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5181 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, X. Zhang, D. Qi, L. Xie, B. K. Chandran, X. Chen and W. Huang, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 589 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Root, S. Savagatrup, A. D. Printz, D. Rodriquez and D. J. Lipomi, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, X. Zhang, L. Xie, D. Qi, B. K. Chandran, X. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Layani, A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5581 RSC .
S. P. P. Lacour, D. Chan, S. Wagner, T. Li and Z. Suo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 204103 CrossRef .
J. Jones, S. P. P. Lacour, S. Wagner and Z. Suo, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2004, 22, 1723 CAS .
G. D. Moon, G. H. Lim, J. H. Song, M. Shin, T. Yu, B. Lim and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-S. Leem, A. Edwards, M. Faist, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. C. de Mello, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J. Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Scardaci, R. Coull, P. E. Lyons, D. Rickard and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2011, 7, 2621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiu, T. Araki, J. Wang, M. Nogi, T. Sugahara, S. Nagao, H. Koga, K. Suganuma, E. Nakazawa, M. Hara, H. Uchida and K. Shinozaki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6326 CAS .
T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai, Y. Chen, W.-J. Zeng and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10369 RSC .
Y. Ko, S. K. Song, N. H. Kim and S. T. Chang, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lee, J. Lee, H. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong, K. H. Nam, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Won, A. Kim, W. Yang, S. Jeong and J. Moon, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e132 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng, Y. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lee, J. Ham, J. Lee, S. Hong, S. Han, Y. D. Suh, S. E. Lee, J. Yeo, S. S. Lee, D. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5671 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Ding, T. Araki, J. Jiu, T. Sugahara, J. Wang, J. Vanfleteren, T. Sekitani and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, L. Li, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 817 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, L. Li, K. Tong, Z. Ren, W. Hu, X. Niu, Y. Chen and Q. Pei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Lee, K. Lee, S.-Y. Kim, H. Lee, J. Park, K.-H. Choi, H.-K. Kim, D.-G. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, S. Nam and J.-U. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, H. B. Yao, X. Wang, Y. D. Ye, J. L. Wang, Z. Y. Wu, J. W. Liu, F. J. Fan, H. L. Gao, C. L. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 1698 CrossRef .
H. L. Gao, L. Xu, F. Long, Z. Pan, Y. X. Du, Y. Lu, J. Ge and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Woo, K. K. Kim, J. Lee, J. T. Kim and C.-S. Han, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 285203 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, S. Hong, J. Ham, J. Yeo, J. Lee, B. Kang, P. Lee, J. Kwon, S. S. Lee, M. Y. Yang and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-P. Chen and Y.-C. Liao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19856 RSC .
X. Wang, H. Hu, Y. Shen, X. Zhou and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Hyun, M. Park, C. Park, B. Kim, Y. Xia, J. H. Hur, J. M. Kim, J. J. Park and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, J. Zhu, B. Yeom, M. Di Prima, X. Su, J.-G. Kim, S. J. Yoo, C. Uher and N. A. Kotov, Nature, 2013, 500, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Soltanian, R. Rahmanian, B. Gholamkhass, N. M. Kiasari, F. Ko and P. Servati, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1332 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, L. Hu, M. W. Rowell, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, J. R. McDonough, J. Zhu, Y. Yang, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, J. Im, M. Shin, Y. Min, J. J. Park, H. Cho, S. Park, M.-B. Shim, S. Jeon, D.-Y. Chung, J. Bae, U. Jeong and K. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, H. Dong, B. Zhu, J. Li, H. H. Hng, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, S. Luo, L. Sun, Y. Wu, K. Jiang, Q. Li, J. Wang and S. Fan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10178 RSC .
Y. Zhu, F. Xu, X. Wang and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1279 CrossRef .
C. Feng, K. Liu, J.-S. Wu, L. Liu, J.-S. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Q. Li, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 885 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. K. Tee, S. L. Hellstrom, J. a. Lee, C. H. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, S. Liu, S. Fu, S. Zhang, H. Deng and Q. Fu, Small, 2013, 9, 3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. J. Sheehan, J. Zhai, G. Zou, H. Luo, J. Xiong, Y. T. Zhu and Q. X. Jia, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, W. Yuan, P. Brochu, G. Gruner and Q. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 1 Search PubMed .
M. K. Shin, J. Oh, M. Lima, M. E. Kozlov, S. J. Kim and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, X. Niu, Z. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, J. Lim, J. W. F. To, M. Vosgueritchian, T. J. Dusseault, T. H. Kim, S. Hwang and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, M. Pasta, F. L. Mantia, L. Cui, S. Jeong, H. D. Deshazer, J. W. Choi, S. M. Han and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami and M. S. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Morozov, K. Novoselov, M. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. Elias, J. Jaszczak and A. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, P. Ming and J. Li, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 064120 CrossRef .
V. P. Pham, H.-S. Jang, D. Whang and J.-Y. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6276 RSC .
S. Won, Y. Hwangbo, S.-K. Lee, K.-S. Kim, K.-S. Kim, S.-M. Lee, H.-J. Lee, J.-H. Ahn, J.-H. Kim and S.-B. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6057 RSC .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. H. Xue, A. K. Roy and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zang, S. Ryu, N. Pugno, Q. Wang, Q. Tu, M. J. Buehler and X. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi, J. A. Lee, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. K. Tee, J. A. Bolander and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 373 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, B. C. K. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, J.-P. Yi, L. Yang, J.-D. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13754 CAS .
Y. G. Seol, T. Q. Trung, O.-J. Yoon, I.-Y. Sohn and N.-E. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23759 RSC .
J. Li, S. Qi, J. Liang, L. Li, Y. Xiong, W. Hu and Q. Pei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14140 CAS .
J. Y. Oh, S. Kim, H.-K. Baik and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dodabalapur, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 24 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fortunato, P. Barquinha and R. Martins, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Murphy and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Di, F. Zhang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, X. Fu, J. Liu, Z. Wang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, H. M. Zhang, M. Narasimhan and R. E. Demaray, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 316 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marinkovic, D. Belaineh, V. Wagner and D. Knipp, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, H. Park and D. C. Paine, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 063702 CrossRef .
F. Xu, M.-Y. Wu, N. S. Safron, S. S. Roy, R. M. Jacobberger, D. J. Bindl, J.-H. Seo, T.-H. Chang, Z. Ma and M. S. Arnold, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Wu, J. Zhao, F. Xu, T.-H. Chang, R. M. Jacobberger, Z. Ma and M. S. Arnold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 053301 CrossRef .
M.-Y. Wu, J. Zhao, N. J. Curley, T.-H. Chang, Z. Ma and M. S. Arnold, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 124901 CrossRef .
J. Liang, L. Li, D. Chen, T. Hajagos, Z. Ren, S.-Y. Chou, W. Hu and Q. Pei, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, K. Tong and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, G. I. Koleilat, R. Pfattner, D. Kong, P. Lin, R. Nur, T. Lei, H. Wang, N. Liu, Y.-C. Lai, M.-G. Kim, J. W. Chung, S. Lee and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chae, W. J. Yu, J. J. Bae, D. L. Duong, D. Perello, H. Y. Jeong, Q. H. Ta, T. H. Ly, Q. A. Vu, M. Yun, X. Duan and Y. H. Lee, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shin, J. H. Song, G.-H. Lim, B. Lim, J.-J. Park and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shin, J. Y. Oh, K.-E. Byun, Y.-J. Lee, B. Kim, H.-K. Baik, J.-J. Park and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Oh, S. Rondeau-Gagné, Y.-C. Chiu, A. Chortos, F. Lissel, G.-J. N. Wang, B. C. Schroeder, T. Kurosawa, J. Lopez, T. Katsumata, J. Xu, C. Zhu, X. Gu, W.-G. Bae, Y. Kim, L. Jin, J. W. Chung, J. B.-H. Tok and Z. Bao, Nature, 2016, 539, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Lee, B. J. Kim, H. Jang, S. C. Yoon, C. Lee, B. H. Hong, J. A. Rogers, J. H. Cho and J.-H. Ahn, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Trung and N.-E. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603167 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wada, J. Tse-Wei Wang, L.-J. Li, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 023505 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, E. Hubis, G. Tomasello, G. Soliveri, P. Kumar and F. Cicoira, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3126 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Khang, H. Jiang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2006, 311, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Choi, J. Song, D.-Y. Khang, H. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, V. Kumar, I. Adesida and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2857 CrossRef CAS .
N. Thejokalyani and S. J. Dhoble, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 32, 448 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Chiang, A. Kimyonok, M. K. Etherington, G. C. Griffiths, V. Jankus, F. Turksoy and A. P. Monkman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 739 CrossRef .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-G. Zhen, Y.-F. Dai, W.-J. Zeng, Z. Ma, Z.-K. Chen and J. Kieffer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 699 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zhu, J. Peng, Y. Cao and J. Roncali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3509 RSC .
K. Okumoto, H. Kanno, Y. Hamaa, H. Takahashi and K. Shibata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 063504 CrossRef .
H. Sasabe, K. Minamoto, Y.-J. Pu, M. Hirasawa and J. Kido, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2615 CrossRef .
S. Reineke, F. Lindner, G. Schwartz, N. Seidler, K. Walzer, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Nature, 2009, 459, 234 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Farinola and R. Ragni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3467 RSC .

          Y. Matsuhisa, K. Yamae, H. Tsuji, V. Kittichungchit, N. Ide and T. Komoda, 18th Microoptics Conference,  2013 .
S. Zhang, S. Yue, Q. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Liu, G. Xie, Q. Xue, D. Qu, Y. Zhao and S. Liu, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2014 CrossRef .
J.-H. Jou, S.-M. Shen, C.-R. Lin, Y.-S. Wang, Y.-C. Chou, S.-Z. Chen and Y.-C. Jou, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 865 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jou, M.-H. Wu, S.-M. Shen, H.-C. Wang, S.-Z. Chen, S.-H. Chen, C.-R. Lin and Y.-L. Hsieh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013307 CrossRef .
T.-H. Han, Y. Lee, M.-R. Choi, S.-H. Woo, S.-H. Bae, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 105 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. Oida, G. S. Tulevski, S.-J. Han, J. B. Hannon, D. K. Sadana and T.-C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2294 Search PubMed .
M. S. White, M. Kaltenbrunner, E. D. Głowacki, K. Gutnichenko, G. Kettlgruber, I. Graz, S. Aazou, C. Ulbricht, D. A. M. Egbe, M. C. Miron, Z. Major, M. C. Scharber, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 811 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yin, J. Feng, R. Ma, Y.-F. Liu, Y.-L. Zhang, X.-L. Zhang, Y.-G. Bi, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yin, J. Feng, N.-R. Jiang, R. Ma, Y.-F. Liu and H.-B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31166 CAS .
Q. Pei, G. Yu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 269, 1086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, L. He, L. Duan and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4206 RSC .
H. L. Filiatrault, G. C. Porteous, R. S. Carmichael, G. J. E. Davidson and T. B. Carmichael, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2673 CrossRef PubMed .
R. C. Chiechi, E. A. Weiss, M. D. Dickey and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 142 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Wood, J. E. Halpert, M. J. Panzer, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Keplinger, J.-Y. Sun, C. C. Foo, P. Rothemund, G. M. Whitesides and Z. Suo, Science, 2013, 341, 984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Yan, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Yan, G. Cai, M. Cui, A. L.-S. Eh and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Yang, B. Chen, J. Zhou, Y. M. Chen and Z. Suo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Karar, H. Chander and S. M. Shivaprasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5058 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. R. Bade, J. Li, X. Shan, Y. Ling, Y. Tian, T. Dilbeck, T. Besara, T. Geske, H. Gao, B. Ma, K. Hanson, T. Siegrist, C. Xu and Z. Yu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. R. Bade, X. Shan, P. T. Hoang, J. Li, T. Geske, L. Cai, Q. Pei, C. Wang and Z. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607053 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Omnès, E. Monroy, E. Muñoz and J.-L. Reverchon, Proc. SPIE - Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2007, 6473, 64730E CrossRef .
C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cuiffi, T. Benanti, W. J. Nam and S. Fonash, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 143307 CrossRef .
W. Cao and J. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2123 CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, S. Li, W. Shi and J. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 145 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. J. Janssen and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245 RSC .
L. Bian, E. Zhu, J. Tang, W. Tang and F. Zhang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1292 CrossRef CAS .
P. Heremans, D. Cheyns and B. P. Rand, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347 CAS .
Q. Zhang, B. Kan, F. Liu, G. Long, X. Wan, X. Chen, Y. Zuo, W. Ni, H. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Hu, F. Huang, Y. Cao, Z. Liang, M. Zhang, T. P. Russell and Y. Chen, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 9, 35 CrossRef .

          X. Che, X. Xiao and S. R. Forrest, 2014 IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference,  2014, 0140 .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591 CrossRef .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Andersen, H. F. Dam, M. Hösel, M. Helgesen, J. E. Carle, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, S. A. Gevorgyan, J. W. Andreasen, J. Adams, N. Li, F. Machui, G. D. Spyropoulos, T. Ameri, N. Lemaitre, M. Legros, A. Scheel, D. Gaiser, K. Kreul, S. Berny, O. R. Lozman, S. Nordman, M. Valimaki, M. Vilkman, R. R. Sondergaard, M. Jorgensen, C. J. Brabec and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2925 CAS .
R. V. Salvatierra, C. E. Cava, L. S. Roman and A. J. G. Zarbin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1490 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Li and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, J. Lee, S. Jeong, S. Yang, J.-H. Ko and H.-G. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1811 CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, H. Chong, M. Vosgueritchian, J. Mei and Z. Bao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 355 CrossRef CAS .
C. Müller, S. Goffri, D. W. Breiby, J. W. Andreasen, H. D. Chanzy, R. A. J. Janssen, M. M. Nielsen, C. P. Radano, H. Sirringhaus, P. Smith and N. Stingelin-Stutzmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2674 CrossRef .
S. Savagatrup, A. S. Makaram, D. J. Burke and D. J. Lipomi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Printz, S. Savagatrup, D. J. Burke, T. N. Purdy and D. J. Lipomi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 13635 RSC .
S. Savagatrup, A. D. Printz, D. Rodriquez and D. J. Lipomi, Macromol., 2014, 47, 1981 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, J.-H. Kim, T. E. Kang, C. Lee, H. Kang, M. Shin, C. Wang, B. Ma, U. Jeong, T.-S. Kim and B. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, D. W. Zhao, A. K. K. Kyaw and Y. N. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Deng, Y. Zhang, G. Guan and H. Peng, Small, 2015, 11, 675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Giacomo, A. Fakharuddin, R. Jose and T. M. Brown, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3007 Search PubMed .
X. Yin, P. Chen, M. Que, Y. Xing, W. Que, C. Niu and J. Shao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N.-G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916 CAS .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Głowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwödiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, W. M. Choi, H. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Larson, B. Peele, S. Li, S. Robinson, M. Totaro, L. Beccai, B. Mazzolai and R. Shepherd, Science, 2016, 351, 1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Lee, M. Y. Lee, C. H. Park, H. R. Lee and J. H. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703638 CrossRef PubMed .
S. F. Zhao, J. H. Li, D. X. Cao, G. P. Zhang, J. Li, K. Li, Y. Yang, W. Wang, Y. F. Jin, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12147 CAS .
T. Sun, J. I. Scott, M. Wang, R. J. Kline, G. C. Bazan and B. T. O'Connor, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600388 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-P. Chen, C.-Y. Chiang, Y.-Y. Yu, Y.-S. Hsiao and W.-C. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 165, 111 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Hsieh, J.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Shih, C.-C. Chueh and W.-C. Chen, Org. Electron., 2018, 53, 339 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Liang, H. Gao, Y. Li, X. Niu, X. Zhu, Y. Xiong and Q. Pei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40523 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Juan Zhao	Juan Zhao received her BS degree in 2009 and PhD in 2015 from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. She conducted her PhD work as a joint PhD student at the University of Wisconsin–Madison (USA) from 2013 to 2015, and mainly worked on stretchable organic thin-film transistors under the guidance of Prof. Michael Arnold. She joined Sun Yat-sen University in 2016, and is currently an associate professor at the School of Chemistry. Her research is focused on the development of organic optoelectronic materials and devices.
Zhihe Chi, Xiaojie Chen and Zhan Yang (from left to right)	Zhihe Chi, Xiaojie Chen and Zhan Yang (from left to right) are students in the School of Chemistry at Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU). Zhihe Chi is an undergraduate student, and she is working on the fabrication of organic optoelectronic devices. Zhan Yang received his BS degree from SYSU in 2016 and is now a PhD student. His research is focused on the design and synthesis of organic optoelectronic materials. Xiaojie Chen received her BS degree from SYSU in 2017 and is now a graduate student. Her research is focused on the design and fabrication of organic optoelectronic devices.
Michael S. Arnold	Michael S. Arnold is a professor of materials science and engineering at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. His work focuses on the growth, assembly, properties, and applications of low-dimensional materials including carbon nanotubes, graphene, and 2D materials.
Yi Zhang	Yi Zhang received her BS degree in chemistry, with distinction, from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU, China) in 1997, and her PhD in chemistry and physics of polymer from SYSU in 2002. Then she joined the faculty at SYSU in 2002 as an assistant professor and is currently a full professor of chemistry in SYSU. In 2009–2010, she carried out one year research work in the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign as a visiting scholar. In 2017, she was awarded the Science and Technology Innovation Leading Talents of Guangdong Province. Her research is mainly focused on the development of organic/polymeric photoelectric materials and high-performance functional polyimide.
Zhenguo Chi	Zhenguo Chi received his BS degree in chemistry (1991) from Hangzhou University (China) and his MS in chemistry and physics of polymer (1994) from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Science Academy. He obtained a PhD in 2003 from Sun Yat-sen University (China). In 2003–2006, he carried out his postdoctoral work in Fudan University (China) and Korea University (South Korea). In 2015–2016, he was an academic visitor at Durham University (UK). He is currently a full professor of physics and chemistry of materials at Sun Yat-sen University. His research is mainly focused on the development of organic/polymeric photoelectric materials and devices.
Matthew P. Aldred	Matthew. P. Aldred was born in Bolton, UK in 1978. He obtained his BSc (1999) and PhD (2003) degrees from the University of Hull. During his PhD he worked on liquid crystal synthesis in the George Gray Laboratories, under the supervision of Prof. Stephen Kelly, for OLED applications. After two years working at Hull University for ZLX Ltd as a research chemist, he held numerous academic and industrial research positions, including Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (China), TexChem Polymers (Malaysia) and Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (China). Aldred is the co-author of around 50 research papers and numerous patents. He now resides in the UK and his research interests include organic synthesis, reactive mesogens, piezochromism, aggregation-induced emission and photochromism.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic device configurations of (a) a TFT, (b) an OLED, and (c) an OPV.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The fabrication of buckled CNTs. (b) SEM images of released a CNT film and a buckled CNT film re-stretched to 65%. (c) On/off currents and mobility as a function of applied strain. Reproduced from ref. 108. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of a buckled ion gel dielectric and (e) on/off currents and mobility as a function of applied strain. Reproduced from ref. 109. Copyright 2015 American Institute of Physics. (f) Optical images at 0% and 67% biaxial elongation and (g) on/off currents and mobility as a function of applied strain for the biaxially stretchable transistors. Reproduced from ref. 110. Copyright 2017 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication process of the stretchable TFT. (b and c) ION, IOFF and mobility as a function of applied strain along the channel width and length directions, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 111. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Fabrication process flow for durable stretchable transistors. Normalized (b) ION and (c) IOFF for devices stretched in both the parallel and perpendicular directions. (d) Transfer curves for a device that was cycled to 100% strain for different cycles. Reproduced from ref. 113. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the OTFT. (b) SEM image of a wrinkled Al2O3 film. Normalized on/off current and mobility as a function of strain along (c) the length direction and (d) the width direction. Reproduced from ref. 114. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the transistor on an SBS substrate. (b) Transfer curves of the device obtained at different strains. Reproduced from ref. 115. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic structure of OTFTs. (b) Normalized mobility and (c) on and off currents for devices stretched parallel and perpendicular to the charge transport direction. Reproduced from ref. 80. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Chemical structures of the stretchable polymers. (b) Device configuration of the truly stretchable transistors. (c) Mobility and (d) on/off ratios of the transistors under parallel or perpendicular strains. Reproduced from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Microscopy images of the graphene TFTs under a strain of 5%. (b) Normalized hole and electron mobility as a function of strain. Reproduced from ref. 118. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic depiction of a MoS2 TFT. Top-right: differential image of AFM; bottom-right: the topography of the ripple structure on the MoS2 film surface. (b) The dependence of normalized electron mobility and on/off ratio against strain. Reproduced from ref. 121. Copyright 2013 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 11  Transfer characteristics of stretchable OECTs at 0%, 15%, and 30% strains. Inset: schematic of the stretchable OECT. Reproduced from ref. 122. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Images of the folded PLEDs being stretched from 0% to 100%. (b) Current–voltage curves of the PLEDs in the flat state and under 40% tensile strain. Reproduced from ref. 142. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Optical photographs of a PLED driven at 14 V with specified strains. (b) Brightness–voltage and (c) current efficiency–brightness curves as a function of stretching cycles between 0–40% strain. Reproduced from ref. 57. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of stretchable OLEDs. Photographs of the stretchable OLEDs based on a 120% pre-strained substrate at 5 V with 0% strain (b) and 70% strain (c). (d) Current density–luminance–driving voltage characteristics and (e) current efficiency–driving voltage characteristics of the devices under different strains. Reproduced from ref. 143. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Images of a 2D OLED operating at 5 V at strains of 0, 25, and 50%. (b) Current density–luminance–voltage curves and (c) current efficiency–voltage curves of 2D OLEDs with different strain values. Reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of device structure. (b) Photograph of the Ru device during stretching. (c) Plot of total emitted energy vs. the number of strain cycles for Ru/PDMS (solid line) and Ru/PMMA (dotted line) devices. Reproduced from ref. 147. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Current density and luminance, and (b) current efficiency of a PLEC biased at 12 V as a function of strains. (c) Photographs of a PLEC biased at 14 V at 0% and 120% strains. Reproduced from ref. 56. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structures of materials in the emissive layer. (b) Optical photographs of a PLED driven at 8 V with specified strains. Reproduced from ref. 79. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Emission intensity of the device under different strains. (b) Photographs of the ACEL device under 0% and 700% strains. Reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (c) Stretchable ACEL device under 0% and 1500% strains. Reproduced from ref. 153. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  SEM images of an MAPbBr3/PEO composite film at (a) 0%, (b) 30% and (c) 50% strains. (d) Current efficiency of a PeLED under strains of 0–40%. (e) Photos of a lit PeLED under a 4 V biased voltage before (top) and after (bottom) stretching to 40% strain. Reproduced from ref. 157. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Optical images of a PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM film being non-stretched and stretched, and photograph of this film on a pre-strained PDMS membrane. (b) I–V curves as a function of strain. (c) I–V curves as a function of stretching cycles. Reproduced from ref. 93. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Chemical structures of the P3AT semiconductors, and crack onset strains of the pure P3AT films and their blends with PCBM. Photographs of (b) P3HT:PCBM and (c) P3DDT:PCBM devices under 10% strain. Reproduced from ref. 179. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Stretchable solar cell at 0% (left), 30% (middle) and 50% (right) compression strain. (b) Isc (red circle), FF (blue triangle), PCE (black diamond), Voc (green triangle) of the device as a function of compression/tensile strain. Reproduced from ref. 18. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Fabrication process of fiber-shaped polymer solar cells. (b) The J–V curves of the PSC before and after 100 stretching cycles, and (c) PCE as a function of strain. η0 and η correspond to the PCE before and after stretching with different strains, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 184. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of the perovskite solar cell. (b) Photograph of the solar cells with 0% and 44% area compression. (c) I–V characteristics and (d) normalized performance values of the device when compressed: Voc (blue downward triangles), FF (green upward triangles) and Isc (red circles). Reproduced from ref. 190. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
