Spongy structure of CdS nanocrystals decorated with dye molecules for semiconductor sensitized solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM03530K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM03530K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2883-2889Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSpongy structure of CdS nanocrystals decorated with dye molecules for semiconductor sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Tao 
            Ling‡
, 
      
        
          
            Ming-Ke 
            Wu‡
, 
      
        
          
            Kai-Yang 
            Niu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhi-Ming 
            Gao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Sun
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xi-Wen 
            Du
          
        
      *
      Tianjin Kay Laboratory of Composite and Functional Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: xwdu@tju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 22 27402371;   Tel: +86 22 27892270
Received 
      19th October 2010
    , Accepted 29th November 2010First published on 24th January 2011AbstractWe exploit a new structure of semiconductor sensitized solar cells, where CdS nanocrystals are assembled into a spongy structure and decorated with organic molecules to serve as photoanode. UV-vis absorption, Nyquist impedance spectra, combining with photocurrent density-voltage characterization demonstrate that the assembled CdS nanocrystals with porous architecture can effectively capture the incoming light and allow thorough infiltration of electrolyte, while the decoration of organic molecules helps to accelerate hole-transfer. As a result, the solar cells with spongy structure show higher absorption, short-circuit-current density, open-circuit voltage, and final performance than traditional semiconductor sensitized solar cells. Our results indicate that it is essential to develop reasonable semiconductor structures for constructing solar cells with high efficiency.
Introduction
Since Grätzel reported the efficient TiO2-based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), many efforts have been made to enhance the photo-electron conversion efficiency of this low-cost solar cell.1–5 However, the conversion efficiency is still at about 12%. The development of new structures and sensitizers were considered to play key roles in enhancing overall efficiencies and device stabilities.6–9 Recently, solar cells with semiconductor nanocrystals as light harvesters have attracted extensive attention, because semiconductor nanocrystals can bring many advantages to solar cells, such as adjustable band gap and absorption to meet the wavelength range of solar light;11–13 higher stability arising from their inorganic characteristic;11,12 multiple exciton generation for obtaining high efficiencies.14,15 Therefore, it was expected that semiconductor nanocrystals can boost the energy conversion efficiency of solar cells beyond the traditional Shockley and Queisser limit of 32%.10
In spite of these potential advantages, the performance of semiconductor sensitized solar cells (SSSCs) is much worse than that of DSSCs up to now,16–19 which can be ascribed to the low efficiency of light absorption and electron transport of SSSCs. In traditional SSSCs (T-SSSCs), semiconductor nanocrystals with a narrow band gap serve as sensitizers and are absorbed onto a photoanode composed of oxide semiconductor nanoparticles with a wide band gap, such as TiO2, ZnO, or SnO2 (Fig. 1a).20 The photoanode possesses a porous structure to load sensitizers, transport electrons to the FTO substrate, and soak electrolyte for hole elimination. Even so, such a structure only allows the adsorption of a single layer of nanocrystals, since excessive nanocrystals can cause the quenching of photocurrent.12 Obviously, the monolayer of semiconductor nanocrystals can not capture all the incident light. On the other hand, photo-generated electrons must jump many times between oxide nanoparticles before reaching the collecting electrode; hence, they are easily trapped and recombine at the interface of oxide nanoparticles.21
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of (a) traditional SSSCs, (b) spongy SSSCs and (c) energy levels of CdS/N3 dye/electrolyte system. 
Considering the nature of semiconductor nanocrystals, they can generate and transfer carriers simultaneously while being assembled into arrays. Therefore, it is reasonable to construct a photo-anode by only using assembled nanocrystals. In the present work, we propose a structure for SSSCs (Fig. 1b) in which numerous semiconductor nanocrystals with a narrow band gap are assembled into a spongy structure and further decorated by N3 dye molecules. Although pure porous CdS layer has recently been employed as both the photosensitive material and the electron transport layer, the power conversion efficiency is not high (∼1.0% at 1 sun illumination).22 The reason can be attributed to the severe recombination of photo-generated carriers due to the coexistence of numerous photo-generated electrons and holes in the spongy structure. As a solution, we modified the spongy structure with hole-transfer molecules, which accelerates charge separation by quick transition of holes to electrolyte (Fig. 1c).23 As a result, the remaining electrons can flow smoothly through the hole-free assembled nanocrystals, ensuring a high collection efficiency of photo-generated electrons.
Overall, the specific spongy SSSC (S-SSSC) with assembled nanocrystals decorated with organic molecules has many advantages: (i) a large amount of nanocrystals in the spongy structure can absorb incident light efficiently; (ii) the spongy structure can serve as a transport layer itself, which allows removal of the traditional oxide layer containing many interfaces and defects to trap the photo-generated carries; (iii) the spongy structure allows thorough infiltration of electrolyte and efficient hole transfer; (iv) when the spongy structure contains three dimensional suplattice of quantum dots (namely semiconductor nanocrystals with a size less than their exciton Bohr radius), mini-band effect can be expected24 and the conduction of hot carriers and the open-circuit voltage can be enhanced; (v) the configuration of spongy nanocrystals with organic molecules facilitates charge separation and electron collection.
CdS nanocrystals were considered as an ideal material for SSSC application, and many efforts have been directed to fabricate CdS nanocrystals.25–27 On the other hand, N3 dye (Ru(II) cis-di(thiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bypyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid) owns appropriate energy levels, i.e. the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), coordinating well with the conductive band (CB) and valance band (CB) of CdS material,28 as shown in Fig. 1c. Therefore, we choose CdS nanocrystals and N3 Dye to construct the photoanode of S-SSSCs. A hydrothermal method, which is simple and productive, is adopted to synthesize the spongy structure of CdS nanocrystals, and an annealing treatment is conducted subsequently to improve their crystalline and charge mobility.29,30 S-SSSC achieves a conversion efficiency of 1.61% under incident light of 100 mW cm−2 with an active area of 0.4 cm2. Comparing with T-SSSC, S-SSSC shows much higher photo-electron conversion efficiency, and N3 molecules can speed up hole transport and reduce electron-hole recombination.
Experimental
Preparation of spongy anodes of CdS nanocrystals with N3 dye (CdS/N3 dye)
Commercial conductive glass with FTO layer was first coated with a TiO2 layer by a dip-coating method, where the precursor solution was 0.2 M titanium isopropoxide in ethanol. Then the FTO substrate was annealed in air at 500 °C for 1 h. Afterwards, spongy structure of CdS nanocrystals was deposited onto FTO substrate by a hydrothermal route, where the precursor was an aqueous solution of 0.025 M cadmium acetate, 0.075 M thiourea, 0.005 M sodium lauryl benzenesulfate, and 2 M ammonia. 40 mL CdS precursor solution and the FTO glass were sealed in a Teflon-lined stainless autoclave of 50 mL, heated at 120 °C for a period of time, and then cooled to room temperature naturally. The thickness of CdS nanocrystals layer was controlled by the reaction time. Specifically, CdS layer with a thickness of 2 μm is achieved by 2 h reaction. As-formed spongy structure of CdS nanocrystals was annealed at the temperature range of 120–500 °C for 10 min in air and then cooled down to room temperature in furnace. The FTO substrates with CdS nanocrystals were heated to 70 °C and immersed in a standard N3 dye solution with a concentration of 5 × 10−4 M in ethanol for a period of time. The samples were then rinsed with ethanol to remove excessive dye and dried in air at room temperature.
Preparation of traditional SSSC anodes (TiO2/CdS)
Commercial photoanodes with 2 μm TiO2 nanoparticles coated onto FTO substrate (P25) were purchased from Dalian HeptaChroma SolarTech Co. Ltd. CdS nanocrystals were deposited onto the TiO2 nanoparticles by a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method. Specifically, the substrate was successively immersed in two different beakers, one contained 0.1 M Cd(NO3)2 aqueous solution and the other 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution, the immersion time in each beaker is 5 min. Such an immersion cycle was repeated for several times. Finally, the as-prepared samples were rinsed with distilled water, dried and annealed in air at 400 °C for 10 min.
Preparation of traditional DSSC anodes (TiO2/N3 dye)

          DSSC photoanodes were obtained by immersing P25 in 5 × 10−4 M N3 dye solution for 1 h, and then dried by N2 purging. Preparation of CdS/N3 cosensitized anodes (TiO2/CdS/N3 dye): CdS/N3 dye cosensitized TiO2 anodes were prepared by immersing TiO2/CdS anode in 5 × 10−4 M N3 dye solution for 1 h, and then dried by N2 purging.

          Cell construction
For the construction of solar cells, the anodes with an effective area of 0.4 cm2 were assembled and sealed with a transparent hot-melt Surlyn ring to the counter electrodes (Pt-coated FTO glass). The iodide-based electrolyte, consisting of 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.3 M tert-butylpyridine, and 0.3 M tetrabutylammonium iodide in acetonnitrile, was injected into the interelectrode space from the counter electrode side through a predrilled hole.
Measurements and analysis
The morphology of photoanodes was observed using a Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a FEI Technai G2 F20 transmission electron microscope (TEM) with a field-emission gun operating at 200 kV. The X-ray diffractometry (XRD) for the crystal structure of the products was carried out in a Rigaku D/max 2500v/pc diffractometer. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a Hitachi 3010 spectrophotometer. Photocurrent density-voltage (J-V) curves were recorded using a Keithley 2611 digital multimeter. The light source was a 150 W xenon lamp (Sciencetech, SS150) calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 with a standard Si solar cell. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) measurements were carried out at a constant temperature of 20 °C under dark condition, using Par 2273 Potentiostats-Electrochemistry Workstation. The EIS spectra were obtained at forward bias of −0.2 V at frequencies ranging from 0.05 Hz to 200 kHz and the oscillation potential amplitudes of 10 mV.
Results and discussion
Synthesis and characterization of CdS nanocrystals
In order to improve the crystallinity, as-synthesized CdS nanocrystalys were annealed at 400 °C for 1h. Fig. 2a and 2b show typical top-view and side-view SEM images, respectively, of the as-synthesized CdS nanocrystals. The nanocrystals are found to form a three-dimensional porous structure with a lot of micron- and nano-sized holes. This unique structure is ideal for the infiltration of solution species, i.e. electrolyte and decorating molecules. Moreover, the size and distribution of holes can be adjusted by changing the concentration of NH3·H2O (ESI, Fig. S1†). The spongy structure is supposed to originate from the specific conditions of hydrothermal synthesis. The high temperature and pressure lead to many gas bubbles, which serve as template for the coagulation of rapidly grown nanocrystals, as a result, the nanocrystals assemble into a porous structure.31
 Fig. 2  Characterizations on the spongy structure of CdS nanocrystals annealed at 400 °C for 1 h. (a) and (b) are top-view and side-view SEM images of the spongy CdS nanocrystals, respectively. (c) TEM image of CdS nanocrystals, and the SAED pattern (inset) corresponding to hexagonal CdS. (d) HRTEM image of a single CdS nanocrystal, and the inset is the FFT pattern of the HRTEM image. 
The TEM image shown in Fig. 2c illustrates that the size of CdS nanocrystals varies from several nanometres to several ten nanometres, and the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern in the inset of Fig. 2c exhibits polycrystalline rings corresponding to hexagonal structure, being consistent with XRD result (ESI, Fig. S5a†). Fig. 2d gives a high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of a CdS nanocrystal, where the lattice spacing of 0.358 nm corresponds to the (100) plane of hexagonal CdS, and the fast Fourier transformation (FFT) pattern in the inset of Fig. 2d indicates a hexagonal structure with [011] orientation.
Performance comparison between traditional SSSC and spongy SSSC
In order to evaluate the performance of S-SSSCs, we compared the optical absorption and the conversion efficiency of S-SSSC and T-SSSC with the same anode thickness of 2 μm. In Fig. 3a, the spongy structure of CdS nanocrystals decorated with N3 dye shows higher absorption intensity than TiO2/CdS anodes with the same thickness, and the extra absorption band in the range of 550–700 nm can be ascribed to the existence of N3 molecules. Photocurrent density-voltage (J-V) curves of both solar cells are shown in Fig. 3b. The short-circuit-current density (JSC) of S-SSSC is three times higher than that of T-SSSC, which can be attributed to the injection of more electrons to the FTO substrates. Meanwhile, S-SSSC has a slightly larger open-circuit voltage (VOC). As a result, the photovoltaic conversion efficiency (η) of S-SSSC is over two times higher than that of T-SSSC.
 Fig. 3  Performance comparison between T-SSSC and S-SSSC. (a) UV-vis absorption spectra for photoanodes of T-SSSC and S-SSSC. (b) and (c) are J-V characteristics and photovoltaic performances of T-SSSC and S-SSSC. (d) EIS spectra of T-SSSC and S-SSSC in dark condition with forward bias of −0.2 V. (e) Equivalent-circuit parameters of T-SSSC and S-SSSC. 
Moreover, we employed Nyquist impedance spectra (EIS) to investigate the carrier transfer in SSSCs. Fig. 3d shows the spectra at a forward bias of −0.2 V under dark condition. The transmission line model equivalent-circuit mode32–34 was used to fit the EIS (ESI, Fig. S3†), which gives the values of the electron transport resistance (Rt), the interfacial charge recombination resistance (Rct) and the chemical capacitance (Cμ) (Fig. 3e). Further, the average electron lifetime (τn) in photoanode can be calculated by τn = RctCμ, and the effective electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) is given by Dn = L2/(RtCμ), where L is the thickness of the photoanode. The results shown in Fig. 3e illustrate that S-SSSC has a much larger Rct due to the decoration of N3 molecules, which will be discussed in detail later. As a result, the carriers in S-SSSC posses a longer lifetime than that in T-SSSC. However, the electron transport resistance of S-SSSC is higher than that of T-SSSC, which leads to a lower fill factor (FF) of S-SSSC. Conclusively, the high performance of S-SSSC arises from both higher light-harvesting efficiency gained by assembled nanocrystals and lower carrier recombination via the decoration of N3 dye.
Performance comparison between the spongy anode with N3 dye and that without N3 dye
In this section, we investigate how the decoration of N3 dye improves the conversion efficiency of S-SSSC. It is well known that the bottleneck for the performance enhancement of SSSCs is hole elimination, which induces the electron-hole recombination and the photo-corrosion of semiconductor nanocrystals.12 Therefore, it is very essential to accelerate the hole transfer in S-SSSC. Appropriate organic molecules can draw holes from nanocrystals within several picoseconds.23 Hence, the decoration of nanocrystals with organic molecules can speed up the hole transfer in SSSCs.12 As shown in Fig. 1c, the VB edge of CdS nanocrystals is lower than the HOMO of N3 dye, thus the holes generated in CdS nanocrystals can transfer quickly to N3 dye. At the same time, N3 dye as light harvester can produce free electrons in LUMO, which are then injected into the CB of CdS nanocrystals. In Fig. 4a, the spongy structure decorated with N3 dye shows higher absorption in the visible range of 500–700 nm than that without N3 dye. The J-V characterizations show that the spongy structure decorated with N3 dye has much higher JSC, FF and η than that without N3 dye (Fig. 4b and 4c). Additionally, the decoration also increases η value from 0.77% to 1.20%, however, still lower than that of S-SSSC or DSSC (TiO2/N3 dye) (ESI, Fig. S4†).
 Fig. 4  Performance comparison between the spongy anode with N3 dye and that without N3 dye. (a) UV-vis absorption spectra. (b) and (c) are J-V characteristics and photovoltaic performances. (d) EIS spectra in dark with forward bias of −0.2 V. (e) Equivalent-circuit parameters by fitting the EIS results. 

Fig. 4d and 4e show EIS results and dynamic parameters of S-SSSCs with and without N3 dye, respectively. For the spongy structure decorated with N3 dye, the chemical capacitance, Cμ, is slightly larger than the bare one, indicating that the decoration can enhance the density of free electrons in the CB of CdS nanocrystals.35,36 Importantly, the spongy structure with N3 dye has a much larger Rct, which strongly proves that N3 dye can retard the recombination of electrons with electrolyte, and explains the increase in FF from 0.27 to 0.38. The significant increase in Rct leads to a surprising long carrier lifetime (11 s), indicating that no significant recombination takes place during charge transport in the spongy structure decorated with N3 dye. On the other hand, after the quick removal of hole by the decoration of N3 dye, the electron transport resistance though CdS nanocrystals, Rt, drops significantly, which leads to a larger effective electron diffusion coefficient. As a result, a longer electron diffusion length (Ln) was achieved after the decoration of N3 dye. UV-vis absorption, EIS, combining with J-V characterization jointly demonstrates that the decoration of N3 dye plays an important role on enhancing charge separation, electron transfer and then the final efficiency of S-SSSC.
Performance of spongy SSSCs annealed at different temperature
Because the crystal structure of CdS nanocrystals can make significant effect on the light absorption and electron transfer, an annealing treatment was executed on the CdS nanocrystals to modify their crystal structure. XRD results (ESI, Fig. S5†) indicate that the annealing treatment induces a structural transformation from cubic to hexagonal at 300 °C, and CdS is oxidized into CdSO3 at the temperatures higher than 500 °C. Although hexagonal structure is thermodynamically stable for bulk CdS,37 the extreme conditions created by hydrothermal technique induce the formation of metastable cubic phase. In the subsequent annealing process, the high temperature can help to overcome the energy barrier, as a result, the metastable cubic phase transforms into energetically favorable hexagonal phase. Moreover, the size of CdS nanocrystals increases with the annealing temperature. The structural transformation and the size growth of nanocrystals can be responsible for the high conversion efficiency achieved at 400 °C. Hexagonal CdS nanocrystals are advantageous in photo-electron conversion over that with cubic structure,29 and the large particle size increases the carrier diffusion length and reduce the number of interfaces through which the electrons transport, thus can significantly improve the photo-current.30 However, the appearance of CdSO3 at high temperature deteriorates CdS nanocrystals seriously, and leads to the degradation of conversion efficiency.
Performance of spongy SSSCs with different thickness
The performance of S-SSSC also depends on the thickness of spongy structure, which can be controlled by the reaction time. Fig. 5c and 5d show that conversion efficiency increases with the thickness of the spongy structure and reaches a maximum of 1.61% at a thickness of 2.0 μm. Further increase in the thickness leads to a decrease in the conversion efficiency, which can be interpreted by either less efficient injection of electrolyte or longer transport path for electrons.
 Fig. 5  Performance of S-SSSCs annealed at different temperature and with different thickness. (a) J-V characteristics and (b) photovoltaic performances of spongy CdS nanocrystals anodes annealed at different temperatures; (c) J-V characteristics and (d) photovoltaic performances, of spongy CdS nanocrystals with different thickness. 
The performance of S-SSSC can be further improved by choosing other nanocrystals with long exciton lifetime and excellent carrier transport, adopting ultrafine nanocrystals with strong quantum confinement effect, constructing more regular porous structure, and seeking reasonable combination of nanocrystals and organic molecules. Therefore, the assembled nanocrystals have the potential on achieving high conversion efficiency and then open a new avenue towards solar cells with high performance.
Conclusions
We constructed efficient spongy-SSSCs with assembled CdS nanocrystals decorated with N3 molecules. The solar cells with spongy structure show higher absorption, short-circuit-current density, open-circuit voltage, and conversion efficiency than traditional SSSCs. The decoration of CdS nanocrystals with N3 dye induces a significant increase in conversion efficiency attributable to the improved hole transfer. Although not fully optimized, the performance of spongy-SSSCs is competitive with traditional SSSCs. These promising results emphasize the importance of developing more reasonable three-dimensional structure of assembled nanocrystals for the application in SSSCs.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 50972102, 50902103), National High-tech R&D Program of China (Nos. 2007AA021808 and 2009AA03Z301), and 2009AA03Z301), and Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin City (Nos. 09JCZDJC22600 and 08JCYBJC02900)
Notes and references
B. O. Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, C. Klein, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 808 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. D. Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, T. Bessho and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, C. Baik, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, M. S. Kang, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 333 CrossRef .
A. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2338 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Y. Cao, J. Zhang, M. Wang, R. Li, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 626 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, T. W. Hamann, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4458 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Lee and Y. S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604 CrossRef .
H. J. Lee, M. K. Wang, P. Chen, D. R. Gamelin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4221 CrossRef CAS .
O. Niitsoo, S. K. Sarkar, C. Pejoux, S. Rühle, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 306 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, E. Borgarello and M. Grätzel, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1984, 342 RSC .
N. Kopidakis, K. D. Benkstein, J. Van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11307 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Im, Y. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5665 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Liang, C. G. Zhen, D. C. Zou and D. S. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16338 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cao, Y. Jiang, C. Wang, W. H. Wang, L. Z. Wang, M. Niu, W. J. Zhang, Y. Q. Li and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S. Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 022105 CrossRef .
T. Ganesh, R. S. Mane, G. Cai, J. H. Chang and S. H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7666 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tena-Zaera, A. Katty, S. Bastide and C. Lévy-Clément, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1626 CrossRef CAS .
E. Talgorn, R. D. Abellon, P. J. Kooyman, J. Piris, T. J. Savenije, A. Goossens, A. J. Houtepen and L. D. A. Siebbeles, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1723 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kostoglou, N. Andritsos and A. J. Karabelas, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 115 CrossRef CAS .
F. Febregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 325 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Wang and H. S. Teng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9489 RSC .
M. Sykora, M. A. Petruska, J. Alstrum-Acevedo, I. Bezel, T. J. Meyer and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 5360 RSC .

          D. R. Lide, in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL, 75th edn,  1995, pp. 4–46 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The hole control of spongy CdS nanocrystals, the performance of TiO2 based solar cells, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis, and the effect of annealing on spongy anodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm03530k‡ The authors contribute equally to the present work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of (a) traditional SSSCs, (b) spongy SSSCs and (c) energy levels of CdS/N3 dye/electrolyte system.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterizations on the spongy structure of CdS nanocrystals annealed at 400 °C for 1 h. (a) and (b) are top-view and side-view SEM images of the spongy CdS nanocrystals, respectively. (c) TEM image of CdS nanocrystals, and the SAED pattern (inset) corresponding to hexagonal CdS. (d) HRTEM image of a single CdS nanocrystal, and the inset is the FFT pattern of the HRTEM image.	 

 	Fig. 3  Performance comparison between T-SSSC and S-SSSC. (a) UV-vis absorption spectra for photoanodes of T-SSSC and S-SSSC. (b) and (c) are J-V characteristics and photovoltaic performances of T-SSSC and S-SSSC. (d) EIS spectra of T-SSSC and S-SSSC in dark condition with forward bias of −0.2 V. (e) Equivalent-circuit parameters of T-SSSC and S-SSSC.	 

 	Fig. 4  Performance comparison between the spongy anode with N3 dye and that without N3 dye. (a) UV-vis absorption spectra. (b) and (c) are J-V characteristics and photovoltaic performances. (d) EIS spectra in dark with forward bias of −0.2 V. (e) Equivalent-circuit parameters by fitting the EIS results.	 

 	Fig. 5  Performance of S-SSSCs annealed at different temperature and with different thickness. (a) J-V characteristics and (b) photovoltaic performances of spongy CdS nanocrystals anodes annealed at different temperatures; (c) J-V characteristics and (d) photovoltaic performances, of spongy CdS nanocrystals with different thickness.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The hole control of spongy CdS nanocrystals, the performance of TiO2 based solar cells, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis, and the effect of annealing on spongy anodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm03530k
‡ The authors contribute equally to the present work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
