Recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries in view of green chemistry  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC01639C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC01639C
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 6139-6171Recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries in view of green chemistry

        
          
            Yukun 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Weiguang 
            Lv
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hanlin 
            Huang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenyi 
            Yan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaokang 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Pengge 
            Ning
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hongbin 
            Cao
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Zhi 
            Sun
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing Engineering Research Center of Process Pollution Control, Institute of Process Engineering, Innovation Academy for Green Manufacture, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101407, China. E-mail: sunzhi@ipe.ac.cn
cGannan Normal University, Ganzhou, 341000, China
Received 
      10th May 2021
    , Accepted 21st July 2021First published on 22nd July 2021AbstractRecycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) is of great importance for both critical metal supply and environmental protection. Although the physical chemistry is still focused on pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy and electrometallurgy, state-of-the-art recycling technologies are a trend that is turning towards being more material/energy efficient in line with the principles of green chemistry. For instance, selective recycling of specified metals and direct regeneration of battery materials are being trialled to develop short-cut processes that prevent secondary pollution generation and improve the atomic economy during the whole recycling process. In this review, a number of technologies for recycling spent LIBs are overviewed, especially at different recycling stages to stepwise recover battery materials. It is clearly understood that extraction of critical metals and subsequent regeneration of materials are only part of the recycling process, while pretreatment to obtain black mass powder from battery cells and pollution control, in view of the recycling process to minimise environmental impact, are also extremely important. Furthermore, green design of batteries, as well as process design in view of the whole life cycle of LIBs, are topping the list of the research which requires profound and elaborate efforts. It is expected that this review could provide a guideline for implementing green chemistry principles into spent LIB recycling and stimulate further discussions on improving the green degree of the process.
1 Introduction
With the rapid growth in energy storage demand from consumer electronics, electric vehicles and wind/solar to electricity facilities, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have experienced a leap in development.1 Until the end of 2019, as shown in Fig. 1(a), among various electrochemical energy storage technologies, the cumulative installed capacity of LIBs was the largest, exceeding 80%.2 Driven by the development of new energy vehicles, the installed capacity of power batteries had already surpassed the consumer market. The demand for LIBs is in the development stage of shifting from the market of small consumer batteries to the market of electric vehicles and energy storage power batteries.1 The global lithium battery market demand is expected to reach $694.265 billion in 2025, and the shipment will reach 439.32 GW h (ref. 3) (Fig. 1b). Such a huge demand for LIBs will lead to large consumption of their manufacturing resources, as well as the generation of a large number of spent LIBs, which will cause irreversible pollution and damage to the environment.
 Fig. 1  (a) Installed share of various electrochemical energy storage technologies in 2019.2 (b) LIB demand by application and its market size forecast from 2019 to 2025.3 (c) Manufacturing and scrapping of Panasonic batteries used by Tesla.4 (d) The accumulative sums of spent LIBs from consumer electronics.7 
Recycling spent LIBs is of great importance from the viewpoint of resource recovery and environmental protection. In the early stages of LIB production, waste batteries were produced in large quantities. According to the annual reports of Tesla (shown in Fig. 1c), from the second quarter of 2017 to the end of 2019, the average quarterly battery production loss was as high as 39%,4 with nearly 40% of batteries being eliminated as soon as they are produced. In addition, as the output of LIBs increases, when their service life is reached a lot of spent LIBs will inevitably appear. Generally speaking, the lifespan of LIBs in consumer electronic products is only 1–3 years, and the lifespan of power batteries is 8–10 years.5,6 The statistics and forecast for the number of spent LIBs from Consumer Electronics (CEs) in China in 2010–2020 is shown in Fig. 1d. By 2020, the number of spent LIBs in China's CEs products will reach about 5.5 billion.7 If handled improperly, toxic and flammable fluorine-containing organic electrolytes and heavy metals such as nickel, cobalt and copper will ooze out of these LIBs. According to the report, 4000 tons of spent LIBs contain more than 1100 tons of heavy metals and 200 tons of toxic electrolytes.8 If spent LIBs are disposed of in landfill, it may cause toxic heavy metals to penetrate into the groundwater, causing serious environmental pollution. Likewise, if these LIBs are burned as general solid waste, a considerable amount of toxic gas will be generated, thereby polluting the atmosphere. In response, it is very necessary to deal with the spent LIBs harmlessly. It is also necessary to consider the non-toxic and harmless nature of the reagents and operating methods used in the processing.
Besides this, these spent LIBs are also potential “urban mines” that can provide high economic value. They contain a large number of valuable metals, some of which are even higher in grade than the metals in natural ores.9 A large amount of high-quality secondary resources can be provided through refurbishment and recycling. At the same time, the increase in the mining of the natural ore of these metals has also caused its shortage, creating a market for the recycling of spent LIBs. Recycling closes the loop by returning materials to the value chain. The development of the recycling market will also promote the sustainable development and industrial upgrading of the LIB industry.
In summary, the recycling of spent LIBs has great value in saving resources and protecting the environment. It was found that a lot of studies are based on this direction. In these studies, the recycling process of spent LIBs required the introduction of some toxic reagents, which will cause difficulties for follow-up processing. There are also many studies that consumed a lot of resources and energy in the process. To transform the recycling of spent LIBs from laboratory curiosity into practical engineering applications, it is important to pay attention to the green chemistry issues in the recycling process, which is the part that has been ignored in previous review articles. This review attempts to fill this knowledge gap and review the up-to-date hydrometallurgical processes for the recovery of critical metals from spent LIBs. The sustainable method of LIB recycling involves multiple strategies. In this review, we analyzed the green chemistry issues in the process from the perspective of the current status of spent LIB recycling, technical challenges, battery design and life cycle assessment, and discussed whether LIBs are environmentally friendly, safe and sustainable, and whether it is possible to form a closed cycle from production to recovery. In addition, we also considered the impact of national policies on the recycling of green LIBs to provide guidance for future research.
2 State-of-the-art LIB recycling
In recent years, many studies have focused on LIB recycling methods based on metallurgy processes. However, compared with raw ore, the composition of spent LIBs is more complex.
The LIB mainly contains active materials, current collectors, binders, conductive agents, and other materials, as given in Fig. 2.10 The commercial anode active materials are mainly carbon materials, while there are many types of cathode active materials, including lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO2, LCO), ternary materials (LiNi1−x−yCoxMnyO2), ferrous lithium phosphate (LiFePO4, LFP), lithium manganese oxide (LiMn2O4), lithium manganate (LiMnO2), lithium nickel oxide (LiNiO2) and other lithium intercalation oxides.10 Binders are used to fix the anode and cathode on the current collector and they commonly include poly (vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), styrene butadiene rubber (SBS), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and so forth. The electrolyte is generally composed of lithium salts such as lithium perchlorate (LiClO4), lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF4) or lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) and organic solvents, which are toxic, harmful and flammable.11,12 The function of the separator is to separate the anode and cathode of the battery, preventing the two from contacting and causing a short circuit, and ensuring that the electrolyte ions can pass through.13
 Fig. 2  Diagrams showing the shape and structure components of various LIBs. (a) Cylindrical, (b) coin, (c) thin and flat, and (d) prismatic.11 (e) Conceptual schematic showing how the three recycling scenarios close battery material loops and which materials are recovered.16 
Although there has been a lot of research on the recycling of spent LIBs all over the world, the technology is still at the laboratory level due to the complex structure of the spent LIBs.1 The most commonly used technology in the industry is a pyrometallurgical process.14,15 Although this process does not need pretreatment, its energy-wasting, the equipment investment is large and it will cause serious pollution. In response to these problems, many companies have developed hydrometallurgical processes. The hydrometallurgical processes can recover lithium and aluminum with low energy consumption. However, this process requires pretreatment, leaching, purification and other steps, and we can see the path is very long. Due to its economic and environmental advantages, direct recycling has attracted wide attention in recent years. It can recover cathode materials while maintaining their chemical structures, but it is still in the early development stage. The difference between the three methods in recovered materials and associated chemical forms is shown in Fig. 2e.16
Not only does the variety of impurities lead to technical restrictions, but the market circulation of batteries also brings a lot of inconvenience to recycling.
The production of the main raw materials used in LIBs is under the control of several countries.17 Among them, Australia and Chile control about 80% of lithium production,18 China controls about 70% of graphite production and the Democratic Republic of Congo controls more than half of cobalt production, as shown in Fig. 3. However, LIBs are classified as one of the 9 hazardous materials due to their unstable thermal and electrical qualities. Improper handling during transportation will cause thermal runaway and serious risk. Therefore, the LIBs must undergo and pass a series of tests before being transported by land, sea or air, which increases the transportation cost of the batteries.19 At the same time, instead of transporting batteries to countries/regions with less stringent regulations that govern transport and recycling, it is better to establish mature recycling facilities in areas with high battery usage, which not only saves economic costs, but also obtains strategic materials. The development of electric vehicles has led to an exponential increase in the demand for batteries, fluctuations in the prices of lithium and cobalt and the unsustainable production of strategic materials. All of these issues make the supply of lithium-ion battery raw materials widely concerning. Therefore, local recycling of spent LIBs reasonably solves these problems. At the same time, since the high cost of transporting spent LIBs is caused by the classification of its hazardous substances, it is the most ideal measure by which LIBs can be recycled locally or be rendered inert.
 Fig. 3  Global production of main LIB materials (lithium, graphite, nickel, manganese, and cobalt represent the key elements). 
3 LIB recycling technologies
3.1 Pretreatment

3.1.1 Overview. 
In the process of recycling, impurities such as the shell, separator and current collector of spent LIBs are pretreated to obtain intermediate products of black mass (BM, active substance) with certain purity. The BM is then converted to the final product by either hydrometallurgy or pyrometallurgy. Pretreatment can provide cleaner raw materials for downstream separation processing, thus greatly improving the recovery efficiency of the entire process. Pretreatment processes usually include mechanical–physical processes (discharge, crushing and separation) and advanced processes (heat treatment, mechanical and chemical treatment, chemical dissolution and supercritical fluid extraction, etc.). The actual pretreatment process varies greatly depending on the objectives of the product and the characteristics of the spent LIBs.
Spent LIBs usually need to undergo thorough discharge before treatment to prevent the release of a large amount of heat from the remaining electric energy, thus avoiding the thermal runaway accident of the battery.9,20,21 After discharge treatment, the electrode material is separated and the BM is purified through the comminution and separation process. Comminution includes crushing, granulation and grinding processes. Different comminution processes can be qualitatively distinguished by the particle size characteristics of processed products. According to different processing principles, common crushing methods include hammer crushing,22 wet crushing,23,24 shear crushing,25,26 impact crushing26,27 and cutting milling.28 In the recovery process, the crushing effect of the material usually has a great influence on the subsequent separation process. Separating generally includes size separation,29–31 density separation,32,33 froth flotation,23,34,35 magnetic separation36–38 and eddy current separation.22,39 The purpose of the comminution and separation process is to separate and remove the metal shell, plastic film, separator and current collector of the LIBs, thus obtaining coarse BM products for subsequent processing.


3.1.2 Cleaner pretreatment. 
For a long time, people have not paid enough attention to pollution prevention in the pretreatment process of spent LIBs. The main components of the battery, such as the electrode, electrolyte, separator, binder, etc. are potential sources of pollution during the pretreatment process, as shown in Table 1. Among them, the electrolyte, separator and PVDF binder are the main impurities and pollutants, which cannot be completely removed by conventional mechanical treatment. The electrolyte is released during discharge, crushing and separation. The exposed electrolyte is highly volatile, decomposing and partly adsorbed on the separator. Due to the strong bonding property of PVDF, the active substance of the cathode is still firmly bonded to the surface of the aluminum foil after crushing, and part of the electrolyte is also adsorbed to the active substance.
Table 1 Potential pollution sources in the pretreatment process of spent lithium-ion battery




Pollution source
Main components
Chemical characteristics
Potential pollution




Cathode electrode includes LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, LiNiO2 and LiNixCoyMnzO2 (NCM, x + y + z = 1), etc. The electrolyte consists of conductive salt and various organic solvents. Solute salts include LiPF6, LiBF4, LiClO4, etc. Solvents contain ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonate (PC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC), diethyl carbonate (DEC), 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) and ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC), etc. PP, PE and PVDF are abbreviations of polypropylene, polyethylene and polyvinylidene fluoride.




Cathode
Lithium metal oxide
Reacting with acids/reducing agents to form heavy metals
Heavy metal pollution


Anode
Graphite
Dust exploding in open flame or high temperature
Dust pollution


Solute salt
LiPF6
Strong corrosive, easy hydrolysis and thermal decomposition
Fluoride and phosphorus pollution


Solvent
Carbonate ester
Easy hydrolysis, volatilization and decomposition, etc.
Organic pollution


Separator
PP, PE
Release of carbon monoxide (CO)/aldehydes/organic acids on combustion
Organic and white pollution


Binder
PVDF
Forming hydrogen fluoride (HF) and fluorinated organic in the pyrolysis process
Organic and fluoride pollution




The mechanical processes such as discharge, crushing and separation in pretreatment provide sufficient conditions for the cross-medium transfer of potential pollutants in the battery, which is the main place for the generation, migration and transformation of pollutants. The electrolyte of LIBs is composed of soluble lithium salt (LIPF6) and various carbonate solvents (EC, DMC, DEC, etc.). The migration and transformation of the electrolyte mainly occurs in the chemical discharge and crushing process in the pretreatment. LIPF6 is easily decomposed and hydrolyzed when heated, resulting in HF, fluorine, phosphorus and other gases, thus causing fluorine and phosphorus pollution. Additionally, organic carbonate components are easy to volatilize decomposition into volatile organic compounds (VOC), resulting in organic pollution. The electrolyte is the main source of fluorine and phosphorus pollutants in the pretreatment process. The polyolefin separator itself is chemically stable, but its porous structure easily adsorbs electrolytes and decomposition products (such as lithium fluoride (LiF), phosphorus pentafluoride (PF5), phosphorus oxyfluoride (POF3)) of electrolytes, resulting in secondary entrainment pollution. Fluorine binder (PVDF) is a potential organic contaminant. After decomposition at a high temperature, it will produce HF, resulting in fluorine contamination. There is almost no transfer and transformation of the binder in the mechanical treatment of spent LIBs. However, as an impurity, PVDF will produce a lot of secondary pollution in the subsequent process, such as fluorine-containing organic wastewater. Additionally, as organic matter, the binder may also adsorb part of the electrolyte, resulting in entrainment pollution.
The goal of green chemistry is to stop pollution at its source, not to cure it after it has been polluted. In the field of spent LIB recycling, it is thought that the green chemistry should be reflected in the pretreatment process and not only limited to the subsequent metallurgical process. The research, development and application of clean pretreatment technology for controlling the source of main pollutants in the recycling process of spent LIBs is the key to realizing the closed loop and sustainable development of the LIB industry. Using green and clean techniques during discharge, crushing, separation and advanced treatment can not only reduce the generation of pollutants from the source during the process, but also provide higher quality BM raw materials for subsequent treatment, thus enhancing recovery efficiency throughout the recycling process.
The discharge operation in pretreatment is an easily neglected pollution generation process. The discharge technology of the spent battery is mainly divided into physical discharge and chemical discharge. Physical discharge is done by freezing the electrolyte at low temperatures and then perforating the battery to force it to discharge. Physical discharge technology can avoid electrolyte exposure and control the generation of fluorine and phosphorus pollutants from the source, but electrolyte migration and transformation may still occur in the subsequent pretreatment process. Toxco used liquid nitrogen to discharge spent LIBs in the early stage,40,41 but this technology has high requirements for equipment and is difficult to apply widely. In contrast, the chemical discharge technology42–44 is simple, economical and easy to scale up, which is suitable for large-scale applications. However, the metal shell of the battery is prone to electrochemical corrosion during the discharge process, which cannot prevent the electrolyte from leaking into the discharge solution, resulting in serious secondary pollution caused by fluorophosphorus compounds and organic compounds. The study by Li et al.45 shows that there are a variety of metal ions with different concentration levels, such as aluminum (Al), ferrum (Fe), cobalt (Co), lithium (Li), cuprum (Cu) and manganum (Mn), in the waste discharge solution of spent LIBs. The application of chemical discharge technology needs to strike a balance between discharge efficiency and environmental risk. High discharge rates tend to lead to faster electrochemical corrosion, but this problem does not seem to have received sufficient attention from researchers. Xiao et al.46 found that the manganese sulphate discharge medium can form a very thin isolation layer on the anode surface of spent LIBs, thus inhibiting electrochemical corrosion and electrolyte leakage. The mechanism of this process can be explained by the oxygen (O2) control process, which forms manganese dioxide (MnO2) layers to reduce the contact between oxygen and the iron anode, thus reducing the surface corrosion. This method is a potential green discharge scheme, but the lower discharge rate and higher solution cost may limit its large-scale application.
The process of crushing and separation is the main place for the migration and transformation of pollutants such as electrolytes, separators and binders. Conventional mechanical treatment methods cannot achieve their separation and removal, so it is necessary to adopt advanced treatment technologies to treat pollutants at the source. The characteristics of advanced treatment technologies such as mechanochemistry, heat treatment, chemical dissolution and supercritical fluid extraction are summarized in Table 2, with emphasis on the removal of the electrolyte, separator and binder and the effect of pollution prevention and control.
Table 2 Comparison of main characteristics of several advanced pretreatment techniques




Pretreatment technology
Contaminant/impurity disposal
Technology evaluation


Electrolyte
Separator
Binder
Foreign substance
Secondary pollution




In the ‘contaminant/impurity disposal’ column, ‘√’ indicates that the technology can treat the corresponding contaminant/impurity, and ‘×’ indicates that the technology can treat the corresponding contaminant/impurity; in the ‘foreign substance’ column, ‘√’ indicates that the technology requires the addition of foreign substances, and ‘×’ indicates that the technology does not require the addition of foreign substances; in the ‘secondary pollution’ column, ‘+’ indicates that the technology has secondary pollution, and ‘−’ indicates that the technology has almost no secondary pollution. The degree of secondary pollution increases with the number of ‘+’ marks.




Mechanochemical method
×
×
√
×
+


Heat treatment
√
√
√
×
++


Chemical dissolving
√
×
√
√
+++


Supercritical fluid extraction
√
×
×
√
−




Among the advanced treatment technologies, only supercritical fluid extraction (SFE)47–49 does not theoretically produce secondary contamination and can directly utilize the recovered electrolyte components. Liu et al.50 developed a recycling process for the electrolytes of spent LIBs, which consists of supercritical carbon dioxide (CO2) extraction, resin, molecular sieve purification, component supplement, etc. The electrolyte obtained from separation is comparable with commercial LIB electrolytes in ionic conductivity (20 °C, 0.19 ms cm−1), electrochemical stability (vs. Li/Li+, 5.4v) and cycle stability (0.2C, 100 cycles, capacity retention rate 66%). SFE technology can realize the recycling of electrolytes, but it requires high processing equipment and still faces many challenges in practical application.
The main purpose of mechanochemical treatment51–53 and chemical dissolution54–56 is to remove the PVDF binder and enhance the dissociation of the active substances. Studies57,58 have shown that the mechanochemical method can enhance the leaching of active substances through mechanical force action, and can also realize selective leaching of metal ions. However, due to many factors, such as equipment, economy and safety, it is difficult for the mechanochemical method to be applied on a large scale. Based on the principle of similar phase dissolution, PVDF can be dissolved and removed in organic solvents such as N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP)55,56 and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).54 The chemical solution method can effectively separate the electrode materials from the current collectors while dissolving the harmful electrolyte components. In recent years, many researchers have studied the design of dissociative solvents with low toxicity and pollution. Bai et al.59 studied the feasibility of using triethyl phosphate (TEP) to dissolve the PVDF binder, separate aluminum foil and recover cathode materials. Compared with NMP, DMF and other traditional solvents, TEP has higher solubility to PVDF, lower chemical toxicity and is a safer and more environmentally-friendly solvent. The results indicated that the recovered aluminum foil had no corrosion signs, the polymer binder could be recovered by non-solvent induced phase separation and the recovered cathode material still had a complete crystal structure and good electrochemical properties. He et al.60 prepared an aqueous exfoliating and extracting solution (AEES) with sodium salt as the main raw material and used it for the separation of electrode materials. By optimizing the solvent concentration, the recovery efficiencies of the electrolyte, aluminum foil, copper foil and electrode materials reached 95.6%, 99.0%, 100% and nearly 100%, respectively. The adhesion analysis indicated that AEES could reduce the mechanical adhesion and Coulomb force between the electrode materials and the current collector. Meanwhile, the developed AEES could effectively dissolve electrolytes. Carbonate components could be recovered by distillation, and LiPF6 could also be utilized by precipitation. The chemical dissolution process will inevitably introduce exogenous substances, and the stability, the recycling performance and the regeneration process of the solvent are the main factors limiting the application of this process. The potential pollution of invalid solvents to the environment has not attracted the attention of researchers.
Compared with other advanced treatment technologies, heat treatment has both technical advantages and cost advantages. Mechanochemical treatment, chemical dissolution and supercritical fluid extraction technologies are primarily used to separate and remove a single pollutant. In the absence of any exogenous substances, heat treatment technology can remove many pollutants in spent LIBs. Additionally, according to the pyrolysis behavior of different components such as the electrolytes, separator and binder, multi-step pyrolysis technology61,62 can also realize selective separation and removal of impurities, avoiding the complex interaction between different impurities, which is conducive to the prevention and control of the pollutants at the source. Zhu et al.62 studied the low temperature pyrolysis process of spent NCM batteries in a N2 atmosphere and developed a gradient pyrolysis process based on the results of thermogravimetric analysis. The low temperature pyrolysis process of spent NCM batteries was divided into two stages: electrolyte separation (carbonate volatilization and lithium decomposition, 90–180 °C) and organic matter pyrolysis (membrane and PVDF decomposition, 400–480 °C). The BM products were effectively recovered by a 150 °C/450 °C gradient pyrolysis process, and the fluorine and phosphorus pollutants were harmlessly treated by alkaline absorption. Zhong et al.61 used the gradient pyrolysis process to recover the spent LiFePO4 batteries and obtained the pure cathode materials by combining the color sorting and flotation process. The pyrolysis behavior of different spent LIBs at medium and low temperatures (0–600 °C) is similar, which is the volatilization and decomposition of the electrolyte, membrane and binder components. The pyrolysis products at 20–200 °C are mainly volatile organic gases such as EC, DEC and EMC, while the pyrolysis products at 400–480 °C are mainly tar (C15–C36, PVDF decomposition) and gaseous short chain aliphatic hydrocarbons (C2–C6, membrane pyrolysis). The electrolytes in spent LIBs are easy to migrate and transform in the discharge process. The development of safe and low-cost physical discharge technology or direct crushing technology can reduce the pollution in the discharge process from the source. Zhong et al.63 developed a safe and clean pretreatment process combining inert crushing without discharging and low temperature volatilization, with 99.32% of the carbonate in the spent LIBs removed by evaporation (condensation and absorption by ethanol) and 99.93% of the LIPF6 decomposed into LiF (residual in the solid), HF (absorbed by calcium chloride solution) and phosphoric acid (H3PO4). LIBs have complex structures and varied organic compositions. The thermal conversion mechanism of the electrolyte, separator and binder components needs to be further studied to better guide the development and design of clean heat treatment technology.
At present, the pretreatment technology of spent LIBs cannot completely achieve pollution-free status, but through low-temperature discharge,62 inert crushing,63 multi-step pyrolysis,61,62 vacuum pyrolysis64,65 and other clean technologies, the source control of pollution can be realized in the pretreatment process. Combined with the thought of green chemistry, a design idea of the clean pretreatment process is proposed, as shown in Fig. 4. Although there are still some technical and economic difficulties in the promotion of pollution source control technology, excessive reliance on a pollution end treatment strategy is not conducive to sustainable development and clean recycling. In the future, it will be necessary to develop an integrated treatment technology of pollutants with lower requirements for equipment, to balance the economic cost, environmental benefits and multi-level and multi-angle demands of product processing.
 Fig. 4  A proposed design idea for the clean pretreatment process of spent LIBs. 

3.2 Material regeneration technology

3.2.1 Direct regeneration. 
Direct regeneration technology, i.e., direct lithium supplement of spent cathode materials by physical and chemical methods, restore their electrochemical performance. The recycling process of spent cathode materials by traditional metallurgical methods often requires large amounts of acids, bases or other chemicals to obtain raw materials with high purity, such as metal sulfates, lithium carbonate, etc.66 Meanwhile, heavy metal-containing residue and waste water could be produced in relevant processes, leading to secondary pollution, which does not meet the requirements of green chemistry.67 Thus, researchers have proposed a direct regeneration technology for the repair of the spent cathode materials directly. In particular, the black mass of the cathode with low impurity content is obtained by fine disassembly of the battery, and then the black mass is regenerated by various methods including hydrothermal and solid-phase calcinating for lithium supplement. The advantage is to make full use of the residual energy in the spent cathode material, significantly shorten the process and reduce the consumption of reagents, thus achieving the purpose of regeneration of spent cathode material while achieving energy saving and consumption reduction.
The direct regeneration methods for waste LiCoO2 were investigated first. Nie et al. investigated the regeneration of lithium cobalt cathode material. It supplements lithium by mixing the cathode electrode material with the lithium source and then the mixture is calcined at a high temperature to achieve the regeneration. The electrochemical performance of the material was significantly improved after the lithium supplement. However, the method is not appropriate for coping with the complex and diverse spent materials because the method requires the Li/Co ratio to be accurately calculated; it is obvious that the original Li/Co ratio in each spent battery often varies.68 Shi et al. first mixed the lithium source with the cathode material for a hydrothermal reaction and successfully supplemented lithium. The advantage is that this method does not need to focus on the Li/Co ratio. Fig. 5(a) shows a schematic diagram of the preparation process. Its process only requires the provision of lithium hydroxide solution, and then the spent cathode obtained by stripping is added to the solution for hydrothermal lithium supplementation. The research shows that the product obtained by hydrothermal reaction, although the Li/Co ratio has been repaired, has poor electrochemical stability and needs to further improve its properties by high-temperature roasting. The performance of the recycled material obtained by this method is superior to that of the recycled material obtained by direct high-temperature roasting.69
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of direct regeneration technology of (a) spent LiCoO2,69 (b) ternary cathode material,70 (c) TEM diffractogram of spent ternary cathode material and (d) regenerated cathode,71 (e) illustration of the crystal structure change of LiFePO4 after recycling and regeneration,74 (f) spent LiFePO4 cathode material, and (g) regenerated LiFePO4 cathode material.74 
Meng et al. introduced a mechano-activation method to the direct regeneration field. The mechano-activation process makes the subsequent solid-synthesis process more effective. The comparative results indicate the positive effect of the mechano-activation process on the regenerated cathode (106 mA h g−1 for non-mechano-activation and 165 mA h g−1 for mechano-activation at 0.2C).67 Shi et al. further found that the direct regeneration of NCM by high-temperature roasting was not satisfactory. This is mainly due to the formation of NiO and other compounds on the surface of NCM after decay, which is difficult to react with the lithium source to obtain a better cathode material. Lithium replenishment can be effectively achieved by hydrothermal and then high-temperature roasting.70Fig. 5(b) shows the reconversion from rock salt and spinel in the spent material to layered. Fig. 5(c) shows the transmission electron microscope (TEM) diffraction pattern of the spent cathode material, in which the non-layered rock salt structure obviously appears at the edges of the particles. The results suggest the destruction of the material structure, which leads to performance decay. Fig. 5(d) shows the TEM diffraction pattern of the cathode after regeneration, in which the whole particle shows intact lamellar diffraction streaks from the edge to the interior, i.e., the regenerated structure is good. Besides this, the results of the Fourier transformation in the figure can also demonstrate differences of the structure in different regions of the materials. For the potential safety problem from the high pressure in the hydrothermal treatment, as alternative routes, Shi et al. and Wang et al. further proposed the molten salt system to successfully achieve the lithiation of the waste cathode materials.71,72 The introduction of a mixed molten-salt system and ionic liquid system provides an increase in the reaction temperature, which is only 50–100 °C, but the lithiation process can be conducted at ambient pressure. Furthermore, the direct coating of other materials on the waste cathode is also a route to achieve regeneration. For example, Meng et al. successfully coated vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) on the waste NCM to achieve the sustainable preparation of LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2–V2O5 cathode materials.73 Achieving the regeneration through mechanochemical activation and solid-state sintering can also achieve the direct regeneration of the waste cathode materials.67
Xu et al. investigated the regeneration of spent LiFePO4 and their study showed that in situ regeneration of spent lithium phosphate can be achieved at room temperature.74 Their TEM characterization of the lattice stripe changes before and after regeneration confirmed the success of lithium supplementation, and the mechanism was verified by TEM, EELS and other means. The regeneration mechanism is given in Fig. 5(e), showing that the decay of cathode performance is due to the entry of Fe2+ into the Li site, resulting in the inability of Li to re-enter. The introduction of lithium hydroxide and citric acid can make the Fe2+ in the Li layer leave the Li site and return to its original position, thus achieving structural repair and restoring the electrochemical performance of the material. It also compared the phases before and after the regeneration and found that some iron phosphate appeared in the decayed lithium phosphate, while the corresponding diffraction peaks of the phases disappeared after the restoration, indicating the successful regeneration. The diffraction results of the spent cathode materials before and after regeneration are given in Fig. 5(f and g). The results show that the structure of the cathode material was effectively repaired and restored to an ordered structure.
Recent developments of the direct regeneration method have been summarized in Table 3. It mainly includes the raw discharge capacities, regenerated discharge capacities and regeneration process. It should be noted that since the direct regeneration process often does not include impurity removal processes, the impurity content in the spent cathode material obtained from the pretreatment process will directly affect the electrochemical performance of the regenerated product. The main means of existing pretreatment processes are calcinating, crushing, separating, etc., which make it difficult to obtain spent cathode materials with low impurity content.61,62 In addition, most existing direct regeneration studies focus on a single cathode material, which is based on the fine pretreatment,71,75 but in the real recycling process, the composition of the spent cathode is often complex.75–78 It includes not only NCM cathode waste but also LiFePO4, lithium cobaltate waste, Al, Fe, Cu and other impurities. How to make the direct regeneration method cope with the complex system is the future direction to focus on. Therefore, from the perspective of large-scale industrial applications, the direct regeneration will be greatly limited by whether the front-end can achieve fine classification and disassembly. In contrast to direct regeneration, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical demonstrate a high degree of adaptability to raw materials. These methods often include impurity removal processes, so the tolerance to impurities is much higher than that of direct regeneration methods, and therefore has the prospect of large-scale application.
Table 3 The relevant data about the recent development in the direct regeneration methods




Cathode material
Raw discharge capacities (mA h g−1, 1C)
Regeneration process
Regenerated discharge capacities (mA h g−1, 1C)
Ref.




Spent LCO
135.0
Solid state synthesis with Li2CO3 at 900 °C
152.4

79



Spent LCO
131.7
Hydrothermal at 220 °C and short annealing with lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) at 850 °C
147.8

69



Spent NCM111
145.9 (0.1C)
Ionothermal synthesis with ionic liquids at 150 °C and calculated with Li2CO3 at 500 °C
173.6 (0.1C)

70



Spent NCM523
94.34
Synthesis with eutectic solutions at 300 °C and calculated with Li2CO3 at 850 °C
149.3

71



Spent NCM111
72.0 (0.2C)
Mechanochemical activation and solid-state sintering with Li2CO3 at 800 °C
165.0 (0.2C)

67



Spent NCM111
76 (0.1C)
Coting V2O5 on the spent NCM111 through spray drying, and calculated with Li2CO3 at 350 °C
172.4 (0.1C)

73



Spent LFP
103 (0.5C)
Low temperature aqueous solution relithiation and annealing with Li2CO3 at 600 °C
159 (0.5C)

74



Spent NCM523
15.1
Spray drying with PO43− polyanions, and calculated at 450 °C and 850 °C
170.7

75



Spent LFP
142.9 (0.2C)
Solid state synthesis with Li2CO3 at 650 °C
147.3 (0.2C)

80



Spent Li[Li0.144Ni0.136Co0.136Mn0.544]O2
271 (0.1C)
Heated with LiNO3 and LiOH·H2O at 300 °C
305 (0.1C)

81







3.2.2 Hydrometallurgy. 
Hydrometallurgy is the mainstream technology in the field of recycling, which has been widely concerned by researchers. It has the advantages of low exhaust emission, mild reaction conditions and high metal recovery efficiencies. The typical hydrometallurgy process mainly includes leaching, separation and purification. The leaching methods, which have been widely investigated in recent years, mainly include acid leaching, ammonia leaching, biological leaching and electrochemical leaching. Although the leaching reagents have varied in recent investigations, according to the leaching results, the leaching methods can be divided into total leaching and selective leaching. The separation and purification methods usually include similar technologies, like precipitation, solvent extraction, adsorption, electrolysis, etc.
3.2.2.1 Total leaching. 
The conventional hydrometallurgical recycling process includes leaching all of the valuable metals in the waste LIBs at first, namely, removing the metal ions from the solid to the solution. Then, these metals are extracted one by one from the solution to the product through separation and purification methods. Typical total leaching processes use inorganic acids like hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and nitric acid (HNO3) as leaching agents. The H+ can react with waste oxide, LCO, NCM or LFP; it can also react with current, like Al and Cu foils. Kim et al. investigated the leaching of metals from waste LCO by using H2SO4. The results indicate that only 60% Co and 80% Li can be extracted from waste solid to leachate.82 This is due to the existence of high valence cobalt, which needs to obtain electrons to be effectively leached. Similar results have also been found in other waste cathode materials, like NCM and LiMn2O4 (LMO). In contrast, low valence iron (Fe2+) exists in the waste LFP, which results in the demand for oxidation in the leaching process. For this, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), sodium hydrogen sulfite (NaHSO3), metals and some organic matter with reducibility were investigated as an additive to strengthen the leaching process. Peng et al. proposed utilizing the metals in the waste of spent LIBs, like Cu foil and Fe shell, as reductive agents to achieve the high leaching efficiency of other valuable metals. As for oxidation, H2O2 and persulfate were commonly used in the recycling process of LFP (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  The emitted CO2 (a) and the consumed resources (b) when producing various acids; (c) acids requiring the addition of a reducing agent during the leaching process; (d) the pH of various acids (1 mol L−1). 
Although the leaching efficiencies of valuable metals in the waste LIBs have been enhanced to a high value, many problems, like environmental problems, usage of reagents and energy consumption problems, have been exposed and still wait to be solved. For example, the waste Fe shell and Al foil have a lower value than other metals, but also need to consume H+ in the process. These metal ions in the leachate need to be removed from the leachate to improve the purity of other valuable metals. These processes also consume many reagents and usually result in the loss of other metals for the adsorption of hydroxide or extractant. Therefore, many good works tried to separate these impurity metals from cathode materials by physical methods in the pretreatment stage, which have been introduced in the previous section. The efficient pretreatment process can effectively reduce the reagent consumption in the separation and purification stage of the total leaching process. The corrosion and potential waste acid gas were also environmental problems. Li et al. proposed utilizing organic acid as a leaching reagent to reduce the usage of an inorganic acid. Organic acids can be degraded or recycled and are regarded as more green than inorganic acid. Recently, a deep eutectic solvent was further proposed to replace the previous acid. However, green chemistry should be based on the whole process of chemical metallurgy, rather than a single process. For this, the energy consumption and pollution produced in the production process of these new reagents also need to be considered. Meanwhile, in view of future research, waste battery recycling needs to be oriented to industrial application and its production scale also needs to be considered. Many novel leaching reagents have low solubility, which will limit the practical application. For example, if the solid to liquid process is only 10 g L−1 and all of the valuable metals were leached from waste (LCO), the concentration of Co2+ is only 6 g L−1. As for the concentration of Li, it is only 0.7 g L−1 and is hard to be further extracted as the final product.
Other technologies have also been used to strengthen the leaching process to reduce the usage of acid, accelerate the reaction rate or reduce reagents. For example, mechanochemical activation or mechanical activation was introduced to the leaching process. With the aid of high-energy ball-milling of materials, the mechanically induced changes subsequently influence their physical and chemical properties. The particle size and specific surface area of waste materials can be increased and decreased, respectively, through a single mechanical process. Guo et al. improved the leaching of Co and Li from waste LIBs only through the mechanical method. However, the strengthening is usually enough to achieve a high leaching efficiency. For this, the effects of many Co-grinding reagents have been investigated in recent years. Wang et al. chose polyvinyl chloride (PVC) as a Co-grind reagent to improve the leaching of metals from waste LCO. The schematic diagram for this process is shown in Fig. 7(a). The chlorine contained in the spent PVC effectively destroys the original structure of waste and improves the extraction efficiency of valuable metals.83 The Co-grind reagent ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) has also been shown to have a positive effect on the treatment of waste LCO.84 Single mechanical activation for the spent cathode has also been investigated by them. Fig. 7(b1–3) shows the change for the cathode under different rotary speeds.85 The results suggest that the spent LiCoO2 crystals are destroyed to amorphism with the activation. The crystals become refined and have more lattice distortion during the mechanical activation process. Fig. 7(b4 and 5) exhibit the obvious differences between a pristine spent cathode and an activated cathode through TEM, HRTEM and SAED. Yang et al. investigated the application of mechanochemical activation in the recycling of spent LFP. The results indicated that the leaching efficiency of Fe and Li can be significantly improved from 40% and 60% to 97.67% and 94.29%, respectively, by mechanochemical activation pretreatment and the diluted H3PO4 leaching solution.57Fig. 7(c) shows the schematic illustration for the reaction process and the SEM images for the product FePO4·2H2O. Li et al. reported the strengthening effect of the mechanochemical process on the leaching process with critic acid.86 The schematic illustration for this process is shown in Fig. 7(d).
 Fig. 7  (a1) The XRD, (a2) XRD peak intensity, and (a3) FWHM of the LiCoO2 powders activated at different rotary speeds; TEM, HRTEM, and SAED of the LiCoO2 powders activated at (a4) 0 rpm and (b5) 500 rpm;85 (b) schematic of the mechanochemical activation process for the recycling of spent LiCoO2 batteries through Fe and PVC as a co-grinding reagent;83 schematic plot of a mechanochemical activation process for the recycling of spent LiFePO4 batteries through (c) EDTA-2Na57 and (d) citric acid as a co-grinding reagent.86 
Ultrasonic enhancement is another enhancement method. Under ultrasonic conditions, the change of pressure in the solution makes the cavitation bubbles formed near the surface of the particles collapse, which effectively reduces the thickness of the diffusion layer and increases the surface of the particles. For this, the leaching process of valuable metals is strengthened. Jiang et al., Li et al. and Zhou et al. investigated the effect of ultrasonic conditions, which can effectively increase the leaching efficiency of valuable metals.87–89 The research results generally show that the enhancement effect of ultrasound is limited, and it cannot effectively replace the use of reducing agents and acid, but only reduce the dosage. The leaching efficiency of valuable metals, like Co2+ and Li+, can only be improved 5–10% in the inorganic acid leaching system, and the leaching rate of these metals is relatively insignificant.88 In contrast, the effect of ultrasound on the organic acid system is remarkable.
Prabaharan et al. and Li et al. studied the process of applying an electric field to enhance the leaching of valuable metals.90,91 Due to the presence of an external electric field, the anode can continuously produce H+ during the water electrolysis process, while the transition metal ions begin to be reduced at the cathode. At the same time, some cations such as Mn2+ can also be oxidized at the anode to generate MnO2.90,91 In this way, the H+ produced by the anode can not only reduce the usage of acid but also realize the leaching of valuable metals. However, the excess acid is still necessary to the system to reach high leaching efficiencies of these metal ions.91 Meng et al. directly fixed the waste LCO on the cathode and provided electrons through the electric field to achieve the goal of enhancing the leaching process in the malic acid solution.92 The reductive leaching was achieved through electrochemical reduction with no additive. Diaz et al. achieved the goal of strengthening the leaching process while introducing a small amount of Fe ions by constructing an electro-Fenton system and using the mutual transformation of Fe2+ and Fe3+.93 Electrolysis in molten salt is also an effective method in the recycling process. Zhang et al. investigated the application of molten-salt-electrolysis (MSE) for the spent LiCoO2 and LiFePO4. The technology can reach a high recovery rate for the valuable metals.94,95 For example, the recovery efficiency of Li and Co is higher than 85% and 99%, respectively, in the spent LiCoO2 system. In the spent LiFePO4 system, a paired electrolysis system was established to obtain Fe and Fe3O4 at the cathode and anode, respectively. Meanwhile, the Li+ and PO43− remain in the molten salt. This process essentially simulates the introduction of electricity, which is meaningful for reducing reagent consumption and for improving the greenness of the recycling process. However, the consumption of electricity and the dosage of the reagents for the electrolyte should obtain more attention to ensure the process can meet the requirements of green chemistry. Furthermore, the extraction of metal from the electrolyte and the reusing of the electrolyte are also ignored in current investigations, which should also attract more attention.
The electrochemical methods are also used to extract metal ions from the leachate to obtain the product. Lupi investigated the electrodeposition process for extracting Co2+ and Ni2+ from the leachate as Co metal and Ni metal.96,97 Barbieri et al. electrodeposited cobalt hydroxide onto conductive glass. The pH of leachate was adjusted to 6.5 to reduce the deposition of the Co metal.98 Lv et al. investigated the paired electrolysis process based on the previous research. In this system, cobalt metal and persulfate were synchronously obtained from the diaphragm electrolyzer.99 Furthermore, the electrochemical method was also used to selectively leach Li from the spent cathodes, which have been introduced as detailed in the corresponding section.100 However, the limitation for using the electrodeposition method is that it is hard to separate Ni2+ and Co2+, which are usually coexisting in the leachate. Meanwhile, the impurities, like Fe ions, can also reduce the Faraday efficiency of the electrochemical process.
Except for traditional leaching methods, the leaching with deep eutectic solvent (DES) has attracted more and more attention in recent years. DESs are a class of compound which show an excellent effect on dissolving metal oxides. It is regarded as a class of green solvent because it is cheaply obtained, easily prepared and made of relatively nontoxic and biodegradable compounds.101 Tran et al. used choline chloride (ChCl):EG DES as a leaching reagent, achieving the leaching of Li and Co from the spent LiCoO2.101 Chen et al. designed the DES by mixing monocarboxylic acids (formic acid, acetic acid, propionic acid, n-butyric acid) with ChCl. The relevant system can also reach high leaching efficiency for Co2+.102 Roldán-Ruiz et al. used choline chloridep-toluenesulfonic acid (PTSA) monohydrate to design the DES system with ChCl. The DES system also presents a high leaching performance for the spent cathode materials.103 Wang et al. proposed a novel method to identify the reducibility of the different DESs based on electrochemical principles. The results indicated that the ChCl:urea DES is better than ChCl:EG DES to leach valuable metals from the spent cathode.104 Although the cost for the DES is cheap, it is still higher than inorganic acid. For this, how to reuse the DES in the recycling process needs to be investigated deeply in the future.
The complexity of the leachate from the total leaching process mainly depends on the complexity of raw waste materials. The ultimate goal of the hydrometallurgy process is to selectively separate the valuable metal ions in the solution and prepare the corresponding raw materials. Therefore, the complex leaching solution produced in the total leaching process often causes great problems for the subsequent extraction and purification process.
Furthermore, the kinetics of the leaching process has also been extensively studied; these studies have important implications for the recovery process. According to previous studies, it can be found that Li in the cathode material is easier to be leached than Ni, Co and Mn, while the leaching of Ni, Co and Mn is more simultaneous in the acid with or without reductant. Gao et al. indicate that the reaction kinetic control model for Ni, Co, Mn and Li is the same as each other, but different reaction conditions can lead to different kinetics for them. For example, when the leaching reagent is acetic acid, the leaching process without reductant is all controlled by the residue layer diffusion step, but with H2O2 as the reductant, the controlled step is transformed to the surface chemical reaction step.105 He et al. also reported that the leaching process was controlled by surface chemical reaction steps with L-tartaric acid and H2O2.106 Some leaching processes were also identified to belong to the logarithmic rate law.107,108 The differences in the kinetic research of articles can be attributed to the diversity of waste.
3.2.2.2 Selective leaching technology. 
The traditional recovery processes mostly use the total leaching of valuable metals as the initial step of extraction, which leads to the complex leachate usually containing aluminum, iron, copper, calcium, magnesium and other impurities. When extracting valuable metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt, lithium, etc., complicated impurity removal processes are often required at first.109 The hydrometallurgy recycling processes can be summarized as four steps: leaching, removing impurities, separating and product preparation.110,111 Among them, one impurity usually needs one removal process leading to the complex recycling process. The same situation also occurs in the solvent extraction process. Of course, in recent years, some scholars have conducted related research on the co-extraction of nickel, cobalt and manganese, and have made some progress, but there is still room for further development.112 The removal process of various impurity metal ions will be discussed in detail in the following chapters. The separation processes often cause the loss of other metal ions due to entrainment or co-extraction in the process of removing or extracting target metal ions. The loss of lithium is one of the more typical examples. According to reports, over 20% lithium ions are extracted at the same time as co-extracting nickel, cobalt and manganese ions, and this part of lithium loss is difficult to further recover.112,113 Therefore, in order to shorten the extraction process and reduce the consumption of reagents, the most direct and effective way is to reduce the leaching efficiency of impurities in the leaching process, namely, selective leaching. Specifically, each step of the leaching process tries to transfer only the target metal ions from the solid phase to the liquid phase, while limiting the leaching of other non-target metal ions. Then, the leachate can be directly used to synthesis the corresponding product.
According to the previous kinetic analysis, it can be found that the leaching behavior of nickel, cobalt and manganese during the leaching process is relatively similar, so it is difficult to selectively leach these metal ions. For this, there is only a little investigation into the selective leaching of them. At the same time, due to the current low overall lithium recovery rate, research on selective lithium extraction has received extensive attention and some progress has been made. The research is mainly carried out from three aspects: pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy and biological leaching, and this chapter mainly focuses on the research progress of selective lithium extraction in the field of hydrometallurgy.
Although the physical and chemical properties of cathode materials are different, the process of selectively extracting lithium is relatively similar. Usually, researchers use the battery charging and discharging process to design the selective lithium extraction process. During the charging process, the lithium in the positive electrode material can be released from the layered structure of the positive electrode material to the electrolyte at a higher potential, and finally, migrate to the negative electrode.116 Therefore, one of the ideas for selectively extracting lithium is to provide a solution environment with strong oxidizing properties, so as to achieve the selective extraction of lithium. For waste LFP materials, Yang et al. developed the acetic acid and hydrogen peroxide system (Fig. 8(a)),114 and Li et al. developed the sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide system to achieve the selective leaching of Li (Fig. 8(b)).115 The two systems have the same mechanism, that is, higher oxidation–reduction potential of the solution provided by hydrogen peroxide under appropriate pH conditions, and then the lithium in the LFP materials is removed from the solid phase to leachate. For this, the results in the article indicate that there is no leaching of Fe in the whole process. The relevant process can be further illustrated by the Li–Fe–P–H2O E–pH diagram (Fig. 8(c)). It indicates that FePO4·2H2O and Li+ have a large stable area, in which LiFePO4, Fe2+, Fe3+ and H3PO4 all trend to convert to stable FePO4·2H2O. For this, the key point to this selective leaching process is to control the pH and redox potential (Eh).117 For example, sulfuric acid is a strong electrolyte, so it is necessary to stabilize the solution at a proper pH by strictly controlling the ratio of Li and H+ as proposed by Li et al. Since acetic acid is a weak electrolyte, it is easier to maintain a proper pH. Wang et al. used persulfate to provide a strong oxidizing solution environment and achieved the goal of selectively extracting lithium from LFP.118 At the same time, Lv et al. also used persulfate to achieve the goal of selectively extracting lithium from waste NCM.119 The reaction temperature of the two systems is different. Among them, the reaction temperature of the LFP system was relatively low, while in the NCM system Lv et al. clearly indicated that a high temperature was required to fully activate persulfate. Fe2+ may have a certain activation effect on persulfate, but the specific reason remains to be further explored by other scholars. Furthermore, recently, Lv et al. proposed utilizing hydrothermal treatment to achieve the selective leaching of Li with stoichiometric H+ consumption (Fig. 9(e)).123 In this process, only stoichiometric inorganic acid is consumed to reach a high leaching efficiency of Li+ (95%). Meanwhile, the leaching selectivity of Li+ is higher than 98%, which means only a little of the other metal ions are leached into leachate.
 Fig. 8  The schematic plot of selective leaching of lithium from LiFePO4 with (a) acetic acid and H2O2,114 (b) H2SO4 and H2O2,115 (c) The E–pH diagram for the Li–Fe–P–H2O,117 (d) the selective leaching of lithium from LiFePO4 with persulfate persulfate,118 (e) the Schematic plot of selective leaching of lithium from NCM through hydrothermal treatment,123 (f) the Schematic plot of selective leaching of lithium from NCM through electrochemical method.100 
 Fig. 9  (a) Plausible pathways for the sulfation roasting conversion of cathode powder from spent LiCoO2 batteries.148 (b) Illustration of the conversion mechanism for roasting LiNixCoyMnzO2 with (NH4)2SO4.149 (c) Possible reaction controlling mechanism of chlorinating conversion of NCM electrode materials.150 (d) Plausible pathways for the conversion of mixed powders from spent LiMn2O4 batteries at enclosed vacuum conditions.151 
In addition to adding a strong oxidant to achieve the selective extraction of lithium from the solution environment, the application of an electric field to provide a strong oxidizing solution environment to achieve a selective lithium extraction process is also a potential path. Liu et al. and Lv et al. all used different spent cathode materials as the anode and inorganic salt as the electrolyte to achieve the delithiation of cathode materials.100,120Fig. 9(f) shows the electrochemical leaching process and the images for the relevant product. The lithium can be released from the layered structure of spent cathode materials under a high oxidation potential provided by the electric field. At the same time, since the solution is alkaline, the dissolution of other transition metal ions is inhibited. In addition, Lv et al. also identified that the remaining transition metal oxides can be used as excellent electrocatalysts. The process is still essentially an oxidative leaching process.
It is also an idea to destroy or transform the spent material phase by mechanochemical activation, and then achieve selective leaching in the solution. Among them, Wang et al. successfully realized the migration of Li by ball milling with LCO using C and dry ice as co-grinding reagents.121 In the mechanochemical activation process, C causes the LiCoO2 to transform into Co3O4 and Li2CO3, thus realizing the transfer of lithium from insoluble matter to soluble matter. Furthermore, the slag is disposed of by H2O to leach the Li from solid to a solution. As for other metals, the leaching of them is limited by the neutral environment. Wang et al. also investigated the mechanochemical process through utilizing NaCl and SiO2 as co-grinding reagents.58 In the reaction process, Li+ is replaced by Na+ leading to the phase change from LiCoO2 to LiCl. Yang et al. used Na2S as a co-grinding agent to achieve the selective leaching of Li from waste NCM cathode materials.122 Among them, Na2S acts as a solid reducing agent, realizing the solid-phase reduction of high-valent transition metal ions. The investigation also shows that the NCM precursor after delithiation is an excellent electrocatalyst.
The advantages of selective leaching technology are obvious. In the traditional leaching process, for example, the mechanical activation technology proposed by Yang et al., all the valuable metals are leached from the waste. Since the solution contains a lot of Fe ions, it is necessary to remove the Fe ions from the leachate before further preparation of the lithium product. The reason is lithium products such as lithium carbonate need to be synthesized at a higher pH, at which Fe2+/Fe3+ can also be precipitated. Other transition metal ions can also combine with OH− to form precipitated products, resulting in excessively high impurity content in lithium carbonate products. Therefore, lithium can only be extracted at the end of the process. The process to remove impurities or extract other metals consumes a lot of precipitation reagents. Even the products from the precipitation process need to be further purified. As for impurities, because the value of Fe is relatively low, and the slag of the iron removal process has not yet been effectively reused, it will not only consume lots of reagents, but also generate a large amount of solid waste that is difficult to treat. Therefore, the selective extraction process implemented by Yang et al. and Li et al. successfully avoid the iron removal process, which is of great significance for improving the greenness of the recycling process.
In addition, the selective extraction of other metal ions has also received attention. Ku et al. and Zheng et al. investigated the leaching system with ammonia. The results indicated that during the ammonia leaching process, due to the different complex abilities of transition metal ions and ammonium ions, Li, Ni and Co are leached, while Mn remained in the leaching as a precipitate.124,125 This research reduces the consumption of reagents in the Mn removal process. Therefore, related investigations have received extensive attention, and more in-depth research of the ammonia leaching system has also been carried out in recent years.126,127


3.2.3 Pyrometallurgy. 
Pyrometallurgy mainly extracts and refines target metals from raw ore through high temperature smelting and reduction reaction of minerals.128–131 The pyrometallurgy process is suitable for the treatment of various waste materials, and the key metals in waste electrical appliances and electronic waste can be recovered through similar pyrometallurgy processes. The spent LIBs are transformed into alloy (Ni/Co alloy) and slag products (lithium-rich slag) at temperatures higher than 1000 °C.128,132,133 The slag modification agent containing Al2O3, CaO, MgO, SiO2 and other components134–136 can adjust the slag phase composition, and the alloy products are further recovered after subsequent hydrometallurgy treatment. The reduction reaction and phase transition mechanisms of different metals are different at high temperatures. Lithium and transition metal components are enriched in the slag phase and alloy phase, respectively. Although the pyrometallurgy process can selectively enrich lithium in the slag phase, the direct leaching of lithium from slag requires high energy consumption.137 Compared with hydrometallurgy, the pyrometallurgy process does not require raw materials to be pretreated (such as discharge, crushing, etc.), and does not produce a large amount of acid and alkali wastewater. However, pyrometallurgy processes usually produce large amounts of CO, CO2, VOC and dust, with high process energy consumption.
Conventional pyrometallurgy has the problems of lithium loss, high energy consumption and heavy pollution. By changing the reduction system and strengthening the reaction process, “mild pyrometallurgy” processes138 such as sulphate roasting,139,140 salt roasting,141–143 sub-molten salt roasting144,145 and vacuum metallurgy146,147 can overcome the disadvantages of conventional pyrometallurgy to some extent. The mild pyrometallurgy process has the characteristics of low energy consumption and low pollution, and contains the concept of green chemistry, which is the trend of process development and design in the future.
Sulfation roasting as a traditional roasting technology is not considered environmentally friendly due to serious SOx emissions. Lin et al.148 studied the sulfation reaction of LiCoO2 and found that the generation of SOx could be eliminated by controlling the transfer path of sulfur atoms in different phases. At 800 °C, through the aging treatment of LiCoO2 and H2SO4 and controlling the amount of H2SO4, the sulfur can be completely recycled in the form of SO42− to avoid the formation of SOx. The proposed reaction mechanism is shown in Fig. 9a. By water leaching and precipitation at room temperature, 99.3% of Li and 98.7% of Co were recovered in the form of Li2CO3 and Co3O4 with the purity of 99.89% and 99.95%, respectively. Compared with conventional pyrometallurgy, sulfation roasting can realize selective recovery of lithium, avoid the generation of lithium-rich solid waste residue from the source and avoid the emission of gas pollutants. Sulfation roasting is a green and efficient mild pyrometallurgy process.
Similar to sulfation roasting, secondary pollutants such as NH3, HCl and SO3 are easily released in the salt roasting process. The commonly used reducing agents for salt roasting are ammonium chloride and ammonium sulfate. Xiao et al.149 studied the kinetic process of NCM cathode material and NH4Cl roasting, and the proposed reaction mechanism is shown in Fig. 9b. The results show that the spent LIBs raw materials and NH4Cl can be rapidly converted into metal chlorides by chlorination roasting at 400 °C for 20 min, and the metal leaching rate is close to 100%. In the process of chlorination roasting of NCM cathode material, the nucleation reaction and phase interface reaction play a controlling role in the early and late reactions, respectively. Yang et al.150 studied the roasting process of spent NCM batteries and (NH4)2SO4 and found that more than 90% of lithium could be selectively recovered from the roasting products at 650 °C by water leaching at room temperature (Fig. 9c). The results show that the tendency of metals to form sulfate is Li > Mn > Co > Ni. The leaching efficiency and selectivity of lithium depend on the roasting temperature, the dosage of (NH4)2SO4 and the content of Mn. Compared with the conventional carbothermal reduction process, the salt roasting process can greatly reduce the reaction temperature and selectively recover lithium. However, the salt roasting process inevitably produces pollutants such as NH3, HCl and SO3, but the recycling and reuse of waste gas can make the salt roasting process a potential green and sustainable process.
Vacuum metallurgy can reduce the temperature of carbothermal reduction reactions by creating vacuum conditions. The reaction products of lithium carbonate can be directly recovered through water immersion and evaporation. Additionally, the leakage of gas pollutants can be avoided in the negative pressure environment. Xiao et al.151 studied the vacuum metallurgy process of LiMn2O4 spent LIBs and proposed the collapse mechanism of lithium release in the vacuum metallurgy process, as shown in Fig. 9d. At 700 °C, under the vacuum condition of 1000 Pa, the recovery of Li reached 81.90% and the purity of Li2CO3 was 99.7%. Vacuum metallurgy avoids the use of external reducing agents. Although a vacuum atmosphere can reduce the temperature of the carbothermal reduction reaction, it requires additional energy consumption and equipment cost to maintain the vacuum degree.
Lithium can be selectively extracted from spent LIBs by pyrometallurgy, but conventional reduction roasting is often associated with high carbon emissions. To achieve the goal of carbon neutrality and carbon peak, optimizing the energy structure and developing low-carbon technology has always been the development direction of the industry. Hydrogen energy is currently most widely used in the field of transportation and has a variety of application scenarios in energy storage, military and other fields. In the field of spent LIB recycling, hydrogen reduction technology has also attracted extensive attention.
Liu et al.152 studied the hydrogen reduction roasting process of spent NCM batteries, and successfully prepared battery-grade LiOH·H2O products. The results indicated that at 500 °C for 15 min roasting, about 98% of Li was quickly converted into soluble LiOH, while Ni, Co and Mn were quickly converted into corresponding insoluble metals and oxides. Compared with other roasting processes (nitrification, carbon reduction, vulcanization), the hydrogen reduction process does not produce SO2, CO, NOx and other harmful gases. It is a clean and efficient process with no carbon emissions.
Although hydrogen reduction technology has many advantages, there are still some limitations in the application of hydrogen reduction technology in spent LIB recycling. The current hydrogen storage and transportation technology cannot balance reserves, cost and safety well, and the transportation of the hydrogen pipe network is still restricted by geographical and safety factors. Due to the flammable and explosive nature of hydrogen, the process of hydrogen reduction often requires higher requirements for equipment and monitoring systems. Meanwhile, hydrogen itself is more expensive, all of which will increase the cost of recycling spent LIBs.
The composition and structure of spent LIBs are complex, so it is more suitable for short-range recycling by pyrometallurgy processes with strong adaptability of raw materials. A mild pyrometallurgical process can overcome the problems of lithium loss and high energy consumption in the conventional pyrometallurgical process, but it is still difficult to avoid the generation of gas pollutants. The hydrogen reduction process is a clean, short-range and efficient recovery technology, but it still faces the constraints of storage, transportation, cost and other factors. Future research should focus on reaction systems, process enhancement and pollution prevention and control to develop and design a green mild pyrometallurgy process.


3.2.4 Biological metallurgy. 
Microbial technologies are promising for LIB recycling because there is no need for the addition of toxic chemicals, thereby avoiding the generation of hazardous byproducts. According to the different reaction principles, biological leaching can be divided into acidolysis, redoxolysis and complexolysis (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Different ways of biological leaching acidolysis including acidolysis, redoxolysis and complexolysis. 
Acidolysis is the dissolution of insoluble metal substances with the help of acids produced by microorganisms. For instance, Acidithiobacillus thioooxidans can use sulfur as a nutrient and produce biogenic sulfuric acid, which can then dissolve insoluble metals in the target raw material. The mechanism of this reaction is that the bioacid dissociates to form protons that attack the oxygen on the surface of the metal. And then, the metal is leached from the raw material. It can be seen that this biogenic acidolysis mechanism is similar to that of chemical acidic leaching.153 The process does not need to add toxic reagents such as a strong acid and alkali, which is a greener and more effective leaching measure. Wu et al.154 used a biogenic acidolysis method to successfully leach metallic lithium from spent LIBs, with a leaching rate of up to 91.4%. The equation for the acidolysis-mediated bioleaching reaction is shown below: (1) (2)
Redoxolysis is extracellular polymers (EPS) secreted by bacteria attached to the surface of spent batteries, and metals are taken into the solution through the transfer of electrons. For example, the conversion of ferrous ions to ferric ions (eqn (3)), which corrodes the surface of the material and causes metal solubilization. This process does not require direct contact between the bacteria and the material. In some cases, the metal leaching process in spent LIBs is coordinated by two mechanisms. Xin et al.155 research shows that biogenic sulfuric acid and ferric ions synergistically promote the Co bioleaching from LIBs in mobile phones. (3)
Complexolysis means that microbial secondary metabolites chelate with metal ions and form soluble metal–organic complexes. Bahaloo-Horeh et al.156 used organic acids produced by Aspergillus niger to dissolve Ni, Co, Mn, Li, Cu and Al from spent LIBs. Among them, the leaching mechanisms of Aspergillus niger are related to its low molecular weight metabolites, such as organic acids. These organic acids leach high value metals from spent LIBs by two mechanisms. First, hydrogen ions can replace metal cations in the material, thus inducing metal dissolution. Secondly, organic acids can convert insoluble metals into soluble metal ligand complexes through chelation. There are also a lot of studies on the leaching of Co and Li from spent LIBs through bioleaching based on complexolysis.
Bioleaching technology is only one-third of the cost of traditional leaching technology, more efficient and conducive to environmental protection and resource conservation. Also, the toxicity of organic acids produced by microorganisms is much lower than that of inorganic acids. It is a greener and more environmentally friendly leaching method. However, bioleaching technology for metal recovery from spent LIBs is still in its infancy and requires considerable follow-up research to improve the efficiency and separability of the process.

3.3 Pollution control of LIB recycling
We should not only pay attention to the recycling of valuable metals but also pay attention to pollution control during the recycling process. For example, spent graphite anodes (hazardous waste), fluoride ion and phosphorus ion in the leaching solution.
In the past few years, the recovery of valuable metals from spent LIBs has received great attention because of its huge economic benefits. However, recycled anode materials have not attracted widespread attention due to their low added value. The quality of the anode material accounts for 20% of the entire battery, so a large amount of spent graphite is produced every year. In the industrial regeneration process of spent LIBs, spent graphite anodes are mainly processed in the form of burning and dumping. But these contain a lot of harmful substances. If these hazardous wastes are not properly disposed of, they will pollute water, air and soil, seriously threatening the ecological environment and human health. On the other hand, if the spent graphite can be effectively recycled, it will alleviate the shortage of graphite resources and promote the sustainable development of new energy industry.
There are many kinds of existing products in the recycling of spent graphite anodes. Based on the classification of these products, they can be divided into graphite carbon materials, LIB electrode materials, supercapacitor electrode materials, catalysts and adsorbents. Zhang et al.,157,158 Yu et al.159 and He et al.160 introduced pyrolysis, grinding and Fenton reagent (Fe2+/H2O2), respectively, to expose the hydrophobic surface of graphite and the hydrophilic surface of LiCoO2 to strengthen the difference in the anode and cathode and improve the separation efficiency of flotation, thereby obtaining graphitic carbon materials. The process of directly recycling graphitic carbon materials is simple, but the value added to the product is not high. Therefore, existing research is more focused on turning it into high value-added products. In order to realize the closed-loop cycle of the spent graphite anode, many studies have regenerated the spent graphite anode as a LIB electrode material.161–164 Nowak et al.161 used three different extraction methods to remove the remaining electrolyte and regenerate the spent graphite anode into a new LIB anode material. Among them, the method of extracting electrolytes with sub-critical carbon dioxide and acetonitrile was considered to be a suitable regeneration method. The regenerated graphite anode showed the best electrochemical performance, and at the same time, the recovery rate of electrolytes reached about 90%. These processes are long, but the value added to the products is high, and the closed-loop cycle can be realized. Graphite is also a commonly used raw material of catalysts. Some researchers regenerate the spent graphite anode into graphene and its derivatives, for ozone catalysis,165 electrocatalysis,166,167 photocatalysis168 and so on, and the surface of the spent graphite anode obtained a lot of functional groups after repeated charging and discharging. The structure disorder, layer spacing and specific surface area of the material are also increased. These characteristics meet the requirements of the adsorbent. Therefore, the spent graphite anode is also one of the raw materials of the adsorbent.169,170 Hao et al. synthesized an efficient and environmentally-friendly, high-efficiency heavy metal adsorbent using graphite anodes from spent LIBs and its adsorption capacity for chromium was 135.81 mg g−1.
The above studies are mostly based on the production waste produced during the production of graphite anodes for LIBs and the graphite anodes dismantled in the laboratory. The graphite leaching residue produced in the actual industrial regeneration process is doped with a lot of impurities. In addition to organic and metal impurities, it may also contain titanium dioxide and other substances. No matter what source of spent graphite anode is used for resource utilization, purification is necessary. The nature and type of impurities are important factors that affect the selection of impurity removal methods. The impurity composition of spent graphite anodes from different sources is different, and the impurity removal methods are also different. The existing literature lacks a summary of the impurities that may exist in spent graphite anodes from different sources, and lacks theoretical guidance on the selection of impurity removal methods. This is also an issue that we need to pay attention to in the future.
In the whole process of recycling spent LIBs, most researchers pay attention to the removal of metal impurities, such as manganese, iron and aluminum, but few people pay attention to the removal of non-metallic impurities, such as fluorine and phosphorus. These impurities are widely present in the electrolyte. After pretreatment, a large number of pollutants still enter the subsequent separation and purification stage. If left unchecked, it is easy to cause environmental pollution and endanger biological health. Phosphorus is one of the nutrients in the ecosystem, but releasing too much into the water can lead to eutrophication and damage the ecological environment. In order to ensure the stability of biological system, the concentration of phosphorus should be lower than 0.02 mg L−1.171 In our group, LiFePO4 was used as the reducing agent and induced crystallization was carried out to remove Fe and P,172 and the removal behavior of non-metallic impurities in the process was paid attention to. Fluoride is an essential constituent for humans. However, when the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is too high, it can harm the health of living things, such as dental/skeletal fluorosis, neurotransmitters and fetal cerebral function.173,174 The maximum acceptable concentration of fluoride is 1.5 mg l−1 (from the World Health Organization).45 Many technologies have been developed by researchers to remove fluoride: adsorption,175,176 precipitation,177 electrocoagulation,178,179 ion exchange180 and membrane techniques,181 but these are all research on the removal of fluorine from solutions such as urban groundwater and drinking water. There is still a lack of research on the impurity behavior of fluorine in the solution produced during the leaching process, and we need to focus on future research.
3.4 Recycling process
As shown in Fig. 11, we summarize the various processes of LIB recycling, including pretreatment, extraction and regeneration, and the combination between them. The pretreatment process consumes a lot of energy directly, such as electricity and heat, while more and more exhaust gas and wastewater are emitted as the pretreatment steps increase (marked in the brown font in the figure, including fluorine phosphorus gas and wastewater). Three types of mass flow are obtained in this section, and the type and content of impurities in them affect the process selection in the subsequent extraction section. When the impurity content is high, the more complex the subsequent purification process is required. When there is only a cathode in the final mass flow, direct regeneration of the material can be achieved by lithium replenishment. However, this also means that the pretreatment process has consumed a lot of energy and produced a large number of contaminants that are difficult to treat.
 Fig. 11  Flow chart of spent LIB recycling processes: methods, objectives and problems of each section. 
In the extraction process, the main methods are total leaching and selective leaching. Compared with total leaching, selective leaching seems to have more steps, but in fact the process is shorter and more in line with the principles of green chemistry. It does not require subsequent steps for the removal of multiple impurities (non-high value metals such as Al, Fe, Cu, etc., and non-metallic impurities such as F, P, etc.). Also, selective leaching avoids the introduction of secondary pollution and the emission of waste gas and wastewater during the removal process. By comparing the above LIB recycling technologies, we believe that a short pretreatment and subsequent multi-step selective leaching process is more in line with green chemistry principles (marked by a green line in the figure). However, this process still lacks relevant studies for selective extraction of multiple metals, which needs our subsequent development.
From the above description, it is easy to see that, although we try to prevent the generation of secondary pollution and try to improve the atomic economy of the whole recycling process, we still cannot avoid the problems of the long recycling process due to the complex structure of the battery and environmental pollution due to the toxic substances contained in the battery material (shown in Fig. 11). For example, the generation of fluorine or phosphorus compounds, if left untreated, can endanger biological health. In order to better solve these problems, we should focus on the more front-end area of battery design, designing batteries with easier to disassemble packaging and safer and less toxic materials. This will reduce the difficulty of the subsequent recycling process and establish a greener life cycle for LIBs.
4 LIB green design
4.1 Easy-to-recycle battery materials

4.1.1 The binder. 
The role of the binder is becoming more and more important in the energy density of the battery. In addition to the chemical and electrochemical stability in the electrode/electrolyte interaction, the binder must adapt to the large dimensional changes of the electrode time after time during battery cycling. However, the prevalence of binders in the component materials of spent batteries brings additional risks. Fluorine-containing binders easily form highly corrosive hydrogen fluoride during the recycling process. Besides this, the PVDF is a low-temperature fluorination agent for metal oxides, which may complicate the cathode recovery and regeneration and has been mentioned above. Another obvious disadvantage is that it is difficult to dissolve, which makes the recovery process difficult.
There is an urgent need to develop a green binder without fluoride. This kind of binder requires two characteristics: (1) no fluorine and (2) is easily soluble in green solvents such as water or alcohol. Recently, Zhao et al. applied environmentally friendly carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) in anode materials to improve the electrochemical performance of SiOx/graphite anodes.182 The CH2COONa group in CMC can be hydrolyzed and their products form a hydrogen bond or an ester bond with the –OH on the surface of the silicon oxide.183 These hydrogen bonds or ester bonds make CMC dissolve better in water. In addition, Zhao et al. also used another water-soluble binder, guar gum (GG), which can stabilize conductive particles and active materials, thereby improving the cycle performance of the SiOx/graphite anodes. Compared with the PVDF, polysaccharide binders such as CMC and GG not only provide better battery cycle performance, but also can be removed more easily during the recycling process. In addition, cellulose can also be prepared into nano-level materials, so that it has both the properties of polysaccharides and nano-materials. Using micro fibrillated cellulose (MFC) nanocomposites as a binder, flexible electrodes can be prepared in the water.184 This is also difficult to do for binders such as PVDF. In addition to CMC and GG, conductive polyamide-imide (PAI),185 self-healing poly (acrylic acid) (PAA),186 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)187 and gum arabic (GA)188 are also environmentally friendly.
Based on realistic factors, in addition to developing a new binder, it is also very important to reduce or even avoid the use of a binder. The battery should be designed with as little binder as possible, and the type and distribution of binders should be described in the specification as detailed as possible, because this will affect the method of material separation.


4.1.2 The electrolyte. 
Today's commercial systems usually use electrolytes based on organic carbonates, such as PC and EC,189 but because these electrolytes are flammable, they pose a serious safety risk and will greatly reduce the battery's operating temperature range. The replacement of these dangerous electrolytes is very urgent.
Ionic liquids (ILs) usually contain a large number of asymmetric organic cations and weakly coordinated inorganic/organic anions. At present, they represent a very interesting new type of room temperature ionic fluid. The main advantages of ILs are non-flammability, non-volatility, high chemical and thermal stability and in some cases hydrophobicity. These make IL electrolytes easy to separate during recovery. For this reason, the use of ionic liquids as “green” solvents has attracted widespread attention, and has recently been intensively studied as electrolytes (or electrolyte components) of various electrochemical devices. For example, pyrrolidinium-based ILs (PYR 14 FSI) show high conductivity (>4 mS cm−1 at 20 °C) and electrochemical stability. This ionic liquid is an attractive candidate for LIB electrolytes.190 Of course, ILs are still biotoxic, but they can be recovered by distillation, extraction, membrane separation, adsorption separation, phase separation and other methods.
In addition to ionic liquids, water-based LIBs provide a promising alternative to safe, cost-effective and scalable energy storage, and have high power density and high safety. Compared with traditional organic electrolytes, water electrolytes have the following advantages: (1) low cost; water electrolytes are highly competitive in terms of manufacturing costs; in addition, because the assembly line does not require water and oxygen-free conditions, the cost is further reduced; (2) environmentally friendly, because water is non-flammable and non-toxic; (3) due to the high ionic conductivity of the water medium, the water-based LIBs have fast charging ability; (4) high resistance to improper electrical and mechanical handling, namely rapid discharge, bending, cutting and washing, it will not cause any catastrophic consequences.
Li+-based aqueous batteries (ABs) were proposed by Li et al.191 The first reported Li+-based ABs provided an average operating voltage of 1.5 V and an energy density of about 55 W h kg−1. Since then, many scientific researchers have made extensive efforts to develop various Li+-based ABs. Recently, Yang et al. reported a halogen conversion–intercalation chemical reaction in graphite.192 In the case of an average voltage of 4.2 v, the capacity of the composite electrode produced by graphite is 243 mA h g−1. Importantly, this high energy density was accompanied by inherent safety and environmental insensitivity. The electrolyte of the water-based LIB is non-toxic, non-flammable and non-volatile. However, the large-scale application of ABs is hindered by two common problems: limited energy density and unsatisfactory lifespan. Fundamentally speaking, water has inherent thermodynamic oxidation potential (oxygen evolution reaction) and reduction potential (hydrogen evolution reaction), and the voltage difference is only 1.23 V. The narrow electrochemical stability window of water will inhibit the operating voltage of ABs, resulting in insufficient energy density. This requires more scientific research and funding in the future (Fig. 12b and c).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a real battery recycling process. (b) Conceptual schematic of classification of Abs.194 (c) Actual (red star) energy density of the LBC-G//G full cells compared with various state-of-the-art commercial and experimental Li-ion chemistries.195 (d) Actual (red star) energy density of the LBC-G cells compared with various state-of-the-art Li-ion chemistries using both non-aqueous and aqueous electrolytes.196 (e) Schematic diagram of an idealised battery recycling process. 

4.2 Easy-to-recycle battery pack design

4.2.1 Simple disassembly mechanism. 
As shown on the casing of almost all commercial LIBs, the manufacturer does not recommend disassembly. This is to avoid safety hazards, such as the possibility of short circuits during work. However, in the field of automobile battery recycling, one of the most important design issues is how to easily separate the components of the battery. Here, the battery pack requires high power and high energy density, which can only be achieved by integrating batteries.193 Effective separation and recycling of batteries can recycle more materials and keep them in a cleaner status. Obviously, the battery pack should be designed to be as stable as possible to prevent it from breaking during operation. However, this contradicts the goal of being easier to separate. This means that two points need to be considered when designing the battery: (1) the battery is not easy to be separated and damaged by hand; (2) the battery is easy to be safely separated by professional tools.
The ideal green design of the battery can be unpacked and the liquid phase removed, and then the solids are sorted into individual components of electrodes, pack and separators etc. (Fig. 12e). The waste and active materials can simply be separated by green solvents (water or alcohol), without extensive auxiliary chemicals. But under realistic conditions, the structure of LIBs is much more complicated (Fig. 12a). For example, a car battery pack consists of a lot of batteries, which not only need to be opened separately, but also must be removed from the binder. The complex battery structure and the risks associated with electrocution, etc. make separation slow and complicated. In addition, each component in a LIB may contain a chemical composition that is different. There are many differences in the cathodes of LIBs.
Some researchers emphasize the importance of a simple disassembly mechanism.36,197 There are some new design schemes that meet this demand. Chinese battery manufacturer Build Your Dream (BYD) recently developed a battery called blades (Fig. 12d), which can be used in conjunction with the grid and can provide higher structural strength for the battery pack (Fig. 12d). Under this design, the manufacturer easily disassembles batteries and replaces cells in the event of a failure. The optimized battery pack structure can increase space utilization by 50% and achieve safer battery operation.


4.2.2 Uniform industry standards. 
The fundamental reason why LIBs are difficult to recycle is the lack of standard rules in the field of battery design. LIBs in small portable devices dominate, but due to their large differences in shape, their batteries are often customized. For car batteries, it has higher purity and higher value. Due to the rapid development of our technology, even different versions of mobile phones or electric vehicles from the same company may have different chemical compositions.
The ideal situation is to design a series of battery cells of different sizes to adapt to different environments. Manufacturers can assemble standardized battery cells into groups of different shapes to meet their needs. In the recycling process, the manufacturer only needs to disassemble the battery into standard battery cells to carry out the standard recycling process. If it is difficult to reach a unified world standard, manufacturers can pursue the standardization of fixtures. The standardization of the pack opening is the basis for recycling the battery simply.198 Kathrin Wegener et al. proposed a concept of a battery disassembly workstation.199 When humans perform more complex tasks, robots can perform simple or repetitive tasks, such as removing screws and bolts. This robot needs to have the following capabilities: (1) a suitable program to complete the task of unscrewing; (2) a means of autonomously changing the screwdriver position according to the types of screws and bolts found in the electric vehicle battery; (3) some means to get information about the location of these fasteners. The point to note for automatic battery removal is that external short circuits may occur through unintentional contact with external tags (such as conductive tools, metal sheets during cutting or contact with the metal surface in the glove box). This requires the battery to undergo proper discharge before disassembly. Of course, the simpler way is to ground the robot. In addition, when opening the battery, care must be taken to prevent short circuits inside the cell.
As shown above, current LIBs are rarely designed and manufactured with recycling in mind. But with the dramatic increase in demand for power batteries in recent years, battery recycling has become critical, and the choice of shorter processes and greener recycling methods is imminent. If we can consider the design of a more easily recyclable battery at the early stage of battery manufacturing, it will greatly reduce the difficulty of subsequent recycling. The design of recycling mainly includes the following two aspects: (1) the use of clean and easy to recycle raw materials, such as fluorine-free binders, water electrolytes, etc.; (2) the design of more easily disassembled battery packaging and the establishment of a unified industry standard to facilitate the establishment of a standard recycling process and avoid the current industry often using the whole crushing and separation method, thus avoiding the complex process and resource consumption of “decontamination – introduction of secondary pollution – reprocessing” in the recycling process. It is also an interesting area of research to develop automation technology and introduce the use of robots in this process.
Traditional LIB recycling is more focused on wet metallurgy and material regeneration, but combined with the discussion of recycling technology in the third part of this paper, we can see that earlier consideration of material recycling can greatly reduce the difficulty of recycling, with better recovery of LIB raw materials back to the manufacturing process. Nowadays, in the field of battery design, the improvement of product performance is most important, but the increasing use of products, resource consumption, cost increase and environmental pollution affects the battery design, making it possible to consider the subsequent recycling process at the early stage of design and manufacturing.

5 Life cycle assessment of LIBs
Life cycle assessment (LCA) refers to the compilation and evaluation of the input, output and potential environmental impact of a product or a system in its whole life cycle. It is an effective and comprehensive evaluation method, which can be applied to the whole life cycle of the production system from raw materials, manufacturing, use and end-of-life disposal. According to the definition of the International Standards Organization (ISO) 14040 series,200,201 LCA mainly includes four steps: determination of purpose and scope, inventory analysis, impact assessment and results interpretation. Currently, the commercial software that can be used for LCA study are Simapro, GaBi and GREET (Greenhouse gases, Regulated Emissions and Energy use in Transportation). LCA evaluation systems have been widely used in many fields. In recent years, with the rapid development of the new energy vehicle industry, it is also applied for environmental impact and energy consumption assessment of LIBs.202–204
However, most of the studies focused on the stages of materials acquisition, manufacturing and use, with only a few studies involving the recycling process.205–211 The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of the United States verified the benefits of recycling quantitatively207 and conducted a comprehensive assessment of LIBs for electric vehicles.208 The cathodes with nickel and cobalt have the highest potential for environmental impacts including resource depletion, global warming, ecological toxicity and human health. In the recovery process of LIBs, the highest environmental risk is contributed by the treatment process involving nickel, cobalt and its compounds due to their great toxicity to human health. Three recycling technologies (pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical and direct recovery processes) were roughly evaluated with a hypothetically ideal scenario, but detailed comparison analyses were absent. The results indicated that recycling could reduce the environmental impacts by replacing raw materials to avoid mining and refining processes. Therefore, it is recommended to recycle spent LIBs in order to reduce the environmental impacts of their life cycle, and actively develop recycling technologies to save raw materials. Data sources are from battery recyclers and GaBi4, which brought about possible bias between the assessment results and the actual situations.
The first systematic and detailed calculation of each process of lithium battery recycling was from the Research Report of Argonne laboratory.211 The material and energy flow of each section of the four recovery processes (hydrometallurgy, pyrometallurgy, intermediate physical and direct physical recycling) were analyzed. The evaluation object was based on the recovery process of spent LiMn2O4 power batteries using citric acid. The results showed that the highest energy consumption stage in the hydrometallurgy process was calcination to burn off carbon and PVDF. Although the research results cannot fully reflect the current technological status due to technology innovation and data limitations, their methodology and framework provide very valuable and pioneering work for the following researchers.
The energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of recycling LIBs were also assessed in several research studies. Hendrickson et al.209 adopted geographic information systems (GIS) and LCA to assess energy and water consumption, GHG and pollutants impacts of recycling spent LIBs in California. Multiple scenarios with different recycling technologies including hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes were analyzed. The results showed that recycling materials by pyrometallurgy could offset a maximum of 56% energy demand and lead to a 23% reduction of GHG emissions in comparison with primary material production, whereas hydrometallurgy demonstrated better in energy consumption and air pollutant and GHG release. Dunn et al.210 evaluated GHG and the pollutants generated and energy consumption in the recovery process of LiMn2O4. According to the results, all three recycling processes (hydrometallurgical, intermediate physical and direct physical recycling) could reduce environmental impacts and energy consumption compared with that of vingin production. In addition, direct physical recycling of LiMn2O4, aluminum and copper were proven to be the best choice of the three recycling processes with as much as a 48% energy reduction. In a word, environmental-friendly recycling of LIBs should be maximized to complete the closed-loop of batteries, which also complies with sustainable development and green design laws.
Some researchers have set up models and analyzed the carbon footprint of power battery recycling processes,204,209,211,212 and the reduction of GHG emissions of different recycling technologies are presented in Table 4. These results showed that battery recycling would effectively reduce carbon emissions, compared with the production of primary materials. Boyden et al.213 calculated and evaluated the carbon footprint of different stages in the process of spent battery recycling. The results showed that for pyrometallurgical processes, the largest impacts were caused by plastic incineration for global warming potential, whereas landfilling caused the largest impacts for global warming potential in hydrometallurgical processes. Besides this, CO2 emissions in different processes of end-of-life battery treatment have been assessed by Ryuji Kawamoto et al.,214 in which landfilling and shredding and sorting contributed the most CO2 release. In addition, we think that the hydrometallurgical process has a lower carbon footprint than pyrometallurgical methods of recycling, for the latter includes calcination and roasting in high temperatures.
Table 4 The reduction of GHG emissions of different recycling technologies




Recovery technologies
Battery type


LMO
NMC




Hydrometallurgical
50%
—
—
1200 kg–CO2 eq.
—


Pyrometallurgy
23%
—
—
—
—


 


Direct physical recycling
—
—
—
—
—


Average
36.5%
48%
15%
—
800 kg–CO2 eq.


Study
1
2
3
4
5




The application of LCA in the battery recycling process can provide information for the global optimization of energy consumption and environmental impact of the whole life cycle of LIBs, which will promote the green design of the battery production process and sustainable development of electrical vehicles. The outcomes varied with different scopes and boundaries, data sources and assumptions. The main parameters in these studies are the environmental impacts of specific indicators (e.g., eutrophication potential, photochemical oxidant creation potential, acidification potential and human toxicity potential etc.), GHG emissions and energy consumption. Other factors, such as the toxicity and environmental impact of characteristic pollutants, technological innovation, transportation and emergencies should also be considered. With the development of globalization and big data systems, the availability of data will be improved. These optimizations will help assessment conclusions guide the harmless and environmental friendliness of the LIBs recovery process more accurately.
6 Economic analysis of LIBs
Spent batteries have both attributes of high resource values and environmental hazards. Therefore, the recycling of spent batteries can effectively reduce the environmental risk and recover the critical metals such as lithium, nickel and cobalt to alleviate the supply shortage.115,196,215 However, the recovery process of spent batteries involves many steps, from transportation, storage to recycling, leading to a large cost. At present, the domestic power battery recycling industry is not mature. The production scale of the built production line is small, and the battery recycling system is not perfect. In this case, the cost analysis data from the actual production is limited.
Some researchers have carried out economic analysis on the recycling of spent power batteries. Arshad et al.216 has investigated an economic calculation model, in which collection and transportation cost, water consumption, depreciation cost of equipment, chemical reagent cost, electric power consumption, cost of equipment maintenance and labor costs have been systematically considered in the calculation of cost. This model was comprehensive, but no detailed conclusion has been provided. Wang et al.217 have developed an optimization model to analyze the profitability of battery recycling. The various components of different batteries lead to different values of recycled materials. Based on the estimation of spent lithium battery recovery technology, the sensitivity analysis has been carried out. The results showed that the profitability is highly dependent on the components of cathode chemistries in the waste stream and the resultant variability in material mass and value (Fig. 13(a)). The relationship of variable costs, fixed costs and the break-even amount is exhibited in Fig. 13(a), in which the break-even point will most likely move left as the variable costs of recycling LIBs decrease due to technological progress in the future. How the potential recoverable economic value changes with recycling efficiencies has been examined by Wang et al.218 The influence degree was presented by assuming three scenarios, including lab-scale efficiency (high), average lab-scale efficiency (medium) and US cumulative recycling rate (low) (Fig. 13(b)). Lab-scale maximums could achieve quite close to the maximum economic value in the current situation. Yang et al.219 compared the revenue generated from processing 10000 tonnes of spent LIBs of the same chemistry using different processing technologies (Fig. 13(c)). Direct regeneration of cathode materials provides the highest revenue for all battery chemicals. Compared with the other two technologies, the income difference generated by direct regeneration is particularly important for battery chemicals such as LFP, LMO and NMC811, because these materials have low economic value as individual elements. Compared with the pyrometallurgical process, the hydrometallurgical process is often criticized for its large number of processing steps. However, its revenue is always considered higher than that of pyrometallurgical processes. This is due to the higher purity and the greater amount of material it can recycle.
 Fig. 13  (a) Minimum volumes of spent LIBs for a recycling facility to cover all expenses for different fixed and variable costs. Star refers to the base case. Darker color refers to lower break-even levels; lighter color refers to higher levels.217 (b) Percentage of the total recoverable value achieved with potential yield scenarios.218 (c) Revenue generated per kg cell recycled.219 
In the recovery process, different recycling technologies should be adopted according to the characteristics of the raw materials to maximize profits. For example, when recovering LIBs with LiCoO2 as the main cathode component, hydrometallurgical recovery technology may be the most effective way to recover cobalt, and the revenue will be larger due to the high price of cobalt. If the raw materials being recovered contain a high proportion of other types of LIBs that involve low prices of components (e.g. LFP, LMO), pyrometallurgical processes may be more suitable from an economic point of view. At present, the biological metallurgy technology has not been applied in the recovery industry of spent batteries, and there is a lack of economic analysis on the cost-income of this technology. We will continue to pay attention to the relevant progress and establish an assessment model for economic evaluation applicable to different types of recovery technologies in the future.
7 Conclusions and perspectives
Spent LIBs have dual properties of resources and environment, and future process design needs to consider more environmental benefits of the recycling process, so as to achieve a balance between resource recovery and environmental friendliness. Recent investigations have also paid attention to the green chemistry, and all the typical “5R (Recycling, Regeneration, Rejection, Reduction and Reuse)” have also been followed (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  The “5R principle” of green chemistry in LIB recycling. 
In the recycling process of spent LIBs, the pretreatment process is the key process to realize the separation and purification of raw materials. It is an effective way to realize pollution source prevention and control by selecting greener and more sustainable pretreatment technology based on the 5R principle. Conventional solution discharge technology will produce contaminated wastewater rich in heavy metals and organic matter. Low temperature heat treatment can remove the electrolyte but cannot realize its recycling. The combination of cryogenic discharge technology and supercritical extraction technology will be a solution in line with the “Reuse” and “Rejection” principle. The cryogenic discharge technology can reduce the discharge wastewater from the source. The supercritical extraction technology can realize the clean recovery and utilization of electrolyte components, and supercritical CO2 is also an excellent extraction agent with good circulation and relatively low energy consumption demand. In the separation and purification process of black powder, conventional physical processing (crushing, sorting, etc.) and thermal processing (heat treatment, etc.) has largely avoided the use of toxic and harmful chemical reagents. Besides this, some of the pollutants (such as organic waste gas, etc.) can be effectively controlled by conventional treatment technologies (such as VOC oxidation combustion, etc.). In the future, more consideration should be given to pollutant prevention and control in the development of pretreatment technologies. Green pretreatment technologies for spent LIBs can reduce environmental risks at the source.
As for the extraction process, lots of reagents are consumed, while the chemical reactions may release harmful gas, wastewater or residues. For this, in the extraction process, the principles of green chemistry should also be utilized to make the recycling process become more sustainable. For example, according to the “Reduce” and “Regeneration” principle, the direct regeneration technologies are widely investigated to skip the metallurgical technology, in which lots of reagents are consumed, achieving the regeneration of the cathode or anode materials. Meanwhile, the usage of the leachant, reductant, precipitant and other reagents is also strictly controlled through unraveling the mechanisms in details. The development of the selective leaching technologies can also reduce the usage of the relevant reagent by reducing the precipitation process, which aims to remove the impurities in the total leaching technologies. From the perspective of process length, direct regeneration has more advantages than traditional extraction–regeneration processes. However, from the perspective of application scope, the direct regeneration must be based on the pure spent materials with little other impurities. Such raw materials are generally difficult to obtain directly in the recycling process, and are usually obtained after complex pretreatment processes, in which energy consumption, reagents consumption or secondary pollution may be present. The “Reuse” principles not only relate to the reuse of the spent cathode, but also to the reuse of the reagent in the recycling process. For example, the reuse of organic acid, extractant and adsorbent is important to make the leaching and purification process greener.
In recent investigations, a more concerned research direction is to find green reagents that can be used in the recycling process. Typical reagents include organic acid, deep eutectic solvent and ionic liquid. All of them can be used as a leachant to achieve the leaching of valuable metals. The deep eutectic solvent and ionic liquid can also be used as an extractant in the solvent extraction. The deep eutectic solvent has advantages on the price, preparation process, non-volatility and contents that mainly include relatively nontoxic and biodegradable compounds. However, a comprehensive and critical analysis should be conducted based on LCA or other methods. As we all know, although some of them have advantages of nontoxic or biodegradable properties, the preparation process for them is not green, and even consumes more reagents or releases pollutants. A similar situation also appears in the comparison between pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes. In the traditional concept, the application of pyrometallurgical technologies is limited by high energy consumption due to the higher smelting temperature, while hydrometallurgical technologies are regarded as low-energy-consumption methods due to the relatively mild reaction temperature. However, through the analysis of energy consumption of the whole process, it is found that the differences in the energy consumption between them is small. In the future, pyrometallurgy technology should be more fully combined with hydrometallurgy processes. For example, according to the “Rejection” and “Reduction” principle, through low pollution reduction roasting (such as carbon, hydrogenation, etc.) and water leaching to achieve the selective recovery of lithium, pyrometallurgy technology can avoid the use of acid and base reagents. Meanwhile, the influence of impurities (affecting the extraction of Ni, Co and Mn) and the resource loss caused by lithium terminal recovery in conventional hydrometallurgy process are avoided.
To fulfill the 5R principle for battery recycling in the future, many issues need to be considered:
(1) Technological progress: For the pretreatment, it is necessary to consider reducing energy consumption and exhaust gas (such as hydrogen fluoride) and improve the quality of products to better carry out subsequent treatments. The material regeneration process is the key to the whole recovery process, and the main methods are pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy. Requirements for more efficient removal of impurities that result in higher purity, while at the same time considering the pollution problem in the process, must be paid attention to. Not only the pollution of metal and organic matter, but also the non-metal pollutants, such as fluorine and phosphorus. In addition, in the LIB design for better use and recycling, the use of toxic reagents should be reduced and a better disassembly pack should be designed.
(2) Policy support: In addition to technical research, collection, storage and transportation are also crucial for the recycling of spent LIBs. We need to strengthen the regulations in these areas and also upgrade the recycling technology so that LIB can be made inert locally. Furthermore, it is necessary to increase policies and regulations on LIB design and recycling globally to more safely and efficiently recycle spent LIBs, enable short-cut processes and reduce pollutant emissions.
(3) Environmental and safety: The existing research on the recycling of spent LIBs focuses more on the high value metals and pays less attention to the pollution caused by the entire process. On the premise of ensuring the recovery rate, we also need to pay attention to the possible dangers of the recovery process and the secondary pollutants (such as wastewater and exhaust gas) generated during the process. When designing the recycling process, it is necessary to fully consider the pollution problem to minimize the occurrence of secondary pollution. At the same time, non-toxic reagents should be used instead of toxic reagents, and recycling technologies with low energy consumption and low emissions should be explored to control pollution as early as possible.
(4) Green chemistry: Although the current research related to lithium-ion battery recycling still focuses on pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy and other recycling technologies, state-of-the-art technologies as a trend are turning towards being more materials/energy efficient. By comparing the existing recycling processes, we believe that a shorter pretreatment process should be used. Then various metals are selectively leached from the material. Finally, the content of the solution is adjusted to regenerate the cathode material. This method has a shorter process flow, can better avoid the introduction of secondary pollution, and is more in line with green chemistry principles. In the future we need to pay more attention to the principles of green chemistry in the recycling process, such as developing short-cut processes, prevent secondary pollution generation, improve the atomic economy, green design of batteries and the whole life cycle of LIBs. Improving recycling efficiency based on environmental protection and resource conservation for longer-term development in the field of LIBs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support on this research from National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 51874269 and 51934006.
References
X. Zheng, Z. Zhu, X. Lin, Y. Zhang, Y. He, H. Cao and Z. Sun, A Mini-Review on Metal Recycling from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries, Engineering, 2018, 4, 361–370 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pilśniak, A. W. Trochimczuk and W. Apostoluk, The Uptake of Gold(I) from Ammonia Leaching Solution by Imidazole Containing Polymeric Resins, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2009, 44, 1099–1119 CrossRef .
J. Pan, Y. Sun, W. Li, J. Knight and A. Manthiram, A Green Lead Hydrometallurgical Process Based on a Hydrogen-lead Oxide Fuel Cell, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2178 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Oishi, K. Koyama, H. Konishi, M. Tanaka and J. C. Lee, Influence of Ammonium Salt on Electrowinning of Copper from Ammoniacal Alkaline Solutions, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Zeng, J. Li and Y. Ren, Prediction of Various Discarded Lithium Batteries in China, in 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST), IEEE,  2012, pp. 1–4 Search PubMed .
M. Contestabile, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, A Laboratory-Scale Lithium-Ion Battery Recycling Process, J. Power Sources, 2001, 92, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gu, J. Guo, X. Yao, P. A. Summers, S. D. Widijatmoko and P. Hall, An Investigation of the Current Status of Recycling Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries from Consumer Electronics in China, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 161, 765–780 CrossRef .
J. Ordoñez, E. J. Gago and A. Girard, Processes and Technologies for the Recycling and Recovery of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 195–205 CrossRef .
G. Dorella and M. B. Mansur, A Study of the Separation of Cobalt from Spent Li-Ion Battery Residues, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 210–215 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Issues and Challenges Facing Rechargeable Lithium Batteries, in Materials for sustainable energy: a collection of peer-reviewed research and review articles from Nature Publishing Group,  2011, pp. 171–179 Search PubMed .
A. M. Bernardes, D. C. R. Espinosa and J. A. S. Tenório, Recycling of Batteries: A Review of Current Processes and Technologies, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 291–298 CrossRef CAS .
Q. W. Wu, W. Q. Lu and J. Prakash, Characterization of a Commercial Size Cylindrical Li-Ion Cell with a Reference Electrode, J. Power Sources, 2000, 88, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jia, Market analysis of China's lithium-ion battery separator, Fine Spec. Chem., 2013, 21, 9–12 Search PubMed .
F. Gu, J. F. Guo, X. Yao, P. A. Summers, S. D. Widijatmoko and P. Hall, An Investigation of the Current Status of Recycling Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries from Consumer Electronics in China, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 161, 765–780 CrossRef .
Y. L. Xia, W. Z. Hui, Z. W. Xing, H. X. Luo, C. J. Tao, H. Y. Hui and G. J. B, Development and Challenges of Lifepo4 Cathode Material for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 269–284 RSC .
C. Xu, Q. Dai, L. Gaines, M. Hu, A. Tukker and B. Steubing, Future Material Demand for Automotive Lithium-Based Batteries, Commun. Mater., 2020, 1, 1–10 CrossRef .

          M. K. Mann, A. T. Mayyas and D. M. Steward, Supply-Chain Analysis of Li-Ion Battery Material and Impact of Recycling, National Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL), Golden, CO, United States,  2019 Search PubMed .
E. A. Olivetti, G. Ceder, G. G. Gaustad and X. Fu, Lithium-Ion Battery Supply Chain Considerations: Analysis of Potential Bottlenecks in Critical Metals, Joule, 2017, 1, 229–243 CrossRef .
M. Chen, X. Ma, B. Chen, R. Arsenault, P. Karlson, N. Simon and Y. Wang, Recycling End-of-Life Electric Vehicle Lithium-Ion Batteries, Joule, 2019, 3, 2622–2646 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, R. Chen, F. Sun, F. Wu and J. Liu, Preparation of Licoo2 Films from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by a Combined Recycling Process, Hydrometallurgy, 2011, 108, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yao, Y. Feng and G. Xi, A New Method for the Synthesis of Lini1/3co1/3mn1/3o2 from Waste Lithium Ion Batteries, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44107–44114 RSC .
G. Granata, F. Pagnanelli, E. Moscardini, Z. Takacova, T. Havlik and L. Toro, Simultaneous Recycling of Nickel Metal Hydride, Lithium Ion and Primary Lithium Batteries: Accomplishment of European Guidelines by Optimizing Mechanical Pre-Treatment and Solvent Extraction Operations, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .

          W. N. Smith and S. Swoffer, Process for Recovering and Regenerating Lithium Cathode Material from Lithium-Ion Batteries, Google Patents, US20140064923,  2014 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, R. Sun, J. Xu, Z. Che and M. Kang, Recovery of Cobalt from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries Using Sulphuric Acid Leaching Followed by Solid-Liquid Separation and Solvent Extraction, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85303–85311 RSC .
T. Zhang, Y. He, L. Ge, R. Fu, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, Characteristics of Wet and Dry Crushing Methods in the Recycling Process of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 766–771 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y. He, F. Wang, L. Ge, X. Zhu and H. Li, Chemical and Process Mineralogical Characterizations of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries: An Approach by Multi-Analytical Techniques, Waste Manage., 2014, 34, 1051–1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ruffino, M. C. Zanetti and P. Marini, A Mechanical Pre-Treatment Process for the Valorization of Useful Fractions from Spent Batteries, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2011, 55, 309–315 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, M. Matsuda, A. Shibayama and T. Fujita, Recovery of Licoo2 from Wasted Lithium Ion Batteries by Using Mineral Processing Technology, Resour. Process., 2004, 51, 3–7 CrossRef .
R. Zhan, T. Payne, T. Leftwich, K. Perrine and L. Pan, De-Agglomeration of Cathode Composites for Direct Recycling of Li-Ion Batteries, Waste Manage., 2020, 105, 39–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z. Du, Y. He, H. Wang, W. Xie and T. Zhang, A Sustainable Process for the Recovery of Anode and Cathode Materials Derived from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Sustainability, 2019, 11, 2363 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zheng, W. Wang, Y. Dai, Q. Ma, Y. Liu, D. Mu, R. Li, J. Ren and C. Dai, A Closed-Loop Process for Recycling Linixcoymn (1−X−Y) O2 from Mixed Cathode Materials of Lithium-Ion Batteries, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 42–50 CrossRef .
H. Bi, H. Zhu, L. Zu, S. He, Y. Gao and S. Gao, Pneumatic Separation and Recycling of Anode and Cathode Materials from Spent Lithium Iron Phosphate Batteries, Waste Manage. Res., 2019, 37, 374–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sommerville, J. Shaw-Stewart, V. Goodship, N. Rowson and E. Kendrick, A Review of Physical Processes Used in the Safe Recycling of Lithium Ion Batteries, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2020, e00197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Wang, T. Hu, X. Bai, S. Wang, W. Xie, J. Hao and Y. He, Recovery of Licoo2 and Graphite from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Cryogenic Grinding and Froth Flotation, Miner. Eng., 2020, 148, 106223 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y. He, F. Wang, H. Li, C. Duan and C. Wu, Surface Analysis of Cobalt-Enriched Crushed Products of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries
by X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 138, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Herrmann, A. Raatz, S. Andrew and J. Schmitt, Scenario-based development of disassembly systems for automotive lithium ion battery systems, in Advanced Materials Research, Trans. Tech. Publ.,  2014, pp. 391–401 Search PubMed .
S. Barik, G. Prabaharan and B. Kumar, An Innovative Approach to Recover the Metal Values from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Waste Manage., 2016, 51, 222–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. W. Ellis and J. A. Montenegro, Magnetic Separation of Electrochemical Cell Materials, Google Patents, US20130256198,  2015 Search PubMed .

          J.-R. Lin, C. Fan, I.-L. Chang and J.-Y. Shiu, Clean Process of Recovering Metals from Waste Lithium Ion Batteries, Google Patents, US006514311B1,  2003 Search PubMed .
P. Meshram, B. D. Pandey and T. R. Mankhand, Extraction of Lithium from Primary and Secondary Sources by Pre-Treatment, Leaching and Separation: A Comprehensive Review, Hydrometallurgy, 2014, 150, 192–208 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Li, E. Fan, Q. Xue, Y. Bian, F. Wu and R. Chen, Toward Sustainable and Systematic Recycling of Spent Rechargeable Batteries, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7239–7302 RSC .
Y. Fu, Y. He, L. Qu, Y. Feng, J. Li, J. Liu, G. Zhang and W. Xie, Enhancement in Leaching Process of Lithium and Cobalt from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Benzenesulfonic Acid System, Waste Manage., 2019, 88, 191–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nie, L. Xu, D. Song, J. Song, X. Shi, X. Wang, L. Zhang and Z. Yuan, Licoo2: Recycling from Spent Batteries and Regeneration with Solid State Synthesis, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1276–1280 RSC .
P. Yadav, C. J. Jie, S. Tan and M. Srinivasan, Recycling of Cathode from Spent Lithium Iron Phosphate Batteries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, K. Zhang, S. Wu, X. Cai, K. Chen, Y. Li, B. Sun, Y. Jia, F. Meng and Z. Jin, Performance of Novel Hydroxyapatite Nanowires in Treatment of Fluoride Contaminated Water, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 303, 119–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, J. Guo, L. Zhan and Z. Xu, A Cleaner Approach to the Discharge Process of Spent Lithium Ion Batteries in Different Solutions, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 255, 120064 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Bertuol, C. M. Machado, M. L. Silva, C. O. Calgaro, G. L. Dotto and E. H. Tanabe, Recovery of Cobalt from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Extraction, Waste Manage., 2016, 51, 245–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, Y. Yu, K. Huang and L. Wang, Development Tendency and Future Response About the Recycling Methods of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Based on Bibliometrics Analysis, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101111 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Mu, R. Zheng and C. Dai, Supercritical Co2 Extraction of Organic Carbonate-Based Electrolytes of Lithium-Ion Batteries, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54525–54531 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Mu, R. Li, Q. Ma, R. Zheng and C. Dai, Purification and Characterization of Reclaimed Electrolytes from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4181–4187 CrossRef CAS .
O. Dolotko, I. Z. Hlova, Y. Mudryk, S. Gupta and V. P. Balema, Mechanochemical Recovery of Co and Li from Lco Cathode of Lithium-Ion Battery, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 824, 153876 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fan, L. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Bian, Q. Xue, J. Wu, F. Wu and R. Chen, Selective Recovery of Li and Fe from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by an Environmentally Friendly Mechanochemical Approach, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11029–11035 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Bian, X. Zhang, Y. Yao, Q. Xue, E. Fan, F. Wu and R. Chen, A Green and Effective Room-Temperature Recycling Process of Lifepo4 Cathode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Waste Manage., 2019, 85, 437–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Bankole and L. Lei, Recovery of Limn1/3ni1/3co1/3o2 from Spent Lithium-Ion Battery Using a Specially Designed Device, Environ. Eng. Manage. J., 2018, 17, 1043–1051 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Li, Q. Zhang and X.-M. He, Preparation of Lini1/3co1/3mn1/3o2 Cathode Materials from Spent Li-Ion Batteries, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2007, 17, S897–S901 Search PubMed .
M. Yu, Z. Zhang, F. Xue, B. Yang, G. Guo and J. Qiu, A More Simple and Efficient Process for Recovery of Cobalt and Lithium from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries with Citric Acid, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 215, 398–402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Zheng, H. Cao, C. Zhao, X. Lin, P. Ning, Y. Zhang, W. Jin and Z. Sun, A Closed-Loop Process for Selective Metal Recovery from Spent Lithium Iron Phosphate Batteries through Mechanochemical Activation, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9972–9980 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. Tan, L. Liu and J. Li, Selective Regeneration of Lithium from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Ionic Substitution Stimulated by Mechanochemistry, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 279, 123612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, R. Essehli, C. J. Jafta, K. M. Livingston and I. Belharouak, Recovery of Cathode Materials and Aluminum Foil Using a Green Solvent, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 6048–6055 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, Z.-Y. Zhang, L. Alai and F.-S. Zhang, A Green Process for Exfoliating Electrode Materials and Simultaneously Extracting Electrolyte from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 375, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, W. Liu, J. Han, F. Jiao, W. Qin, T. Liu and C. Zhao, Pyrolysis and Physical Separation for the Recovery of Spent Lifepo4 Batteries, Waste Manage., 2019, 89, 83–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu and M. Chen, Development of a Two-Stage Pyrolysis Process for the End-of-Life Nickel Cobalt Manganese Lithium Battery Recycling from Electric Vehicles, Sustainability, 2020, 12, 9164 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, W. Liu, J. Han, F. Jiao, W. Qin and T. Liu, Pretreatment for the Recovery of Spent Lithium Ion Batteries: Theoretical and Practical Aspects, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 263, 121439 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun and K. Qiu, Vacuum Pyrolysis and Hydrometallurgical Process for the Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 194, 378–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, J. Li and Z. Xu, Recycling Metals from Lithium Ion Battery by Mechanical Separation and Vacuum Metallurgy, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 338, 124–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Natarajan and V. Aravindan, Burgeoning Prospects of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries in Multifarious Applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802303 CrossRef .
X. Meng, J. Hao, H. Cao, X. Lin, P. Ning, X. Zheng, J. Chang, X. Zhang, B. Wang and Z. Sun, Recycling of Lini1/3co1/3mn1/3o2 Cathode Materials from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Mechanochemical Activation and Solid-State Sintering, Waste Manage., 2019, 84, 54–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nie, L. Xu, D. Song, J. Song, X. Shi, X. Wang, L. Zhang and Z. Yuan, Licoo2: Recycling from Spent Batteries and Regeneration with Solid State Synthesis, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1276–1280 RSC .
Y. Shi, G. Chen and Z. Chen, Effective Regeneration of Licoo2 from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries: A Direct Approach Towards High-Performance Active Particles, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 851–862 RSC .
Y. Shi, G. Chen, F. Liu, X. Yue and Z. Chen, Resolving the Compositional and Structural Defects of Degraded Linixcoymnzo2 Particles to Directly Regenerate High-Performance Lithium-Ion Battery Cathodes, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1683–1692 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, M. Zhang, Y. S. Meng and Z. Chen, Ambient–Pressure Relithiation of Degraded Lixni0.5co0.2mn0.3o2 (0 < X<1) Via Eutectic Solutions for Direct Regeneration of Lithium–Ion Battery Cathodes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(20), 1900454 CrossRef .
T. Wang, H. Luo, Y. Bai, J. Li, I. Belharouak and S. Dai, Direct Recycling of Spent Ncm Cathodes through Ionothermal Lithiation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(30), 2001204 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, H. Cao, J. Hao, P. Ning, G. Xu and Z. Sun, Sustainable Preparation of Lini1/3co1/3mn1/3o2–V2o5 Cathode Materials by Recycling Waste Materials of Spent Lithium-Ion Battery and Vanadium-Bearing Slag, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5797–5805 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, Q. Dai, H. Gao, H. Liu, M. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Chen, K. An, Y. S. Meng, P. Liu, Y. Li, J. S. Spangenberger, L. Gaines, J. Lu and Z. Chen, Efficient Direct Recycling of Lithium-Ion Battery Cathodes by Targeted Healing, Joule, 2020, 4, 2609–2626 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, C. Tan, Y. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Huang, Q. Pan, F. Zheng, H. Wang and Q. Li, A Green, Efficient, Closed-Loop Direct Regeneration Technology for Reconstructing of the Lini0.5co0.2mn0.3o2 Cathode Material from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 410, 124610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, B. Li, C. Yuan, S. Ni and L. Li, Recycling Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Ammonium Sulfite-Reduction Ammonia Leaching, Waste Manage., 2019, 93, 153–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, F. Liu, A. T. Aji, B. P. Wilson and M. Lundstrom, Extraction of Li and Co from Industrially Produced Li-Ion Battery Waste - Using the Reductive Power of Waste Itself, Waste Manage., 2019, 95, 604–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Golmohammadzadeh, F. Rashchi and E. Vahidi, Recovery of Lithium and Cobalt from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Organic Acids: Process Optimization and Kinetic Aspects, Waste Manage., 2017, 64, 244–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nie, L. Xu, D. Song, J. Song, X. Shi, X. Wang, L. Zhang and Z. Yuan, Licoo2: Recycling from Spent Batteries and Regeneration with Solid State Synthesis, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1276–1280 RSC .
X. Li, J. Zhang, D. Song, J. Song and L. Zhang, Direct Regeneration of Recycled Cathode Material Mixture from Scrapped Lifepo4 Batteries, J. Power Sources, 2017, 345, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. J. Zuba, S. Bai, Z. W. Lebens-Higgins, B. Qiu, S. Park, Z. Liu, M. Zhang, L. F. J. Piper and Y. S. Meng, Regeneration of Degraded Li-Rich Layered Oxide Materials through Heat Treatment-Induced Transition Metal Reordering, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 99–107 CrossRef .
S. M. Shin, N. H. Kim, J. S. Sohn, D. H. Yang and Y. H. Kim, Development of a Metal Recovery Process from Li-Ion Battery Wastes, Hydrometallurgy, 2005, 79, 172–181 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wang, C. C. Zhang and F. S. Zhang, Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Battery with Polyvinyl Chloride by Mechanochemical Process, Waste Manage., 2017, 67, 232–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, C. Zhang and F. Zhang, An Environmental Benign Process for Cobalt and Lithium Recovery from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Mechanochemical Approach, Waste Manage., 2016, 51, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Q. Tan and J. Li, Unveiling the Role and Mechanism of Mechanochemical Activation on Lithium Cobalt Oxide Powders from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 13136–13143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Bian, X. Zhang, Y. Yao, Q. Xue, E. Fan, F. Wu and R. Chen, A Green and Effective Room-Temperature Recycling Process of Lifepo4 Cathode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Waste Manage., 2019, 85, 437–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Q. Meng, P. Dong, Z. Fei and Q. Li, Recycling of Licoo2 Cathode Material from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries by Ultrasonic Enhanced Leaching and One-Step Regeneration, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 277, 111426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiang, Y. Chen, S. Ju, Q. Zhu, L. Zhang, J. Peng, X. Wang and J. D. Miller, Ultrasound-Assisted Leaching of Cobalt and Lithium from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 48, 88–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. Zhai, X. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Ultrasonic-Assisted Leaching Process, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 380–385 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prabaharan, S. P. Barik, N. Kumar and L. Kumar, Electrochemical Process for Electrode Material of Spent Lithium Ion Batteries, Waste Manage., 2017, 68, 527–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. He, Z. W. Zhao, D. Wang and W. Xu, Recovery of Lithium and Manganese from Scrap Limn2o4 by Slurry Electrolysis, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16738–16746 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, Y. Zhang and P. Dong, Use of Electrochemical Cathode-Reduction Method for Leaching of Cobalt from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 180, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Diaz, M. L. Strauss, B. Adhikari, J. R. Klaehn, J. S. McNally and T. E. Lister, Electrochemical-Assisted Leaching of Active Materials from Lithium Ion Batteries, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 161, 104900 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, H. Xie, B. Lu, X. Chen, P. Xing, J. Qu, Q. Song and H. Yin, A Green Electrochemical Process to Recover Co and Li from Spent Licoo2-Based Batteries in Molten Salts, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13391–13399 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Qu, J. Qu, X. Chen, H. Xie, P. Xing, D. Wang and H. Yin, A Paired Electrolysis Approach for Recycling Spent Lithium Iron Phosphate Batteries in an Undivided Molten Salt Cell, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 8633–8641 RSC .
C. Lupi and M. Pasquali, Electrolytic Nickel Recovery from Lithium-Ion Batteries, Miner. Eng., 2003, 16, 537–542 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lupi, M. Pasquali and A. Dell'era, Nickel and Cobalt Recycling from Lithium-Ion Batteries by Electrochemical Processes, Waste Manage., 2005, 25, 215–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. S. Barbieri, E. P. C. Lima, S. J. Cantarino, M. F. F. Lelis and M. B. J. G. Freitas, Recycling of Spent Ion-Lithium Batteries as Cobalt Hydroxide, and Cobalt Oxide Films Formed under a Conductive Glass Substrate, and Their Electrochemical Properties, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 158–163 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, D. Ruan, X. Zheng, L. Li, H. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, One-Step Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries and Synthesis of Persulfate through Paired Electrolysis, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129908 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lv, H. Huang, C. Huang, Q. Gao, Z. Yang and W. Zhang, Electric Field Driven De-Lithiation: A Strategy Towards Comprehensive and Efficient Recycling of Electrode Materials from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 283, 119634 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Tran, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, K. Kato, G. Babu and P. M. Ajayan, Deep Eutectic Solvents for Cathode Recycling of Li-Ion Batteries, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 339–345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Chao, X. Li, G. Zhou, Q. Lu, M. Hua, H. Li, X. Ni, P. Wu and W. Zhu, Engineering a Tandem Leaching System for the Highly Selective Recycling of Valuable Metals from Spent Li-Ion Batteries, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 2177–2184 RSC .
M. J. Roldán-Ruiz, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutiérrez and F. D. Monte, Highly Efficient P-Toluenesulfonic Acid-Based Deep-Eutectic Solvents for Cathode Recycling of Li-Ion Batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5437–5445 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Z. Zhang, Z. Lu and Z. Xu, A Novel Method for Screening Deep Eutectic Solvent to Recycle the Cathode of Li-Ion Batteries, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4473–4482 RSC .
W. Gao, J. Song, H. Cao, X. Lin, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Selective Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries – Process Development and Kinetics Evaluation, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 178, 833–845 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, S. Sun, Y. Mu, X. Song and J. Yu, Recovery of Lithium, Nickel, Cobalt, and Manganese from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Using L-Tartaric Acid as a Leachant, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 714–721 CrossRef CAS .
P. Meshram, B. D. Pandey and T. R. Mankhand, Hydrometallurgical Processing of Spent Lithium Ion Batteries (Libs) in the Presence of a Reducing Agent with Emphasis on Kinetics of Leaching, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 281, 418–427 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Bian, X. Zhang, Y. Guan, E. Fan, F. Wu and R. Chen, Process for Recycling Mixed-Cathode Materials from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries and Kinetics of Leaching, Waste Manage., 2018, 71, 362–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Weng, S. Xu, G. Huang and C. Jiang, Synthesis and Performance of Li[(Ni1/3co1/3mn1/3)(1−X)Mgx]O2 Prepared from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 246–247, 163–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Lv, Z. H. Wang, H. B. Cao, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, A Critical Review and Analysis on the Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1504–1521 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, C. Cai, G. Peng, J. Hu, H. Hou, B. Liu, S. Liang, K. Xiao, S. Yuan and J. Yang, Hydrometallurgical Recovery of Spent Lithium Ion Batteries: Environmental Strategies and Sustainability Evaluation, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 5750–5767 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Xu and Y. He, Lithium Recycling and Cathode Material Regeneration from Acid Leach Liquor of Spent Lithium-Ion Battery Via Facile Co-Extraction and Co-Precipitation Processes, Waste Manage., 2017, 64, 219–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, K. Lahtinen, E. Medina, P. Kauranen, M. Karppinen, T. Kallio, B. P. Wilson and M. Lundström, Role of Impurity Copper in Li-Ion Battery Recycling to Licoo2 Cathode Materials, J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227630 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Meng, H. Cao, X. Lin, C. Liu, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Selective Recovery of Lithium from Spent Lithium Iron Phosphate Batteries: A Sustainable Process, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3121–3133 RSC .
H. Li, S. Xing, Y. Liu, F. Li, H. Guo and G. Kuang, Recovery of Lithium, Iron, and Phosphorus from Spent Lifepo4 Batteries Using Stoichiometric Sulfuric Acid Leaching System, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8017–8024 CrossRef CAS .
J. Piatek, S. Afyon, T. M. Budnyak, S. Budnyk, M. H. Sipponen and A. Slabon, Sustainable Li-Ion Batteries: Chemistry and Recycling, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1002/aenm.202003456 .
Q. K. Jing, J. L. Zhang, Y. B. Liu, C. Yang, B. Z. Ma, Y. Q. Chen and C. Y. Wang, E-Ph Diagrams for the Li-Fe-P-H2o System from 298 to 473 K: Thermodynamic Analysis and Application to the Wet Chemical Processes of the Lifepo4 Cathode Material, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14207–14215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Liu, Q. Jing, C. Yang, Y. Chen and C. Wang, Sustainable and Facile Method for the Selective Recovery of Lithium from Cathode Scrap of Spent Lifepo4 Batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5626–5631 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, Z. Wang, X. Zheng, H. Cao, M. He, Y. Zhang, H. Yu and Z. Sun, Selective Recovery of Lithium from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Coupling Advanced Oxidation Processes and Chemical Leaching Processes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5165–5174 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, S. Yang, F. Lai, H. Wang, Y. Huang, F. Zheng, S. Wang, X. Zhang and Q. Li, Innovative Electrochemical Strategy to Recovery of Cathode and Efficient Lithium Leaching from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4767–4776 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. Tan, Q. Huang, L. Liu, J. F. Chiang and J. Li, Converting Spent Lithium Cobalt Oxide Battery Cathode Materials into High-Value Products Via a Mechanochemical Extraction and Thermal Reduction Route, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 125222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Yang, H. L. Yang, H. B. Cao, Z. H. Wang, C. W. Liu, Y. Sun, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Direct Preparation of Efficient Catalyst for Oxygen Evolution Reaction and High-Purity Li2co3 from Spent Lini0.5mn0.3co0.2o2 Batteries, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 236, 117576 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, X. Zheng, L. Li, H. Cao, Y. Zhang, R. Chen, H. Ou, F. Kang and Z. Sun, Highly Selective Metal Recovery from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries through Stoichiometric Hydrogen Ion Replacement, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s11705-020-2029-3 .
H. Ku, Y. Jung, M. Jo, S. Park, S. Kim, D. Yang, K. Rhee, E. M. An, J. Sohn and K. Kwon, Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Battery Cathode Materials by Ammoniacal Leaching, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 313, 138–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, W. Gao, X. Zhang, M. He, X. Lin, H. Cao, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Spent Lithium-Ion Battery Recycling - Reductive Ammonia Leaching of Metals from Cathode Scrap by Sodium Sulphite, Waste Manage., 2017, 60, 680–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, S. Wang, F. Yan, Z. Zhang, X. Shen and Z. Zhang, Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries: Selective Ammonia Leaching of Valuable Metals and Simultaneous Synthesis of High-Purity Manganese Carbonate, Waste Manage., 2020, 114, 253–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, F. Meng, X. Yi, J. Shu, M. Chen, Z. Sun, S. Sun and F.-R. Xiu, A Novel and Efficient Ammonia Leaching Method for Recycling Waste Lithium Ion Batteries, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 251, 119665 CrossRef CAS .
T. Georgi-Maschler, B. Friedrich, R. Weyhe, H. Heegn and M. Rutz, Development of a Recycling Process for Li-Ion Batteries, J. Power Sources, 2012, 207, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Malcharczikova, L. Kroca, M. Kursa, P. Horak and T. Ltd, The Possibilities of Recovery of Selected Metals from Lithium Batteries by Pyrometallurgical Way,  2019 Search PubMed .
T. Traeger, B. Friedrich and R. Weyhe, Recovery Concept of Value Metals from Automotive Lithium-Ion Batteries, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2015, 87, 1550–1557 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vest, R. Weyhe, T. Georgi-Maschler and B. Friedrich, Recovery of Valuable Metals from Battery Scrap, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2010, 82, 1985–1990 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bernardes, D. C. R. Espinosa and J. A. S. Tenorio, Recycling of Batteries: A Review of Current Processes and Technologies, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 291–298 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Chen, F.-S. Zhang and J. Zhu, A Preliminary Investigation for Spent Libs Recycling,  2011 Search PubMed .
H. Dang, B. Wang, Z. Chang, X. Wu, J. Feng, H. Zhou, W. Li and C. Sun, Recycled Lithium from Simulated Pyrometallurgical Slag by Chlorination Roasting, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 13160–13167 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Ren, S. Xiao, M. Xie, B. Pan, Y. Fan, F. Wang and X. Xia, Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Smelting Reduction Process Based on Mno-Sio2-Al2o3 Slag System,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. Xiao, G. Ren, M. Xie, B. Pan, Y. Fan, F. Wang and X. Xia, Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Smelting Reduction Process Based on Mno-Sio2-Al2o3 Slag System, J. Sustain. Metall., 2017, 3, 703–710 CrossRef .
R. Yazami and P. Touzain, A Reversible Graphite Lithium Negative Electrode for Electrochemical Generators, J. Power Sources, 1983, 9, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Lin, H. Cao, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Recycling of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries in View of Lithium Recovery: A Critical Review, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 228, 801–813 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, L. Li, E. Fan, C. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Cao, Z. Sun and R. Chen, Conversion Mechanisms of Selective Extraction of Lithium from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Sulfation Roasting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18482–18489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, C. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, W. Lv, F. Rao, P. Yao, J. Wang and Z. Sun, Synergic Mechanisms on Carbon and Sulfur During the Selective Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 2271–2279 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Dun-fang, W. Cheng-yan, Y. I. N. Fei, C. Yong-qiang, J. I. E. Xiao-wu, Y. Yong-qiang and W. Jun, Leaching of Valuable Metals from Roasted Residue of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries with Ammonium Sulfate, Chin. J. Process Eng., 2009, 9, 264–268 Search PubMed .
X. Qu, H. Xie, X. Chen, Y. Tang, B. Zhang, P. Xing and H. Yin, Recovery of Licoo2 from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries through a Low-Temperature Ammonium Chloride Roasting Approach: Thermodynamics and Reaction Mechanisms, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6524–6532 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, X. Qu, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Xie, J. Zhao, Z. Ning, P. Xing and H. Yin, Recycling of Spent Lithium Nickel Cobalt Manganese Oxides Via a Low-Temperature Ammonium Sulfation Roasting Approach, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 279, 123633 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fan, L. Li, J. Lin, J. Wu, J. Yang, F. Wu and R. Chen, Low-Temperature Molten-Salt-Assisted Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16144–16150 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, H. Xie, B. Lu, X. Chen, P. Xing, J. Qu, Q. Song and H. Yin, A Green Electrochemical Process to Recover Co and Li from Spent Licoo2-Based Batteries in Molten Salts, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13391–13399 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun and K. Qiu, Vacuum Pyrolysis and Hydrometallurgical Process for the Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 194, 378–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun and K. Qiu, Organic Oxalate as Leachant and Precipitant for the Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Waste Manage., 2012, 32, 1575–1582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Liu, H. Cao, R. Chen, Y. Yang, L. Li and Z. Sun, Environmentally Benign Process for Selective Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Using Conventional Sulfation Roasting, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 5904–5913 RSC .
J. Xiao, R. Gao, B. Niu and Z. Xu, Study of Reaction Characteristics and Controlling Mechanism of Chlorinating Conversion of Cathode Materials from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 407, 124704–124704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Cao, Q. Jing, Y. Chen and C. Wang, Sustainable and Facile Process for Lithium Recovery from Spent Linixcoymnzo2 Cathode Materials Via Selective Sulfation with Ammonium Sulfate, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 15732–15739 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, J. Li and Z. Xu, Novel Approach for in Situ Recovery of Lithium Carbonate from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries Using Vacuum Metallurgy, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11960–11966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. Liu, C. Peng, Q. X. Ma, J. L. Wang, S. L. Zhou, Z. M. Chen, B. P. Wilson and M. Lundstrom, Selective Lithium Recovery and Integrated Preparation of High-Purity Lithium Hydroxide Products from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 259, 9 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Wu and Y.-P. Ting, Metal Extraction from Municipal Solid Waste (Msw) Incinerator Fly Ash—Chemical Leaching and Fungal Bioleaching, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2006, 38, 839–847 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Qiu, M. Zhu and W. Tan, Mechanism Underlying the Bioleaching Process of Licoo2 by Sulfur-Oxidizing and Iron-Oxidizing Bacteria, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2019, 128, 344–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xin, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Xia, F. Wu, S. Chen and L. Li, Bioleaching Mechanism of Co and Li from Spent Lithium-Ion Battery by the Mixed Culture of Acidophilic Sulfur-Oxidizing and Iron-Oxidizing Bacteria, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 6163–6169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bahaloo-Horeh and S. M. Mousavi, Enhanced Recovery of Valuable Metals from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries through Optimization of Organic Acids Produced by Aspergillus Niger, Waste Manage., 2017, 60, 666–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Zhang, Z. X. Du, Y. Q. He, H. F. Wang, W. N. Xie and T. Zhang, A Sustainable Process for the Recovery of Anode and Cathode Materials Derived from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, Sustainability, 2019, 11, 2363 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Zhang, Y. Q. He, H. F. Wang, Y. Feng, W. N. Xie and X. N. Zhu, Application of Mechanical Crushing Combined with Pyrolysis-Enhanced Flotation Technology to Recover Graphite and Licoo2 from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 231, 1418–1427 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yu, Y. Q. He, Z. Z. Ge, H. Li, W. N. Xie and S. Wang, A Promising Physical Method for Recovery of Licoo2 and Graphite from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries: Grinding Flotation, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 190, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. He, T. Zhang, F. F. Wang, G. W. Zhang, W. G. Zhang and J. Wang, Recovery of Licoo2 and Graphite from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries by Fenton Reagent-Assisted Flotation, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 143, 319–325 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rothermel, M. Evertz, J. Kasnatscheew, X. Qi, M. Grutzke, M. Winter and S. Nowak, Graphite Recycling from Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3473–3484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Wang, Y. S. Huang, C. F. Huang, X. S. Wang, K. Wang, H. B. Chen, S. B. Liu, Y. P. Wu, K. Xu and W. S. Li, Reclaiming Graphite from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries Ecologically and Economically, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 313, 423–431 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, Y. C. Zhuang, Y. M. Deng, X. N. Song, X. X. Zuo, X. Xiao and J. M. Nan, From Spent Graphite to Amorphous Sp2+Sp3 Carbon-Coated Sp2 Graphite for High-Performance Lithium Ion Batteries, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. L. Song, S. Y. Lei, W. Sun, H. S. Hou, F. Jiang, X. B. Ji, W. Q. Zhao and Y. H. Hu, A Process for Combination of Recycling Lithium and Regenerating Graphite from Spent Lithium-Ion Battery, Waste Manage., 2019, 85, 529–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, H. B. Cao, L. L. Chen, C. M. Chen, X. G. Duan, Y. B. Xie, W. Y. Song, H. Q. Sun and S. B. Wang, Tailored Synthesis of Active Reduced Graphene Oxides from Waste Graphite: Structural Defects and Pollutant-Dependent Reactive Radicals in Aqueous Organics Decontamination, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 229, 71–80 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zuo, Q. Jiao, X. Zhu, C. Zhang, X. Xiao and J. Nan, Preparation, Characterization and Electrochemical Properties of a Graphene-Like Carbon Nano-Fragment Material, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 156–163 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Jiao, X. H. Zhu, X. Xiao, X. X. Zuo, J. M. Nan and L. S. Wang, Carbon Nano-Fragments Derived from the Lithium-Intercalated Graphite, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 2, H27–H29 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Zhang, Z. P. Liu, C. J. Xu, W. Z. He, G. M. Li, J. W. Huang and H. C. Zhu, Preparing Graphene Oxide-Copper Composite Material from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries and Catalytic Performance Analysis, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44, 5075–5089 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, Y. Yao, M. L. Wang, R. J. Chen, Y. J. Yu, F. Wu and C. Z. Zhang, Preparation of Mno2-Modified Graphite Sorbents from Spent Li-Ion Batteries for the Treatment of Water Contaminated by Lead, Cadmium, and Silver, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25369–25376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. M. Guo, Y. Yao, F. Wu, C. Z. Zhang, R. J. Chen, J. Lu and K. Amine, Mg-Enriched Engineered Carbon from Lithium-Ion Battery Anode for Phosphate Removal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2905–2909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Wang, X. Gao, J. Qian and B. Pan, Structural Evolution of Lanthanum Hydroxides During Long-Term Phosphate Mitigation: Effect of Nanoconfinement, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 55(1), 665–676 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Lv, X. Zheng, D. Ruan, Y. Yang, H. Cao and Z. Sun, Near-to-Stoichiometric Acidic Recovery of Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries through Induced Crystallization, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(8), 3183–3194 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ali, Z. A. ALOthman and M. M. Sanagi, Green Synthesis of Iron Nano-Impregnated Adsorbent for Fast Removal of Fluoride from Water, J. Mol. Liq., 2015, 211, 457–465 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tang and G. Zhang, Efficient Removal of Fluoride by Hierarchical Ce–Fe Bimetal Oxides Adsorbent: Thermodynamics, Kinetics and Mechanism, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 721–729 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vasudevan and J. Lakshmi, The Adsorption of Phosphate by Graphene from Aqueous Solution, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5234–5242 RSC .
L. Chai, Y. Wang, N. Zhao, W. Yang and X. You, Sulfate-Doped Fe3o4/Al2o3 Nanoparticles as a Novel Adsorbent for Fluoride Removal from Drinking Water, Water Res., 2013, 47, 4040–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Budyanto, Y.-L. Kuo and J. Liu, Adsorption and Precipitation of Fluoride on Calcite Nanoparticles: A Spectroscopic Study, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 150, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vasudevan, B. S. Kannan, J. Lakshmi, S. Mohanraj and G. Sozhan, Effects of Alternating and Direct Current in Electrocoagulation Process on the Removal of Fluoride from Water, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2011, 86, 428–436 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vasudevan and M. A. Oturan, Electrochemistry: As Cause and Cure in Water Pollution—an Overview, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2014, 12, 97–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, B.-S. Zhu, K.-S. Zhang, Z. Jin, B. Sun, T. Luo, X.-Y. Yu, L.-T. Kong and J.-H. Liu, Porous 2-Line Ferrihydrite/Bayerite Composites (Lfbc): Fluoride Removal Performance and Mechanism, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 268, 325–336 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghosh, M. Sinha and M. Purkait, A Comparative Analysis of Low-Cost Ceramic Membrane Preparation for Effective Fluoride Removal Using Hybrid Technique, Desalination, 2013, 327, 2–13 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, Y. Meng, H. Yin, K. Guo, R. Ji, G. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Beneficial Effect of Green Water-Soluble Binders on Siox/Graphite Anode for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 742, 137145 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Bridel, T. Azais, M. Morcrette, J.-M. Tarascon and D. Larcher, Key Parameters Governing the Reversibility of Si/Carbon/Cmc Electrodes for Li-Ion Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1229–1241 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jabbour, C. Gerbaldi, D. Chaussy, E. Zeno, S. Bodoardo and D. Beneventi, Microfibrillated Cellulose–Graphite Nanocomposites for Highly Flexible Paper-Like Li-Ion Battery Electrodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7344–7347 RSC .
A. Kubotera and R. Saito, Dispersion of Carbon Nanoparticle in Water with Poly (Acrylic Acid)-Poly (Amideimide) Copolymers, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2016, 294, 941–946 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, H. Kim, Y. Cho, K. T. Lee, N. S. Choi and J. Cho, A Highly Cross–Linked Polymeric Binder for High–Performance Silicon Negative Electrodes in Lithium Ion Batteries, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 8892–8897 CrossRef .
J. Song, M. Zhou, R. Yi, T. Xu, M. L. Gordin, D. Tang, Z. Yu, M. Regula and D. Wang, Interpenetrated Gel Polymer Binder for High–Performance Silicon Anodes in Lithium–Ion Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5904–5910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ling, Y. Xu, H. Zhao, X. Gu, J. Qiu, S. Li, M. Wu, X. Song, C. Yan and G. Liu, Dual-Functional Gum Arabic Binder for Silicon Anodes in Lithium Ion Batteries, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .

          W. van Schalkwijk and B. Scrosati, Advances in Lithium-Ion Batteries, Springer Science & Business Media,  2007 Search PubMed .
P. Johansson, L. E. Fast, A. Matic, G. B. Appetecchi and S. Passerini, The Conductivity of Pyrrolidinium and Sulfonylimide-Based Ionic Liquids: A Combined Experimental and Computational Study, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2074–2076 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. S. Wainwright, Rechargeable Lithium Batteries with Aqueous Electrolytes, Science, 1994, 264, 1115–1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, J. Chen, X. Ji, T. Pollard, X. Lv, C. Sun, S. Hou, Q. Liu, C. Liu, T. Qing, Y. Wang, O. Borodin, Y. Ren, K. Xu and C. Wang, Aqueous Li-ion Battery Enabled by Halogen Conversion–intercalation Chemistry in Graphite, Nature, 2019, 569, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. T. Warner, The Handbook of Lithium-Ion Battery Pack Design: Chemistry, Components, Types and Terminology, Elsevier,  2015 Search PubMed .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, F. Xie, C. Ye, H. Li, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Roadmap for Advanced Aqueous Batteries: From Design of Materials to Applications, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, “Water-in-Salt” Electrolyte Enables High-Voltage Aqueous Lithium-Ion Chemistries, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Thompson, J. M. Hartley, S. M. Lambert, M. Shiref, G. D. J. Harper, E. Kendrick, P. Anderson, K. S. Ryder, L. Gaines and A. P. Abbott, The Importance of Design in Lithium Ion Battery Recycling – a Critical Review, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 7585–7603 RSC .
T. Waldmann, A. Iturrondobeitia, M. Kasper, N. Ghanbari, F. Aguesse, E. Bekaert, L. Daniel, S. Genies, I. J. Gordon and M. W. Löble, Post-Mortem Analysis of Aged Lithium-Ion Batteries: Disassembly Methodology and Physico-Chemical Analysis Techniques, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A2149 CrossRef CAS .

          V. K. Soo, Life Cycle Impact of Different Joining Decisions on Vehicle Recycling,  2018 Search PubMed .
K. Wegener, W. H. Chen, F. Dietrich, K. Dröder and S. Kara, Robot Assisted Disassembly for the Recycling of Electric Vehicle Batteries, Procedia CIRP, 2015, 29, 716–721 CrossRef .

          I.I.O.f., Standardization, Environmental Management – Life-Cycle Assessment Principles and Framework, International Standards Organization, Paris,  2006 Search PubMed .

          ISO, Environmental Management – Life-Cycle Assessment Principles and Framework, International Standards Organization, Paris,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. Kallitsis, A. Korre, G. Kelsall, M. Kupfersberger and Z. Nie, Environmental Life Cycle Assessment of the Production in China of Lithium-Ion Batteries with Nickel-Cobalt-Manganese Cathodes Utilising Novel Electrode Chemistries, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 254, 120067 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Cusenza, S. Bobba, F. Ardente, M. Cellura and F. Di Persio, Energy and Environmental Assessment of a Traction Lithium-Ion Battery Pack for Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 215, 634–649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hao, Q. Qiao, Z. Liu and F. Zhao, Impact of Recycling on Energy Consumption and Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Electric Vehicle Production: The China 2025 Case, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2017, 122, 114–125 CrossRef .
X. Tian, Y. Wu, P. Hou, S. Liang, S. Qu, M. Xu and T. Zuo, Environmental Impact and Economic Assessment of Secondary Lead Production: Comparison of Main Spent Lead-Acid Battery Recycling Processes in China, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 144, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Luo, Z. Zhang, F. Meng and J. Yang, Life Cycle Assessment of Lithium Nickel Cobalt Manganese Oxide (Ncm) Batteries for Electric Passenger Vehicles, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 273, 123006 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Gaines, To Recycle or Not to Recycle: Insights from Life-Cycle Analysis, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 37 DOI:10.1557/mrs.2012.40 .

          S. Amarakoon, J. Smith and B. Segal, Application of Lca to Nanoscale Technology: Li-Ion Batteries for Electric Vehicles, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,  2013 Search PubMed .
T. P. Hendrickson, O. Kavvada, N. Shah, R. Sathre and C. D. Scown, Life-Cycle Implications and Supply Chain Logistics of Electric Vehicle Battery Recycling in California, Environ. Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 014011 CrossRef .

          J. B. Dunn, L. Gaines, M. Barnes, J. L. Sullivan and M. Wang, Material and Energy Flows in the Materials Production, Assembly, and End-of-Life Stages of the Automotive Lithium-Ion Battery Life Cycle, Argonne National Lab,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. B. Dunn, L. Gaines, J. Sullivan and M. Q. Wang, Impact of Recycling on Cradle-to-Gate Energy Consumption and Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Automotive Lithium-Ion Batteries, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 12704–12710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qiao, F. Zhao, Z. Liu and H. Hao, Electric Vehicle Recycling in China: Economic and Environmental Benefits, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2019, 140, 45–53 CrossRef .
A. Boyden, V. K. Soo and M. Doolan, The Environmental Impacts of Recycling Portable Lithium-Ion Batteries, Procedia CIRP, 2016, 48, 188–193 CrossRef .
R. Kawamoto, H. Mochizuki, Y. Moriguchi, T. Nakano, M. Motohashi, Y. Sakai and A. Inaba, Estimation of Co2 Emissions of Internal Combustion Engine Vehicle and Battery Electric Vehicle Using Lca, Sustainability, 2019, 11, 2690 CrossRef .
K. Larsson and K. Binnemans, Selective Extraction of Metals Using Ionic Liquids for Nickel Metal Hydride Battery Recycling, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4595–4603 RSC .
F. Arshad, L. Li, K. Amin, E. Fan, N. Manurkar, A. Ahmad, J. Yang, F. Wu and R. Chen, A Comprehensive Review of the Advancement in Recycling the Anode and Electrolyte from Spent Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 13527–13554 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Gaustad, C. W. Babbitt and K. Richa, Economies of Scale for Future Lithium-Ion Battery Recycling Infrastructure, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2014, 83, 53–62 CrossRef .
X. Wang, G. Gaustad, C. W. Babbitt, C. Bailey, M. J. Ganter and B. J. Landi, Economic and Environmental Characterization of an Evolving Li-Ion Battery Waste Stream, J. Environ. Manage., 2014, 135, 126–134 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, E. G. Okonkwo, G. Huang, S. Xu, W. Sun and Y. He, On the Sustainability of Lithium Ion Battery Industry – a Review and Perspective, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 36, 186–212 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Installed share of various electrochemical energy storage technologies in 2019.2 (b) LIB demand by application and its market size forecast from 2019 to 2025.3 (c) Manufacturing and scrapping of Panasonic batteries used by Tesla.4 (d) The accumulative sums of spent LIBs from consumer electronics.7	 

 	Fig. 2  Diagrams showing the shape and structure components of various LIBs. (a) Cylindrical, (b) coin, (c) thin and flat, and (d) prismatic.11 (e) Conceptual schematic showing how the three recycling scenarios close battery material loops and which materials are recovered.16	 

 	Fig. 3  Global production of main LIB materials (lithium, graphite, nickel, manganese, and cobalt represent the key elements).	 


Cathode	Lithium metal oxide	Reacting with acids/reducing agents to form heavy metals	Heavy metal pollution
Anode	Graphite	Dust exploding in open flame or high temperature	Dust pollution
Solute salt	LiPF6	Strong corrosive, easy hydrolysis and thermal decomposition	Fluoride and phosphorus pollution
Solvent	Carbonate ester	Easy hydrolysis, volatilization and decomposition, etc.	Organic pollution
Separator	PP, PE	Release of carbon monoxide (CO)/aldehydes/organic acids on combustion	Organic and white pollution
Binder	PVDF	Forming hydrogen fluoride (HF) and fluorinated organic in the pyrolysis process	Organic and fluoride pollution



Mechanochemical method	×	×	√	×	+
Heat treatment	√	√	√	×	++
Chemical dissolving	√	×	√	√	+++
Supercritical fluid extraction	√	×	×	√	−

 	Fig. 4  A proposed design idea for the clean pretreatment process of spent LIBs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of direct regeneration technology of (a) spent LiCoO2,69 (b) ternary cathode material,70 (c) TEM diffractogram of spent ternary cathode material and (d) regenerated cathode,71 (e) illustration of the crystal structure change of LiFePO4 after recycling and regeneration,74 (f) spent LiFePO4 cathode material, and (g) regenerated LiFePO4 cathode material.74	 

Spent LCO	135.0	Solid state synthesis with Li2CO3 at 900 °C	152.4	
79

Spent LCO	131.7	Hydrothermal at 220 °C and short annealing with lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) at 850 °C	147.8	
69

Spent NCM111	145.9 (0.1C)	Ionothermal synthesis with ionic liquids at 150 °C and calculated with Li2CO3 at 500 °C	173.6 (0.1C)	
70

Spent NCM523	94.34	Synthesis with eutectic solutions at 300 °C and calculated with Li2CO3 at 850 °C	149.3	
71

Spent NCM111	72.0 (0.2C)	Mechanochemical activation and solid-state sintering with Li2CO3 at 800 °C	165.0 (0.2C)	
67

Spent NCM111	76 (0.1C)	Coting V2O5 on the spent NCM111 through spray drying, and calculated with Li2CO3 at 350 °C	172.4 (0.1C)	
73

Spent LFP	103 (0.5C)	Low temperature aqueous solution relithiation and annealing with Li2CO3 at 600 °C	159 (0.5C)	
74

Spent NCM523	15.1	Spray drying with PO43− polyanions, and calculated at 450 °C and 850 °C	170.7	
75

Spent LFP	142.9 (0.2C)	Solid state synthesis with Li2CO3 at 650 °C	147.3 (0.2C)	
80

Spent Li[Li0.144Ni0.136Co0.136Mn0.544]O2	271 (0.1C)	Heated with LiNO3 and LiOH·H2O at 300 °C	305 (0.1C)	
81


 	Fig. 6  The emitted CO2 (a) and the consumed resources (b) when producing various acids; (c) acids requiring the addition of a reducing agent during the leaching process; (d) the pH of various acids (1 mol L−1).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a1) The XRD, (a2) XRD peak intensity, and (a3) FWHM of the LiCoO2 powders activated at different rotary speeds; TEM, HRTEM, and SAED of the LiCoO2 powders activated at (a4) 0 rpm and (b5) 500 rpm;85 (b) schematic of the mechanochemical activation process for the recycling of spent LiCoO2 batteries through Fe and PVC as a co-grinding reagent;83 schematic plot of a mechanochemical activation process for the recycling of spent LiFePO4 batteries through (c) EDTA-2Na57 and (d) citric acid as a co-grinding reagent.86	 

 	Fig. 8  The schematic plot of selective leaching of lithium from LiFePO4 with (a) acetic acid and H2O2,114 (b) H2SO4 and H2O2,115 (c) The E–pH diagram for the Li–Fe–P–H2O,117 (d) the selective leaching of lithium from LiFePO4 with persulfate persulfate,118 (e) the Schematic plot of selective leaching of lithium from NCM through hydrothermal treatment,123 (f) the Schematic plot of selective leaching of lithium from NCM through electrochemical method.100	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Plausible pathways for the sulfation roasting conversion of cathode powder from spent LiCoO2 batteries.148 (b) Illustration of the conversion mechanism for roasting LiNixCoyMnzO2 with (NH4)2SO4.149 (c) Possible reaction controlling mechanism of chlorinating conversion of NCM electrode materials.150 (d) Plausible pathways for the conversion of mixed powders from spent LiMn2O4 batteries at enclosed vacuum conditions.151	 

 	Fig. 10  Different ways of biological leaching acidolysis including acidolysis, redoxolysis and complexolysis.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 11  Flow chart of spent LIB recycling processes: methods, objectives and problems of each section.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a real battery recycling process. (b) Conceptual schematic of classification of Abs.194 (c) Actual (red star) energy density of the LBC-G//G full cells compared with various state-of-the-art commercial and experimental Li-ion chemistries.195 (d) Actual (red star) energy density of the LBC-G cells compared with various state-of-the-art Li-ion chemistries using both non-aqueous and aqueous electrolytes.196 (e) Schematic diagram of an idealised battery recycling process.	 


Hydrometallurgical	50%	—	—	1200 kg–CO2 eq.	—
Pyrometallurgy	23%	—	—	—	—
 
Direct physical recycling	—	—	—	—	—
Average	36.5%	48%	15%	—	800 kg–CO2 eq.
Study	1	2	3	4	5

 	Fig. 13  (a) Minimum volumes of spent LIBs for a recycling facility to cover all expenses for different fixed and variable costs. Star refers to the base case. Darker color refers to lower break-even levels; lighter color refers to higher levels.217 (b) Percentage of the total recoverable value achieved with potential yield scenarios.218 (c) Revenue generated per kg cell recycled.219	 

 	Fig. 14  The “5R principle” of green chemistry in LIB recycling.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
