Encapsulation of organic active materials in carbon nanotubes for application to high-electrochemical-performance sodium batteries   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE02806J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE02806J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1264-1269Encapsulation of organic active materials in carbon nanotubes for application to high-electrochemical-performance sodium batteries†

        
          
            Jae-Kwang 
            Kim‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Yongil 
            Kim‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Seungyoung 
            Park
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hyunhyub 
            Ko
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Youngsik 
            Kim
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Solar & Energy Engineering, Cheongju University, Cheongju, Chungbuk 360-764, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jaekwang@cju.ac.kr
bSchool of Energy & Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 689-798 Ulsan, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ykim@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      11th September 2015
    , Accepted 2nd November 2015First published on 10th November 2015AbstractSodium (Na) ion batteries are interesting candidates for replacing lithium (Li) ion batteries, primarily due to the abundance of Na in the environment. However, the performance and energy density of a Na-ion battery are inferior to those of a Li-ion battery. Organic active materials can help overcome the drawbacks associated with Na-ion batteries because of their many advantages. However, such organic polymer electrodes are subjected to a high self-discharge and low practical capacity because the polymer electrode easily dissolves in an organic electrolyte and forms an insulating layer. Therefore, in this study, we have designed a unique organic electrode in which an active polymer is encapsulated into a carbon nanotube (CNT) to form an electrode with high polymer content. The CNT is able to retain the active polymer within the electrode structure, providing an effective electronic conduction path. Moreover, the CNT can contain large amounts of active polymer and therefore exhibits superior electrochemical properties without self-discharge, making it well suited for use as a cathode material in a Na-ion battery.

Broader context
Recently sodium (Na) ion batteries have been attracting attention as promising alternatives to current lithium ion battery technology for specific applications, such as in electric vehicles, locomotives and energy storage systems (ESSs) due to their material abundance, low-cost and environmental benignity. Recent research studies on Na-ion batteries are mostly directed on the development of Na intercalated inorganic materials. However, these materials suffer from low capacity utilization or sluggish kinetics. For this reason, soft materials of the redox-active organic polymers have been investigated as the potential cathodes for Na-ion batteries due to their advantages over inorganic solids such as open and flexible frameworks as well as environmental friendliness. However, organic polymer cathodes suffer from low electron conductivity and dissolution in liquid electrolytes, which hinders their use in commercial batteries. To overcome these challenges, the PTMA polymer-impregnated carbon nanotube (CNT) was prepared by the dissolution-diffusion-washing process in this work. The well-connected CNT network provides the rapid electron transport in the electrode, and additionally prevents the dissolution of the active polymer into the electrolyte. As a result, the PTMA-impregnated CNT cathode in a Na-ion battery shows the enhancement of stability, discharge capacity, cycle life, and rate capability.

Introduction
Rechargeable lithium (Li) ion batteries have been widely adopted as power sources for portable electronic devices such as smart phones, laptop computers, and tablets because of their high energy density and long cycle life. Their range of applications has been expanded to large-scale energy storage for electric vehicles (EVs) and energy storage systems (ESSs).1–3 However, against this large-scale demand for Li-ion batteries, we have to consider the increasing cost of Li because of their limited quantities available to mine in the Earth's crust.
Sodium (Na) ion batteries are interesting candidates for replacing Li-ion batteries, primarily due to the abundance of Na in the environment. Therefore, they are attracting considerable attention as large-scale electrical energy storage systems.4,5 The main component of such a battery is the Na intercalation-type inorganic cathode, which determines the battery's energy density and capacity. The performance of a Na-ion battery is inferior to that of a Li-ion battery because of the large ionic radius of the Na ions and the slow reaction kinetics.6–8 Moreover, a Na-ion battery will typically exhibit a lower energy density than a Li-ion battery owing to its relatively large weight and the low reduction potential of Na.6,7
Organic active materials offer the promise of solving the drawbacks of Na-ion batteries because they have some inherent advantages such as lightness, fast reaction kinetics, renewability, and environmental friendliness. Furthermore, they are abundant resources with a high electrochemical reaction constant.9–11 Among the organic active materials, poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy-4-vinylmethacrylate) (PTMA) has stable organic radical 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO) as its repeating unit, which exhibits a fast reversible oxidation/reduction behavior and which allows higher levels of power, high potentials, and a long cycle life.12–14 The nitroxide radical moiety of the initial state TEMPO is oxidized to an oxoammonium cation during charging. During discharging, the oxoammonium cation is reduced to a nitroxide radical and an aminoxy anion by means of a two-stage process.15,16 In the subsequent electrochemical process, the TEMPO radical undergoes a two-electron redox reaction, corresponding to a theoretical capacity of 225 mA h g−1, while the reversible electrochemical reaction occurs rapidly with the anions/cations of the electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 1. PTMA undergoes rapid redox reactions with an electron transfer rate constant in the order of 10−1 cm s−1, resulting in a high rate capability. However, the PTMA electrode is subjected to a high self-discharge because the polymer electrode easily dissolves in an organic electrolyte.17–19 In addition, PTMA exhibits a low energy density due to its high insulating characteristics that give rise to a need for large amounts of carbon conductor in the electrode. When a high content PTMA of over 50 wt% is applied to the electrode, the polymer battery exhibits inferior electrochemical properties because of the poor contact between the active polymer and the carbon conductor.20
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the electrochemical mechanism for PTMA. 
In this study, we designed a unique organic electrode, in which the active polymer is encapsulated into a carbon nanotube (CNT) to form a high-active polymer-content electrode. The CNT plays the role of a strong absorbent, retaining the active polymer material and preventing its dissolution into the electrolyte. The CNT also provides an effective electronic conduction path and its network-like structure forms a stable organic electrode structure. In addition, because the CNT provides a large surface area with a vacant space in the centre, it can contain a large amount of active polymer. Therefore, the organic electrode material encapsulated into the CNT exhibits superior electrochemical properties without self-discharge as a cathode material in a Na-ion battery, even with high active polymer content.
Experimental
Materials
PTMA was prepared by the radical polymerization of a 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine methacrylate monomer with a 2,2′-azobisisobutyronitrile initiator, followed by oxidation with hydrogen peroxide in the presence of a NaWO4 catalyst (Fig. S9, ESI†) (purity ≥95% and yield ≥85%).13 A carbon nanotube (CNT) with a 120 nm average diameter was prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD).21 PTMA was dissolved in CNT-containing N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent, where PTMA diffuses into the vacant spaces of the CNT. The PTMA-impregnated CNT was dried and washed in acetone, followed by vacuum filtering to remove excess PTMA on the outside of the CNT. The dissolution-diffusion-washing process was performed three times to produce well-impregnated CNTs (Fig. S1, ESI†). The cathode was prepared by blending the PTMA-impregnated CNT (93 wt%) and the poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF) binder (7 wt%). For comparison, we also fabricated a PTMA–CNT composite electrode using 63 wt% PTMA, 30 wt% CNT, and 7 wt% PVdF. The length of the CNT ranges between 3 and 10 μm with an average length of 5 μm, while the diameter ranges between 100 and 300 nm.
Characterization of morphology and physical properties of the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping were performed using a Nanonova 230 scanning electron microscope (FEI, USA). Focused ion beam (FIB) measurements using a Quanta 3D FEG (FEI, USA) were performed to observe the inside of a CNT and a PTMA-impregnated CNT. The size distribution of the PTMA-impregnated CNT was observed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy performed using a JEM-3010 JEOL. Ab initio Harree–Fock (HF) self-consistent field (SCF) molecular orbital calculations have been performed to determine the size of PTMA using the standard 6-31G* basis set.
Characterization of electrochemical performance
A PTMA-based Na-ion battery cell was fabricated by stacking a 150 mm Na metal anode (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and an organic cathode using a Celgard 2200 separator. The weight and thickness of the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode without the Al substrate were 2.5 mg and 30 μm. The electrolyte was a 1 M solution of NaClO4 in ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate (1:1 v/v) (PanaXetec. Co.). The cell was assembled in an argon-filled glove box in which the moisture level was <10 ppm. Electrochemical performance tests were carried out between 1.5 and 4.0 V at different current densities from 0.1C to 5C using a WBCS3000 battery tester (WonATech. Co.).
Results and discussion
A schematic diagram for the preparation of a PTMA-impregnated CNT is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†) and the details of the procedure are provided in the Experimental section. The good thermal stability and the weight percentage of PTMA-impregnated CNT are revealed by TGA analysis (Fig. S2, ESI†). An initial decomposition of PTMA occurs at 330 °C and 68 wt% of PTMA in the PTMA-impregnated CNT disappeared at 500 °C. The dried CNT of 32 wt% is maintained at 600 °C, which means the weight percentages of 68 wt% PTMA and 32 wt% CNT in the completed PTMA-impregnated CNT.

Fig. 2 shows the focused-ion beam (FIB) images of a CNT and a PTMA-impregnated CNT. The CNTs are cut at a point 500 nm from the top to observe the inside of the CNT. The vacant space in the center of the CNT is clearly visible in Fig. 2a, while it can be seen that there is no empty space in the PTMA-impregnated CNT (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2d shows the results of EDX line-scanning across a cross-section of the PTMA-impregnated CNT (indicated by the solid red line in Fig. 2c). The red and green spectra represent the oxygen (O) and nitrogen (N) signal counts along the solid line, respectively. The EDX spectra prove the existence of PTMA in the CNT and the consistent signal indicates that PTMA is uniformly distributed. The surface areas of the CNT and the PTMA-impregnated CNT are determined by the BET method as presented in Fig. S3 (ESI†). The CNT exhibits an extremely large surface area of 122.1 m2 g−1 that corresponds to the unique tube morphology shown in the FIB image in Fig. 2a. In the PTMA-impregnated CNT, the surface area is significantly reduced to 11.6 m2 g−1, indicating that the CNT is completely filled with PTMA. This is verified from the TEM/FIB images of Fig. 2b and f. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images of the CNT and the PTMA-impregnated CNT, shown in Fig. 2e and f, respectively, clearly demonstrate that the vacant space inside the CNT (Fig. 2e) is filled by PTMA. PTMA appears darker under a TEM as it is heavier than the CNT. The red line in Fig. 2f corresponds to the EDX count for the carbon (C) signal, which is evenly distributed within the CNT. The spectrum shows that PTMA is present only inside the CNT and not on the outside.
 Fig. 2  FIB images of the CNT (a) and PTMA-impregnated CNT (b), SEM image (c) and EDX line profile (d) of the PTMA-impregnated CNT and TEM images of the CNT (e) and PTMA-impregnated CNT (f) by EDX line scanning of the C atom along the cross-section. 
To fabricate the general cathode, PTMA and CNTs were dissolved in NMP solvent to make slurry, followed by the usual process for preparing an electrode. In this process, the rod-like CNTs become coated with an insulating layer of PTMA. In fact, at a high PTMA content (>60 wt%), the electrode becomes non-conducting because the insulating PTMA perfectly surrounds the conductive CNT, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The thick layers of polymer coating tend to fuse together to produce a flake-like structure similar to that formed by pure PTMA.20 The PTMA–CNT composite electrode exhibits a smooth surface due to the formation of a thick PTMA coating (Fig. 3a), which results in the ion exchange during the electrochemical reaction being mainly induced on the surface of the electrode. This is because the ions slowly diffuse to the inner part of the electrode due to the non-conducting nature of the electrode, while electron transfer is inhibited by the insulating PTMA layer between the CNTs. In contrast, the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode has a three-dimensional morphology with an uneven surface, as shown in Fig. 3b, which results in easy electrolyte penetration and rapid ion diffusion in a Na-ion battery. Moreover, the direct contact between CNTs improves the electron transfer due to the reduced resistance.22–25 To understand the effect of the electrode surface morphology on the interface resistance and ion diffusion, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out, as shown in Fig. 3c. The medium-frequency semicircles are attributed to the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) between the active polymer and the electrolyte, while the low-frequency region corresponds to the ion diffusion process within the electrodes.26,27 The charge-transfer resistance (Rct) values of 3716 Ω and 283 Ω relate to the ion movement obtained for a general PTMA–CNT composite electrode and a PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode, respectively. It is assumed that the thick, non-conducting PTMA layer in the PTMA–CNT composite electrode adversely affects the free passage of ions by functioning as a barrier at the electrode/electrolyte interface, thus resulting in a higher Rct. Fig. 3d shows the relationship between Z′′ and ω−1/2 (ω = 2πf) in the low-frequency region. The low slope of the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode in the low-frequency region indicates good ion kinetics in the electrode material.26–28 The general PTMA–CNT composite electrode exhibits a slope that is five times steeper than that exhibited by the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode. The results of the EIS measurement suggest that the PTMA-impregnated CNT reduces the charge transfer resistance between PTMA and the electrolyte and improves the ion kinetics of the electrode.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of PTMA–CNT composite (a) and PTMA-impregnated CNT (b) electrodes, and impedance spectra (c) and the relationship (d) between Z′′ and the square root of frequency (ω−1/2) in the low-frequency region for PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT electrodes cells. Open circuit voltage (OCV) (e) of a PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT based Na-ion batteries during twelve days and schematic illustration (f) of the PTMA-impregnated CNT structure. 
The self-discharge rate is one important property of a rechargeable Na-ion battery and determines the lifetime and efficiency of the battery;17,19 a high self-discharge rate greatly decreases the lifetime and efficiency of the battery. The self-discharge effect arises from the dissolution of the active electrode material and is investigated from the change in the open-circuit-voltage (OCV), as shown in Fig. 3e. The Na cells are charged to a 100% state-of-charge (SOC) and the OCV is observed under conditions of no current flow. The OCV of the PTMA-impregnated CNT cell remains stable at 3.3 V for over 20 days, whereas that of the general PTMA–CNT composite decreases continuously, dropping to 2.3 V after 20 days.
The results indicate that the use of PTMA-impregnated CNTs effectively prevents the dissolution of organic active materials, thereby minimizing self-discharge. Importantly, the narrow windows (or pores) of the CNT can trap PTMA during cycling due to the strong adsorption force between the graphene wall of the CNT and PTMA, thus preventing the dissolution of the organic PTMA.29–32 The TGA patterns in the bare PTMA and PTMA-impregnated CNT are an effective indication of the PTMA absorption strength in the carbon structure. The TGA curves for the bare PTMA (Fig. S5, ESI†) show that PTMA evaporates at 240 °C, but then its weight loss stops at 430 °C. However, for the PTMA-impregnated CNT, the decomposition of PTMA starts at 330 °C, which is higher than that of pure PTMA. This indicates the existence of strong adsorption strength in the PTMA-impregnated CNT. The mechanism of electron transfer in the PTMA-impregnated CNT is shown in Fig. 3f. Heterogeneous electron transfer first occurs from the wall of the CNT to the TEMPO pendant (the stable organic radical that forms the repeating unit in PTMA), and then the electron is transferred to the neighboring TEMPO pendant by means of homogeneous electron transfer, which occurs as a result of a fast self-exchange reaction.33 The electron self-exchange reaction between neighboring TEMPO pendants is a two-step electron process, involving conversion from aminoxy anions to oxoammonium cations via a nitroxide radical. A high rate constant was achieved for both heterogeneous electron transfer (10−1 cm s−1) and homogeneous electron transfer resulting from a self-exchange reaction (1.8 × 105 M−1 s−1).33 Therefore, the PTMA-impregnated CNT seems to be promising for application to a high-rate sodium battery.

Fig. 4a displays the initial charge–discharge curve of the general PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT electrodes for a Na-ion battery with a 0.1C-rate. During the first charge process, the voltage increases from the OCV to a top cut-off voltage of 4.0 V with one plateau voltage because the start-state involves a nitroxide radical, as shown in ESI,† Fig. S6. However, the first discharge exhibits two plateau voltages for the aminoxy anion by the two-electron process. The initial charge capacity is 61 mA h g−1 for the PTMA–CNT composite and 120 mA h g−1 for the CNT-encapsulated PTMA. During the discharge of the PTMA–CNT composite, the voltage rapidly drops from 4.0 to 1.5 V with a blurred plateau and reaches 142 mA h g−1. On the other hand, the first discharge capacity of the PTMA-impregnated CNT is 222 mA h g−1 and exhibits two notable voltage plateaus at 3.36 V and 2.1 V, corresponding to the two-stage reduction of the oxoammonium cations to nitroxide radicals at the first plateau and of nitroxide radicals to aminoxy anions at the second plateau (Fig. S6, ESI†). The change in the PTMA structure during the charge–discharge reaction was monitored by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The PTMA-impregnated CNT electrodes were carefully disassembled, washed in diethyl carbonate (DEC) and then investigated by XPS. Fig. S7 (ESI†) shows the high-resolution XPS core level spectra of Na 1s and N 1s. After the discharge, the intensity of the Na 1s peak increases significantly, indicating Na+ uptake with conversion to aminoxy anions upon discharge. The strong peak at 399 eV in the N 1s spectra of the pristine electrode is assigned to the N–O bond of PTMA, while the 402 eV peak is attributed to the NO bond that appears with the formation of the oxoammonium cation upon charging. The XPS results effectively support the two-stage electrochemical reaction of PTMA and demonstrate the possibility of using PTMA with suitably designed high-capacity organic materials for application in Na-ion batteries. The short cycling performance of Na//PTMA cells with a PTMA–CNT composite electrode and a PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode at different current rates is shown in Fig. 4b. When the current density is increased to 0.1, 0.5, 1, 3, and 5C, the discharge capacities of the PTMA-impregnated CNT remain at about 222, 216, 210, 200, and 190 mA h g−1, respectively. Therefore, it is clear that the storage capacity of the PTMA-impregnated CNT is stable at each current rate. In contrast, the PTMA–CNT composite exhibits discharge capacities of 142, 35, 17, 15, and 10 mA h g−1 when cycled at different current densities of 0.1, 0.5, 1, 3 and 5C, respectively. The rate retentions of the PTMA–CNT composite and the PTMA-impregnated CNT are 7% and 86%, when the current density increases from 0.1 to 5C. The fast ion diffusion and rapid electron transfer owing to the interconnected network of the CNT and the enhanced contact between PTMA and the electrolyte result in the high rate performance of the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode. When the current rate reverses back to 0.1C in the Na//PTMA-impregnated CNT cell, the cell capacity immediately recovers to its original value, which indicates that the PTMA-impregnated CNT cathode can attain stability even after a high rate of cycling. The charge–discharge curves for the Na//PTMA-impregnated CNT cell appear to be similar from the second and third cycles (Fig. 4c), indicating that the PTMA-impregnated CNT possesses stable charge–discharge properties and good cycle stability. The second charge curve exhibits two voltage plateaus at 2.51 V and 3.51 V, which can be attributed to the two-electron oxidation reaction from aminoxy anions to oxoammonium cations; this result is consistent with the CV results shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†). To maintain an appropriate charge balance at the PTMA cathode during the charge–discharge process, the anions/cations in the electrolyte (ClO4−/Na+ in the present case) contribute to the redox reaction. The charge and discharge capacities in the second cycle are 219 and 215 mA h g−1, respectively, and it can be seen that the discharge capacity is slightly reduced relative to the first cycle. In the charge–discharge capacity cycle the CNT does not contribute (Fig. S10, ESI†). Fig. 4d shows the cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the PTMA-impregnated CNT at a rate of 0.5C. The Na//PTMA-impregnated CNT cell exhibits a high initial discharge capacity of 217 mA h g−1 (230 mA h cm−3 volumetric capacity) as well as excellent cycleability with no noticeable decrease in performance, even after 100 cycles. The loss in discharge capacity is less than 8% and the Coulombic efficiency remains close to 100%, with the exception of the first cycle in which the oxidation process starts with the nitroxide radical during the first charge (∼190% Coulombic efficiency). Thus, the decrease in overall capacity of the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode, as calculated from the initial and 100th cycle capacities, is around 0.07% per cycle. In addition, when the PTMA-impregnated CNT was tested as the electrode for Li-ion batteries, it also exhibits promising electrochemical performances as shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†). Given its high capacity, excellent cycle stability, high rate capability, and ability to withstand a high load, the PTMA-impregnated CNT can be a promising cathode material for both Na-ion and Li-ion batteries. These properties could be attributed to the encapsulation of PTMA into the CNT, which enables easy electrolyte penetration into the inner part of the electrode, while the CNT layer without the insulating PTMA layer could effectively enhance the electrical conductivity and hasten the transport of electrons.
 Fig. 4  Initial charge–discharge curves (a) and rate performance (b) of PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT electrodes. Potential profiles (c) of charge–discharge at the 1st, 2nd and 5th cycles and cycle performance (d) of the PTMA-impregnated CNT sodium battery at room temperature are also shown. 
Conclusions
We have successfully prepared a PTMA-impregnated CNT composed of 68 wt% PTMA and 32 wt% CNT by means of a dissolution-diffusion-washing process. The PTMA-impregnated CNT was used as an electrode with a 7 wt% PVdF binder, which enabled the fabrication of Na-ion batteries with high stability and excellent electrochemical properties. The narrow vacant spaces in the center of the CNT can trap PTMA, preventing the dissolution of the active polymer, self-discharge, and the formation of an insulating PTMA layer on the surface of the electrode and between the CNTs. The PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode also achieves fast ion diffusion by allowing the electrolyte to easily penetrate the electrode and allowing rapid electron transport through the well-connected CNT network without a thick insulating PTMA layer. Therefore, the PTMA-impregnated CNT is beneficial for the enhancement of stability, discharge capacity, cycleability, and rate capability, even with a high PTMA content. The PTMA-impregnated CNT exhibits a reversible redox reaction via a two-electron process. The fabricated electrode was found to deliver an initial discharge capacity of 222 mA h g−1 at a 0.1C-rate, with a capacity retention of around 93% after 100 cycles at 0.5C, thus reflecting the reversible redox nature of the electrode and excellent cycle life. Furthermore, when measured at high currents, the PTMA-impregnated CNT-electrode also improved the rate capability (210 mA h g−1 at 1C and 190 mA h g−1 at 5C). Our results show that the PTMA-impregnated CNT electrode is a very promising candidate for use in Na-ion batteries with advanced electrochemical properties.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the 2015 Research Fund (1.150034.01) of UNIST (Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology) and Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2014R1A1A2A16053515) and (NRF-2014R1A2A1A11052110).
Notes and references
Y. K. Sun, Z. H. Chen, H. J. Noh, D. J. Lee, H. G. Jung, Y. Ren, S. Wang, C. S. Yoon, S. T. Myung and K. Amine, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 942–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y. K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994–10024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, D. H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, J. Lu, Y. Ren, X. Luo, X. Zhang, J. Wen, D. Miller, A. DeWahl, S. Hackney, B. Key, D. Kim, M. D. Slater and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400458 Search PubMed .
H. Pan, Y. S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 CAS .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Xu, X. Han, C. Pellegrinelli, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, J. Wan, A. C. Chung, O. Vaaland, C. Wang and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5664–5668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4404–4409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8444–8448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stolar and T. Baumgartner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 9007–9024 RSC .
H. Nishid, S. Iwasa, Y. Pu, T. Suga, K. Nakahara and M. Satoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 827–831 CrossRef .
J. K. Kim, J. Scheers, J. H. Ahn, P. Johansson, A. Matic and P. Jacobsson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2426–2430 CAS .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 CAS .
W. Guo, Y. X. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5221–5225 CAS .
Q. Huang, D. Choi, L. Cosimbescu and J. Lemmon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20912–20928 Search PubMed .
T. Suga, H. Konishi and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1730–1732 RSC .
Y. H. Wang, M. K. Hung, C. H. Lin, H. C. Lin and J. T. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1249–1251 RSC .
J. K. Kim, A. Matic, J. H. Ahn and P. Jacobsson, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9795–9797 RSC .
J.
K. Kim, G. Cheruvally, J. H. Ahn, Y. G. Seo, D. S. Choi, S. H. Lee and C. E. Song, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2008, 14, 371–376 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar and Y. Ando, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 3739–3758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yan, X. Zhou, Y. Li, F. Wang, H. Zhong, H. Wang and Q. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3392,  DOI:10.1038/srep03392 .
J. C. Bachman, R. Kavian, D. J. Graham, D. Y. Kim, S. Noda, D. G. Nocera, Y. Shao-Horn and S. W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7040,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms8040 .
Y. Chen, X. Zhang and Z. Xie, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8054–8063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Ko, S. B. Park, K. Y. Jung and Y. C. Kang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5462–5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, J. Z. Wang, S. L. Chou, D. Wexler, H. J. Li, K. Ozawa, H. K. Liu and Y. P. Wu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4715–4720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Kim, J. Manuel, G. S. Chauhan, J. H. Ahn and H. S. Ryu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1366–1372 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, M. Rao, S. Aloni, L. Wang, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5053–5059 CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Xu and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4288–4294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, S. Evers, X. Liang, M. Cuisinier, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10920–10930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakahara, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 222–227 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee02806j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
Recently sodium (Na) ion batteries have been attracting attention as promising alternatives to current lithium ion battery technology for specific applications, such as in electric vehicles, locomotives and energy storage systems (ESSs) due to their material abundance, low-cost and environmental benignity. Recent research studies on Na-ion batteries are mostly directed on the development of Na intercalated inorganic materials. However, these materials suffer from low capacity utilization or sluggish kinetics. For this reason, soft materials of the redox-active organic polymers have been investigated as the potential cathodes for Na-ion batteries due to their advantages over inorganic solids such as open and flexible frameworks as well as environmental friendliness. However, organic polymer cathodes suffer from low electron conductivity and dissolution in liquid electrolytes, which hinders their use in commercial batteries. To overcome these challenges, the PTMA polymer-impregnated carbon nanotube (CNT) was prepared by the dissolution-diffusion-washing process in this work. The well-connected CNT network provides the rapid electron transport in the electrode, and additionally prevents the dissolution of the active polymer into the electrolyte. As a result, the PTMA-impregnated CNT cathode in a Na-ion battery shows the enhancement of stability, discharge capacity, cycle life, and rate capability.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the electrochemical mechanism for PTMA.	 

 	Fig. 2  FIB images of the CNT (a) and PTMA-impregnated CNT (b), SEM image (c) and EDX line profile (d) of the PTMA-impregnated CNT and TEM images of the CNT (e) and PTMA-impregnated CNT (f) by EDX line scanning of the C atom along the cross-section.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of PTMA–CNT composite (a) and PTMA-impregnated CNT (b) electrodes, and impedance spectra (c) and the relationship (d) between Z′′ and the square root of frequency (ω−1/2) in the low-frequency region for PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT electrodes cells. Open circuit voltage (OCV) (e) of a PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT based Na-ion batteries during twelve days and schematic illustration (f) of the PTMA-impregnated CNT structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  Initial charge–discharge curves (a) and rate performance (b) of PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT electrodes. Potential profiles (c) of charge–discharge at the 1st, 2nd and 5th cycles and cycle performance (d) of the PTMA-impregnated CNT sodium battery at room temperature are also shown.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee02806j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
