Review: applications of the functional photocatalysts BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I) for clean energy, the environment, and future photobiorefineries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA09877F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA09877F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 3297-3314Review: applications of the functional photocatalysts BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I) for clean energy, the environment, and future photobiorefineries

        
          
            Zulfiqar 
            Ali
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiliang 
            Ma
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Hong
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Runcang 
            Sun
          
        
      *a
aLiaoning Key Lab of Lignocellulose Chemistry and BioMaterials, Liaoning Collaborative Innovation Center for Lignocellulosic Biorefinery, College of Light Industry and Chemical Engineering, Dalian Polytechnic University, Dalian 116034, China. E-mail: jlma@dlpu.edu.cn; rcsun3@dlpu.edu.c;  Fax: +86-0411-86323652;   Tel: +86-0411-86323652
bCentre for Future Materials, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield Central, Queensland 4300, Australia
Received 
      20th December 2022
    , Accepted 15th January 2023First published on 16th January 2023AbstractDeveloping clean and sustainable alternative energy sources is tremendously desirable. As a typical sustainable energy component, solar energy has attracted intensive efforts to explore its application. Among the energy sources, photocatalysis is a high-efficiency ecofriendly technology. Recently, BiOX nanocomposites have been widely employed in clean energy, water splitting, H2 and NH3 generation, CO2 transformations, pollutant remediation, and the selective oxidation of alcohols into respective aldehydes. However, the photocatalytic performance of pristine BiOX is relatively low, mainly due to its limited visible-light-absorption range and high exciton recombination rate, which restrict its practical application. Therefore, modifying the morphologies, band structures, and photoelectric properties are required to enhance the photocatalytic performance. In this review, we first explored its structure, preparation methodologies, strategies for fabrication, and tuning their band edges and photoelectrical properties. Then, photocatalytic reaction mechanistic insights were explored. Afterward, the applications for sustainable energy and environmental remediation were evaluated. Last but not least, the feasibility for the photocatalytic volarization of lignocellulosic biomass-derived feedstocks into fine chemicals was evaluated. The summarized progress in developing BiOX nanocomposites as high-efficiency photocatalysis can enlighten the research looking to exploit solar energy.
1. Introduction
Traditional fossil fuels are nonrenewable and have led to severe environmental pollution and global warming.1 In a quite vulnerable time, the world is looking for alternate and sustainable green resources.2,3 Alongside advances in science and technology, a significant exploration of renewable resources is currently being pursued.4,5 Therefore, a paradigmatic shift has supervened from conventional to clean renewable energy. Remarkably, photocatalytic technology has been used in the application of solar energy.
An archetypal photocatalytic system is based on a semiconductor material, which participates in the acquisition, separation, and migration of electron–hole pairs to accomplish photocatalytic reactions. Materials with narrow band gaps are highly preferable to utilize abundant solar energy. The modification of traditional photocatalysts and the discovery of novel alternatives with distinctive topologies and advanced capabilities can obtain suitable materials. In the last decades, Bi-based composites,6 such as Bi2O3, Bi2WO6, BiVO4, Bi2O2CO3, and BiOX (X = Cl, Br, and I), have attracted massive interest. BiOX materials are investigated for their tunable band gaps and novel layered structures. Besides, Bi3+ can stabilize oxo clusters and metal oxides and increase their stability. Valence band (VB) maxima are established by the 2p of O and np of X, while conduction band (CB) minima are established by the 6p of Bi.7 The varied band gaps of 3.2 eV in BiOCl, 2.7 eV in BiOBr, and 1.8 eV in BiOI have enabled scientists to employ engineered strategies to modify and investigate structures and activities.
BiOX materials are covalently stacked, tetragonal8 compact, and highly crystalline compounds.9 The [Bi2O2] slabs overlap with the double slabs of X atoms.10,11 The charge difference between these layers comprises an electric field to induce a dipole, which can effectively separate the exciton pairs. In BiOX composites,12,13 the charge density on the Bi–O layer being higher than that on the slabs of X layers can reduce the inter-planar ratio between Bi and X, produce hybrid CB, and facilitate the splitting and migration of charge carriers. These features significantly benefit the photoelectric properties and performance. Therefore, in this review, as shown in Fig. 1, we discuss the research progress on their structure, including 0D to 3D (their preparation, characteristics, and applications); their fabrication methods (analysis and applicability for desired BiOX composites preparations); investigate their photocatalytic reaction mechanisms (by analyzing the compatibility of BiOX for various photocatalytic applications); engineering strategies (for promising features, tuning the band edges and improved topologies, tailoring photoelectric properties); and applications, including in sustainable energy (photocatalytic water splitting, H2 generation, NH3 synthesis), and environmental applications (pollutants remediation, CO2 photoreduction). In addition, we consider lignocellulosic biomass chemical composition and its feasibilities for photocatalytic volarization to produce fine chemicals. We conclude by forecasting the future perspectives.
 Fig. 1  Framework for the current review of BiOX photocatalysts. 
2. Nanostructures of BiOX photocatalysts
The performance of nanomaterials is highly linked with their structure. With continuing technological advancements, various strategies are employed to enlarge the surface area, control size, and improve the optical and electrical properties. Morphologies with more active sites have been developed to boost the photocatalytic activities. Different composites of BiOX (Fig. 2) have been investigated to accomplish better outcomes, including the fabrication of zero-dimensional (0D) to three-dimensional (3D) BiOX composites and their applications.
 Fig. 2  Structural evolution: 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D materials-modified BiOX. 
2.1. 0D materials-modified BiOX
0D nanomaterials are popular due to their smaller size (<100 nm), excellent photoelectric properties, and tunable surface functionalities. The common morphologies are nanoparticles and quantum dots (QDs). QDs are non-toxic, easy to induce more active sites, and have faster charge transferability. Owing to their extraordinary features, including ultrasmall size, quantum confinement, best physical and chemical characteristics, and high compatibility for versatile applications, some 0D BiOX photocatalysts have been examined for pollutant degradation. For example, Bi QDs set in C-doped BiOCl were fabricated by He et al. via the solvothermal method for the better photocatalytic degradation of NOx.14 Carbon quantum dots (CQDs)-modified BiOCl ultrathin nanosheets were synthesized by a facile solvothermal method with different feeding ratios, and a higher activity of 5 wt% was observed for the degradation of rhodamine B (RhB).15 It was observed that C facilitated electron transfer between the Bi QDs and BiOCl for the photocatalytic degradation of NOx from the atmosphere without conversion into toxic oxides. While in the case of Bi QDs/BiOCl, it aggravated the photocatalytic activity by promoting hot electrons of Bi besides the photoexcited electrons. The modification with QDs can thus boost the visible-light-harvesting capacity, fast electron-transfer ability, and enhance the photocatalytic activity.
2.2 1D materials-modified BiOX
The 1D morphologies of BiOX materials, including nanofibers, nanoplates, and nanosheets, have been widely investigated. For example, BiOX nanofibers with 80–140 nm diameters were prepared by Wang's group via electrospinning over a polyacrylonitrile (PAN) template at 500 °C for 10 h.16 The advantage of this technique was the fast photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants. At the same time, the shrinkage of the nanofibers by the decomposition of PAN may be a hindrance to reducing the band gap. The reaction of Bi2O3 and excessive HCl was used to prepare BiOCl nanofibers. A sol solution was obtained by dissolving 2 g of BiOCl in 20 mL of C2H5OH (95% v/v) with the addition of 5 M HCl to adjust the pH to 1 with stirring for 3 h at 60 °C. Nanofibers with a thickness of 30–100 nm and 1–3 μm diameters were obtained. Then, with the addition of cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) a flower-like morphology emerged.17 The CNFs changed morphology after dying, assembling into nano-, meso-, and macro-scale hierarchical structures with a homogeneous surface distribution. The energy band gap was reduced to 2.92 eV and they exhibited higher performance in pollutant degradation.
2.3 2D materials-modified BiOX
The 2D materials, such as nanoplates, nanosheets, and nanoflakes, have highly tunable optical and photoelectrical properties. Their lamellar shape and interlaminated weak van der Waals forces facilitate the transfer of charge. Hydrolysis, solvothermal/hydrothermal, and thermal annealing are the methods commonly used for the fabrication of these materials. For example, BiOCl 2D nanosheets were prepared by hydrolyzing the molecular precursor Bin(Tu)xCl3n,18 of which the oxygen defect-rich facet (001) facilitated the separation of the exciton pairs. Also, 2D BiOI nanosheets were fabricated with (001) and (100) exposed facets and employed for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. In another study, it was noticed that the (110) facet exposed on BiOI nanosheets prepared via a hydrothermal method generated reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as ˙O2−, which increased the photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol.19 Oxygen defect-rich surface BiOBr nanosheets were prepared by using carboxylic acid as a chelating agent.20 Compared with pristine BiOBr, the modified and surface oxygen defect-rich BiOBr photocatalyst demonstrated a 5.3 times higher performance in methyl orange (MO) degradation. Generally, 2D material BiOX nanocomposites are more stable, and their facet exposure and surface defect-rich properties are highly desirable for investigating photocatalytic reactions and mechanisms.
2.4 3D materials-modified BiOX
The 3D photocatalysts are most effective for achieving good results due to their distinctive structural features, including microspheres and hierarchical nanomorphologies. For example, the hierarchical flower-like structure of BiOI was prepared by Yang's group via hydrolysis at room temperature and investigated for CO2 reduction, obtaining better results than traditional photocatalysts under visible light.21 Some 3D BiOBr materials have been fabricated by modification with magnetic bentonite (MB) and sodium decylsulfate (SDS) via the solvothermal method. It was observed that MB could improve solid–liquid partition, agglomeration, and exciton recombination. SDS could facilitate the growth of loos flower-like structures by organizing nanosheets with a higher surface lattice exposure, resulting in the superior photocatalytic degradation of pharmaceutical complex organic pollutants like tetracycline (TC) and ciprofloxacin (CIP).22 Its spherical structure provides the maximum surface area with more oxygen defects than a flower-like morphology. 3D photocatalysts favor photocatalytic reactions due to their more active sites, ability to harvest the maximum light energy, and as their quick dispersion can accelerate the migration of exciton pairs.
3. Typical preparation methods of BiOX
Currently, many methods have been reported to prepare BiOX photocatalysts. In all, Bi salts Bi(NO3)3·3H2O, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O, NaBiO3·2H2O, Bi2O3, Bi, BiCl3, and BiI3 were used as the sources of Bi and cetyltrimethylammonium halide (CTAX), metal halides MX (M = Na, K; X = Cl, Br, I) and ionic liquids possessing a halogen were used as stabilizers.23,24 As the synthetic conditions highly impact the photocatalysts' morphology, size, and surface area, it was necessary to adopt a feasible fabrication method. Some methods for fabricating and modifying BiOX novel photocatalysts are presented here.
3.1 Hydrolysis method
The hydrolysis method is convenient and can be performed at room temperature under ambient conditions. For example, nanostructures of BiOX were prepared by the hydrolysis of BiX3 above 60 °C for 6 h, in a higher acidic medium.25 In another hydrolysis approach for Bi(NO3)3 with HCl and Na2CO3, some 21–85 nm nanosheets were prepared at pH 2 and 25 °C in 30 min.26 The method is simple but needs a higher acidic quantity to control the pH because minor changes in the pH can influence both the catalyst structure and performance. Differing from the laboratory synthesis, industrial mass production needs extra measures to monitor the pH and improve the stability of BiOX nanocomposites. It is sensitive, corrosive, and the non-recoverability of the used acid together make it less sustainable for large-scale applications.
3.2 Hydrothermal/solvothermal methods
Hydrothermal/solvothermal methods are common methods for the fabrication of modified BiOX nanocomposites. The reaction is catalyzed with spontaneous pressure, and then the changing reaction kinetics can control the physicochemical properties of the materials. For example, nanospheres of BiOX were prepared by the reaction of Bi(NO3)3 with NaX in ethylene glycol at 160 °C for 12 h.27 While its nanoplates were prepared replacing solvent by mannitol for 3 h at 150 °C.28 In this preparation, four-sided surfaces with the (001) plane and (110) plane on the top and bottom faces were characterized. The parameters selection, such as solvent, temperature, pressure, and time, influence the structure. To achieve the desired features of the nanocomposites, the reactions were performed at high temperatures and pressure with a suitable solvent. The solvent initiated the reaction and solvents with –OH groups are mostly chosen. For example, ethylene glycol, ethanol, and H2O were chosen as green solvents, and here the role of –OH was to oxidize Bi. The precursors and surfactants play a crucial role in the fabrication process. Biomass-assisted solvothermal fabrications are attracting more attention as green and sustainable precursors and stabilizers for large-scale applications. A setup of the solvothermal method is given in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Hydrothermal/solvothermal preparations of BiOX photocatalysts. 
3.3 Template method
A material's morphology is modulated by crystal growth and nucleation. The process comprises three steps: template formation, material fabrication, and template removal. A nanosized template is used in the template method to prepare BiOX nanocomposites by a suitable method. For example, Cui et al. used a carbonaceous mesosphere as a template, which was calcined to adsorb Bi3+ with Cl− on the surface, and hollow microspheres of BiOX with a thickness of 40 nm and diameter of 200 nm were prepared by the reaction of Bi(NO3)3 with HCl at 400 °C.29 Whereas Yan's group employed a butterfly wings template to prepare hierarchical BiOX and successfully obtained a 2D nanosheet raised uniformly on the surface of the template.30 The templates provide an interface for the segregation of ions and ultimately, the origin of the morphology, such as mesospheres, nanotubes, and nanosheets (Fig. 4). Only a few hard templates are available, so soft templates have been employed the most, and these offer good structural development and improved activities. However, template removal often requires a sophisticated technique. Various carbonaceous material-assisted fabrication methods have been reported with higher stability and good performance is supportive for the utilization of lignocellulosic biomass-derived material as green and sustainable templates for the fabrication of materials-modified BiOX.
 Fig. 4  Template method for the fabrication of BiOX photocatalysts. 
3.4 Calcination
Calcination contains highly crystalline structures. In this method, BiOX nanocomposites are prepared by heat treatment to induce desired physicochemical properties. Yu et al. calcined BiOBr flakes at a high temperature of 750 °C, and observed that during calcination a plate-like Bi24O31Br11 was obtained, which upon further heating was converted into a rod-like Bi2O3 around 850 °C, and the photocatalytic results showed that these materials exhibited a variation in performance and band structure that was correlated with the absorption of light and the material's microstructure.31 Some other morphologies, like the hollow mesospheres of Bi24O31Cl10, have been prepared by adjustment of the reaction thermodynamics.29 This method works at high temperatures, so some changes in the lattice and facets may be expected at the transition temperature, but in general, it provides an improved particle size, and crystallinity, and reduces the concentration of imperfections and adsorbed water molecules on the surface. Further improvements can be induced in the structure and desirable photoelectric properties of modified BiOX, for which a calcination method setup is given in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Calcination process in the preparation of BiOX photocatalysts. 
3.5 Selective fabrication of BiOX
BiOX novel photocatalysts have tunable band edges and a highly crystalline structure. Unfortunately, their comparative photocatalytic capabilities are still inadequate, and do not meet the prerequisites for realistic applications. To realize the photocatalytic performance of novel photocatalysts, BiOCl, BiOBr, BiOI, and their nanocomposites were fabricated in typical ways to optimize the bandgap for maximum absorption of the visible-light spectrum.

3.5.1 Preparation of BiOCl. 
BiOCl materials have a layered structure, robust chemical and optical properties, and are easy to fabricate. The wide band gap, UV absorbance, and recombination of excitons hinder the harvesting of visible light. BiOCl can be prepared by a hydrolysis method32 using stabilizing solvents. It is a simple method but requires maintenance of the pH, and the reverse reaction tends to minimize its yield, while the need for expensive stabilizers also make it less sustainable. In template-assisted fabrication, some nanotemplates are used, such as a carbonaceous template, to grow BiOCl hollow microspheres, which are calcined at 400 °C under atmospheric conditions.29,33 It was observed that its exposed facet (001) displayed higher catalytic activity under visible light due to its high surface energy and density of oxygen atoms, which favored the adherence of RhB and photogenerated electrons to create reactive oxygen species, such as ˙O2−. In another method, a modified bilayer BiOCl–MoS was fabricated by selective assembly for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution (PHE). Because of their atomic-level-directed charge separation, they displayed an ultralong carrier lifetime of 3446 ns and a super-superior PHE with 33 mmol g−1 h−1.34 The photocatalytic oxygen evolution (POE) assessed with Bi3O4Cl/BiOCl was 58.6 μmol g−1 h−1.35 While F-doped BiOCl, showing high performance in the degradation of RhB36 and S-doped BiOCl with an improved visible-light-absorption range, was investigated for O2 capture.37 A heterojunction type-II BiOCl/BiCl3Br-CTA being oxygen vacancy-rich was prepared for the selective oxidation of toluene.38 This may maximize the absorption range of visible light and increase the oxygen vacancies on the surface to facilitate activation. Modified BiOCl has high tunable opportunities because of its wide band gap and structure. So, some strategies (see Section 4) can be employed for fabrication to investigate their applications.


3.5.2 Preparation of BiOBr. 
BiOBr photocatalysts with medium band gaps can absorb visible light and so have been widely explored for the remediation of environmental pollution and organic synthesis. Researchers have introduced activity-based features in the structure of nanocomposites to improve their applications. Solvothermal/hydrothermal methods, being promising and convenient, are highly utilized. For instance, a 3D flower-like nanocomposite with 75% BiOBr/GH offered better light absorption and a higher photocatalytic activity.39 Using the hydrothermal approach, Wu's group prepared various morphologies of BiOBr by the same method.40 The structures were acquired by nucleation and crystallization after the source ingredients underwent reaction at a high temperature and pressure. The hydrolysis approach can create multilayer Br–Bi–O–Bi–Br structures. For example, BiOBr nanosheets were prepared by Wu's group, with the hydrolysis of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and NaBr by adjusting the temperature.41 Noticeably, the reversible reaction can slow down the reaction rate and decrease the yield. In the precipitation, Dog's group fabricated BiOBr nanoplates by adding an aqueous solution dropwise into Bi(NO3)3·5H2O-acetic acid and aged this solution for 4 h.42 It looks quite advantageous due to its simple procedure and low cost, but the size and crystallinity of the material cannot be controlled. The sol–gel process is integrated with hydrolytic precipitation by thoroughly mixing the reactants in the liquid phase. For example, Ai's group prepared BiOBr microspheres through the reaction of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and CTAB by the sol method.43 Nonetheless, purification is very critical for the sol–gel performance, but is widely applied for the fabrication of nanomaterials to achieve desirable features, including high purity, chemical and thermodynamic stability, and transparent and controllable porosity. For desired photocatalytic applications, BiOBr and modified nanocomposites may be fabricated utilizing various methods and engineering tactics (see Section 4).


3.5.3 Preparation of BiOI. 
BiOI has the narrowest band gap (1.8–2.1 eV) among BiOX photocatalysts. Various morphologies, including nanofibrils and flower-like microspheres, were fabricated by Hu's group using the solvothermal method at 160 °C for 12 h in various solvents. However, it had a high recombination rate, which affected its photocatalytic activity (e.g., with water, ethanol, ethylene glycol, and glycerol).44 This study proved that: (1) the solvent nature could influence the morphology; (2) H2O assisted tiny nuclei anisotropically with a 60–70 nm thickness of nanosheets; (3) EtOH gave a hierarchical microsphere with a 50 nm thickness nanosheet; and (4) both ethylene glycol and glycerol led to the best hierarchical microspheres with a high surface area. In the precipitation method, nano/flowers and microspheres of BiOI were prepared by Cao's group with different solvents. The factors affecting the morphology were the solvent nature, viscosity, and amount of stabilizer. The effect of PVP on the morphology of BiOI was investigated, and the catalyst was analyzed against the degradability of RhB.45 Using tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) as a precursor and template of I via a hydrothermal method, Liu's group prepared flower-like microspheres of BiOI, which was more efficient than its nanoplates.46 This method showed reduced activity and limited dye degradation. Ye's group investigated the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by BiOI nanosheets and found the activity was correlated to exposure of the (001) facet with a significant separation of excitons.47 The roles of the solvent, reaction conditions, methods, and strategies were all critical to designing different morphologies. BiOI had a small band gap and was expected to harvest the maximum visible-light energy, but on the other hand, only compulsory modifications can minimize the recombination rate and prolong the exciton life to boost the photocatalytic performance.

Fig. 6 shows a summary of BiOX novel photocatalysts, which can be fabricated by various methods and strategies to improve the band edge, shorten the migration time, and attenuate the recombination rate and enhance the photocatalytic activity. Due to their wide energy band, functional novelty, and layered structure, more advancements are expected in the future.
 Fig. 6  Graphical summaries of BiOX photocatalysts. 

4. Photocatalyst structure-tailoring strategies
4.1 Photocatalytic mechanistic insight
Photocatalysis has become a state-of-the-art process with its safe nature and versatile applications. It is also known as artificial photosynthesis, as the reaction components include a light source and a semiconductor photocatalyst material capable of absorption of the visible-light spectrum (Fig. 7). The photocatalytic redox reaction starts when photons of incident light hit the electron in the valence band of a material. If the energy of the incident photons is higher than the threshold energy, this can cause excitations between the VB and CB48 to produce holes in the VB.49,156 These exciton pairs can initiate photocatalytic reactions if diffusing to the surface. Thus, the key factors in photocatalysis are light absorption, the creation of electron and hole pairs, the separation of charge carriers (e−–h+), and migration toward the active sites.
 Fig. 7  Photocatalytic reaction and mechanism. 
These zero-order reactions mainly rely on the photocatalyst concentration and light source stability. The mechanical exciton migration time also matters for initiation. Propagation and reaction depend on the photogenerated charge carriers, migration time, and recombination rate. The exciton e−–h+ pairs are produced in a few femtoseconds (fs), but the interval from the core to the interface active sites is a fraction of a picosecond (ps). Despite this, the photocatalytic reaction time between carriers and absorbed reactants ranges from nanoseconds (ns) to microseconds (micros) (ms).48 The exciton e−–h+ pair recombine phase is rapid, ranging from ps to ns. Recombination can be accompanied by absorption and trapping, which can significantly impact performance. Three states of charge carriers prevail during the trapping processes: trapped electrons and trapped holes, which are limited to the surface,50 and free electrons, which can be distributed throughout the material. Generally, exciton production, capture, and recombination are all critical to determining the performance of photocatalysts. Therefore, various tactics, including heterojunction, a solid solutions strategy, superficial alteration, surface plasmon resonance, defect engineering, bismuth-rich strategy, and elemental doping,4,51 are mostly employed to design materials-modified BiOX photocatalysts for desired applications.
4.2 Heterojunction
The heterojunction strategy is perhaps the most investigated due to its intriguing mechanism and diversified composition. A series of heterojunctions have been designed for BiOX nanocomposites, including heterojunction-II (Fig. 8a), n–p heterojunctions, and Z-scheme or S-scheme materials for various applications. A 1D heterojunction of Bi12O17Br2/Bi24O31Br31 was constructed via calcination.52 It was reported that the staggered band potentials of both materials improved the charge separation. In some cases, the n–p heterojunctions were employed for fast interfacial charge transfer. As a typical example, an n–p heterojunction of BiOCl/Bi12O17Cl2 was developed,53 which could effectively transfer electrons to the (001) facet. The newly formed heterojunction's reduction potential increased electron deposition on the CB and enhanced the performance. Furthermore, many Z-scheme heterojunctions (Fig. 8b) have been fabricated, such as BiOX–Au–CdS (X = Cl, Br)54 and BiOI/Bi2S3,55 which could efficiently degrade pollutants. The activity and stability were enhanced by a Z-scheme construction. Currently, the step scheme (S-scheme, see Fig. 8c) is attracting interest for designing semiconductor materials for clean energy applications and various chemical transformations. S-Scheme bifunctional ternary g-C3N4/Bi/BiVO4 was fabricated to investigate the photocatalytic aerobic oxidation of pollutants and the anaerobic reduction of CO2.56 The formation of the S-scheme hybrid junction can significantly improve the charge potential for combined aerobic and anaerobic photocatalytic activities. The S-scheme BiVO3/SnO2 nano-heterojunction was investigated for H2 evolution.57 The nano-heterojunction was more stable than the pristine SnO2. The heterojunction strategy can be employed to achieve multifunctional hybrid photocatalytic materials. Modification of BiOX nanocomposites via this strategy can improve their applicability and performance.
 Fig. 8  Strategies for tuning the band structure of BiOX photocatalysts (a: heterojunction, b: Z-scheme, c: S-scheme, d: doping). 
4.3 Solid solution strategy
Hybridizing the crystalline phase at the atomic level is highly suitable for improving the band structure. Anions and cations of the host solution can be replaced with a new composition58 by adjusting the concentration of the anions and cations ratios,59 through which a suitable band structure can be achieved. Modified BiOX solid solutions have been widely investigated for different applications, showing better performance compared to their pristine counterparts.60 For example, Bi4O5BrxI2−x hierarchical solid solution nanosheets were investigated for CO2 reduction and the removal of heavy metal Cr(VI).61 A flower-like BiOCl0.5Br0.5 was fabricated by solid solution, which exhibited a higher photocatalytic degradation of RhB under visible light than pristine BiOX.62 Also, 3D flowers of BiOClxBr1−x (ref. 63) BiOClxIy BiOCl, BiOBr, and BiOI hierarchical mesosphere were prepared by a one-pot method.64 These solutions were more effective than pure BiOCl and BiOBr. Compared with doping, this technique has no discrete level for recombining electrons and holes.65 Hence, it can produce a uniform band gap parallel to the original semiconductors, as well as increased electron excitation with a lower recombination rate. Designing solid solutions BiO(XmYnZp) with a suitable composition can enhance the photocatalytic efficiency by a cumulative effect (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Tuning the band structure of BiOX photocatalysts by a solid solution method. 
4.4 Superficial alteration
The surface of a semiconductor is the interface where reactions occur, and alterations of this can enhance the activity. For example, introducing a co-catalyst66 or metals on the surface can improve the absorption of light energy for charge transfer and separation by a lower recombination.67–69 For instance, Bi-metal accelerated the photocatalytic activity of Bi3O4Cl.67 A similar phenomenon was noticed in Bi12O17Cl2–MoS2, in which the Bi–S bond facilitated the migration of photoelectrons and improved H2 generation.34 Carbon-based materials, graphene oxides, reduced graphene oxide, carbon dots, and nanotubes have also been used for surface alteration. RGO-BiOCl70,71 g-C3N4/CDs/BiOCl,10 and nitrogen-doped CQD-modified BiOBr72 were fabricated and their photocatalytic activities investigated, showing satisfactory results. These reports suggested that surface alteration can enhance the reaction activity by facilitating charge separation and the conduction of photoexcited electrons. As carbon-based materials are more compatible, lignocellulose biomass-derived materials can be used as green alternatives for the surface alteration and stabilization of nanocomposites.
4.5 Surface plasmon resonance
As for the strategy of surface plasmon resonance, single metal atoms/nanoparticles are decorated on the photocatalyst surface to create surface plasmon resonance.73 For example, a Co–Bi3O4Br74 fabricated by this strategy exhibited a higher photocatalytic reduction potential for CO2 to CO. Introducing single atoms, especially noble metals, as co-catalysts may be more effective because it can increase the surface area, and make it easy to investigate the mechanism and the higher performance. The effect of plasmon resonance of rare metals on the BiOX photocatalyst performance has not yet been investigated fully for the selective oxidation of lignocellulosic biomass. There is still huge space to be investigated, which would be an innovative transformation of biomass-derived feedstocks.
4.6 Defect engineering
The creation and utilization of surface defects is a promising strategy to boost photocatalyst efficiency. Surface defects can act as active sites for reactants by increasing the light absorption, shortening the migration time, and lowering the exciton recombination rate.75,76 For instance, O defects could successfully activate CO2 by localization of the surrounding electrons and by reducing the reunion of electrons approaching the surface.77 In another study, the effects of O defects on N2 reduction into NH3 were investigated by Bi3O4Br, and a correlation was found between the lattices and O defects. It was observed that O defects were linked with Bi defects and exhibited higher activity. The findings of this study were supported by HAADF-STEM and EPR.78 Surface defects provide more interfaces for the substrate, and some BiOX photocatalysts retaining O and Bi defects can be fabricated and tested for water splitting and selective oxidation reactions.
4.7 Bismuth-rich strategy to modify the band gap
The band gap topologies of BiOX composites could well be modified to match the requirements of diverse applications by tweaking the elemental compositions. Bismuth-rich strategies can impact the band gaps. For example, in BiOCl and BiOBr, the band gaps were reduced but were enlarged in BiOI as compared to the pristine composites.79,80 Bi24O31Br10 exhibited a remarkable photocatalytic hydrogen evolution behavior compared with BiOBr.81 The concentration differences of Bi, O, and Br relative to BiOBr resulted in orbital hybridization and the bottom of the CB to rise, together with a reduced band gap. After 40 h of light irradiation, Bi24O31Br10 could split water to produce 133.9 μmol of hydrogen. Furthermore, bismuth-rich BiOX composites with a diversity of customizable interfaces and elemental combinations can be fabricated for selective applications.
4.8 Elemental doping to develop hybrid materials
Elemental doping has been utilized to design hybrid photocatalytic materials with advanced features. It involves creating an imbalanced proportion of electrons and holes between the conduction and valence band to speed up reactions. Accordingly, the Fermi level is shifted close to the conduction or valence band depending on the nature of the dopants (electron donors or acceptors) and their concentrations. The band gap of BiOX can be tuned by two types of doping: metallic elemental doping, including Pt, Mn Zn, Al, Sn, W, Ti, Ag, Pd, Pt, Rh, Cu, and Fe, and non-metal element doping, including I, N, B, S, P, and C. Some studies investigated the metal element doping of BiOX, which showed improved photocatalytic activity by increasing the absorption of visible-light energy. In contrast, non-metal doping narrows the band gaps of BiOX by creating an impurity energy level between the VB and CB. It also, however, improves the semiconductors' charge transmission properties. Various studies have investigated tuning the band energy and its effects on performance. Zhang et al. investigated co-doping BiOCl with I and Sb and determined its structure and optical properties.82 The catalyst performance can be improved83 by narrowing the energy gap between the VB and CB, but with a low efficiency of utilization of charge carriers. The effect of iodine(I) doping decreased the VB and favored the extra visible-light-absorption capacity of Bi12O17Cl2.84 An impurity energy level between the VB and CB was introduced by carbon doping (Fig. 8d), which displayed an improved band structure, internal electrostatic force, and enhanced singlet oxygen generation. In C–Bi3O4Cl, carbon doping increased exciton separation by confining and minimizing the recombination rate and maximizing its efficiency for water oxidation.85 Elemental doping can also improve the photocatalytic performance by facet exposure and by introducing an impurity level in the band structure. This can enhance the ultrastrong internal structure to facilitate electron transfer, confine excitons between the VB and CB, and hinder recombination. The generation of singlet oxygen (˙O2−) can be enhanced by the gain of photoexcited electrons at the CB, which can further enhance the oxidation potential. Lignocellulosic biomass-derived feedstocks can be used as non-metallic and green alternatives dopants in the fabrications and applications of BiOX photocatalysts.
5. Photocatalytic applications of BiOX
BiOX novel photocatalysts have emerged as potential candidates for sustainable energy, environmental applications, and chemical synthesis because of their ecofriendly nature, low cost, tunable band structure, and wide absorption range.
5.1 Solar water splitting
The most innovative approach for tackling the global energy concern is photocatalytic water splitting, which converts solar energy into sustainable clean fuel.150 As water is the most plentiful resource on earth,86 its splitting can give an adequate amount of H2, O2, and energy. Therefore, various efforts have been made to achieve sustainable goals. Different types of solar water splitting are shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Solar water-splitting types, from photovoltaic electrolysis to photocatalysis. 
Solar water splitting is mainly classified into three categories: (1) photovoltaic electrolysis,87,88 in which external bias and solar energy are used, which includes two sub-categories: (a) strong external bias and solar energy, which are concurrently applied in a wired system, and (b) the monolithic system, in which an artificial leaf with a single electrode is used for the photovoltaic electrolysis of water; (2) photoelectrolysis,88 which is also classified into two sub-categories: (a) photoelectrode–electrode, in which a slight external bias and solar energy are employed, and (b) tandem cells, where no external biases are employed and solar energy is used entirely; (3) photocatalytic water splitting89,90 its two sub-categories are: (a) photocatalyst suspensions, in which powdered photocatalysts composed of semiconductor materials91 are suspended in solution for furnishing the reaction, and (b) semiconductor photocatalyst nanosheets,92 in which thin films of the catalysts are deposited or suspended in solution. The migration of excitons to the expected favorable sites may influence the solar conversion and water splitting.151 The nanosheets have hollow cavities and are thus highly porous, which can provide a large surface area and abundant active sites to boost reactant adsorption. For example, open ultrathin porous C-doped CN nanocages exhibited higher a hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) rate of 1135 μmol g−1 h−1.151 while 2D amorphous transition metal oxides 2D/2D g-C3N4 (CN)/a-TMOs heterojunctions materials showed enhanced and stable (HER) rates because of their synergistic effects of charge separation and abundant defects.152 Photocatalytic water splitting is substantially reliant on the concentration of multielectrons at active sites. Multielectrons were used to create 0D–2D nickel-doped and Ti3C2TX MXene (MN) quantum dots. Multielectrons create a mid-expanded absorbance spectrum and prolonged lifespan of charge carriers.153 Thus, a photocatalyst system with a wide absorption spectrum, multielectron CB, short migration time, and low recombination of excitons would be an ideal candidate for solar conversion to hydrogen via water splitting.
5.2 H2 generation
The world is striving for sustainable, green, and carbon-neutral energy directions by utilizing the ecofriendly and high energy capacities of H2. According to the latest report of the International Energy Agency (IEA), H2 consumption demands will increase to 200 mt by 2030, while in 2021 it was just 94 mt. The produced H2 is consumed as feedstock for the production of ammonia (55%), petrorefineries (25%) for crude oil into refined fuels, and for the synthesis of methanol (10%). The remaining 10% is used for metallurgy, glass production, the electronic industry, prevention of corrosion in power plant pipelines, and in steel manufacturing, while only a very small fraction is used in hydrogen fuel cell-based transportation facilities. To meet the demand of H2, currently some electrochemical and thermocatalytic methods are working, which mostly employ expensive catalysts and complex experimental setups, while solar H2 production by water splitting is green, sustainable, and economical. As solar energy is considered a pollution-free, plentiful, unlimited source,93 it is widely investigated as an innovative approach. Some reports about BiOX photocatalysts for water splitting are noteworthy. The reaction mechanism is given in Fig. 11a. For example, it was reported the bismuth-rich Bi24O31Br10 photocatalyst could generate H2 with a production rate of 66.95 μmol g−1 h−1 in a 10% MeOH mixture solution.25,93 In another study, Bi4O5Br2 delivered 170.25 μmol g−1 h−1 H2 in a solution of 40% MeOH with 1% Pt,94 which was 1.65 times higher than that of Bi4O5I2, with the latter having a more negative conduction band. With vacancies of Bi and O on the surface, ultrathin nanosheets of Bi4O5Br generated 238 μmol g−1 h−1 H2.93 A Bi12O17Cl2 heterojunction was developed with a MoS layer, and it was found to be more active for the generation of H2. The MoS could receive photoelectrons from Bi12O17Cl2 through the Bi–S bond and transport them to its active sites to generate H2, with the catalyst activity stable for 100 h.25,95 In a typical study, a BiOBr/C Schottky junction was used for H2 generation with a yield of 2850 μmol g−1 h−1 with a parallel junction.96 However, there is a scarcity of Bi-based BiOX photocatalysts with CB positions negative enough to split water. Thus, multifunctional and hybrid materials BiOX with an effective band gap, high absorbance of light energy, and long-run stability for higher performance are desirable for H2 generation.
 Fig. 11  (a) H2 generation and (b) NH3 generation over a BiOX photocatalyst. 
5.3 Green NH3 production
Ammonia is a high-value commodity with wide applications, such as the production of fertilizers and nitric acid, uses as a cooling agent, for making artificial fibers, explosives, and as the electrolyte of dry cells.97 It can serve as a storage molecule for H2, and due to this property its use in ammonia fed-fuel cells98 is under investigation. So far, industrial-scale ammonia is produced by the Haber–Bosh process, which works at high pressure (200–100 atm) and temperature (500–300 °C).99 This conventional method for the generation of NH3 is less sustainable with a higher energy consumption. Therefore, investigations are underway to develop a sustainable photocatalytic system for green NH3 generation100 (Fig. 11b). For example, in 2015 Zhang's group used BiOBr for the production of NH3.101 In another study, the role of the defective crystal structure and oxygen vacancies in the reduction of N2 to NH3 was investigated and it was found that 1.38 mmol g−1 h−1 of NH3 was generated by Bi5O7Br under visible light in water, with a 2.3% efficiency obtained at 420 nm, while the stability was noted after testing over 4 cycles without changes. Under a 300 W xenon lamp irradiation, Xiong's group generated 12.72 mmol g−1 h−1 NH3 by using Bi5O7Br,102 and some of their findings are listed in Table 1. Under visible-light irradiation, a transition metal chalcogenide quantum dot (TMCs QD)-metal NC-graphene (GR) ternary heterostructure photosystem was reported and showed improved photoactivity toward selective reaction of nitroaromatic to amino derivatives,154 in which the synergistic effects of TMCs QD-metal NC-GR supported these transformations. Although, the photocatalytic production of ammonia is a big challenge and facing several constraints, such as a strong and high bond enthalpy of N2, slow transfer of charges to N2, higher recombination of excitons, and less stability of photocatalysts causing a low QE, more efforts are ongoing to overcome these. In particular, advanced photocatalytic features and further mechanistic insights would be helpful to accomplish the goal of green ammonia production in the future.
Table 1 Effects of functional BiOX photocatalysts in different fieldsa




Entries
Photocatalysts
Applications
Light source
Optimum conditions
Yields
References





a R: Reactants; D: catalyst dosage; T: temperature; S: solvent system.





1
Bi24O31Br10
H2 generation
Xe lamp 300 W
D: 50 mg
H2 133.9 μmol g−1 h−1

115



R: 20 mL H2O and 10 mL MeOH


S: H2O + MeOH


2
Bi4O5Br2
H2 generation
300 W Xe
R: 30 mL H2O and 20 mL MeOH, with Pt 1 wt%
H2 170.25 μmol g−1 h−1

116



D: 40 mg


S: H2O + MeOH


3
Bi3O4Br
H2 generation
300 W Xe lamp
R: 45 mL H2O and 5 mL MeOH solution with Pt 1 wt%
H2 380 μmol g−1 h−1

78



D: 50 mg


S: H2O + MeOH


4
MoS–Bi12O17Cl2
H2 generation
300 W Xe lamp
R: 80 mL ascorbic acid aqueous solution (0.3 M)
H2 33 mmol g−1 h−1

34



400 nm cutoff filter
D: 10 mg




S: H2O


5
C–Bi3O4Cl
O2 generation
150 W Xe lamp
R: 200 mL H2O
O2 860 μmol g−1 h−1

117



420 nm cutoff filter
D: 100 mg




S: H2O


6
Bi7O9I3
O2 generation
300 W Xe lamp
R: H2O
O2 199.26 μmol g−1 h−1

118



D: 50 mg


S: 50 mL aqueous solution and 1 mL AgNO3 solution (2 wt%)


7
Bi3O5BrI
CO2 reduction
300 W Xe lamp
R: CO2
22.85 μmol g−1 h−1

61



400 nm cutoff filter
D: 50 mg




S: Water vapor


8
g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2
CO2 reduction
300 W Xe lamp
R: 1 atm CO2
CO 45.6 μmol g−1 h−1

104



400 nm cutoff filter
D: 0.1 g




S: 10 mL


9
Bi12O17Cl2
CO2 reduction
300 W Xe lamp
R: 80 KPa CO2
CO 34.65 μmol g−1 h−1

119



D: 30 mg


T: 30 °C


S: 50 mL H2O


10
Co–Bi3O4Br
CO2 reduction
300 W Xe lamp
R: 0.08 MPa CO2
CO 107.1 μmol g−1 h−1

74



D: 30 mg


T: 5 °C


S: 50 mL H2O


11
Bi4O5Br2
CO2 reduction
Xe lamp
R: 1 mL CO2
CO 3.16 μmol g−1 h−1

120



D: 50 mg
CH4 0.5 μmol g−1 h−1


T: 20 °C


S: 5 mL H2O


12
Bi5O7I-001
N2 fixation to NH3
300 W Xe lamp
R: 1 atm N2
NH3 223 μmol g−1 h−1

121



D: 50 mg


S: 80 mL H2O and 20 mL MeOH


13
Bi3O4Br
N2 fixation to NH3
300 W Xe lamp
R: N2
NH3 50.8 μmol g−1 h−1

78



D: 50 mg


S: 100 mL H2O


14
Bi5O7Br nanotubes
N2 fixation to NH3
300 W Xe lamp
R: 8 mm
NH3 1.38 mmol g−1 h−1

122



400 nm cutoff filter
D: 50 mg




S: 10 mL


15
Bi5O7Br
N2 fixation to NH3
300 W Xe lamp
R: 100 mL H2O
NH3 12.72 mmol g−1 h−1

102



400 nm cutoff filter
D: 25 mg




S: 10 mL


16
Bi12O17Br2 nano belts
Oxidation of benzyl alcohol into benzaldehyde
500 W Xe lamp
D: 50 mg
44% with 99% selectivity

123



420 nm cutoff filter
T: 50 °C




S: 10 mL isopropanol with oxygen


17
Bi24O31Br10(OH)x
Reduction of nitrobenzene
410 nm LED for 24 h
R: 8 mm nitrobenzene
42%

124



D: 50 mg


S: 10 mL isopropanol


18
Bi24O31Br10(OH)x
Oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones
450 nm LED for 24 h
R: 8 mm
71% and 55%

125



D: 50 mg


S: 10 mL acetonitrile




5.4 Environmental applications
Environmental pollution and climatic changes are becoming the biggest challenges facing the industrialized world, and these have had severe negative impacts on ecosystems and biodiversity. Researchers are investigating ways to abate the effects of greenhouse gases, and toxic pollutants contaminating water, air, and soil. Therefore, in the next sections, we discuss some investigations on the photoreduction of CO2 and on pollution remediation via modified BiOX photocatalysts.

5.4.1 CO2 photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) reduction. 
According to recent reports, with higher emission CO2 and other gases, the world's annual temperature has increased by 1.5 °C. The adverse effects of global warming and climate change have provoked the world to take urgent measures. Most countries have been set benchmarks to achieve their carbon peak and carbon neutrality in the coming decades. One way toward substantiality is the utilization of renewable alternative energy, like H2, and another way is carbon capture utilization and storage (CCUS). Commonly, the electrocatalytic (EC) reduction of CO2 is investigated as a cleaner and renewable energy technology, but photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) reduction technologies are getting more attention for more sustainable approaches in the transformation of CO2 into high-value chemicals and fuels, such as formic acid (HCOOH), CH3OH, formate (HCOO−), and methane (CH4).155 Such transformations face a big challenge, whereby the bond enthalpy CO is higher (∼750 kJ mol−1) and the LUMO of CO2 is also at a higher energy, so single electron activation also needs a higher reduction potential, i.e., −1.9 eV vs. NHE.103 Defect engineering, surface basic site modification, and metal co-catalyst decoration are extensively utilized for CO2 activation. Light absorption, electron/proton transport pathways, charge separation/recombination kinetics, and interfacial interactions, such as reactant and intermediate adsorption/desorption, all play a part in PEC CO2 reduction efficiency.155 Some material-modified BiOX photocatalysts have been investigated for CO2 transformations. For example, ultrathin Bi4O5Br2 nanosheets, under ordinary solar light, could reduce CO2 into CO and CH4. Ye's group reported that ultrathin Bi4O5Br2 generated 2.73 μmol g−1 h−1 CO and 2.04 μmol g−1 h−1 CH4, while BiOBr produced 1.68 μmol g−1 h−1 of CO and 0.17 μmol g−1 h−1 of CH4. Bi4O5BrI could reduce CO2 to produce 22.85 μmol g−1 h−1 of CO.70 The heterojunction g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2 further increased the yield of CO to 45.6 μmol g−1 h−1.104 Nanotubes of Bi12O17Cl2 with oxygen vacancies generated 48.6 μmol g−1 h−1 CO in pure water, which was 16.8% more than that produced by bulk Bi12O17Cl2.77 Co-doped ultrathin Bi3O4Br generated 107.1 μmol g−1 h−1 of CO by photoreduction. The source of CO could be confirmed by isotopic labeling as 13CO2, and FTIR confirmed that it was produced by the conversion of CO2 to CO.74,77,105 Furthermore, some relevant findings are listed in Table 1. PEC reduction can be more effective if the semiconductor materials have a practicable band gap and maximum surface adsorption capacity for CO2. Also, it can produce organic compounds by the photoreduction of CO2, which is highly economical for sustainable development but such investigations are in the infancy and still at the academic stages; therefore, an efficient and stabilized photocatalytic system for higher scale applicability remains desirable. Fig. 12 shows the proposed CO2 transformations in such systems.
 Fig. 12  Proposed CO2 photoreduction over BiOX photocatalysts. 


5.4.2 Pollutant remediation. 
Sustainable socioeconomic development is highly linked to a pollution-free environment, but rapid increases in population and industrial development have brought about huge environmental pollution. The common land pollutants are composed of complex organic compounds, toxins, carcinogenic oxides, free radicals, and heavy metals. The main air pollutants are a mixture of gases, oxide emissions, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and particles released from point source pollution, including industries and automobiles that consume fuels. Acidic oxides, such as NOx and SOx,106,107 are among the most harmful pollutants, related to acid rain and photochemical smog. Water pollutants are mostly industrial wastes,108,109 toxins, and contaminants. The degradation of dangerous chemical compounds and capture of toxic heavy metals via photocatalysis can be a green and sustainable strategy for addressing these problems. Green chemistry has established rules for ecofriendly industrial processes and waste disposal.110 While in pollutants remediation, the challenge is identifying and removing contaminants. Therefore, a system with luminous qualities for the identification of contaminants, accumulation, and removal would be highly valued. The semiconductor-material-modified BiOX novel photocatalysts and their composites have been widely investigated for the degradation of various organic pollutants, dyes, and complex pharmaceutical wastes, due to their lower toxicity, earth abundance, easy fabrication, and ability to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS).111,112 In previous studies, pollutants such as RhB, phenol, resorcinol, ciprofloxacin, tetracycline hydrochloride,126 and NOx were investigated over modified BiOX photocatalysts as sustainable and environmentally friendly remediation solutions. In recent decades, to control air pollution, catalytic converters have been made compulsory in automobiles, which can decrease the toxicity of effluents and emissions,113,114 while the use of precious metals have made them less economical. Therefore, a photocatalytic system-based hybrid converter is need to replace this technology in the future, and that should also be more economical and viable.

5.5 Biomass transformations
The utilization of biomass in the chemical industry is replacing the reliance on petroleum-based products due to its renewability and sustainability features. Lignocellulosic biomass has a treasure trove of renewable carbon feedstocks with a diversified chemical composition, which make it highly suitable for fuel production (biodiesel, bioethanol) and high-value chemicals and polymers (organic acids, PLA, FDCA, etc.).135 The key components are cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. The hydrophobic behavior of lignin and encapsulation by cellulose and hemicellulose give it its firmness and stiffness.127,128 Cellulose provides mechanical strength and a framework for the lignocellulosic biomass, in which 1,4-β-D-glucan is the monomer that develops the framework through photopolymerization, which exhibits a paracrystalline microfibril structure.129,130 Hemicellulose is composed of aldopentose sugars and is classified into xylan and glucomannan. Xylan exists in hardwood and herbaceous plants at around 20–30% content and cereals at about 50%.131 Glucomannans and glactoglucomannans mainly occur in softwood132 Xylan in hemicellulose is formed by the homopolymerization of 1,4-linked β-D-xylopyranose with the side chains of arabinose, galactose, uronic acid, acetic acid, p-coumaric, arabino furanose, and acetyl group at O3 and ferulate ester at O5 as the ferulic acid content. Its chain is composed of 100–200 units with a high degree of substitution and which provides rigidity through intermolecular interaction covalent linkages.133 Lignin is an amorphous heteropolymer comprised of the alcohols p-coumaryl, coniferyl, and sinapyl, which is connected with xylan via a glycosidic linkage. It is also highly resistant to degradation, although it can be dissolved at higher temperatures in acidic or basic medium.134 A summary of lignocellulosic biomass is presented in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Summaries of lignocellulosic biomass. 
Its chemical diversity, bioavailability and cost effectiveness have attracted scientists to utilize biomass for various transformations at the industrial scale. Most lignocellulosic biomass-based intermediates, including monosaccharides disaccharides sugars, organic acid, aldehydes, ketones, and a variety of polymers units, can serve as cheap and renewable raw materials for chemical productions. For these transformations, mostly thermocatalysis and electrocatalysis are used, which often need a huge amount of energy and harsh reaction conditions (high temperature and pressure). Due to the undesired side reactions and limited selectivity of the target products and higher cost, these techniques are less sustainable. For large-scale and long-run operations, more sustainable and cost-effective technologies are highly desirable. As such green chemistry would be desirable as it emphasizes the decontamination of synthetic products and industrial wastes, as well as the usage of environmentally friendly and sustainable chemical synthesis practices. Thus, photobiorefineries utilizing solar energy and semiconductor materials (see mechanism Section 4.1) for chemical productions are considered green, more economical, and sustainable.
Modified BiOX photocatalyst materials have been widely investigated for multiple applications (see Sections 5.1–5.4), because of their oxidation potential, easy fabrication, and earth abundance. However, their applications for biomass-derived feedstocks volarization have not been explored yet, which may be due to their wide band gap, low visible light absorbance, and higher recombination of exciton pairs. Nevertheless, some studies have been performed on selective oxidation. The transformation of alcohols to their respective carbonyl compounds has been suggested for their applicability. For example, benzyl alcohol was photocatalytically oxidized to benzaldehyde using Bi12O17Cl2,123 whereby charge separation and superoxide production by photogenerated electrons synergistically enhanced the selectivity to 99% and yield to 44%. In another typical study, modified Bi24O31Br10(OH)x was used to aid converting primary alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes,125 showing a quantum efficiency of isopropanol of 71% at 450 nm irradiation in 24 h. These studies replaced expensive noble metal-based oxidation reactions systems with clean photooxidations; some findings are listed in Table 1.
The selective oxidation of lignocellulosic biomass feedstocks is highly feasible due to its simple structures and large number of oxidizable O–H and C–H bonds. For the applicability of BiOX photocatalysts, some modification in band structure via a suitable fabrication method (see Section 3) coupled with a structure-tailoring strategy (Section 4) are highly inevitable, which can reduce the band gaps, maximize the visible-light-absorbance ranges, minimize recombination, and prolong the lifespan of photogenerated charge carriers. The synergistic effects of surface defects (oxygen-rich vacancies) may be crucial for activation of the O–H and C–H bonds, while superoxide production by photogenerated electrons at the CB can selectively oxidize biomass-based feedstocks into the target products. In this perspective, we are optimistic that some biomass-derived carbon feedstocks, such as xylose, glucose, fructose, xylonic acid, lactic acid, acetic acid, formic acid, 5-HMF, 2,5-DMHF, glyceraldehyde, or glycol aldehyde, could be oxidized to respective fine chemicals over modified BiOX photocatalysts. In the future, some studies will be conducted to investigate their possible applicability and sustainability.

5.5.1 Selective photocatalytic oxidation of 5-HMF. 
As a biomass-derived renewable carbon feedstock, 5-HMF has been investigated for the production of biofuels and high-value chemicals due to its composition, structure, and properties. It is composed of a furan ring with hydroxyl and formyl groups.
It is produced by the dehydration of fructose, with some of its derivatives used for the industrial production of bio-polyester. For example, 2,5-furan dicarboxylic is used for the synthesis of polyethylene furoate, which is used for manufacturing beverage packing materials.136,137 Different companies synthesize FDCA to produce polyester, polyamide, and polyurethane.138,139 Photocatalysis is preferred for preparing organic compounds and for the oxidation of alcohols into aldehydes, and also for producing carboxylic acids due to its more economical and less toxic nature than traditional oxidation reactions.140 The selective oxidation of 5-HMF would be highly promising if possible via photocatalysis at mild conditions.141 Mechanistically it can undergo the following reactions; oxidation, reduction, and esterification. It is widely used in the food industry as a flavoring agent, used to capture ammonia with its carbonyl group, and used in the pharmaceutical industry as a reliever of oxidative stress. However, the most famous derivatives are aldehydes, amines, alcohols, and carboxylic acids, which are highly applicable in polymerization. For example, it can synthesize caprolactam, the starting material for nylone-6,6 polymerization. Some of its products are considered effective fuels. Its possible selective oxidation via photocatalyst is shown in Fig. 14. It can yield fine chemicals and fuels via photocatalysis; for instance, its selective oxidation can produce 2,5-furan dicarboxylic acid, which is a critical commodity fine chemical. It can be reduced into 2,5-dimethoxy furan. Accomplishing these goals via a novel material-modified BiOX photocatalyst would be an innovative achievement.
 Fig. 14  Proposed reaction pathways for biomass-derived 5-HMF. 


5.5.2 Selective oxidation of lactic acid. 
Lactic acid is a biomass-derived renewable platform chemical,142 produced mainly by the fermentation of sugars or synthesized by thermochemical catalysis. Its higher percentage occurs in sour milk, which is widely used in the food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries due to its multiple physicochemical properties.143 According to recent reports, the global market worth in 2021 was 2.9 billion USD and it is expected to show an 8% compound annual growth rate (CAGR) from 2022 to 2030. Its utilization in end-use industrial sectors, including food, pharmaceutical, cosmetic industries, and chemical industries, is economically emerging in developing countries.143 Its solutions and racemic mixtures are used in the medical and chemical industries for various applications due to its optical properties. It can be polymerized into poly lactic acid (PLA), which is a highly versatile, renewable, and degradable bioplastic. It is more reactive due to the carboxyl and hydroxyl functional groups and undergoes various reactions: dehydration, decarboxylation, polymerization, condensation, and esterification. It can be converted into a series of products: pyruvic acid, acetaldehyde, acetic acid, formic acid, ethanol144 CO2, and H2O. Its selective photochemical oxidation into pyruvic acid is attracting higher interest from researchers as it is cheap and can be optimized under ordinary conditions. Thus, it can alter the biological production of pyruvic acid, which is an essential commodity. Upon further oxidation, it can produce ethanol, which can be used as an alternative to fossil fuels for energy needs. Based on its market demand, photocatalytic production will be highly sustainable for future biorefineries, and some possible products are shown in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  Photocatalytic production of lactic acid and its derivatives from biomass-derived feedstock. 


5.5.3 
            D-Xylonic acid. 

D-Xylonic acid is a platform chemical with versatile physicochemical properties that has various applications in the food, pharmaceutical, and chemicals industries, and in construction materials.145 It can be used as a green solvent, biocatalyst, and starting material to synthesize different fine chemicals.146 It is mainly derived from lignocellulosic biomass, which can be produced as a by-product of vitamin C. Due to its various applications, the US Department of Energy has listed it in the top 30 potential compounds. It is synthesized by biological and thermocatalysis to meet market demand.147 The biological method is based on the fermentation of biomass via enzymatic or microbial cultures, which is an ecofriendly process, but it is expensive and complicated. While in thermocatalysis, heavy metal-based catalysts and harsh reaction conditions are applied, which make it less economical, yet mostly practiced to date. The photocatalytic oxidation of biomass-derived feedstocks into xylonic acid is extremely sustainable.148 A yield of 76.76% with CIS/GO@3D-OMA g-C3N4 (ref. 149) and 88.1% yield with P@CN–SO3H were obtained under mild conditions from biomass-derived feedstocks.144 The catalysts were stable and recyclable, while obtaining a higher yield is still a challenge; therefore, modified BiOX photocatalysts would be considered more innovative and sustainable for their higher yield and production at a large scale.
It is a platform chemical, so it can be used as a starting material for the synthesis of 1,2,4-butanetriol and 1,2,4-butanetriol trinitrate. Fig. 16 shows a possible mechanism for its use for the synthesis of glycolic acid and ethylene glycol.144 It can undergo dehydration at carbon numbers 2 and 3 to produce 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-pentanovate, which can further undergo oxidative cleavage to produce pyruvic acid and glycolaldehyde. Pyruvic acid can be oxidized into acetic acid, which can yield renewable bioethanol. To sum, D-xylonic acid can be used to synthesize various high-value chemicals, solvents, and common commodities with broad industrial applications, so its production by photobiorefineries would help pave a way toward sustainability.
 Fig. 16  Proposed selective oxidation of D-xylonic acid. 

6 Conclusions and future outlooks
BiOX-based photocatalysts have wide applications in clean energy, environmental remediation, and selective organic transformations. Therefore, we review the extensive literature to provide a forecast prospective.
Photocatalysis is the state-of-the-art process with its safe nature and versatile applicability. As offering abundant and pollution-free energy, it was investigated for innovative and ecofriendly systems. A typical photocatalytic system is made of a semiconductor material and involves the acquisition, separation, and migration of electron–hole pairs to realize photocatalytic processes. Materials with narrow band gaps are ideal for harvesting plentiful solar energy. These reactions rely on the photocatalyst concentration and light source stability. Mechanistically, the exciton migration time matters for initiation and propagation, while the reaction depends on the photogenerated charge carriers, migration time, multielectron deposition on the CB, as well as the recombination rate. The desirability of functional photocatalysts like BiOX is their tunable bandgap, high stability during reactions, earth abundance, and economical and environmentally friendly nature. They possess excellent optical and photoelectrical properties, with a range of wide band gaps that make suitable for the design of new semiconductor photocatalysts. These materials have covalently stacked compact and highly crystalline structures, and can be designed into 0D–3D nanocomposites by modification. The 3D BiOX materials are most effective, due to their (a) distinctive morphologies (flower like, hollow cages, and mesospheres), (b) abundant active sites (defect-rich surface), (c) maximum light harvesting (multiple facet exposure), and (d) higher light-dispersion property. The structure, composition, and fabrication method significantly impact the performance of semiconductor materials. Materials-modified BiOX photocatalysts are fabricated by various methods coupled with a suitable engineering strategy. Generally, hydrolysis, solvothermal, hydrothermal, template, and calcination methods are used, with strategies including heterojunctions (type-II, Z-scheme, S-scheme), solid solutions, surface alteration, surface resonance, defect engineering, Bi-rich strategy, and elementals doping (metal and non-metals doping). The solvothermal/hydrothermal method has certain merits, like (a) desired properties can be introduced by controlling the reaction parameters, and (b) green solvents can be used to make it more economical. The most viable strategy is non-metallic doping (C doping), whereby various biomass-based feedstocks can be used as biorenewable and economical dopants for the fabrication and stabilization of materials-modified BiOX photocatalysts. C doping also introduces an impurity level between the VB and CB, which facilitate charge migration and restricts the recombination of exciton pairs. Generally modified BiOCl, BiOBr, and BiOI nanocomposites have been investigated for various applications. BiOCl has a wide band gap and UV absorbance, while BiOI has the shortest band gap and higher recombination rates, and BiOBr has a medium wide band gap. Therefore, possible modifications are made for their applicability, which can enhance their visible-light-absorbance spectrum, facilitate quick charge transfer, and prolong the excitons lifetime and synergistically improve their performance. Materials-modified BiOX photocatalysts have been highly investigated for pollutants degradation, rarely investigated for the production of clean energy, water splitting, and selective oxidation reactions, but no significant efforts have been made for their application in biomass transformation. Various pollutant remediation processes, including air pollutants (SOx, NOx, COx), industrial and pharmaceutical organic wastes (complex organic compounds, dyes, drugs toxins, carcinogenic oxides) degradation and CO2 photoreduction, have been investigated. CO2 photoreduction has gained more attention from academia and industry in the last few decades, mainly because of its production by the burning of fossil fuels. As a main greenhouse gas, its increase in the atmosphere has led to a rise in global temperatures, global warming, and severe climatic threats. To minimize its effects, various technologies (CCUS) are widely applied, among which photoelectrocatalytic reduction is considered viable and economical for CO2 transformation to fine chemical and fuels. However, some challenges remain, such as: (a) adsorption of CO2 on the surface of materials, (b) activation of the CO bond, and (c) the high reaction enthalpy. Semiconductors with a more effective band gap and large surface defects for CO2 adsorption can be more viable for these transformations. The modified BiOX materials have rarely been investigated for water splitting to generate H2, O2, and green ammonia. As a green and clean source of energy, solar conversion to hydrogen by water splitting has been intensely investigated, as it could alter our reliance on fossil fuels. The process for such requires: (a) semiconductor materials with large visible light absorption, (b) multielectrons deposition on the CB, and (c) higher material stability for long reaction runs. Previous studies suggest that there is scarcity of modified Bi-based BiOX photocatalysts with CB positions negative enough to split water and for the generation of ammonia, while the stability of the materials and their low quantum efficiency are still big challenges too. The most neglected applications are photocatalytic biomass-derived feedstocks volarization. Lignocellulosic biomass has potential as a treasure trove of renewable carbon feedstocks with a diversified chemical composition; lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose, and derivative feedstocks, such as, monosaccharides disaccharides sugars, organic acid, aldehydes, ketones, and a variety of polymers units, which can serve as cheap and renewable raw materials for chemical industries. With these features, biorefineries are gaining a big market share due to the bioavailability, renewability of raw materials, and sustainability of the end products. The synergistic effects of the modification of BiOX with biomass-based feedstock may enhance the surface defects (Bi- and O-rich vacancies) for activation of the oxidizable O–H and C–H bonds of biomass-based feedstocks, and the deposition of electrons on the CB for superoxide generation would be highly favorable for the selective oxidation of biomass-based feedstock into fine chemicals.
In line with the above scenarios, a few future research directions are outlined below.
(1) To realize the applications of modified BiOX-based photocatalysts, considering their 3D structures would be a promising area, so future researchers should focus on constructing appealing 3D structural features to enhance the activity and applicability.
(2) Fabrication methods and engineering strategies are the key concerns to achieve the desired features in target materials and good performance. Therefore, a facile fabrication method coupled with a suitable engineering strategy for large-scale application would be very attractive.
(3) To achieve sustainable clean energy goals, like the carbon peak and carbon neutrality, designing advanced, stable, and recyclable photocatalytic systems correlated with mechanistic insights will be essential.
(4) Solar to hydrogen by water splitting and green ammonia production or CO2 photoreduction via modified BiOX materials could provide innovative solutions, but need the design of materials with an effective band gap, maximum visible light absorbance, swift charge transfer, and reduced recombination of exciton pairs.
(5) To design advanced features for modified BiOX photocatalysts for the photocatalytic volarization of lignocellulosic biomass-derived feedstocks to fine chemical production would be an attractive strategy for academia and industry to promote economical and green practices in the future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank for the Foundation of NSFC-CONICFT Joint Project (No. 51961125207), Liaoning Province “Xingliao Talent Plan” Outstanding Talent Project (XLYC1901004), Innovation Support Program for High-level Talents of Dalian (Top and Leading Talents) (201913), Dalian City Outstanding Talent Project (2019RD13), the Foundation (No. 2021KF08) of Guangxi Key Laboratory of Clean Pulp & Papermaking and Pollution Control, College of Light Industry and Food Engineering, Guangxi University.
Notes and references
Z. Usmani, M. Sharma, A. K. Awasthi, T. LukkF, M. G. Tuohy, L. Gong, P. Nguyen, A. D. Goddard, R. M. Bill and S. C. Nayak, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 148, 111258 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, B. Wang, W. Wang, T. An, G. Li, T. W. Ng, H. Y. Yip, C. Xiong, H. K. Lee and P. K. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15148–15155 RSC .
X. Wu, N. Luo, S. Xie, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6198–6223 RSC .
Y. Liu, B. Yang, H. He, S. Yang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2022, 804, 150215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ahmad, S. Shukrullah, M. Y. Naz, S. Ullah and M. A. Assiri, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2022, 105, 1–33 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Gondal, C. Xiaofeng and M. A. Dastageer, Applications of bismuth oxyhalides, Springer,  2017, pp. 89–107 Search PubMed .
M. Canpolat, C. Kürkçü, Ç. Yamçıçıer and Z. Merdan, Solid State Commun., 2019, 288, 33–37 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sharma, V. Dutta, S. Sharma, P. Raizada, A. Hosseini Bandegharaei, P. Thakur and P. Singh, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 78, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, C. Lv, X. Zhou, L. Ye, H. Xie, Y. Liu, H. Su, B. Zhang and G. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2740–2747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Khaneghah, A. H. Yangjeh and K. Yubuta, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 102, 1435–1453 CrossRef .
Y. Pu, J. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Chen, S. I. Kim and H. J. Seo, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 98, 2528–2533 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Du, X. Xu and S. X. Dou, Mater. Today Phys., 2021, 16, 100294 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Dong, Y.-M. Zhang and Z.-Y. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 8461–8474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, J. Li, K. Li, M. Sun, C. Yuan, R. Chen, J. Sheng, G. Leng and F. Dong, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 1430–1438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. Ji, B. Wang, S. Yin, Q. Zhang, Z. Chen and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20111–20123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, C. Shao, Y. Liu and L. Zhang, Scr. Mater., 2008, 59, 332–335 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tian, S. Luo, J. She, Y. Qing, N. Yan, Y. Wu and Z. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 464, 606–615 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, C. Gong, J. Liu, L. Tian, T. Peng, K. Deng and L. Zan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8354–8360 RSC .
M. Pan, H. Zhang, G. Gao, L. Liu and W. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 6240–6248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Wang, Y. Zhao, F.-t. Li, L. J. Dou, Y. P. Li, J. Zhao and Y. J. Hao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, C. Zhang, C. Lai, G. Zeng, D. Huang, M. Cheng, J. Wang, F. Chen, C. Zhou and W. Xiong, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 254, 76–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Z. Tong, Y. Muhammad, G. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhu and R. Tang, J. Chem. Eng., 2020, 388, 124374 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, Y. Su, X. Jin, H. Xie and C. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2014, 1, 90–112 RSC .
Q. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 127877 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raza, Z. Qin, S. O. A. Ahmad, M. Ikram and G. Li, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106569 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Q. Shi, C. M. Fan, X. G. Hao, G. Y. Ding and Y. f. Wang, Int. J. Miner., Metall. Mater., 2012, 19, 467–472 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, W. Peng, G. Tang, Q. Guo and Y. Luo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 757, 455–465 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding, L. Ye, Q. Zhao, Z. Zhong, K. Liu, H. Xie, K. Bao, X. Zhang and Z. Huang, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 14, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cui, J. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Chen, X. Xing, L. Wang and R. Yu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 593–601 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, H. Zhao, T. Li, W. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Yuan, L. Huang, L. Yao, J. Yao and H. Su, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 10203–10208 RSC .
C. Yu, W. Zhou, J. Yu, F. Cao and X. Li, Chin. J. Chem., 2012, 30, 721–726 CrossRef CAS .
L. Armelao, G. Bottaro, C. Maccato and E. Tondello, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 5480–5485 RSC .
Y. Li, Q. Wang, B. Liu and J. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 957–969 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, G. Zhan, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Ning, X. Shi, H. Zhang, H. Lin, Z. Zhang, J. Long, Y. Li and X. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900059 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, D. Wang and L. Song, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 173, 298–308 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, Y. Liu, T. Jing, B. Huang, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Qin and Y. Dai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 47261–47264 RSC .
G. Qiu, T. Wang, X. Li, X. Tao and B. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 11517–11526 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chang, Y. Pu, G. Shen, Y. Cui, X. Wei, B. Cao, Y. Yu and S. Xu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 2479–2488 RSC .
D. Wu, S. Yue, W. Wang, T. An, G. Li, H. Y. Yip, H. Zhao and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Wang and Q. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8622–8629 RSC .
W. Zhang, Q. Zhang and F. Dong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 6740–6746 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ai, W. Ho, S. Lee and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4143–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, S. Weng, Z. Zheng, Z. Pei, M. Huang and P. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 264, 293–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cao, J. Wang, S. Li, J. Cai, W. Tu, X. Lv and G. Qin, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 639, 445–451 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Li, N. Du, S. Song and W. Hou, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31393–31399 RSC .
L. Ye, X. Jin, X. Ji, C. Liu, Y. Su, H. Xie and C. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 291, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hussain, J. Hou, M. Tahir, S. S. Ali, Z. U. Rehman, M. Bilal, T. Zhang, Q. Dou and X. Wang, Catal. Rev., 2022, 29, 1–55 CrossRef .
N. N. Vu, S. Kaliaguine and T. O. Do, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901825 CrossRef .
C. C. Lee, M. Y. Chang, P. T. Huang, Y. C. Chen, Y. Chang and S. W. Liu, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 114501 CrossRef .
P. Dumrongrojthanath, T. Thongtem, A. Phuruangrat and S. Thongtem, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2016, 42, 5087–5097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, P. P. Yu, Q. G. Chen, H. Y. Zhou and A. W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13032–13040 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, K. Xiao, Y. He, T. Zhang, F. Dong, X. Du and Y. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 75–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. F. Yin, J. C. Yao, M. Arif, B. Qiu, P.-f. Li and X. Liu, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 602, 124778 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, N. H. Shah, J. Yang, K. Zhang, Y. Cui and Y. J. A. A. N. M. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 6418–6427 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xie, W. He, S. Liu, C. Li, J. Zhang and P. K. Wong, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 140–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Abd-Rabboh, A. Galal, R. A. Aziz and M. Ahmed, RCS Adv., 2021, 11, 29507–29518 CAS .
B. Liu, J. Li, W. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Jiang and Y. Bando, Small, 2017, 13, 1701998 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13406–13413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ren, J. Liu, J. Liang, K. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Luo, Y. Huang, P. Liu and X. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 9706–9712 RSC .
Y. Bai, L. Ye, T. Chen, P. Wang, L. Wang, X. Shi and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 633–640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Han, J. Zhu and X. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 477, 25–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, X. Li, D. Zhang, F. Dong and S. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 671, 318–327 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin, Y. Guo, D. Zhou, Y. Yang and Y. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 390, 765–777 CrossRef CAS .
T. JING and Y. DAI, Acta Phys. Sin., 2017, 33, 295–304 CAS .
J. Ran, H. Wang, H. Jin, C. Ling, X. Zhang, H. Ju, L. Jing, J. Wang, R. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23278–23282 RSC .
Z. Cui, Y. Sun, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16928–16934 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Huang, K. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Wang, Z. Fang, Y. Zhao, F. Gao, P. Liu and W. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9200–9208 RSC .
N. Li, G. Zhu, M. Hojamberdiev, R. Zhu, J. Chang, J. Gao, Q. Guo and P. Liu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 356, 440–450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, G. Cao, H. Wang, P. Feng and Z. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 11796–11804 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, J. Ma, L. Yao, L. Cui and W. Qi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 519, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. Ji, B. Wang, X. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. Chen and H. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 136–146 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, C. Chen, S. Z. Yang, S. Chen, M. Duan, J. Xiong, C. Zhu, R. Long, W. Hao and Z. Chi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, G. Liu, B. Wang, X. Chen, C. Wang, Z. Lin, J. Xia and H. Li, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000480 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiong, J. Di and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2662–2677 RSC .
J. Di, C. Zhu, M. Ji, M. Duan, R. Long, C. Yan, K. Gu, J. Xiong, Y. She and J. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57, 14847–14851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. F. Chisholm, J. Zhong, C. Chen, X. Cao, F. Dong, Z. Chi, H. Chen and Y. X. Weng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807576 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, H. Li, G. Zhan and L. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 112–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, M. Chen, D. Huang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, C. Zhou, C. Lai, H. Wang, M. Cheng and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 1025–1045 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shang, W. Hao, X. Lv, T. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Du, S. Dou, T. Xie, D. Wang and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 954–961 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. K. Tang, W.-M. Lau, W. J. Yin, S. X. Hu and L. M. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 20968–20973 RSC .
W. Meng, R. Hu, J. Yang, Y. Du, J. Li and H. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 1283–1292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, H. He, J. Cao, H. Lin and S. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2019, 112, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, C. Lv, X. Zhou, C. Zhang, B. Zhang, H. Su and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 62, 4350–24357 Search PubMed .
W. J. Cosgrove and D. P. Loucks, Water Resour. Res., 2015, 51, 4823–4839 CrossRef .
İ. B. Pehlivan, U. Malm, P. Neretnieks, A. Glüsen, M. Müller, K. Welter, S. Haas, S. Calnan, A. Canino, R. G. Milazzo, S. M. S. Privitera, S. A. Lombardo, L. Stolt, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 6011–6022 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. Xie, V. Adamaki, H. Khanbareh and C. R. Bowen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7757–7786 RSC .
J. He, P. Liu, R. Ran, W. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 6835–6871 RSC .
X. Tao, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, C. Li and R. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3561–3608 RSC .
K. Afroz, M. Moniruddin, N. Bakranov, S. Kudaibergenov and N. Nuraje, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21696–21718 RSC .
R. Shwetharani, H. Chandan, M. Sakar, G. R. Balakrishna, K. R. Reddy and A. V. Raghu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 18289–18308 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, P. Song, J. Di and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21434–21454 RSC .
K. Sridharan, S. Shenoy, S. G. Kumar, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and S. Pitchaimuthu, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 426 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, L. Feng, Y. Dou, H. Guo, Y. Liang, G. Li, J. He, P. Liu and J. He, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 13209–13219 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, P. V. Cherepanov, J. Choi, B. H. Suryanto, R. Y. Hodgetts, J. M. Bakker, F. M. F. Vallana and A. N. Simonov, Joule, 2020, 4, 1186–1205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Afif, N. Radenahmad, Q. Cheok, S. Shams, J. H. Kim and A. K. Azad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 822–835 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Cheema and U. Krewer, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 34926–34936 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Energy Chem., 2019, 1, 100013 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. Gu, X. Zhou, K. Gao, K. Sun, D. Wu, J. Xia and X. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 4783–4792 RSC .
P. Li, Z. Zhou, Q. Wang, M. Guo, S. Chen, J. Low, R. Long, W. Liu, P. Ding and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12430–12439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, P. Song, J. Di and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Ye, L. Wang, X. Shi, P. Wang, W. Bai and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, P. Li, L. Ye, Y. Zhou, F. Su, C. Ding, H. Xie, Y. Bai and P. K. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24995–25004 RSC .
U. Asghar, S. Rafiq, A. Anwar, T. Iqbal, A. Ahmed, F. Jamil, M. S. Khurram, M. M. Akbar, A. Farooq and N. Shah, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106064 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Goldsmith, Calif. Med., 1971, 115, 55 CAS .
W. Tang, Y. Pei, H. Zheng, Y. Zhao, L. Shu and H. Zhang, Chemosphere, 2022, 295, 133875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Manoiu, K. Kubiak Wójcicka, A. I. Craciun, Ç. Akman and E. Akman, Water, 2022, 14, 1124 CrossRef CAS .
P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2010, 39, 301–312 CAS .
B. Xiao, W. Zhao, Y. Xiang, X. Wu and G. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liao, L. Chen, M. Sun, B. Lei, X. Zeng, Y. Sun and F. Dong, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 779–789 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Kafle, H. Valera and A. K. Agarwal, Novel internal combustion engine technologies for performance improvement and emission reduction (Energy, Environment and Sustainability), Springer,  2021, pp. 175–196 Search PubMed .

          J. Carrillo Hermosilla, P. R. d. González and T. Könnölä, What is eco-innovation?Springer,  2009, pp. 6–27 Search PubMed .
J. Shang, W. Hao, X. Lv, T. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Du, S. Dou, T. Xie, D. Wang and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 954–961 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, J. Cao, H. Lin, Y. Wang and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4059–4064 CrossRef .
J. Li, L. Cai, J. Shang, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4059–4064 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ji, R. Chen, J. Di, Y. Liu, K. Li, Z. Chen, J. Xia and H. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 533, 612–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, P. Song, C. Zhu, C. Chen, J. Xiong, M. Duan, R. Long, W. Zhou, M. Xu and L. Kang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 1025–1032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, X. Jin, T. Ge, H. Xie, R. Sun, F. Su, X. Li and L. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 409, 128178 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Ye, T. Chen, L. Wang, X. Shi, X. Zhang and D. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27661–27668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Hai, X. Ding, K. Chang, Y. Xiang, X. Meng, Z. Yang, H. Chen and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701774 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xiao, J. Jiang and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 487–493 CrossRef .
Y. Dai, C. Li, Y. Shen, S. Zhu, M. S. Hvid, L.-C. Wu, J. Skibsted, Y. Li, J. H. Niemantsverdriet and F. Besenbacher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16711–16719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, P. Ren, Y. Li, D. Lv, Y. Shen, Y. Li, H. Niemantsverdriet, F. Besenbacher, H. Xiang and W. Hao, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 6331–6336 CrossRef .
F. Chang, B. Lei, X. Zhang, Q. Xu, H. Chen, B. Deng and X. Hu, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 572, 290–298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barakat, H. D. Vries and X. Rouau, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 134, 362–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Antonio, Biofuel Res. J., 2019, 6, 962–979 CrossRef .

          V. I. Popa and I. Volf, Biomass as Renewable Raw Material to Obtain Bioproducts of High-Tech Value, Elsevier,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Reza, C. Bertinetto, K. K. Kesari, P. Engelhardt, J. Ruokolainen and T. Vuorinen, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Mota, D. Oliveira, R. Marchiosi, O. Ferrarese-Filho and W. Santos, AIMS Bioeng., 2018, 5, 63–77 CAS .
J. He, L. Su, X. Sun, J. Fu, J. Chen and J. Wu, Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng., 2014, 19, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Qaseem, H. Shaheen and A. M. Wu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 144, 110996 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Abdel-Hamid, J. O. Solbiati and I. K. Cann, Adv. Appl. Microbiol., 2013, 1–28 CAS .
P. Sudarsanam, R. Zhong, S. Van den Bosch, S. M. Coman, V. I. Parvulescu and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8349–8402 RSC .
S. Albonetti, A. Lolli, V. Morandi, A. Migliori, C. Lucarelli and F. Cavani, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 520–530 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, C. Li, Y. Guo, X. Liu, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 526, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ghosh, R. A. Molla, M. A. Iqubal, S. S. Islam and S. M. Islam, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 520, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang and M. J. Dumont, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 1478–1492 CrossRef CAS .
I. Krivtsov, M. Ilkaeva, E. Salas-Colera, Z. Amghouz, J. R. García, E. Díaz, S. Ordóñez and S. Villar-Rodil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6770–6780 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hou, X. Qi, M. Zhen, H. Qian, Y. Nie, C. Bai, S. Zhang, X. Bai and M. Ju, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 119–231 RSC .
D. N. Jin, G. J. Jiao, W. F. Ren, J. H. Zhou, J. L. Ma and R. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 16450–16458 RSC .
X. P. Yang, J. L. Ma, S. F. Sun, Z. D. Liu and R. C. Sun, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 2104–2113 RSC .
J. L. Ma, D. N. Jin, X. P. Yang, S. L. Sun, J. H. Zhou and R. C. Sun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4150–4160 RSC .
J. L. Ma, L. D. Zhong, X. W. Peng and R. C. Sun, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1738–1750 RSC .
J. L. Ma, X. W. Peng, L. Zhong and R. C. Sun, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 9140–9150 RSC .
Z. G. Li, D. Li, W. Lan, X. H. Li, X. F. Wan, R. C. Sun, C. F. Liu and Y. X. Peng, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 7084–7092 RSC .
L. Chen, Y. Huang, R. Zou, J. L. Ma, Y. Yang, T. Li, M. Li, Q. Hao, H. Xie and X. Peng, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1382–1388 RSC .
J. Q. Zhang, K. N. Liu, S. L. Sun, R. C. Sun and J. L. Ma, Green Chem., 2021, 24, 8367–8376 RSC .
X. C. Dai, M. H. Huang, Y. B. Li, T. Li, B. B. Zhang, Y. He and F. X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2741–2753 RSC .
Y. Y. Li, B. X. Zhou, H. W. Zhang, T. Huang, Y. M. Wang, W. Q. Huang and G. F Huang, J. Chem. Eng., 2022, 430, 132880 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Zhou, S. S. Ding, K. X. Yang, J. Zhang, G. F. Huang, A. Pan and W. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009230 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Zhu, Z. C. Wang, B. Tang, H. Liang, B. J. Liu, S. Li and F. X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 11926–11937 RSC .
S. Hou, M. H. Huang and F. X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7006–7012 RSC .
B. Tang and F. X. Xiao, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 9023–9057 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, W. Peng, J. Zhang, J. C. Lian, T. Huang, N. Cheng and G. F. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100816 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Framework for the current review of BiOX photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural evolution: 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D materials-modified BiOX.	 

 	Fig. 3  Hydrothermal/solvothermal preparations of BiOX photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 4  Template method for the fabrication of BiOX photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 5  Calcination process in the preparation of BiOX photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 6  Graphical summaries of BiOX photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocatalytic reaction and mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 8  Strategies for tuning the band structure of BiOX photocatalysts (a: heterojunction, b: Z-scheme, c: S-scheme, d: doping).	 

 	Fig. 9  Tuning the band structure of BiOX photocatalysts by a solid solution method.	 

 	Fig. 10  Solar water-splitting types, from photovoltaic electrolysis to photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) H2 generation and (b) NH3 generation over a BiOX photocatalyst.	 


1	Bi24O31Br10	H2 generation	Xe lamp 300 W	D: 50 mg	H2 133.9 μmol g−1 h−1	
115

R: 20 mL H2O and 10 mL MeOH
S: H2O + MeOH
2	Bi4O5Br2	H2 generation	300 W Xe	R: 30 mL H2O and 20 mL MeOH, with Pt 1 wt%	H2 170.25 μmol g−1 h−1	
116

D: 40 mg
S: H2O + MeOH
3	Bi3O4Br	H2 generation	300 W Xe lamp	R: 45 mL H2O and 5 mL MeOH solution with Pt 1 wt%	H2 380 μmol g−1 h−1	
78

D: 50 mg
S: H2O + MeOH
4	MoS–Bi12O17Cl2	H2 generation	300 W Xe lamp	R: 80 mL ascorbic acid aqueous solution (0.3 M)	H2 33 mmol g−1 h−1	
34

400 nm cutoff filter	D: 10 mg

	S: H2O
5	C–Bi3O4Cl	O2 generation	150 W Xe lamp	R: 200 mL H2O	O2 860 μmol g−1 h−1	
117

420 nm cutoff filter	D: 100 mg

	S: H2O
6	Bi7O9I3	O2 generation	300 W Xe lamp	R: H2O	O2 199.26 μmol g−1 h−1	
118

D: 50 mg
S: 50 mL aqueous solution and 1 mL AgNO3 solution (2 wt%)
7	Bi3O5BrI	CO2 reduction	300 W Xe lamp	R: CO2	22.85 μmol g−1 h−1	
61

400 nm cutoff filter	D: 50 mg

	S: Water vapor
8	g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2	CO2 reduction	300 W Xe lamp	R: 1 atm CO2	CO 45.6 μmol g−1 h−1	
104

400 nm cutoff filter	D: 0.1 g

	S: 10 mL
9	Bi12O17Cl2	CO2 reduction	300 W Xe lamp	R: 80 KPa CO2	CO 34.65 μmol g−1 h−1	
119

D: 30 mg
T: 30 °C
S: 50 mL H2O
10	Co–Bi3O4Br	CO2 reduction	300 W Xe lamp	R: 0.08 MPa CO2	CO 107.1 μmol g−1 h−1	
74

D: 30 mg
T: 5 °C
S: 50 mL H2O
11	Bi4O5Br2	CO2 reduction	Xe lamp	R: 1 mL CO2	CO 3.16 μmol g−1 h−1	
120

D: 50 mg	CH4 0.5 μmol g−1 h−1
T: 20 °C
S: 5 mL H2O
12	Bi5O7I-001	N2 fixation to NH3	300 W Xe lamp	R: 1 atm N2	NH3 223 μmol g−1 h−1	
121

D: 50 mg
S: 80 mL H2O and 20 mL MeOH
13	Bi3O4Br	N2 fixation to NH3	300 W Xe lamp	R: N2	NH3 50.8 μmol g−1 h−1	
78

D: 50 mg
S: 100 mL H2O
14	Bi5O7Br nanotubes	N2 fixation to NH3	300 W Xe lamp	R: 8 mm	NH3 1.38 mmol g−1 h−1	
122

400 nm cutoff filter	D: 50 mg

	S: 10 mL
15	Bi5O7Br	N2 fixation to NH3	300 W Xe lamp	R: 100 mL H2O	NH3 12.72 mmol g−1 h−1	
102

400 nm cutoff filter	D: 25 mg

	S: 10 mL
16	Bi12O17Br2 nano belts	Oxidation of benzyl alcohol into benzaldehyde	500 W Xe lamp	D: 50 mg	44% with 99% selectivity	
123

420 nm cutoff filter	T: 50 °C

	S: 10 mL isopropanol with oxygen
17	Bi24O31Br10(OH)x	Reduction of nitrobenzene	410 nm LED for 24 h	R: 8 mm nitrobenzene	42%	
124

D: 50 mg
S: 10 mL isopropanol
18	Bi24O31Br10(OH)x	Oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones	450 nm LED for 24 h	R: 8 mm	71% and 55%	
125

D: 50 mg
S: 10 mL acetonitrile

 	Fig. 12  Proposed CO2 photoreduction over BiOX photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 13  Summaries of lignocellulosic biomass.	 

 	Fig. 14  Proposed reaction pathways for biomass-derived 5-HMF.	 

 	Fig. 15  Photocatalytic production of lactic acid and its derivatives from biomass-derived feedstock.	 

 	Fig. 16  Proposed selective oxidation of D-xylonic acid.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
