Nanocomposites of polymer brush and inorganic nanoparticles: preparation, characterization and application  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5PY01333J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5PY01333J
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 753-769Nanocomposites of polymer brush and inorganic nanoparticles: preparation, characterization and application

        
          
            Genkuo 
            Nie
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guozhu 
            Li
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xiangwen 
            Zhang
          
        
      
Key Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Collaborative Innovative Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: gzli@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      21st August 2015
    , Accepted 6th December 2015First published on 8th December 2015AbstractThe formation of nanocomposites by embedding inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) in polymer brushes has been studied extensively for the development of functional surfaces. Polymer brushes are particularly useful matrices for the preparation of nanocomposites, because the macromolecular matrix acts as a reaction chamber for nanoparticle synthesis, as a scaffold for immobilization, and as a capping agent for preventing nanoparticle aggregation. Moreover, synergies between the polymer chains and the inorganic NPs will grant the composite new properties. The stimuli-responsive polymers/NPs endow the composites with excellent properties for many applications, such as in sensors, detectors, and electronic/optical devices. We tackle in this review the use of a subset of polymer brushes (e.g., polyelectrolytes and polyampholytes) for the embedment of inorganic NPs to make composite surfaces/NPs with specific functions.
1. Introduction
Inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) are probably one of the most important and extensive family of materials in catalysis, sensors, semiconductors, and medicine.1 Their quantum confinement effects and high surface-to-volume ratio endow NPs with some unique properties compared with their corresponding bulk materials.2–4 However, their properties decrease with aggregation and increase of particle size.5,6 Moreover, it is difficult to separate them from a mixture. As a consequence, several systems including polymer ligands,7 dendrimers,8 and microgels9 have been explored as carrier systems to prevent aggregation and maintain the desired properties of the NPs. Among them, polymer brushes are fashionable due to their distinctive advantages.10 Commonly employed strategies are based on loading the polymer brush with metal ion precursors and synthesizing NPs in situ, or though adsorption of the pre-fabricated NPs. The macromolecular matrix acts as a reaction chamber that provides a scaffold for immobilization, prevents aggregation, and functions as a capping agent to limit NP growth.11
Polymer brushes are layers of ultrathin polymers constructed by tethering one end of the polymer chains to a planar or curved substrate in close proximity to each other.12 Depending on the polymer used, this open structure can stabilize NPs and affect the function of the composite (e.g., endowing it with optical, electronic, magnetic, and catalytic properties) at the same time. The NPs stabilized through this system usually retain a uniform small particle size and the size can be modulated.13 Polyelectrolytes and polyampholytes with charged groups are especially useful matrices for immobilization of NPs to prepare nanocomposites, as a variety of precursor salts can be easily introduced. Composites with polymer brush and NPs arise in various applications and in experimental systems where polyelectrolytes/polyampholytes provide charged environments, and organize NPs to generate new materials with novel properties. For instance, the stimuli-responsive polymers/NPs endow the composites with excellent properties for many applications, such as in sensors, detectors, and electronic/optical devices.
In this minireview, we highlight polymer brushes, especially polyelectrolyte/polyampholyte brushes, with embedded inorganic NPs according to their category, and with an emphasis on the unique function of every group. We will also discuss our insights into the characterization and the application of the nanocomposite systems.
2. Preparation of polymer brushes with embedded NPs
Nanocomposites can be formed on two kinds of surfaces, including flat bulk surfaces and curved nanosurfaces. A schematic outline for the preparation of a composite on a flat surface as demonstrated by the Huck group is shown in Scheme 1.14 Polymer brushes with cationic quaternary ammonium groups were used to bind gold salt. Ballauff’s group prepared composites on curved nanosurfaces grafted with polyelectrolyte brushes, as shown in Scheme 2.15 Negatively charged carboxylic acid groups with Ag+ were employed for composite preparation.
 Scheme 1  Schematic outline of the procedure used to synthesize Au NPs inside polyelectrolyte brushes. (a–c) Poly-METAC brushes are synthesized by surface-initiated aqueous atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), followed by immersion in AuCl4− solution for 30 min. (d) The Au-loaded brushes are then treated with NaBH4 to produce mostly metallic Au NPs, along with some partially reduced Au species.14 
 Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the preparation of poly(styrene)(PS)–poly(acrylic acid)(PAA)–Ag composite particles in situ. PS core particles are first prepared by a conventional emulsion polymerization. In a second step, the PS-cores are covered with a thin layer of photoinitiator 2-[p-(2-hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone)]-ethyleneglycol methacrylate (HMEM). In the third step, the shell of polyelectrolyte brushes is formed by photoemulsion polymerization: shining light on the aqueous suspension of these particles generates radicals at their surface which initiate the radical polymerization of the functional monomer (silver acrylate) on the surface of the core particles. Concomitantly the silver anions embedded in the PAA brushes are reduced into Ag nanoparticles under UV irradiation.15 
Based on the system of poly(styrene) (PS) grafted with cationic polyelectrolyte brushes, Ballauff’s group also reported the preparation of a nanocomposite with platinum NPs from the nanoalloy of gold and platinum (Scheme 3).16 After the embedment of the Au–Pt nanoalloy, the gold was slowly and selectively dissolved by cyanide ions in the presence of oxygen. The resulting platinum NPs are faceted single crystals that remain embedded in the polyelectrolyte-chain layer. The composite systems of the core organic particles and the platinum single nanocrystals exhibit an excellent colloidal stability, as well as high catalytic activity in hydrogenation reactions in the aqueous phase.
 Scheme 3  Synthesis scheme of Pt nanocrystals (NCs) by de-alloying of a Au–Pt nanoalloy. The carrier particles are SPBs that consist of a solid PS core (RH = 50 nm) onto which cationic polyelectrolyte chains of 2-aminoethylmethacrylate (2-AEMH) are attached. In a first step, the chloride counterions were exchanged against AuCl4− ions; in a second step the rest of the Cl− ions were exchanged against PtCl42− ions. Bimetallic Au45Pt55 nanoalloy particles were generated by reduction of the mixture of these ions by NaBH4.17 The composition of the resulting nanoalloy can be adjusted by the ratio of the metal ions in the brush layer. In the final step, cyanide ions and oxygen were used to leach out the Au atoms from the nanoalloy under very mild conditions. This procedure leads to faceted Pt NCs with a diameter of a few nanometers embedded in the surface layer of the polyelectrolyte chains.16 
To obtain the organic–inorganic nanocomposite, metal ion precursors anchored in a polymer matrix are reduced, hydrolyzed, or precipitated. Various kinds of metal or metal oxide NPs, including Au, Ag, Pt, Pd, Ni, TiO2, Fe3O4, MnO2, H3PW12O40, CdS and CdSe have been synthesized within a matrix of polymer brush either by dispersive or van der Waals, electrostatic, hydrogen or covalent bonds. Table 1 summarizes recent studies on the preparation of nanocomposites. Besides specific non-ionizable groups, there are mainly three kinds of functional groups on the brushes used for binding purposes, namely, cationic groups, anionic groups, and zwitterionic groups. The as-prepared nanocomposites have a wide range of tunable properties depending on the selection of polymer and NPs. These nanocomposites are promising materials for many applications, such as in catalytic systems, antibiofouling materials, sensors, detectors and electronic/optical devices.
Table 1 Overview of the polymer brushes and corresponding metal NPs for the preparation of nanocomposites




Structure of polymer brush
Metal ions
Embedded NPs
Ref.







PtCl62−
Pt

18–21



PdCl42−
Pd

22



MnO4−
MnO2

23



AuCl4−
Au

24






H3PW12O40
PW12O403−

25



AuCl4−
Au

26,27



Au
Au

28,29






AuCl4−
AuPd

30,31



PdCl42−


AuCl4−
Au

19



PtCl62−, AuCl4−
Au–Pt

17






PdCl42−, AuCl4−
Pd, Au

32






PdCl42−
Pd

33






CdSe
CdSe

34






H3PW12O40
H2PW12O40−

35






H3PW12O40
H2PW12O40−

36






Cd(OOCCH3)2, Na2S
CdS

37



PtCl62−, Pd2+
Pt, Pd

38



Au
Au

39



Ag+
Ag

40






Au
Au

41






Au
Au

42






Mn2+
MnO2

43



Cd2+, H2S, Cd(Ac)2, SeSO32−
CdS–CdSe

44



Ag+
Ag

45






CdCl2, Na2S
CdS

46



Ag+
Ag

47



[Ag(NH3)2]+ HAuCl4
Au

48



Ni2+
Ni

49






Au
Au

50






Ag(ac)
Ag

51



Na2PdCl4
Pd





Cd2+, H2Se
CdSe

52









CdS

53






Cd(Ac)2 and H2S
CdS

54






Ag+
Ag

55






Ag+
Ag

56






Fe2+, Fe3+
Fe3O4

57



α-Fe2O3


α-FeOOH





PdCl42−, PtCl62−, AuCl4−
Au, Pd, Pt

58



[Ag(NH3)2]+
Ag

59






Ag+
Ag

60






PS-covered Au NPs
Au

61






Au
Au

62






Au
Au

63





There are mainly three steps to prepare a nanocomposite via the embedment of inorganic NPs into polymer brushes. Firstly, an appropriate substance and corresponding linkages are chosen. Secondly, the surface of the substance is modified by polymer brush though different techniques, mainly (i) the “grafting to” and (ii) the “grafting from” strategies. Lastly, different precursors are taken up into the brush, followed by suitable in situ reaction for the formation of inorganic NPs. In addition, some inorganic NPs are pre-fabricated, and then introduced into polymer brushes through specific interaction.64 For example, Au NPs have been immobilized into brushes of poly((2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl) methacrylate with thiol end groups.62
To create stable polymer brush on the surface, it is essential to attach the polymer chains onto surfaces with an appropriate surface packing density. As mentioned above, the attachment strategies can generally be categorized into “graft-from” and “graft-to” methods. The “graft-from” method involves (i) the immobilization of initiators on the surface by adhesive linkers and (ii) polymerization initiated by the immobilized initiators, such as atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible-addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT), nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP), and photoiniferter-mediated polymerization (PIMP).65–67 Though uniform polymer brush can be prepared by this approach, the “graft-from” method is complex and difficult. Initiator must be finely adhered, and oxygen-free conditions are necessary for the living radical polymerization during grafting. The “graft-to” method involves (i) preparation of polymers containing adhesive groups, such as mussel-inspired 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) groups68 and (ii) direct attachment of the polymers onto the surface. Compared with the “graft-from” method, the “graft-to” method is more convenient but the quality of polymer brush is harder to control. More work should be carried out for the development of more vigorous “graft-to” methods to simply prepare better quality polymer brush. Until now, polymer brushes have been grafted to or from surfaces via several common adhesive linkers, including thiols for a gold surface, silanes for a glass surface, hydrophobic moieties for a hydrophobic surface, or DOPA for various surfaces.
The mechanical and chemical robustness of polymer brushes, coupled with their high degree of synthetic flexibility towards the introduction of a variety of functional groups, qualify them to be a reactive platform for NP embedment. Generally, polyelectrolytes and polyampholytes are employed for preparing nanocomposites because their charged groups can absorb ions selectively. After the introduction of metal ions directly (the ions can be converted to inorganic NPs after reactions) or other ions (the ions can only help to form inorganic NPs in reactions, e.g., cyanide ions used for the formation of Pt NPs in ref. 16) to the matrices, inorganic NPs can be generated in situ in polymer brush through certain reactions.
Amines, including primary amines, secondary amines, tertiary amines and quaternary amines, were used as functional groups of polymer brush to anchor inorganic NPs. Positively charged quaternary amine is the most popular structure due to its strong electrostatic adsorption of negative metal ions, such as PtCl62−, AuCl4− and MnO4−. Moreover, bimetallic NPs immobilized in spherical polyelectrolyte brushes can be formed easily using this system.17,30,31
Sulfonic acid group has been used to anchor Fe3+ and Fe2+ for the embedment of magnetic iron oxide NPs.57 The sulfonate brushes have a strong affinity for metal ions, to capture the iron precursors used in the synthesis of magnetic NPs. After adsorption of iron salts into the sulfonate brushes, magnetic NPs were formed within the brushes via simple air oxidation.
Likewise, carboxylic acid was employed as an anchor group for the embedment of cationic metal ions, such as Mn+, Ni+, Ag+, and Cd2+. Besides, zwitterionic polymer brushes with both positively charged quaternary amine and negatively charged carboxylic acid groups were used for the anchoring of Ag+ and preparation of a Ag–polymer nanocomposite.60
There are many advantages of these ways for generating metallic NPs. Because of the confinement of the counterions, NPs are only generated within the polyelectrolyte layer, and the amount is limited to some extent by the density of the brushes. Since the generation of NPs can take place only within the brush layer instead of outside, all particles are confined in the colloidal carrier and remain stable despite the countervailing power between them. Therefore, stabilization of the NPs against aggregation is realized. The metal NPs need no extra agent to stabilize their surface which limits the activity of NPs. Additionally, the open structure and unique property of the brushes can enhance certain functions of the composite, e.g., the diffusivity of guest molecules, the catalytic activity, and the sensitivity.69,70
Huck’s group investigated the interactions and changes in gold NPs inside polyelectrolyte brushes of controlled thickness.14 Gold chloride within these polymer brushes produces a homogeneous distribution of well-segregated Au NPs with minimal aggregate formation. The NPs do not affect the swelling properties of the ultrathin polyelectrolyte layer. Uhlmannre’s group reported the in situ synthesis of Pd and Pt NPs in poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP) brushes by adsorption of either Pd2+ or PtCl62− ions to the polymer, following reduction by sodium borohydride.38 Moreover, block copolymer brushes of poly(4-vinylpyridine-b-styrene) (P4VP-b-PS) have been grafted for the infiltration of pre-fabricated gold NPs to prepared nanocomposite.61 With solvent annealing, the polymer-covered NPs are either sequestered into the corresponding block copolymer domain or expulsed from the brush, depending on the shell density of the nanocomposite. However, from an industrial point of view, the methods mentioned above may involve the copious use of organic solvents, which is usually environmentally unfriendly and economically prohibitive.
More efficient, facile, precise and environmentally benign methods should be developed for the preparation of nanocomposites. Then, various aspects of the nanocomposites should be studied in order to further understand their complex structure–property relationships. Tailoring the interfacial interaction of NPs and polymer brush is conducive to a better understanding of the relationships for an optimized synthesis route of the composite. In the thin layer of polymer brush, there is a large volume fraction of interfacial polymer compared with the volume fraction of NPs. By taking advantage of this large interfacial area and interfacial volume, unique combinations of properties of polymer brush and NPs can be achieved for controllable preparation. Therefore, the growth of the colloidal NPs, the interactions between inorganic NPs and polymer brushes, and the collective state of the composites are key domains to investigate to achieve more precise preparation. Moreover, theoretical simulation will be a powerful tool to guide the experimental synthesis. For instance, Lian et al. predicted that the nature of NP interactions can be manipulated by changing the solvent condition using 2D self-consistent field calculations.71 This opens the possibility to manipulate NP interactions by exchanging the solvents used in the composite preparation.
The construction of more accurate and complex structures of the nanocomposites remains a challenge but will lead to materials with advanced functionalities. In the future, assembly methods for a desired structure should be developed. Guidelines for process optimization should be established to meet this challenge. Additionally, the structure–property relationships to predict the performance of a given architecture should be figured out. As a result, the structure of the nanocomposite and the interaction between NPs and brushes must be fully characterized. It is necessary to figure out the configuration of NPs in the brushes. In the following sections, discussion will be conducted on general characterizations used to analyze the obtained nanocomposites.
In addition, depending on the architecture and property expected, the polymer brush can be manipulated using external stimuli to endow the materials with “smart” properties such as the solvent responsive polymer brushes,72,73 thermosensitive polymer brushes,74 pH- and ion-sensitive polymer brushes75–77 and nonbiofouling polymer brushes.78,79 These polymer brushes combined with certain NPs lead to various applications of nanocomposite systems, which will be discussed in section 4.
3. Characterization
The characterization of these nanocomposites is still a challenging task, since many of the analytical tools for polymer brushes or composites are bulk solution-based technologies.80 Based on the achievement of being able to analyze the surface of pure polymer brushes, many methods have been developed for the characterization of organic–inorganic-hybrid nanocomposites. Table 2 presents an overview of the techniques that have been employed to characterize the nanocomposites. This section will highlight how some of the most prominent properties of nanocomposites are determined by the relevant tools currently available.
Table 2 Overview of analytical techniques that are available for the characterization of polymer brushes with embedded inorganic NPs




Methods
Property
Ref.




UV-vis spectra
Optical properties reflecting NP size and shape as well as the refractive index of the matrix in which the NPs are embedded

22,24,29,34,35,40,41,44,45,50,52–55,58,59,81



The concentration change of a certain organic compound, such as 4-nitrophenol

18–21,26,27,32,38,45,49,58,82



X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement
Structures of nanoparticles

20,23,25,31–33,44,57–59



Phase identification


Morphology of the samples


IR spectra, FTIR, ATR-IR, ATR-FTIR
Chemical composition

25,26,33,35–38,43,44,50,51,53,55,59,63



Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, high-resolution transmission microscopy (HR-TEM)
Morphology, the specific surface area of the nanoparticles, distribution of the particles

17–21,23–28,31–33,36–38,43–45,49,50,52–54,56,58,59,62,63,82,83



Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
The amount of metal

18–23,25,26,30–33,36,37,43,44,58,82



Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
The morphology of the surface

28,29,34,37–42,50–53,55,57,59,60,62,81,83



X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
Chemical composition and structure

24,29,37,38,40,42–44,48,50,51,53,57,59,60,62



Photovoltaic action spectroscopy
Photovoltaic quantum efficiency

34



PL spectroscopy
Photoluminescence and optical properties

37



Open-aperture Z-scan
Photoluminescence and optical properties

37



N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms, BJH method
Specific surface area, and pore size distributions

35,43



Chronopotentiometry (CP)
Capacitance performance

43



Cyclic voltammetry
Supercapacitor performance

42,43,63



Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
Size distribution, dispersition

21–23,26,28,29,36,38,48,55,59,63



High-resolution electron microscopy (HRSEM)
Morphology




Superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) measurements
Magnetic properties

57



Vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM)
Magnetic properties

20,26



Extended X-ray absorption fine structure measurements (EXAFS)
Chemical composition and structure

30



Dynamic light scattering (DLS)
Particle size, film thickness

17,18,21–23,31,32,49



Spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE), ellipsometric measurements
Thickness of the brush

24,28,29,39,40,51,60,61,81



Scanning force microscopy (SFM)
Roughness

54



Quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D)
The phototunable uncaging and swelling of the composite

83



Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
Chemical structure

21,35



Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS)
Brush-NP interaction, surface state

42,48,59,62



Surface plasmon resonance (SPR), T-SPR, LSPR, spectroscopy
Thickness of the brush, interaction between the brush and NPs

29,39,81



Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis
Chemical composition

17,21,23,31,52,54,58,59,61



X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements
Estimate density, porosity, and pore filling of mesoporous thin films

24,53,81



STEM, cross-sectional HAADF-STEM, bright-field (BF-STEM) images
Thickness and the structure of the composite

31,58,61



Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES)
Metal content

25,26,35,45,49



Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
Metal content

56



Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS), small-angle neutron scattering (SANS)
Nanometer-scale structure of the nanocomposite

24,84,85





Two (or more) complementary techniques are generally used to characterize the structures of nanocomposites, e.g., XRD and TEM. Due to its ease of use and availability, XRD is most commonly employed to probe the structure of nanocomposites. XRD offers a convenient method to determine the crystallinity/phase of embedded inorganic NPs. But little can be said about the spatial distribution of the NPs in the polymer brush or any structural inhomogeneities in nanocomposites. Additionally, some nanocomposites initially do not exhibit well-defined basal reflections. Thus, peak broadening and intensity decreases result in difficult systematic study of such composites by XRD. Therefore, conclusions concerning the structure and formation mechanism of nanocomposites based solely on XRD patterns are only tentative. On the other hand, TEM allows a qualitative understanding of the internal structure and can directly provide information in real space, in a localized area, on morphology and defect structures. The formation of NPs in the polymer brushes has been investigated by TEM. Uhlmann employed a special TEM sample called a “TEM window”. This method uses an ion beam to cut a lamella with the silicon substrate on the bottom, a polymer layer in the middle, plus a vaporized carbon layer and stabilizing Pt layers on the top. Thus, an image of NPs vertically in planar brushes was directly collected, as presented in Fig. 1.38 Huck’s group also employed this method to characterize magnetic NP-loaded polyelectrolyte brushes in as early as 2008.57 By using HAADF-STEM, Huck et al. clearly showed that the Au NPs which were originally distributed throughout P4VP-b-PS brushes have mostly migrated from the P4VP into the PS domain, as displayed in Fig. 2.61 This process is illustrated in Scheme 4.
 Fig. 1  TEM image of an FIB lamella (a lamella cut by focused ion beam) of P2VP brushes with Pd NPs.38 
 Fig. 2  Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM images of P4VP-b-PS brushes infiltrated with PS-covered Au NP after annealing with CH2Cl2 vapor: (a) ∑PS = 1.79 chains per nm2 and (b) ∑PS = 0.95 chains per nm2. The intensity of the images was inverted for improved visibility. The gradient in brightness, most noticeable in (a), arises from the variation in sample thickness, due to sample preparation. Layer thicknesses of 16 nm P4VP and 20 nm PS in Fig. 3b are in good agreement with original layer thicknesses of 13 and 19 nm, respectively.61 
 Scheme 4  Schematic illustration of Au NP infiltration into block copolymer brushes.61 
AFM is another effective tool to characterize nanocomposites by providing the morphological information. Hu et al. employed AFM to figure out the morphology of the surfaces and determine the embedment of silver NPs in polymer brushes due to the changes of surface roughness.60 Huck’s group investigated the influence of iron precursor concentration on the height of the patterned sulfonate brushes before and after the synthesis of the iron oxide NPs using height profiles of AFM.57 From the changes of height and corresponding morphology of the AFM image, a conclusion was drawn that a high concentration of iron salts will lead to brush collapse, and possibly also damage the brush layer, while a low concentration of iron salts will increase the height of the brushes. After oxidation, the NPs are clearly visible in the AFM images.
XPS can provide quantitative information about the chemical composition/state of the NPs and brush chains. The chemical structure of the analyzed material can be determined from the energy gaps of the elements and ratio amount of one element to another. XPS can also determine the location of NPs in the brush. Gupta and co-workers performed XPS at three different takeoff angles (angle between surface normal and electron-optical axis of the spectrometer) of 0°, 60° and 75° to collect the information from different mean depths of 8 nm, 4 nm, and 2 nm, respectively, of the polymer brush layer.50 By recording spectra at these different incident angles, the location of NPs can be determined. In addition, the amount of metal on the surface can be estimated by the XPS spectra in conjunction with ellipsometry data, as shown below.38  
Uhlmann et al. employed the above equation to estimate the amount of surface NPs, where σ: grafting density of P2VP brush, n,P2VP: number average of molecular weight of P2VP, MPt: molecular weight of platinum, MN: molecular weight of nitrogen, NA: Avogadro's number, APt: amount of platinum on the surface, nN: molar amount of nitrogen on the surface, nPt: molar amount of platinum on the surface and wN/P2VP weight percentage of nitrogen in P2VP. For a typical sample with Pt NPs, an amount of APt ≈ 0.1 mg m−2 was estimated.
Moreover, the chemical composition and structure of the hybrid system can be probed by a series of techniques. IR spectroscopy is a useful tool to qualitatively provide evidence for the presence of certain functional groups. The interaction between chains and NPs can be observed from the difference of peaks in IR spectra. For the characterization of very thin films, the sensitivity can be improved by using special techniques, such as grazing-angle Fourier transform infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (FTIR-RAS).
The combination of XPS and ATR-FTIR spectroscopy can reveal the diffusion processes of ions into the polymer brushes, the formation of NPs and their interaction. Using this combination, Uhlmann’s group investigated the embedding of Pd and Pt NPs.38 They found that PdCl2 adsorbs via a coordination bond between the nitrogen of the pyridine group and the metal ion, whereas H2PtCl6 first protonates the nitrogen and thereafter interacts electrostatically.
XRR is a powerful technique to estimate density, porosity, and pore filling of mesoporous thin films from the analysis of the total reflection critical angles.86 Moreover, the precise nanometer-scale structure has been widely studied by small-angle X-ray/neutron scattering (SAXS/SANS) which is a small-angle scattering technique where the source for the elastic scattering of the X-rays/nertrons is the inhomogeneities in the sample. SAXS/SANS can be done in situ and give more information concerning the nanometer-scale structure of the dispersed phase of the nanocomposite. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) can be used to monitor the size of NPs, and can then therefore determine the change of film thickness on the NPs. The thicknesses of the obtained composite film can also be measured by ellipsometry or SPR. Additionally, TGA, ICP-AES, ICP-MS and EDX have been employed to measure the amount of metal in the composite. The topography and surface structure of composites have also been investigated by SEM, SERS, QCM-D and SPR.
To measure the magnetic properties of the NP-loaded brushes, SQUID and VSM have been employed. Finite-size effects and the shape of the hysteresis loop change with the rotation of NPs within the matrix. Huck’s group performed SQUID measurements where the applied magnetic field was aligned perpendicular to the orientation direction of the brushes to investigate whether iron oxide NPs are tightly immobilized within the brush matrix.57 If the NPs have partial freedom of rotation within the matrix, a change of direction in the external magnetic field would enable the partial orientation of the easy axes of NPs along the applied field, thus leading to a shape change in the magnetization curves. Otherwise, the optical properties of the nanocomposites are studied by the spectra of UV-vis, photovoltaic action, PL and open-aperture Z-scan, and their electronic performance can be characterized by chronopotentiometry or cyclic voltammetry measurements. Some technologies of characterization can complete several property identifications. For example, UV spectroscopy is not only used to characterize the catalysis activity of hydrogenation of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol, but also gives a fast and strong signal to detect the variation in optical properties of immobilized NPs.45,58
The properties of polymer brush–NPs nanocomposites are generally distinguished compared to the pure polymer matrix. In particular, they commonly exhibit improved mechanical properties and thermal stability regardless of the preparative method. Apart from the properties of individual components in a nanocomposite, the dispersion of NPs in the polymer brush and the interfacial interaction play important roles in affecting the overall properties of the system. Some trends are observed but no universal rules for the behavior of polymer-brush nanocomposites can be deduced in general. Unraveling the structure–property relationships of these nanocomposite materials is still a challenge and a new frontier in this field. To fully understand structure–property relationships, existing characterization techniques and the newly developed ones must be combined for more detailed investigation. We hope the properties of the nanocomposites can be predicted based on their full characterization.
4. Applications of NPs–polymer-brush nanocomposites
Embedding inorganic NPs in polymer brushes is a facile strategy to combine the advantages of NPs and polymer brushes for surface functionalization. Such nanocomposites usually possess unique properties, including catalytic activity, antifouling/antimicrobial functions or magnetic/optical/electronic properties. For instance, the nanocomposites of noble-metal NPs, such as gold, platinum, and palladium, are usually applied in catalysis. The embedment of silver NPs in polyelectrolyte brush will endow the composite with antimicrobial function. Polymer brushes with the embedment of metal oxide, such as TiO2, RuO2, MnO2, NiOx, CoOx, and Fe2O3, are efficient materials for photocatalysis, or electrodes for pseudocapacitance and magnetic materials. Moreover, metal salts, such as CdS–CdSe, have potential applications in the production of solar cells. This section will discuss various applications of nanocomposite systems.
4.1 Nanocomposites used as catalysts
Polymer brush can control the size of NPs under small values without the use of extra stabilizing agents and can facilitate the diffusion of reactants to active sites. As a result, polymer brushes embedded with metal NPs, such as gold, platinum, and palladium, draw much attention in catalysis. Several groups in the last years have exploited the embedment of NPs into polymer brushes on nanosurfaces for catalytic application.
Ballauff and co-workers investigated the catalytic property of NPs in spherical polyelectrolyte brushes via counterion exchange. They conducted a systematic study of the catalytic activity of platinum NPs generated on the surface of a cationic spherical polyelectrolyte brush.18 Long chains of poly(2-methylpropenoyloxyethyl) trimethylammonium chloride were grafted to form a positively charged layer to bind divalent PtCl62− ions and then the ions were reduced by NaBH4 under an atmosphere of nitrogen. The brush layer leads to nearly monodisperse NPs with an average size of about 2 nm and exhibits excellent colloidal stability. This is also the decisive factor for the higher activity than other systems in the reduction of 4-nitrophenol by NaBH4. Pt NPs generated in spherical polyelectrolyte brush on the surface of particles were also investigated with regard to their catalytic behavior in the hydrogenation of butyraldehyde to 1-butanol. Due to the immobilization of Pt NPs in the brush, the composite reflects a very robust, water-based catalyst system, and preserves activity over many runs.87
Ballauff and Kempe introduced the bimetallic gold–platinum NPs immobilized on spherical polyelectrolyte brushes.17 Firstly, [AuCl4]− ions were immobilized as counterions within the surface layer of cationic polyelectrolyte chains, replacing only a certain fraction of the Cl− counterions. After ultra-filtration, [PtCl6]2− ions were introduced in the same manner. The excess of metal ions was flushed away by ultra-filtration. Finally, both two kinds of ions were reduced at the same time by NaBH4 leading to an Au–Pt alloy of a given composition. The catalytic activity for the oxidation of alcohols to their respective aldehydes was observed at ambient conditions in water with yields above 99%. Results showed that the synergistic effects of the two elements and stabilizing-agent-free conditions played an important role. They also applied this composite system to photocatalytic reactions.58 A uniform distribution of metal NPs (such as Au, Pt and Pd) selectively deposited on as-prepared TiO2 NPs immobilized in polystyrene sodium sulfonate brushes was achieved. Ions are confined as counterions in the brush system in the presence of BH4−. This system combines the catalytic activity of the metal NPs and the intrinsic photocatalytic activity of TiO2. The metal NP/TiO2@SPB composite particles possess excellent photocatalytic activity for the degradation of RhB under UV irradiation. The reaction rate constant is 3–5 times higher than that of the pure TiO2 particles. The activity increase comes from the enhanced adsorption of the dye on the surface of the particles due to the compatibility with the chains of the polyelectrolyte brushes.
The position of the NPs in the brush and the diffusion of reactant can affect the activity of the composites. Ballauff and co-workers compared the catalytic activity of Pd NPs immobilized in spherical polyelectrolyte brushes and core–shell microgels.22 The first system consisted of a solid core of polystyrene onto which long chains of poly((2-methylpropenoyloxyethyl) trimethylammonium chloride) (PMPTAC) were grafted and PdCl42− ions introduced. The second system consisted of a solid core of polystyrene and a shell of cross-linked poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPA). PdCl42− ions were complexed within the network. The catalytic activities of the Pd NPs in both carrier systems were investigated by monitoring photometrically the reduction of 4-nitrophenol. The Pd NPs immobilized in the first system exhibit a much higher activity than the ones immobilized within the second system. The stronger interaction between the dendrimers and the surface of the NPs in system 2 reduces their activity.
The size of the NPs in polymer brush can be regulated by temperature. Guo et al. successfully adjusted the size of nickel NPs in spherical poly(acrylic acid)(PAA) brushes(SPBs) by tuning the reaction temperature.49 The average size of nickel NPs increased from 3 to 7 nm upon increasing the reaction temperature from 273 to 303 K. These Ni-NPs trapped in SPBs were used to catalyze the reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol by NaBH4. Recently, Au NPs were immobilized in poly(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA) brushes for the thermally adjustable reduction of 4-nitrophenol.27
Improving the harmonization between the solvent and the brush can facilitate molecular diffusion and increase the activity of the composite in the reaction. For instance, Liu reported that the addition of cyclodextrin in Ag-NPs immobilized in the spherical polyelectrolyte brushes accelerates the reduction of 4-nitrophenol by NaBH4. This is because the addition of cyclodextrin makes the interaction of the reactant with the NPs easier.45 Additionally, the catalytic activity of metal NPs (Ag) can be modulated in a carrier system of nancomposite containing Ag NPs by a thermodynamic transition.88 The reaction rate decreases with increasing temperature when approaching the volume transition. This is due to the strong shrinking of the network. Results indicate that catalytic activity of nanocomposite can be modulated by volume transition over a wide range.
Leaching problems can be solved by the efficient anchoring effects of the brush. For example, solid supports functionalized with polymer brushes improve the recoverability of heteropolyacids (HPAs). HPAs with the Keggin structure and oxidizing capability are efficiently used in deep desulfurization of diesel fuel. Kang and Dai firstly synthesized HPW-poly(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate)(PDMAEMA)–SiO2 by impregnating HPW on the PDMAEMA–SiO2 support.25 Because [PW12O40]3− ions could be tightly immobilized onto the molecular chain of the PDMAEMA polymer brushes, recoverability of the HPW-PDMAEMA–SiO2 could be enhanced. At optimal reaction conditions, the oxidative desulfurization (ODS) conversion of dibenzothiophene (DBT) reached 100%.
The nanocomposite can also be applied in more complex reactions, e.g., Suzuki- and Heck-type cross-coupling reactions. Long chains of poly[(2-methylpropenyloxyethyl)trimethylammonium chloride] were used as carriers.89 Then, Pd NPs were immobilized on spherical polyelectrolyte brushes. Both reactions were conducted at mild and environmentally benign conditions and could be recycled with no significant loss of activity.
However, there are still many unsolved problems of the composites which hinder their industrial applications as a catalyst. Firstly, the scale-up of the nanocomposite preparation should be carried out for mass production. The nanocomposites as catalysts discussed above are all prepared in the lab scale with complex steps. More facile methods should be developed for real applications. Secondly, the model reactions used to evaluate the activity of these composites are very simple, which are only limited to the reduction 4-nitrophenol by NaBH4, Suzuki- and Heck-type cross-coupling reactions. More practical reactions should be employed for the activity/selectivity evaluation of the nanocomposites. Moreover, environmental problems should be a concern due to the use of many organic solvents involved in these processes.
4.2 Nanocomposites used as sensors
Surface properties can be greatly modulated by polymer brushes and the embedded NPs, and then detection can be carried out based on the stimuli-responsive property. For instance, due to the fascinating features of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAM) and poly(2-vinylpyridine)(P2VP), they have been used extensively for the preparation of sensors.39,90,91 The Minko and Hutter groups changed the pH from 5.0 to 2.0 to adjust the shrinking and swelling of P2VP brush with gold NPs. This led to a corresponding change in the surface plasmon resonance, as detected by transmission surface plasmon resonance (T-SPR) spectroscopy, as illustrated in Fig. 3.39 Similarly, at a lower critical solution temperature (LCST), PNIPAAM is hydrated and the chains are in an extended conformation state. It exhibits a hydrophobically collapsed conformational state when the temperature is greater than the LCST. So, PNIPAAM is very sensitive to temperature along with the changed optical parameters. Miyashita and co-workers used PNIPAAM to fabricate hybrid nanoassemblies with embedded Au NPs. They presented good response to temperature and solvent changes, and can be applied in sensors for temperature detection, as shown in Fig. 4.41
 Fig. 3  Top: schematic of the reversible pH change-induced swelling of gold nanoparticle-coated poly-(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP) polymer brushes. Bottom: T-SPR spectra of gold nanoislands (containing adsorbed PGMA, P2VP polymer brushes, and gold nanoparticles) at pH 2.0 and 5.0.39 
 Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of hybrid nanoassemblies at 20 °C and 40 °C. (b) LSPR peak wavelength changes of hybrid nanoassemblies.41 
In addition, Stamm used the multifunctional properties of Ag NPs and the responsiveness of P2VP brushes to the pH of surrounding media to prepare P2VP–Ag nanoassemblies as pH nanosensors.40 In this system, a higher reaction time and concentration promote the self-aggregation of small Ag colloids during the first stage of the reduction process.
In summary, the application of these nanocomposites as nanosensors is promising, as the straightforward but highly sensitive nanosensor based on the organic–inorganic hybrid material has been achieved. However, large-scale construction of such ultrathin hybrid films on certain surfaces is still a challenge.
4.3 Nanocomposites used as optical materials
Semiconductor NPs have attracted much interest due to their optical properties and great potential for many applications, especially as photovoltaic materials and nonlinear optical materials. Semiconducting polymers also hold great potential for the fabrication of organic optoelectronic devices. However, an inherent loss of order of polymer limits their application. This problem can be overcome by the combination of the intrinsic properties of both materials. Huck and co-workers presented a new approach to achieving order in molecular semiconductors via alignment of polymer chains using surface-initiated polymerization.34 Triarylamine side groups of polyacrylate brushes as hole-transporting components show characteristics of high mobilities for hole transport. Additionally with the solution processing and uptake of CdSe, the nanocrystals completely interpenetrate the film from top to bottom resulting in efficient electron transport pathways along nanocrystal “channels” (Fig. 5). Diodes fabricated from blends of CdSe NPs in the poly(triphenylamine acrylate) (PTPAA) show much higher current densities than the hole-only diodes fabricated from the pure polymer or brush film. As shown in Fig. 5, the CdSe nanocrystal infiltrated PTPAA brush device had an external quantum efficiency of 20% at 400 nm, approximately twice that of the blend device (1:8 PTPAA/CdSe). They obtained an open-circuit voltage of approximately 850 mV and a peak external quantum efficiency of 8%, which demonstrates that the brush composite films are highly suitable for photovoltaic operation. Their composites showed photovoltaic quantum efficiencies of up to 50% as heterojunction photovoltaic diodes.34
 Fig. 5  (a) Photovoltaic action spectra for a CdSe nanocrystal (2.6 nm diameter) infiltrated PTPAA brush (45 nm thick) device (open diamonds) and for PTPAA/CdSe nanocrystal blend device 1:8 by weight (solid circles), with external quantum efficiency (dotted lines) and internal quantum efficiency (solid lines). (b) Current–voltage characteristics for a device comprising a 20 nm thick PTPAA brush film grown from a modified PEDOT:PSS coated ITO slide, infiltrated with 2.8 nm diameter CdSe nanocrystals and capped with an aluminum cathode, in the dark (dashed line) and under 400 nm incident illumination (solid line).34 
Yang and co-workers fabricated CdS NPs on the edges of reduced graphene oxide sheets with P2VP polymer brushes.37 The composites showed nonlinear optical properties. With an increase of the CdS content in the composites, the resonance energy transfer from NPs to RGO increased and the nonlinear optical effects of the nanocomposite increased. Strong optical limiting ability has been observed due to the energy-transfer between CdS NPs and RGO sheets. However, all the works mentioned in this section are very preliminary. More efforts are necessary for the advanced applications of these novel nanocomposites.
4.4 Other applications of the nanocomposites

4.4.1 Nanocomposites used as electrode materials. 
Transition-metal oxides, such as RuO2, MnO2, NiOx, CoOx, and Fe2O3, are typical electrode materials. Among them, manganese dioxide (MnO2) with a high theoretical specific capacitance, natural rich abundance, low cost, and low toxicity, is a very promising electrode material for pseudocapacitors. Compared with their crystalline counterparts, noncrystalline oxides can provide even larger surface areas and an easy ion transport pathway, but the problem is how to stabilize the particles. Liu employed perpendicularly grafted poly(sodium methacrylic acid) brushes onto graphene oxide as templates for loading MnO2 NPs.43 The polymer brushes allow control over the morphology of MnO2 into amorphous characteristics while retaining a specific surface area of 147 m2 g−1 with a vast number of pores of the as-prepared MnO2. Amorphous MnO2 presents good stability because of the carboxylic–MnO2 chelating bond. The graphene oxide based nanocomposites show an outstanding performance as electrode materials for pseudocapacitance (specific capacitance reaches up to 372 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, with only an 8% drop after 4000 charge–discharge cycles at the same current density). The superb capacitance performance coupled with the convenient and economic preparation of the graphene-oxides/polymer-brush/MnO2 (GOPM) suggests their great potential application in supercapacitors.


4.4.2 Nanocomposites used as antimicrobial and antiadhesive platforms. 
Polymer brushes are very attractive candidates for ultrathin nonbiofouling coatings with good resistance to adsorption of proteins, cells, bacteria or other biological species.92,93 Silver NPs possess a very particular function against bacteria and low toxicity to humans.94 This leads to a rapidly growing use of this noble metal as an antimicrobial agent in wound dressings,95 textiles,96 water and air purification,97 bone implants,98 and so on. So, the formation of nanocomposites by imbedding Ag NPs in polymer matrices enhances both the nonbiofouling and the antimicrobial functions.
Hu et al. developed a silver-zwitterion nanocomposite through the affinity and complexation of carboxylic groups and Ag+ precursor ions, followed by in situ reduction to Ag NPs by ultraviolet (UV) irradiation or NaBH4 reduction.60 As shown in Fig. 6, they compared the quantitative data of the antimicrobial efficiency of the surfaces. Due to the embedment of Ag, an excellent bactericidal activity of silver-zwitterion nanocomposite was illustrated by the comparison of E. coli killed by pC4N+, pC8N+ and pCBMA. Moreover, embedding of silver NPs does not affect the antifouling property of the pCBMA polymer brush (Fig. 7). Results showed that the CB-Ag surface released 98.7% of contacted bacteria relative to the pC8N+ surface. The pC4N+surface released 39.4% of bacteria relative to the number released from pC8N+. Guo also immobilized silver NPs in the spherical polyelectrolyte brushes (SPB) as an antibacterial material.47 Liu coated silver NPs on a glass surface using 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane as a coupling agent. This composite can be used as a material capable of killing harmful microorganisms in the food industry.99
 Fig. 6  Bactericidal activity of various surfaces against E. coli K12. The y axis represents the percentage of live E. coli K12 colonies grown relative to the number of colonies grown on a pCBMA surface (n = 3). Note that zwitterionic pCBMA cannot kill the bacteria.60 
 Fig. 7  Bacterial cell density of E. coli K12 on the surfaces after releasing (gently shaking in PBS for 30 min; n = 3).60 


4.4.3 Magnetic applications. 
Magnetic NPs with their size below several tens of nanometers are considered suitable materials for a broad range of biomedical applications due to their negligible remanence and coercive fields. It has also been demonstrated in the literature that the collective properties of close-packed magnetic NPs differ from those of isolated NPs because of dipole–dipole interactions between adjacent NPs. The brush system can allow the NPs to maintain their uniform shape and small size, meanwhile keeping a collective property. Huck et al. synthesized magnetic-NP-loaded anionic poly(3-sulfopropyl methacrylate) brushes.57 Instead of the expected superparamagnetic behavior, SQUID measurements clearly showed ferromagnetic signatures (remanence and coercivity) which is not normally associated with small NPs. The brush tightly anchored the magnetic particles. Upon application of an external magnetic field, the brushes showed reversible dimensional changes, qualifying these nanocomposites as promising candidates as materials for magnetically driven nanoactuators.
Magnetic nanocomposites have also been used in catalytic reactions. As discussed in section 4.1, besides the good catalytic activity and high stability, recycling is another important property of catalysts. The traditional separation techniques, including centrifugation and filtration, are usually time-consuming and of low efficiency, which does not favor the recycling of catalysts. Magnetic separation can make up for these disadvantages. Many groups have devoted efforts to investigating magnetic nanomaterials.100–102 Additionally, in order to produce a magnetic-based catalyst with good redispersibility, surface functionalization with brush is a possible choice. Yang successfully synthesized multifunctional Fe3O4@SiO2@PHEMA-g-PDMAEMA microspheres.26 Gold NPs were facilely loaded into the functional PDMAEMA brushes through in situ reduction due to their strong coordinate interaction (Scheme 5). This catalyst showed highly catalytic efficiency and good reusable properties during their recycling with a facile recovery (at least six times) in the reduction of 4-nitophenol to 4-aminophenol. Another work reported a magnetic spherical polyelectrolyte brushes consisting of a core of poly(styrene-co-divinylbenzene) particle embedded with magnetite NPs and a well-defined shell of positively charged poly([2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl] trimethylammonium chloride) brush.20 The platinum particles immobilized into brushes were also achieved by reduction of PtCl62− ions using BH4−. This system showed high catalytic activity (high dispersion of NPs) and efficient reuse ability (the efficient anchoring NPs by brush) and a good recovery (the magnetic core) for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol. However, magnetic substances are not applicable to every objective system. In addition, a corresponding initiator that can strongly adhere onto the substrate is required.
 Scheme 5  Preparation of the Fe3O4@SiO2@PHEMA-g-PDMAEMA.26 
In summary, the nanocomposites of polymer brushes and inorganic NPs will become an effective solution to many problems involving interfaces. Their potential in various sectors of research and application is promising and attracting increasing investment from governments and businesses in many parts of the world. However, all of the niche applications discussed above are still only being addressed in the lab. There are few such commercial products on the market. For industrial applications, more emphasis should be placed on the development and scale up of this technology. Therefore, participation from engineering communities is urgently needed. Hence, it will be easier to develop and bring out a product from the lab.

5. Summary and outlook
Polymer brushes can modify the surface of substances, be stimuli-responsive to the environment, act as a reaction chamber that provides a scaffold for immobilization, prevent NP aggregation, and function as a capping agent limiting NP growth. On the other hand, the embedment of NPs in polymer brushes will endow the surface with new functions, e.g., optical, electrical and magnetic properties. Combining the merits of NPs and brushes, novel composite systems can be prepared. Researchers have conducted extensive studies of nanocomposites with noble metal NPs. The applications of composites embedded with transition metal or metal salts NPs are also investigated. Other NPs in the composites, such as HPW, have been explored as well. Though some issues regarding such nanocomposites remain, and more endeavors are still needed.
The preparation of polymer brush should be investigated continuously for the development of new composites. With the advance of polymer science, especially the fine grafting of polymers onto various surfaces, new methods for the preparation of controllable polymer brushes should be introduced into composite fabrication. For instance, the newly developed technology of electrochemically mediated ATRP can be introduced for the fabrication of gradient and patterned polymer brushes.103,104 Then the morphology of polymer brushes, e.g., brush distribution, chain height and polymer density, will be well manipulated. The packing density of the brush will directly affect the amount of the counterions immobilized, the size of the inorganic NPs and even the morphology of the NPs. The brush height plays an important role in the property of the composite, such as the sensitivity and responsiveness. Then, resulting from deep investigation into the complex influence of properties of the polymer brush, a detailed mechanism of composite formation will be clear.
The embedment of NPs should also be investigated, because there will be some differences in the mechanism of formation of inorganic NPs in polymer brush compared with that in bulk solution. Various precursors of metal and different reductants should be studied. With the development of nanotechnology, new methods for the embedment of NPs in polymer brushes should be introduced. For example, microwave-assisted preparation of inorganic nanostructures can be employed for composite fabrication and will benefit the development of composite fabrication.105 In addition, new NPs should be embedded for the development of novel nanocomposites. For instance, the preparation of composites with alloy NPs will be a new research area and a lot of new materials will be developed based on such investigation.106 We expect that in the future it will be possible to embed and orient inorganic NPs in any desired way in certain polymer brushes.
The basic properties of the hybrid system can already be characterized now. However, more detailed information about polymer brushes and the NPs is still unclear. New technology and equipment should be used for the characterization of the nanocomposites. The interaction between the inorganic NPs and the polymer brush should be characterised in the near future. Moreover, future work will be directed towards understanding the role of the brush structure on the packing of the NPs, and the influence on nanoparticle–nanoparticle interactions. In addition, the influence of the NPs on the properties of the polymer brushes will be another interesting area for research.
We note also, that a lot of theoretical works on this subject have been done by molecular dynamic simulation,107–110 Monte Carlo simulation111 or both of these methods.112 Moreover, dissipative particle dynamics (DPD),113 self-consistent field (SCF) theory114–116 and other new methods117 have been developed to predict the properties of nanocomposites. Although many theories have been developed to assist in our understanding of the organic–inorganic hybrid system, the progress in the simulation of nanocomposites is still hampered by our lack of precise theory.
Until now, there have been relatively few systematic studies combining both experimental and theoretical works. In the future, we hope that the combination of computational study and experimental investigation will stimulate in-depth work and eventually lead to the discovery of many new classes of oriented polymer-brush-NPs materials. We hope to close the gaps that still exist in our theoretical understanding, to assist in the successful preparation and application of nanocomposites.
In summary, the reproducible and controlled fabrication and explorations of nanocomposites on bulk/nano surfaces with well-defined physicochemical properties and tailorable functions are longstanding challenges. Future endeavors in this field are further proposed as described above. With the development of this composite technology, more and more applications will be realized.
References

          G. Schmid, Nanoparticles: from theory to application, John Wiley & Sons,  2011 Search PubMed .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Hutchings, M. Brust and H. Schmidbaur, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1759–1765 RSC .
Z. Lu and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6874–6887 RSC .
M. R. Ivanov, H. R. Bednar and A. J. Haes, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 386–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Petosa, D. P. Jaisi, I. R. Quevedo, M. Elimelech and N. Tufenkji, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 6532–6549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Grubbs, Polym. Rev., 2007, 47, 197–215 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Crooks, M. Zhao, L. Sun, V. Chechik and L. K. Yeung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 181–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Xu and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7908–7914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Barbey, L. Lavanant, D. Paripovic, N. Schüwer, C. Sugnaux, S. Tugulu and H.-A. Klok, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5437–5527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lee, S. C. Hendy and C. Neto, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2894–2899 RSC .
B. Yameen and A. Farrukh, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1736–1753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wang, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3370–3375 CrossRef CAS .
O. Azzaroni, A. A. Brown, N. Cheng, A. Wei, A. M. Jonas and W. T. S. Huck, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3433–3439 RSC .
Y. Lu, Y. Mei, M. Schrinner, M. Ballauff, M. W. Möller and J. Breu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7676–7681 CAS .
M. Schrinner, M. Ballauff, Y. Talmon, Y. Kauffmann, J. Thun, M. Möller and J. Breu, Science, 2009, 323, 617–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schrinner, S. Proch, Y. Mei, R. Kempe, N. Miyajima and M. Ballauff, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mei, G. Sharma, Y. Lu, M. Ballauff, M. Drechsler, T. Irrgang and R. Kempe, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12229–12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wunder, F. Polzer, Y. Lu, Y. Mei and M. Ballauff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8814–8820 CAS .
S. Wu, J. Kaiser, X. Guo, L. Li, Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 5608–5614 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, F. Schacher, M. Drechsler, A. Hanisch, Y. Lu, M. Ballauff and A. H. E. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2626–2634 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mei, Y. Lu, F. Polzer, M. Ballauff and M. Drechsler, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1062–1069 CrossRef CAS .
F. Polzer, D. A. Kunz, J. Breu and M. Ballauff, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2916–2922 CrossRef CAS .
A. Calvo, M. C. Fuertes, B. Yameen, F. J. Williams, O. Azzaroni and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5559–5567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, G. Luo, L. Kang and B. Dai, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16769–16776 RSC .
B. Liu, D. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Chen, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6363–6372 CAS .
J. Chen, P. Xiao, J. Gu, D. Han, J. Zhang, A. Sun, W. Wang and T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1212–1214 RSC .
Z. Yenice, S. Schön, H. Bildirir, J. Genzer and R. von Klitzing, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 10348–10358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-K. Chen, P.-C. Pai, J.-Y. Chang and S.-K. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1935–1947 CAS .
J. Kaiser, W. Szczerba, H. Riesemeier, U. Reinholz, M. Radtke, M. Albrecht, Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Faraday Discuss., 2013, 162, 45–55 RSC .
J. Kaiser, L. Leppert, H. Welz, F. Polzer, S. Wunder, N. Wanderka, M. Albrecht, T. Lunkenbein, J. Breu, S. Kummel, Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 6487–6495 RSC .
J. Yuan, S. Wunder, F. Warmuth and Y. Lu, Polymer, 2012, 53, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X.-Y. Shi, Y.-Y. Bi, J.-F. Wei and Z.-G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 657–664 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. W. Henry, J. Snaith, B. Sun, N. C. Greenham, R. H. F. Wilhelm and T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2005, 1653–1657 Search PubMed .
L. A. Sofia, A. Krishnan, M. Sankar, N. Kala Raj, P. Manikandan, P. Rajamohanan and T. Ajithkumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21114–21122 CAS .
J. Yang, N. Zhang, H. Li, B. Xu, W. Tian and D. Dong, Polym. Int., 2015, 64, 804–810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Li, Y. Xie, X. Song, X. Qu and H. Zhao, Mater. Lett., 2014, 118, 184–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koenig, F. Simon, P. Formanek, M. Müller, S. Gupta, M. Stamm and P. Uhlmann, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 2301–2311 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tokareva, S. Minko, J. H. Fendler and E. Hutter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15950–15951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, P. Uhlmann, M. Agrawal, S. Chapuis, U. Oertel and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2874–2879 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mitsuishi, Y. Koishikawa, H. Tanaka, E. Sato, T. Mikayama, J. Matsui and T. Miyashita, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7472–7474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gehan, L. Fillaud, M. M. Chehimi, J. Aubard, A. Hohenau, N. Felidj and C. Mangeney, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6491–6500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, B. Yu, F. Zhou and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8587–8592 CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Yu, T. Gao, R. Wang, Q. Ye and F. Zhou, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 966–972 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Zhu, L. Li, X. Guo, S. F. Lincoln and R. K. Prud'homme, AIChE J., 2014, 60, 1977–1982 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cang, R. Zhang, G. Shi, J. Zhang, L. Liu, X. Hou, Z. Yu, D. Fang and X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3745–3751 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Xu, X. Wang, M. Shao, J. Xu, J. Wang, L. Li, R. Zhang and X. Guo, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 127, 148–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, G. Ren and W. Cai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60857–60860 RSC .
Z. Zhu, X. Guo, S. Wu, R. Zhang, J. Wang and L. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 13848–13853 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, M. Agrawal, P. Uhlmann, F. Simon, U. Oertel and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8152–8158 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Boyes, B. Akgun, W. J. Brittain and M. D. Foster, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 9539–9548 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, M. Drechsler, Y. Xu, M. Zhang and A. H. E. Müller, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1547–1554 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, H. Wang and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8957–8964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. Drechsler and A. H. E. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Benetti, X. Sui, S. Zapotoczny and G. J. Vancso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 939–944 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Hindi, K. M. Watts, J. B. Taylor, K. Zhang, Z. Li, D. A. Hunstad, C. L. Cannon, W. J. Youngs and K. L. Wooley, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 121–123 RSC .
W. S. Choi, H. Y. Koo, J. Y. Kim and W. T. S. Huck, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4504–4508 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, T. Lunkenbein, J. Preussner, S. Proch, J. Breu, R. Kempe and M. Ballauff, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4176–4183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Wang, T. Chen and Z.-R. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21468–21473 CAS .
R. Hu, G. Li, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhang, J. J. Zou, L. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3773–3779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Oren, Z. Liang, J. S. Barnard, S. C. Warren, U. Wiesner and W. T. S. Huck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1670–1671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zengin, U. Tamer and T. Caykara, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 448, 215–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, R. Mishra, S. Pilla, S. Tripathi, M. K. Pandey, G. Shah, A. K. Mishra, M. Prabaharan, S. B. Mishra, J. Xin, R. R. Pandey, W. Wu, A. C. Pandey and A. Tiwari, Carbohydr. Polym., 2010, 82, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
E. Glogowski, R. Tangirala, T. P. Russell and T. Emrick, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 5076–5086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Edmondson, V. L. Osborne and W. T. Huck, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 14–22 RSC .
J. Pyun, T. Kowalewski and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2003, 24, 1043–1059 CrossRef CAS .
R. Barbey, L. Lavanant, D. Paripovic, N. Schüwer, C. Sugnaux, S. Tugulu and H.-A. Klok, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5437–5527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Lee, P. B. Messersmith, J. N. Israelachvili and J. H. Waite, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 99–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Combellas, F. Kanoufi, S. Sanjuan, C. Slim and Y. Tran, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5360–5370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Azzaroni, A. A. Brown and W. T. S. Huck, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lian, S. Qi, J. Zhou and F. Schmid, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 4099–4108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aoki, M. Kitamura and S. Ito, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 285–287 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Chen, C.-Y. Hsieh, C.-F. Huang, P. M. Li, S.-W. Kuo and F.-C. Chang, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8729–8736 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, A. Küller, M. Grunze and J. Li, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3981–3987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, P. Gong, I. Szleifer, P. Vlček, V. Šubr and J. Genzer, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8756–8764 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Treat, N. Ayres, S. G. Boyes and W. J. Brittain, Macromolecules, 2005, 39, 26–29 CrossRef .
P. Gong, T. Wu, J. Genzer and I. Szleifer, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8765–8773 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang and Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 920–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, S. Zhu, K. Ishihara and J. L. Brash, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5980–5987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schmidt and M. M. Malwitz, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Roiter, I. Minko, D. Nykypanchuk, I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 284–292 RSC .
S. Wunder, Y. Lu, M. Albrecht and M. Ballauff, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 908–916 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bano, M. Carril, P. Di Gianvincenzo and R. P. Richter, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 8411–8420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Wang, Y.-S. Sun, A. S.-T. Chiang, H.-F. Hung, M.-C. Chen and K. Wood, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11941–11950 CAS .
Y. Lin, A. Böker, J. He, K. Sill, H. Xiang, C. Abetz, X. Li, J. Wang, T. Emrick and S. Long, Nature, 2005, 434, 55–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gibaud and S. Hazra, Curr. Sci., 2000, 78, 1467–1477 CAS .
G. Sharma, Y. Mei, Y. Lu, M. Ballauff, T. Irrgang, S. Proch and R. Kempe, J. Catal., 2007, 246, 10–14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Mei, M. Ballauff and M. Drechsler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3930–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Proch, Y. Mei, J. M. R. Villanueva, Y. Lu, A. Karpov, M. Ballauff and R. Kempe, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 493–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. C. Stuart, W. T. S. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Muller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban, F. Winnik, S. Zauscher, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101–113 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Schild, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1992, 17, 163–249 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Chen, J. Zheng, B. D. Ratner and S. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2934–2941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mi, M. T. Bernards, G. Cheng, Q. Yu and S. Jiang, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 2919–2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Ratte, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 1999, 18, 89–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ip, S. L. Lui, V. K. Poon, I. Lung and A. Burd, J. Med. Microbiol., 2006, 55, 59–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Lee, H. K. Park, Y. M. Lee, K. Kim and S. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2959–2961,  10.1039/B703034G .
V. A. Oyanedel-Craver and J. A. Smith, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 927–933 CrossRef .
O. D. Schneider, S. Loher, T. J. Brunner, P. Schmidlin and W. J. Stark, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2679–2684 RSC .
Y. Lv, H. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Hao, J. Liu, Y. Wang, G. Du, D. Liu, J. Zhan and J. Wang, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 1455–1460 CAS .
J. Chomoucka, J. Drbohlavova, D. Huska, V. Adam, R. Kizek and J. Hubalek, Pharmacol. Res., 2010, 62, 144–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Lu, E. E. L. Salabas and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hsing, Y. Xu and W. Zhao, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 755–768 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shida, Y. Koizumi, H. Nishiyama, I. Tomita and S. Inagi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3922–3926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, B. Yu, W. T. Huck, W. Liu and F. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1708–1710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Zhu and F. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6462–6555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Milchev, D. Dimitrov and K. Binder, Biomicrofluidics, 2010, 4, 032202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yaneva, D. I. Dimitrov, A. Milchev and K. Binder, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 336, 51–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Merlitz, C.-X. Wu and J.-U. Sommer, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 8494–8501 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Jin, J. Cheng, Y. Jiang, L. He and L. Zhang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2014, 52, 299–309 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ermilov, A. Lazutin and A. Halperin, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3511–3520 CrossRef CAS .
T. Curk, F. J. Martinez-Veracoechea, D. Frenkel and J. Dobnikar, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2617–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Guskova, S. Pal and C. Seidel, Europhys. Lett., 2009, 88, 38006 CrossRef .
J. U. Kim and B. O'Shaughnessy, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 413–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Kim and M. W. Matsen, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
A. Halperin, M. Kröger and E. B. Zhulina, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3622–3638 CrossRef CAS .
A. Milchev, D. I. Dimitrov and K. Binder, Polymer, 2008, 49, 3611–3618 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic outline of the procedure used to synthesize Au NPs inside polyelectrolyte brushes. (a–c) Poly-METAC brushes are synthesized by surface-initiated aqueous atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), followed by immersion in AuCl4− solution for 30 min. (d) The Au-loaded brushes are then treated with NaBH4 to produce mostly metallic Au NPs, along with some partially reduced Au species.14	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the preparation of poly(styrene)(PS)–poly(acrylic acid)(PAA)–Ag composite particles in situ. PS core particles are first prepared by a conventional emulsion polymerization. In a second step, the PS-cores are covered with a thin layer of photoinitiator 2-[p-(2-hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone)]-ethyleneglycol methacrylate (HMEM). In the third step, the shell of polyelectrolyte brushes is formed by photoemulsion polymerization: shining light on the aqueous suspension of these particles generates radicals at their surface which initiate the radical polymerization of the functional monomer (silver acrylate) on the surface of the core particles. Concomitantly the silver anions embedded in the PAA brushes are reduced into Ag nanoparticles under UV irradiation.15	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis scheme of Pt nanocrystals (NCs) by de-alloying of a Au–Pt nanoalloy. The carrier particles are SPBs that consist of a solid PS core (RH = 50 nm) onto which cationic polyelectrolyte chains of 2-aminoethylmethacrylate (2-AEMH) are attached. In a first step, the chloride counterions were exchanged against AuCl4− ions; in a second step the rest of the Cl− ions were exchanged against PtCl42− ions. Bimetallic Au45Pt55 nanoalloy particles were generated by reduction of the mixture of these ions by NaBH4.17 The composition of the resulting nanoalloy can be adjusted by the ratio of the metal ions in the brush layer. In the final step, cyanide ions and oxygen were used to leach out the Au atoms from the nanoalloy under very mild conditions. This procedure leads to faceted Pt NCs with a diameter of a few nanometers embedded in the surface layer of the polyelectrolyte chains.16	 



	PtCl62−	Pt	
18–21

PdCl42−	Pd	
22

MnO4−	MnO2	
23

AuCl4−	Au	
24



	H3PW12O40	PW12O403−	
25

AuCl4−	Au	
26,27

Au	Au	
28,29



	AuCl4−	AuPd	
30,31

PdCl42−
AuCl4−	Au	
19

PtCl62−, AuCl4−	Au–Pt	
17



	PdCl42−, AuCl4−	Pd, Au	
32



	PdCl42−	Pd	
33



	CdSe	CdSe	
34



	H3PW12O40	H2PW12O40−	
35



	H3PW12O40	H2PW12O40−	
36



	Cd(OOCCH3)2, Na2S	CdS	
37

PtCl62−, Pd2+	Pt, Pd	
38

Au	Au	
39

Ag+	Ag	
40



	Au	Au	
41



	Au	Au	
42



	Mn2+	MnO2	
43

Cd2+, H2S, Cd(Ac)2, SeSO32−	CdS–CdSe	
44

Ag+	Ag	
45



	CdCl2, Na2S	CdS	
46

Ag+	Ag	
47

[Ag(NH3)2]+ HAuCl4	Au	
48

Ni2+	Ni	
49



	Au	Au	
50



	Ag(ac)	Ag	
51

Na2PdCl4	Pd


	Cd2+, H2Se	CdSe	
52



	

	CdS	
53



	Cd(Ac)2 and H2S	CdS	
54



	Ag+	Ag	
55



	Ag+	Ag	
56



	Fe2+, Fe3+	Fe3O4	
57

α-Fe2O3
α-FeOOH


	PdCl42−, PtCl62−, AuCl4−	Au, Pd, Pt	
58

[Ag(NH3)2]+	Ag	
59



	Ag+	Ag	
60



	PS-covered Au NPs	Au	
61



	Au	Au	
62



	Au	Au	
63


UV-vis spectra	Optical properties reflecting NP size and shape as well as the refractive index of the matrix in which the NPs are embedded	
22,24,29,34,35,40,41,44,45,50,52–55,58,59,81

The concentration change of a certain organic compound, such as 4-nitrophenol	
18–21,26,27,32,38,45,49,58,82

X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement	Structures of nanoparticles	
20,23,25,31–33,44,57–59

Phase identification
Morphology of the samples
IR spectra, FTIR, ATR-IR, ATR-FTIR	Chemical composition	
25,26,33,35–38,43,44,50,51,53,55,59,63

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, high-resolution transmission microscopy (HR-TEM)	Morphology, the specific surface area of the nanoparticles, distribution of the particles	
17–21,23–28,31–33,36–38,43–45,49,50,52–54,56,58,59,62,63,82,83

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)	The amount of metal	
18–23,25,26,30–33,36,37,43,44,58,82

Atomic force microscopy (AFM)	The morphology of the surface	
28,29,34,37–42,50–53,55,57,59,60,62,81,83

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)	Chemical composition and structure	
24,29,37,38,40,42–44,48,50,51,53,57,59,60,62

Photovoltaic action spectroscopy	Photovoltaic quantum efficiency	
34

PL spectroscopy	Photoluminescence and optical properties	
37

Open-aperture Z-scan	Photoluminescence and optical properties	
37

N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms, BJH method	Specific surface area, and pore size distributions	
35,43

Chronopotentiometry (CP)	Capacitance performance	
43

Cyclic voltammetry	Supercapacitor performance	
42,43,63

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)	Size distribution, dispersition	
21–23,26,28,29,36,38,48,55,59,63

High-resolution electron microscopy (HRSEM)	Morphology	

Superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) measurements	Magnetic properties	
57

Vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM)	Magnetic properties	
20,26

Extended X-ray absorption fine structure measurements (EXAFS)	Chemical composition and structure	
30

Dynamic light scattering (DLS)	Particle size, film thickness	
17,18,21–23,31,32,49

Spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE), ellipsometric measurements	Thickness of the brush	
24,28,29,39,40,51,60,61,81

Scanning force microscopy (SFM)	Roughness	
54

Quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D)	The phototunable uncaging and swelling of the composite	
83

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)	Chemical structure	
21,35

Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS)	Brush-NP interaction, surface state	
42,48,59,62

Surface plasmon resonance (SPR), T-SPR, LSPR, spectroscopy	Thickness of the brush, interaction between the brush and NPs	
29,39,81

Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis	Chemical composition	
17,21,23,31,52,54,58,59,61

X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements	Estimate density, porosity, and pore filling of mesoporous thin films	
24,53,81

STEM, cross-sectional HAADF-STEM, bright-field (BF-STEM) images	Thickness and the structure of the composite	
31,58,61

Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES)	Metal content	
25,26,35,45,49

Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)	Metal content	
56

Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS), small-angle neutron scattering (SANS)	Nanometer-scale structure of the nanocomposite	
24,84,85


 	Fig. 1  TEM image of an FIB lamella (a lamella cut by focused ion beam) of P2VP brushes with Pd NPs.38	 

 	Fig. 2  Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM images of P4VP-b-PS brushes infiltrated with PS-covered Au NP after annealing with CH2Cl2 vapor: (a) ∑PS = 1.79 chains per nm2 and (b) ∑PS = 0.95 chains per nm2. The intensity of the images was inverted for improved visibility. The gradient in brightness, most noticeable in (a), arises from the variation in sample thickness, due to sample preparation. Layer thicknesses of 16 nm P4VP and 20 nm PS in Fig. 3b are in good agreement with original layer thicknesses of 13 and 19 nm, respectively.61	 

 	Scheme 4  Schematic illustration of Au NP infiltration into block copolymer brushes.61	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Top: schematic of the reversible pH change-induced swelling of gold nanoparticle-coated poly-(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP) polymer brushes. Bottom: T-SPR spectra of gold nanoislands (containing adsorbed PGMA, P2VP polymer brushes, and gold nanoparticles) at pH 2.0 and 5.0.39	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of hybrid nanoassemblies at 20 °C and 40 °C. (b) LSPR peak wavelength changes of hybrid nanoassemblies.41	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photovoltaic action spectra for a CdSe nanocrystal (2.6 nm diameter) infiltrated PTPAA brush (45 nm thick) device (open diamonds) and for PTPAA/CdSe nanocrystal blend device 1:8 by weight (solid circles), with external quantum efficiency (dotted lines) and internal quantum efficiency (solid lines). (b) Current–voltage characteristics for a device comprising a 20 nm thick PTPAA brush film grown from a modified PEDOT:PSS coated ITO slide, infiltrated with 2.8 nm diameter CdSe nanocrystals and capped with an aluminum cathode, in the dark (dashed line) and under 400 nm incident illumination (solid line).34	 

 	Fig. 6  Bactericidal activity of various surfaces against E. coli K12. The y axis represents the percentage of live E. coli K12 colonies grown relative to the number of colonies grown on a pCBMA surface (n = 3). Note that zwitterionic pCBMA cannot kill the bacteria.60	 

 	Fig. 7  Bacterial cell density of E. coli K12 on the surfaces after releasing (gently shaking in PBS for 30 min; n = 3).60	 

 	Scheme 5  Preparation of the Fe3O4@SiO2@PHEMA-g-PDMAEMA.26	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
