Light energy harvesting with nano-dipoles  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR11732K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11732K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1728-1733Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLight energy harvesting with nano-dipoles

        
          
            Michele 
            Garbugli
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Matteo 
            Porro
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Vittoria 
            Roiati
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Aurora 
            Rizzo
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Gigli
          
        
      def, 
      
        
          
            Annamaria 
            Petrozza
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Guglielmo 
            Lanzani
          
        
      *ab
aDept. of Physics, Politecnico di Milano, p.zza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133, Milano, Italy
bCenter for Nano Science and Technology@Polimi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, via G. Pascoli 70/3, 20133, Milano, Italy. E-mail: guglielmo.lanzani@iit.it
cDept. of Mathematics “F.Brioschi”, Politecnico di Milano, p.zza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133, Milano, Italy
dNational Nanotechnology Laboratory (NNL), Istituto Nanoscienze-CNR, c/o Distretto Tecnologico, via per Arnesano 16, I-73100, Lecce, Italy
eDipartimento di Ingegneria dell'Innovazione, Università del Salento, via per Arnesano, I-73100, Lecce, Italy
fCenter for Bio-Molecular Nanotechnologies (CBN) of IIT@NNL-UniLe-Lecce, via Barsanti c/o STAMMS, Arnesano, 73010, Lecce, Italy
Received 
      14th November 2011
    , Accepted 12th December 2011First published on 19th December 2011AbstractWe propose a new approach for converting light energy into electrical energy, based on the photogeneration of nano-dipoles at donor–acceptor interfaces. The nano-dipoles are oriented in space so as to contribute to a collective polarization that induces a potential difference across the material, sandwiched between electrodes. A current is detected in the external circuit upon illumination. Such a device would exploit many advantages of organic semiconductors and get rid of the main limitation, namely transport. We provide a proof of concept and we discuss the ideal limit of the device based on numerical simulations. This provides design guidelines to the achievement of best performances. Simulations show that the proposed device can be an appealing opportunity with giant conversion efficiency provided some technological issues are overcome.
Introduction
Solar energy harvesting is a crucial issue in the twenty first century1 that is challenging a wide area of scientific research with a general consensus on the need for new ideas and new processes.2 There are several established ways to exploit the energy of solar radiation. In particular organic photovoltaics in third generation solar cells exploits electron donor–acceptor (D–A) extended interfaces in the so-called bulk heterojunctions for converting sun light into electrical energy.3–5Photons, absorbed by the active material, generate neutral singlet states or excitons that migrate to the interface where they dissociate into negative and positive charges. These latter are initially bound by Coulomb attraction, but through a series of phenomena not yet fully understood they become free carriers and finally contribute to the cw current in the external circuit.6 The material-design rules for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells are very strict.7 The maximum efficiency does not depend on the absolute position of the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) and Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) levels, but is a function of the donor–acceptor level offset.8 In addition, the control over the nanomorphology of the donor/acceptor composite9 as well as a sufficient charge transport are mandatory for high power-conversion efficiency.10–12 In particular poor transport is a major issue for such a device configuration because it affects several steps in the conversion process, from charge carrier separation/recombination to collection at the electrodes.13,14
Here we show that the ability of the D–A pair to efficiently transfer an electron upon light absorption can be exploited in a different way if the D–A pairs are organized in ordered arrays. In fact in this way, upon photon absorption, a macroscopic polarization is induced by the coherent sum of the oriented nano-dipoles.15,16 We note that nano-dipoles, associated with inorganic nanorods, have been previously proposed in photovoltaics, however for a very different scope, namely to separate electron–hole pairs and run drift currents in traditional devices.17 In our case the polarized medium, sandwiched between two capacitor plates, will induce a current in the external circuit that can be used to generate power through a load resistance, as happens in pyroelectric detectors.18 In this way one can convert light energy into electrical energy without generating a current through the active layer. Such an approach gets rid of the transport issue in the device engineering, whilst internal quantum efficiency remains high.
In the following we show a proof of concept of the device, we discuss the theoretical limit of this approach and we propose further developments.
Results and discussion
In Fig. 1a a simple sketch of the Light Harvesting Capacitor (LHC) is presented.19 The active compound is made of a double layer of archetypal electron donor (D) and acceptor (A) materials, namely copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)20 or metal-free phthalocyanine (H2Pc)21 and buckminsterfullerene (C60)22 or 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic bisbenzimidazole (PTCBI).23 Each layer has a thickness of the order of the exciton diffusion length, about 20 nm.24 The D–A bilayer is sandwiched between two layers of optically transparent PMMA which confine holes and electrons in the D–A region. The device has an active area A = 16 mm2 and is 240 nm thick, consisting of 40 nm of organic bilayer and 200 nm of PMMA. Bottom and top electrodes are made by indium tin oxide (ITO) and gold respectively. In Fig. 1b the measured current dynamics upon photoexcitation of the device are shown (black line), together with the illumination profile (dotted line).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the structure of the device. On the left, molecular structures of the considered D–A pairs. (b) Illumination intensity profile (dotted line) and typical response of the LHC (solid line). The device, realized as described in Methods section, is made of ITO/PMMA(100 nm)/H2Pc(20 nm)/PTCBI(40 nm)/PMMA(100 nm)/Au(80 nm). Illumination wavelength is 632 nm, with 40 mW cm−2 power. 
We see that a current peak follows both the rising and falling edges of the light profile, albeit with opposite sign. Such current pulses can be related to the charging and discharging of the LHC that is working in alternate regime. Essentially the capacitor plates allow harvesting the electrochemical potential stored in the collective charge separated state, according to the following simple picture: the polarization resulting inside the capacitor upon illumination induces a voltage VP that causes a transient current through the external circuit. In the dark the polarization will decay off, thus causing a second adjustment, in opposite direction, again through the external load. This experiment shows that the LHC is indeed working properly and it demonstrates the photo-electrostatic effect. We focus now our attention to its best performance.
First we consider the internal energy conversion efficiency (ηINT) of the LHC as the ratio between the electrostatic energy u stored in the slab during illumination and the absorbed light energy. In the ideal situation each absorbed photon generates a long lived dipole (no recombination). Considering that the surface charge density is NΔμ where N is the volumetric density of induced dipoles and Δμ is the averaged dipole we obtain (1)Eqn (1), in spite of being extremely rough, suggests two guidelines: high density of dipoles and large nano-dipoles lead to high efficiency.
If we consider recombination, the number N of induced dipoles can be estimated by solving a simple rate equation with the generation rate (G), which depends on the photon fluence and the absorption cross-section, and recombination rate (1/τ).25 In order to preserve the condition that each absorbed photon generates a dipole, we assume the layer to be thin enough that any exciton can reach the interface, in other words the D–A layer thickness is of the order of the exciton diffusion length.26 Because the optical density of such a layer is low, we envisage the use of a multi-layer structure, made by a stack of active double layers, each separated by a thin dielectric layer. Note that here the addition of layers does not dramatically affect the cell performance because charge collection is not an issue. In contrast, proper choice for the stack composition can lead to very high absorption of the radiation on the largest spectral range possible, thus improving the external energy conversion efficiency of the device.
In order to evaluate the best parameters for the ideal multi-stack LHC, some simulations have been performed. We consider the device as a stack of n oriented D–A bilayers, each of them absorbing light in a different spectral range, separated by an insulating layer. Eventually for each color a D–A layer can be repeated equal to a certain number of times. Let S1,i(t), i = 1,…n be the averaged volumetric concentrations of photo-induced dipoles in each of the n active layers. We assume that all the layers have the same thickness d and we introduce an average dipole size a along with a characteristic decay time τ. The upper limit of a is the layer thickness. The evolution of the dipole concentration in each layer can be then modeled with the ordinary differential equation: (2)with initial condition S1,i(0) = 0,i = 1…n. The first term on the right hand side takes into account the generation of dipoles due to exciting photon fluence Fi(t) per spectral range calculated by approximating the sun emission with the black body emission at 5800 K and 1000 W m−2 total power per unit area. Conventional Lambert–Beer model is used in order to take into account the progressive absorption in the layers and absorption coefficients αi(v) are assumed to have a Gaussian profile according to (3)where i is the peak absorption frequency and σv,i determines the width of the Gaussian distribution. These parameters can vary from a layer to another since materials with different absorption spectra can be used in the multi-bilayer structure in order to harvest photons in different spectral bands.
Once the concentrations S1,i(t) are known, it is possible to compute the potential difference arising across each photoactive layer by using: (4)where e is the fundamental charge, while εa and εd are the dielectric permittivities of the acceptor and donor materials. These, in turn determine an overall polarization voltage (5)
The stored polarization energy is then (6)where the capacitance C of the device is computed as the sum of the contribution of each layer: (7)εi and h being the dielectric permittivity and the thickness of the dielectric layers respectively.
We define the internal and external energy conversion efficiency of the LHC as (8a) (8b)where ELIGHT(t) = PsunAt, Psun is the incident light intensity, A the device area, t the time of excitation and Abs is the absorbed fraction of the incident spectrum. Such efficiencies are not constant with time, since the process of charge accumulation is nonlinear and reaches a maximum value. For this reason we define  as the time at which the total polarization voltage VP(t) reaches 95% of its stationary maximum value V∞P and we consider for the efficiencies the values ηEXT() and ηINT() attained at such an instant.
In Fig. 2ηint and ηext, as defined in eqn (8a) and (8b), are plotted as functions of the number of bilayers, for several dipole lifetime values. The first case we consider is a device absorbing red light only (α0,i = 2 × 105 cm−1, λi = 620 nm, σi = 40 nm, i = 1,…,n) in which the active bilayer, 20 nm thick, is repeated n times and separated by 10 nm of dielectric material. For simplicity all the materials are assumed to have relative dielectric constant εr = 2.5.27,28 Moreover, the area of the device is taken to be 25 mm2 and the dipole size is set to an average value of 4 nm. Under the best conditions, the simulation shows that the internal energy conversion efficiency is close to 50%, while the external one is around 4%. As suggested by eqn (1), a longer dipole lifetime induces larger dipole population and higher device energy conversion efficiency. The efficiency η as a function of the number of bilayers reaches a maximum at 3 and 11 bilayers for the internal and external case respectively. With a larger number of layers the efficiency drops down. This effect can be related to the competition of two phenomena: the capacitance C decreases with the number of bilayers, while VP(t) increases. Since EP(t) is quadratic in VP(t), this term dominates and the efficiency should increase linearly. However, since each subsequent bilayer receives less light (Lambert–Beer law holds), it also contributes less to VP(t). The efficiency starts decreasing when the increase in V2P(t) by adding one bilayer will be less than the decrease in C. ηINT() is simply ηEXT() divided by the fraction of absorbed light, which increases monotonically with the number of bilayers. Hence it peaks at a lower number of bilayers than ηEXT().
 Fig. 2  Simulated internal and external efficiency as a function of the number of active bilayers absorbing red light, for several values of the dipole lifetime. 
In Fig. 3 we report the internal and external conversion efficiencies computed assuming the stacking of several couples of donor–acceptor layers that absorb at different wavelengths. We consider three types of bilayers absorbing red, green and blue light respectively with λred = 620 nm, λgreen = 540 nm and λblue = 460 nm and σλ,red = 40 nm, σλ,green = 30 nm and σλ,blue = 21 nm. For simplicity α0,i = 2 × 105 cm−1 for all the layers and their size is the same as in Fig. 2. The number of bilayers is increased each time by three. It is interesting to notice that the main advantage of introducing a panchromatic photosensitivity in the device is to compensate the detrimental effect related to an increase of the thickness when trying to improve the device absorption monochromatically. In this way the LHC exceeds 5% of external energy conversion efficiency using more than 15 bilayers.
 Fig. 3  Simulated internal and external efficiency as a function of the number of active bilayers absorbing in three different ranges, for several values of the dipole lifetime. 
The external energy conversion efficiency as a function of the dipole size and for different dipole lifetimes is shown in Fig. 4 for a device with ten active bilayers absorbing red light. For a dipole size of the order of the layer thickness the energy conversion efficiency reaches 25%.
 Fig. 4  Simulated external efficiency as a function of the dipole length for several values of the dipole lifetime for a multi-layer device (n = 10) absorbing red light. 
These simulations show that the LHC approach is extremely interesting for light energy conversion.
The formation of the nano-dipoles stack at the donor–acceptor interface will induce a local electric field which can influence the materials energetics and eventually hampers the charge transfer process itself at the interface.29 We expect saturation to occur when the dipole-induced electric field determines a potential difference corresponding to the energy gap ΔED–A between the donor and acceptor LUMO levels. Such a saturating electric field (FS) will be approximately (9)
Taking a dipole moment μ = e × 4 nm and an energy gap ΔED–A = 0.9 eV30 we get FS = 2.25 × 108 V m−1. This value would be reached only when each D–A pair at the interface has been excited. The saturation effect is not apparently a crucial one. Eqn (9) suggests anyway that a robust electron transfer reaction with large ΔED–A is preferable.
The experimental energy conversion efficiency (ηX) of the LHC can be estimated by retrieving the electrostatic energy stored in the polarized medium, uX as: (10)where Q is obtained as the time integral of the transient current flowing when light shines on the device. When the laser intensity is set to 37.5 μW cm−2 the accumulated charge results in 0.39 nC. Considering an overall relative dielectric constant of 2.5 the value of the capacitance is 1.47 nF (as obtained from both calculation and direct measurement). The experimental external efficiency of the bilayer is 0.025%. This should be roughly multiplied by a factor of ten to compare with simulation, due to the difference between the dielectric thicknesses of the experimental device with respect to that used in the simulation. We see that theory and experiment lead to a similar value for the lifetime of the charge separated state of 10 ms. This is however not significant, because we do not know the value of the experimental photo-induced average nano-dipole.
To corroborate the effect of adding bilayers we fabricated and tested a prototype multi-stack device. In Fig. 5 we show a comparison between the transient current measured from three devices realized with single, double and triple active bilayers of 20 nm CuPc and 20 nm fullerene. Increasing the number of active bilayers, the total current extracted from the circuit increases, and so does the efficiency. These are proofs of concept for the LHC and the multi-layer idea. Experimentally we obtain external efficiencies much lower than the theoretical limit. This is not surprising, for several reasons. We are working with a non-optimized system where dipole size, dipole lifetime, absorption spectra, bilayers and dielectric spacing do not fulfil the requirements of our model. A global strategy that includes a careful material screening and the use of an advanced deposition technology will be able to realize more efficient devices.
 Fig. 5  Evolution of the measured current for three devices with respectively one, two and three active bilayers. Inset: the absorption spectra for the three devices. 
Conclusions
We propose an innovative optoelectronic device which, according to simulation, is able to harvest solar energy with high efficiency. The device under illumination builds up material polarization. Generation of the light-induced polarization is a well known nonlinear optical phenomenon, which is usually referred to as optical rectification.31 The phenomenon we report can thus be described by an effective non-linear susceptibility. Experiments suggest our device to have giant non-linear response with χ(2) ≈ 104 m V−1.
In terms of energy harvesting, the ideal LHC should have the following characteristics:
(1) absorption spectrum as broad as possible, in order to match the complete solar spectrum;
(2) D–A layer thickness comparable to the singlet diffusion length;
(3) high density of molecular packing and dipole density;
(4) long-living charge separated states of the order of milliseconds.
In addition we note that one very peculiar characteristic of the LHC efficiency is to be correlated to the dipole population, which implies a distinct advantage at high excitation densities, if saturation does not set in. The use of a concentrator (simply a lens) might boost the efficiency. The realization of an LHC architecture with properties close to 1–4 is nowadays possible, even if technologically challenging and it requires a specific effort beyond this first communication.
Methods
1 cm2 etched ITO coated glasses (Psiotec Ltd) were used as conductive substrates after standard cleaning (acetone and 2-propanol from Sigma Aldrich) and oxygen plasma etching. The PMMA powder (Mw: 996000, Sigma Aldrich) was dissolved in chloroform (30 mg mL−1) and spin coated at 4000 rpm for 1 minute to obtain 100 nm thick dielectric films. Donor/acceptor couples of small molecules (CuPc/C60 and H2Pc/PTCBI) were evaporated in an Edwards Auto 60 evaporator or in a Kurt Lesker multiple chamber system at a pressure of 10−7 mbar. Buckminsterfullerene (Mw: 720.64, Sigma Aldrich) and 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic bisbenzimidazole (Mw: 536.54, Luminescence Technology) were evaporated on top of PMMA coated ITO glasses. Thickness was varied between 10 and 40 nm. Copper phthalocyanine (Mw: 576.07, Sigma Aldrich) and metal-free phthalocyanine (Mw: 514.54, Luminescence Technology) were evaporated afterwards on top of the corresponding acceptor layer. Thickness was varied between 10 and 40 nm. The PMMA solution in butyl acetate (30 mg ml−1) was spin coated on top of the evaporated bilayer; 75 nm thick films were obtained with 1 minute 4000 rpm. 25 mm two gold (Testbourne Ltd) contacts were thermally evaporated through a shadow mask onto the PMMA dielectric layer. For characterization, ITO (bottom) and gold (top) electrodes were connected to a fast dynamic oscilloscope (tektronix 100 MHz bandwidth) through a BNC cable. A He–Ne laser (Melles Griot), 18 mW maximum power, was employed as illumination source. Laser beam was optically enlarged with a lenses system, to cover the whole active area, and gradually attenuated to monitor a broad range of incident powers. The sample was illuminated from the ITO transparent electrode to assure maximum absorption at the donor/acceptor interface. Light was manually or mechanically chopped at various frequencies. Charge and discharge characteristics were recorded on the oscilloscope and analyzed with commercial software (Origin).
Computational methods
Simulations have been performed using the commercial suite MATLAB. Particular attention has been devoted to the implementation of black body radiation and progressive absorption according to the Lambert–Beer law since this is a fundamental aspect for the evaluation of the considered multi-stack devices.
In order to solve the differential system, the MATLAB built-in function ode4532 has been employed that implements a high order in time method with temporal advancement step adaptivity. The use of ode23s function33 has also been considered in sight of a future introduction of circuit dynamics in the model, since this could result in making the ODE system stiff. In fact, for particular values of model and circuit parameters the characteristic times of the evolution of the voltages in the circuit could be remarkably different and this determines the need for suitable more robust methods such as ode23s.
Notes and references

          N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Front Matter, in Energy for a Sustainable World: from the Oil Age to a Sun-Powered Future, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2010 Search PubMed .
Renewable energy issue, Chem. Soc. Rev.,  2009, 38, 1–300 Search PubMed.
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. G. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CAS .
R. Mauer, M. Kastler and F. Laquai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2085–2092 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C. S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goffri, C. Müller, N. Stingelin-Stutzmann, D. W. Breiby, C. P. Radano, J. W. Andreasen, R. Thompson, R. A. J. Janssen, M. M. Nielsen, P. Smith and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 950–956 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, J. J. Kwiatkowski, J. Kirkpatrick and J. M. Frost, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1768–1778 CrossRef CAS .
V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A. da Silva Filho, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J. L. Bredas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 926–952 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and H. Bassler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605–4607 CrossRef CAS .

          S. C. Veenstra, Electronic Structure of Molecular Systems from Gas Phase to Thin Films to Devices, PhD thesis, University of Groningen,  2002 Search PubMed .
D. Shvydka and V. G. Karpov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053507 Search PubMed .
A. Odon, Meas. Sci. Rev., 2001, 1, 215–218 Search PubMed .
D. J. Bindl, N. S. Safron and M. S. Arnold, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5657–5664 Search PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, H. Fukusumi and M. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1992, 61, 2580–2582 Search PubMed .
P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, H. M. Haverinen, Z. Wang, S. Madakuni, Y. Kim, J. Li and G. E. Jabbour, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4256–4260 CrossRef CAS .
F. Monestier, J.-J. Simon, P. Torchio, L. Escoubas, B. Ratier, W. Hojeij, B. Lucas, A. Moliton, M. Cathelinaud, C. Defranoux and F. Flory, Appl. Opt., 2008, 47, 251–256 Search PubMed .

          O. Svelto, Principles of Lasers, Plenum press, New York, 4th edn,  1998 Search PubMed .
R. R. Lunt, N. C. Giebink, A. A. Belak, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 053711 CrossRef .
A. Kahn, W. Zhao, W. Gao, H. Vazquez and F. Flores, Chem. Phys., 2006, 325, 129–137 Search PubMed .
M. Na and S. W. Rhee, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
U. B. Cappel, S. M. Feldt, J. Schoneboom, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9096–9101 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2650–2652 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. R. Shen, Principles of Nonlinear Optics,  1984, p. 57 Search PubMed .
J. R. Dormand and P. J. Prince, J. Comput. Appl. Math., 1980, 6, 19–26 Search PubMed .
L. F. Shampine and M. W. Reichelt, SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 1997, 18, 1–22 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the structure of the device. On the left, molecular structures of the considered D–A pairs. (b) Illumination intensity profile (dotted line) and typical response of the LHC (solid line). The device, realized as described in Methods section, is made of ITO/PMMA(100 nm)/H2Pc(20 nm)/PTCBI(40 nm)/PMMA(100 nm)/Au(80 nm). Illumination wavelength is 632 nm, with 40 mW cm−2 power.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8a)
	(8b)

 	Fig. 2  Simulated internal and external efficiency as a function of the number of active bilayers absorbing red light, for several values of the dipole lifetime.	 

 	Fig. 3  Simulated internal and external efficiency as a function of the number of active bilayers absorbing in three different ranges, for several values of the dipole lifetime.	 

 	Fig. 4  Simulated external efficiency as a function of the dipole length for several values of the dipole lifetime for a multi-layer device (n = 10) absorbing red light.	 
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 5  Evolution of the measured current for three devices with respectively one, two and three active bilayers. Inset: the absorption spectra for the three devices.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
