Polymorphism as an additional functionality of materials for technological applications at surfaces and interfaces   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00283E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00283E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2502-2517Polymorphism as an additional functionality of materials for technological applications at surfaces and interfaces†

        
          
            Denis 
            Gentili
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Massimo 
            Gazzano
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Manuela 
            Melucci
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Derek 
            Jones
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Massimiliano 
            Cavallini
          
          
        
      *a
aIstituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati (ISMN), Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Via Gobetti 101, 40129 Bologna, Italy. E-mail: massimiliano.cavallini@cnr.it
bIstituto per la Sintesi Organica e Fotoreattività (ISOF), Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via Gobetti 101, 40129 Bologna, Italy
Received 
      31st December 2018
    First published on 14th March 2019AbstractPolymorphism is a widespread phenomenon occurring in many solid materials having important effects in many scientific disciplines. Since molecular packing can determine the functional properties of materials but is often difficult to control, polymorphism has usually been considered a drawback for technological applications. Thanks to advances in its control over the past few years, polymorphism is now often considered more as an opportunity because it allows a much wider range of functionality in, for example, a solid molecular material, where a corresponding packing type can be selected or even promoted. This tutorial review introduces the reader to the most representative progress in applications of polymorphism as an additional functionality of materials especially in its current promise for technological applications. In addition, it examines the most powerful strategies to control and fully exploit the intrinsic properties of polymorphism and transitions between its various metastable states, through fine-tuning of molecular packing in a reproducible manner. The aim is to create awareness about polymorphism as a novel enabling technology rather than as a problem.
Denis Gentili
Denis Gentili is a research scientist at the Istituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati (ISMN) of the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche. He graduated summa cum laude in Industrial Chemistry and received his PhD in Chemical Science from the University of Bologna. His research interests encompass chemistry, materials science and fabrication, with a focus on nanomaterials and their interactions with biological systems as well as functional organic/inorganic and hybrid materials for application in opto-electronics, sensing and data storage.
Massimo Gazzano
Massimo Gazzano, who obtained his PhD in Chemical Sciences from the University of Bologna in 1986, has been widely working on the structural characterization of materials. He was the team leader during experiments carried out at neutron facilities (ILL, ISIS) and synchrotron sources (ESRF, Diamond). He applied microfocus scanning diffraction to the study of materials morphology. Investigation of structure–property relationships caused his interest in polymorphism in polymers, pharmaceutical ingredients, biomaterials, organic electronics molecules and devices.
Manuela Melucci
Manuela Melucci graduated summa cum laude in Chemistry in 2000, and obtained her PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2005 from the University of Bologna (Italy). She was selected in 2013 and 2014 by the Royal Society of Chemistry as an Emerging Investigator, i.e. one among the internationally recognised, up-and-coming scientists from around the world in the materials science area. Her research activity includes design, synthesis, property-specific tailoring of π-conjugated molecular materials for applications in organic (opto)electronics and bioelectronics. She is also involved in the Graphene Flagship project for the synthesis of graphene-based materials and composites for sensing and water purification applications.
Derek Jones
Derek Jones after obtaining his BSc from Newcastle Polytechnic worked for Dow Chemicals in King's Lynn, later obtaining an MSc in Analytical Chemistry at Loughborough and then a PhD at Swansea building a UPS instrument with Prof. Betteridge. Since 1975, in Italy, he has continued extracting electrons from materials in both gas and solid phases (XPS/UPS), then adding them to molecules in the gas phase with home-built electron transmission (ETS) and dissociative electron attachment (DEAS) spectrometers. More recently, having studied silicon surfaces by electron tunnelling (UHV-STM) he is now again working with XPS especially of graphene and other 2D materials.
Massimiliano Cavallini
Massimiliano Cavallini is Research Director at CNR-ISMN where he heads the multidisciplinary group of “Nanotechnology of Multifunctional Materials”. He received a Laurea cum Laude in 1995 and PhD in Chemistry in 1999 from the University of Florence. His multidisciplinary research spans from unconventional bottom-up nanofabrication, applications of unusual properties, phenomena such as dewetting and polymorphism, information storage, development of time–temperature integrators and nano-electrochemistry. He is the author of 150 papers, several book chapters and is the inventor of 15 international patents. He has been Principal Investigator of several EU projects, and received the ESF-European Young Investigator Award (EURYI) in 2006.

Key learning points
1. Exploit polymorphism as a functional property.
2. Enlarge the applications of many materials beyond their original scope.
3. Search for polymorphism and new crystal forms in known materials.
4. Re-evaluate some materials in view of technological applications of polymorphs.
5. Suggest preparation and processing methods as a further opportunity for controlling polymorph types and thus their technological applications.

1. Introduction
Polymorphism denotes the existence of different forms or crystallized structures of a solid substance having different stabilities but with the same stoichiometry. It is a well-known, natural phenomenon common to both organic and inorganic compounds and is present in almost all scientific disciplines involving solid materials.1,2 Indeed, it has implications in fields ranging from medicine to materials science, catalysis and electronics. As the crystal structure determines the properties of a material, polymorphism can have a direct impact on its functional properties, and thus on its technological applications. Different morphs can have dramatically different chemical, physical and biological properties such as being either an insulator or a conductor, ferromagnetic or diamagnetic, fluorescent or non-fluorescent, an effective drug or not, and so on. In addition, there are functional properties, such as magnetoelectricity and multiferroicity, originating directly from polymorphism, which can be exploited. Because of difficulties in its control, polymorphism has often been considered a drawback in technological applications, limiting the development of many materials and in some cases leading to their being abandoned. However, more recently, the approach towards the ‘problem’ of polymorphism has been changing, mainly due to advances made in controlling and exploiting it, to obtain novel functional materials rather than it being an ‘undesired’ form of a targeted system. Given this recently revised vision of polymorphism, we propose here a critical overview of the most promising technological opportunities which it can now offer.3 The aim of this tutorial review is to spread awareness in the materials science community that polymorphism can be, under certain conditions, directly exploited as a useful property for a variety of technological applications. Presenting some representative examples, we intend to stimulate readers towards the application of new, and old, materials beyond their originally planned use by exploiting their polymorphism as an opportunity, instead of it being a limitation. Moreover, we review some applications of polymorphism directly related to materials science, excluding its fundamental aspects as well as its specific implications for pharmaceuticals which are the subject of other authoritative reviews.1,2 We also exclude works where polymorphism does not provide any added value for applications, including extensive studies on the characterization of specific polymorphs.
We first briefly describe, in general, how polymorphism can be discovered, promoted and exploited in existing materials (Section 2), followed by methods and relevant strategies currently used for the control of polymorphism (Section 3). Section 4 discusses how polymorphism can be advantageously exploited in various fields, including electronic, optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices, chemosensors, mechanical actuators as well as magnetoelectric and multiferroic phenomena related to polymorphism. The review concludes (Section 5) with a brief summary of the most important results obtained so far together with an outlook on the promise of future applications of polymorphism in materials science.
2. Principal ways to advantageously exploit polymorphism
Polymorphism can offer both directly and indirectly a technological advantage through the main routes shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the advantages of polymorphism. 
2.1. Discovery, promotion and control of polymorphism in existing materials
Despite the greatest portion of published articles about polymorphism being concerned with the selection of a specific polymorph on the basis of its property (i.e. the most conductive, most fluorescent, etc.), the identification of new or specific polymorphs allows the development of novel applications, without the need for newly synthesized molecules, through access to metastable phases with enhanced functional properties.4,5 Usually when unknown crystal phases are discovered, the stability ranges and relative properties of each morph are reported with suggestions on which one would be the most suitable for given functional properties. Here, cases are considered where polymorphism represents an added value, such as when it provides access to metastable phases otherwise inaccessible under normal conditions. Indeed, polymorphs useful for technological applications can be fruitfully used even though metastable, when they persist in that state for a period greatly exceeding the lifetime of the end-user device.
2.2. Tuning of functional properties
As different polymorphs exhibit different properties, polymorphism can be exploited to tune the performance of a device by acting upon the nature and composition of polymorphic materials. Section 4 presents some specific examples where important properties of materials can be directly or indirectly tailored by playing on the relative polymorph abundance.6,7
2.3. Generation of original functional properties
Over the past two decades, previously little-known physical phenomena such as magnetoelectricity and multiferroicity have emerged at the interfaces in polymorphic materials at the nanoscale. Interest in these particular phenomena began with Hill8 and has now led to innumerable studies some examples of which are described in more detail in Section 4.
Despite the origin of these properties often being due to the existence of interfaces between different morphs, nanoscale polymorphic systems present some peculiar advantages with respect to mixtures of different materials at the nanoscale. The use of a single material, thus improving chemical compatibility and providing low resistive barriers for charge transport and electrochemical interactions,9 renders the use of a polymorphic material much more advantageous for many technological applications. Several examples in which functional properties emerge and/or can be tuned by directly acting upon the polymorph composition are presented in Sections 3 and 4.
2.4. Exploiting polymorphism as a functional property
Recently, the idea of exploiting polymorphism itself as a functional property is gaining ground. Specific properties of each polymorph are not the most important aspect, the key element being the presence of at least one property which changes in an overtly detectable manner, as a consequence, for example, of the occurrence of a phase transition. One can thus exploit the differences in properties resulting from such transitions. For example, using a change in colour with temperature (Fig. 2), one can determine the temperature to which a device has been exposed and for how long. This can be exploited to fabricate time–temperature sensors10 as described in Section 4. Several cases are also described there in which polymorphism itself generates novel properties which can be exploited in device applications.3,11
 Fig. 2  A generic scheme to exploit polymorphism as a functional property. 
3. Strategies for polymorph selection
Technological applications require control of structure, composition, range of stability and morphology of the active materials. Therefore, reproducible control of polymorphism is a key factor for its exploitation in any such applications. Prediction as well as control of polymorphism in materials is a challenging issue for materials chemists as molecular packing in a given material arises from the effects of intermolecular, molecule–solvent and molecule–substrate interactions leading to great complexity in defining a priori general rules for both its promotion and tuning.
Control of polymorphism can be achieved at different stages in the process of polymorph formation:
3.1 Before preparation through rational chemical design;
3.2 During preparation by tuning both conditions and techniques used;
3.3 After preparation through post-treatments.
Although methods for polymorph control are still imperfect, various strategies to control polymorphism have been developed and discussed in a previous review article.5 In this section, we briefly review only the most important strategies for controlling polymorphism deemed to be useful in technological applications.
3.1. Chemical design
The molecular packing of molecular materials is strongly influenced by intermolecular interactions, such as π–π stacking interactions, van der Waals interactions, and other interactions involving hydrogen bonding or S⋯S, S⋯N and S⋯C interactions. Although polymorphism has been observed for several classes of molecular materials, no general rules for predicting polymorphism occurrence by molecular design are currently available.12 Indeed, a recent review concluded that “prediction and realization of targeted polymorphism still remains a holy grail of materials sciences”.12 At present, it is only possible to relate the presence of specific molecular backbone and peripheral structures, building blocks, and their assembly modes which give rise to polymorphism (Fig. 3).13
 Fig. 3  Assembling strategies of structural motifs and building blocks associated with the occurrence of polymorphism at surfaces.12–18 
In fully fused π-conjugated molecular materials, such as pentacene,14 polymorphs have been observed in crystals grown under different experimental conditions. Polymorphism is common in π-conjugated molecular materials, with different configurations showing small energy differences. For example, the functionalization of oligo-acenes can radically change the molecular packing in the solid state, as is the case for tetracene molecules which show a face-to-edge herringbone packing without π–π overlap whereas, upon adding four phenyl groups to form rubrene, a face-to-face herringbone packing with π–π stacking is preferred. The functionalization of pentacene with fluorine atoms also converts the crystal packing from a face-to-edge herringbone to a π-stacked arrangement, whereas functionalization with bulky triisopropylsilyl (TIPS) groups favours a 2D-brickwork packing.15 Moreover, the chain length as well as the regio-chemistry of substituents can be exploited to chemically control molecular packing.13 In particular, the alkyl end group symmetry can induce and control conformational polymorphism in a series of 2,3-thienoimide (N) based oligothiophenes in a single crystal, powder and solution cast film.13 The presence of heteroatoms in π-conjugated materials can affect both intramolecular and intermolecular non-covalent interactions and thus, in turn, extend the range of possible packing modes leading to polymorphism.15 In heterocyclic-based materials, such as linear oligothiophenes, polymorphism has been primarily ascribed to inter-ring torsion.16 In most of these materials, the side-chains show a fully stretched S-anti conformation and are packed in a herringbone structure where the S-anti planar molecules rotate somewhat from the face-to-face arrangement. Alkyl chain end substitution or substitution in beta at the thienyl rings affects the packing mode also favouring polymorphism. Moreover, the presence of heteroatoms in the aliphatic chain ends also allows intermolecular contacts which can influence the packing mode and thus polymorphism.17 Another structural element associated with the existence of polymorphs is the presence of a fused-ring core as the inner moiety of alpha-linked oligomers. The π–π stacking deriving from the aromatic core combined with the conformational degrees of freedom among the side-chains is likely the driving force for the formation of different stable polymorphs originated from different rotation angles between side-chains and the π-core. An example of this is a 3,6-diaryl-2,5-dihydro-1,4-diketopyrrolo pyrrole derivative for which two different polymorphs were isolated.18 Crystal packing in both polymorphs is stabilized via S⋯O, C–H⋯O/π, and π⋯π interactions forming α-herringbone sheets with a columnar network in the β-form.18 The presence of fused-ring units as end groups of alpha–alpha linked oligomers has often been associated with polymorphism. Also, in this case intermolecular π–π interactions through the end π groups and π–π-stacking of the aromatic chain, combined with the high inter-ring torsional degrees of freedom of the repeating units, impart a greater tendency to multiphase packing and thus polymorphism. The family of thienoimide-based compounds having unsaturated inner bridges provides a good example of how fluorescence emission can be related to the polymorph type.
3.2. Techniques used during material preparation
This section highlights some particular techniques which can be used during preparation of the target material in order to favour polymorphism and thus desired properties. Since this topic has already been considered in other reviews,5 we limit our overview to strategies useful for technological applications.

3.2.1 Processing conditions and deposition methods. 
Processing methods and conditions used to deposit molecular materials have a strong impact on the resulting molecular packing and, therefore, the appropriate choice of both can be a means to control the polymorphism. For example, the molecular packing of pentacene, when prepared in thin films by evaporation in high vacuum, strongly depends on the nature of the substrate, deposition temperature and film thickness.14 The molecular packing of soluble materials, when solution-processed, depends on other processing parameters, such as the nature of the solvent and concentration of solute,3 allowing one to increase the parameter space to control their polymorphism.19,20 However, while for some materials, such as electrospun poly(vinylidene fluoride) (an important ferroelectric polymer which forms five polymorphs of which only the β-phase exhibits piezoelectricity and pyroelectricity)21 and thieno(bis)imide-based oligothiophenes (an organic semiconductor),22 the formation of polymorphic crystal structures can be controlled by varying both the techniques and conditions used during preparation, in many other cases, there can be a predominant parameter which dictates the crystal packing independently of the deposition method.


3.2.2 Spatial confinement. 
During crystallization, spatial confinement can play a critical role in the orientation of crystallites and functional properties for a wide range of functional materials.19,23 Kinetics and thermodynamics of crystallization processes where nucleation and phase transformations take place at length scales near the critical size23 can be drastically different compared to unconfined crystallization processes. Such spatial confinement has been achieved using nanoporous media23 or through solution-shearing24 to obtain metastable polymorphs. In particular, nanoscale pores allow selective crystallization of different polymorphs, such as, for example, with crystallization of anthranilic acid within nanoporous glass beads where the metastable polymorph of anthranilic acid crystallizes in pores with diameters <23 nm, with the selectivity increasing on further reducing the pore size. This preference for the metastable form in smaller pores was attributed to a smaller critical size compared to the other forms, reflecting size-dependent polymorph stability with confinement. Likewise, pimelic acid, suberic acid, and coumarin have also been crystallized as previously unknown polymorphs in nanometer-scale pores of controlled-pore glass beads and cylindrical pores of polymer monoliths. Thus, crystallization in small pores can lead to the discovery of new polymorphs which would otherwise not be detected using conventional screening methods.23
Spatial confinement can also be an effective strategy for stabilizing metastable polymorphs in thin films. For example, using the solution-shearing method as shown in Fig. 4a, Diao et al.4 were able to stabilize various metastable polymorphs under ambient conditions and identify a new metastable polymorph of 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene. During the solution-shearing process, crystallization is initiated at the surface of the solution and proceeds towards the substrate. As shown in Fig. 4b, the solution is first confined in a thin liquid film then forming a crust at the surface which self-confines the crystallization front along the vertical direction. The confinement results can be increased by decreasing the starting concentration and film thickness.24
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the solution-shearing method. (b) Conceptual illustration of how crystal growth proceeds during solution shearing. The equilibrium polymorph (blue) first forms at the solution–air interface and begins to grow downwards towards the substrate. The metastable polymorph (red) forms soon after. Figure adapted from ref. 24, with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Nature, copyright 2014. 


3.2.3 Surface functionalization. 
Molecule–substrate interactions can play a crucial role in molecular packing. Interactions with a substrate can affect the growth mode of organic materials in thin films and can lead to the formation of substrate-induced phases at the substrate–thin film interface differing from those in the bulk of the film.14,25 Thus, through functionalization of substrate surfaces, molecule–substrate interactions can be optimized to control both the formation and selection of polymorphs. Indeed, surface functionalization by means of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) has found applications in many research areas, ranging from opto-electronic devices to bioactive surfaces, and has been used to develop template-based strategies to control polymorphism. For example, Hiremath et al.26 found that three different crystal phases of 1,3-bis(m-nitrophenyl) urea can be selectively nucleated and grown with high purity on SAM-functionalized gold surfaces by varying the end functionality of the SAM. The molecule–substrate interactions favour polymorph selectivity through a combination of chemical and geometrical, i.e. two-dimensional lattice matching (epitaxial), interactions at the SAM/crystal interface. Furthermore, the introduction of surface confinement effects, through the use of patterned surfaces, in combination with surface functionalization can be exploited to control both molecular packing and crystal size.27

3.3. Post-deposition processing
Post-deposition treatments have been successfully used to control the polymorphism of various materials. Amongst these, post-deposition processing with thermal and solvent–vapor annealing is the most common offering a simple and effective strategy to control polymorphism, converting metastable polymorphs to more thermodynamically stable ones. Changes in molecular packing through thermal annealing are due to the interplay between intermolecular and molecule–substrate interactions, whereas for solvent–vapour annealing molecule–solvent interactions must also be considered. Thermal and solvent–vapour annealing have been exploited to improve the electrical performance of organic semiconductors. For example, Jones et al.28 recently reported that substrate-induced phases, i.e. polymorphic forms which occur near the interface with a rigid substrate but not observed among polymorphs in the bulk crystals,14 of an organic semiconductor deposited by spin-coating on SiO2 surfaces can be easily converted to the bulk polymorph through a post-processing process of solvent–vapour annealing. In situ measurements have shown directly the phase transformation of metastable pentacene thin films to the bulk-like phase when exposed to solvent vapors29 revealing that solvent molecules interact mainly with the surface of the film to induce a solid–solid transition without noticeable swelling, dissolving or melting. Post-processing by both thermal and solvent–vapour annealing of metastable thin-films14 causes their conversion into thermodynamically favoured polymorphs. Moreover, as reported by Hiszpanski et al.,30 the appropriate combination of thermal and solvent–vapor annealing can be an effective strategy to control the crystal structure and molecular orientation in thin films of organic materials showing that three polymorphs of contorted hexabenzocoronene can be independently achieved simply by altering the sequence of thermal and solvent–vapor annealing.
4. Technological application of polymorphism
Although organic compounds are more prone to form polymorphs many technological applications have been developed using inorganic compounds since they often exhibit higher performance and reproducibility in device development when compared to their organic counterparts.
4.1. Polymorphism in electronics
Different polymorphs, even with small distortions in their crystal structure, can dramatically differ in electronic properties, for example, with differences of orders of magnitude in charge mobility, or even change their conducting nature from insulator to semiconductor or conductor or vice versa.5 These different properties have been exploited in various systems by appropriate crystal engineering which can include spatial control of the crystal structure, usually through some kind of lithography. Polymorphism can be advantageously exploited to fabricate electronic components made from a single material,31 to tune a functional property32,33 or itself be the origin of functional properties.34 Often the advantages of polymorphs are exploited at the junction or interfaces of device components. In fact, devices with junctions between passive and active components (for example, between metal electrode and semiconducting material), which consist of two phases of the same material, usually have a charge transport barrier which can be quite low compared to corresponding hetero-junctions, thus providing low-resistance ohmic contacts.9 This advantage often enhances device performance with a significant reduction in power consumption, a major challenge in nanoelectronics. In this section we briefly consider some applications related to the electronic or optoelectronic properties of polymorphs highlighting their role and possible advantages.

4.1.1 Planar junctions. 
The different conduction properties of polymorphs have been exploited for the fabrication of coplanar semiconductor–metal-like homojunctions and 2D electronic circuitry made of a single material.31 Such applications exploit the fact that some transition-metal dichalcogenides can be selectively grown with spatial control over semiconducting or metal-like polymorphic areas.
The most representative of these, MoTe2, is considered a model material due to its peculiar properties, such as its 2H polymorph which has a bandgap similar to that of silicon and its strong spin–orbit coupling which holds promise for its use in electronic and spintronic applications. In addition, the fact that MoTe2 is a stable two-dimensional material, allows the fabrication of real 2D circuitry. Despite its complexity the control of polymorph selection is well established and can be obtained during its epitaxial growth on a variety of substrates.9,31
Planar metal–semiconductor homojunctions in MoTe2 were fabricated by Cho et al.9via applied-strain or laser illumination combined with accurate control of the flux during thin film growth. Using this technique the authors fabricated in-plane 2H–1T′ MoTe2 homojunctions and, by masking the surface, a controlled pattern was obtained with micrometric resolution. Using a similar approach, Sung et al.,31 with heteroepitaxial integration of several layers of 2H–1T′ MoTe2, obtained metal–semiconductor polymorphs within the same atomic layer. This result was obtained by accurate engineering of the polymorphic heteroepitaxial growth consisting of selective and sequential growth for the two polymorphs.
Their coplanar interface was atomically flat and seamless across the two distinct crystalline polymorphs. Remarkably, this combination of polymorphs established a novel type of electrical contact with an exceptionally low contact barrier of ∼25 meV. This great improvement was exploited in the same work for the fabrication of a coplanar field effect transistor (FET).
Combining the two 2H/1T′ MoTe2 polymorphs in a field effect geometry consisting of the alternation of the 1T′/2H/1T′ phases (Fig. 5), a device was produced with significantly higher on-current and gate tunability outperforming conventional top-contacted field effect transistors made of the same materials. Fig. 5 shows the configuration and electrical properties of the coplanar 1T′/2H MoTe2 polymorph transistor with corresponding electrical characteristics measured at room temperature.
 Fig. 5  (a) Scheme of the MoTe2 polymorph device. (b) Optical micrograph of the physical device. (c) Current–voltage curves recorded at room temperature for 1T′-coplanar contacted (blue), Au-top contacted (red) 2H MoTe2 transistors and Au-top contacted 1T′-MoTe2 (black). (d) Transfer characteristics of back-gate voltage Vg modulation of sheet conductance G for 1T′-coplanar contacted (blue), Au-top contacted (red) 2H-MoTe2 FETs. Figure adapted from ref. 31, with permission from Springer, Nature Nanotechnology, copyright 2017. 
The proposed assembly scheme was successfully proposed using other transition-metal dichalcogenide polymorphs, indicating the potential for a new type of high-performance 2D device architecture.31


4.1.2 Vertical junctions: varistors, capacitors and memristors. 
In addition to the intrinsic properties related to the crystal structure which are usually bulk properties, polymorphism plays an important role in thin films and in the interfacial properties which indirectly influences material properties and relative applications. In particular, polymorphism in thin films influences grain size, shape, morphology, roughness and surface tension. These parameters have a dramatic impact on charge transport, and thus on many electrical devices. Particularly relevant is the case in which the charge transport occurs through micro/nano structured systems rich in domain boundaries or interfaces as often happens in thin films and micro/nano mixtures. In such systems the charge transfer occurring at the interfaces of zones with different grain structures determines the performance of the corresponding devices as in varistors, which change their electrical resistance with applied voltage, and capacitors which passively store charge in an electric field. Polymorphism affects all devices in which interfaces between polymorphs play a key role.
Varistors. 
Elfwing et al.32 studied Bi2O3/ZnO mixtures, a widely used varistor material exhibiting highly nonlinear current–voltage characteristics and marked energy-handling capability. The interfacial Bi2O3/ZnO microstructure and chemical composition regulate charge transport properties through this material, which can vary by many orders of magnitude, depending on the size, quality and nature of the Bi interfaces between the mixture grains. The authors showed that the microstructure at the Bi2O3/ZnO interface depends on the nature of Bi2O3 polymorphs. In particular, they showed that α-Bi2O3 wets the ZnO grains, generating a good conductive interface (Fig. 6a) whereas δ-Bi2O3 does not, resulting in a rougher and poorly conducting interface (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  Bright-field (left) and dark-field (right) TEM image of a triple-grain junction in a ZnO/Bi2O3 varistor material. (a) Crystalline α-Bi2O3 extends into the ZnO/Bi2O3 interface, revealing a small dihedral angle and good wetting properties. (b) Crystalline δ-Bi2O3 is at the Bragg angle and its dihedral angle indicates that the phase is not wetting the ZnO grains. Figure adapted from ref. 32, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., copyright 2000. 
Despite the study being limited to morphological and structural characterization it opens up the possibility of acting upon the interfacial Bi2O3/ZnO microstructure and thus upon material characteristics through changing the Bi2O3 polymorph composition.7
Capacitors. 
Another example of the central role of polymorphism in electronic vertical junctions is the case of capacitors. In this case polymorphs can influence the capacitor efficiency in two different manners. One is a direct, intrinsic effect consisting in a change in the dielectric constant of the insulating layer. In this case, polymorphism as such has no significant role and is not considered. An example of the second is given by Bae et al.33 who report on the important role of polymorphs in the reduction of leakage-current in an organic capacitor based on nanocomposite insulators/organic semiconductor layered structures.
Many nanocomposite insulators have, in fact, been developed with the specific aim of reducing the operating voltage of organic devices so that they can be used in flexible and plastic electronic devices. The aim is to reduce the elevated leakage currents present in such devices, and attributed to percolation pathways formed in the nanocomposite insulator formed during the processing.
Comparing two different capacitors, made of metal–insulator–metal (MIM) and metal–insulator–semiconductor–metal (MISM) junctions using a Nylon6–TiO2 nanocomposite or poly(4-vinylphenol) buffer as insulating layers Bae et al.33 show that when a layer of pentacene is hosted in the MISM capacitor, the leakage current is significantly reduced. The reduction ratio for the leakage current between the MIM and MISM capacitors results from the different polymorphs of pentacene which are critically dictated by the morphology of the underlying layer and thus by the polymorph composition.
Memristors. 
The dramatic differences in the functional properties of polymorphs combined with their possible interconversion can be advantageously exploited in many kinds of memory devices.7,11,34 The interconversion between polymorphs for memory applications has been proposed both for organic and inorganic compounds by exploiting the different electrical conductivities of different polymorphs together with their controlled interconversion. This transition is exploited in memo-resistive switching devices usually named memristors, which can change their resistance through the application of an appropriate pulsed voltage. In the simplest configuration a memristor consists of an insulating or semiconducting, inorganic or organic, thin film sandwiched between two electrodes in which the resistive switching occurs by the application of a high electric field.35 Memristors are important because they are non-volatile, meaning that they retain a memory state without power. In fact, Zhu et al.34 proposed the application of polymorphic transitions in resistance random access memories (RRAM) based on a memristor, switching between a high resistance state (logic state 0) and a low resistance state (logic state 1), by applying a voltage pulse. The authors used TaO2 exploiting its dramatic change in electrical conductivity between triclinic TaO2 (T-TaO2), a semiconductor with a band gap of about 1.0 eV, and the tetragonal polymorph rutile TaO2 (R-TaO2) which behaves as a metallic conducting phase. The transition occurs via a Peierls distortion with an energy barrier of 0.19 eV per atom from R-TaO2 to T-TaO2 and 0.23 eV per atom for the inverse transition. Fig. 7 shows the scheme of the polymorphic transition with a consequent change in the density of states when TaO2 switches between metallic and semiconducting states.
 Fig. 7  (a) Unit cell of triclinic structured TaO2 (T-TaO2) and rutile (tetragonal) structured TaO2 (R-TaO2). Blue and red balls symbolize Ta and O atoms, respectively. (b) Density of states for semiconducting T-TaO2 corresponding to a highly resistive logic state “0” and a low resistance state, R-TaO2, corresponding to a logic state “1”. The vertical dashed lines indicate the Fermi level. Figure adapted from ref. 34, with permission from AIP Publishing. 
Whereas conventional RRAM based on resistive switching often shows complex and sometimes simultaneous unwanted effects such as filament formation/destruction, space-charging and traps, charge transfer, ionic conduction, which result in poorly controllable conductive switching, limiting their development, the polymorphic transition can potentially be simpler and, paradoxically, more controllable and reproducible.


4.1.3 Tailoring charge transport in organic electronic devices. 
Polymorphism is most widely diffused in organic compounds, because interactions among molecules in crystals are weak and molecules can easily rearrange by small relative shifts or slight conformational rotations with low energies. Charge transport in organic semiconductors depends strongly upon the crystal structure, and therefore polymorphism has a strong impact on charge transport and more in general on organic electronics.
Most studies related to electronics concern the study and comparison of different polymorphs, and usually, when new crystal phases are found, papers report the stability ranges and the relative properties of each one, suggesting which polymorph is the most suitable for the desired application. Usually, polymorphs are selected on the basis of their electrical performance, but polymorphism has some peculiar advantages since it can also allow access to metastable phases with molecules packed in a suitable way to give high or even outstanding device performance. For example, TIPS-pentacene in its metastable phase exhibits an extraordinary hole charge mobility (ca. 11 cm2 V−1 s−1),11 an order of magnitude higher than its stable polymorphs (ca. 1 cm2 V−1 s−1). In addition, polymorphism offers unique advantages for the study of the fundamental properties of semiconductors such as the role of crystal packing in charge transport because of the identical molecular structures and chemical composition amongst polymorphs. Polymorphism as a design strategy for high-performance organic electronics is covered in a dedicated review.5
Despite attention towards organic electronics being more focused on the study of the “best” polymorphs, some studies have shown the possibility of tailoring device performance by acting upon the polymorph composition. For example, polymorphic compositions of a semiconducting active layer of dibenzotetrathiafulvalene (DB-TTF) and polystyrene (PS) blends prepared by solution shearing can be finely controlled by acting on the deposition speed, temperature and/or the semiconductor/binder polymer ratio6 thus allowing modification of FET parameters such as the charge mobility, threshold voltage and on/off ratio as a function of polymorphic composition.

Fig. 8a shows the XRD diffractograms of DB-TTF/PS thin films at different substrate temperatures showing the evolution of polymorphic composition. Upon heating the substrate, the amount of α-polymorph decreases, and above 100 °C only the γ-phase is found. This suggests that at high temperatures the blend forms only the kinetic metastable phase while below 100 °C, the thermodynamic α-phase, observed in single crystals, coexists with the γ-phase. The corresponding electrical characteristics measured as transfer curves (i.e., source–drain current (IDS) vs. source–gate voltage (VGS) at a fixed source–drain voltage) of the transistors are shown in Fig. 8b. The curve shows a large off-current variation significantly affecting the final device performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) XRD diffractograms of DB-TTF/PS thin films deposited at different substrate temperatures The diffraction peak at 2θ of 8° and its reflections have been assigned to the α-phase, whereas the peak at 6.5° to the γ-phase (see ref. 6 and related references). (b) Corresponding transfer characteristics of the OFETs. (VDS = −40 V). Figure adapted from ref. 6, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., copyright 2017. 

4.2. Optoelectronic devices
The charge carrier mobility in organic semiconductors is closely related to appropriate interactions between neighbouring molecules. In conjugated systems, π-orbital overlap is modulated by their relative positions, and hence by polymorphism. As an example, different properties are found in hexabenzocoronene crystal structures where the molecules have the same spatial arrangement but different packings30 as reported in Fig. 9a–c. Furthermore, conformational changes will redistribute the π-electrons within the molecule and modify the molecular shape which affects the molecular packing. The importance of polymorphism in optoelectronic materials is also confirmed by the recent discovery36 and structure determination of a new polymorph of Alq3, designated as ε-Alq3, one of the most widely studied and used electroluminescent OLED materials.
 Fig. 9  Example of polymorphism due to different packings but with molecules adopting the same conformation and single-molecule multicolour lasing. (a) Overlap of coronene molecules: red polymorph P21/c, blue polymorph II; (b and c) views of the molecular packings. (d and f) α and β chalcone polymorphs; (e and g) PL spectra as a function of the pump laser energy and dependence of the peak intensity for α and β crystal forms, respectively. Figure adapted from ref. 38, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., copyright 2016. 
Ter-dimethyl-fluorene also has several polymorphs with different molecular conformations where slight changes in molecular conformation lead to several different crystal morphologies, ribbon and rod-like microcrystals, due to variations in intermolecular interactions.37 Although all these microcrystals display deep blue lasing behaviours, the rod-like microcrystal shows a threshold only half of that of the ribbon-like one due to the effects of molecular orientation and optical microcavities. Indeed, the optoelectronic characteristics of a device depend heavily on molecular orientation with respect to supporting substrates or macroscopic crystal faces.
The feasibility of multicolour lasing based on organic polymorphs has been demonstrated in preliminary experiments on α- and β-phases of a chalcone derivative38 providing a good example of polymorph-dependent multicolour amplified spontaneous emissions, see Fig. 9d–g.
The design of molecular structures to influence molecular packing is also a promising approach using thiophene-based molecules. Given that oligothiophenes have a linear backbone with a nearly flat conformation, the insertion of different substituents, the regiochemistry of the substitution and some steric restraint can be exploited to design molecules which should pack in various ways and potentially with good conductivity. The combination of thioalkyl substituents and head-to-head regiochemistry of substitution induces aggregation of sulfur-over-rich tetra-substituted octathiophenes mainly via S⋯S noncovalent interactions.39 Ordered arrays of molecules self-organize into supramolecular crystalline fibres combining high charge mobility with intense fluorescence. Small differences in properties between conformers can be amplified leading to quite different bulk properties as reported in thioalkyl octa-substituted octathiophenes.16 In a series of thienoimide (N) alkyl oligothiophenes, a class of electron-deficient oligothiophene semiconductors combining ambipolar or n-type charge transport with simultaneous electroluminescence, the even/odd number of carbon atoms in the alkyl chains can be exploited to promote and control conformational polymorphism.13Fig. 10 shows the case of C4–C6 side chains where the thienoimide moiety can adopt both syn and anti-conformations with respect to the adjacent thiophene ring which results in two different molecular packings displaying different optical features. In contrast, under the studied conditions C3 or C5 alkyl chains result in a single conformation producing a rigid molecular packing.
 Fig. 10  Substituted oligothiophenes as an example showing chemically-driven molecular assembly. (a) Molecular structure of even- and odd-chain-ended thienoimide derivatives; (b) highlight of molecular conformation: anti–anti–anti when even substituted, or syn–anti–syn for either even or odd substitutions; (c) a view parallel to the main molecular plane showing the different packing motifs. Figure adapted from ref. 13, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Molecular orientation can also have an enormous impact on charge transport and amplified spontaneous emission properties.40 To optimize optical properties, predominant edge-on orientation can be obtained directly during material preparation41 or by post-deposition processing.30
4.3. Solar cells
One promising application of semiconductors is in solar cells and photovoltaics. Despite many works related to polymorphism concerning the selection of the best polymorphs, together with the problems or the positive effects of mixed phases, in solar cell technology, polymorphism can be a further parameter to be exploited for photon harvesting or more in general to optimize the photovoltaic yield.
The down-conversion process of high-energy photons to obtain energies closer to the band gap of silicon (1.12 eV) is promising for extending the active spectral range in order to enhance solar cell efficiency. In the study of doped Pr3+ and Yb3+ yttrium silicate (Y2Si2O7) as a luminescent concentrator in photovoltaic cells,42 only its β-phase showed near-infrared emission deriving from ytterbium ions under visible excitation with a down-conversion efficiency of around 15%. Indeed, in its α-phase, which possesses lower structural order (see Fig. 11), the interaction between dopants occurs in all directions resulting in a lower probability of energy transfer.
 Fig. 11  Calculated X-ray diffraction pattern, crystal structure, and near infrared emission spectra for: α-Y2Si2O7 (a–c) and β-Y2Si2O7 (d–f). NIR spectra are recorded in samples with increasing amounts of Yb3+ ions. The secondary emission peaks in samples with low Yb3+ concentrations are highlighted. They are due to down-conversion processes and are localized at about 1070 nm, very close to 1100 nm, the wavelength most effectively absorbed by silicon. Figure adapted from ref. 42, with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2016. 
Often the promising nature of a material can be limited by the simultaneous formation of secondary phases which perturb the system resulting in limited device performance. This happens with the inorganic absorber Cu2SnS3 (CTS),43 an example of an “only earth-abundant compound”, a promising alternative to commonly used thin films, based on more toxic and rarer elements. It displays four structural polymorphs (tetragonal, cubic, monoclinic and triclinic) and a correlation was found between the predominant CTS phase and the optoelectronic properties of CTS photovoltaic cells. X-ray diffraction and Raman studies attributed the presence of cubic-CTS to the limited performance of reported CTS devices and suggested the preparation of pure monoclinic CTS, predicting better optoelectronic properties with the pure polymorph. On the contrary, the presence of a small amount of a different polymorph may also be desirable as in the preparation of CuAlO2 nanocrystals for p-type dye-sensitized solar cell applications.43 Significant increases in energy conversion is obtained in the presence of only a small amount of the 2H phase in the 3R polymorph. Indeed, the smaller Cu–Cu distance in the 2H phase compared to the 3R polytype leads to increasing electrical conductivity because holes mainly pass through the Cu+ plane, giving a higher photocurrent density.
4.4. Time temperature integrators and sensing
Polymorphic transitions can be directly exploited in thermo-responsive materials, which show an abrupt change in physical properties with temperature. Thermochromism has been exploited in Time–Temperature Integrators (TTIs), devices able to trace the thermal history of a system.3,10 A simple irreversible transition can occur in a thin film of the given substance when exposed to heat. The transitions may be of diverse nature, but must be associated with clearly defined variations in an observable and measurable property, such as colour, fluorescence or conductivity.
Thieno(bis)imide end-functionalized terthiophene, a highly processable material, exhibits a continuous variation in its fluorescence upon polymorphic interconversion. Using these compounds, Gentili et al.3 exploited for the first time a polymorphic interconversion with corresponding temperature-dependent fluorescence for a TTI.
Thermally treated polycrystalline films exhibited an irreversible polymorphic transition accompanied by changes in photoluminescence properties with spectral shifts from yellow to green, the shift being proportional to the temperature of the thermal treatment measured by quantification of a CCD signal. Fig. 12 shows the fluorescence evolution of a printed tag upon thermal treatment observed under a fluorescence microscope with a quantitative analysis of the fluorescence images.
 Fig. 12  (a) Fluorescence image of the evolution of 2 polymorphs of thieno(bis)imide end-functionalized thiophene oligomer. (b) Image of TTI showing the evolution of the fluorescence in a patterned film vs. temperature. The images were taken at room temperature after exposing the pattern to the indicated temperature for 30 seconds. Figure adapted from ref. 3, with permission from Springer, Scientific Reports, copyright 2013. 
The quantitative analysis of the fluorescence evolution shows that for each temperature the colour is defined by a unique combination of red, green and blue components and that the red component decreases linearly with temperature. The temperature to which the device was exposed can thus be analytically derived from the colour composition. This kind of device can thus record the highest temperature to which it was subjected for a given time, depending upon the response time of the material used. Similar devices were tested using inhomogeneous thin layers of various fluorescent compounds by changing both the molecular core and the surrounding functional groups.13,44
4.5. Magnetoelectricity and multiferroicity by polymorphism
Material properties depend on crystal structures and even small lattice distortions can dramatically change their properties. Often interfaces can also exhibit dramatic, and sometimes useful, differences. Lattice distortion occurs at such interfaces due to abrupt changes in crystal periodicity and the presence of another phase.
Over the past two decades, novel physical phenomena such as magnetoelectricity and multiferroicity (the simultaneous existence of more than one ferroic property, such as ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity in a single material)8,11 have emerged at the interfaces of polymorphic nanoscale mixtures of a variety of inorganic oxides. In some cases, a property already present in the material can be enhanced, but often an emerging property is strikingly different from those of the parent phases.
The phenomena are expressed at the interface zone, a morphotropic phase boundary, where the crystal structure changes abruptly, generating a variety of effects such as piezoelectricity,45 ferromagnetism, ferroelectricity or combinations of them (multiferroicity), depending on the nature of the materials. Nanoscale mixtures can be spontaneously formed by material processing or artificially engineered for specific applications and can be tailored through acting upon polymorph size, quantities and composition.
Magnetoelectric and multiferroic compounds present intriguing opportunities, these materials being proposed for their application as active materials in voltage-tunable spintronic devices, sensors and magnetoelectric memory. A representative case of multiferroic materials in which polymorphism plays a crucial role is a bismuth ferrite system (BFO). BFOs have received much attention because they exhibit robust ferroelectricity and antiferromagnetism at room temperature.
In 2011 He et al.11 demonstrated, in epitaxial thin films, enhancement of the magnetization in a strain-driven rhombohedral and super-tetragonal polymorph of BiFeO3. They found that the magnetization of the rhombohedral phase was considerably improved as a consequence of piezomagnetic coupling to the adjacent tetragonal-like phase and the epitaxial constraint (Fig. 13). Remarkably, due to its multiferroic properties the authors showed that the magnetic moment can be manipulated using an electric-field.
 Fig. 13  Morphology, structures and control of magneto-optical properties of different polymorphs in mixed phase BiFeO3 epitaxial thin films. (a) Topography image. Red and green areas show two sets of mixed phase features. (b) Scheme of a rhombohedral/super-tetragonal mixed phase structure. LAO indicates the substrate (LaAlO3). (c) LCP-PEEM image of spatially defined zones, erased in the area indicated by a red box by scanning with a PFM tip at positive bias and returned by applying inverse bias (green area). (d) Corresponding XMCD-PEEM image showing magnetic contrast generated by PFM scanning. Figure adapted from ref. 11, with permission from Springer, Nature Communications, copyright 2011. 
More recently Fernández-Posada et al.7 introduced a novel perovskite oxide made of a solid solution of a BiFeO3–BiMnO3–PbTiO3 ternary system showing a multiferroic phase boundary with room-temperature magnetoelectricity. The origin of its multiferroic properties and magnetoelectricity is analogous to that previously described for BiFeO3 epitaxial films under high compressive stress, but without the need for epitaxial thin film technology or strain engineering. Remarkably, despite some technical limitations related to the reversibility of the system which require further studies, this advance enables the use of polymorphic perovskite oxides as novel materials for memory applications.
4.6. Negative pressure by polymorphic transition
Another rather peculiar characteristic of polymorphic transitions in some compounds is the creation of negative pressures. It is well-known that high pressures can change the structure and consequently the properties of many compounds; for example, high pressures can transform insulating materials into metallic conductors, or even into high temperature superconductors by reducing the lattice parameters in some materials. Negative pressure is the opposite process of expanding a lattice either uniaxially or multiaxially (Fig. 14a). It has been predicted that such a lattice expansion could enhance or generate entirely new properties in the materials.
 Fig. 14  (a) Crystal structure of PbTiO3 in its unstrained state and under negative pressure generating stretching in all directions. The arrows indicate the directions of applied stress. (b) Raman spectra of PbTiO3 wires (diameter 650 nm) recorded at 475 °C. The lowest frequency peak E(1TO) is diagnostic of the Curie temperature. (c) Evolution of the E(1TO) peak with temperature. Figure adapted from ref. 46, with permission from Springer, Nature Materials, copyright 2015. 
Wang et al.46 exploited the transition between two polymorphs having different densities to create a negative pressure, in order to enhance or generate entirely new ferroelectric properties in PbTiO3 nanowires. When a compound undergoes a phase transformation to a lower density structure, the transition can induce a stretching of the original denser structure, leading to an internal negative pressure. The resulting stress from lattice rearrangement usually generates cracks or voids in the crystal which, however, can be partially or totally prevented using appropriate geometries such as freestanding nanowires.
Wang et al., in fact, exploited the transition between the less dense (6.87 g cm−3) body-centred tetragonal structure of PbTiO3 and the denser (7.94 g cm−3) perovskite structure (Fig. 14b and c), the polymorphic transition resulting in strongly enhanced tetragonality, spontaneous polarization and changes in Curie temperature, as predicted by theory, due to this negative pressure effect.
Wang's study introduces an effective route to obtain negative pressure in materials, potentially generating new original functionalities or extending their functional properties beyond their normal levels. More recently, Siol et al.47 extended a similar approach to heterostructural alloys. They show how negative-pressure polymorphs can be obtained by mixing different materials. In particular they used two different high-density forms of MnSe and MnTe to make a Mn(Se,Te) alloy with a low-density structure. This Mn(Se,Te) negative-pressure polymorph has a reduction down to 1/4 of the effective electron mass compared to the parent compounds. In addition, it exhibits a piezoelectric behaviour not possessed by any of the parent compounds. This example shows how heterostructural alloying combined with a polymorphic transition can lead to negative-pressure polymorphs with new, useful and normally inaccessible properties.
4.7. Polymorphic oxides for advanced chemosensors
The different selectivities of polymorphs in a variety of sensors can change one48 or more49 functional properties. Nanostructures and mixtures of metal oxide (MOx) semiconductors are largely used as resistive sensing components for the detection of a variety of gases. The operating principle of these devices begins with the adsorption of the gas molecules on the surface of MOx changing its resistance through catalytic redox reactions. These chemical reactions are governed by the electronic structure of the oxide system as well as by its crystal structure, and relative orientation of the surfaces of the MOx exposed to the analytes.
Gouma48 has investigated the role of polymorphism on the gas sensing behaviour of MOx, using MoO3 as the model system. MoO3 has been extensively used for detecting a variety of gases with excellent selective properties, and, remarkably, it can form several different polymorphs which show different selectivities to a range of chemical compounds and, in particular, the α polymorph of MoO3 is selective to ammonia. The sensor selectivity, even in the presence of interfering gases, is mainly determined by the crystalline polymorph chosen. Nanoscale processes favour metastable, more efficient, polymorphic configurations which would otherwise be energetically unstable under normal testing conditions, allowing an optimization of sensor performances.
4.8. Mechanical actuators
Thermo-mechanically responsive materials, materials which change their shape with temperature, are very important for applications requiring micro-mechanical actuators. An example recently reported by M. Dharmarwardana et al.50 exploited a transition between two polymorphs of butoxyphenyl N-substituted naphthalene diimide (BNDI, Fig. 15a), an interesting model material exhibiting contemporary marked thermomechanical behaviour and thermochromism (Fig. 15b). In BNDI the transition from the α (monoclinic) to the β (triclinic) phase causes massive stress within the crystal resulting in a marked geometric deformation (Fig. 15c). The authors exploited this polymorphic transition to build a micrometric actuator consisting of a cantilever made of BNDI capable of lifting masses almost two orders of magnitude greater than that of the single crystal itself (Fig. 15d). A successive work51 demonstrated the tuning of the thermo-mechanical/chromic properties over a range of temperatures, by varying the number of carbon atoms on the alkoxyphenyl substituent.
 Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure of BNDI; (b) changes in crystal dimensions and colour during phase transformation from the α (monoclinic) to the β (triclinic) phase; (c) corresponding molecular packing changes; (d) thermo-mechanical work of the BNDI cantilever. The masses of the crystal and a 0.5 mm diameter tungsten carbide ball are 0.010 mg and 0.832 mg, respectively. Figure adapted from ref. 50, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
This tutorial review highlights representative progress in the control and applications of polymorphism as an additional functionality of materials for technological applications by reviewing some published works on polymorphism as an unforeseen opportunity.
The studies presented include organic and inorganic materials showing that polymorphism itself can be directly exploited as a functional property, taking advantage of phase transitions, or as a means of tuning functional properties by changing the polymorphic composition. Polymorphism can act both directly and indirectly on material properties thus governing properties and performances of corresponding devices. Through the examples mentioned, we hope to have shown convincingly that polymorphism is not always a drawback but, in contrast, can actually represent a versatile property useful for tuning or even giving rise to, often novel, functional properties. As such, it necessarily leads us to re-evaluate many commonly used materials for sometimes fascinating and original technological applications. The examples demonstrate that polymorphism as a functional property has many advantages, including: (i) universality, in principle it applies to almost any class of materials; (ii) chemical homogeneity, the use of a single, pure and well-defined material; (iii) new unexpected properties of known materials without having to synthesize new ones; (iv) accessing metastable phases with particularly fascinating properties for new devices.
These advantages will stimulate polymorph screening and specific-polymorph synthesis as a tool to control and optimize the quality and efficiency of the final materials, in analogy with what currently happens in the pharmaceutical industry for specific drugs.
The examples and techniques presented here are stimulating and technologically promising, but are clearly still at the level of proof-of-concept. We hope this review will stimulate materials scientists to consider polymorphism as a useful route in the research laboratory for preparing experiments where the structural properties of materials are essential. A closer interaction between experiment and modelling is indispensable for a complete understanding and control of the physical parameters governing polymorphism, since the interplay between surface and interfacial forces, self-organization and recrystallization have to be considered. Although these features have not been specifically addressed in this review, they are critical for understanding and rationalizing the mechanism and the role of the different parameters in the functional properties related to polymorphism. Clearly, a more perfect control and standardization of process parameters are crucial for promoting polymorphism as a feasible technology in real-life applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Italian flagship NANOMAX, N-CHEM.
References

          J. Bernstein, Polymorphism in molecular crystals, Oxford University Press, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
G. R. Desiraju, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 3–5 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gentili, M. Durso, C. Bettini, I. Manet, M. Gazzano, R. Capelli, M. Muccini, M. Melucci and M. Cavallini, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2581 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Diao, K. M. Lenn, W.-Y. Lee, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, J. Xu, Y. Mao, Y. Kim, J. A. Reinspach, S. Park, A. Aspuru-Guzik, G. Xue, P. Clancy, Z. Bao and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17046–17057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chung and Y. Diao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3915–3933 RSC .
S. Galindo, A. Tamayo, F. Leonardi and M. Mas-Torrent, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700526 CrossRef .
C. M. Fernández-Posada, A. Castro, J.-M. Kiat, F. Porcher, O. Peña, M. Algueró and H. Amorín, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12772 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Hill, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6694–6709 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Zhao, J. Seok, D. H. Keum, J. Baik, D.-H. Choe, K. J. Chang, K. Suenaga, S. W. Kim, Y. H. Lee and H. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 625–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cavallini, A. Calo, P. Stoliar, J. C. Kengne, S. Martins, F. C. Matacotta, F. Quist, G. Gbabode, N. Dumont, Y. H. Geerts and F. Biscarini, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4688–4691 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, Y. H. Chu, J. T. Heron, S. Y. Yang, W. I. Liang, C. Y. Kuo, H. J. Lin, P. Yu, C. W. Liang, R. J. Zeches, W. C. Kuo, J. Y. Juang, C. T. Chen, E. Arenholz, A. Scholl and R. Ramesh, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Cruz-Cabeza, S. M. Reutzel-Edens and J. Bernstein, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8619–8635 RSC .
L. Maini, F. Gallino, M. Zambianchi, M. Durso, M. Gazzano, K. Rubini, D. Gentili, I. Manet, M. Muccini, S. Toffanin, M. Cavallini and M. Melucci, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2033–2035 RSC .
A. O. F. Jones, B. Chattopadhyay, Y. H. Geerts and R. Resel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2233–2255 CrossRef CAS .

          M. K. Ravva, C. Risko and J.-L. Brédas, in Non-Covalent Interactions in Quantum Chemistry and Physics, ed. A. Otero de la Roza and G. A. DiLabio, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 277–302 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-809835-6.00011-6 .
H. Muguruma and S. Hotta, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 339, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
F. Di Maria, E. Fabiano, D. Gentili, M. Biasiucci, T. Salzillo, G. Bergamini, M. Gazzano, A. Zanelli, A. Brillante, M. Cavallini, F. Della Sala, G. Gigli and G. Barbarella, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4943–4951 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Salammal, J.-Y. Balandier, J.-B. Arlin, Y. Olivier, V. Lemaur, L. Wang, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, A. R. Kennedy, Y. H. Geerts and B. Chattopadhyay, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 657–669 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gentili, F. Valle, C. Albonetti, F. Liscio and M. Cavallini, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2692–2699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cavallini, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6085–6092 RSC .
J. Chang, M. Dommer, C. Chang and L. Lin, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 356–371 CrossRef CAS .
E. Benvenuti, D. Gentili, F. Chiarella, A. Portone, M. Barra, M. Cecchini, C. Cappuccino, M. Zambianchi, S. G. Lopez, T. Salzillo, E. Venuti, A. Cassinese, D. Pisignano, L. Persano, M. Cavallini, L. Maini, M. Melucci, M. Muccini and S. Toffanin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5601–5608 RSC .
Q. Jiang and M. D. Ward, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2066–2079 RSC .
G. Giri, R. Li, D.-M. Smilgies, E. Q. Li, Y. Diao, K. M. Lenn, M. Chiu, D. W. Lin, R. Allen, J. Reinspach, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. T. Thoroddsen, P. Clancy, Z. Bao and A. Amassian, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gentili, F. Liscio, N. Demitri, B. Schafer, F. Borgatti, P. Torelli, B. Gobaut, G. Panaccione, G. Rossi, A. Degli Esposti, M. Gazzano, S. Milita, I. Bergenti, G. Ruani, I. Salitros, M. Ruben and M. Cavallini, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 134–143 RSC .
R. Hiremath, J. A. Basile, S. W. Varney and J. A. Swift, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 18321–18327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Lee, I. S. Lee, S. S. Dette, J. Boerner and A. S. Myerson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14982–14983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. F. Jones, Y. H. Geerts, J. Karpinska, A. R. Kennedy, R. Resel, C. Röthel, C. Ruzié, O. Werzer and M. Sferrazza, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1868–1873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amassian, V. A. Pozdin, R. Li, D.-M. Smilgies and G. G. Malliaras, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2623–2629 RSC .
A. M. Hiszpanski, R. M. Baur, B. Kim, N. J. Tremblay, C. Nuckolls, A. R. Woll and Y.-L. Loo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15749–15756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Sung, H. Heo, S. Si, Y. H. Kim, H. R. Noh, K. Song, J. Kim, C. S. Lee, S. Y. Seo, D. H. Kim, H. K. Kim, H. W. Yeom, T. H. Kim, S. Y. Choi, J. S. Kim and M. H. Jo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1064–1070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elfwing, R. Österlund and E. Olsson, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 2311–2314 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Bae, Y.-S. Jeong and J. Park, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2012, 567, 57–62 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, J. Zhou, Z. Guo and Z. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 091903 CrossRef .
M. Cavallini, Z. Hemmatian, A. Riminucci, M. Prezioso, V. Morandi and M. Murgia, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1197–1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rajeswaran and T. N. Blanton, J. Chem. Crystallogr., 2005, 35, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Ou, X.-H. Ding, Y.-X. Li, C. Zhu, M.-N. Yu, L.-H. Xie, J.-Y. Lin, C.-X. Xu and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14803–14810 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, Y. Zhang, S. Han, F. Li, H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4899–4903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Di Maria, P. Olivelli, M. Gazzano, A. Zanelli, M. Biasiucci, G. Gigli, D. Gentili, P. D'Angelo, M. Cavallini and G. Barbarella, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8654–8661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, T. Yasuda, Y. S. Yang, N. Matsumoto and C. Adachi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1523–1526 RSC .
L. Favaretto, M. Zambianchi, S. G. Lopez, A. Mazzanti, C. Zanardi, R. Seeber, D. Gentili, F. Valle, E. Benvenuti, M. Muccini, G. Ruani, F. Mercuri, S. Milita, F. Liscio, M. Cavallini, S. Toffanin and M. Melucci, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10320–10331 RSC .
K. Grzeszkiewicz, L. Marciniak, W. Strek and D. Hreniak, J. Lumin., 2016, 177, 172–177 CrossRef CAS .
F. Oliva, L. Arqués, L. Acebo, M. Guc, Y. Sánchez, X. Alcobé, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, E. Saucedo and V. Izquierdo-Roca, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23863–23871 RSC .
M. Melucci, M. Durso, C. Bettini, M. Gazzano, L. Maini, S. Toffanin, S. Cavallini, M. Cavallini, D. Gentili, V. Biondo, G. Generali, F. Gallino, R. Capelli and M. Muccini, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3448–3456 RSC .
M. Ahart, M. Somayazulu, R. E. Cohen, P. Ganesh, P. Dera, H.-k. Mao, R. J. Hemley, Y. Ren, P. Liermann and Z. Wu, Nature, 2008, 451, 545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, B. Wylie-van Eerd, T. Sluka, C. Sandu, M. Cantoni, X.-K. Wei, A. Kvasov, L. J. McGilly, P. Gemeiner, B. Dkhil, A. Tagantsev, J. Trodahl and N. Setter, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 985–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Siol, A. Holder, J. Steffes, L. T. Schelhas, K. H. Stone, L. Garten, J. D. Perkins, P. A. Parilla, M. F. Toney, B. D. Huey, W. Tumas, S. Lany and A. Zakutayev, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaaq1442 CrossRef PubMed .
P. I. Gouma, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2003, 5, 147–154 CAS .
D. Gentili, N. Demitri, B. Schaefer, F. Liscio, I. Bergenti, G. Ruani, M. Ruben and M. Cavallini, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7836–7844 RSC .
M. Dharmarwardana, R. P. Welch, S. Kwon, V. K. Nguyen, G. T. McCandless, M. A. Omary and J. J. Gassensmith, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9890–9893 RSC .
M. Dharmarwardana, B. S. Arimilli, M. A. Luzuriaga, S. Kwon, H. Lee, G. A. Appuhamillage, G. T. McCandless, R. A. Smaldone and J. J. Gassensmith, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 6054–6060 RSC .

Footnote† Dedicated to the memory of Prof. Joel Bernstein, recognised as the world authority on polymorphism in molecular crystals.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Denis Gentili
	Denis Gentili is a research scientist at the Istituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati (ISMN) of the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche. He graduated summa cum laude in Industrial Chemistry and received his PhD in Chemical Science from the University of Bologna. His research interests encompass chemistry, materials science and fabrication, with a focus on nanomaterials and their interactions with biological systems as well as functional organic/inorganic and hybrid materials for application in opto-electronics, sensing and data storage.

Massimo Gazzano
	Massimo Gazzano, who obtained his PhD in Chemical Sciences from the University of Bologna in 1986, has been widely working on the structural characterization of materials. He was the team leader during experiments carried out at neutron facilities (ILL, ISIS) and synchrotron sources (ESRF, Diamond). He applied microfocus scanning diffraction to the study of materials morphology. Investigation of structure–property relationships caused his interest in polymorphism in polymers, pharmaceutical ingredients, biomaterials, organic electronics molecules and devices.

Manuela Melucci
	Manuela Melucci graduated summa cum laude in Chemistry in 2000, and obtained her PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2005 from the University of Bologna (Italy). She was selected in 2013 and 2014 by the Royal Society of Chemistry as an Emerging Investigator, i.e. one among the internationally recognised, up-and-coming scientists from around the world in the materials science area. Her research activity includes design, synthesis, property-specific tailoring of π-conjugated molecular materials for applications in organic (opto)electronics and bioelectronics. She is also involved in the Graphene Flagship project for the synthesis of graphene-based materials and composites for sensing and water purification applications.

Derek Jones
	Derek Jones after obtaining his BSc from Newcastle Polytechnic worked for Dow Chemicals in King's Lynn, later obtaining an MSc in Analytical Chemistry at Loughborough and then a PhD at Swansea building a UPS instrument with Prof. Betteridge. Since 1975, in Italy, he has continued extracting electrons from materials in both gas and solid phases (XPS/UPS), then adding them to molecules in the gas phase with home-built electron transmission (ETS) and dissociative electron attachment (DEAS) spectrometers. More recently, having studied silicon surfaces by electron tunnelling (UHV-STM) he is now again working with XPS especially of graphene and other 2D materials.

Massimiliano Cavallini
	Massimiliano Cavallini is Research Director at CNR-ISMN where he heads the multidisciplinary group of “Nanotechnology of Multifunctional Materials”. He received a Laurea cum Laude in 1995 and PhD in Chemistry in 1999 from the University of Florence. His multidisciplinary research spans from unconventional bottom-up nanofabrication, applications of unusual properties, phenomena such as dewetting and polymorphism, information storage, development of time–temperature integrators and nano-electrochemistry. He is the author of 150 papers, several book chapters and is the inventor of 15 international patents. He has been Principal Investigator of several EU projects, and received the ESF-European Young Investigator Award (EURYI) in 2006.

Key learning points
1. Exploit polymorphism as a functional property.
2. Enlarge the applications of many materials beyond their original scope.
3. Search for polymorphism and new crystal forms in known materials.
4. Re-evaluate some materials in view of technological applications of polymorphs.
5. Suggest preparation and processing methods as a further opportunity for controlling polymorph types and thus their technological applications.


 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the advantages of polymorphism.	 

 	Fig. 2  A generic scheme to exploit polymorphism as a functional property.	 

 	Fig. 3  Assembling strategies of structural motifs and building blocks associated with the occurrence of polymorphism at surfaces.12–18	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the solution-shearing method. (b) Conceptual illustration of how crystal growth proceeds during solution shearing. The equilibrium polymorph (blue) first forms at the solution–air interface and begins to grow downwards towards the substrate. The metastable polymorph (red) forms soon after. Figure adapted from ref. 24, with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Nature, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Scheme of the MoTe2 polymorph device. (b) Optical micrograph of the physical device. (c) Current–voltage curves recorded at room temperature for 1T′-coplanar contacted (blue), Au-top contacted (red) 2H MoTe2 transistors and Au-top contacted 1T′-MoTe2 (black). (d) Transfer characteristics of back-gate voltage Vg modulation of sheet conductance G for 1T′-coplanar contacted (blue), Au-top contacted (red) 2H-MoTe2 FETs. Figure adapted from ref. 31, with permission from Springer, Nature Nanotechnology, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 6  Bright-field (left) and dark-field (right) TEM image of a triple-grain junction in a ZnO/Bi2O3 varistor material. (a) Crystalline α-Bi2O3 extends into the ZnO/Bi2O3 interface, revealing a small dihedral angle and good wetting properties. (b) Crystalline δ-Bi2O3 is at the Bragg angle and its dihedral angle indicates that the phase is not wetting the ZnO grains. Figure adapted from ref. 32, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., copyright 2000.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Unit cell of triclinic structured TaO2 (T-TaO2) and rutile (tetragonal) structured TaO2 (R-TaO2). Blue and red balls symbolize Ta and O atoms, respectively. (b) Density of states for semiconducting T-TaO2 corresponding to a highly resistive logic state “0” and a low resistance state, R-TaO2, corresponding to a logic state “1”. The vertical dashed lines indicate the Fermi level. Figure adapted from ref. 34, with permission from AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) XRD diffractograms of DB-TTF/PS thin films deposited at different substrate temperatures The diffraction peak at 2θ of 8° and its reflections have been assigned to the α-phase, whereas the peak at 6.5° to the γ-phase (see ref. 6 and related references). (b) Corresponding transfer characteristics of the OFETs. (VDS = −40 V). Figure adapted from ref. 6, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  Example of polymorphism due to different packings but with molecules adopting the same conformation and single-molecule multicolour lasing. (a) Overlap of coronene molecules: red polymorph P21/c, blue polymorph II; (b and c) views of the molecular packings. (d and f) α and β chalcone polymorphs; (e and g) PL spectra as a function of the pump laser energy and dependence of the peak intensity for α and β crystal forms, respectively. Figure adapted from ref. 38, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  Substituted oligothiophenes as an example showing chemically-driven molecular assembly. (a) Molecular structure of even- and odd-chain-ended thienoimide derivatives; (b) highlight of molecular conformation: anti–anti–anti when even substituted, or syn–anti–syn for either even or odd substitutions; (c) a view parallel to the main molecular plane showing the different packing motifs. Figure adapted from ref. 13, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Calculated X-ray diffraction pattern, crystal structure, and near infrared emission spectra for: α-Y2Si2O7 (a–c) and β-Y2Si2O7 (d–f). NIR spectra are recorded in samples with increasing amounts of Yb3+ ions. The secondary emission peaks in samples with low Yb3+ concentrations are highlighted. They are due to down-conversion processes and are localized at about 1070 nm, very close to 1100 nm, the wavelength most effectively absorbed by silicon. Figure adapted from ref. 42, with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Fluorescence image of the evolution of 2 polymorphs of thieno(bis)imide end-functionalized thiophene oligomer. (b) Image of TTI showing the evolution of the fluorescence in a patterned film vs. temperature. The images were taken at room temperature after exposing the pattern to the indicated temperature for 30 seconds. Figure adapted from ref. 3, with permission from Springer, Scientific Reports, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 13  Morphology, structures and control of magneto-optical properties of different polymorphs in mixed phase BiFeO3 epitaxial thin films. (a) Topography image. Red and green areas show two sets of mixed phase features. (b) Scheme of a rhombohedral/super-tetragonal mixed phase structure. LAO indicates the substrate (LaAlO3). (c) LCP-PEEM image of spatially defined zones, erased in the area indicated by a red box by scanning with a PFM tip at positive bias and returned by applying inverse bias (green area). (d) Corresponding XMCD-PEEM image showing magnetic contrast generated by PFM scanning. Figure adapted from ref. 11, with permission from Springer, Nature Communications, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Crystal structure of PbTiO3 in its unstrained state and under negative pressure generating stretching in all directions. The arrows indicate the directions of applied stress. (b) Raman spectra of PbTiO3 wires (diameter 650 nm) recorded at 475 °C. The lowest frequency peak E(1TO) is diagnostic of the Curie temperature. (c) Evolution of the E(1TO) peak with temperature. Figure adapted from ref. 46, with permission from Springer, Nature Materials, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure of BNDI; (b) changes in crystal dimensions and colour during phase transformation from the α (monoclinic) to the β (triclinic) phase; (c) corresponding molecular packing changes; (d) thermo-mechanical work of the BNDI cantilever. The masses of the crystal and a 0.5 mm diameter tungsten carbide ball are 0.010 mg and 0.832 mg, respectively. Figure adapted from ref. 50, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to the memory of Prof. Joel Bernstein, recognised as the world authority on polymorphism in molecular crystals.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
