Printed supercapacitors: materials, printing and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00819H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00819H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3229-3264Printed supercapacitors: materials, printing and applications

        
          
            Yi-Zhou 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Cheng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Lan-Qian 
            Yao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangchun 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen-Yong 
            Lai
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
          
        
      ab
aKey Laboratory for Organic Electronics and Information Displays, Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Jiangsu National Synergetic Innovation Center for Advanced Materials (SICAM), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, 9 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China. E-mail: iamwylai@njupt.edu.cn
bShaanxi Institute of Flexible Electronics (SIFE), Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU), 127 West Youyi Road, Xi'an 710072, Shaanxi, China
Received 
      23rd November 2017
    First published on 23rd May 2019AbstractSupercapacitors hold great promise for future electronic systems that are moving towards being flexible, portable, and highly integrated, due to their superior power density, stability and cycle lives. Printed electronics represents a paradigm shift in the manufacturing of supercapacitors in that it provides a whole range of simple, low-cost, time-saving, versatile and environmentally-friendly manufacturing technologies for supercapacitors with new and desirable structures (micro-, asymmetric, flexible, etc.), thus unleashing the full potential of supercapacitors for future electronics. In this review, we start by introducing the structural features of printed supercapacitors, followed by a summary of materials related to printed supercapacitors, including electrodes, electrolytes, current collectors and substrates; then the approaches to improve the performance of printed supercapacitors by tuning printing processes are discussed; next a summary of the recent developments of printed supercapacitors is given in terms of specific printing methods utilized; finally, challenges and future research opportunities of this exciting research direction are presented.
Yi-Zhou Zhang
Dr Yi-Zhou Zhang received his bachelor's degree from Nanjing University, after which he obtained PhD from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Wei Huang and Prof. Wen-Yong Lai. His research interests mainly focus on flexible electronics, especially on printed flexible devices including supercapacitors, strain sensors, and integrated functional systems.
Yang Wang
Yang Wang obtained his master's degree from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications under Professor Wei Huang's supervision in 2015. He is currently focusing on inkjet printing two-dimensional materials for flexible energy storage devices with focus on supercapacitors.
Tao Cheng
Dr Tao Cheng received his PhD degree from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications (NJUPT) in 2018 and is now a lecturer at NJUPT. His current research expertise focuses on flexible/stretchable electronics and printed electronics.
Lan-Qian Yao
Lan-Qian Yao is now a PhD candidate under Prof. Wen-Yong Lai's supervision in the Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His current research mainly focuses on using different printing methods to fabricate flexible energy storage devices especially paper-based supercapacitors.
Xiangchun Li
Dr Xiang-Chun Li received his PhD degree in Organic Electronics from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications. He is currently a postdoc at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His research focuses on the development of organic optoelectronic materials for applications in organic solar cells, supercapacitors, and energy storage and conversion.
Wen-Yong Lai
Dr Wen-Yong Lai is a full professor at Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications. He received his PhD from Fudan University in 2007. He then joined the Key Laboratory for Organic Electronics & Information Displays and Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications. His research mainly focuses on the design, synthesis, and application of organic & polymer optoelectronic materials for organic/flexible electronics and in the exploration of novel materials and processes for printed electronics.
Wei Huang
Dr Wei Huang received his PhD from Peking University in 1992. In 2001, he was appointed as a chair professor at Fudan University, where he founded and chaired the Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM). After that he became the vice president of Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, and then the president of Nanjing Tech University. Now he is the deputy president of Northwestern Polytechnical University. He was elected as Academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2011. His research interests include organic/plastic materials and devices, nanomaterials and nanotechnology, etc. He has published more than 1000 refereed journal publications with SCI citations over 47000 and an h-index of 99.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, electronics is facing a major paradigm shift from rigid devices and circuits to flexible, stretchable, and conformable electronic systems.1–4 One representative scenario falls within the realm of the Internet of Things (IoT), where daily objects are interconnected through ubiquitous, low-cost, thin and flexible sensors.5–7 Powering these devices is difficult in traditional ways, i.e., by wiring them to power outlets or through batteries, which need to be recharged or changed regularly.8 A promising alternative is to harvest energy from ambient environment-motions, light or temperature gradients.9,10 However, the power outputs from these sources are mostly irregular and uneven. Therefore, energy storage is essential for these systems.11 Rechargeable batteries are usually considered for this application; however, toxic chemicals can sometimes cause safety and disposability problems. Moreover, the cycle lifetimes of batteries are often insufficient. Finally, the instability of battery components could pose strict encapsulation requirements. As an alternative to batteries, supercapacitors (SCs) primarily store energy electrostatically. Their cycle lifetimes and power output are drastically higher than those of batteries. Moreover, SCs can be made from non-toxic materials that are safer and more stable, which means that SCs can be safely used under a wide range of conditions and can be disposed of easily, with much less damage to the environment. SCs thus hold great promise as energy storage devices for future electronic systems due to their superior power density, stability and cycle lives to batteries.12–15
Miniaturized sensor nodes and circuits are urgently needed for health and environmental monitoring, industrial process tracking, transport surveillance, etc.16 Recently, energy storage units have lagged behind other components and thus have become the bottleneck of flexible/wearable electronics in the process of miniaturization. In this context, micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) with an in-plane electrode configuration are attracting great attention, especially for powering flexible electronic systems,17–20 since their configurations make it easy for them to be integrated on chips or flexible substrates. Despite their relatively low energy density, MSCs are indispensable for applications that require high power and long cycle lives, complementary to more mature microbatteries. To date, various methods for fabricating MSCs, mostly inspired by the microelectronics industry, have been reported.
Printed electronics provides a whole range of simple, low-cost, time-saving, versatile and environmentally-friendly manufacturing technologies for SCs with new and desirable structures (micro-, asymmetric, flexible, etc.) to unleash the full potential of SCs for future electronics.21–23 As an emerging class of technologies, printed electronic techniques (inkjet printing, screen printing, 3D printing, etc.) enable manufacturing of electronic devices at greatly reduced fabrication and prototyping costs and allow the realization of devices over large and nonconventional (such as non-flat and flexible) substrates.24–27 Just as the invention of the printing press by Gutenberg in the 15th century AD enabled knowledge to be spread to the masses, and thus played a key role in laying the foundation for modern knowledge-based society, standing at the beginning of the third millennium, printing has been showing prospects for revolutionizing the electronics industry, and human society as well.
In general, printing SCs works by dispersing active materials into a suspension or a viscous paste followed by various printing and deposition methods. The printing methods vary greatly in terms of ink rheological properties, achievable resolution and material selection. For example, inks with low, medium, and high viscosities can be used for inkjet printing, screen printing, and 3D printing, respectively, and inks with a wide viscosity range can be patterned using pen-based direct ink writing. For printed MSCs, the typical footprint area is less than 1 cm2; both the feature widths of interdigital finger electrodes and the distance between adjacent electrodes are in the μm range. The challenge is to obtain well-defined electrodes with μm-level precision and good adhesion to the substrate/current collector, without shorting between the positive and negative electrodes.28 The processes of printing SCs generally include ink preparation, deposition, and solidification. Correspondingly, the key issues that may have dramatic influences on the electrochemical performances mainly include: (1) preparation of well-dispersed and printable inks; (2) stable and on-demand dispensing of inks; (3) tuning of the wetting behaviour of inks on substrates without compromising feature resolution nor causing shorts between electrodes; and (4) solidification of inks into desired 2D patterns as well as 3D structures, meanwhile ensuring good adhesion between electrodes and substrates/current collectors.
Apart from the general advantages of printing methods such as low cost, large area, flexibility and easy integration, printing offers unique advantages for the fabrication of SCs, including: (1) 3D printing can easily fine-tune the electrode morphology in three dimensions, resulting in increased exposed active surface area, even obtaining hierarchically porous electrodes; on the other hand, increased height/footprint ratios of the interdigitated electrodes can be easily achieved when printing MSCs; both can maximize the specific energy/power density per unit mass, area and volume of the supercapacitor device.29–32 (2) An asymmetric planar configuration of the supercapacitor device can be easily achieved by printing; furthermore, by adopting different electrodes and carefully tuning the weights of the two electrodes, the energy density can be maximized.21,33 (3) Materials that are difficult to pattern using traditional manufacturing techniques (e.g., ceramics) can be patterned into electrodes through printing; thus supercapacitor electrode selection can be extended to a much broader range of materials. Furthermore, by using printing, their performances and applications can be dramatically increased through careful patterning in three dimensions.18,34,35 (4) Through printing, prototypes can be much more easily manufactured and tested, in terms of both material selection and device configuration design; thus the research process can be greatly accelerated without wasting large quantities of materials, some of which are expensive to obtain.36,37 In this sense, printing is not only a fabrication technique, but also an enabling tool for new applications as well as for industrialization. The main printing methods to fabricate SCs are schematically summarized in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The main printing methods to fabricate SCs. Inkjet printing.38 Reprinted from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 3D printing.39 Reprinted from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Transfer printing.40 Reprinted from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. Pen-based direct ink writing.41 Reprinted from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. Roll-to-roll printing.42 Reprinted from ref. 42 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2010. Patterned coating represented by spray coating.43 Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. Patterned vacuum filtration.44 Reprinted from ref. 44 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Since printing methods enable both easy fabrication of asymmetric-/micro-supercapacitors and 3D current collectors/electrodes and easy utilization of emerging materials such as 2D materials, printing in fact represents a paradigm shift in the field of (flexible) SCs, as demonstrated in the booming publications in this field.45–52 Despite SCs being an important class of energy storage devices with great promise especially for flexible and on-chip applications, there remains a lack of comprehensive reviews on printed SCs. With this in mind, we construct this review as follows: we first introduce the structures of SCs, especially the novel structures facilitated by printing; then the materials involved in the fabrication of printed SCs are discussed; in the following section, the common issues in the process of printing SCs are addressed; the fifth section covers the recent progress of printed SCs in terms of different printing methods; applications of printed SCs are introduced in the sixth section; finally we summarize and present our views on the challenges and future research directions regarding the field of printing SCs.
2. Device structures of printed SCs
The basic structure and physics as well as performance evaluation methods are well covered by other reviews on SCs and MSCs.17,53,54 In terms of performance evaluation of printed SCs, the gravimetric properties are often inappropriate, particularly for MSCs. The volumetric properties of electrodes can also be misleading, especially if they are obtained from very thin electrodes, because the outstanding volumetric values are likely to significantly decrease if the electrode thickness is largely increased, which is often the case for printed SCs. Therefore, the areal properties are often more useful, but they should be normalized to the foot-print area.
The device structure has a great influence on the performance of SCs, which can be easily tuned by the printing methods. First of all, the mass loading has a large influence on the energy storage capacity of SCs. Printing is a promising manufacturing technique in this regard because it can modulate the mass loading easily by controlling the ink concentration, the number of printed layers, etc. In one example from our group, flexible and semi-transparent SCs with exquisite patterns using PEDOT/Ag grids as electrodes were successfully fabricated via inkjet printing and their areal specific capacitance can be gradually enhanced by increasing the number of PEDOT:PSS layers.55
The configurations of SCs typically include sandwich-structured and planar interdigitated SCs as shown in Fig. 2a. This classification also applies when describing MSCs. Sandwich-structured SCs, which consist of electrolyte sandwiched in between two electrodes, are presently the most widely adopted configuration in bulk SCs because of the simple design, low cost and ease of mass production. Nevertheless, in SCs with sandwiched configurations, the current runs perpendicular to the whole device, which includes the electrodes and the electrolyte, as illustrated in the top part of Fig. 2b.56 The comparatively large interface resistances between different layers and the long ion diffusion paths commonly lead to their relatively low specific capacitance and low power density. Moreover, undesirable displacement between different layers of sandwiched SCs is commonly observed, especially when they are bent, which is unfavorable for flexible electronics. By contrast, planar SCs have advantages over sandwiched SCs because of their delicate and unique interdigitated electrode configurations.44,57,58 To begin with, the narrow interspaces between the interdigitated electrodes can help prevent electrical short-circuiting and decrease the transport resistance of electrolyte ions, thus improving electrode–electrolyte interfaces. Meanwhile, the planar configuration can avert displacement between different layers as often observed in sandwiched SCs and therefore can improve the mechanical flexibility, which is crucial for flexible and portable electronics. Moreover, the interdigitated electrode design can enhance the electrochemical performance of planar SCs. This is particularly important for SCs using 2D materials as electrodes which possess a thin-film structure and a flat morphology, because the interdigitated design can facilitate transport of the electrolyte ions through the planar surfaces of the 2D material electrodes with a short diffusion distance, as shown in the lower part of Fig. 2b. It is worth noting that although interdigital patterns are used in most of the MSC literature, other designs such as spiral-shaped electrodes can lead to larger energy/power densities.59 Given the versatile patterning capability of printing, more superior electrode designs are expected to emerge in the future. Lastly, in the context of printed SCs, a sandwiched configuration is often impractical because it is difficult to deposit an electrode layer on top of a gel or liquid electrolyte. In contrast, planar MSCs suggest a promising technology that can be easily integrated into on-chip microelectronic devices due to their in-plane configuration and their small sizes. Thus, it is of great interest as well as challenging to fabricate interdigitated electrode structures for high-performance MSCs. To this end, different methods have been developed, including photolithography, vacuum vapor deposition and laser scribing.60–68 However, these methods are complicated, cost-intensive and unfavorable for mass production. In contrast, printing methods have great patterning capability, and they are compatible with solution-based and roll-to-roll processes, thus providing feasible and effective manufacturing techniques for low-cost and mass production of MSCs with an interdigitated electrode configuration. For example, a scalable and printable technique has been developed to construct hierarchical nanocoral-structured interdigitated electrodes for flexible MSCs.22 Intriguingly, because of the use of the inkjet-printing process, excellent versatility in artistically and precisely designing electrode patterns was achieved. It was found that the areal specific capacitance of MSCs was gradually enhanced with the decrement of the interspace between the two adjacent electrodes. Inkjet-printed flexible all-solid-state MSCs with nanocoral structures achieved high areal capacitances up to 52.9 mF cm−2. Meanwhile, large-area aesthetic SCs were fabricated as energy-storage units in a wearable self-powered system, demonstrating the great scalability of this printing process.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic comparison of sandwich-type SCs (top) and planar SCs (bottom). (b) Diagrams showing the ion movement involved in the operation of ‘sandwiched’ (top) and ‘in-plane’ (bottom) structured SCs respectively. Reprinted from ref. 56 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. 
Printing methods such as 3D printing and screen printing enable easy fabrication of thicker electrodes; thus 3D SCs with larger areal capacitance and energy density than 2D thin-film SCs with the same footprint area can be fabricated. The 3D structure will expose the surfaces of the electrodes to the electrolyte in three dimensions, facilitating charge storage processes, and leading to both larger effective surface area and enhanced active mass utilization. Moreover, the current collector with a 3D porous structure can also lead to lower resistance and thus better electrochemical performances. The thick electrodes (normally, electrodes with thicknesses above 5 μm can be viewed as thick electrodes) of 3D SCs may decrease power density; however, the largely increased energy density is usually more important for 3D SCs to be applied as energy storage devices. Moreover, thick yet porous electrodes hold the promise of simultaneously increasing the energy and power densities. Other than increasing the areal capacitance and energy density, the 3D structure is also promising to endow SCs with other functionalities. In a recent interesting example, Lv et al. reported a 3D stretchable SC inspired by a honeycomb lantern.69 The SC is based on expandable honeycomb composite electrodes and possesses device-thickness-independent ion-transport paths. The 3D SC shows about 60 times higher capacitance (7.34 F cm−2) than its 2D counterpart (120 mF cm−2) at a similar discharge rate. Moreover, the 3D structure can drastically improve the stretchability of the SC and can enable customizable shapes, making the integration of the SC with stretchable/wearable electronics easy.
SCs are also commonly categorized into symmetrical and asymmetric SCs depending on whether the two electrodes are based on the same material. For symmetrical SCs, the two electrodes are based on the same materials which possess either electric double-layer capacitance (EDLC) or pseudocapacitance. Asymmetric SCs (ASCs) consist of electrodes based on different materials, usually an EDLC-type electrode (anode) as a power source and a faradaic electrode (cathode) as an energy source. Thus ASCs have the potential of possessing high energy and power densities at the same time, meanwhile showing good cycling stability, and wide operational voltage windows. One distinct advantage of printing methods is that they can easily deposit different materials with different mass loadings/thicknesses on substrates, holding great promise for the fabrication of ASCs as the optimization of the two electrodes can be easily achieved through printing. Our group reported the first example of using inkjet printing to fabricate ASCs on a flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate.28 In this work, flexible all-solid-state ASCs based on lamellar K2Co3(P2O7)2·2H2O nanocrystal whiskers and graphene nanosheets were successfully fabricated by inkjet printing in a simple and cost-effective way. The assembled micro-devices exhibited an optimal specific capacitance of 6.0 F cm−3, good rate/mechanical stability and long-term cycling stability (5000 cycles) with a maximum energy density of 0.96 mW h cm−3, demonstrating great promise for applications in flexible electronics.
3. Printable materials for SCs
Similar to other printed devices, the processability, performance and long-term reliability of the materials used for printing are essential for the successful printing of SCs. The key components of SCs, namely electrodes, current collectors and electrolytes, all have specific requirements in the context of printed SCs.54,70 Inks of each component need to be developed with specific formulation and properties depending on the specific printing method. A typical ink generally consists of fillers, solvents, binders and additives. Inks with specific properties, such as viscosity and surface tension, can be obtained by modulating the proportion of each component to meet the requirements of different printing methods. In this section, we will discuss printable electrodes, current collectors and electrolytes in the context of printed SCs, followed by an introduction of common substrates.
3.1 Electrode materials
Of all the major components in SCs, the electrode is arguably the most critical component in determining the electrochemical performance of SCs. Therefore, the development of electrode materials with high performance at low cost is the focus of a large portion of research on SCs.53 Ideally, the electrode materials of SCs should possess high specific surface area, tunable hierarchical porosity, abundant electroactive sites, high stability and high electronic conductivity.71 To date, electrode materials for printed SCs have been mainly carbon-based materials, conducting polymers, metal oxides, novel 2D nanomaterials and metal organic frameworks (MOFs), etc.72 The electrode materials for SCs can be mainly categorized into EDLC and pseudocapacitive materials depending on their charge storage mechanism. The most widely used EDLC materials are carbon-based materials, which show high electrical conductivity, high surface area and controllable porosity properties, but limited energy density. Metal oxides and conductive polymers are common pseudocapacitive electrode materials owing to their fast reversible redox reactions. Pseudocapacitive materials usually show higher capacitance than EDLC materials, but they tend to have inferior cycle lives.

3.1.1 Carbon-based materials. 
Carbon-based materials have advantages including large specific surface area, good conductivity, low cost and good wettability to electrolytes, making them ideal EDLC electrode materials. Common ones mainly include activated carbons, graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs).73
Activated carbon materials are widely available, as they can be obtained from biomass with high carbon content such as wood. They also have advantages including low cost and stable performance, which make them widely applied to commercial SCs. Activated carbons tend to have a hierarchically porous structure with wide pore-size distribution including micropores and mesopores. The specific surface area, pore-size distribution, pore density and surface functional groups together affect the electrochemical performance of activated carbons. The optimization of activated carbon electrode materials can be achieved through tuning of pore-size distribution and surface modification. To meet the demands of printed SCs, activated carbon inks should be developed with specific formulations and rheological properties. In one example, an inkjet ink was successfully prepared by mixing activated carbon powders with PTFE polymer binders in ethylene glycol stabilized with a surfactant.74 MSCs were then fabricated by inkjet printing the activated carbon ink on patterned gold current collectors; the devices showed an excellent capacitive behavior over a wide potential range of 2.5 V and a cell capacitance of 2.1 mF cm−2. In another example, a screen-printable ink comprising 0.2 g mL−1 activated carbon dispersed in water together with 5 wt% matte medium as a binder was developed; SCs fabricated from this ink demonstrated capacitances as high as 0.51 F cm−2 at 10 mV s−1.75
Graphene refers to a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice, which has aroused great interest since Novoselov and Geim isolated it from graphite in 2004.76 It exhibits many excellent properties, including a large theoretical specific surface area of up to 2630 m2 g−1, high electrical conductivity, excellent thermal and chemical stability, superior mechanical flexibility, and a wide potential window.77 In this regard, graphene-based materials manifest great promise for flexible SCs. Various methods have been developed to prepare graphene, mainly including mechanical exfoliation, epitaxial growth, pyrolysis of hydrocarbons on metal surfaces and solution-based and chemically assisted exfoliation.73 Among these methods, solution-based and chemical exfoliation are the most common mass production techniques of printable graphene inks. For example, a simple and effective technology combining polymer stabilization and solvent exchange techniques was developed to formulate stable graphene inks with high concentration and compatible fluidic characteristics for efficient and reliable inkjet printing; fully printed MSCs using this graphene ink exhibited an areal capacitance of around 0.59 mF cm−2 and scalability and were low cost.78 CNTs are another group of carbon allotropes with a hollow cylindrical nanostructure that can be regarded as curled graphene nanosheets. CNTs show advantages including large specific surface area, high electrical conductivity, hierarchical pore structure and chemical stability. CNT inks have also been formulated and investigated for printed SCs.70


3.1.2 Metal oxides. 
SCs based on carbon materials often exhibit excellent cycling stability but meanwhile relatively low specific capacitance and low energy density. By contrast, metal oxides are the most widely explored pseudocapacitive electrode materials for SCs with higher capacitance/capacity.71 Common metal oxides include NiO, CoO, Co(OH)2, MnO2, NiCo2O4 and V2O5.79 However, the structures of metal oxides tend to collapse after long-term cycling because of their redox reaction with electrolytes. Additionally, the poor electrical conductivity of metal oxides is also detrimental to the electrochemical performance of SCs. Thus, binders and conductive additives are often required to obtain metal oxide inks.


3.1.3 Conducting polymers. 
Conductive polymers are another class of pseudocapacitive electrode materials; they usually have higher electrical conductivity than metal oxides; thus they can be directly used as electrodes for SCs without extra current collectors and conductive additives.80 Furthermore, they show excellent mechanical flexibility and easy dispersion in solvents and are relatively low cost. The commonly used conductive polymers are polythiophene (PTH), polypyrrole (PPy) and polyaniline (PANI), and all of them exhibit excellent printability, suggesting a promising class of electrode materials for printed SCs. However, the expansion and contraction of conductive polymers are inevitable in the charge/discharge process, which are detrimental to their cycling stability. Recently, a novel set of redox-active conjugated microporous polymers, TAT-CMP-1 and TAT-CMP-2, based on nitrogen-rich and highly conductive triazatruxene building blocks, were successfully designed and synthesized, which are promising as efficient and stable electrode materials for SCs. The as-fabricated SCs showed high specific capacitance and excellent cycling stability, enabling the possible use of these materials as electrodes in electrochemical devices.81


3.1.4 Novel 2D nanomaterials beyond graphene. 
Besides graphene, there is a booming class of novel 2D nanomaterials that have shown prospects as SC electrode materials. Since 2011, a class of 2D transition metal carbides and carbonitrides, also known as MXenes, have been attracting ever-growing attention especially in the field of electrochemical energy storage.82,83 MXenes possess abundant surface functional groups, thus showing great promise as printable SC electrode materials because of their large capacitance, hydrophilicity, high electrical conductivity and good mechanical properties. Peng et al. reported the fabrication of all-MXene (Ti3C2Tx) solid-state interdigital MSCs employing spray coating, then a photoresist-free direct laser cutting method.84 The all-MXene devices exhibited low contact resistances, high capacitances and outstanding rate-capability with areal and volumetric capacitances of ∼27 mF cm−2 and ∼357 F cm−3, respectively, at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. However, a symmetric MXene SC has a narrow voltage window of around 0.6 V due to possible oxidation at high anodic potentials. To increase the energy density of MXene-based SCs, Jiang et al. designed an asymmetric SC device combining a Ti3C2Tx MXene and ruthenium oxide (RuO2) as two electrodes.85 This asymmetric SC can operate in a voltage window of 1.5 V, which is about two times wider than that of symmetric MXene SCs, and is among the largest voltage windows reported to date for MXene-based SCs.
Among the large family of 2D nanomaterials, black phosphorus (BP) is also attracting extensive attention owing to its unique structure with corrugated planes of P atoms. The interaction of P atoms in BP involves strong intralayer covalent bonds and weak interlayer van der Waals forces.86 Thus, thin BP sheets with a few layers or even a monolayer can be exfoliated from the bulk BP by breaking the weak interlayer molecular force.87 Despite its relatively lack of stability, BP still holds promise for printed SC application. Recently, a symmetrical SC based on liquid-exfoliated BP nanoflakes was fabricated using PVA/H3PO4 as gel electrolyte.48 The as-fabricated SC demonstrated a volumetric capacitance of 17.78 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and cycling stability with about 71.8% capacitive retention after 30000 charge–discharge cycles.


3.1.5 Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), which refer to a new class of porous coordination polymers, are a promising group of SC electrode materials because of their high porosity, controlled pore size, diverse structures, chemical stability and tunable chemical compositions.88–90 It has been observed that MOFs can have specific surface areas as high as 46000 m2 g−1, comparatively uniform pore sizes and large pore volumes, showing great promise in the field of energy storage. In one example, a zirconium MOF exhibited a high capacitance of 5.09 mF cm−2, which remained stable after at least 10000 charge/discharge cycles.91
Ten years since Yaghi and co-workers found MOFs, they have successfully synthesized covalent organic frameworks (COFs), namely porous organic frameworks connected by covalent bonds.92 COFs are an interesting class of covalent porous crystalline polymers, which enable the elaborate integration of organic building blocks into an ordered configuration with atomic precision.93 The 2D or 3D crystalline structures of COFs are well-defined and predictable because strong covalent bonds form between the building units through various synthetic organic reactions.94 The strong covalent bonds typically include B–O, C–N, B–N, and B–O–Si. COFs also have controllable pore sizes, high surface areas, and high flexibility in molecular designs, showing great potential in the field of energy storage. Halder et al. reported a free-standing SC electrode based on COF thin sheets that exhibited an excellent areal capacitance of 1600 mF cm−2 (gravimetric 169 F g−1) and cycling stability (>100000 cycles) with little decrease.95 Due to their organic and soluble nature, both MOFs and COFs are promising materials for printed SC application.

3.2 Electrolytes
As an important component of SCs, electrolytes have a great influence on the electrochemical properties of devices, especially on their voltage window, rate capability and cycling stability.96 The features to differentiate electrolytes mainly include their ionic conductivity, electrochemical window, operating temperature range, stability and safety. Printed SCs almost inevitably use solid-state electrolytes, or more specifically gel electrolytes. The advantages of solid-state electrolytes include their relatively high ionic conductivity, facile fabrication process, and simple and cheap packaging; no leakage concerns; etc. Moreover, solid-state electrolytes are promising for the fabrication of bendable and flexible SCs. Meanwhile, they avoid the use of separators in the SC device, which is particularly important for planar MSCs. Choosing a suitable solid-state (gel) electrolyte plays an important role in developing high-performance printed SCs.97 An ideal gel electrolyte in this context should exhibit high electrochemical and thermal stability, high ionic conductivity, excellent bending and stretching tolerance and dimensional stability. Gel electrolytes can be mainly categorized into aqueous gel polymer electrolytes, organic gel polymer electrolytes, ionic liquid-based gel polymer electrolytes and redox-active gel electrolytes.

3.2.1 Aqueous gel polymer electrolytes. 
Among the gel electrolytes, aqueous gel polymer electrolytes are the most widely utilized due to their high ionic conductivity, low cost and environment friendliness;98 however, aqueous electrolytes usually possess limited electrochemical windows. Aqueous gel polymer electrolytes mainly consist of a host polymer matrix, an electrolytic salt and a plasticizer. Typical polymer matrixes include polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), peracetic acid (PAA) and polyethylene oxide (PEO); the plasticizer is usually water; and the electrolytic salt can be a neutral salt (LiCl or Na2SO4), a strong acid (H2SO4 or H3PO4) or a strong base (KOH). Aqueous gel polymer electrolytes are also regarded as hydrogel electrolytes, where water molecules are trapped by 3D polymeric networks. The degree of plasticization of the gel electrolytes relies on the polymer to plasticizer ratio, which influences the glass-transition temperature of the gel electrolytes. As for polymer matrixes, PVA has been extensively applied owing to its high hydrophilicity, facile preparation procedure, superior film-forming characteristics, nontoxicity and low cost. The choice of the electrolyte salt depends on the electrode materials. It is worth noting that acidic or alkaline solutions can cause damage to many dispensing nozzles; thus care should be taken when printing aqueous electrolytes.


3.2.2 Organic gel polymer electrolytes. 
Despite the excellent attributes of aqueous gel polymer electrolytes, their relatively narrow operating voltage window somewhat restrains their extensive applications. This problem can be overcome by using organic gel polymer electrolytes. The preparation methods for organic gel polymer electrolytes greatly affect the ionic conductivity and mechanical properties of the system. Generally, organic gel polymer electrolytes are prepared by physically blending a polymer with high molecular weight, e.g., PMMA or PVDF-HFP, with a conducting salt in a nonaqueous solvent system followed by gelation. Organic solvents, including propylene carbonate (PC), dimethyl formamide (DMF), ethylene carbonate (EC), and their mixtures, have been commonly employed as plasticizers to broaden the operating voltage range.99 The cell voltage could be increased to 2.5–3 V, which is significantly larger than those using aqueous gel polymer electrolytes. The increase of the cell voltage window is desirable for improving the energy density of SCs.


3.2.3 Ionic liquid-based gel polymer electrolytes. 
Compared with aqueous and organic electrolytes, ionic liquid-based gel electrolytes show some extra advantages, such as nonvolatility, high ionic conductivities, nonflammability, wide operating voltage windows (up to 3.5 V) and superior mechanical compliance. Thus, they have great potential for applications in flexible and stretchable SCs. Furthermore, they are more suitable for printed SCs due to their superior stability and lack of corrosion behaviour to printing nozzles. Several flexible solid-state SCs using ionic liquid gel electrolytes have been reported. The obtained SCs exhibited superior performance due to the high ion conductivity and wide working voltage window of the ionic liquid-based gel electrolytes. Similar to aqueous gel polymer electrolytes and organic gel polymer electrolytes, a variety of polymer hosts, such as PVA, PVDF-HFP and PEO, have been studied for ionic liquid gel electrolytes.100 For instance, Tamilarasan et al. prepared an ionic liquid gel electrolyte by employing 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide as a supporting electrolyte and PAN as a polymer host (PAN/[BMIM][TFSI]).101 The as-prepared electrolyte showed superior thermal stability, a high ionic conductivity of about 2.42 mS cm−1 at ambient temperature and good mechanical flexibility. Flexible solid-state SCs using graphene as electrodes and PAN/[BMIM][TFSI] as electrolytes exhibited a maximum power density of 82 kW kg−1 and energy density of 32.3 W h kg−1 and excellent cycling stability.


3.2.4 Redox-active gel electrolytes. 
Redox-active species can be added to electrolytes, which improves the capacitance and energy density of SCs. Redox additives can introduce additional pseudocapacitance via reversible faradaic reactions along with fast electron transfer at the electrode–electrolyte interface, leading to improvement of specific capacitance.102 Small-sized ions are capable of accessing the micropores and small mesopores of hollow porous electrodes with ease. A large number of redox couples, such as K3Fe(CN)6,103 iodides (KI),104 and Na2MoO4,105 and organic redox mediators, such as P-phenylenediamine (PPD)106 and hydroquinone,107 have been used to prepare redox-active gel electrolytes.

3.3 Current collectors
To facilitate charge transport, electrode materials for SCs usually need to be attached to current collectors with high conductivity and high specific surface area. Current collectors are particularly challenging for flexible SCs. The common current collectors of printed SCs can be divided into three categories: metals, carbon materials and conductive polymers.

3.3.1 Metal current collectors. 
Metal current collectors mainly include stainless steel meshes, nano-gold, nano-silver, nickel foam, etc.108 Metal nanomaterials are one of the most widely used current collectors for printed SCs due to their high electrical conductivity and ease of being formulated into inks. Xu et al. fabricated a high-performance ultra-flexible transparent all-solid-state SC using an embedded Ag grid transparent conductive electrode (TCE) as the current collector.109 The embedded Ag grid TCE, fabricated by a facile soft ultraviolet imprinting lithography method combined with scrap techniques, exhibited not only excellent optoelectronic properties (Rs ∼ 2.0 Ω sq−1 & T ∼ 89.74%) but also superior mechanical flexibility. The high electrical conductivity, superior optical transmittance and excellent mechanical flexibility could meet the needs of current collectors for flexible transparent SCs. The as-fabricated SCs used solution-processed PEDOT:PSS films as active electrode materials and exhibited large specific capacitance, long cycling lives, high optical transparency, flexibility and superior stability. Both the electrical conductivity of metals and the contact area between the current collectors and the active materials have great influences on the transportation & collection of electrolyte ions and thus capacitance. Compared with planar metal current collectors, a three-dimensional hierarchical structure is desirable for enhancing the contact area between the current collector and capacitive materials.110 SCs with a 3D hierarchical structure can provide not only high specific capacitance and good rate capability but also good flexibility and cycling stability, which suggests a novel and effective strategy to improve the performance of printed SCs.


3.3.2 Carbon-based current collectors. 
Carbon materials with their comparatively high electrical conductivity, low cost, easy availability and environment-friendliness are often used as current collectors and/or electrodes. For instance, Wang et al. developed a consecutive spray printing strategy to construct SCs with SWNTs as electrodes/current collectors.111 One interesting carbon-based current collector is carbon fiber paper which is composed of micro-scale or nano-scale fibers, forming a highly conductive percolating network. Moreover, carbon fiber paper can provide rich interconnected pore channels and large specific surface area, which effectively increase the contact between electrolyte and the active materials.

3.4 Substrates
Substrates play an important role in printed SCs. The parameters to evaluate substrates in the context of printed SCs include mechanical flexibility, wettability, thinness, surface smoothness, density, heat resistance, cost, and even transparency in some applications.112
Wettability deserves special attention for printed SCs because of its great influence on the morphology of printed films. For example, it is difficult to print aqueous ink on hydrophobic surfaces because the aqueous solution is inclined to contract, and is thus unable to effectively spread on the hydrophobic substrate, leading to a non-uniform film morphology.113 To solve this problem, pre-treatments of substrates such as plasma treatment or chemical modification are usually performed prior to printing. Furthermore, as heating or sintering is normally required during the printing processes, heat resistance is another crucial parameter for evaluating substrates, particularly for polymer-based plastic substrates. Additionally, mechanical flexibility is usually preferred for printed SCs especially when the SCs are integrated into flexible circuits through a roll-to-roll printing process. Common flexible substrates for SCs include metal foils, PET, polyimide (PI), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), paper, etc. Each kind of substrate possesses unique attributes and advantages as well as shortcomings. Here we will briefly introduce these common substrates for printed SCs.

3.4.1 Metal foils. 
Metal foils, such as gold (Au), copper (Cu), aluminum (Al) and nickel (Ni), have been widely utilized as substrates for SCs because of their superior electrical conductivity and relatively good mechanical ductility.112 Given their excellent conductivity, metal foils can simultaneously act as current collectors. Metal foils are usually much thicker and heavier than the active materials coated on their surfaces, which may decrease the gravimetric specific capacitance of the SC devices. Moreover, it is difficult to effectively transport charges from thick electrode materials to the surfaces of conducting substrates, which can decrease the rate capability and capacitance of SCs based on thick electrodes. To solve this problem, 3D conductive structures such as metal meshes or foams have been developed as substrates for SCs, which can increase the mass loading of the active materials and improve the charge transport performance.114,115 It is worth mentioning, however, that the superior mechanical flexibility of metal foils renders them attractive for printed flexible SCs.


3.4.2 Polymer-based plastic substrates. 
Polymer-based plastic substrates are extensively used in printed SCs because of their low cost, thinness, light weight and excellent mechanical deformability.65 However, different from metal foils, plastic substrates are non-conductive; thus SCs based on them need current collectors. A PET film is presently the most prevailing and commonly used plastic substrate owing to its easy availability, water and moisture barrier properties, high optical transparency of above 90% and relatively low cost.116 Nevertheless, the heat resistance of PET is comparatively poor, and therefore the temperature in the printing process must be controlled below around 130 °C. Polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) has better heat resistance but exhibits lower transparency and is of higher cost.117 PI has the best heat resistance with the highest cost and lowest transparency.118
In recent years, stretchable and wearable electronics have aroused great interest. Correspondingly, stretchable SCs are stringently needed to meet the requirements of stretchable electronics. The most attractive attribute of stretchable SCs is that they can not only be bent but also be twisted, compressed or stretched. However, common flexible substrates such as PET, PEN and PI can only be bent without the capability of being stretched; thus, it is imperative to develop highly elastic substrates with excellent stretchability to facilitate the development of printed stretchable SCs. PDMS is a mature stretchable substrate with a low elastic modulus and superior stretchability. Various high-performance stretchable SCs with strong tolerance to strain have been fabricated using PDMS as a substrate.119 Although PDMS exhibits excellent stretchability, its hydrophobic surface properties will impede the spreading of aqueous ink on it, leading to a non-uniform film morphology. Pre-treatments, such as oxygen plasma treatment and ultraviolet ozone (UVO) treatment, are essential for improving the hydrophilicity of PDMS before printing. Additionally, the adhesion between PDMS and metal is weak, which generally results in the formation of fracture in printed metal current collectors. Chemical modification is an effective technique to enhance the adhesion force between PDMS and printed metal films.


3.4.3 Paper substrates. 
Paper is an interesting substrate for printed SCs because of its hydrophilicity, porosity, wide availability and flexibility. Moreover, papers are much cheaper, more biodegradable and eco-friendly compared to plastic substrates. Recent investigations have proved that paper can act as a substrate for high-performance SCs.13 The natural affinity between paper and printing makes paper an interesting substrate for printed SCs. Printed SCs can look like inkjet-printed letters or figures that are commonly found in office documents;23 thus seamless integration of electronics and normal printed patterns can be achieved.


3.4.4 Textiles. 
Textiles refer to a class of flexible, porous materials made by weaving or pressing natural or synthetic fibers such as cotton or polyester. Prototypes of textile SCs and fiber SCs were recently demonstrated for textile-based energy storage applications.75,120 The field of energy textiles is rapidly growing, but flexible energy storage directly comparable with everyday fabrics is still challenging to make in terms of their feel, thickness and durability. In a recent example, an activated carbon ink was screen-printed onto knitted carbon fibers, and textile SCs with high performance and excellent stretchability were fabricated based on thus-printed activated carbon electrodes.75

4. Printing processes and optimization
Printing electronic technologies can be classified based on different standards.121,122 Common classifications include (1) digital printing processes (e.g., inkjet printing and 3D printing) and non-digital printing processes (transfer printing and screen printing) depending on whether a template is employed; (2) contact techniques (e.g., screen printing, flexography, gravure printing and transfer printing) and non-contact techniques (e.g., 3D printing, inkjet printing) depending on whether the print head is in direct contact with the substrate; and (3) sheet-based and roll-to-roll-based printing depending on the volume of production. These printing processes differ significantly in ink formulation, minimum feature size and application, as summarized in Table 1. In this section, we discuss the basics of optimizing the printing processes from ink formulation to approaches that can help obtain optimized printing morphologies and structures. This will provide a context for the detailed discussions of SCs printed by using different methods in the next section.
Table 1 Comparisons of major methods for printing SCs




Printing method
Ink type viscosity (mPa s)
Minimum line width (μm)
Contact





a Depend on patterned masks.
b Areal coating.





Inkjet printing
Low viscosity Newtonian liquid 2–25
30–50
No


Screen printing
50–5 × 103
30–50
Yes


3D printing
Stereolithography (SLA)
High viscosity paste containing photosensitive resin
10–25
No


Selective laser sintering (SLS)
Powder
100
No


Extrusion-based direct writing
High viscosity non-Newtonian paste
1
No


Fused deposition modeling
Filament
30
No


Gravure printing
102–103
10–50
Yes


Flexographic printing
103–2103
45–100
Yes


Pen-based direct ink writing
Wide-range
>1000
Yes


Spray coating
Low viscosity liquid




No


Meyer rod coating
High viscosity slurry




Yes


Patterned vacuum filtration
Wide range




Yes




4.1 Ink formulations
Generally, inks refer to active materials in the form of powders or liquids dispersed in solvents to form stable mixed solutions or colloidal suspensions or viscous pastes, consisting of active materials, additives, binders and solvents. Common active materials contain carbon-based materials,29 metal oxide materials,79,123 conductive polymers124 and 2D nanomaterials like graphene,125 MXenes,126 and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs).127 Additives are used to modify or tailor the physical properties of inks to meet the requirements of printing processes. Binders are added to bind active materials to each other and to substrates. Post-treatments like annealing are often needed to facilitate solvent evaporation and thus to solidify the deposited materials. Solvents are sometimes crucial for inks to remain stable and to meet the requirements of various printing processes. Careful selection of solvents is particularly important when performing multilayer printing. A variety of solvents, both aqueous and organic, are often used depending on the printing technique, substrate and device structure.128 Ink formulation is the first issue to consider for the fabrication of printed SCs, and is crucial for both successful printing and the quality of printed devices. For instance, most dispersions of nanomaterials can be directly used for spray coating, while complicated processes are required to prepare inks for inkjet, flexographic and gravure printing processes.34 In particular, the size of materials in the ink dispersion is very important for inkjet printing. For small spheres in water, the settling velocity (w) is given by Stokes’ law:129  where ρp is the particle density, ρf is the fluid density, g is the acceleration, r is the particle's radius and η is the fluid viscosity. Since the settling velocity w scales with r2, materials with smaller radii of gyration will improve the ink lifetime and reduce the nozzle blockage. Normally for a piezo-driven inkjet printer, the lateral size of materials should be less than 1/20 of the nozzle diameter to avoid nozzle blockage during printing.129 Two rheological properties, namely, viscosity (η) and surface tension (γ), of the inks need to be carefully controlled to prepare printable inks, and the required parameters strongly depend on the specific printing method utilized (Table 1). Viscosity plays an important role in ink formulation engineering since it could affect the shape, size and velocity of printed droplets. The ideal viscosity range depends on the printing technology; a narrow viscosity range of 2–25 mPa s is preferred for inkjet printing to prevent stray drops, while a high viscosity range of around 0.05–5 Pa s is expected for screen printing.130 Optimized surface tension is also very important for achieving printable inks. For inkjet printing, low surface tension could result in spontaneous dripping of droplets from the nozzles, while high surface tension would make ejection of droplets impossible.
4.2 Tuning of printing parameters
The quality of printed patterns can be dramatically affected by subtle changes in the printing parameters, which may lead to irregular patterning, a lower resolution and a non-uniform film morphology known as the “coffee ring” effect. Detailed discussions can be found in books and articles.131,132 In this section, we show examples of improving the morphology of printed films by tuning printing parameters. The first issue in this regard is to overcome the “coffee-ring” effect, which is common in most printing processes, and is one of the main problems that can deteriorate the quality of the printed films. The general approach is to add drying agents which have higher boiling points and lower surface tension than the main printing solvent. During the drying process, the main solvent with a lower boiling point and higher surface tension evaporates more rapidly at the droplet contact line. Meanwhile, a Marangoni flow with inward flow is developed by a surface tension gradient over the whole droplet. This prevents the formation of the “coffee-ring”. Wang et al. prepared a water-based ink by adding propylene glycol and Triton X-100 to increase the viscosity of water and to decrease the surface tension of the water-based ink, respectively. This optimized solvent mixture can disrupt the weak Marangoni flow, which helps in reducing the “coffee-ring” effect (Fig. 3a).38 The heating rate is also an important approach to minimize the “coffee-ring” effect, since solvent evaporation is highly dependent on the heating rate. Kim et al. demonstrated that gradual heating could effectively restrict the convection flow during solvent evaporation in printed silver nanoparticle ink, resulting in homogeneously printed silver lines.133
 Fig. 3  (a) Droplet drying process with excess surfactant (left) and optimal surfactant (right) concentrations. Reprinted from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Effect of the droplet spacing on the line morphology of printed black phosphorus on Si/SiO2 at 60 °C; scale bar, 100 μm. (c) Effect of the droplet spacing and printing temperature on the roughness along printed line edges. Reprinted from ref. 87 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
Apart from the “coffee-ring” effect, the morphology of printed patterns can also be affected by the droplet spacing and substrate temperature. The maximum droplet spacing required for coalescence (pmax) is defined as:129,134  where d0 is the initial droplet diameter, βeqm refers to the diameter of the spherical cap of the droplet on the substrate and θeqm refers to the equilibrium droplet contact angle. If the droplet spacing is too small, stacked coins or bulging occurs. When the droplet spacing is too large, isolated droplets appear. Hu et al. studied the relationship between the morphology of inkjet-printed black phosphorus lines on Si/SiO2 with droplet spacing (Fig. 3b) and substrate temperature (Fig. 3c).87 When the droplet spacing was 15 μm, the printed line was broad since the droplets significantly overlap with each other. The line morphology changed from bulging to uniform edges as the droplet spacing increased from 25 to 35 μm. A narrower scalloped line was formed due to the merging of insufficient ink when the droplet spacing was increased to 75 μm. When the droplet spacing was further increased to 95 μm, a series of isolated droplets appeared since they were too far apart to merge with each other. The edge roughnesses at different substrate temperatures were also studied as shown in Fig. 3c.
4.3 Interface engineering
It is sometimes challenging to print continuous lines with good adhesion and high resolution on certain substrates which can deteriorate the device performances. The wetting properties of materials on a substrate are determined by the surface energy, roughness, and micro-structure of the substrate. The wetting process can be described by Young's equation:γsv = γsi + γivcosθwhere γsv, γsi and γiv are the interface surface energies between the solid surface (s), the vapor (v) and the ink (i); and θ is the contact angle (Fig. 4a). The contact angle represents the wetting property; that is, a small contact angle (≪90°) suggests good wetting, which means that the ink can form continuous films, while a large contact angle (≫90°) suggests poor wetting, which means that the ink tends to retract and bead up. Changing the surface energy of the substrate is an efficient method to control the wetting properties of the droplets on the substrate and to limit the spreading of the droplets. The wetting properties of the substrate in SCs affect the binding force between the electrode materials and the substrate, thus affecting the transmission rate of electrolyte ions and the cycling performance of SCs. Elena et al. described an approach to improve the printability of silver nanoparticle inks on flexible polymer substrates.135 The adhesion between a silver metal conductive layer and a polymer substrate was enhanced by surface modification with oxygen plasma followed by treatment with functional alkoxysilanes to form self-assembled layers (Fig. 4b). In the case of alkoxysilanes on PEN substrates, the adhesion was improved from 50% to 100% for water-based Ag nanoparticle inks and from 80% to 95% for organic-based Ag inks. The result for PDMS substrate treatment was even more striking; the adhesion was improved from 0% to 90% for water-based Ag nanoparticle inks and from 0% to 95% for organic-based Ag inks, while exhibiting a relatively low sheet resistance of up to 0.1 Ω sq−1.
 Fig. 4  (a) Wetting of a droplet on a substrate. (b) The approach to enhance the silver ink adhesion which consists of four major steps: (1) plasma treatment of the substrate; (2) silanization of the treated polymer surface; (3) screen printing of silver ink; and (4) curing of the printed ink. Reprinted from ref. 135 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
4.4 Post-treatments
Post-treatment of printed electronics refers to subsequent processing techniques such as sintering, UV curing, and annealing to improve both the mechanical properties and the electrical conductivity of electrodes and current collectors. Thus post-treatments are essential to achieve the desired electrochemical performance of printed SCs.
Sintering is usually conducted for metallic nanoparticle-based conductive inks, which usually contain organic additives to prevent nanoparticles from aggregation and precipitation. The nanoparticles would lose their organic shells and form physical contact with each other after sintering. Different sintering techniques, including thermal, chemical, photonic and laser, and microwave plasma sintering, have been explored.
Thermal sintering is the process of burning off organic residues in printed patterns by heating at a pre-set temperature on a hot plate or inside an oven. Usually the electrical conductivity of thermally sintered printed films decreases as the sintering temperature and duration decrease. However, due to the low glass-transition temperatures of some polymer substrates like PET, high temperature sintering becomes impossible. So different thermal sintering methods with lower sintering temperatures have been developed. Someya et al. reported printable elastic conductors containing Ag nanoparticles, which were formed in situ by mixing micrometer-sized Ag flakes, fluorine rubbers, and surfactant, followed by sintering at temperatures as low as 80 °C. The printable elastic composites exhibited excellent conductivities as high as 6168 S cm−1.136
Chemical sintering refers to the process wherein functionalized nanoparticle-based inks can be sintered at room temperature by reacting either with chemical agents or with agents within the inks.137 Magdassi et al. reported the possibility of sintering Ag nanoparticle-based ink at room temperature. They synthesized Ag nanoparticles stabilized with polyacrylic acid sodium salt and demonstrated that the printed patterns could undergo the self-sintering process at room temperature. This is because the presence of a destabilizing agent could cause detachment of the anchoring groups of the stabilizer from the Ag nanoparticles’ surfaces and thus “sinter” the printed Ag patterns.138
Photonic and laser sintering are the processes that employ light beams to heat printed patterns, facilitating solvent evaporation and nanoparticle coalescence.139 Zheng et al. developed a new copolymer ink, poly(4-methacryloyl benzophenone-co-2-methacryloyloxy ethyl-trimethylammonium chloride) [P(MBP-co-METAC)], which can be sintered with UV-light at room temperature due to the incorporation of UV reactive ligands for self-crosslinking and surface grafting.140 Ko et al. demonstrated that a laser beam can be used not only for sintering but also for patterning a printed conductive layer. Due to the high spatial resolution of the laser beam, the printed ink was sintered locally to form conductive patterns surrounded by unsintered ink. The unsintered ink can be subsequently washed away by rinsing the substrate, and thus forming the designed patterns with a lateral line resolution of around 1 μm.141
Microwave plasma sintering is the process that combines microwave radiation and plasma sintering together. During the sintering process, heat is not only generated inside the printed layer but also transferred from the plasma directly onto the layer's surface. Schubert et al. demonstrated a combination of a tailored Ag nanoparticle ink and the microwave plasma sintering method for post-treatment of printed patterns. Features with low conductivity were obtained through a low-pressure argon plasma sintering process, after which the printed patterns were treated by microwave flash. The sintered Ag nanoparticles exhibited a surprisingly high electrical conductivity of up to 60% that of bulk silver.142
Ultraviolet curing (or simply UV curing) is a photochemical process in which high-intensity UV light is used to promote the solidification of printed ink. It is commonly integrated as the post-treatment unit in inkjet or ink-based 3D printers. A UV light source can be directly integrated into the printing equipment to achieve real-time curing and improve production efficiency significantly. During the printing process, instant UV curing can also reduce the spontaneous movement of the droplets on the substrate surface and improve the morphology of the printed patterns. Jarrett J. et al. integrated a UV sintering unit in a roll-to-roll printer for instant curing in order to avoid pattern distortions.143
5. Recent developments of printed SCs
In this section, we summarize the recent developments of printed SCs in terms of different printing methods. A comparison of different representative research studies can be found in Table 2.
Table 2 Main properties and components of different printed SCs




Electrode materials
Configuration
Electrolyte
Electrochemical performance
Printing method
Ref.




Polyaniline (PANI)
Symmetric, planar
1.0 M H2SO4
A specific capacitance of over 420 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1
3D printing

144



Graphene
Symmetric, planar
3 M KOH
A capacitance of 4.76 F g−1 at a current density of 0.4 A g−1, an energy density of 0.43 W h kg−1 at a power density of 76.36 W kg−1
3D printing

39



V2O5/GO//G-VNQDs/GO
Asymmetric, planar
PVA/LiCl
A potential window of 1.6 V, an areal capacitance of 207.9 mF cm−2, an areal energy density of 73.9 μW h cm−2
3D printing

21



Graphene
Symmetric, planar
PVA/H3PO4
37.5 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1, an energy density of 5.20 μW h cm−2 at a power density of 3.2 mW cm−2
Gravure printing

145



MnO2/Ni//PPy/Ni
Asymmetric, planar
1 M Na2SO4
Areal capacitances of 25.8 mF cm−2 at 0.305 mA cm−2, 8.05 μW h cm−2 at 0.305 mA cm−2, and 7.32 mW cm−2 at 9.76 mA cm−2
Screen printing

146



Ni/MnO2
Symmetric, planar
CH3COOLi/PVA
An areal capacitance of up to 52.9 mF cm−2, the highest specific power density of 39.6 W cm−3 at an energy density of 11.1 mW h cm−3
Inkjet printing

22



Graphene/PEDOT:PSS
Symmetric, planar
PVA/H2SO4
A volumetric capacitance of 348 F cm−3, an energy density of 12 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 4386 W cm−3
Spray coating

147



Graphene-oxide (GO)/polyaniline (PANI)
Symmetric, planar
PVA–H3PO4
An areal capacitance of 153.6 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1, an energy density of 4.83 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 25.3 W cm−3
Direct ink writing

148



K2Co3(P2O7)2·2H2O//graphene
Asymmetric, planar
PVA/KOH
A specific capacitance of 6.0 F cm−3 at 10 mA cm−3, an energy density of 0.96 mW h cm−3
Inkjet printing

33



GO−MnO2//AC
Asymmetric, sandwiched
PVA/LiCl
1.586 F cm−2 (1023 F g−1) at 4 mA cm−2, an energy density of 22 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 0.099 W cm−3
Inkjet printing

149



Graphene
Symmetric, planar
[EMIM][TFSI]/PS-PMMA-PS
An areal specific capacitance of 268 μF cm−2
Inkjet printing

52



GO/Ag-NWs/GO
Symmetric, planar
PVA–H3PO4
A specific capacitance of 121 F g−1
Spray coating

150



SWCNT
Symmetric, planar
PVA/LiCl
A volume capacitance of 15.34 F cm−3, an energy density of 1.2 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 11.8 W cm−3
Direct ink writing

151



Graphite
Symmetric, planar
PVA/H2SO4
141.8 mF g−1 at 4.33 mA g−1, an energy density of 0.125 mW h mg−1 at a power density of 0.03 W mg−1
Direct ink writing

152



SWCNT/RuO2
Symmetric, sandwiched
PVA/H3PO4
A specific capacitance of 138 F g−1, a power density of 96 kW kg−1, and an energy density of 18.8 W h kg−1
Inkjet printing

153



Activated-carbon/CNTs/Ag NW
Symmetric, planar
[BMIM][BF4]/ETPTA
A working voltage window of up to 2.0 V, 100 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2
Inkjet printing

23



Electrochemically exfoliated graphene
Symmetric, planar
PSSH
An areal capacitance of ∼0.7 mF cm−2, an energy density of over 1 mW h cm−3 at a power density of around 0.1 W cm−3
Inkjet printing

154



Exfoliated graphene (EG)/PEDOT:PSS
Symmetric, planar
PVA/H2SO4
An areal capacitance of 5.4 mF cm−2
Inkjet printing

155



Functionalized MWCNT (f-MWCNT)
Symmetric, sandwiched
[EMIM][BF4]/[PVdF-HFP]
A specific capacitance of 235 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 in a wide operating potential range of 3 V, an energy density of 16.2 W h kg−1 and a power density 45 kW kg−1 at 1 A g−1
Inkjet printing

156



Graphene/polyaniline (NGP/PANI)
Symmetric, sandwiched
1 M H2SO4
A specific capacitance of 82 F g−1, a power density of 124 kW kg−1 and an energy density of 2.4 W h kg−1 at 20 mV s−1
Inkjet printing

157



Ti3C2Tx
Symmetric, planar
PVA/H2SO4
Areal and volumetric capacitances of 27 mF cm−2 and 357 F cm−3, specifically at 20 mV s−1, an energy density of 18 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 15 W cm−3
Spray coating

84



FeOOH/MnO2
Symmetric, planar
PVA/LiCl
350.2 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, an energy density of 5 × 10−4 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 0.04 mW cm−2
Screen printing

158



RuO2/PEDOT:PSS
Symmetric, sandwiched
PVA/H2SO4
A volumetric capacitance of 190 F cm−3, a power density of 147 μW cm−2 at an energy density of 0.053 μW h cm−2
Spray coating

159



RuO2/PEDOT:PSS/graphene
Symmetric, planar
1 M H2SO4
A specific capacitance of 820 F g−1
Screen printing

160



CoO/CNT
Symmetric, planar
PVA/KOH
17.4 F cm−3 and an energy density of 3.48 mW h cm−3 at 0.25 A cm−3
Screen printing

161



Activated carbon
Symmetric, sandwiched
PVA/H3PO4
An areal capacitance of 45 mF cm−2 at 0.3 mA cm−2
Roll-to-Roll printing

162



Graphene/polyaniline
Symmetric, sandwiched
1 M H2SO4
A specific capacitance of 269 F g−1, a power density of 454 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 9.3 W h kg−1
Screen printing

163



MWCNTs–MnO2//MWCNTs–MoO3
Asymmetric, sandwiched
4 M LiCl
An operating potential window of 1.7 V, an energy density of 11.04 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 614.6 mW cm−3
Screen printing

164



Crumpled reduced GO
Symmetric, sandwiched
6 M KOH
366 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, energy densities of 22.9 and 8.1 W h kg−1 at power densities of 119.2 and 15.4 kW kg−1, respectively
Spray coating

165



Graphene
Symmetric, sandwiched
H2SO4/PVA
A volume capacitance of ∼280 F cm−3, an energy density of ∼2.9 mW h cm−3 at a power density of ∼2.3 W cm−3
Spray coating

43



MnO2/carbon-microspheres
Symmetric, sandwiched
PVA/H3PO4
An areal capacitance of 19.23 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2
Screen printing and transfer printing

166



MXene (Ti3C2Tx, Ti3CNTx)
Symmetric, planar
H2SO4/PVA
An areal capacitance of 61 mF cm−2 at 25 μA cm−2
Transfer printing

40



Phosphorene and graphene
Symmetric, planar
BMIMPF6
An areal capacitance of 9.8 mF cm−2, a volumetric capacitance of 37.0 F cm−3, an energy density of 11.6 mW h cm−3
Transfer printing

44



Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), polyaniline, and metal oxide (MnO2)
Symmetric, planar
PVA/H2SO4
Energy densities of 5–11 mW h cm−3 at power densities of 1–6 W cm−3
Direct ink writing

41





5.1 Inkjet printing

5.1.1 Principles. 
Inkjet printing is a digital, non-contact, mask-free and high precision printing technique. It is a popular technique to deposit patterned materials onto metallic, paper and polymeric substrates.13,167 Continuous inkjet (CIJ) and drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjet printing are the two main inkjet printing modes.168 CIJ printing is the process in which a continuous stream of droplets is jetted by a printhead and then deposited onto substrates driven by an electrostatic field. Most inkjet printers for the fabrication of electronic devices are based on the DOD mode. DOD inkjet printing can be divided into thermal and piezoelectric types based on the mechanism of how inks are jetted out of nozzles. In the thermal inkjet process, a resistive element is heated to create a thin film, which in turn forms an expanding bubble that injects droplets through the nozzle onto the substrate. By contrast, in the piezoelectric inkjet process, an electric field is applied to piezoelectric materials to create a distortion, which then creates pressure to the chamber to push ink through the nozzle onto the substrate.
The key issues that concern researchers in inkjet printing are mainly droplet formation and morphology optimization of printed patterns. Jetting needs to be carefully optimized to prevent any printing instabilities, such as satellite drops or tails, which could decrease both the stability and the resolution of printed patterns. The inverse Ohnesorge number Z, which summarizes the fluidic properties of functional ink, is often used to evaluate ink printability, which is defined as  where α is the nozzle diameter, ρ is the density, γ is the surface tension, and η is the viscosity of the fluid. Jang et al. suggested that the optimal Z value is in the range of 4 and 14 considering the characteristics such as single droplet formability, position accuracy, and maximum allowable jetting frequency.169 However, there are also reports that inks with Z values outside of the optimal range (3 < Z < 14) can also be printed smoothly. Shin et al. demonstrated a stable printing process with Z = 35.5 for ethylene glycol–water ink.170 Schubert et al. printed polystyrene nanoparticle inks with Z ranging from 21 to 91,171 whereas Hsiao et al. demonstrated glycerol–water and photoresist inks with Z values as low as 2.7 and 1, respectively.172
Ink formulation engineering is an efficient way to control the droplet formation and thus the morphology of printed patterns. The final resolution and morphology of the printed patterns are also influenced by the printing parameters, interface engineering and post-treatments, which have been discussed in detail in Section 4.4.
Inkjet printing features the following advantages. (1) Low viscosity inks such as water-based inks can be inkjet-printed. (2) In a non-contact printing technique, the print head does not need to contact the substrate and thus avoids cross-contamination and damage to the nozzle and the substrate. As a digital and mask-free technique, inkjet printing shows high flexibility regarding the pattern geometry and design configuration. (3) It is easy to deposit different materials in one printing process by adopting multiple print heads under the accurate coordination of computer programming. (4) Only a small amount of ink is required and little waste is produced during the inkjet printing process, which help in saving expensive materials and reducing the general costs. The typical volume to fill an inkjet printer cartridge is in the range of a few millilitres. On the other hand, inkjet printing presents several limitations. (1) It is challenging to prepare printable inks with appropriate fluidic physical properties like surface tension and viscosity due to the strict requirements of inkjet printers. (2) It normally has a low throughput speed; however, it can also be used for large-scale and high throughput printing by adopting industrial level print-heads, which integrate many small print-heads into linear arrays.


5.1.2 Recent developments. 
Inkjet printing has been widely used to fabricate various devices, especially organic light-emitting diodes and organic solar cells, which are beginning to enter the industrial manufacturing stage. The manufacturing of energy storage devices by inkjet printing has likewise attracted the attention of researchers. In an early example, Cui et al. demonstrated SCs on paper through inkjet printing (Fig. 5a).173 SWNTs were inkjet-printed as an electrode material onto a paper substrate which had been previously treated with PVDF to avoid any short circuit. The printed SC achieved a specific capacity of 33 F g−1 at a high specific power of 250000 W kg−1 and showed good cycling stability with very little capacitance decay until 2500 charge/discharge cycles. Our group reported a flexible and transparent SC through inkjet printing (Fig. 5b).55 By inkjet-printing PEDOT:PSS/Ag grid electrodes, flexible and transparent all-solid-state SCs with a specific areal capacitance of 4.52 mF cm−2 and an energy density of 0.59 mW h cm−2 (at a power density of 0.036 W cm−2) were fabricated. To show the outstanding patterning flexibility of inkjet printing, SCs with various designs including logos, flowers and dragons were fabricated as shown in Fig. 5c–e. The printed SCs possessed superior flexibility, aesthetic appearance and relatively high optical transparency, showing great promise for flexible and wearable electronic devices. In order to improve the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, Liu et al. reported a composite ink consisting of Ag nanoparticles, PEDOT:PSS and CNTs.174 Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS-CNT/Ag composite films which serve as both interdigitated electrodes and current collectors were inkjet printed onto paper substrates as shown in Fig. 5f. The printed interdigitated electrode films showed a highly regulated size and structure owing to the efficient and accurate control of inkjet printing. Due to the synergistic effects of the PEDOT:PSS-CNT/Ag composite film and the paper substrate, the printed all-solid-state MSCs delivered a high volumetric specific capacitance of 23.6 F cm−3 and a maximum energy density of 42.1 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 89.1 mW cm−3.
 Fig. 5  (a) A photo of an inkjet-printed SC on paper. Reprinted from ref. 173 with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright 2010. (b) The structure of the printed SC. (c–e) Photographs of the aesthetic SCs with various exquisite patterns. Reprinted from ref. 55 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (f) Schematic illustrations of the fabrication process of paper-based all-solid-state flexible MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 174 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (g) Photograph of a printed graphene-based MSC. Reprinted from ref. 177 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013. (h) Digital photo of a completely printed MSC. (i) Digital photo of inkjet-printed graphene patterns. Reprinted from ref. 178 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (j) Schematic illustration of an all-inkjet-printed MSC on paper. Reprinted from ref. 23 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (k) Digital photo of an inkjet-printed MSC array on a Kapton substrate. Reprinted from ref. 154 with permission from with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Graphene and other 2D nanomaterials are emerging as promising functional electrode materials for inkjet-printed SCs. A stable water-based GO nanosheet ink was inkjet-printed onto Ti foils and then thermally reduced (T = 200 °C) to be promising SC electrodes, as first reported by Le et al.175 Although the power density was considerably lower (2.19 kW kg−1) than those of CNT-based electrodes (70–100 kW kg−1),176 the results suggest that inkjet-printing is a viable and scalable route to fabricate graphene-based SC electrodes. To further improve the electrochemical performance of graphene-based SCs, Li et al. prepared MSCs by inkjet printing liquid exfoliated graphene inks in an interdigitated configuration on the top of printed Ag current collectors (Fig. 5g).177 A high-concentration graphene ink with appropriate fluidic properties, which is free from the toxicity and aggregation of flakes, was prepared by a distillation-assisted solvent exchange and polymer stabilization (ethyl cellulose, EC) process. The printed MSC showed an areal specific capacitance of 0.19 mF cm−2 at 100 mV s−1, owing to the high conductivity and large surface area of graphene. The device performance can be further enhanced by printing more layers of graphene; that is, the areal specific capacitance could reach 0.59 mF cm−2 with 8 layers of graphene. Hersam et al. reported MSCs based on inkjet-printed interdigitated graphene electrodes as both electrodes and current collectors (Fig. 5h).178 By employing the inkjet-printed in-plane interdigitated graphene electrodes, an all-solid-state MSC was fabricated with a volumetric capacitance of 9.3 F cm−3 at a current density of 0.25 A cm−3 and a volumetric energy density of 1.29 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 278 W cm−3. The MSC also showed excellent operational stability with minimal capacitance decay after 10000 cycles. Furthermore, the graphene electrodes can be inkjet-printed on a large scale, which offers compelling prospects for practical utility (Fig. 5i). Wang et al. inkjet-printed 2D δ-MnO2 nanosheets to construct all-solid-state MSCs.38 A highly concentrated water-based δ-MnO2 nanosheet ink was developed with an average lateral size of 89 nm and a thickness of 1 nm. By engineering the formulation of the δ-MnO2 ink, the printed δ-MnO2 patterns showed a uniform morphology without the undesired “coffee-ring” effect. The MSCs exhibited a high volumetric capacitance of 2.4 F cm−3, and an energy density of 1.8 × 10−4 W h cm−3 at a power density of 0.018 W cm−3. Furthermore, the fabricated MSCs showed good mechanical flexibility and excellent cycling stability with a capacitance retention of 88% after 3600 charge–discharge cycles.
Recently, fully inkjet-printed SCs have been attracting increasing more and more attention.179 Lee et al. reported a new class of fully inkjet-printed solid-state SCs on a conventional A4 paper.23 The solid-state SCs were fabricated by inkjet-printing activated carbon/CNT ink as electrodes, and ionic liquid/ultraviolet-cured triacrylate polymer as an electrolyte. As illustrated in Fig. 5j, cellulose nanofibril (CNF)-mediated nanoporous mats were first printed on the top of an A4 paper to make high resolution patterns. Then SWNT/AC inks were inkjet-printed on the top of the CNF–paper substrate, followed by printing Ag NW inks. To improve the electrical conductivity of electrodes, a photonic sintering technique was employed for the post-treatment of electrodes. Afterwards, the electrolyte ink was inkjet-printed on the top of the treated electrode and then dried at 80 °C to remove the residual water. Consecutively, UV-curing reaction was used to solidify the gel polymer electrolyte. The fully inkjet-printed SC exhibited excellent cycling stability after more than 10000 charge/discharge cycles.
Li et al. demonstrated scalable fabrication of graphene-based MSCs on various substrates by using only inkjet printing.154 High-concentration electrochemically exfoliated graphene inks were formulated through a solvent exchange technique. The printed thick graphene films (with thicknesses up to ∼0.7 μm) can serve as both the electrodes and current collectors owing to the high electrical conductivity of the graphene films. Then, solid-state electrolyte poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid) (PSSH) was printed on top of the graphene electrodes. The fully printed solid-state MSC exhibited an areal capacitance of around 0.7 mF cm−2, which is higher than those of partly printed graphene-based MSCs reported until then.180 Due to the simplicity and efficiency of the fully printing process, the MSCs can be printed on a large scale. As shown in Fig. 5k, large-scale MSC arrays comprising more than 100 MSC devices were fabricated on a flexible Kapton substrate. Without any external voltage balance, the large-scale arrays could be charged up to 12 V and exhibited twice higher power density than the corresponding individual devices.

5.2 Screen printing

5.2.1 Principles. 
Screen printing is a widely used mass-printing process in which ink is squeezed through a stencil screen and deposited onto a substrate. A wide variety of functional inks and substrates can be used for screen printing due to its simplicity and versatility.146,181
There are mainly two types of screen printing, i.e., the flat-bed and rotary techniques. The flat-bed technique is the stepwise process in which ink is pressed through a flat patterned screen onto a substrate. After printing, the patterned screen is lifted up and the substrate is changed or removed by hand to repeat the deposition process. Thus, the flat-bed screen technique enables precise multilayer printing. It also shows great potential for laboratory scale printing owing to the low-cost and malleability of the patterned screens. On the other hand, the rotary technique is the process in which ink is pressed through a polyester screen cylinder and a perforated metal to deposit onto a substrate. As the screen rotates at the same speed with the substrate, the ink is continuously pressed onto the substrate using a stationary squeegee, making a full print cycle upon every rotation. Therefore, the rotary technique can achieve a much higher printing speed than the flat-bed technique. During the screen-printing process, the wet thickness of the printed pattern is determined by a number of parameters, such as the concentration of functional ink, the mesh count per inch, the emulsion thickness, and the fraction of ink transferred onto the substrate. The quality of the screen-printed patterns depends on the screen mesh, the printing parameters, the substrates and the ink viscosity.
Screen printing features the following advantages. (1) Screen printing is suitable for high aspect ratio patterns. (2) Thick functional films can be obtained more easily than by other techniques. (3) Paste movements can be easily controlled during printing. (4) The overall cost of screen-printing techniques is lower than those of other techniques. On the other hand, due to the high viscosity of inks, screen-printed films suffer from high roughness and low resolution, which limit the application of screen printing in printed electronics, especially when accurate overlays are required.


5.2.2 Recent developments. 
Screen printing has been widely used for printing electronic circuits, photovoltaics, displays, and energy storage devices.182,183 Recently, screen-printed SCs have been attracting more and more attention. In order to make an “energy textile” which can be integrated with a garment, Jost et al. prepared a flexible and lightweight fabric SC electrode by screen-printing porous carbon electrode materials into woven cotton and polyester fabrics.184 The porous structure of these substrates facilitates ion transfer between the electrodes and is beneficial for SC applications. The screen-printed porous carbon electrodes achieved a high specific capacitance of 90 F g−1 with an areal capacitance of 0.43 F cm−2. Furthermore, Jost et al. also screen-printed textile-based SCs on woollen clothing with activated carbon electrodes (Fig. 6a).75 Woven carbon fiber was fabricated by cutting the fabric into textile followed by screen-printing activated carbon ink onto the textile as electrodes and the current collector. Polymer electrolyte was employed to prevent leaking onto the wearer. The printed SC exhibited a capacitance of 0.51 F cm−2 at 10 mV s−1. Furthermore, the printed SC showed high mechanical flexibility when bending at 180° or even stretching.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of assembled SCs by screen printing. Reprinted from ref. 75 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Illustration of the screen printing method and screen-printed patterns on different substrates. Reprinted from ref. 164 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (c) Procedure for screen-printing RuO2/PEDOT:PSS/graphene electrodes. Reprinted from ref. 160 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (d) Illustration of a screen-printed graphene-based solid-state flexible SC. Reprinted from ref. 186 with permission from IOPscience, copyright 2017. 
Wang et al. demonstrated an asymmetric SC by screen-printing a MWCNTs–MnO2 anode and a MWCNTs–MoO3 cathode onto screen-printed commercial carbon nanoparticles acting as a current collector. Their approach can be extended to various substrates, including clothes, PET and paper (Fig. 6b).164 The fully printed ASC showed a wide operational potential window of 1.7 V and a high energy density of 11.04 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 614.6 mW cm−3. Furthermore, the device exhibited excellent cycling stability with ∼91.3% of the initial capacitance retention after 5000 charge/discharge cycles. Xu et al. reported thin film SCs based on screen-printed graphene/PANI hybrid inks.163 Graphene served as a stable and underlying conductive network for PANI, which acted as a spacer to separate graphene nanosheets. Due to the synergistic effect between graphene and PANI, the printed SCs showed a high specific capacitance of 269 F g−1, an energy density of 9.3 W h kg−1 and a power density of 454 kW kg−1. The devices also showed excellent cycling stability with no degradation after over 1000 charge/discharge cycles. Shi et al. prepared ASCs by screen-printing 2D MnO2 nanosheets and graphene as the cathode and anode, respectively.185 The ASCs exhibited a high energy density of 97.2 W h kg−1 with no more than 3% capacitance loss even after 10000 cycles. Cho et al. screen-printed water-dispersible RuO2 decorated PEDOT:PSS/graphene-based inks as electrode materials for SCs as illustrated in Fig. 6c.160 PEDOT:PSS, graphene, and hydrous RuO2 NPs were mixed into an aqueous ternary electrode ink. The PSS binders in the PEDOT:PSS system could optimize the viscosity of the PEDOT:PSS-based inks to be suitable for screen-printing. The resulting RuO2/PEDOT:PSS/graphene screen-printed electrode exhibited an impressive conductivity of 1570 S cm−1, a larger specific capacitance of 820 F g−1, and a better cycling performance with 81.5% retention of the initial capacitance after 1000 cycles compared with a PEDOT:PSS-only electrode. This work provides insights into how to improve the electrochemical performance of printed electrodes and SC devices by tuning the ink formulation.
In another example, graphene oxide ink was screen-printed on textiles followed by reduction via a rapid electrochemical method as illustrated in Fig. 6d.186 The printed SC exhibited a high areal capacitance of 2.5 mF cm−2, 95.6% of which was maintained under bending conditions. Moreover, the SC maintained 97% of the original capacitance even after 10000 cycles.

5.3 Three-dimensional (3D) printing

5.3.1 Principles. 
3D printing or additive manufacturing refers to a class of processes for making 3D solid objects from digital files in a layer-by-layer manner. Each of these layers can be regarded as a thin horizontal cross-section of the eventual object. Unlike subtractive manufacturing, additive manufacturing can produce complex 3D structures without wasting materials; it has shown great potential for the fabrication of energy storage devices.35,187,188 There are more than fifty additive manufacturing technologies that can be categorized into seven groups according to the International Organization for Standardization and the American Society for Testing and Materials (ISO/ASTM 52900:2015): binder jetting, directed energy deposition, material extrusion, material jetting, powder bed fusion, sheet lamination and vat photopolymerization.189 Although 3D printing and additive manufacturing are often used interchangeably, the term additive manufacturing is more formal, broader and more all-inclusive, and it is preferred by people working in the industry. The term 3D printing, on the other hand, is preferred by makers and the media. 3D printing gained its popularity since fused deposition modelling (FDM) – which works in a very similar way to common 2D printing – appeared on the market to become a popular tool for making 3D prototypes. Thus today the image when most people think of 3D printing is likely a desk-top FDM 3D printer, which merely accounts for one of the seven additive manufacturing processes.
Of the various additive manufacturing methods, light- and ink-based 3D printing are the main technologies that are important in the context of printed SCs.190 A wide range of materials including powders, liquids, and filaments can be 3D printed, the achievable feature sizes of which are defined by the specific patterning and solidification process involved. Light-based 3D printing methods mainly include stereolithography (SLA), which photopolymerizes photocurable resins into solid objects using a rastering laser; and selective laser sintering (SLS), which obtains 3D objects by locally heating and fusing together polymer particles in a powder bed using a rastering laser. The light-based 3D printing methods generally show high resolution; however, they suffer from an inherent trade-off between resolution, object volume and speed as well as limited material choices that are mostly restricted to rigid thermoset polymers and thermoplastic polymer powders.191 One kind of SLA is worthy of attention as a potentially powerful tool for micro- or even nano-fabrication, i.e., two-photon polymerization (2PP), which involves a photochemical process induced by a femtosecond laser that is focused into the volume of a photosensitive resin using a high-numerical-aperture-objective.192,193 On the other hand, ink-based 3D printing, including FDM, direct ink writing and binder jetting, can deposit a wide range of materials in the form of low-viscosity fluids, continuous filaments and viscoelastic materials. Compared to light-based methods, ink-based methods are the major 3D printing methods for printing SCs.194 FDM is the method most widely used in commercial 3D printers due to the earliest expiration of its patent, which leads to lower cost. FDM works by extruding ink, usually a thermoplastic polymer in the form of a filament, after heating it up inside the nozzle to a temperature close to its melting point. The extruded filament quickly cools down and solidifies after being deposited onto a substrate, building a 3D structure in a layer-by-layer manner. Most common thermoplastic polymers are polylactic acid (PLA), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and polycarbonate.195 There are conductive filaments (mostly based on graphene or CNTs) commercially available that can be used for current collectors or electrodes for SCs; however, their low conductivity (hundreds of S m−1) due to the low concentration of the active material within the filaments restricts their application.196,197 The material choice for FDM is rather limited due to the high temperature needed during the FDM process.
Direct ink writing (DIW) refers to the deposition of a shear-thinning (decrease of viscosity with an increase of shear forces inside the nozzle) ink filament in a layer-by-layer manner.198 The shear-thinning behavior enables materials to be extruded through fine nozzles, as well as to possess high enough shear elastic moduli and shear yield strengths in order to retain their shape. The resolution of DIW can be quite high (less than 5 μm) depending on the nozzle size.199 DIWs are versatile manufacturing techniques that can print a wide variety of materials such as plastics, hydrogels and nanomaterials, and thus have attracted the most attention for 3D printed SCs.30,200 Post-treatment processes such as photopolymerization, thermal curing, and freezing201 are required to solidify the printed object and to improve mechanical properties.
Binder jetting refers to the process in which special adhesives are ejected from the nozzle with a desired pattern and deposited onto a thin layer of powders where the binder will bond the layer of powder and create a solid structure.202 3D structures can be fabricated by repeating the above procedure. The binder jetting technique alleviates the need for supporters as the powders can support themselves. A variety of powder materials, such as ceramics, plaster and active carbon, can be used for binder jetting. Binder jetting normally produces a porous hard solid after removing the binder. Due to its high porosity, it is possible to infiltrate the product with a second phase to obtain a functional composite.203 One interesting direction for binder jetting in energy storage is to make electrodes by using metal oxide powders with conductive binders.
Compared to other printing technologies, 3D printing offers the following advantages. (1) Excellent printing flexibility and geometry controllability. A wide range of materials including powders, liquids and metals can be used for 3D printing. On the other hand, devices with complex 3D configurations can be realized by 3D printing, especially the hierarchically porous structure which is advantageous for enhancing electrochemical performances. (2) Good control over the thickness of the printed pattern. Both thin-film and thick electrodes can be printed, especially electrodes with high aspect-ratio configurations. (3) Cost effectiveness and environment friendliness due to the additive manufacturing nature and the simplified processes. However, it has to be pointed out that limited materials can be directly printed using a 3D printer and the structures fabricated by 3D printing often exhibit poor mechanical properties.


5.3.2 Recent developments. 
Extrusion-based DIW is the main-stream 3D printing method to fabricate SCs because of the simple and low-cost printing setup, flexible material selection and well-controlled object structures. A wide range of functional materials can be used for DIW including colloidals, polymers, metal alloys, etc.204,205 Typically, DIW requires inks to possess high viscosity, high yield stress, and well-controlled viscoelasticity. Yang et al. 3D printed a quasi-solid-state asymmetric MSC with ultrahigh areal energy density.21 By using 3D printing, graphene–vanadium nitride quantum dots (G-VNQDs) with graphene oxide dispersions were printed as an anode on a current collector, followed by vanadium pentoxide with graphene oxide as a cathode, as illustrated in Fig. 7a. To complete MSC fabrication, PVA/LiCl electrolyte was 3D printed into the channels between the anode and the cathode. The 3D printed asymmetric MSC achieved an areal capacitance of 207.9 mF cm−2 and an areal energy density of 73.9 μW h cm−2. Recently, aerogels have shown great promise for 3D printed energy storage applications. Among them, graphene aerogels have attracted increasing attention due to their high specific surface area for ion access, tunable porosity and pore structures as well as mechanical properties. The key to direct ink writing of aerogels is to prepare gel-based viscoelastic functional material inks with non-Newtonian shear thinning behaviors. As an example, Zhu et al. prepared an extrudable GO-based composite aerogel ink for extrusion-based direct writing.39 The aerogel ink consisted of GO, silica fillers, catalyst and graphene nanoplatelets, which can improve the electrical conductivity and decrease the resistance of the composite ink without a detrimental loss of surface area. In order to convert the printed structure to an aerogel, the key is to keep the composite ink wet during the printing and gelation processes. As shown in Fig. 7b, the prepared aerogel ink was extruded through a micronozzle in an isooctane bath, which was used to avoid gel collapse. Afterwards, the 3D printed porous structure was processed into aerogels by gelation, supercritical drying, and carbonization, followed by etching of silica with hydrofluoric acid. The symmetric SC printed by DIW achieved a gravimetric capacitance of 4.76 F g−1 at a current density of 0.4 A g−1, and 61% of the capacitance could be retained when the current density was increased by 20 times to 8 A g−1. Moreover, the SC with thick electrodes (∼1000 μm) showed outstanding rate capability (87% capacitive retention from 2 to 10 A g−1) due to the presence of ordered macropores that help improve the ion diffusion and electrical conductivity to enable fast charge transport. A superelastic polypyrrole (PPy)-coated graphene aerogel electrode was fabricated by 3D printing and polymer self-assembly (Fig. 7c).206 Due to the controllable periodic macropores and the uniform deposition and adhesion of PPy, the PPy-graphene aerogel electrode achieved a high specific gravimetric capacitance of 395 F g−1 as well as good mechanical properties. Apart from aerogels, hydrogels have attracted attention for 3D printed SCs due to their flexibility/stretchability, conformability and bio-compatibility. Conducting polymer hydrogels are interesting material platforms that combine the advantages of hydrogels and conductive polymers. Dou et al. prepared a hierarchically nanostructured polyaniline (PANI) hydrogel by using amino trimethylene phosphonic acid (ATMP) as the gelator and the dopant to form a conducting polymer network.144 As shown in Fig. 7d, ammonium persulfate solution (ink A) and ATMP mixed with aniline solution (ink B) were loaded into two separate 3D printer cartridges. By alternatively printing droplets of ink A and ink B on the same spot, immediate contact and mixing of the droplets occurred, which led to rapid hydrogel formation. The interconnected 3D conductive network structure could facilitate the transport of electrons and enhance the polymer elasticity. The 3D printed PANI hydrogel electrode showed the highest capacitance of ∼422 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and an excellent rate performance with ∼240 F g−1 at a current rate of 10 A g−1 owing to the high utilization ratio of electrode materials and the short ion diffusion pathway.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D printing an asymmetric MSC. Reprinted from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (b) Schematic illustration of a 3D direct ink writing fabrication process. Reprinted from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of 3D hierarchical PPy-graphene aerogel composites. Reprinted from ref. 206 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic illustration of the 3D printing process of the PANI hydrogel. Reprinted from ref. 144 with permission from Springer, copyright 2016. (e) Schematic presentation of the binder-jetting technique. Reprinted from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a solid state SC, including 3D printing interdigitated Ti electrodes, PPy electropolymerization and device assembly. Reprinted from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014. 
Binder jetting has also been used to fabricate SCs. Azhari et al. fabricated crack-free, millimeter-thick graphene-based 3D structured electrodes by the binder jetting technique (Fig. 7e).203 Due to the high surface area of the electrodes and the interconnected pore structure, the SC exhibited a gravimetric capacitance of ∼260 F g−1 and an areal capacitance of ∼700 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte.
FDM has also been used to print SCs. Areir et al. demonstrated the use of the FDM technique to deposit activated carbon onto flexible fabrics.207 By tuning printing parameters, the layer thickness can be carefully controlled and accurate orientation has been achieved. To prepare inks with appropriate rheological properties, 2 g of activated carbon powder was mixed with 2 g of PVA binder. Then, the mixture was dissolved in 40 mL DI water and kept overnight to make a homogenous slurry. To complete the SC printing, the activated carbon slurry was first printed as electrodes followed by printing H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte onto flexible electrodes. Finally, a silicone layer was printed to form a gasket to prevent any leaking or drying. The fabricated SC had a capacitance of 68.7 mF at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1.
Zhao et al. produced 3D interdigitated Ti6Al4V electrodes by using selective laser melting that utilizes a high power laser to melt and fuse thin films of metal powder to complete the 3D structure.208 As shown in Fig. 7f, polypyrrole was electrodeposited on the surfaces of interdigitated electrodes as electroactive materials. Due to the unique micro- and macro-structures conferred by 3D printing, the assembled solid-state symmetric SC exhibited a volumetric capacitance of 2.4 F cm−3, an energy density of 213.5 W h m−3 at a current density of 3.74 mA cm−3, and a power density of 15.0 kW m−3 at a current density of 37.4 mA cm−3.
3D printing is particularly promising for the production of 3D MSCs for the following reasons. (1) The thickness of interdigitated electrodes can be optimized from hundreds of nanometers to millimeters to enhance the specific areal capacitance. (2) Symmetric and asymmetric interdigitated electrode arrays can be directly printed on substrates, promoting the integration of MSCs as energy storage unit cells in on-chip devices. (3) 3D printing offers a convenient technology for the encapsulation of MSCs.

5.4 Transfer printing

5.4.1 Principles. 
Transfer printing refers to the printing process in which ink is first patterned onto an intermediate medium (also known as a stamp, which is mostly composed of polymers) and then transferred to the desired substrate by applying pressure and/or heat, which helps in making the pattern leave the intermediary substrate and deposit permanently on the substrate to be printed. Transfer printing decouples the device fabrication and integration processes and thus is especially promising for flexible and stretchable inorganic electronics. Gravure and flexographic transfer printing are the two main modes in industrial applications. The gravure printing system consists of an ink trough in which a gravure roller is rotated and a metal doctor blade that scrapes the excess ink from the roller surface.168 The desired pattern is engraved onto the pattern carrier and then transferred onto the substrate under a given pressure. The functional ink used for gravure printing has medium viscosity (100–1000 mPa s). Additionally, gravure printing can potentially achieve printing speeds as high as 1000 m min−1 because of the inherent R2R feeding system. Different from gravure printing, flexographic printing uses a plate with a raised surface and rapidly drying fluidic inks to print materials directly onto the substrate.168 The ink viscosity used for flexographic printing (1000–2000 mPa s) is higher than that of gravure printing, while the printing speed (around 500 m min−1) is lower than that of gravure printing.
The underlying physics associated with the transfer printing process relates to the fracture mechanics, which involves a system of three layers (stamp/ink/substrate) with two interfaces (stamp/ink and ink/substrate interfaces). Effective transfer printing relies on careful control of adhesion and fracture mechanics at the critical interfaces (the ink/donor, the mold/ink and the ink/substrate), which are determined by the viscosity of the functional inks and the applied pressure. The adhesion energies can also be adjusted by chemical functionalization.209–211 A key advantage of the transfer printing method is that it enables a rapid delivery of functional materials in sparse or dense layouts over a large substrate area, specifically via multiple mold inking and printing cycles.


5.4.2 Recent developments. 
Transfer printing has been utilized to print various nanomaterials such as SWCNTs, graphene and MXenes as electrodes for SCs. Transfer printing can be used to deposit functional materials onto either selective small or large area. Niu et al. reported a strategy to fabricate SWCNT-based transparent conductive films on PET substrates.212 As shown in Fig. 8a, a free-standing SWCNT film was prepared onto a rigid silicon wafer substrate. Ethanol was dropped onto the SWCNT film surface to remove wrinkles. Then the SWCNT film was transferred onto the PET substrate by transfer-printing based on electrostatic adsorption. In order to decrease the thickness of the SWCNT film to less than 100 nm, a repeated halving method was utilized to separate thick SWCNT film into many ultrathin SWCNT films. The ultrathin SWCNT films were used as electrodes for flexible and transparent symmetrical SCs. The specific capacitance of the as-fabricated electrode was ∼22.5 F g−1. Zhang et al. demonstrated the rapid production of flexible MSCs by stamp-printing MXene inks (Ti3C2Tx and Ti3CNTx).40 As shown in Fig. 8b–e, stamps with designed patterns were fabricated by 3D printing. Then the MXene ink was brushed onto the surfaces of the stamps followed by transferring the materials onto paper or other substrates by pressing. Finally, Ag wires were attached and PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte was drop-cast to complete the fabrication of solid-state MXene-based MSCs. The fabricated Ti3C2Tx MSC exhibited a high areal capacitance of 61 mF cm−2 at 25 μA cm−2, a high energy density of 0.76 μW h cm−2 and excellent cycling stability. These excellent performances were attributed to the following: (1) a continuous film which showed excellent metallic conductivity and mechanical flexibility was formed by stamping; (2) the porous paper substrate enhanced the accessibility of ions to the electrode materials; and (3) the interdigitated architecture geometry electrodes facilitated the in-plane movement of ions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of transfer printing SWCNT films on a PET substrate. Reprinted from ref. 212 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013. (b–e) Fabrication of all-MXene-based MSCs by stamping printing. Reprinted from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (f) Schematic illustration of gravure printed planar SCs with the dimensions. (g and h) Optical images with different resolutions of gravure printed graphene@PVA–H3PO4 microelectrodes. Reprinted from ref. 145 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. 
To address the limited ion accessible surface area and the slow ion diffusion rate in planar SCs, a stabilized water-soluble N-doped graphene@PVA–H3PO4 hybrid ink was gravure-printed to construct planar SCs (Fig. 8f).145 As shown in Fig. 8g and h, the gravure-printed hybrid electrodes showed a continuous surface and strong adhesion on the Ag current collector. Due to the improved accessibility of electrolyte ions to the gravure-printed graphene surface, the printed SC exhibited a high areal capacitance of 37.5 mF cm−2 and a maximum energy density of 5.20 μW h cm−2 at an areal power density of 3.2 mW cm−2, corresponding to a volumetric energy density of 2.08 mW h cm−3.
In summary, transfer printing presents a scalable and simple technique to fabricate electrodes for energy storage applications. This technique is a particularly promising step towards the fabrication of flexible integrated energy storage devices.

5.5 Pen-based direct ink writing

5.5.1 Principles. 
Inspired by the day-to-day hand writing process of depositing inks on paper, a wide variety of hand writing tools, such as brush pens,213 fountain pens,214,215 and ball pens,216 have been utilized to fabricate electronic devices. Pen-based direct writing techniques are fast, user-friendly and low-cost methods to deposit functional materials onto substrates, which could be used as components for electric circuits,216 electrochemical sensing217 and electrochemical energy storage devices.213 Different pen-based writing techniques can produce patterns with different resolutions. For instance, brush pens (50–500 μm)213 and ball pens (100–800 μm)217 normally show higher resolutions than pencil writing (900–1900 μm).218 An appropriate writing technique should be selected based on the desired pattern quality. The performances of the electronics were affected by their microstructures (e.g., width resolution and surface roughness) and electrical properties (e.g., conductivity).
Despite the limited resolution and the complicated and often lengthy post-treatments that are often required, pen-based direct ink writing techniques are simple, easily accessible and low cost, while having few limitations regarding inks and substrates; furthermore, they do not require complicated tuning of ink properties nor sophisticated equipment; thus pen-based direct ink writing techniques are valuable tools for the lab-scale testing of materials and prototype construction of energy storage devices. Unlike other printing methods that pose stringent requirements on the properties such as the size and rheology of ink materials, almost any materials in the form of ink can be ‘printed’ by using daily writing tools.219 Even in the case of pencils, although the active ingredient of everyday pencils is graphite, other active materials such as CNTs218 can be made into home-made pencils to make electrode patterns on paper and other substrates in order to meet some specific performance and application demands.


5.5.2 Recent developments. 
The use of daily writing tools such as pens represents a class of rapid methods to deposit continuous patterns on various substrates in a facile and easy way. Recently, many efforts have been devoted towards developing functional inks for pen writing on a wide range of substrates to fabricate SCs. Jiang et al. reported a simple, versatile and cost-effective way to make flexible MSCs by writing with a marker pen.41 As shown in Fig. 9a, desired patterns were drawn on a PEN substrate with a marker pen followed by Au metal deposition. Afterwards, electrode materials were deposited on the top of the Au metal followed by lifting-off the ink in organic solvents such as acetone and alcohols. Various materials can be deposited on rigid, flexible or curvilinear substrates by using this marker pen writing technique. An MSC based on PEDOT-ion gel and PANI–aqueous gel showed a volumetric energy density in the range of 5–11 mW h cm−3 and a power density in the range of 1–6 W cm−3, respectively. These values were comparable to those of thin film batteries. In particular, a PANI film with a thickness of 500 nm achieved a maximum energy density of 12 mW h cm−3. Guo et al. developed a facile and efficient approach to fabricate flexible MSCs by direct hand-writing patterning.220 As shown in Fig. 9b, the designed pattern was drawn on a Ti foil by oily mark pen writing, followed by electrochemically depositing Ni, which served as a current collector. Then nanostructured MnO2 was electrochemically deposited on the current collector to serve as an electrode material. The prepared electrodes were peeled off and transferred to substrates. The fabricated MSC exhibited a maximum specific capacitance of 26.6 mF cm−2 or 53.2 mF cm−3 at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 and a maximum energy density of 4.7 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 80 mW cm−3. Due to the excellent flexibility of the electrodes and the strong binding force between the electrodes and the current collectors, the device showed excellent electrochemical stability after 1000 bending cycles. Recently, additive-free MXene ink has been directly written on different substrates such as paper, plastic, cloth and a polypropylene membrane (Fig. 9c).221 Due to the high conductivity of Ti3C2 MXenes, the written MXene lines showed high electrical conductivity even without additional post-treatments, and can be used as current collectors and electrodes for MSCs. The directly written MXene MSCs exhibited an areal capacitance of 5 mF cm−2 and high flexibility.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustrating the process flow sequence for fabricating MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (b) Schematic illustrating the fabrication process and deposition mechanism of flexible MSCs through the hand-drawing assisted approach. Reprinted from ref. 220 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (c) Written MXene on various substrates. Reprinted from ref. 221 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic illustration and (e) optical image of the dropping process. (f) Optical image and schematic for the moment that the dipped writing brush fills with GO ink. Reprinted from ref. 222 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the paper SC by pencil drawing. Reprinted from ref. 223 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
A brush pen is usually made of a bunch of filaments in a quasi-parallel arrangement. It is an effective tool for device fabrication by painting functional inks onto substrates to form continuous patterns. During the writing process, there is a shear stress between the boundaries of the solution–brush and solution–substrate interfaces. The properties of the fabricated patterns can be tuned by changing the writing speed, the number of writing cycles and the substrate temperature. Li et al. prepared a graphene film on rough and even crumpled substrates by brush pen writing with low-viscosity graphene ink.222 The brush pen writing consists of two processes: ink loading and writing. As shown in Fig. 9d–f, due to the capillary force of the parallel brush hairs, GO ink was spontaneously absorbed and moved up into the brush hairs, serving as a reservoir for continuous writing. The GO ink was deposited onto different substrates and reduced to rGO by illumination treatment. The SC based on rGO electrodes exhibited an energy density of 0.008 mW h cm−2 and a power density of 0.09 mW cm−2 at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. The device also showed good mechanical stability with only 12% specific capacitance decrease after 1000 cycles of half-length bending. Furthermore, the as-prepared all-solid-state SCs with parallel connection reached an areal capacitance of 258.6 mF cm−2, a good energy density of 23.1 μW h cm−2 and a power density of 0.2 mW cm−2.
Unlike ink-based pens, pencils which are composed of graphite and clay enable dry deposition and overcome the rheological limitations of inks as well as the problems related to drying processes like solvent evaporation. During the direct writing process, the deposited graphite particles form a conductive trace through physical friction between the pencil tip and the substrate. Yu et al. reported the assembly of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) directly onto pencil graphite sheets to form a controllable graphite/MWCNT framework as electrodes for a high-performance paper-based SC.223 MWCNT pellets were prepared by loading MWCNTs powder into a cylindrical die and compressing it under a constant pressure. As shown in Fig. 9g, the MWCNT powder was first drawn on a filter paper, followed by pencil drawing of MWNTs to fabricate an MWCNT/graphite film, which served as both the electrodes and the current collector. A paper SC was constructed with MWCNT/graphite as the electrode sandwiching PVA/Na2SO4 gel electrolyte. The SCs exhibited a power density of up to 15.1 W cm−3 at a scan rate of 150 V s−1, which was among the highest values achieved for any paper-based SCs.

5.6 Roll-to-roll (R2R) printing

5.6.1 Principles. 
Roll-to-roll printing holds promise for high-volume and low-cost electronics fabrication by integrating individual printing (coating) units (i.e., gravure printing, offset printing and inkjet printing) with post-treatment units (i.e., UV polymerization and laser sintering).42,224 R2R printing involves a substrate in the form of a very long sheet that is wound on a roll. Therefore, the substrate material is required to possess excellent mechanical flexibility. During the printing and coating processes, the substrate material is unwound from the roll and passed through the printing or coating machine. Ideally, the substrate material should enter the processing machine at one end, while the completed flexible devices should emerge at the other end. The advantages of high resolution, thin film deposition and high throughput promise R2R printing to be an extremely powerful technique for the manufacturing of flexible/organic electronics.


5.6.2 Recent developments. 
Kim et al. reported a novel R2R based technology for patterning CVD graphene at room temperature (Fig. 10a and b).225 This novel R2R technique was free of additional annealing due to the annealing process during the thermal CVD growth of graphene on Cu foil. The as-fabricated transparent, flexible, and in-plane MSC with PVA/H2SO4 gel as the electrolyte showed an areal specific capacitance of 5.0 μF cm−2 at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1. The concept of using a composite electrode material was proposed to improve the electrochemical performance. Lee et al. reported flexible Ag nanoparticle current collectors, which were prepared by using R2R gravure printing followed by a low temperature laser annealing process.162 As shown in Fig. 10c, Ag nanoparticle ink was first deposited onto a PET substrate by the R2R process. Afterwards, laser annealing was performed at 80 °C for a few minutes to form a solvent-free Ag film with a thickness of 400 nm. Activated carbon slurry was then coated on the Ag current collector by a doctor blading technique, and PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte was added to complete the SC fabrication. Due to the excellent conductivity of the laser-sintered Ag current collector, the SC achieved an areal specific capacitance of 45 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 0.3 mA cm−2 and showed high mechanical flexibility without any severe decrease of electrochemical performance when bent up to 135°.
 Fig. 10  (a) Roll-based patterning of graphene and (b) a concept for continuously manufactured MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 225 with permission from IOPscience, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic illustration of fabricating SCs based on flexible Ag electrodes through R2R gravure offset printing. Reprinted from ref. 162 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 

5.7 Patterned coating methods (spray coating, Meyer rod coating, patterned vacuum filtration)

5.7.1 Principles. 
Since the film quality (i.e., thickness, homogeneity and surface roughness) is often not a stringent requirement for electrodes of energy storage devices, coating techniques such as Meyer rod coating, vacuum filtration and spray coating are widely used for deposition of functional inks onto various substrates owing to their simple and low-cost features. With the help of templates, patterned deposition can also be easily achieved.
Meyer rod coating has been routinely used in electrode preparation for batteries in laboratories. It also shows great promise for large scale device fabrication. For instance, it has been adopted to fabricate continuous films of CNTs.226 The CNT ink was coated onto a paper surface with a uniform and controllable thickness by using the Meyer rod coating method. Owing to the conformal coating of CNTs on the fibers of the paper, the CNT paper shows a high conductivity. Vacuum filtration is another routine method for electrode preparation.227 Normally the first step is to deposit conductive materials like CNTs or graphene on a filter membrane as current collectors and sometimes also as electrodes. Recently, patterned electrodes such as interdigitated ones have been obtained through vacuum filtration with the assistance of templates. Spray coating refers to the coating process in which functional inks are sprayed onto various substrates. It can be easily extended to large area fabrication. Moreover, patterning can be easily achieved by utilizing masks. The process involves spraying the ink through a nozzle, forming an aerosol, and finally drying. The spray coating process can be controlled by tuning the parameters such as the physical properties of the ink, the flow rate, the distance between the spray nozzle and substrate, the substrate temperature. Solvents with different vapor pressures determine the evaporation rate of spray-coated inks, which in turn affects the quality of the spray-coated films. A small nozzle diameter or a low pressure will lead to a slow flow rate, which produces scattered droplets and thus a non-uniform coating. The distance between the spray nozzle and substrate is another critical parameter determining the quality of the coated films. The relationship between the droplet diameter and the spray height is given by:228  where Dav is the average diameter of the droplets, vd the average drying rate of the droplets, ΔHvap the latent heat of vaporization (J g−1), kd the thermal conductivity of the droplet (W m−1 K−1) and ΔT the mean temperature difference between the droplet surface and the air.


5.7.2 Recent developments. 
A variety of functional materials have been spray-coated to fabricate SC electrodes, such as CNTs, graphene and MXenes. Cui et al. reported high-performance SCs by spray coating single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) serving as both the electrodes and the current collectors.176 The stable SWCNT suspension was spray-coated onto PET substrates and heated at around 100 °C. The coated SWCNT films were used as electrodes without any further treatment (Fig. 11a). The SWCNT films showed a relatively low sheet resistance of 40–50 Ω due to their decreased contact resistance. The fabricated SC exhibited a specific capacitance of ∼36 F g−1 using PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte (Fig. 11b). The power densities of the SC achieved were 23 kW kg−1 and 70 kW kg−1 by using PVA/H3PO4 gel and organic electrolyte (LiPF6:ethylene carbonate:diethylcarbonate) as electrolytes, respectively. Wu et al. reported the fabrication of ultrathin SCs by spray-coating a graphene–PEDOT:PSS hybrid functional ink onto a gold-deposited PET substrate.147 The highly stable hybrid ink was prepared by sonicating a mixture of PEDOT:PSS and graphene in N,N′-dimethylformamide solution for 1 h. The ink was then spray-coated on the gold-coated PET substrates as shown in Fig. 11c. The sprayed films exhibited a uniform and continuous feature over a large area with a high electrical conductivity of ∼1000 S cm−1. The SC consisted of two sprayed electrodes sandwiching a layer of PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte and possessed a high volumetric capacitance of 348 F cm−3, an ultrahigh rate of up to 2000 V s−1 and excellent cycling stability without capacitance loss even after 50000 cycles. Furthermore, the SC showed excellent flexibility in an arbitrary bending state. Recently, graphene-based planar SCs have drawn great attention due to their superior mechanical flexibility and great potential for miniaturization of electronics for on-chip uses. Zheng et al. reported the fabrication of an arbitrary-shaped planar sandwich-structured SC based on graphene by using spray coating.43 As shown in Fig. 11d, an exfoliated graphene (EG) ink was spray coated on a PET substrate followed by spraying nanosized graphene oxide (NGO) as a solid electrolyte. Afterwards, an EG layer was sprayed on the top of the NGO to form an EG/NGO/EG layer-structured film. PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte was drop-cast onto the above-mentioned film to complete the device fabrication process. The planar SC exhibited an outstanding volumetric capacitance of ∼280 F cm−3 and excellent flexibility with no capacitance loss in different bending states.
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of spray-coated SWCNT networks. (b) SC using spray-coated SWCNT films on PET as electrodes and a PVA/H3PO4 based polymer electrolyte as both an electrolyte and a separator. Reprinted from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (c) Fabrication scheme of a PEDOT:PSS/graphene film on a PET substrate by spray coating. Reprinted from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of an arbitrary-shaped SC by spray coating. Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic illustration of mask-assisted spray coating single and arrayed MSC devices. Reprinted from ref. 155 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a 3D interdigitated SC. Reprinted from ref. 150 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (g) Schematic illustrating fabrication of MXene-based MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Liu et al. demonstrated MSCs on paper and PET substrates by spray-coating graphene–PEDOT:PSS hybrid inks through a shadow mask with a designed geometry (Fig. 11e).155 The fabricated in-plane MSC on paper exhibited a high areal capacitance of 5.4 mF cm−2 and an excellent rate capability. The in-plane MSC based on the PET substrate offered excellent mechanical flexibility, which showed a slight capacitance loss of 1.5% after 1000 bending cycles with a bending radius of 5 mm. Li et al. demonstrated a novel 3D interdigital electrode structure to improve the performance of the SC and to simplify the fabrication process.150 As shown in Fig. 11f, a PVA/H3PO4 film was first coated on the top of a polypropylene substrate followed by spray coating a GO/Ag-NW/GO thin film on the top of the PVA/H3PO4 layer. The steps were repeated to obtain stretchable 3D interdigital electrodes. The GO/Ag-NW/GO film was chemically reduced to an rGO/Ag-NW/rGO film by treating with hydrazine vapor to serve as both electrodes and current collectors. Owing to the 3D structure of interdigital electrodes, the fabricated SCs offered a high volumetric capacitance of 77.9 F cm−3 when the thickness of the rGO layer was only 5 μm. The devices also exhibited high stability with ∼3% capacitance loss after 4000 charge/discharge cycles and only 1% capacitance loss after bending more than 1000 times at 180° because of the all-solid-state design. Jiang et al. demonstrated the fabrication of MXene-based MSCs by spray coating.229 As shown in Fig. 11g, a CO2 laser was used to cut a PET substrate into an interdigitated pattern, and Ti3C2Tx dispersion was spray coated on the top of the patterned PET substrate to form interdigitated electrodes. Afterwards, PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte was painted over the entire devices to complete the MSC fabrication. The MSC delivered an areal capacitance of 23 mF cm−2 and excellent cycling stability with 95% capacitance retention after 10000 charge/discharge cycles. Moreover, the MSC device showed an energy density of 2.8 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 225 mW cm−3.
Meyer rod coating is another simple, effective and low-cost approach for large area coating of continuous films to fabricate flexible energy storage devices. As demonstrated by Cui et al., CNTs and Ag NWs were coated on commercial paper by using the Meyer rod coating technique.226 The coated paper exhibited a high conductivity with a sheet resistance as low as 1 Ohm per square owing to the paper's porous structure and the good adhesion between the paper substrate and coated film. SCs based on the CNT coated paper exhibited an excellent electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance of 200 F g−1, a specific energy density of 30–47 W h kg−1, a specific power density of 200000 W kg−1 and high cycling stability even after 40000 cycles.
Recently, patterned vacuum filtration has emerged as a versatile method to deposit patterned materials on various substrates by using an extremely simple facility. It has been applied to pattern electrodes with a wide range of functional materials. Du et al. reported an rGO–TiO2/GO/rGO–TiO2 sandwich-structured SC by using vacuum filtration.230 As shown in Fig. 12a, a GO–TiO2/GO/GO–TiO2 sandwich structure was fabricated by using a multi-step vacuum filtration approach, followed by reducing the GO–TiO2 hybrid to rGO–TiO2 with UV light. Such a sandwiched configuration had a compact structure without binders, separators and current collectors. The as-prepared SC exhibited a high areal capacitance of 56 mF cm−2 and a high volumetric capacitance of 237 F cm−3 at 2 mV s−1. The device also showed a high volumetric energy density of 16 mW h cm−3 and excellent rate and cycling stability. Xiao et al. developed a one-step mask-assisted vacuum filtration approach to build MSCs based on patterned phosphorene and graphene nanosheets (Fig. 12b).44 Graphene and phosphorene solutions were consecutively vacuum-filtered through a polytetrafluoroethylene membrane with the assistance of a customized mask to form an interdigital structure. Afterwards, the hybrid film was transferred on a PET substrate, followed by peeling off the PET membrane. To complete the MSC device fabrication, an ionic liquid was dropcast on the top of the hybrid film. The fabricated MSC exhibited an areal capacitance of 9.8 mF cm−2, a volumetric capacitance of 37.0 F cm−3 and a high energy density of 11.6 mW h cm−3. The device also showed excellent mechanical flexibility in different bending states. Hu et al. extended this method to make interdigital MXene electrodes for MSCs through a combination of laser cutting, patterned vacuum filtration and physical sputtering.66 As shown in Fig. 12c, an interdigital circuit mask was first realized by laser cutting, followed by vacuum filtration of a colloidal solution composed of fully delaminated few-layered Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes to fabricate an electroactive layer. Consequently, a Au-based current collector was deposited on the top of the electroactive layer by magnetron sputtering. Then a MXene-based MSC on paper was realized by a final lift-off process. Due to the rough nature of the surface and the capillary effect of the cellulose fibers within the paper, the patterned electroactive layer exhibited good mechanical integrity and electrical conductivity. The fabricated all-solid-state symmetric MSC achieved a maximal areal capacitance of 27.29 mF cm−2 and volumetric energy density of 5.48–6.1 mW h cm−3.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematics of the preparation of an rGO–TiO2/GO/rGO–TiO2 hybrid structure. Reprinted from ref. 230 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 44 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic illustrating of patterning of MXenes for paper-based planar symmetric MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 66 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
As demonstrated in the previous sections, printing methods offer the potential for high-volume and low-cost manufacturing of electronics, and allow flexible, large-area and compact devices. The prospects of printed SCs thus focus on the cost-effective fabrication of flexible, lightweight, customizable and easily integrated in-plane-structured MSCs on a large scale. To achieve this goal, inkjet printing and ink-based 3D printing (mainly direct ink writing, DIW) have so far attracted the most attention due to the combination of compatibility with common materials for SCs and excellent patterning capability. The rheological requirements of these two methods represent two ends of the spectra: inkjet printing requires low viscosity Newtonian liquids, while DIW requires high viscosity non-Newtonian inks with sheer-thinning behavior. The mass loading of DIW is thus much higher than that of inkjet printing, resulting in higher capacitance/energy density, and the risk of clogging in the case of DIW is less. Furthermore, DIW can be used to fabricate 3D electrodes with hierarchical porosity, which holds promise to increase both energy and power densities simultaneously. Screen printing is traditionally used to obtain high-aspect-ratio electrodes, but the resolution is rather limited and patterning is inconvenient since a mask is required. Most desktop 3D printers are based on FDM; however, active materials have to be integrated into PLA or ABS filaments and the polymer components often need to be removed after a 3D structure is formed. Moreover, the rough surface and limited accuracy of the product obtained from FDM are often insufficient for the printing of 3D MSCs. Compared to FDM, light-based 3D printing methods such as SLA usually result in higher resolution and excellent surface finish.231 However, the amounts of materials required are much larger than those for ink-based 3D printing, often impractical for printed SCs. Resolution is of critical importance from the perspective of MSCs; most printing methods can easily achieve patterning resolution at the millimeter scale; however, only some technologies (inkjet, SLA, SLS, DIW) can easily reach the micro- or even the nano-scale. Of them, light-based 3D printing (SLS and SLA) can have higher resolution (e.g., 2PP is presently the preferred method to fabricate arbitrary 3D structures at the nano-scale); however, post-treatment processes for these methods such as removing un-solidified powders and supporting structures are very challenging at the micro-scale, whereas the post-treatments for inkjet and DIW are easily automated.

6. Applications of printed SCs
Printing enables easy fabrication of thin-film SCs and conformal lamination of SCs on various substrates; thus printed SCs can be more easily integrated with flexible/wearable electronics than conventional bulk SCs. However, as compared to batteries, the integration of SCs can be more complicated.232–234 SCs have to be coupled with a power management circuit to be useful; this is because, unlike batteries, the output voltage of SCs varies linearly with time; thus it has to be regulated into a steady voltage. Moreover, a d.c.–d.c. boost converter is often needed to amend the voltage of gadgets whose required voltage sometimes exceeds the maximum voltage of SCs.235 As a result, the design of SCs has to be based on a system level. First of all, integration poses requirements on the energy density of printed SCs, as many printed SCs, especially MSCs with a footprint area of several mm2, possess sufficient power density but insufficient energy density to power simple gadgets such as smart miniaturized sensors. To increase energy density without compromising the power performance, it is promising to print 3D SCs. Besides capacitance and power/energy density, performance indexes including the self-discharge rate and capacitance retention upon cycling are sometimes equally if not more important. Lastly, the fabrication method of SCs must be compatible with the processes of assembling the other parts of the circuit.
6.1 Multifunctional SCs
Recently, considerable attention has been paid to the development of multifunctional SCs, as they can be used as energy storage units for intelligent circuits and flexible/wearable electronics. Multifunctional electrodes or electrolytes can endow SCs with new functionalities such as electrochromism, stretchability, self-healability, editabililty and customizability.236,237 One interesting example is electrochromic SCs. The optical properties of electrochromic materials could be modulated by controlling voltages, and these materials exhibit different colors in different redox states. The color change is usually accompanied by energy storage/release in the electrochromic layer. In other words, the charge storage/release process can be reflected by the color change. Therefore, electrochromic electrode materials are useful to build SCs that exhibit the charging/discharging state through color, or to fabricate smart windows that change color upon demand. Printing methods provide feasible techniques for the low-cost mass production of electrochromic energy storage devices. Cai et al. developed a facile inkjet printing method to prepare WO3/PEDOT:PSS and CeO2/TiO2 films as the anode and cathode of an electrochromic SC, respectively. Multifunctional smart windows were successfully fabricated by assembling the inkjet-printed CeO2/TiO2 and WO3/PEDOT:PSS.51 The as-fabricated smart windows showed excellent comprehensive performance, including large optical modulation (more than 70% at 633 nm), fast switching (12.7/15.8 s), high coloration efficiency (108.9 cm2 C−1) and excellent bistability (Fig. 13a and b). Additionally, the transmittance modulation still maintained 76.7% of the original value after being tested for 200 min, demonstrating their excellent electrochemical stability. Smart glass windows usually combine energy storage with electrochromism to realize multifunctionality, showing great potential in future smart homes. For example, a polyaniline-based pseudocapacitive glass has been developed, and its color can change from green to blue. Such smart SCs show great potential as electrochromic windows, which can concurrently power electronic devices, such as mobile phones or laptops.238
 Fig. 13  (a) Images of color transition during a charging–discharging process for a smart window. (b) Transmittance spectra in the bleached and colored states. Reprinted from ref. 51 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (c) Images of stretchable MSCs based on graphene microribbon electrodes. Reprinted from ref. 244 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (d) Integrated sensors and SCs simultaneously experience deformation during the test. Reprinted from ref. 246 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic of the fabrication of a super-stretchable supercapacitor. Reprinted from ref. 249 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (f) Scheme of fabricating a single AMSC on paper. (g) Integration of AMSCs and UV sensors on one-piece paper. (h) Digital image of a practical integrated circuit with AMSCs and UV sensors. Reprinted from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (i) Fabricating a UV sensor and (j) fabricating the AMSC. (k) Schematic illustration of a foldable AMSC array with a UV sensor on a single liquid metal patterned paper substrate. Reprinted from ref. 251 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. 
SCs with superior stretchability are stringently needed to meet the rapid development of wearable/flexible electronics.239,240 To prepare stretchable SCs, one major approach is by introducing specific geometrical structures such as serpentine,241 wrinkled242 and wavy243 structures onto substrates followed by printing materials on top. However, the interface between electrode materials and stretchable substrates can induce a significant amount of stress in electrode materials, which inevitably compromises the stretchability and stability of the stretchable SCs. To overcome this issue, a special kind of suspended wavy graphene microribbon has been designed to achieve highly stretchable and stable MSCs (Fig. 13c).244 The suspended wavy structure has two advantages: (1) intrinsically stiff electrode materials can achieve stretchability and (2) the strain concentration in the electrode fingers could be decreased during the stretching/relaxing processes. The structure also ensures that the electrode fingers maintain relatively constant distance in the stretching/relaxing processes, thus increasing the stability of the stretchable SC. Benefiting from such a suspended wavy structure, the performances of the as-prepared stretchable SCs remained nearly unchanged under a strain of 100%. Besides designing special geometrical structures, developing intrinsically stretchable materials without the introduction of extra structures shows great potential in the facile and low-cost fabrication of stretchable printed SCs. Zhi et al. introduced vinyl hybrid silica nanoparticle cross-linkers onto polyacrylamide hydrogel backbones to promote dynamic cross-linking of the polymer networks, which can serve as stress buffers to dissipate energy when strain is applied; SCs based on the electrolyte could be stretched up to an impressive 1000% strain and compressed to 50% strain without significant performance variation.245 Traditional stretchable SCs fabricated by predesigning structured electrodes for device assembling still lack device-level editability and programmability. To accommodate wearable electronics with arbitrary configurations, it is highly desirable to develop editable supercapacitors that can be directly transferred into non-planar shapes, such as the human body. In this regard, Chen et al. developed editable supercapacitors with customizable shapes and stretchability using mechanically strengthened ultralong MnO2 nanowire composites as electrodes (Fig. 13d).246 The SC with a honeycomb-like structure can tolerate a high strain of 500% without degradation of electrochemical performance, and can maintain nearly 98% of the initial capacitance after 10000 stretch-and-release cycles under 400% tensile strain. This editable SC with customizable stretchability is promising to power various stretchable/wearable electronic devices.
Healability is another important function for wearable electronics.247 Accordingly, integrating the self-healing function into SCs has attracted increasing attention. The present PVA-based electrolytes exhibit neither intrinsically healable nor stretchable properties. It has been recently demonstrated that reversible noncovalent crosslinking is a viable mechanism to achieve self-healing properties.248 A printable multifunctional polyelectrolyte was fabricated based on polyacrylic acid dually crosslinked by hydrogen bonding and vinyl hybrid silica nanoparticles. The polyelectrolyte could be stretched to greater than 3700% strain with a high self-healing efficiency of ∼100%. SCs based on this polyelectrolyte also showed excellent stretchability and high self-healing efficiency (Fig. 13e).249 Besides hydrogen bonding, ionic bonding is also desirable for self-healing properties. A novel sodium polyacrylate hydrogel crosslinked by ferric ions was prepared to promote dynamic reconstruction of the integral network. These noncovalent crosslinkers could form ionic bonds to reconnect damaged surfaces when the hydrogel was cut off, providing an ultimate solution to the intrinsic self-healability problem of energy storage devices.250
In summary, the integration of novel functions such as electrochromism, stretchability, self-healability, editabililty and customizability into a printed SC greatly expands the application range of this important energy storage device, promoting its application in wearable electronics, soft robotics and artificial intelligence.
6.2 As power units for sensors
Portable and wearable sensors that can detect temperature, humidity, light intensity, hazardous gas, and pH have attracted considerable attention in the context of the IoT. However, sensors cannot work independently and require power. In recent years, integrated systems powered by SCs have aroused extensive interest. A printed MSC suggests a feasible power device that can be integrated in a sensor system because of its small size and planar structure. Guo and co-workers reported a sensor integrated with MSC arrays. The MSC was manufactured by screen printing combined with the electrodeposition process (Fig. 13f).146 Asymmetrical MSCs (AMSCs) integrated with sensors were thus successfully fabricated on one piece of paper. The whole device consisted of MSCs, sensors, interconnections, and contact pads, as shown in Fig. 13g and h. Given that MSCs usually showed a comparatively low output voltage and failed to meet the demands of practical applications, two AMSCs connected in series were designed to improve the output voltage in this regard. A ZnO-based UV sensor was used in an integrated system, which was constructed by dropping a suspension of ZnO nanowires on interdigital electrodes. Recently, there have been stringent requirements for high-performance, flexible, and foldable energy storage devices with the development of flexible electronics. Yun and co-workers reported a foldable integrated system composed of resistive UV sensors and asymmetric MSCs as shown in Fig. 13i and j.251 The graphene/ZnO nanoparticle-based UV sensor was driven by the power stored in the AMSCs. The AMSCs used MWNTs loaded with MnO2 nanoballs and V2O5 wrapped MWNTs as positive and negative electrodes, respectively. Fig. 13k schematically illustrates the as-fabricated integrated system in the folding state.
6.3 As energy storage units for ambient energy sources
Printed SCs also manifest great promise to act as bridges between the energy harvester and functional devices in an integrated circuit to constitute the so-called self-powering electronics. Ambient energy sources like solar, thermal or mechanical energy are the major renewable energy sources for flexible electronics, but they suffer from low power output and non-uniform distribution. The characteristics of SCs, such as fast charging speed, high power density and long cycle lives, make them ideal energy storage units for these ambient energy sources.
Solar energy is a major renewable and sustainable energy source. Lin and co-workers developed a scalable and printable technique to construct all-solid-state planar supercapacitors (PSCs) on flexible substrates, which were then further integrated with solar cells.22 The printing process of the PSCs is schematically shown in Fig. 14a. The as-fabricated flexible all-solid-state PSCs achieved an areal capacitance of up to 52.9 mF cm−2. Moreover, the SCs exhibited a highest power density of 39.6 W cm−3 and energy density of 11.1 mW h cm−3. Interestingly, a self-powered T-shirt was made using commercial polycrystalline silicon solar cell panels to harvest solar energy and two SCs thus-made connected in series to collect and store the harvested energy. Under room light illumination, LED arrays integrated on the T-shirt were directly powered up by the solar cell panels, while in the dark, the LED arrays could be lighted up by the energy released from the SCs (Fig. 14b). As a second example, a simple, low-cost, and scalable strategy combining printing and electrochemical deposition has been developed to fabricate a flexible integrated system. This system comprises a MnO2–PPy//V2O5–PANI based all-solid-state asymmetric MSC, a perovskite nanowire-based photoconductive photodetector and a wireless charging coil. In this work, the MSC could be fully charged by the power receiver and then could drive the photodetector to detect light. The manufacturing processes of the integrated system as well as the photograph of the real product are presented in Fig. 14c–e.49 In another example, high-performance organic solar cells (OSCs) have also been integrated with SCs to achieve self-powered electronics. The solar cells were combined with fully printed SCs to form a photo-rechargeable system. The system achieved a total energy conversion and storage efficiency (ECSE) of 1.57% under one sun condition, providing a maximum power of 4.1 mW. Under simulated indoor light, the system yielded an ECSE of 2.9% and delivered 2.8 mW power.252 Chan et al. reported a simple and effective method to deposit a highly uniform and semi-transparent MnO2 film for transparent capacitive energy storage devices; the coffee-ring effect was suppressed by adding ethanol into the MnO2 ink. For practical consideration, both flexible SC and large-area rigid SC devices were fabricated to demonstrate their potential for flexible transparent electronics or capacitive energy-storage windows. Moreover, a solar powered energy storage window which consists of a commercial solar cell and the as-fabricated semi-transparent MnO2-film-based SCs was demonstrated.253
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the printable fabrication procedure. (b) A wearable self-powered system on a T-shirt. Reprinted from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic illustrating the fabrication process of all-solid-state flexible asymmetric MSCs. (d) Circuit diagram of an integrated system. (e) Photograph of the integrated system. Reprinted from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (f) Wearable self-charging system. (g) MSC to drive a digital watch and a commercial temperature-humidity meter. Reprinted from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Another interesting energy source for wearable electronics is the mechanical energy from human motions. How to effectively harvest the mechanical energy and then convert it into electrical energy to power wearable and portable electronic devices has attracted intensive attention. In this context, a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) has been regarded as a promising technology for harvesting the ambient mechanical energy. A self-charging power unit was fabricated by integrating a TENG with a MXene-based MSC, which could serve as a harvester–storage module for flexible and wearable electronics. Symmetric MSCs were fabricated by one-step spray-coating of a Ti3C2Tx film onto PET substrates. The module mainly consists of three components, including a current collector, a rectifier and an MSC. As shown in Fig. 14f, the capacitor could be charged by the regulated current from the TENG, which produced electricity when human skin touched the device. The MSC delivered an areal specific capacitance of 23 mF cm−2 with 95% retention after 10000 charge–discharge cycles, while the TENG exhibited a maximum output power of 7.8 μW cm−2.229 To further enhance the flexibility and biocompatibility of the integrated system, elastic silicone was also selected as the substrate in this work. This work provides an interesting illustration of how to utilize and store the energy from human activities to power electronics (Fig. 14g).
7. Challenges and outlook
As shown in this review article, printing can revolutionize the manufacturing of SCs in terms of increasing design complexity and simplifying manufacturing. The complex 2D structure represented by the interdigital planar structure can improve the ion transport behaviors, thus increasing the power density of printed SCs; the hierarchically porous 3D structure can facilitate ion transport as well as increase mass loading, thus increasing energy and power densities simultaneously. However, printing also suffers from some limitations and challenges, the most important of which include accuracy, surface quality and material availability.
The accuracy limitation is inherent in the layering nature of printing processes, which brings about issues like misalignment and non-uniform solidification. Due to the same layering nature, surface quality is sometimes poor, which is fine for printed SCs on a macroscopic level; however, as the resolution of printing increases and microscopic design of structure becomes feasible, this can also become a serious problem.
Although varying greatly from method to method, the material availabilities of printing methods are generally low, except for some coating methods. Most sophisticated printing techniques require that inks exhibit certain rheological properties, which imply strict requirements on the sizes of active materials, solvents, concentration, etc. It is sometimes challenging to efficiently transfer the active materials to the desired solvent with tailored concentration, while preventing aggregation. In particular, 3D-printed SCs will benefit greatly in particular if 3D-printable inks with features of fast solidification, long-term stability and satisfactory mechanical properties can be developed based on more materials, whereas, so far, mature 3D-printable inks for SCs have been mainly based on graphene or CNT-based materials. It is often difficult to endow 3D printable inks with desired fast-drying capability and mechanical strength without compromising the conductivity or capacitive properties of the active materials. Based on the above analyses, there are several interesting research directions as discussed below.
Printing has provided an easy approach for the on-chip integration and industrial application of SCs. Therefore it shows great prospects for the realization of self-powered integrated electronic systems involving energy harvesting, energy storage, and energy consumption units that are often flexible, intelligent and low-cost. So far, most research studies have focused on the printing of electrodes. Other than electrodes, the printing of current collectors, electrolyte and encapsulation largely remains to be explored. Fully printed SCs will greatly accelerate the application of SCs in a variety of novel and interesting application scenarios. When fully printed SCs have reached maturity, different printing processes and post-treatments can be integrated into a roll-to-roll printing fashion, paving the way for the industrial production of printed SCs and their integrated functional circuits.
Presently, multi-material printing is achieved either by mixing the materials into one ink before printing or by printing/coating the second material on the top of the pre-existing layer of the starting material. With the development of inkjet printing and 3D printing, it is gradually becoming feasible to simultaneously deposit different materials on the different locations or the same spot by stacking vertically. More interestingly, the compositional variation can be tuned easily using programs. This creates exciting possibilities for printed SCs by easily making patterned multi-layers with different materials including electrodes, current collectors and electrolytes.
The resolutions of most printing technologies are in the micrometer range by far. But they are continuously improving, and some, for example, 2PP and electrodynamic jet printing, have entered into the realm of nanofabrication. This has a great significance for printed SCs since many of the energy storage processes such as ion transport and redox reactions take place on the nanoscale. Coupled with computer-assisted design, the performances of printed SCs are expected to significantly improve in the near future, at a much lower cost than as required using traditional nanofabrication methods such as photolithography.
So far, the most structural design of printed SCs is based on traditional 2D fabrication methods. There is still a lack of design strategies, methods and software that match the development of printing technologies. State-of-the-art printing technologies are providing a 3D geometry design freedom unimaginable using traditional fabrication methods. More importantly, they provide the ability to control the local microstructure and chemical composition, which makes it easy to obtain structures like hierarchical porous structures. By using printing technologies, new materials and structures can be tested quickly at a very low cost in terms of both money and materials. Thus printing technologies enable the discovery and optimization of material/device designs to grow at an exponential rate, so will the performances of printed SCs.
Printing optimization is key to producing high quality films and patterns, which leads to high-performance devices. Therefore, albeit tedious, tuning printing processes, such as ink formulation, drop delivery, wet film formation, and solidification, is an important task for researchers in the field of printed SCs. These processes are generally not well-understood and far from well-controlled. Therefore, software for printers should be more user-friendly and intelligent, and the working efficiency of researchers will be dramatically increased if the printing optimization process can be made simpler.
Printing technologies have demonstrated great promise in the fabrication of SCs as presented in this review. To further advance this research field, printing technologies, printable materials, and structure design should proceed hand-in-hand to make printing not only a sustainable, scalable and versatile manufacturing technology for SCs, but also an innovation catalysis that can revolutionize this energy storage device, which shows great potential for the next-generation of electronics.
Abbreviations

IoTInternet of Things
SCSupercapacitor
MSCMicro-supercapacitor
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate)
EDLCElectric double-layer capacitance
ASCAsymmetric supercapacitor
AMSCAsymmetric micro-supercapacitor
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
MOFMetal organic framework
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
PPyPolypyrrole
PANIPolyaniline
BPBlack phosphorus
COFCovalent organic framework
CNFCellulose nanofibril
TMDTransition metal dichalcogenide
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PAAPeracetic acid
PEOPolyethylene oxide
PMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
PCPropylene carbonate
DMFDimethyl formamide
TCETransparent conductive electrode
PIPolyimide
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PENPolyethylene naphthalate
CIJContinuous inkjet
DODDrop-on-demand
FDMFused deposition modeling
SLAStereolithography
2PPTwo-photon polymerization
SLSSelective laser sintering
R2RRoll-to-roll
CVDChemical vapor deposition
OSCOrganic solar cell
TENGTriboelectric nanogenerator

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21835003, 91833304, 21674050, 21805136, 21422402), the National Key Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, 2014CB648300, 2017YFB0404501), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20170999, BK20140060, BM2012010), the Natural Science Foundation of the Higher Education Institutions of Jiangsu Province (17KJB430021), the Program for Jiangsu Specially-Appointed Professors (RK030STP15001), the Program for Graduate Students Research and Innovation of Jiangsu Province (No. KYCX17-0749), the Six Talent Peaks Project of Jiangsu Province (TD-XCL-009), the 333 Project of Jiangsu Province (BRA2017402), the NUPT “1311 Project” and Scientific Foundation (NY218164, NY217169), the Leading Talent of Technological Innovation of National Ten-Thousands Talents Program of China, the Excellent Scientific and Technological Innovative Teams of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (TJ217038), NUPTSF (NY219020, NY219021), the Synergetic Innovation Center for Organic Electronics and Information Displays, and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).
References
M. C. LeMieux and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 585–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nathan, A. Ahnood, M. T. Cole, S. Lee, Y. Suzuki, P. Hiralal, F. Bonaccorso, T. Hasan, L. Garcia-Gancedo, A. Dyadyusha, S. Haque, P. Andrew, S. Hofmann, J. Moultrie, D. P. Chu, A. J. Flewitt, A. C. Ferrari, M. J. Kelly, J. Robertson, G. A. J. Amaratunga and W. I. Milne, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1486–1517 Search PubMed .
T. Cheng, Y. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3349–3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhang, K. H. Lee, D. H. Anjum, R. Sougrat, Q. Jiang, H. Kim and H. N. Alshareef, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0098 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Liu and T. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602790 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Pharr and G. A. Salvatore, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9614–9635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Xu, Y. Duan and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9881–9919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D.-H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
Y.-Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, W.-Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5181–5199 RSC .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160–2181 RSC .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
Z. L. Wang and W. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11700–11721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, F. Wang, M. Yu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7426–7451 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893–12941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bao and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4177–4179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shen, J. Ding and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701527 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Gao and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701736 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-H. Choi, J. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 RSC .
D. Li, W. Y. Lai, Y. Z. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Lewis and B. Y. Ahn, Nature, 2015, 518, 42–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Li and Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2971–2993 RSC .
Y. S. Rim, S. H. Bae, H. Chen, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4415–4440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Dinh, K. Armstrong, D. Guay and D. Pech, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7170–7174 RSC .
K. Fu, Y. Yao, J. Dai and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603486 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ruiz-Morales, A. Tarancón, J. Canales-Vázquez, J. Méndez-Ramos, L. Hernández-Afonso, P. Acosta-Mora, J. M. Rueda and R. Fernández-González, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 846–859 RSC .
X. Tian, J. Jin, S. Yuan, C. K. Chua, S. B. Tor and K. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700127 CrossRef .
K.-H. Choi, D. B. Ahn and S.-Y. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 220–236 CrossRef .
H. Pang, Y. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai, Z. Hu and W. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 303–312 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, J. Kang, L. W. T. Ng, X. Zhu, R. C. T. Howe, C. G. Jones, M. C. Hersam and T. Hasan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3265–3300 RSC .
C. Zhu, T. Liu, F. Qian, W. Chen, S. Chandrasekaran, B. Yao, Y. Song, E. B. Duoss, J. D. Kuntz and C. M. Spadaccini, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 107–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhakeyev, P. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Shu, H. Wang and J. Xuan, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700187 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Gao, F. Fang and Z. Fan, Nano Res., 2018, 1–23 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y.-Z. Zhang, D. Dubbink and J. E. ten Elshof, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, T. Liu, F. Qian, T. Y. Han, E. B. Duoss, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. P. Kremer, A. Seral-Ascaso, S.-H. Park, N. McEvoy, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705506 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4976–4984 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim and Y. I. Song, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zheng, X. Tang, Z.-S. Wu, Y.-Z. Tan, S. Wang, C. Sun, H.-M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2171–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, Z.-S. Wu, L. Chen, F. Zhou, S. Zheng, W. Ren, H.-M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7284–7292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, H. Jin, B. Chen, M. Lin, W. Lu, W. M. Tang, W. Xiong, L. W. Chan, S. P. Lau and J. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6800–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, Y.-G. Cho, H.-K. Song, S.-J. Chun, S.-B. Park, D.-H. Choi, S.-Y. Lee, J. Yoo and S.-Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22568–22577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Secor, T. Z. Gao, M. H. Dos Santos, S. G. Wallace, K. W. Putz and M. C. Hersam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29418–29423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hao, B. Yang, F. Wen, J. Xiang, L. Li, W. Wang, Z. Zeng, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu and Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3194–3201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yue, Z. Yang, N. Liu, W. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, C. Yang, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11249–11257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shi, R. Chen, L. Hua, L. Li, R. Chen, Y. Gong, C. Yu, J. Zhou, B. Liu, G. Sun and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703455 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, X. Cheng and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602598 CrossRef .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, C.-H. Kim, M. C. Hersam, L. F. Francis and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700285 CrossRef .
W. Raza, F. Ali, N. Raza, Y. Luo, E. E. Kwon, J. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood and K.-H. Kim, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 441–473 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sumboja, J. Liu, W. G. Zheng, Y. Zong, H. Zhang and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5919–5945 RSC .
T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, J.-P. Yi, L. Yang, J.-D. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13754–13763 RSC .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. Mohana Reddy, J. Yu and R. Vajtai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, L. He, C. Tang, P. Hu, X. Hong, M. Yan, Y. Dong, X. Tian, Q. Wei and L. Mai, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2510–2519 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, M. Shi, X. Xu, M. Yan, L. Xu, A. Minhas-Khan, C. Han, L. He and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7476–7482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, C. Lu, X. Wang, R. Y. Tay and B. K. Tay, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1528–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Beidaghi and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4501–4510 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, C. Lv and A. Watanabe, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 790–800 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 72–78 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Si, C. Yan, Y. Chen, S. Oswald, L. Han and O. G. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3218–3223 RSC .
H. Hu and T. Hua, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19639–19648 RSC .
J. Ye, H. Tan, S. Wu, K. Ni, F. Pan, J. Liu, Z. Tao, Y. Qu, H. Ji and P. Simon, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801384 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ye, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1609–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, Y. Tang, Z. Zhu, J. Wei, W. Li, H. Xia, Y. Jiang, Z. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Ge, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Loh and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805468 CrossRef PubMed .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, N. Fabre, F. Mesnilgrente, V. Conédéra and H. Durou, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1266–1269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jost, D. Stenger, C. R. Perez, J. K. McDonough, K. Lian, Y. Gogotsi and G. Dion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2698–2705 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
J. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3985–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597–1614 RSC .
Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 268–285 CrossRef CAS .
X.-C. Li, Y. Zhang, C.-Y. Wang, Y. Wan, W.-Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2959–2965 RSC .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 RSC .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703043 CrossRef .
H. O. Churchill and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 330–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, X. Jin, A. Ali, Y. Hu, R. C. Howe, K. Shehzad, Z. Yang, X. Zhu and R. I. Woodward, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 278 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5415–5418 RSC .
H.-C. Zhou, J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 673–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
H. M. El-Kaderi, J. R. Hunt, J. L. Mendoza-Cortés, A. P. Côté, R. E. Taylor, M. O'keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2007, 316, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Halder, M. Ghosh, A. Khayum, M. S. Bera, M. Addicoat, H. S. Sasmal, S. Karak, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10941–10945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
X. Cheng, J. Pan, Y. Zhao, M. Liao and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702184 CrossRef .
N. Choudhury, S. Sampath and A. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55–67 RSC .
H. Gao and K. Lian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33091–33113 RSC .

          M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, in Materials For Sustainable Energy: A Collection of Peer-Reviewed Research and Review Articles from Nature Publishing Group, World Scientific,  2011, pp. 129–137 Search PubMed .
P. Tamilarasan and S. Ramaprabhu, Energy, 2013, 51, 374–381 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ma, J. Li, K. Sun, H. Peng, J. Mu and Z. Lei, J. Power Sources, 2014, 256, 281–287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, J. Wu, L. Fan, K. Xu, X. Zhong, Y. Lin and J. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6881–6886 CrossRef CAS .
S. Senthilkumar, R. K. Selvan, J. Melo and C. Sanjeeviraja, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10541–10550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Wu, L. Fan, Y. Lin, S. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Wang, M. Huang, J. Lin and Z. Lan, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 1319–1324 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roldán, M. Granda, R. Menéndez, R. Santamaría and C. Blanco, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17606–17611 CrossRef .
L. Kong, H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Nano Res., 2017, 1–28 Search PubMed .
J.-L. Xu, Y.-H. Liu, X. Gao, Y. Sun, S. Shen, X. Cai, L. Chen and S.-D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27649–27656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, X. Yan, F. Hu, G. Gao, G. Wu and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705713 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Lu, C. Chen, M. Han, Q. Wang, H. Li, Z. Niu and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28612–28619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, J. G. Kim, Y. Kim, R. Holze, C. D. Lokhande and W. B. Kim, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 325–341 CrossRef .
H. Kim, F. Boulogne, E. Um, I. Jacobi, E. Button and H. A. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 124501 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Gupta, J. Candler, S. Palchoudhury, K. Ramasamy and B. K. Gupta, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, Z. He, J. Chen, J. Zhao, X. Feng, Y. Ma, Q. Fan, L. Wang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1079–1085 RSC .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kurra, M. K. Hota and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lamberti, F. Clerici, M. Fontana and L. Scaltrito, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600050 CrossRef .
Q. Huang, D. Wang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600783 CrossRef .
S. Khan, L. Lorenzelli and R. S. Dahiya, IEEE Sens. J., 2015, 15, 3164–3185 Search PubMed .
K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602736 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. ten Elshof and Y. Wang, Small Methods, 2018, 1800318 CrossRef .
M. Berggren, D. Nilsson and N. D. Robinson, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 3–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Simon, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2393–2396 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Li, M. M. Naiini, S. Vaziri, M. C. Lemme and M. Ostling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6524–6531 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. M. Hutchings and G. D. Martin, Inkjet Technology for Digital Fabrication,  2012, pp. 1–20 Search PubMed .
Y. Aleeva and B. Pignataro, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6436–6453 RSC .

          L. W. Ng, G. Hu, R. C. Howe, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. G. Jones and T. Hasan, Printing of Graphene and Related 2D Materials, Springer,  2018 Search PubMed .
P. J. Yunker, T. Still, M. A. Lohr and A. G. Yodh, Nature, 2011, 476, 308–311 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, M. Nogi and K. Suganuma, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2012, 22, 035016 CrossRef .
J. Stringer and B. Derby, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 29, 913–918 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Agina, A. S. Sizov, M. Y. Yablokov, O. V. Borshchev, A. A. Bessonov, M. N. Kirikova, M. J. A. Bailey and S. A. Ponomarenko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11755–11764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Matsuhisa, D. Inoue, P. Zalar, H. Jin, Y. Matsuba, A. Itoh, T. Yokota, D. Hashizume and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 834–840 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wuenscher, R. Abbel, J. Perelaer and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10232–10261 RSC .
M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny, C. F. Mihailescu, D. F. Anghel and S. Magdassi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3354–3359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Niittynen, R. Abbel, M. Mantysalo, J. Perelaer, U. S. Schubert and D. Lupo, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 556, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, X. Xiao, Y. K. Zhang, K. Li, C. Yan, X. L. Wei, L. N. Chen, H. Y. Zhen, H. Zhou, S. D. Zhang and Z. J. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4926–4934 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ko, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos, C. K. Luscombe, J. M. J. Frechet and D. Poulikakos, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 345202 CrossRef .
J. Perelaer, R. Jani, M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny, S. Magdassi and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3993–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Dumond and H. Y. Low, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2012, 30, 01080 Search PubMed .
P. Dou, Z. Liu, Z. Cao, J. Zheng, C. Wang and X. Xu, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 4274–4282 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chang, L. Li, L. Sai, W. Shi and L. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800059 CrossRef .
R. Guo, J. Chen, B. Yang, L. Liu, L. Su, B. Shen and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702394 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, Z. Liu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Muellen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3669–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. Zhang, Q. Xu, Y. Hou, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, G. G. Wallace, S. Beirne, J. M. Razal and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706592 CrossRef .
P. Sundriyal and S. Bhattacharya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38507–38521 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. Chen, X. Wang, M. Xue and G. F. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4601–4606 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, Y. Jiang, X. Tang, Y. Pan and S. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28433–28440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Down, C. W. Foster, X. B. Ji and C. E. Banks, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 81130–81141 RSC .
P. Chen, H. Chen, J. Qiu and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. S. Delekta, P. Zhang, S. Yang, M. R. Lohe, X. Zhuang, X. Feng and M. Ostling, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8249–8256 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, R. Dong, X. Feng and K. Muellen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2217–2222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Ujjain, P. Ahuja, R. Bhatia and P. Attri, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 83, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, I. Hennig, D. Freyberg, A. J. Strudwick, M. G. Schwab, T. Weitz and K. C.-P. Cha, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, L. Liu, S. Yang, J. Liu, Q. Tian, W. Yao, Q. Xue, M. Li and W. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 361, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Zhang, T. M. Higgins, S. H. Park, S. E. O'Brien, D. H. Long, J. Coleman and V. Nicolosi, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 495–505 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, M. Kim and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10213–10227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, J. I. Wong and H. Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2014, 3, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, S. Hong, J. Kwon, Y. D. Suh, J. Lee, H. Moon, J. Yeo and S. H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8339–8345 RSC .
Y. Xu, M. G. Schwab, A. J. Strudwick, I. Hennig, X. Feng, Z. Wu and K. Muellen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1035–1040 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, N. Liu, C. Yang, W. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, C. Yang and Y. Gao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 85799–85805 RSC .
H. Tang, C. Yang, Z. Lin, Q. Yang, F. Kang and C. P. Wong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9133–9139 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Qiao and Z. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32317–32323 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, T. Kawase, R. H. Friend, T. Shimoda, M. Inbasekaran, W. Wu and E. P. Woo, Science, 2000, 290, 2123–2126 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Bartolotta, J. N. Coleman and C. Backes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6136–6166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jang, D. Kim and J. Moon, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2629–2635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shin, J. Sung and M. H. Lee, Microelectron. Reliab., 2011, 51, 797–804 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. de Gans, E. Kazancioglu, W. Meyer and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 292–296 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Hsiao, S. D. Hoath, G. D. Martin and I. M. Hutchings, J. Imaging Sci. Technol., 2009, 53, 50304 CrossRef .
L. Hu, H. Wu and Y. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183502 CrossRef .
W. Liu, C. Lu, H. Li, R. Y. Tay, L. Sun, X. Wang, W. L. Chow, X. Wang, B. K. Tay, Z. Chen, J. Yan, K. Feng, G. Lui, R. Tjandra, L. Rasenthiram, G. Chiu and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3754–3764 RSC .
L. T. Le, M. H. Ervin, H. Qiu, B. E. Fuchs and W. Y. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 355–358 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme and M. Ostling, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3985–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, E. B. Secor, K.-S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Liu, T. Z. Gao, J.-W. T. Seo, Y. Zhao and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600909 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Gao, F. Fang and Z. Fan, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3065–3087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, V. Mishukova and M. Östling, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 123901 CrossRef .
F. Garnier, R. Hajlaoui, A. Yassar and P. Srivastava, Science, 1994, 265, 1684–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, M. Yu, X. Chen, S. Nie, W.-Y. Lai, W. Su, Z. Cui and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705955 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jost, C. R. Perez, J. K. McDonough, V. Presser, M. Heon, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5060–5067 RSC .
S. Shi, C. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Liu and F. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2598 CrossRef .
A. M. Abdelkader, N. Karim, C. Valles, S. Afroj, K. S. Novoselov and S. G. Yeates, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 035016 CrossRef .
J. C. Ruizmorales, A. Tarancón, J. Canalesvázquez, J. Méndezramos, L. Hernándezafonso, P. Acostamora, J. R. M. Rueda and R. Fernándezgonzález, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 846–859 RSC .
F. Zhang, M. Wei, V. V. Viswanathan, B. Swart, Y. Shao, G. Wu and C. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 418–431 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, M. C. Leu, J. Mazumder and A. Donmez, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., 2015, 137, 014001 CrossRef .
R. L. Truby and J. A. Lewis, Nature, 2016, 540, 371 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2740–2755 RSC .
P. E. Petrochenko, J. Torgersen, P. Gruber, L. A. Hicks, J. Zheng, G. Kumar, R. J. Narayan, P. L. Goering, R. Liska and J. Stampfl, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 739–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. You, J. Li, W. Zhu, C. Yu, D. Mei and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 2187–2197 RSC .
K. Tian, J. Bae, S. E. Bakarich, C. Yang, R. D. Gately, G. M. Spinks, M. in het Panhuis, Z. Suo and J. J. Vlassak, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604827 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Roberson, C. M. Shemelya, E. MacDonald and R. Wicker, Rapid Prototyping J., 2015, 21, 137–143 CrossRef .
M. P. Browne, F. Novotný, Z. k. Sofer and M. Pumera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40294–40301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kennedy, J. Christ, K. Evans, B. Arey, L. Sweet, M. Warner, R. Erikson and C. Barrett, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5458–5466 RSC .
C. B. Highley, C. B. Rodell and J. A. Burdick, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5075–5079 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mao, J. He, X. Li, B. Zhang, Q. Lei, Y. Liu and D. Li, Micromachines, 2017, 8, 113 CrossRef .
D. Therriault, R. F. Shepherd, S. R. White and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 395–399 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, F. Zhang, S. P. Medarametla, H. Li, C. Zhou and D. Lin, Small, 2016, 12, 1702–1708 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, X. Wu, X. Guo, B. Kong, M. Zhang, X. Qian, S. Mi and W. Sun, Sensors, 2017, 17, 1166 CrossRef .
A. Azhari, E. Marzbanrad, D. Yilman, E. Toyserkani and M. A. Pope, Carbon, 2017, 119, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wei, F. Zhang, W. Wang, P. Alexandridis, C. Zhou and G. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 134–147 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lewis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, J. Ye, W. Chen, J. Biener, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and C. Zhu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800053 CrossRef .
M. Areir, Y. Xu, R. Zhang, D. Harrison, J. Fyson and E. Pei, J. Manuf. Process, 2017, 25, 351–356 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, C. Wang, R. Gorkin, S. Beirne, K. Shu and G. G. Wallace, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 20–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Meitl, Z.-T. Zhu, V. Kumar, K. J. Lee, X. Feng, Y. Y. Huang, I. Adesida, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 33 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Loo, R. L. Willett, K. W. Baldwin and J. A. Rogers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7654–7655 CrossRef CAS .
A. Carlson, A. M. Bowen, Y. Huang, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5284–5318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, W. Zhou, J. Chen, G. Feng, H. Li, Y. Hu, W. Ma, H. Dong, J. Li and S. Xie, Small, 2013, 9, 518–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Kim, S.-I. Na, J. Jo, G. Tae and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4410–4415 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Han, B. Kim, J. Li and M. Meyyappan, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 50, 249–253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1704–1707 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang and J. Liu, AIP Adv., 2013, 3, 112117 CrossRef .
A. J. Bandodkar, W. Jia, J. Ramirez and J. Wang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1215–1224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Mirica, J. M. Azzarelli, J. G. Weis, J. M. Schnorr and T. M. Swager, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E3265–E3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. Liu, C. Ouyang, W. H. Wee, X. Cui, T. J. Lu, B. Pingguan-Murphy, F. Li and F. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 165–180 CrossRef CAS .
K. Guo, Y. Wan, N. Yu, L. Hu, T. Zhai and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 144–151 CrossRef .
E. Quain, T. S. Mathis, N. Kurra, K. Maleski, K. L. Van Aken, M. Alhabeb, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 1800256 Search PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Shao, Q. Shi, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, R. B. Kaner and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 429–437 Search PubMed .
Y. Yu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4719–4725 RSC .
M. Bariya, Z. Shahpar, H. Park, J. Sun, Y. Jung, W. Gao, H. Y. Y. Nyein, T. S. Liaw, L.-C. Tai, Q. P. Ngo, M. Chao, Y. Zhao, M. Hettick, G. Cho and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6978–6987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Kim, B. Jang, K. Jo, D. Kim, J. Lee, K.-S. Kim, S.-M. Lee, H.-J. Lee, S. M. Han and J.-H. Kim, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 024003 CrossRef .
L. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. La Mantia, L.-F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, H. Huang, C. Xiao, S. Zheng, X. Shi, J. Qin, Q. Fu, X. Bao, X. Feng, K. Muellen and Z.-S. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8198–8205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. Yu, D. Vak, J. Jo, S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, M.-K. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1838–1846 CAS .
Q. Jiang, C. Wu, Z. Wang, A. C. Wang, J.-H. He, Z. L. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, C. Zheng, W. Lv, Y. Deng, Z. Pan, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700004 CrossRef .
H. Wu, W. Liu, R. He, Z. Wu, Q. Jiang, X. Song, Y. Chen, L. Cheng and S. Wu, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 968–972 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pu, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702817 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Bondade, Y. Zhang, B. Wei, T. Gu, H. Chen and D. B. Ma, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2016, 63, 2850–2861 Search PubMed .
R. Chai and Y. Zhang, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2015, 30, 6720–6730 Search PubMed .
Y. Ayoubi, M. Elsied, A. Oukaour, H. Chaoui, Y. Slamani and H. Gualous, Electr. Power Syst. Res., 2016, 134, 186–196 CrossRef .
S. Pan, J. Ren, X. Fang and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501867 CrossRef .
Q. Xue, J. Sun, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang and C. Zhi, Small, 2017, 13, 1701827 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yang, P. Sun, Z. Chai, L. Huang, X. Cai, S. Tan, J. Song and W. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 53, 11935–11939 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, T. Lv, H. Sun, G. Qian, N. Li, Y. Yao and T. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 536 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Lei, D. Qi, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, G. Xiao, J. Wu, W. Zhang, F. Huo and X. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801683 CrossRef .
D. Kim, G. Shin, Y. J. Kang, W. Kim and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7975–7982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, J. Kang, J.-B. Choi, J. Suhr, J. Yu, F. Li, J.-H. Byun, B.-S. Kim and T.-W. Chou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9437–9445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Chen, M. Zhang, J. D. Hong and G. Shi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600022 CrossRef .
D. Qi, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, W. R. Leow, B. Zhu, H. Yang, J. Yu, W. Wang, H. Wang, S. Yin and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5559–5566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, F. Shi, X. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, H. Hou, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9141–9145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, Y. Luo, Y. Tang, J. Wei, Z. Zhu, X. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704531 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Luo, P. Wan, H. Yang, S. A. A. Shah and X. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606339 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, H. Li, Z. Wang, Q. Xue and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8344–8364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Liu, J. Wang, M. Hu, F. Mo, G. Liang and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9810–9813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, Y. Lim, H. Lee, G. Lee, H. Park, S. Y. Hong, S. W. Jin, Y. H. Lee, S.-S. Lee and J. S. Ha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700135 CrossRef .
B. P. Lechêne, M. Cowell, A. Pierre, J. W. Evans, P. K. Wright and A. C. Arias, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 631–640 CrossRef .
H. Jin, J. Qian, L. Zhou, J. Yuan, H. Huang, Y. Wang, W. M. Tang and H. L. Chan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9088–9096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Yi-Zhou Zhang
	Dr Yi-Zhou Zhang received his bachelor's degree from Nanjing University, after which he obtained PhD from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Wei Huang and Prof. Wen-Yong Lai. His research interests mainly focus on flexible electronics, especially on printed flexible devices including supercapacitors, strain sensors, and integrated functional systems.

Yang Wang
	Yang Wang obtained his master's degree from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications under Professor Wei Huang's supervision in 2015. He is currently focusing on inkjet printing two-dimensional materials for flexible energy storage devices with focus on supercapacitors.

Tao Cheng
	Dr Tao Cheng received his PhD degree from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications (NJUPT) in 2018 and is now a lecturer at NJUPT. His current research expertise focuses on flexible/stretchable electronics and printed electronics.

Lan-Qian Yao
	Lan-Qian Yao is now a PhD candidate under Prof. Wen-Yong Lai's supervision in the Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His current research mainly focuses on using different printing methods to fabricate flexible energy storage devices especially paper-based supercapacitors.

Xiangchun Li
	Dr Xiang-Chun Li received his PhD degree in Organic Electronics from Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications. He is currently a postdoc at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His research focuses on the development of organic optoelectronic materials for applications in organic solar cells, supercapacitors, and energy storage and conversion.

Wen-Yong Lai
	Dr Wen-Yong Lai is a full professor at Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications. He received his PhD from Fudan University in 2007. He then joined the Key Laboratory for Organic Electronics & Information Displays and Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications. His research mainly focuses on the design, synthesis, and application of organic & polymer optoelectronic materials for organic/flexible electronics and in the exploration of novel materials and processes for printed electronics.

Wei Huang
	Dr Wei Huang received his PhD from Peking University in 1992. In 2001, he was appointed as a chair professor at Fudan University, where he founded and chaired the Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM). After that he became the vice president of Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, and then the president of Nanjing Tech University. Now he is the deputy president of Northwestern Polytechnical University. He was elected as Academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2011. His research interests include organic/plastic materials and devices, nanomaterials and nanotechnology, etc. He has published more than 1000 refereed journal publications with SCI citations over 47000 and an h-index of 99.

 	Fig. 1  The main printing methods to fabricate SCs. Inkjet printing.38 Reprinted from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 3D printing.39 Reprinted from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Transfer printing.40 Reprinted from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. Pen-based direct ink writing.41 Reprinted from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. Roll-to-roll printing.42 Reprinted from ref. 42 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2010. Patterned coating represented by spray coating.43 Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. Patterned vacuum filtration.44 Reprinted from ref. 44 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic comparison of sandwich-type SCs (top) and planar SCs (bottom). (b) Diagrams showing the ion movement involved in the operation of ‘sandwiched’ (top) and ‘in-plane’ (bottom) structured SCs respectively. Reprinted from ref. 56 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011.	 


Inkjet printing	Low viscosity Newtonian liquid 2–25	30–50	No
Screen printing	50–5 × 103	30–50	Yes
3D printing	Stereolithography (SLA)	High viscosity paste containing photosensitive resin	10–25	No
Selective laser sintering (SLS)	Powder	100	No
Extrusion-based direct writing	High viscosity non-Newtonian paste	1	No
Fused deposition modeling	Filament	30	No
Gravure printing	102–103	10–50	Yes
Flexographic printing	103–2103	45–100	Yes
Pen-based direct ink writing	Wide-range	>1000	Yes
Spray coating	Low viscosity liquid	


	No
Meyer rod coating	High viscosity slurry	


	Yes
Patterned vacuum filtration	Wide range	


	Yes

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Droplet drying process with excess surfactant (left) and optimal surfactant (right) concentrations. Reprinted from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Effect of the droplet spacing on the line morphology of printed black phosphorus on Si/SiO2 at 60 °C; scale bar, 100 μm. (c) Effect of the droplet spacing and printing temperature on the roughness along printed line edges. Reprinted from ref. 87 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 		 
γsv = γsi + γivcosθ

 	Fig. 4  (a) Wetting of a droplet on a substrate. (b) The approach to enhance the silver ink adhesion which consists of four major steps: (1) plasma treatment of the substrate; (2) silanization of the treated polymer surface; (3) screen printing of silver ink; and (4) curing of the printed ink. Reprinted from ref. 135 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

Polyaniline (PANI)	Symmetric, planar	1.0 M H2SO4	A specific capacitance of over 420 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1	3D printing	
144

Graphene	Symmetric, planar	3 M KOH	A capacitance of 4.76 F g−1 at a current density of 0.4 A g−1, an energy density of 0.43 W h kg−1 at a power density of 76.36 W kg−1	3D printing	
39

V2O5/GO//G-VNQDs/GO	Asymmetric, planar	PVA/LiCl	A potential window of 1.6 V, an areal capacitance of 207.9 mF cm−2, an areal energy density of 73.9 μW h cm−2	3D printing	
21

Graphene	Symmetric, planar	PVA/H3PO4	37.5 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1, an energy density of 5.20 μW h cm−2 at a power density of 3.2 mW cm−2	Gravure printing	
145

MnO2/Ni//PPy/Ni	Asymmetric, planar	1 M Na2SO4	Areal capacitances of 25.8 mF cm−2 at 0.305 mA cm−2, 8.05 μW h cm−2 at 0.305 mA cm−2, and 7.32 mW cm−2 at 9.76 mA cm−2	Screen printing	
146

Ni/MnO2	Symmetric, planar	CH3COOLi/PVA	An areal capacitance of up to 52.9 mF cm−2, the highest specific power density of 39.6 W cm−3 at an energy density of 11.1 mW h cm−3	Inkjet printing	
22

Graphene/PEDOT:PSS	Symmetric, planar	PVA/H2SO4	A volumetric capacitance of 348 F cm−3, an energy density of 12 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 4386 W cm−3	Spray coating	
147

Graphene-oxide (GO)/polyaniline (PANI)	Symmetric, planar	PVA–H3PO4	An areal capacitance of 153.6 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1, an energy density of 4.83 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 25.3 W cm−3	Direct ink writing	
148

K2Co3(P2O7)2·2H2O//graphene	Asymmetric, planar	PVA/KOH	A specific capacitance of 6.0 F cm−3 at 10 mA cm−3, an energy density of 0.96 mW h cm−3	Inkjet printing	
33

GO−MnO2//AC	Asymmetric, sandwiched	PVA/LiCl	1.586 F cm−2 (1023 F g−1) at 4 mA cm−2, an energy density of 22 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 0.099 W cm−3	Inkjet printing	
149

Graphene	Symmetric, planar	[EMIM][TFSI]/PS-PMMA-PS	An areal specific capacitance of 268 μF cm−2	Inkjet printing	
52

GO/Ag-NWs/GO	Symmetric, planar	PVA–H3PO4	A specific capacitance of 121 F g−1	Spray coating	
150

SWCNT	Symmetric, planar	PVA/LiCl	A volume capacitance of 15.34 F cm−3, an energy density of 1.2 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 11.8 W cm−3	Direct ink writing	
151

Graphite	Symmetric, planar	PVA/H2SO4	141.8 mF g−1 at 4.33 mA g−1, an energy density of 0.125 mW h mg−1 at a power density of 0.03 W mg−1	Direct ink writing	
152

SWCNT/RuO2	Symmetric, sandwiched	PVA/H3PO4	A specific capacitance of 138 F g−1, a power density of 96 kW kg−1, and an energy density of 18.8 W h kg−1	Inkjet printing	
153

Activated-carbon/CNTs/Ag NW	Symmetric, planar	[BMIM][BF4]/ETPTA	A working voltage window of up to 2.0 V, 100 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2	Inkjet printing	
23

Electrochemically exfoliated graphene	Symmetric, planar	PSSH	An areal capacitance of ∼0.7 mF cm−2, an energy density of over 1 mW h cm−3 at a power density of around 0.1 W cm−3	Inkjet printing	
154

Exfoliated graphene (EG)/PEDOT:PSS	Symmetric, planar	PVA/H2SO4	An areal capacitance of 5.4 mF cm−2	Inkjet printing	
155

Functionalized MWCNT (f-MWCNT)	Symmetric, sandwiched	[EMIM][BF4]/[PVdF-HFP]	A specific capacitance of 235 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 in a wide operating potential range of 3 V, an energy density of 16.2 W h kg−1 and a power density 45 kW kg−1 at 1 A g−1	Inkjet printing	
156

Graphene/polyaniline (NGP/PANI)	Symmetric, sandwiched	1 M H2SO4	A specific capacitance of 82 F g−1, a power density of 124 kW kg−1 and an energy density of 2.4 W h kg−1 at 20 mV s−1	Inkjet printing	
157

Ti3C2Tx	Symmetric, planar	PVA/H2SO4	Areal and volumetric capacitances of 27 mF cm−2 and 357 F cm−3, specifically at 20 mV s−1, an energy density of 18 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 15 W cm−3	Spray coating	
84

FeOOH/MnO2	Symmetric, planar	PVA/LiCl	350.2 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, an energy density of 5 × 10−4 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 0.04 mW cm−2	Screen printing	
158

RuO2/PEDOT:PSS	Symmetric, sandwiched	PVA/H2SO4	A volumetric capacitance of 190 F cm−3, a power density of 147 μW cm−2 at an energy density of 0.053 μW h cm−2	Spray coating	
159

RuO2/PEDOT:PSS/graphene	Symmetric, planar	1 M H2SO4	A specific capacitance of 820 F g−1	Screen printing	
160

CoO/CNT	Symmetric, planar	PVA/KOH	17.4 F cm−3 and an energy density of 3.48 mW h cm−3 at 0.25 A cm−3	Screen printing	
161

Activated carbon	Symmetric, sandwiched	PVA/H3PO4	An areal capacitance of 45 mF cm−2 at 0.3 mA cm−2	Roll-to-Roll printing	
162

Graphene/polyaniline	Symmetric, sandwiched	1 M H2SO4	A specific capacitance of 269 F g−1, a power density of 454 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 9.3 W h kg−1	Screen printing	
163

MWCNTs–MnO2//MWCNTs–MoO3	Asymmetric, sandwiched	4 M LiCl	An operating potential window of 1.7 V, an energy density of 11.04 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 614.6 mW cm−3	Screen printing	
164

Crumpled reduced GO	Symmetric, sandwiched	6 M KOH	366 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, energy densities of 22.9 and 8.1 W h kg−1 at power densities of 119.2 and 15.4 kW kg−1, respectively	Spray coating	
165

Graphene	Symmetric, sandwiched	H2SO4/PVA	A volume capacitance of ∼280 F cm−3, an energy density of ∼2.9 mW h cm−3 at a power density of ∼2.3 W cm−3	Spray coating	
43

MnO2/carbon-microspheres	Symmetric, sandwiched	PVA/H3PO4	An areal capacitance of 19.23 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2	Screen printing and transfer printing	
166

MXene (Ti3C2Tx, Ti3CNTx)	Symmetric, planar	H2SO4/PVA	An areal capacitance of 61 mF cm−2 at 25 μA cm−2	Transfer printing	
40

Phosphorene and graphene	Symmetric, planar	BMIMPF6	An areal capacitance of 9.8 mF cm−2, a volumetric capacitance of 37.0 F cm−3, an energy density of 11.6 mW h cm−3	Transfer printing	
44

Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), polyaniline, and metal oxide (MnO2)	Symmetric, planar	PVA/H2SO4	Energy densities of 5–11 mW h cm−3 at power densities of 1–6 W cm−3	Direct ink writing	
41


 		 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A photo of an inkjet-printed SC on paper. Reprinted from ref. 173 with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright 2010. (b) The structure of the printed SC. (c–e) Photographs of the aesthetic SCs with various exquisite patterns. Reprinted from ref. 55 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (f) Schematic illustrations of the fabrication process of paper-based all-solid-state flexible MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 174 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (g) Photograph of a printed graphene-based MSC. Reprinted from ref. 177 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013. (h) Digital photo of a completely printed MSC. (i) Digital photo of inkjet-printed graphene patterns. Reprinted from ref. 178 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (j) Schematic illustration of an all-inkjet-printed MSC on paper. Reprinted from ref. 23 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (k) Digital photo of an inkjet-printed MSC array on a Kapton substrate. Reprinted from ref. 154 with permission from with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of assembled SCs by screen printing. Reprinted from ref. 75 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Illustration of the screen printing method and screen-printed patterns on different substrates. Reprinted from ref. 164 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (c) Procedure for screen-printing RuO2/PEDOT:PSS/graphene electrodes. Reprinted from ref. 160 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (d) Illustration of a screen-printed graphene-based solid-state flexible SC. Reprinted from ref. 186 with permission from IOPscience, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D printing an asymmetric MSC. Reprinted from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (b) Schematic illustration of a 3D direct ink writing fabrication process. Reprinted from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of 3D hierarchical PPy-graphene aerogel composites. Reprinted from ref. 206 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic illustration of the 3D printing process of the PANI hydrogel. Reprinted from ref. 144 with permission from Springer, copyright 2016. (e) Schematic presentation of the binder-jetting technique. Reprinted from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a solid state SC, including 3D printing interdigitated Ti electrodes, PPy electropolymerization and device assembly. Reprinted from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of transfer printing SWCNT films on a PET substrate. Reprinted from ref. 212 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013. (b–e) Fabrication of all-MXene-based MSCs by stamping printing. Reprinted from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (f) Schematic illustration of gravure printed planar SCs with the dimensions. (g and h) Optical images with different resolutions of gravure printed graphene@PVA–H3PO4 microelectrodes. Reprinted from ref. 145 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustrating the process flow sequence for fabricating MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (b) Schematic illustrating the fabrication process and deposition mechanism of flexible MSCs through the hand-drawing assisted approach. Reprinted from ref. 220 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (c) Written MXene on various substrates. Reprinted from ref. 221 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic illustration and (e) optical image of the dropping process. (f) Optical image and schematic for the moment that the dipped writing brush fills with GO ink. Reprinted from ref. 222 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the paper SC by pencil drawing. Reprinted from ref. 223 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Roll-based patterning of graphene and (b) a concept for continuously manufactured MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 225 with permission from IOPscience, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic illustration of fabricating SCs based on flexible Ag electrodes through R2R gravure offset printing. Reprinted from ref. 162 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of spray-coated SWCNT networks. (b) SC using spray-coated SWCNT films on PET as electrodes and a PVA/H3PO4 based polymer electrolyte as both an electrolyte and a separator. Reprinted from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (c) Fabrication scheme of a PEDOT:PSS/graphene film on a PET substrate by spray coating. Reprinted from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of an arbitrary-shaped SC by spray coating. Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic illustration of mask-assisted spray coating single and arrayed MSC devices. Reprinted from ref. 155 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a 3D interdigitated SC. Reprinted from ref. 150 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (g) Schematic illustrating fabrication of MXene-based MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematics of the preparation of an rGO–TiO2/GO/rGO–TiO2 hybrid structure. Reprinted from ref. 230 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 44 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic illustrating of patterning of MXenes for paper-based planar symmetric MSCs. Reprinted from ref. 66 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Images of color transition during a charging–discharging process for a smart window. (b) Transmittance spectra in the bleached and colored states. Reprinted from ref. 51 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (c) Images of stretchable MSCs based on graphene microribbon electrodes. Reprinted from ref. 244 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. (d) Integrated sensors and SCs simultaneously experience deformation during the test. Reprinted from ref. 246 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic of the fabrication of a super-stretchable supercapacitor. Reprinted from ref. 249 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (f) Scheme of fabricating a single AMSC on paper. (g) Integration of AMSCs and UV sensors on one-piece paper. (h) Digital image of a practical integrated circuit with AMSCs and UV sensors. Reprinted from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (i) Fabricating a UV sensor and (j) fabricating the AMSC. (k) Schematic illustration of a foldable AMSC array with a UV sensor on a single liquid metal patterned paper substrate. Reprinted from ref. 251 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the printable fabrication procedure. (b) A wearable self-powered system on a T-shirt. Reprinted from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic illustrating the fabrication process of all-solid-state flexible asymmetric MSCs. (d) Circuit diagram of an integrated system. (e) Photograph of the integrated system. Reprinted from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (f) Wearable self-charging system. (g) MSC to drive a digital watch and a commercial temperature-humidity meter. Reprinted from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 
IoT	Internet of Things
SC	Supercapacitor
MSC	Micro-supercapacitor
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate)
EDLC	Electric double-layer capacitance
ASC	Asymmetric supercapacitor
AMSC	Asymmetric micro-supercapacitor
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
MOF	Metal organic framework
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
PPy	Polypyrrole
PANI	Polyaniline
BP	Black phosphorus
COF	Covalent organic framework
CNF	Cellulose nanofibril
TMD	Transition metal dichalcogenide
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PAA	Peracetic acid
PEO	Polyethylene oxide
PMMA	Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PC	Propylene carbonate
DMF	Dimethyl formamide
TCE	Transparent conductive electrode
PI	Polyimide
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PEN	Polyethylene naphthalate
CIJ	Continuous inkjet
DOD	Drop-on-demand
FDM	Fused deposition modeling
SLA	Stereolithography
2PP	Two-photon polymerization
SLS	Selective laser sintering
R2R	Roll-to-roll
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
OSC	Organic solar cell
TENG	Triboelectric nanogenerator
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
