Towards an electricity-powered world  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01249E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01249E
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3193-3222Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsTowards an electricity-powered world

        
          
            Nicola 
            Armaroli
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Vincenzo 
            Balzani
          
          
        
      *b
aMolecular Photoscience Group, Istituto per la Sintesi Organica e la Fotoreattività, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 40129, Bologna, Italy. E-mail: nicola.armaroli@cnr.it;   Tel: (+39) 051-639-9820
bDipartimento di Chimica “G. Ciamician”. Università di Bologna, 40126, Bologna, Italy. E-mail: vincenzo.balzani@unibo.it;   Tel: (+39) 051-2099543
Received 
      2nd March 2011
    , Accepted 21st April 2011First published on 20th July 2011AbstractThe purpose of this review is examination of the present scenario of electricity production and investigation of whether an electricity powered world is possible, indicating which primary energy forms should be preferably utilized. Currently, most of the primary energy used by mankind, including that employed to generate electricity, comes from fossil fuels, which need to be phased out because they bring about severe damage to climate, environment, and human health and, additionally, their stock will be largely depleted during the present century. All the energy technologies poised to replace those based on fossil fuels, namely nuclear and renewables (wind, hydro, concentrated solar power, photovoltaics, biomass, geothermal, tidal, wave) essentially produce electricity, and this suggests that we will progressively shift to an electricity-based economy over the course of the 21st century. The economic, technical, ethical and social issues entangled with nuclear technologies and the unexpectedly fast expansion of renewable energies (particularly wind and solar) point to an increasingly important role of the latter in electricity generation. The present one way utility-to-customer energy system, designed over one century ago, will need substantial reshaping to enable the build up of a smart grid capable of dealing with variable renewable supply and fluctuating end-user demand by exchange of information between customer and utility. To accomplish this result, effort in research and development of storage devices and facilities on the small (e.g., batteries, capacitors) and large (e.g., pumped hydro, compressed air storage, electrolytic hydrogen) scale is needed. In the medium and long term, the expansion of electricity production will also likely lead to progressive replacement of internal combustion engines with electric motors in the automotive sector, accompanied by a shift from individual to mass transportation systems. We have still a long way out of the fossil fuel era, but this challenge can be won only if carbon-free electricity largely replaces the direct combustion of irreplaceable and climate-altering fossil fuel resources.Nicola ArmaroliNicola Armaroli received his PhD in chemical sciences in 1994 from the University of Bologna. After post-doctoral work in the U.S. and Italy, in 1997 he joined the Italian National Research Council (CNR), where he became research director in 2007. His activity concerns the photochemistry and photophysics of molecules and materials targeted at solar energy conversion and lighting devices. He has published three books and over 150 papers and is a consultant on the issues of energy and natural resources. Since 2010 he has served as Chairman of the Working Group on Chemistry and Energy of EUCheMS.Vincenzo BalzaniVincenzo Balzani is Emeritus Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna, Italy. He is a fellow of several academies, including the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. His scientific activity is documented by five monographs and more than 550 papers in the fields of photochemistry, supramolecular chemistry, molecular machines, and solar energy conversion. He believes that scientists have great responsability that comes from knowledge, so that it is their duty to find solution for mankind's problems, like the current energy and climate crisis.

Broader context
Phasing out fossil fuels is the grandest scientific, technological, economic and social challenge of the 21st century. Both nuclear energy and most renewable energies (wind, hydro, photovoltaics, geothermal) are utilized to produce electricity, hence we are progressively moving towards an electricity-powered world. This is a most desirable goal given the versatility of electricity and the high efficiency of electric motors. Nuclear energy has been considered an attractive option to generate large amounts of baseload power, but after 60 years of experience, its economic and environmental sustainability has not been demonstrated yet. On the other hand, an ample choice of established electric technologies that exploit renewable energy flows is now available. Some of them are already or will soon be economically competitive towards conventional counterparts, but their extensive implementation will require tremendous efforts in many areas of science and technology accompanied by strong political support and economic investments. This huge challenge represents an extraordinary opportunity to drive the mature industrial systems of the Western economies towards truly innovative sustainable energy concepts by promoting education, science, and technology at all levels. Energy research is the perfect playground where chemistry can play the role of central science by establishing new concepts, materials, and processes, to be applied also in electricity production, storage, distribution, and efficient utilization.

1. The energy issue
Electricity is the most flexible and convenient form of energy. It can be converted without any losses to useful heat, even to generate temperatures higher than combustion of any fossil fuel; it can be turned with high efficiency into mechanical energy; it is used to create light; it can be easily adjusted with very high precision and is clean and silent at the point of consumption. Today electricity is used to generate any kind of artificial lighting, to heat and cool buildings, to run our information-communication technology, to propel trains and buses, to supply factory machinery with reliable and inexpensive energy, to create entirely new industries, and to perform a variety of other useful achievements that make our life cleaner, easier, more secure and enjoyable. In the future, electricity is also expected to power millions of personal vehicles.1 There are indeed good reasons to believe that we are going towards an electricity-based economy.
Electricity, however, is not a primary form of energy. Currently, fossil fuels cover more than 80% of the energy used by mankind2 and most of the electricity is produced starting from this primary energy form (Fig. 1). Harnessing coal, oil and gas, the energy resources contained in the storage of our spaceship Earth, have been very convenient, but now we know that this entails severe consequences.3–6
 Fig. 1  World total electricity generation by source in 2008 (data from IEA, ref. 2). Other includes geothermal, solar, wind, combustible renewables, waste, and heat. 
Firstly, fossil fuels are a nonrenewable resource that will be exhausted. We have consumed 1 trillion barrels of oil in the last 140 years, and currently the world's growing thirst for energy amounts to over 1000 barrels of oil, 100000 cubic meters of natural gas and 221 tonnes of coal a second.7 Clearly, we cannot go down this way for a long time. Secondly, the use of fossil fuels causes severe damages to human health and environment.6 It has been pointed out8 that the energy challenge we face relates to “the tragedy of the commons”:9 we treat fossil fuels as a resource that anyone anywhere can extract and use in any fashion, and Earth's atmosphere and oceans as a dump for their waste products, including more than 30 Gt per year of CO2. A third critical aspect concerning fossil fuels is that their uneven allocation, coupled with the unequal distribution of wealth, leads to strong disparities in the quality of life among the Earth's passengers.3
If we wish to phase out fossil fuels, we have presently four main options (i) renewable flows provided directly (UV-Vis-NIR radiation) or indirectly (wind, hydro, wave, biomass) by sunshine; (ii) heat coming from the Earth's interior (geothermal energy); (iii) nuclear energy stored in fissile elements available on the Earth's crust; (iv) movement of large masses of water under gravitational forces in some limited coastal locations.These four primary energy resources can be harnessed to mainly produce electricity, through a variety of technologies that human ingenuity has already established or are under development. In this review, we discuss the possibility that they bring us into an environmentally sustainable electricity-based economy in the course of the present century. The global energy issue is discussed in more detail elsewhere.3
2. Historical notes and basic concepts
In the long history of electric energy10,11 at least a few breakthroughs must be highlighted. In 1831 Michael Faraday discovered electromagnetic induction, which allows conversion of mechanical energy into electric energy and vice versa. A probably imaginary tale says that when the prime minister Gladstone asked what practical worth this invention could be, Faraday answer was: “One day, sir, you may tax it”. In 1879 Thomas Edison patented the incandescent carbon filament lamp. Edison is remembered primarily as an inventor, but he was also an effective entrepreneur who made inventions useful for end users. In 1882 he opened the world's first steam-powered electricity generating station to provide electricity for street lighting by direct-current (DC) transmission. In 1888 Nikola Tesla invented the first practicable alternating-current (AC) motor and, with it, the polyphase power transmission system later implemented by George Westinghouse. In a few years electricity changed the way of life of citizens in the affluent countries, providing artificial lights capable of extending the length of the day. The conversion of industrial power from steam to electricity and the adoption of an increasing variety of household energy converters proceeded rapidly in the following years.
The role of electricity in shaping the modern world relies on the widest man-made entity ever developed, the electric grid.12 The distribution of electric energy through the grid sustains the way of life of the developed countries, which today is totally electricity dependent. When for any reasons the grid fails, all activities are paralyzed. Electricity makes the difference between poor and rich countries; in fact, more than one-third of the people in the developing world, some 1.6 billion people, do not have access to this basic energy service.13,14
For an electricity generator, the concepts of electric power (sometimes termed capacity) and electricity generated are important to distinguish for many discussions. Electric power is the rate at which electric energy is transferred, usually measured in watt (W). Electricity generated is the amount of electric energy actually produced by a generator and is usually measured in watt-hour (Wh). Switching between measurements of power and electricity generated is easily done by multiplying the power by the number of hours it is used. Therefore, a 500 MW generator that is used at its peak power for six months (4380 h) would generate 2.19 GWh of electricity. The power needed by some common electric devices is shown in Table 1, where an estimation of the electric energy consumption per day is also indicated.
Table 1 Energy power of some common electric devices and estimated energy consumption per day for efficient appliances available on the market




Device
Power
Time per day (h)
Energy per day





a Maximum power.
b Assuming 80 km driving.
c Assuming 100 km driving.
d At full power.





Quartz watch
1 μW
24
0.000024 Wh


Clock radio
1 W
24
24 Wh


Compact Fluorescent lamp
21 W
5
105 Wh


Laptop computer
20 W
3
60 Wh


Freezer
90 W
24
2 300 Wh


Incandescent lamp
100 W
5
500 Wh


Desktop computer
150 W
2
300 Wh


TV set
160 W
4
480 Wh


Air conditioning
600 W
3
1 800 Wh


Dishwasher
800 W
0.5
400 Wh


Microwave oven
1 400 W
0.5
700 Wh


Electric oven
3 000 W
0.5
1 500 Wh


Electric cars:


G-Wiz
13.1 kWa
2
9.6 kWhb


Tesla Roadster
185 kWa
2
17.4 kWhc


Electric trains:


ETR 200 (Italy)
1 MWd
—
—


Frecciarossa (Italy)
8 MWd
—
—


Shinkansen (Japan)
13.2 MWd
—
—




It is interesting to compare the power consumed by commonly used appliances and that generated by human power (about 80 W).3 When we look at a football game on TV, we mobilize a power of 160 W for 1.5 h. If we could not rely on an electricity distribution system, we would need two humans working for the whole time of the football match to produce the electricity needed, and for operating a dishwasher (800 W) ten humans would be required (Fig. 2). An electric oven (3.0 kW) corresponds to the work of about 40 people. Not even a Roman Emperor had so many human slaves available as the “electric energy slaves” we can rely upon simply by pushing a button. Currently, we are producing them mainly by burning fossil fuels. The power of a big coal electric plant (800 MW) corresponds to that of about 10 million people. The 100 GW of electric power installed in Italy corresponds to the power of 1.3 billion humans so that each Italian citizen can be served, potentially, by as many as 55 “electric energy slaves” at service 24/7, all year long. In the US, each citizen is potentially served by no less than 135 people.
 Fig. 2  The electric power needed to operate a TV set corresponds to that produced by two persons. For operating a dishwasher, the power of 10 people would be needed. 
3. Electricity demand and supply
Electricity represents about 40% of the primary energy consumption and less than 20% of the final energy demand (Fig. 3).2 Electricity production was rising steadily at an average rate of 3% per year from 1990 to 2007, but only by 1.3% in 2008 and decreased in 2009 due to the economic crisis.
 Fig. 3  Share of the world total final energy consumption in 2008 (data from IEA 2010). Other includes geothermal, solar, wind, heat, etc. 
Electricity can be generated by using a variety of primary energy sources and technologies (see e.g.Table 2) and more than 60% of the production is obtained by burning fossil fuels (Fig. 1). The amount of electricity generated and the per capita consumption of the top ten energy consuming countries are collected in Table 3.
Table 2 Installed capacity of the largest electric facilities in the world in 2010 belonging to the main current technologies




The largest wind turbine
Emden, Germany
7 MW


The largest concentrated solar power plant
Guadix, Spain
50 MW


The largest photovoltaic power plant
Sarnia, Ontario, Canada
97 MW


The largest wind farm
Oregon, US
450 MW


The largest group of geothermal power plants
California, US
725 MW


The largest nuclear reactor
Areva EPR
1.65 GW


The largest oil-fired electricity station
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
3 GW


The largest coal-fired electricity station
Kendal, South Africa
4.1 GW


The largest nuclear power plant
Kashiwazaki-Kariwa, Japan
8.2 GW


The largest hydropower plant
Three Gorges Dam, China
20.3 GW




Table 3 Population, primary energy and electricity consumption, and CO2 emissions from the top 10 world energy consumers. For comparison, data for the whole world and Ethiopia are also reported




Country
Populationa
Primary energy [from ref. 7]
Electric energy consumptionb
CO2 emissionc


Total (Mtoe)
Per capita (toe/pers)
Total (TWh)
Per capita (kWh/pers)
Total (Mton)
Per capita (ton/pers)





a in 2010, according to US Census Bureau, http://www.census.gov.
b in 2008, latest data from US Energy Information Administration in July 2011, http://www.eia.doe.gov.
c in 2009, latest data from US Energy Information Administration in July 2011, http://www.eia.doe.gov.





U.S.
309 045 000
2 286
7.11
3 906
12 724
5 425
17.7


China
1 330 415 000
2 432
1.64
3 017
2 279
7 711
5.8


Russia
148 357 000
691
4.54
858
6 749
1 572
11.2


India
1 172 707 000
524
0.41
601
519
1 602
1.4


Japan
126 810 000
501
3.65
964
6 883
1 098
8.6


Canada
33 760 000
317
9.53
549
16 409
541
16.2


Germany
81 651 000
320
3.52
544
6 613
766
9.3


France
64 768 000
252
3.76
461
7 155
397
6.2


South Korea
48 636 000
255
4.90
402
8 288
528
10.9


Brazil
201 029 000
254
1.14
420
2 113
420
2.1


Ethiopia
88 013 000
2.8
0.03
3.4
39
6.9
0.1


World
6 850 685 000
12 002
1.65
17 445
2 574
30 398.4
4.5




The demand for electricity fluctuates widely from summer to winter, from working day to holiday (Fig. 4), and throughout the day from hour to hour (Fig. 5) and even minute to minute.15 The seasonal fluctuations differ from country to country. In Northern Europe, the peak demand is in winter for lighting and heating. In warmer regions, e.g. Southern Europe and Southern US, the peak demand is in summer for air conditioning. The fluctuating demand represents a big problem for power utilities because the grid cannot store electricity. Usually, this problem is solved by using different types of generators, taking into account the cost as well as other parameters. In principle, fluctuation like the one shown in Fig. 5 would be best met by dividing the conventional supply into four areas: (i) base load (usually about 30–50% load of installed capacity), intermediate load (20–30%), peaking load (10–20%), and reserve load (the remaining 10–20%). Fig. 6 shows an example, taken from Italy,15 of the number of hours for which a specific power is required during a year. In the case shown, an appropriate base load would have been about 20 GW, the intermediate load 20–25 GW, and the peak load 10–15 GW. Since the installed power in Italy in 2010 was 105 GW, an ample reserve (more than 50 GW) was available.
 Fig. 4  Electricity demand fluctuation in Italy along the days of a week (at 11 am throughout the 2nd week of March 2010). 
 Fig. 5  Electricity demand fluctuation in Italy along the hours of a day (3rd Wednesday of August and December 2009). 
 Fig. 6  Hourly load demand on the Italian grid in 2009. Base load, intermediate load and peak load are schematically indicated. 
The base-load is usually supplied by large plants that are best kept running for long periods and have the lowest generating cost. Intermediate demand is usually met by older, smaller plants with higher generating costs, while peak demand is provided by reserve gas- and oil-fired plants, or by hydroelectric power. Superimposed on the daily demand curve are short-term peaks associated with the personal habits of consumers or by external inputs. The response time to meet sudden demands should be of the order of seconds to minutes.
Interestingly, although renewable energy sources are often variable, it has been estimated that, in California, combining renewables as a single commodity could provide 99.8% carbon free electricity based on a least-cost optimization.16
The production cost of electricity depends on the cost of the primary energy source used, the efficiency of its transformation into electricity, and the costs of power plant, operation, maintenance, and transmission to the end-users. The real cost, however, is very difficult to evaluate because it also depends on several other parameters, including life-cycle of the overall system, explicit and implicit subsidies,17 premium associated with political and social issues, potential environmental tax regimes, and calculation of externalities (e.g., global warming). In some cases, the social and environmental externalities associated with our present energy economy are even larger than the market prices of the dispatched electricity.18
4. Electricity from fossil fuels
Electricity can be obtained by burning any type of fossil fuel. A traditional power plant consists of a furnace that burns the fossil fuel to boil water and generate steam. The dynamic pressure generated by expanding steam turns the blades of a turbine that rotates a generator, a machine capable of converting mechanical energy into AC electric energy by creating relative motion between a magnetic field and a conductor. The steam that leaves the final (low pressure) stage of a turbine is condensed in cooling towers or low temperature heat sinks. Where economically and environmentally possible, electric companies prefer to use cooling water from a river, a lake or the ocean, instead of cooling towers. This type of cooling can reduce building expenses and may have lower energy costs for pumping cooling water through the plant's heat exchangers. However, the wasted heat can cause the temperature of the water to rise detectably, which may be hazardous for fish and aquatic organisms.
Thermal power plants based on fossil fuels emit huge amounts of carbon dioxide, a major contributor to global warming.6,19 Research on capture and storage of carbon dioxide are underway, but this option is difficult for a variety of technical, environmental and economic reasons.3,20–23 Of course, fossil fuels are limited resources, so that they will not be used indefinitely to produce electricity. As happens in the case of any limited energy resource, when the energy required to extract a fossil fuel becomes greater than the energy obtained by subsequently using it, then it will no longer be produced, no matter how high its price or how much of it remains in the ground.
4.1 Coal-fired power plants
Coal is the most abundant and dirtiest of fossil fuels.6 There is much debate about how much coal remains,24 but it is clear that the biggest problem with coal in the next decades is not availability, but environmental sustainability.3,6 The estimated coal reserves amount to about 800 Gt7 and the coal consumption rate is 5.9 Gt/year.25 Simple comparison between these two numbers would lead to the conclusion that there is coal for about 130 years at the current level of consumption. Actually, with an average growth rate of about 3% per year, which is that recorded over the last decade, we will have coal for a period not much longer than that of oil and gas (about half a century).
About two-thirds of the coal mined in the world is used in electricity generation.26 Coal-fired power stations are often large in size (1–4 GW) and generally operate with an average efficiency of 30–40%, or up to 45% in the case of modern supercritical units.27 Just to give a visual impression, a standard 1 GW plant consumes 100-trainloads of coal a day. The raw feed coal from the storage area is first crushed into small pieces, pulverized and injected into the combustion chamber. Burners can be designed to accept any type of coal. Since the feedstock is cheap, coal-fired power plants are usually employed to cover base load electricity demand (Fig. 5), with a production of about 750 g of CO2 per kWh and an enormous amount of ash.6 Currently, each year 131 million tonnes of ash is generated by the US 460 coal-fired power plants; if loaded onto railcars, this ash would fill a train stretching from New York City to Los Angeles three-and-a-half times over.28
The greatest producer of electricity from coal-fired plants is the US, followed by China and India. In Europe, Germany is the largest user of coal for this purpose. In China, electricity is obtained mainly by carbon-fired power plants, ca. 80%,29 and, for the period 2004–2015, China has planned to build about eight-hundred 1 GW coal-fired plants, an average of about one plant every 5 days.30 As large as this number may appear, it should be recalled that it corresponds to one plant per 1.7 million inhabitants, and it should also be noted that in the same period the US, where the energy consumption per person is more than four times higher than in China (Table 3), has planned the construction of almost 50 coal power stations. The coal-burning process generates greenhouse gas not only at the power stations but also at coal-mining sites where CH4 and CO2 are released directly from the coal seams as they are exposed, and subsequently from discarded shales and mudstones.
Coal is not a unique commodity, but exists in many different grades and qualities.3,31 In general, the older the coal the higher the carbon content and the more valuable the resource is. The calorific value may vary by a factor of almost two. The quality and usefulness of any coal depends not only on the organic remains from which it solidifies, but also on the inorganic fraction added by water seepage from the surrounding mineral deposits. This second fraction can be up to 30% of the coal by weight, and contains sulfur, arsenic, cadmium, mercury and radioactive material, all potentially harmful in any waste stream.6
The amount of pollution can be reduced by various measures. Most of the inorganic sulfur can be removed by washing the coal prior to combustion. The remaining inorganic sulfur together with the organic sulfur locked up in the coal itself can be removed from the combustion gases by passing them over a chemical scrubbing agent such as lime or sodium. NOx formation, coming from both fuel-bond and atmospheric nitrogen, can be reduced by lowering the combustion temperature, restricting the air intake, recirculating the flue gases and injecting water. Fine particulates can be reduced by using electrostatic precipitators, fabric filters, or other techniques.
Without considering externalities (e.g., global warming and environmental pollution),6 the cost of electricity produced by coal-fired power plants is typically lower than that for any other source of electric power.
4.2 Oil and gas power plants
Burning oil produced about 25% of world's electricity in 1973 and 5.5% in 2008, whereas in the same period of time, burning gas has increased from 12.1 to 21.3%.2 The progressive shift from oil- to gas-fired power plants is due to the discovery and exploitation of major gas fields, the cleanliness of natural gas as a fuel, the construction of pipelines and liquid natural gas (LNG) carriers to convey the feedstock to the market, and the development of more efficient, simple and combined-cycle, gas turbines.3 Natural gas electricity is expected to further increase as a consequence of the growing exploitation of unconventional shale gas, particularly in the US.32
A gas turbine, also called a combustion turbine, is a rotary engine that extracts energy from a flow of combustion gas.33 Simple cycle gas turbines in the power industry require smaller capital investment than either coal or nuclear power plants and can be scaled to generate small or large amounts of power. The actual construction process can take as little as several weeks to a few months, as compared to years for base load power plants. Because of their ability to be turned on and off within minutes, gas turbines are often employed as peaking power plants (Section 3). A typical large simple-cycle gas turbine may produce 100 to 400 MW of power and usually has 35–40% efficiency, with the remaining part of the energy being lost as heat. Most of that thermal energy, as well as the heat wasted by industrial plants used to produce silicon, steel, tyres etc., could be used to generate electricity.34 In a combined-cycle gas turbines (CCGT) plant, a gas turbine generator produces electricity and the waste heat is used to make steam to generate additional electricity via a steam turbine. For large scale power generation a typical set would be a 400 MW gas turbine coupled to a 200 MW steam turbine giving 600 MW. If the plant produces only electricity, efficiencies close to 60% can in principle be achieved.
At first sight, a simple- or combined-cycle power station looks quite inefficient because most of the chemical energy of the fuel is eventually “wasted” as heat that, rather than dissipating it in cooling towers, rivers, or sea water could be delivered to heat buildings. In such co-generation or combined heat and power (CHP) systems steam circulates in well-lagged pipes and the customers may be metered for the heat received as well as for the electricity.35 CHP power stations have indeed expanded in the last decades in Europe, particularly in Denmark, Finland, and the Netherlands. Gas turbines for CHP applications are usually much smaller that the huge turbines used in main electricity-generation stations. They typically have outputs in the range 25–300 kW and are very simple machines. The relatively small size is also a major advantage in that it allows microturbines to be situated conveniently at the source of electricity and, even more important, the heat demand. Therefore microturbines are becoming an interesting solution for power and heat co-generation not only for town districts, but also for hospitals, hotels, industries, farms, and even off-shore oil rigs.35,36
The CHP technology is beneficial, but it is worthwhile to point out its limits. For CHP plants, it is common practice to lump together the efficiency of electricity production and heat production into a single total efficiency. For example, if the efficiency of electricity generation is 15% and the efficiency of heat generation is 60%, the CHP power plant is said to be 75% efficient, and this number is favourably compared with the less than 60% electric efficiency of an electricity only gas power station. This comparison, however, is misleading since electricity is more valuable than heat. Furthermore, while it is assumed that using the waste heat does not affect the efficiency of electricity production, this in fact cannot be true for thermodynamic reasons because the efficiency of heat engines is related to the temperature difference between furnace and cold sink, and the latter is warmer when heat has to be delivered to buildings.
The most efficient combined-cycle natural gas power plants produce about 360 g of CO2 per kWh, less than 50% of coal plants.36 It should be considered, however, that natural gas leaks out during the (often very long) journey from the well to the power station and methane has a nearly eight times as big global warming effect as CO2.3
5. Hydroelectric power plants
While the use of falling water to provide energy has a long history in many parts of the world, the first hydroelectric power plant began operation in 1882 on the Fox River in Appleton, Wisconsin, USA. The generator was driven through a system of gears and belts by a water wheel that operated under a 3-m fall of water. It had an output of 12 kW, which was sufficient to run about 250 electric lights.36 Today, hydroelectricity contributes to around 2% to the world's total energy supply and to around 16% to the global electricity demand.2
Presently, hydroelectric power is by far the world's largest renewable source of electricity, with about 850 GW of installed capacity and an annual production of over 3 PWh.37In terms of electricity produced, it is second only to fossil fuel and generates about 10 times more power than geothermal, solar and wind power combined (Fig. 1).38 An additional 120 GW of capacity is under development, mainly in China. Hydropower is exploited in at least 160 countries and in some of them (Brazil, Canada, Norway and Venezuela) it accounts for the majority of internal electricity production. Brazil, Canada, China, Russia and the United States currently produce more than half of the world's hydropower, mainly via mountain lakes or reservoirs. In principle, hydropower could also be obtained allowing ocean water to flow through turbines into areas below sea level like the Dead Sea, the Qattara Depression in Egypt, and the Dead Valley in California, from where water would be removed by evaporation.39
Hydroelectricity generation is based on turbines that convert the energy of falling water into mechanical power with an efficiency of about 90%. There exist two major schemes for hydroelectricity production:
(i) Use of water from mountain lakes or reservoirs, held back by dams (Fig. 7); these systems have large generating capacities, in the range from ca. 5 MW to several GW, and are operated by electricity utilities that feed electricity into the grid.
 Fig. 7  Schematic section of a hydroelectric power plant with water reservoir. 
(ii) Exploitation of the flow of rivers or streams, normally without involving reservoirs and dams; these small schemes, that produce from a few kW up to a several MW, may be privately owned and operated providing power to villages, isolated communities, or industrial processes using large amounts of electricity.
There are about 800000 dams operating worldwide; 45000 are higher than 15 m (large dams). Major dams are over 150–250 m in height. It is estimated that almost half of the world's rivers contain at least a large hydroelectric dam. Dams often directly serve the needs of large-scale industrial electricity users such as aluminum smelters and paper mills, which purposely locate their plants near hydropower facilities. Hydroelectricity is also used to fill the need for peak power, which is the supply that must come on line quickly to meet rapid consumption increase (Fig. 4), as well as to compensate for the fluctuating energy supply generated by renewable resources (section 9).40 The inherent advantage of using hydroelectric power for peak-power application is that turbines are ready to generate power at any time. Variations in use according to need and season mean that dams produce, on average, about half of their rated power capacity.
An important advantage of hydropower is that turbines can be designed to run either forwards or backwards, either generating power from falling water or using power to pump water up to a high-level reservoir. When demand rises, the upper reservoir can be drained back through the turbine into the lower reservoir. The overall efficiency of this process can be in excess of 70% and maximum generation can be reached in only a few seconds. This method is used to store excess electricity produced overnight by coal or nuclear power stations, which run best when operated steadily, as well as variable solar and wind electricity (section 10).One advantage of hydroelectric plants is their ability to run in spinning-reserve mode, thereby enabling it to be used to provide peaking or gap-filling power. The fact that hydroelectric systems require no fuel means that they also require non fuel-extracting infrastructures and no fuel transport. The reservoirs created by dams can provide water for irrigation, a way to control floods and make amenities for recreational use.
Apart from all these advantages, the disadvantages and limitations should also be considered. Hydroelectricity is a mature technology, with little room for improvement. There is considerable opportunity for new capacity in Africa and Asia, but in Europe 75% of what is deemed feasible has already been exploited and in several regions, e.g. the Middle East, there is no hydroelectric resource available. Recent concerns have cooled interest in starting dam construction in most industrialized nations because these hydroelectric projects suffer for hidden costs that make them both economically and ecologically questionable. Reservoirs take up a lot of space: as much as 600 km long and 2 km wide in the case of the Three Gorges dam in China. Today the overall area under man-made lakes is as large as two Italys. In 2000, the World Commission on Dams41 pointed out that although dams have made an important and significant contribution to human development, “in too many cases an unacceptable and often unnecessary price has been paid to secure those benefits, especially in social and environmental terms, by people displaced, by communities downstream, by taxpayers and by the natural environment.” Dams have physically displaced 40–80 million people worldwide, and most of these people have never regained their former livelihoods. In many cases, dams have led to the disappearance of several valuable sacred, archaeological and cultural sites and to a significant and irreversible loss of species and ecosystems. Many dammed rivers, such as the Colorado River in the US or, for several months a year, the Yellow River in China, no longer flow to the sea. Water exiting a turbine usually contains very little suspended sediment, which can lead to scouring of riverbeds and loss of river banks.
Dam failures are generally catastrophic; a recent preliminary estimate has concluded that in the period 1907–2007 there were more than 180000 direct deaths caused by accidents at energy infrastructures, 94% of which are attributable to hydropower facilities.42 Hydroelectric generation can be vulnerable to major changes in the climate, including variation of rainfall, ground and surface water levels, and glacial melt. Recent research on climate change and global warming has shown that decaying plant matter from flooded areas releases methane and carbon dioxide, and in some cases these emissions can be of the same order of magnitude to those avoided by not burning fossil fuels.43 Growing awareness of the economic and environmental issues that hydroelectric dams face has not only slowed construction of new dams in industrial nations but has also led to a drop in financial investing for hydropower projects in the developing world. In China, where hydroelectric power supplies about 15% of the electric energy, the construction of 13 dams on the Nu river, one of only two Chinese rivers that have not yet been dammed, has recently been halted.
In spite of its drawbacks, large hydroelectric power generation will continue to substantially expand.38 In the meantime, the amount of hydroelectricity produced by water flowing down rivers will also increase.
6. Nuclear power plants
In a nuclear power plant, the heat of a nuclear reaction produces high-pressure steam which is used to turn the turbine of an electric generator. On June 26, 1954, the USSR's Obninsk Plant became the world's first nuclear power plant connected to an electricity grid. It provided around 5 MW of electric power, enough to power 2000 homes.44 The first nuclear power station of the western world, Calder Hall in England, was opened in October 1956 with an initial capacity of 50 MW. In 1957, the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) were founded.
Installed nuclear capacity initially increased relatively quickly, rising from less than 1 GW in 1960 to 100 GW in the late 1970s (Fig. 8). From 1970 to 1975 the growth averaged 30% per year, but just as the nuclear industry was achieving dominance as a major source of electricity generation, it stopped growing and more than two-thirds of all nuclear plants ordered after January 1970 were eventually cancelled.45A much slower increase led to a capacity of 330 GW in the 1990 and then to 376 GW in 2010.46 In the last few years, while the installed capacity increased slightly through technical improvements at existing plants (“uprating”), nuclear electricity generation decreased (2%) from 2658 TWh in 2006 to 2608 TWh in 2007, with a particularly large decrease (6%) in the European Union. A further decrease of 7 TWh occurred from 2007 to 2008, and of 43 TWh from 2008 to 2009.47 In 2009 (Fig. 1), nuclear power plants generated about 13.5% of the world's commercial electricity (down from 15% in 2006, 16% in 2005 and 18% in 1993). Since roughly 16% of the world's end use comes from electric energy, nuclear energy contributes now to less than 2.5% of the world's end-use demand. Note that the three times higher figure concerning nuclear energy contribution to world primary energy consumption refers to the heat production by nuclear power plant, without taking into account that the thermal-to-electric energy conversion efficiency is only 33%.
 Fig. 8  Historic deployment of nuclear energy. Bars: number of reactors; line: operating capacity. 
Nuclear power plants have relatively low fuel cost and can run at full capacity almost constantly, delivering up to 90% of their capacity. In fact, they cannot be switched on/off or operated at lower power without losing efficiency. This makes them well suited for providing base-load power to national grids. In 2010, France produced 74.1% of its electricity from nuclear energy, followed by Slovakia (51.8%), Belgium (51.1%), and Ukraine (48.1%). This share is 19.6% for US and 1.8% for China and India.47
The stop of the development of nuclear energy in the last two decades is due to various reasons, including rising economic costs,48 energy conservation policies, limited uranium supply, the accidents at Three Mile Island (1979, US) and Chernobyl (1986, Ukraine, USSR), environmentalist opposition, risks related to nuclear weapon proliferation and terrorism,49 technical and economic difficulties encountered in dismantling old plants and, most importantly, the unsolved problem of highly radioactive waste that has to be conserved in safe depositories for ten or hundred thousand years.3 Nevertheless, in the past decade, there has been renewed interest in nuclear power plants. The main factors driving this trend are (i) a perceived need to increase generation from low-carbon sources to combat climate change and (ii) the hope of achieving energy independence from unstable oil and gas producers. Other reasons for constructing new nuclear power plants are the increasing number of plants in North America and Western Europe which are close to the retirement age, and the development of a new generation of nuclear reactors, so-called Generation III+ designs, claimed to be more reliable and less expensive.50But while nuclear supporters talk about a nuclear renaissance phase,51 nuclear opponents believe that nuclear energy is already phasing out.52
Over the last years, several international assessments of the possible future of nuclear power in the world have been adjusted to optimistic prospects for 2030.53–57 According to the World Nuclear Industry Status Report,50 however, a detailed examination of the situation shows that nuclear power will hardly increase in the next two decades. Without any significant new build for years, the average age of the world's operating nuclear power plants has been increasing steadily, standing at 27 years in 2011.58 Nuclear utilities envision reactor lifetimes of 40 or even 60 years, but experience shows that the average age of the 125 units that have already been shutdown is 22 years.58 Furthermore, calculation of how many plants would be shut down year by year allows to estimate that, to maintain the current operating capacity, in addition to the 65 units under construction,58 42 reactors (generating 15,900 MW) would have to be planned, completed and started up by 2015, one every month and a half, and an additional 192 units (170,000 MW) over the subsequent decade, or one every 19 days.50 The achievement of the 2015 target is simply impossible given the existing constraints on the fabrication of key reactor components. As a result, the number of reactors operating will decline over the years to come—even if the installed capacity level could be maintained—unless lifetime extension beyond 40 years becomes standard. Were life extensions to become standard, many other questions regarding safety, maintenance costs and other issues would need to be more carefully addressed.
The accident which occurred in Japan at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant on 11 March 2011, caused by a 9.0 magnitude earthquake followed by tsunami, has shown once again that safety is an important and unsolved issue for nuclear energy. The accident involved four reactors, three operating and one temporarily defueled. It was initially classified at INES 3 (INES is International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale) but then upgraded up the maximum value of 7, like Chernobyl. As usually happens with nuclear accidents, there was poor communication with the public and improvised efforts to remedy. Areas of northern Japan 30–50 km from the plant showed radioactive cesium levels high enough to cause concern. Food grown in the area was banned from sale. Worldwide measurements of iodine-131 and caesium-137 indicated that the releases from Fukushima were of the same order of magnitude as the releases of those isotopes from the Chernobyl disaster. Plutonium contamination has been detected in the soil at two sites in the plant. Following this disaster, several European countries have accelerated the procedure to shut down the oldest operating facilities, whist others are reconsidering nuclear expansion plans.
In conclusion, a nuclear renaissance is very unlikely because nuclear energy is characterized by substantial economic uncertainties, unsolved technical problems, risky features, safety problems and political difficulties3 (see also section 14.2).
7. Contribution by other traditional energy sources
The Earth's surface is heated from beneath by a minuscule endogen heating flux of about 90 mW m−2.59 Its distribution over the planet is far from being homogeneous, since there are hot spots, signalled by the presence of geysers and fumaroles, in which the Earth's heat is spectacularly released with high intensity. The average temperature gradient within a few km near the Earth's surface is about 30 °C km−1. Values may range from about 10 °C km−1 in ancient “cold” continental crust to over 100 °C km−1 in areas of active volcanism.
Conversion of the energy contained in hot rock into electricity is accomplished by using water as a heat transport medium to the Earth's surface (Fig. 9), where vapour is produced and then injected into turbine generators, likewise any other conventional electricity technology.60 The steam temperature in geothermal power plants is smaller as compared to that of conventional fossil fuel facilities, therefore the electricity conversion efficiency (10–17%) is smaller due to the Carnot limit. Nonetheless they deliver electricity at a price comparable to that of coal-fired power plants.61 Geothermal power capacity reached over 10.7 GW in 2009.62 The US is now developing more than 120 projects, representing at least 5 GW, and 3 GW are in the pipeline in other countries. In 2009, the world geothermal electricity production exceeded 67 TWh,62 an amount higher than the annual electricity consumption of Austria and at least ten times smaller than the technical potential.63
 Fig. 9  Scheme of the hydrothermal system that enables the exploitation of geothermal heat for energy production. The fluid reservoir is placed between two impermeable rock layers but, at the same time, somehow connected with the Earth's water cycle; the upper impermeable layer is relatively thin. Intrusion of hot molten rock (magma) at relatively shallow depth induces convective circulation of groundwater inside the reservoir permeable layer. 
Geothermal energy is obtainable not only through the naturally occurring (and rather rare) hydrothermal systems exploited up to now, but also “artificially”.60 This approach can be implemented through enhanced geothermal systems (EGS), which aim at exploiting fields characterized by hot dry rocks (HDR) with low permeability that do not allow spontaneous circulation of water or vapour. In such systems, permeability is stimulated artificially by hydraulic fracturing, high-rate water injection, and/or chemical treatment.60,64 A report published by MIT states that EGS have the potential to supply about 10% of the US base-load electricity by 2050.64
Minor amounts of electric energy have been traditionally produced by burning biomass in the form of wood, crop residues, waste incineration, as well as by exploiting tidal and wave energy.3 The generation of electric power from new renewable energy, which is growing fast but currently supplies only a small fraction of the electric energy, will be discussed in section 9.
8. Traditional electric grid
8.1 A vital, complex and fragile system
The electric grid, through which all modern economies are powered,12 was dubbed the greatest invention of the twentieth century by the American Academy of Engineering in 2000, surpassing in importance even the automobile, the airplane and the computer. The grid can deliver energy to the user more cheaply, and in far more versatile form, than coal or other forms of fuel hauled to each user's locations and consumed on site. Therefore, electrification has since long become the embodiment of political programs all around the world.
A complete grid system comprises three components: generation, transmission, and distribution of electric power. Electricity generation can be obtained as described in the previous sections. Transmission can take place by alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC). High voltage AC transmission (230–765 kV in North America, 100–400 kV in Europe) by aluminum lines is the method most commonly used. Transmission networks are linked to distribution networks which supply electric energy to the end-users at a voltage that can vary according to the type of use.
The grid is a complex and fragile system since each of its components must operate regularly and, in case, must be protected (which means disconnected) to avoid damage. Even a minor local problem can trigger a cascade of events that may become uncontrollable. Since the grid cannot store electric energy, instantaneous balancing differences between power supply and demand must be achieved. To cope with variable and sometime unpredictable demand, grid utilities must bring generation assets online to ensure reliability (peaking plants). Peakers must be easy to switch on and therefore are oil or, more often, gas powered plants. They are expensive to operate requiring fuel bought on the more volatile spot markets, and remain inactive for most of the year without generating revenue. In the US, 10% of all generation assets and 25% of distribution infrastructure are required for roughly 5% of the time. As we will see later, a more effective way to match supply and demand is likely to become turning on and off demand instead of supply, a method seldom used presently.
Today, large interconnected electricity grid infrastructures are norm for all industrial countries. Even if a utility can be completely self-sufficient, it is often advantageous to have the opportunity to buy and sell power to and from neighbouring utilities. In North America, the grids that serve the US and Canada are joined by only few weak links.65 In Europe, forty-two electricity companies of 34 nations are integrated in the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E).66
8.2 Problems posed by deregulation
Traditionally, many countries have had a state monopoly for the generation and distribution of electricity. A centralized monopoly system makes sense, and is even indispensable, at the distribution level, but is not necessary for electricity generation that can use a variety of primary energy resources in innumerable facilities. Therefore, starting from the 1990s, many countries began to deregulate their electricity system in an attempt to stimulate free market competition.36,67 Deregulation usually involved the separation (unbundling) of the generation, transmission, and distribution operations into distinct financial entities and imposed electric utility companies to buy electricity from independent producers. In theory, deregulation would promote efficiency, lower the price of electricity and encourage private capital to invest in new power stations and transmission lines. In practice, however, deregulation has often originated new problems. Private companies, indeed, tend to focus on short-term return and have little interest in making investments that do not show profit for many years. The national interest and even the customer satisfaction do not enter much in their calculations. Furthermore, economic convenience often leads to massive power exchanges difficult to plan. In the US deregulated areas, commercial transactions increased by 400% and network congestion by 300% between 1999 and 2002. In fact, deregulation has contributed to making the electric system more fragile. North America and other countries have indeed experienced major blackouts after deregulations.
Aside from underinvestment in the energy infrastructure, poorly designed deregulation can cause other damages including market manipulation, as it happened during the 2000–2001 energy crisis in California.68,69 Although the origin of the crisis is attributable to a rapid growth of energy demand caused by the increase in population and the mushrooming of computers and industrial equipment, the shortage of energy was also created by an unstable commercial situation that arose following partial deregulation of the electricity market. At the beginning of 2001 producers began shutting down plants to increase prices and, as a consequence, on March 19–20, 2001, blackouts affected 1.5 million customers. A major corporation responsible for market manipulation was Enron. A chairman of the California Power Authority made the following testimonial statements about deregulation and Enron's involvement in the energy crisis:69“There is one fundamental lesson we must learn from this experience: electricity is really different from everything else. It cannot be stored, it cannot be seen, and we cannot do without it, which makes opportunities to take advantage of a deregulated market endless. It is a public good that must be protected from private abuse. (…) Never again can we allow private interests to create artificial or even real shortages and to be in control. Enron stood for secrecy and a lack of responsibility. In electric power, we must have openness and companies that are responsible for keeping the lights on. There is no place for companies like Enron that own the equivalent of an electronic telephone book and game the system to extract an unnecessary middleman's profit”.
According to a 2007 study of DOE, retail electricity prices rose much more from 1999 to 2007 in states that adopted deregulation than in those that did not.70 In Europe, too, waves of electricity outages and increase in the electricity costs have led to widespread discussion about the wisdom and value of deregulation.
9. Electricity generation from new renewables
9.1 Intermittency and fluctuation
The traditional electric infrastructure is based on the following premises: (i) electric energy is produced in large amounts in a few places (centralized generation), usually located at sites that are not too remote (except large hydro) from large consumer markets; (ii) the generated energy is continuously adjusted to a fluctuating demand; (iii) power is distributed by the grid throughout the country to the customers (decentralized use). Exploitation of the new renewable energy sources, wind and solar energy, implies profound changes in the electricity system because such resources are, by their own nature, strongly delocalized over the territory and their availability is variable and often unpredictable.35
Usually, no more than 20% variable energy can be grid-connected without disturbing the function of current infrastructure. Extrapolation of this argument leads the opponents of wind and solar energy to state that such resources cannot be exploited unless parallel back-up conventional plants are provided that should be turned on and off to compensate for fluctuation of supply. In such a case, of course, the cost of wind (and solar) energy would be prohibitive. It should be pointed out, however, that besides back-up supply, there is another equally effective way to match supply and demand, namely manoeuvring demand as a function of the fluctuating supply. While this option looks difficult on a small scale and on the basis of traditional grid management, it will be a key feature of smart electric grids (Section 13). Indeed, controlling energy demand-response is a strategy already used in traditional, cleverly managed grids,12 as shown by the following example. In the afternoon of February 26, 2008, over a span of three hours the winds died down in Texas and the contribution of thousands of tall wind turbines fell by 75%. The 1.5 GW drop, equivalent to the output of three midsized coal burning plants, coincided with an increase in demand. At 6.30 pm the Texas grid system was approaching collapse. The problem, however, could be rapidly solved because managers of the state's power network had set up agreements with large industrial customers allowing temporary power cut off in exchange for lower rates. Within 10 min, about 1.2 GW of load was interrupted and the system was stabilized.
The utilization of variable renewable energies, the increasing number of customers, the continuous differentiation of their requirements, and the increasing use of electricity in the transport sector call not only for a smart grid, but also for systems capable of storing electric energy (section 10) and for full involvement of customers as main players in dealing with the electricity problem.
9.2 Electricity from wind
Wind is the world's fastest growing electric technology. The growth of the wind sector in the period 1991–2008 was even stronger than that of the nuclear industry in its golden age (1961–1978)71 and is expanding faster than even its fiercest advocates could have wished a few years ago. The potential for wind energy is indeed huge: a recent study indicates that a network of land-based 2.5 MW turbines restricted to non-forested, ice-free, non-urban areas operating at as little as 20% of their rated capacity could supply more than 40 times the current worldwide consumption of electricity and over five times the total global use of energy in all forms.72 Another study73 shows that 50% of the world total energy demand in 2030 could be obtained by using 3.8 million of 0.5 MW wind turbines.
The recent economic and financial crisis had some effect also on the growth of the global wind energy market that in 2010, for the first time in two decades, was slowed down compared to the previous year.74At the end of 2010 the global installed wind capacity was about 195 GW, with an increase of 36 GW (23%) compared to 2009.74 The first five nations for total capacity installed are now China, US, Germany, Spain, and India. In 2009, wind power accounted for 39% of all new electric capacity installed in the US and 37% of that installed in Europe. The development is accompanied by a general diversification process, as shown by 20 nations having now installations for more than 1 GW compared with 13 countries in 2007. In 2010, the new EU installed wind capacity was 9.9 GW, slightly lower compared to 2009 (10.7 GW).74Fig. 10 shows the change in the EU electric energy mix from 2000 to 2009.75
 Fig. 10  Change in the EU power capacity mix from 2000 to 2009. The growth of wind power is noteworthy. 
The prospects for wind electricity development remains bright also because enhanced deployment over wide geographic areas would cope with the problem of local intermittency.76In 2010 China has surpassed the US in terms of installed capacity, becoming the world leader; it sets national target at 200 GW for 2020,77 substantially higher than the nuclear share. According to the Energy Watch Group, in 2030 electricity production from wind energy comes close to, or even outpaces hydropower energy.78 Installation costs for wind power are around $1.8 million per MW for onshore developments and between $2.4 million and $3.0 million for offshore projects.38 In many countries, subsidies lower the prices below that of coal. The main limit on wind power installation, at the moment, is how fast manufacturers can make turbines.
Wind power differs from solar power in that it is available, in principle, 24 h per day, but in practice its intensity is highly variable. Typically, conversion to electricity varies as the cube of the wind speed at low wind speeds, asymptoting to a constant value for moderate to higher wind speeds, and dropping to zero at the highest wind speeds when the blades of the turbine are normally feathered to prevent damage. The operation range is usually at wind speeds of between 4 and 20 m/s. The efficiency of a wind turbine is limited in principle because the wind must keep moving after it passes through the spinning blades, but in the last fifteen years the technology has strongly improved.79 Since wind travels more slowly at ground level because of frictional pull, turbine blades should be mounted as high as possible. The largest turbines are almost 200 m high, have rotor diameter about 120 m, and capacity more than 6 MW.
Wind is variable on any time scale, and even if we add up many turbines covering a vast area the power delivered is somewhat unpredictable.35 Between October 2006 and February 2007 there were 17 days when the output from Britain's 1,632 wind turbines was less than 10% of their capacity and one day when it was only 2%.80 On February 11, 2007 the Irish wind power fell steadily from 415 MW at midnight to 79 MW at 4 am, with a decrease rate of 84 MW per hour for a country-wide fleet of capacity 745 MW. These two examples show that, on connecting wind electricity to the grid, problems may arise and energy storage systems are needed (Section 10).
There is an enormous amount of power in jet-stream winds, which are bands of air moving from west to east at high speeds, typically around 160 km h−1 at altitudes of about 10–15 km, primarily at latitudes between 30 and 60 degrees north or south of the equator. The first global mapping of jet streams shows that their power density can be as high as 10,000 W m−2, i.e. about one thousand times higher than on the ground.81 Two basic design concepts for the exploitation of relatively high altitude jet streams have been proposed. The first one entails the transmission of mechanical energy from altitude to the Earth's surface, where conventional generators produce electricity at the ground. An example is the so-called KiteGen consisting of light airfoils (kites) placed at moderate altitude (800–1000 m) and tethered to ground-base heavy machinery for power generation.82 The second basic approach aims at capturing wind energy closer to jet streams with the generators placed aloft and the electricity transmitted to the ground with a tether.83 In practice, exploitation of high altitude winds is very difficult, but some entrepreneurs and inventors believe that it will be the most revolutionary renewable of the 21st century.84
9.3 Electricity from solar energy conversion
Solar energy can be directly or indirectly converted into electricity by means of several techniques.3,85,86 In practice, only concentrated solar power (CSP) in its various configurations and photovoltaics (PV) with a variety of different materials can produce important amounts of electricity.

9.3.1 Concentrating solar power. 
Concentrating solar power plants produce hot fluids by solar heat and then use them to generate electricity by the same technology used in fossil fuels and nuclear plants. Solar heat can be accumulated and stored at high temperatures using molten salts during the periods of intense sunshine and then used overnight or in cloudy days. Molten salts are low-cost, have a high specific heat capacity and can deliver heat at temperatures compatible with conventional power systems. In Solar Tres power tower in Andalusia (Spain) a large tank containing 6250 t of molten nitrate salt that stores up to 600 MWh (16 h of operation) and allows the plant to run 24/7 during the summer. In any case, to ensure uninterrupted service during overcast periods or bad weather, the turbines can also be powered by oil, natural gas or biofuels. Waste heat from the power-generation process may be used to desalinate seawater or to generate cooling. Excess electric power can be used to generate hydrogen by water electrolysis.87
CSP entails four main different concepts for generating electricity:3 (i) parabolic trough collectors; (ii) solar towers; (iii) dish collectors with Stirling engines; (iv) solar updraft towers (chimneys). These technologies can be operated economically on a large scale only in places with very intense solar irradiation. In principle, ideal locations are deserts, but CSP systems producing steam to generate electricity need cooling water, which may be scarcely available in arid places.
Assuming the same irradiation conditions and comparing with the best sites for wind power generation, solar thermal electricity on the tens of MW power scale is roughly twice as expensive as wind energy and almost comparable in price to photovoltaics. The CSP industry is growing rapidly with over 1 GW under construction, another 14 GW announced globally through 201488 and a potential global deployment of 25 GW by 2020.89 In order to be competitive on the electricity markets, solar thermal electricity has now to be subsidized with tax incentives or feed-in tariffs. Because the costs for raw materials for solar thermal power stations are rising more slowly than the price of fossil fuels, CSP may become competitive earlier than previously expected. In the US, starting from 2008, several utilities have began to invest in solar electricity with 4 GW of CSP plants.90 Solar thermal technologies are also particularly effective in terms of CO2 emissions because life-cycle analysis (LCA) suggest that CSP generated electricity produces about ∼10 g CO2/kWh, a value comparable to wind energy and substantially lower than hydroelectric (∼ 20 g) and PV, which is placed in the range 20–60 g.63
Exploitation of CSP technologies could greatly expand in the near future. The DESERTEC cooperation initiative aims to harness solar energy from deserts, producing large amounts of electric power by CSP plants based in Northern Africa and Arabian Peninsula.91 By using High-Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) transmission lines it would be possible to transfer power with losses of no more than 3% per 1000 km to people living far from the desert areas. Connection with the electricity generated by PV, wind, hydro, geothermal and biomass in European countries would lead to an integrated framework of a relatively large number of medium-capacity transmission lines capable of increasing security of energy supply in an area including Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East (Fig.11). Net export of electric power to Europe would generate earnings in the involved African and Asian countries boosting economic development and creating jobs locally. On the other hand, by importing solar power from deserts, European countries could reduce their dependence on imports of fossil fuels.91
 Fig. 11  Scheme of deployment of renewable facilities in the DESERTEC project across the so-called EUMENA region (Europe-Middle East-North Africa). 


9.3.2 Photovoltaic energy. 
The very beginnings of photovoltaics (PV) dates back to 1839 when the French physicist Edmond Becquerel observed that a voltage and a current were produced when a silver chloride electrode, immersed in an electrolytic solution and connected to a counter metal electrode, was illuminated with white light.92 The year of birth of modern photovoltaic technology is 1954 when the Bell Telephone Laboratories in the US developed a silicon photovoltaic solar cell with 4% efficiency,93 that reached 14% by 1960.94 The boom of space exploration in the 1950s and 1960s was extremely beneficial to photovoltaic technology, as it is the ideal tool to provide reliable and long-lasting energy supply in the space environment. On March 17, 1958 the first space solar array was carried aloft on the US satellite Vanguard I.
In the 1970s, the first projects to deliver solar PV electricity to remote, off-grid areas were implemented. This was conceived either to benefit underdeveloped countries or to power sophisticated instrumentation for environmental monitoring around the globe. In the 1990s big photovoltaic companies began interested in the field and several 4–5 MW PV plants went online in Germany between 2002 and 2004. In 2002 the number of solar PV manufacturers around the world was about 80, then it mushroomed to about 800 at the end of the decade, with the large majority of new companies based in China and Taiwan. In 2005–2007 a silicon shortage occurred that caused a temporary price increase,95 followed by a market oversupply which, in 2009, halved the price of solar modules relative to 2008 and plunged the industry revenues by 40%.96 In the next few years a restructuring of the global PV industry is expected, with the smaller manufacturers that will probably disappear or will be acquired by larger firms.
Inorganic photovoltaic cells are made of semiconducting materials containing silicon or other combinations of elements such as gallium, arsenic, tellurium, sometimes thoroughly combined with metals (e.g. copper or cadmium). The key prerequisite to generate electron flows in semiconducting photovoltaic materials is the creation of an electric potential inside them, which is obtained by means of doping and physical contact. The starting material to fabricate silicon solar cells is quartz (SiO2), a fairly abundant mineral on the Earth's crust. However, the fabrication of solar modules containing Si-wafers of sufficient purity for solar energy conversion is a complex and articulated manufacturing chain.3 The evaluation of the environmental impact of the silicon PV technology have been thoroughly investigated in recent years, by means of cradle-to-grave life-cycle assessments.97–99 Despite the fact that these analysis can make different assumption in terms of module manufacturing and final disposal, annual insulation, conventional technologies displaced, there is wide agreement on the fact that silicon PV would bring significant environmental benefits in terms of avoided emission of greenhouse gases, heavy metals, particulate matter, NOx and SOx in comparison to current grid-electricity mainly produced with fossil fuels.99 Also energy payback times, which used to be above 10 years in the early 1990s, are now within 3–4 years even in the less insulated regions such as northern Europe.97,99 Therefore, since operating lifetimes are not less than 25 years, modern solar silicon cells are net energy producers despite their energy intensive production chain. It has also been pointed out that PV systems are likely to last much longer than 25 years and that the annual degradation rate could be much smaller than 1% as usually reported.100
The very reliable crystalline silicon technology dominates the market, but thin film industry is developing fast101,102 and several innovative designs of PV cells have also been proposed in recent years. Currently, in order to be competitive on the electricity markets, PV electricity has to be subsidized with tax incentives or feed-in tariffs (FIT). It should be pointed out, however, that any form of energy is subsidized either directly or indirectly and that, besides subsidies, costs of externalities (e.g., global warming and environmental pollution) should also be considered.73
Due to its delocalized nature, it is difficult to know with high precision the photovoltaic capacity installed globally, but it can be safely assumed that about 25 GW, including grid-connected and off-grid, were installed at the end of 2009.62,96 This amounts to about 0.45% of the global 4500 GW installed electric generation capacity.103 The latest report claims that, at the end of 2010, 39.5 GW of PV were installed worldwide, capable of producing 50 TWh/y of electricity, equivalent to 7 conventional 1000 MW power plants operating at full load, as a consequence an installation boom in many countries.104In the next future, photovoltaics is expected to consolidate as the fastest growing alternative energy market, with an yearly growth of at least 40%.96 Being bound to sunshine, PV is a technology much useful to provide peak and intermediate power electricity demand, which are the highest during the central hours of the day. Most likely, in well insolated regions, PV will be cost-effective in providing peak electricity to the grid in a few years.67
A recurrent concern regarding the wide development of solar collectors is the extension of the Earth's surface that should be mobilized and eventually made unavailable for other essential services such as food production, wildlife habitat or housing. The Joint Research Center of the European Commission has undertaken a detailed study addressing this issue for PV technology, with reference to each single European country and taking into account specific solar availability.105 In the totally imaginary hypothesis of producing 100% of the EU electricity, by means of standard PV modules mounted at the optimum angle and producing 1kWp over 9.5 m2, the percentage of land area needed has been calculated for each country and is reported in Fig. 12.On average, covering ∼ 0.6% of the European territory by PV modules would theoretically satisfy its entire electricity demand. This estimate is somewhat conservative because the latest PV module technologies have higher conversion efficiency than considered in this appraisal (10%), so the area covered per kWp is smaller and will certainly decrease in the future. Furthermore, the PV area does not translate directly into land area covered because (i) the PV modules are not placed horizontally and (ii) a large share of PV panels (currently about 90%) are normally placed on rooftops, which would exist regardless of whether solar panels are installed.
 Fig. 12  Theoretical PV potential: surface of PV modules (10%conversion efficiency) mounted at the optimum angle that would be needed to completely satisfy the electricity consumption of some selected European countries, expressed as % of the country's area. The European average is 0.6%. 
In the US, in response to expected carbon regulation, utilities have begun to invest in photovoltaic systems. In June 2009, 28 US utilities announced a total of more than 2,200 MW of new PV projects.90 Utilities know that nuclear plants are too expensive and, on the long term, natural gas will likely be not widely available at low cost. Therefore, they begin to look at the benefit of building fuel-free 30 years power plants. Supported by a variety of incentives, a big part of today's solar industry is focused on installations that are owned by or directly benefit the customer. Utilities begin also to be interested in aggregating the energy produced by distributed PV systems, thereby creating a virtual PV power plant. In China there is great interest in PV electricity. For example, a 4.5 MW integrated solar system were used to power buildings in the 2010 Expo Park.106 In 2010 the largest PV power stations in the world were located in Canada, Italy, and Germany with a peak power in the range 40–100 MW, and adopting both crystal silicon and thin film technologies. A larger 550 MW thin film project, Solar Topaz Farm, should be deployed in the California Valley within 2013, covering 25 km2 of ranchland and producing 1,100 GWh of electricity annually.107 The largest PV station in the world, with a peak power of 2 GW, should be built in Ordos City, Inner Mongolia (China) within 2019 at a cost of about $5 billion.108 It should cover an area of about 65 km2 with thin film panels, likewise the California facility.

10. Energy storage for electricity supply networks
10.1 Role of storage
At present, electric energy cannot be stored as such in large amounts. In the early phase of deployment of renewable electric technologies across areas with established electricity grids, the need for storage technologies is not so acute. Usually, a grid can accommodate up to 20% electricity from renewable sources without the need for dedicated storage facilities. It is obvious, however, that a more generalized use of electricity (e.g., in the transport sector) coupled with the extension of the contribution of renewable energies to generate electricity will require reversible interconversion between electricity and storable forms of energy as an integral part of the electric systems.109,110
Energy storage can be beneficial to both utilities and their customers not only to support the use of renewable energies, but more generally to solve a variety of problems concerning reliability and quality of electricity:111

Power quality. 
In case of short-term, random fluctuations, energy storage is used in providing reliable and high-quality power to equipment that require extremely clean power to operate properly; sometimes the energy storage system is coupled directly to the critical equipment.


Peak saving. 
Energy storage can be used by a customer to accommodate the minute-hour peaks in the daily demand curve, when the price of electric energy is related to peak-power demand; the energy store is replenished during off-peak hours and is discharged during the period of the customer's peak demand. This scheme is useful for both customer and utility.


Rapid reserve. 
Energy storage available almost instantaneously is used to accommodate power emergencies that arise from the failure of generating units and/or transmission lines.


Load levelling. 
During low demand hours (typically, at night) energy can be stored and then used to cover part of the high demand necessity (usually, during the day).


Voltage and frequency problems. 
Stored energy can be used to lower the amount of power sent down the line during peak periods and to adjust frequency in case of need for interconnected utilities.
In principle, there are numerous possible options for storing electric energy: (i) directly as electricity in supercapacitors and superconducting magnetic energy storage; (ii) by reversible conversion of electric energy into chemical energy in batteries or by water electrolysis followed by the use of the generated hydrogen in fuel cells; (iii) by reversible conversion into kinetic energy in flywheel or potential energy in pumped-hydro and compressed air energy storage. Depending on the specific type of application, it will be necessary to choose the storage option taking into account the amount of energy that has to be stored, the length of the storage period, the rates at which energy can be fed into or extracted from the storage and several other parameters like efficiency, environmental impact, risk, seating ease and life-cycle.36
Large amounts of electric energy can be stored by electrolytic hydrogen production, or by pumped hydro and compressed air that, however, require special topological or geological formations. The other electric energy storage systems rank in the following descending orders; in terms of power rating: batteries, superconducting magnets, flywheels, supercapacitors; in terms of discharge duration: batteries, flywheels, supercapacitors, superconducting magnets. The quality of an electricity storage system is evaluated on the basis of the following set of specifications:
- Capacity: amount of energy stored by the system, measured in Ah;
- Cycle-life: number of charge-discharge cycles that the system can resist without losing a certain amount of its capacity;
- Specific energy: energy stored per unit weight, Wh/kg;
- Energy density: energy stored per unit volume, Wh/l;
- Energy efficiency: ratio Wh-output/Wh-input;
- Peak power: maximum power density, W/kg.
Other requirements concern: rate of recharge, voltage plateau reliability, preservation, temperature range of operation, safety, need of maintenance operations, and ecological impact.

10.2 Pumped hydroelectric energy storage (PHES)
These systems consist of two water reservoirs, in the form of lakes, separated by a substantial difference in vertical distance. When there is a surplus generating capacity (usually, at night), water is pumped from the lower reservoir to the upper. When extra electricity is needed, the process is reversed and the falling water passes through a turbine to generate electricity. In some schemes, the turbine is used both as a generator and a pump. Pumped hydro is available at almost any scale with discharge times ranging from several hours to a few days. Other advantages of pumped hydro are large power (up to 3 GW), high efficiency (70–85%), long preservation (up to years) and fast response (of the order of seconds). More than 300 pumped-hydro schemes are in operation worldwide, corresponding to 90 GW capacity.111 This technique is currently the most cost-effective means of storing large amounts of electric energy on an operating basis, but capital costs and the presence of appropriate geography are critical decision factors. Interesting examples of international cooperation based on pumped hydro are the use of nuclear electricity generated in France at night to pump up water in Italian hydroelectric plants, and the export of variable wind electricity from Denmark (wind capacity 3.2 GW) to Norway and Sweden.
10.3 Compressed air energy storage (CAES)
Energy can be stored in compressed air on a scale similar to pumped-water energy systems. For very large systems there is no practical alternative to underground storage that can be accomplished in natural or man-made caverns, abandoned mines, exhausted oil, and gas wells. Off-peak electricity is used to compress air to 40–70 atm in either one or two stages. When extra electricity is required, the compressed air is pre-heated in a heat exchanger, mixed with a small amount of natural gas and injected into a two-stage turbine.36,112 Compressed air energy storage is primarily targeted to store excess energy by wind farms,113 but in principle it could be used to store excess electric energy derived by any kind of primary source. A few CAES plants have been constructed, based on large salt caverns. That at Huntorf in Germany is a 290 MW system that can generate power for up to 4 h. Another plant, located in McIntosh, Alabama, has a capacity of 110 MW. A larger facility (2700 MW) is under development in Norton, Ohio. It should be noted that the overall efficiency of compressed-air energy storage facilities is lower than that of pumped-water energy storage systems because air heats up under compression and then cools down in the underground reservoir.
10.4 Flywheel energy storage (FES)
Minutes to hours storage of electricity into a flywheel is obtained in this way: electricity to be stored powers an electric motor that causes rotation of a flywheel, thereby converting electric energy into kinetic energy; the kinetic energy is then reconverted into electric energy when the motor, used as a generator, is powered by the kinetic energy of the wheel. The energy stored is proportional to the mass moment of inertia of the wheel and the square of the angular velocity. The amount of energy that can be stored by a flywheel is orders of magnitude less than that stored by pumped-water or compressed air systems. High-speed flywheels made of composite materials have specific energy up to 100 Wh/kg.112
Flywheels have several advantages compared to batteries: (i) capacity to absorb and release energy at high rate; (ii) long life; (iii) low life-cycle costs; (iv) no environmental impact. Recently flywheels have been introduced to recover as kinetic energy part of the energy that would be dissipated as heat with a conventional brake (kinetic energy recovery systems, KERS, Fig. 13). A flywheel system designed for energy storage in a racing car, with weight 25 kg, total packaging volume of 13 litres and rotating at over 60,000 rpm in an evacuated chamber, can store 0.1 kWh of energy (4 Wh/kg) and can accept or deliver 60 kW of power.114 Electric batteries capable of delivering that much power would weigh about 200 kg. KERS are now under development for road vehicles.
 Fig. 13  A kinetic energy recovery system (KERS) for a Formula 1 car (Flybrid systems). 
Flywheels are also used in electric rails to capture regenerative-braking and to supply voltage support at weak points of the network. When electricity is supplied via a live rail, it is possible to locate the flywheels beside the track rather than on the train. Very large, stationary flywheels weighing 800 t and spinning at 225 rpm are used to supply power pulses of 700 MW for nuclear fusion research experiments at the Joint European Torus (JET) of the European Fusion Development Agreement (EFDA).115
10.5 Superconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES)
SMES systems store energy in the magnetic field created by the flow of DC current, rectified from AC current, in a superconducting coil which has been cryogenically cooled to a temperature below its superconducting critical temperature. Once the superconducting coil is charged, the current will not decay and the magnetic energy can be stored indefinitely. The stored energy can be released back to the network by discharging the coil and reconversion to AC.116
The round-trip efficiency of SMES systems is greater than 95% and the main parts in a SMES are motionless, which results in high reliability. They are, however, very expensive because of the energy requirements of refrigeration and the high cost of superconducting wires. Wider implementation of SMES is tied to the discovery of high temperature superconductors. SMES is currently used for short duration energy storage when improving power quality is needed. However, SMES systems are also considered as a viable alternative to pumped hydro or compressed air for load levelling applications. The most important advantages of SMES compared to other storing systems is that the time delay during charge and discharge is quite short so that power is available almost instantaneously and very high power output can be provided for a brief period of time. These systems can be continuously operated over a large number of complete charge-discharge cycles. If SMES were to be used for utilities, it would be a diurnal storage device, charged from base load power at night and meeting peak loads during the day.
SMES units in the range 1–10 MW are used to provide grid stability in distribution systems and power quality at manufacturing plants requiring ultra-clean power, such as microchip fabrication facilities.
10.6 Electrochemical capacitors (ECs)
In a conventional capacitor, the charge is stored on metallic sheets separated by an insulator. On the application of a voltage, the device stores energy by the separation of positive and negative electrostatic charge. Years of research have led to electrochemical capacitors (ECs), also known as supercapacitors or ultracapacitors, where the dielectric is replaced by an electrolyte which allows storage of much larger amounts of energy.117
While ECs are related to batteries, they use a different energy storage mechanism. Batteries (Section 10.7) move charged chemical species (ions) from one electrode via an electrolyte to the second electrode, where they interact chemically. Thus, batteries store chemical energy. ECs store electric charge physically, without chemical reactions taking place. Therefore the energy storage process is highly reversible and the discharge-charge cycle can be repeated virtually without limit.110
A convenient way to compare the operational characteristics for batteries and ECs is to plot the power density as a function of energy density, as shown in Fig. 14.110 The “capacitors” shown on the low-energy-density end refer to the dielectric types widely used in power and consumer electronic circuits. These types of capacitors have very high power, very fast response time, almost unlimited cycle life, and zero maintenance. However, their energy density is very low (less than 0.1 Wh/kg in most cases). Hence they are not useful for applications in which significant energy storage is needed. On the other hand, ECs can operate over a fairly broad range of energy and power densities. This versatility is a key feature for adapting EC systems for energy storage, energy harvesting, and energy regeneration applications. The high discharge/charge rates of ECs (sub-second response time) have led to their use in a variety of applications based on supplying high power. However, certain performance limitations persist, which include relatively low energy density low cell voltage (<1 V for aqueous and ∼3 V for organic electrolytes), and sensitivity to impurities.
 Fig. 14  Specific power as a function of specific energy for various energy storage devices. 
ECs are intrinsically nanoscale systems in which ions fit into pores of, typically, 0.5–3 nm in size. Recent advances in nanoscience, computational capabilities, and analytical tools have the potential to provide unprecedented breakthroughs for ECs.
Capacitors and batteries have quite different properties that make them ideal partners for several applications.36 Battery-electrochemical capacitor combination is ideal for use as a power source in electric or hybrid electric vehicles. Battery and capacitor are connected in parallel and the capacitor floats at the same terminal voltage as the battery. When there is a sudden load demand for a pulse of high current (acceleration), the capacitor discharges preferentially to meet this requirement. After the pulse, the battery recharges the capacitor at leisure. Furthermore, a capacitor allows energy to be captured from regenerative braking since it is more efficient in accepting large currents than a battery.
10.7 Batteries
Batteries are devices in which electric energy can be stored as chemical energy. “Primary” batteries are discharged once and then discarded, whilst ”secondary” batteries (in the following, simply called batteries) can be recharged many times.118 Batteries are based on reversible oxidation/reduction processes of various kinds (vide infra). Since long, batteries are the most practical way of storing electric energy on the small-to-medium scale (Fig.14).
Batteries and fuel cells119differ in two main aspects.120 First, in a battery, the electro-active materials are stored internally, and the electrodes at which the energy conversion reactions occur are themselves part of the electrochemical fuel. The characteristics of the negative and positive electrodes determine both the power density (e.g., electric, transport, and catalytic properties of the active material and non-reactive materials) and the energy density (e.g., mass of active materials) of the battery. As a battery converts its chemical energy to electric energy, electrodes are consumed and undergo significant physical and chemical changes that affect its performance. Second, because of the dual functions of the electrodes described above, a conventional battery has minimal or no scale-up advantages. Instead, it can only be scaled-out. That is, if more energy is needed, then more battery modules with identical components are required. As the amount of electroactive materials increases in a battery, more current collecting materials, electrolyte, separators, and enclosure materials are also needed.
Battery storage applications fall into two broad categories: energy and power applications. Energy applications involve storage discharge over periods of hours (typically one discharge cycle per day) with correspondingly long charging periods. Power applications involve comparatively short periods of discharge (seconds to minutes), short recharging periods, and often require many cycles per day.
There are several reasons for the growing interest in batteries. In the last few years there has been a huge increase in the sales of portable electronic devices that require battery power and of main-connected devices that use batteries for memory back-up. Stationary batteries are extensively used as standby power sources in all the places that need uninterruptible power supply (e.g., hospitals, airports, hotels, railway stations, supermarkets, office blocks, computer centres, etc.). In many situations, the role of such batteries is that of providing power until a standby diesel generator can be started. Implementation of large scale energy-storage system based on batteries is taking place, particularly for demonstration purposes.36 Such systems can play various roles, including peak-saving, load-levelling and enhancing power quality. In a few cases they have been installed to interface renewable energy sources (wind and solar) to utility grids.121 Most of the current interest in batteries concerns the urgent need of coupling variable renewable energy with bulk energy storage systems, particularly because of the expected extension of electric traction in the transport sector.
In order to place the battery storage problem in a real context, we can take as a reference the most important form of stored energy, namely oil, which is characterized by the following properties: (i) specific energy, 11.9 kWh/kg; (ii) energy density, 10.3 MWh/m3; (iii) easy to deliver; (iv) usable at ambient temperatures and pressures; (v) storable for long times without appreciable loss. These are targets that it will be very difficult to match by any battery.

10.7.1 Battery requirements. 
Rechargeable batteries come in many different sizes and capacities. The cycle-life of a battery is measured by the number of charge-discharge cycles that it can resist without losing more than 20% of its capacity. Degradation is caused by irreversible side reactions. The specific energy for current batteries is within 30 and 160 Wh/kg, i.e. at least two orders of magnitude lower than the specific energy of oil. The energy efficiency in most cases is around 60–80%. The peak power may range between 80 and 1000 W/kg.36 The voltage plateau depends on the type of battery. A desired requirement is that the power delivered is stable over a good depth of discharge. Other important factors, beside price, are charge retention on open circuit stand, rate of recharge, temperature range of operation, reliability, need of maintenance operations, safety, benign nature of materials and efficient material reclamation at end of service-life. The relative importance of the various requirements depends of the kind of application. For example, in order to store photovoltaic energy fast recharge is not needed, but energy efficiency is of primary importance. For stationary uses, peak power may be more important than specific energy. For use in electric vehicles, high specific energy and high energy density are needed and fast recharging is also desirable.
Batteries based on different chemical reactions vary widely in their performance parameters and also batteries of the same kind may exhibit different properties depending on the operational conditions since several of the involved parameters are interdependent. For example, the life of a battery is a function of the depth of discharge and temperature, and the voltage plateau is a function of the rate of discharge. For all these reasons it is quite difficult to make general comparisons among the various types of batteries.


10.7.2 Types of batteries. 
Lead-acid batteries. 
Over 90% of the world market for medium-to-large rechargeable batteries concerns lead-acid batteries, invented 150 years ago and repeatedly improved along the years. These cheap batteries are based on overall reaction 1. The standard cell voltage is 2.04 V. 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(1) ⇄ PbO2(s) + Pb(s) + 2H2SO4(aq)(1)
Overcharging with excessive voltages will generate oxygen and hydrogen gas by electrolysis of water, forming an explosive mix. The acid electrolyte is also corrosive. Because the electrolyte takes part in the charge-discharge reaction (on charge water is consumed and sulfuric acid is generated), it is relatively simple to determine the state of charge by merely measuring the relative density of the electrolyte.
A typical lead-acid car battery has the following properties: cycle-life: 500–800 cycles, strongly dependent on temperature (ideal temperature: 10–25°); specific energy: 30–40 Wh/kg; energy density: 65–75 Wh/l; energy efficiency: 50–92%; power peak:150–400 W kg−1; voltage plateau: 2.1 V; self-discharge rate: 3%–20% per month; capacity, (Ah), decreasing strongly with decreasing discharge time. Depending on the specific use, they can be constructed by using different lead alloys and can be designed according to different schemes so as to favour maximum current output (starting batteries), deep discharge (uninterruptible power supplies, electric cars, interface to photovoltaic systems), low maintenance (conventional cars), or other specific properties. In order to obtain batteries that do not need maintenance, the so called valve-regulated technique is used, in which very small amount of acid is required and oxygen is generated at the positive electrode and reduced at the negative electrode. These batteries are particularly useful for remote-area power supply.
Currently, attempts are being made to develop alternatives to lead-acid batteries (particularly for automotive use) because of concerns about the environmental consequences of improper disposal of old batteries and of lead smelting operations. Lead-acid battery recycling, however, is one of the most successful recycling programs in the world.122
Alkaline batteries. 
The most popular ones are nickel-cadmium (NiCd) batteries that operate according to the overall reaction 2 (the alkaline electrolyte is not consumed): Cd(OH)2 + 2Ni(OH)2 ⇄ Cd + 2NiO(OH) + 2H2O(2)For normal NiCd batteries, voltage (1.2 V) and specific energy (30–40 Wh/kg) are rather similar to lead-acid batteries. NiCd batteries offer some advantages compared to lead-acid batteries, e.g., faster charge and discharge, minimal loss of capacity and longer cycle-life; but if they are repeatedly recharged after being only partially discharged they gradually lose their maximum energy capacity (memory effect). They are expensive and are matter of environmental concern because cadmium is a toxic heavy metal and therefore requires special care during battery disposal. Nowadays less toxic nickel-metal-hydride (NiMH) are progressively replacing the NiCd batteries in spite of a higher cost and high self-discharge rate. Because of their high power, NiMH batteries are used in hybrid electric vehicles.
Another kind of batteries, nickel-zinc (NiZn) are increasingly important; because of their fast recharge they are used in the light electric vehicle sector. Considerable progress has recently been made concerning cost, energy density, and cycle-life of these batteries.123
Flow batteries. 
A flow battery may be seen as a hybrid of rechargeable battery and fuel cell.36,120 In flow batteries an electrolyte containing one or more dissolved electroactive species flows through an electrochemical cell that converts chemical energy to electricity with formation of a spent material. Additional electrolyte is stored externally, generally in tanks, and is usually pumped through the reactor (gravity feeding is also possible). Flow batteries can be rapidly “recharged” by replacing the electrolyte liquid (in a similar way to refilling fuel tanks for internal combustion engines), while the spent material can be recovered for re-energization. A schematic view of a flow battery is shown in Fig.15. In a flow battery, capacity and energy density are independent of each other: the capacity is determined only by the size of the reservoir, whereas the power is determined by the design and size of the cell stack. The main disadvantage of flow batteries is their more complicated system requirements for pumps, sensors, flow and power, and secondary containment vessels.
 Fig. 15  Schematic layout of a flow battery. For details, see text. 
Flow batteries are normally considered for relatively large (up to many MWh) stationary applications. For example, (i) for load levelling, where the battery is used to store cheap night-time electricity and provide electricity when it is more costly, (ii) for storing energy from renewable sources such as wind or solar for discharge during periods of peak demand, and (iii) for providing energy when the main power fails. The most common flow batteries are based on the redox reactions between Zn2+ and Br− or between vanadium in different oxidation states.
In zinc-bromine batteries a solution of zinc bromide is stored in two tanks. When the battery is charged or discharged the solutions (electrolytes) are pumped through a reactor and back into the tanks. One tank is used to store the electrolyte for the positive electrode reactions and the other for the negative. Since bromine is a volatile and reactive liquid, it is complexed with organic amines to give an “oil”. The overall reaction is: 2Br− + Zn2+ ⇄ Zn + Br2 (complexed)(3)

Zinc-bromine flow batteries (eqn (3)) have theoretical potential 1.83 V, which falls to lower values depending on the operating conditions. The primary features of the zinc-bromine battery are superior specific energy (75 to 85 Wh/kg); depth of discharge; long cycle-life; 75% efficiency; large capacity scale (50 kWh, stackable to 3MWh systems, available on transportable trailers). An attractive feature of these batteries is that they are constructed mostly of lightweight plastic components and they are easily assembled.
Another flow battery is the vanadium redox battery based on vanadium compounds dissolved in sulfuric acid solution (reaction 4): VO2+ + V3+ + H2O ⇄ VO2+ + V2+ + 2H+(4)
Both half-cells are connected to storage tanks and pumps so that very large volumes of the electrolytes can be circulated through the cell. Battery specifications are as follows: operating voltage, 1.4–1.6 V; specific energy, 10–20 Wh/kg; energy density, 15–25Wh/l; efficiency, 80%; cycle-life, indefinitely high; durability, 10–20 years. Because of its relatively low specific energy, the vanadium flow battery cannot be used in electric vehicles. It finds application, however, as a stationary storage equipment. A 12 MWh vanadium redox battery has been installed in a wind farm of 32 MW power in Ireland. It has been calculated that scaling up to a storage capacity of 10 GWh, 36,000 tonnes of vanadium would be needed, close to the worldwide production of vanadium per year (40,000 tonnes).35 This comparison shows that the problem of intermittency of renewable energy is not easy to solve. Nevertheless, flow redox batteries can help. Several projects based on vanadium flow batteries to smooth the intermittency of wind farms are in course of realization.
Sodium batteries. 
Sodium is a very reactive metal that can ignite or explode when treated with water. Therefore, is not an obvious candidate as an electrode in a battery. On the other hand, it has some interesting properties: (i) the electrochemical reduction potential of Na+ (- 2.71 V) is much more negative than that of other metals (e.g. - 0.76 V for Zn2+); (ii) it is a light element; (iii) it is abundant and cheap; (iv) it is non toxic. Coupling liquid sodium with liquid sulfur at temperature of 300–350 °C, it is possible to construct a sodium-sulfur battery that can be used for storage of wind energy.124,125A number of sodium-based battery options have been proposed over the years, but the variants that have been developed the furthest are referred to as sodium-beta batteries. This designation is used because of two common and important features: liquid sodium is the active material in the negative electrode, and a sodium ion conductive beta-alumina ceramic separator functions as the electrolyte.
The hermetically sealed sodium-sulfur batteries produced by the NGK Japanese company are operated under the conditions in which the active materials at both electrodes are liquid and the electrolyte is solid. They have 4.3 times the capacity of lead-acid batteries and can be controlled remotely.126 Massive installation of such batteries in northern Japan allows storage of considerable amounts of wind energy that is sold at high price when demand is greatest.
Replacing sulfur with nickel chloride led the Zeolite Battery Research Africa Project to construct a sodium-nickel-chloride (Na-NiCl2) battery called ZEBRA. This battery utilizes molten sodium chloroaluminate (NaAlCl4, melting point of 157 °C) as the electrolyte.127 The ZEBRA battery has nominal voltage 2.58 V and an attractive specific energy and power (120 Wh/kg and 180 W/kg). For comparison, the LiCoO2 lithium-ion battery (vide infra) stores 150–200 Wh/kg. The normal operating temperature range of ZEBRA batteries is 270 °C to 350 °C, cycle-life 3000, durability 8 years. These batteries are robust, reliable, safe and require no maintenance. Therefore, they have been extensively used in the last 15 years for a variety of cars and buses. There is a limitation, however. When not in use, ZEBRA batteries should be left under charge so that they will remain molten and be ready for use when needed. If shut down and allowed to solidify, the reheating process may require up to two days to restore the battery pack to the desired temperature and impart a full charge.
Lithium-ion batteries. 
Lithium-ion batteries118 are rechargeable batteries not to be confused with lithium batteries, which are not rechargeable. The most common material for the anode is graphite. The cathode is a lithium-cobalt layered oxide, LiCoO2 (or related compounds), and the electrolyte consists of lithium salts, such as LiPF6 or LiClO4, dissolved in an organic solvent (e.g., ether). The battery is assembled in the discharge state. During charge, Li+ ions are withdrawn from the layered structure of LiCoO2, transported through the electrolyte and then intercalated into graphite. As a result, cobalt is oxidized from Co3+ to Co4+. This process is reversed on discharge. Specific properties of Li-ion batteries are as follows: cycle-life: ∼ 2000 cycles; specific energy: 150–200 Wh/kg; energy density: 250–530 Wh/l; energy efficiency: 80–90%; power peak: 300–1500 W/kg; voltage plateau: 3.7 V; self-discharge rate: 5%–10% per month; durability, 1–3 years; capacity (Ah) decreasing strongly with decreasing discharge time. All these parameters are improved month after month by an extraordinary research effort.
Because of their high specific energy, Li-ion batteries have been extremely successful: more than 500 million cells are produced per year. Furthermore, they are apparently the only practicable solution for powering electric vehicles because they combine a reasonably high energy density with high efficiency and cycle-life. Progress on Li-ion batteries involves the use of a variety of new materials.128–130 Since cobalt is expensive, LiCoO2 is often replaced by LiNiO2 or better by Li–Mn oxides which are not only cheaper, but also less toxic. Using lithium iron phosphate, LiFePO4, ultrahigh discharge rates have been obtained, comparable to those of ultracapacitors. Nanophosphate technology is at the basis of the A123Systems,131 high-power lithium-ion batteries. Porous Co3O4 nanosheets allow the construction of batteries with high discharge capacity.132 Oxocarbon lithium salts are currently investigated and MIT researchers have also shown they can genetically engineer viruses to build both the positively and negatively charged ends of a lithium-ion battery.133
Of course, Li-ion batteries are not free from disadvantages. They may be irreversibly damaged if discharged below a certain voltage, their capacity declines from time of manufacturing at a rate that depends on temperature, and they may explode (very rarely) if overheated or if charged to an excessively high voltage.134 To reduce these risks, they generally contain a small protection circuit.
In lithium-polymer batteries (Li-poly), the lithium-salt electrolyte is not held in an organic solvent as in the lithium-ion design, but in a solid polymer composite such as polyethylene oxide or polyacrylonitrile. In these polymer cells, the electrode sheets and the separator sheets are laminated onto each other. Since no metal casing is needed, the battery can be lighter and it can be specifically shaped to fit the device it will power.
An important step toward the electrification of the personal transportation is the development of cost-effective, long lasting, and abuse-tolerant Li-ion batteries.135
Metal-air batteries. 
Metal-air batteries in principle have higher specific energy density because the use of atmospheric oxygen for the cathodic half reaction reduces the weight related to the cathode reactant. A major drawback of metal-air batteries is that they are difficult to recharge. The activity in this field concerns zinc-air136 and, especially, lithium-air batteries whose development in a few decades could lead to a real breakthrough in the field of batteries for electric vehicles.137

10.8 Electrolytic hydrogen
For storing electric energy over long periods, reversible conversion to chemical fuels is an interesting choice, since chemicals are inexpensive to store and low efficiency is less critical for long storage periods. The most attractive chemical for this process is hydrogen (H2) generated locally by electrolysis of water using variable excess solar138 or wind139 power. When combined with air or oxygen (O2) in fuel cells, H2 can regenerate electricity on demand. Fig. 16 shows a scheme that evidences the use of electricity and hydrogen as parallel and interchangeable energy carriers.1,140 In fact, as discussed elsewhere,3,73,119,141in a hydrogen-based economy the most important role of hydrogen would be that of powering fuel cells to produce electric power.
 Fig. 16  Hydrogen and electricity as parallel and interchangeable energy carriers. The dashed arrow represents the presently inefficient photochemical water splitting processes. 
11. Illumination
Illumination represents the closest experience of electricity use for anybody. It is therefore interesting to have a look at the progress made in this field concerning efficiency, that is a necessary condition for the transition to an electricity powered world.
At the beginning of the twentieth century most of the electricity was used for residential lighting, but now illumination takes a relatively small share (about 19%) of global electricity consumption.142 This is due not only to the great disparities in typical power ratings of lights and common appliances (Table 1), but also to the increasing luminous efficacy, which is defined as the ratio of luminous flux usable for vision emitted from a light source (in lumen, lm), to the electric power (in watts) consumed by the source. In 1882 carbonized fibers in Edison's first lamp produced about 1.4 lm/W, five times that of a candle.59 Standard incandescent lights generate about 15 lm/W, which corresponds to about 2.2% of conversion efficiency of electricity into light. It has been estimated that a moderate affluent person uses for lighting about 4 kWh per day, including a small fraction of public lighting (0.1 kWh per day for street-lights and 0.005 kWh per day for traffic lights).35 Unfortunately, because of their very low efficiency, billions of bulbs waste billions of kWh, contributing a substantial fraction of greenhouse gases that are changing climate.142
A substantial progress in illumination is being obtained with compact fluorescent lamps, CFLs, which have much higher efficiency (20%, ∼70 lm/W efficacy) and longer lifetime (8,000–20,000 h). Although CFLs are about 5 times more expensive than incandescent lamps, replacing incandescent bulbs with CFLs reduces the cost of lighting by about five times. In the US, where there are 4 billions light bulbs installed, using CFLs would save an amount of electricity equivalent to that produced by twenty 1,000 MW power plants.143 Incandescent bulbs and conventional halogen bulbs are being phased out gradually from many markets worldwide within 2015. Difficulties arise because nearly all CFLs are made in China, and it is not clear whether such a large number of CFLs, which require intensive hand assembly to attach the glass to the base, can be produced in a few years.
CFLs do not rely on heat to produce visible light, but on fluorescence. For doing that, they must contain small amounts of mercury vapors which, upon excitation with a beam of electrons, emit UV light. Excitation by such UV light of a phosphor deposited on the inside surface of the glass tube causes visible fluorescence. Each CFL has 1.0–5.0 mg of mercury, which according to EPA is 60–20 times less than that contained in the older mercury thermometers and much less than the mercury emitted by coal-fired power plants to produce the larger amount of electricity required by incandescent bulbs. If broken during use or improper disposal, the mercury contained in CFLs can be dispersed in the environment.144 Hence, in countries where there is a small percentage of coal-based power generation and little or no CFL disposal (e.g. Sweden and Switzerland), the use of fluorescent lamps may increase mercury emissions. On the other hand, significant mercury emission reductions are expected in areas with massive electricity production by coal (e.g. China or Romania).145
A new generation of lights is based on light-emitting diodes (LEDs), which operate on the principle of electroluminescence.146 They are based on semiconductor diodes in which electric flow generates electrons and holes whichrecombine releasing energy in the form of light.147,148 The color of the emitted light is determined by the intrinsic properties (energy gap) of the semiconductor employed. The LED is usually small in area (less than 1 mm2) and needs optical components to shape its radiation pattern. LEDs are about 10 times more expensive than CFLs, but present many advantages including lower energy consumption (efficacy over 100 lm/W), longer lifetime (up to 50,000–100,000 h), improved robustness, smaller size and faster switching. LEDs of many different colors are available and are extensively used as low-energy indicators. Their compact size allows the construction of new displays and sensors, and their high switching rates are useful in communications technology. White light can be produced mixing the colors of red, green and blue LEDs or using phosphor materials to convert blue or UV LED light to broad-spectrum white light.146 In this field, technology is moving fast and LEDs are replacing traditional light sources in automotive and general lighting.
Light emitting diodes based on organic compounds are called OLEDs.149,150 At present, OLEDs have lower efficiency and shorter lifetime than inorganic LEDs. However, polymer-based OLED may be flexible, a property that can be exploited for a variety of applications such as ceiling tiles, semitransparent windows, walls of light, and luminous clothes, thereby opening the way to new definitions of lighting. New advances in material science, electrochemistry and electrochemiluminescence hold out the prospect of even more efficient forms of lighting.
For outdoor illumination, the most usual solutions are low pressure sodium lamps (50–150 lm/W, lifetime 10,000–40,000 h). They are the most efficient light sources now available, although rather poor in rendering colors.142
12. Plugging-in transportation
12.1. Hybrid and full electric vehicles
Most automakers are now engaged in designing and constructing electrified vehicles (EVs). They include straight-electric vehicles which rely only on batteries (BEVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) in which both an electric motor and a fuel powered engine are used either in series or in parallel, and vehicles in which electric power is obtained from hydrogen fuel cells (HFCVs). For BEVs, electricity is supplied from the grid.
In the last ten years, hybrid vehicles like the popular Toyota Prius, have been introduced in the market.151 They have dual gasoline and electric engines, the second one powered by a nickel-metal hydride battery pack that is recharged by the combustion engine and, in part, by energy recovered from braking. The third generation model of this car, consumes 3.9 litre of gasoline per 100 km, produces 89 g of CO2 per km, and costs €25,900. After having used the electric motor for less than 2 km, the battery has to be recharged by the combustion engine. At the end of 2008, the Chinese BYD (Build Your Dreams) Auto began to sell in China the first commercial plug-in hybrid, F3DM PHEV-68, for $22,000. Automobile companies, including Ford, Mercedes, BMW, Honda, Volvo and Lexus, are currently producing more than 20 models of hybrid cars. Since 2009, the hybrid market in the US has moderated the recession of the automobile market.
In 2001 an Indian company launched a small 3-door full-electric car, the G-Wiz.152 It is powered by eight 6 V lead acid batteries (peak power of 13 kW), has a range up to 77 km with energy consumption of 21 kWh per 100 km, about four times better than an average fossil fuel car. In 2006 Tesla Motors presented Tesla Roadster, an all electric sport car powered by a lithium-ion battery pack that weights 450 kg and stores 53 kWh.153 This car costs around €100,000 and exhibits the following features: overall weight 1220 kg, range 350 km, motor's maximum power 185 kW, acceleration from 0 to 100 km h−1 in 3.9 s, energy consumption 15 kWh per 100 km, i.e. five times less than an average fossil fuel car (80 kWh per 100 km).
Nearly every major auto manufacturer aims at putting a BEV on the market as soon as possible. Mitsubishi's i-MiEV (190 km per full battery charge) and Subaru Plug-In Stella (90 km) went on sale in 2009. Tesla Motors and Toyota have signed an agreement to develop an electric version of Toyota RAV4. Daimler has introduced the electric version of Smart, and BMW a compact car obtained by adapting an electric drive system from a small company in California to a Mini. The Renault-Nissan Alliance is preparing a mass launch of electric cars, with the tiny Twizy model already on the market at less than 7,000 €. Peugeot is ready to lease its iOn electric car which is based on the Mitsubishi's i-MiEV. Fiat-Chrysler announced that the company will build an all-electric car based on the Fiat 500 by 2012 and a plug-in hybrid truck by 2011. In the Green BlueCar designed and developed by Pininfarina and Bolloré the roof of the car as well as part of its bonnet have been fitted out with an array of solar cells to provide additional power.154 Nearly 20 electric vehicles have been presented at the Detroit International Auto show in 2010.155 Out of the 170 new cars presented at the Geneva Motor Show 2011, 44 were BEV or HEV. In 2011, Nissan Leaf became the first battery electric vehicle awarded as the Car of the Year.
Shifting to plug-in electric drive is strongly supported by some governments.156 This could be the biggest change the automobile industry has seen since the beginning of mass production of vehicles about 100 years ago. On March 2009, President Obama announced programs directing $2.4 billion to electric vehicle development with the goal of having 1 million plug-in cars by 2015. The Energy Improvement and Extension Act of 2008 grants a tax break of $2,500 to $7,500 per car for manufacturers of up to 250,000 plug-in hybrid vehicles. In the US, the public opinion and several organizations (see, e.g., the Project Get Ready initiative of the Rocky Mountain Institute157) support this effort and several cities have roadmaps to become “plug-in ready”. In 2009, Germany's Federal Government has allocated an additional €500 million for research and development of electric vehicles and related infrastructure, with the goal of having a million electric cars by 2020.156
Electric vehicles have a natural advantage in that they can achieve efficiencies around 40% compared with 15% of those using internal combustion engines. However if a fossil fuel electric plant is generating the electricity (efficiency about 35%), then the overall efficiency of the electric vehicle will be about 14%, comparable to that of a normal car. The advantage would be that of reducing emissions of air pollutants in congested urban environment, because the power plant is likely to be in a less populated area. An analysis of indirect emissions from electric vehicles has been reported.158
Full development of BEVs faces several difficulties.159 A first necessity is that the cars have to be light to carry as many batteries as possible to increase mileage performance and to have sufficient power. Batteries, of course, should also be as light and small as possible, while having high energy density, very high in/out efficiencies, high level of safety and a life of at least 10 years. Lead-acid batteries (40 Wh/kg) are too heavy and also nickel-metal hydrides (60–120 Wh/kg) batteries are not satisfactory. Lithium-ion batteries are promising: with their higher specific energy (150–200 Wh/kg), a range of 500 km is achievable, and may have a lifetime up to 10 years if properly charged and discharged; but at present they are very expensive. Problems concerning lithium availability will be discussed in Section 14.3.
The motivation to shift from cars based on internal combustion engines to electricity is that of increasing sustainability of the transport sector by decreasing oil consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. This result, of course could also be substantially pursued simply by reducing power, speed and weight of traditional cars. It is questionable, indeed, that hybrid technology is used to build cars like the Mercedes Class S 400 HYBRID, which consumes 8.2 litres of gasoline per 100 km and emits 179 g km−1 of carbon dioxide. Although consumption and emission are much smaller than for the non-hybrid version of the same car (14.9 l/100 km and 355 g of CO2/km), it should be clear that using such powerful, large and heavy hybrid cars is not the right way to contribute to a sustainable world.
It must be emphasized that current combined capacity of the internal combustion engines powering the world's road vehicles amounts to approximately 40 TW, while the present capacity of the world's electric power stations is about 4.5 TW.103 This comparison highlights, once again, that the transformation of our energy system must be accompanied by a substantial change in the mobility of people and goods and, more generally, in our lifestyle.
12.2 Infrastructure
It has been pointed out that whether communication technology has substantially changed in the last few decades, the modern grid is still based on the original design of more than one century ago.160 For example, nearly all the existing electric transmission and distribution infrastructure in the US was built prior to 1965. Power is generated and distributed by utilities with fairly little communication between utilities and consumers in terms of how to get more out of the system. Things, however, are going to change rapidly.
Mass produced electric vehicles, because of their restricted mileage performance, will require a ubiquitous charging infrastructure of wall sockets which presently is not available. Plug-in should be possible not only in the garage of the house, but also in parking lots of working places, public parking areas, commercial centres, etc. In constructing such an infrastructure, it should be taken into account that the vehicles should not only plug into the grid for charging batteries, but also for communicating with the grid to control and optimize the charging operation. This implies a strict, smart interconnection between electric utility systems and BEVs.
The BEVs will also play the role of mobile electricity-storage resources since their batteries can be cycled on and off to manage peak electric demand and help utilities' reliance on variable renewable energies integrated within the grid.161 Furthermore, when the grid fails to deliver energy for any reasons, the power stored in the car batteries could be used for emergency power supply. The components needed to create such a smart infrastructure already exist; the challenge is linking and scaling them.
Development of plug-in cars should be strictly related to increasing production of electricity by renewable energy such as solar and wind, hence EVs represent an important driving force to develop the use of renewable energies. Their development will be determinant to solve the energy and climate problems and to create entrepreneurial opportunities and new green jobs.
13. Smart grid
The economy of affluent nations depends heavily on electricity, and its role is expected to further increase in the future with the growth of renewable energies. We are indeed moving from a fossil fuel economy to an electricity economy, even if a large share of the electricity will continue to be generated for several years by burning coal, gas, oil, and by nuclear plants. In a hypothetical hydrogen economy,3,119 electricity production and distribution will also play a major role because (i) hydrogen and electricity are parallel and interchangeable energy carriers (Fig. 16), and (ii) most of the hydrogen would likely be produced from renewable energies or nuclear energy through water electrolysis. Therefore the traditional, fragile and insufficient electric grids need to be re-engineered. What we need today are grids capable of using digital information and control technology to improve the reliability, security, and overall efficiency of the electric system.160,162–164
As we have seen before, the hardest task for a grid is to match supply with demand. Since demand is difficult to predict, grid utilities use to turn power production up and down by means of peaker plants. To face an increasing and fluctuating demand and cope with the deployment of variable renewable energies, in the near future the electric industry will be forced to make transformation from a centralized, producer-controlled to a distributed, consumer-interactive systems. This requires the creation of automated, widely distributed energy delivery networks, the smart grids. They will be based on the use of digital technology to enable a two-way flow of electricity and information, capable of optimizing supply and demand. A global network of this type could be compared with internet and the term “electranet” has been coined to emphasize the similarity. A smart grid should perform several important functions. It should be capable of sensing system overloads and rerouting power to prevent a potential outage. It should be able to accept and seamlessly integrate wind and solar energy, whether from large farms or from individual units scattered across millions of rooftops. It should enable real-time communication between the consumer and the utility to allow consumers tailoring their energy consumptions on the basis of individual preference, like price and environmental concerns. It should be capable of delivering high quality power, free of sags, spikes, disturbances and interruptions. It should be increasingly resistant to attack and natural disasters. It should create new opportunities and markets by means of its ability to capitalize on plug-and-play innovation. Last, but not least, it should be increasingly greener to offer a genuine path toward energy saving and significant environmental improvement. Smart grids, smart meters and smart appliances will help to save energy, to optimize its use, to prevent blackouts and also to accumulate data that may help future generations solve unanticipated problems, just as 1960s satellite images collected before awareness of the climate problem assist us today.165
The smart grid is also a necessity for developing plug-in hybrid or all-electric vehicles. In US a study on the potential for plug-in electric cars estimates they would make up half of the annual car sales around 2025.166 Without an integrated communication infrastructure and price signals, handling the increased load of plug-in cars would be difficult and inefficient. With the help of a smart grid, electric cars would be recharged when electric demand runs below what baseload and other nonpeaking plants can produce. For example, fickle wind currents usually generate much power at night. If we can shift auto recharging to night time and synchronize it to when currents are strong, we could save money, help an economic management of the utility and eventually increase the value of that noncarbon-emitting wind power. Smart grid will give more value to variable renewable energy and electric cars can greatly help a reliable behaviour of the grid.
In the US, following the Independence and Security Act of 2007, a research, development and demonstration program for smart grid has been initiated with public/private partnerships under the leadership of DOE.163 Serious attention to the newer, greener grid should be a continuing priority for governments and private investors around the world. With effective investment, regulations and incentives, the enormous task of remodeling the grid for renewable energy will be a benefit to both the environment and the global economy.167
14. Perspectives
14.1 Controlling energy demand
Nowadays everybody wants to have more energy, but, for environmental and safety reasons, we should phase out fossil fuels,6 which currently contribute more than 80% of our primary energy needs.2 Obviously, we are going to face a long and difficult transition.168
The impossibility of solving the energy problem by relentlessly increasing supply is immediately clear if we make some simple calculations. The rate of consumption of the 2.3 billion people populating the Earth in 1950 was 2.85 TW, corresponding to about 1.1 TW per billion people.169 In 2010, the world population reached 6.9 billion and the rate of consumption was about 2.2 TW per billion, yielding an overall primary consumption of about 15 TW. Continuing along this trend, in 2050 the rate of consumption will be around 5 TW per billion people.169 With a population of over 9 billion, the overall consumption should exceed 40 TW. To cope with such a huge increase of about 24 TW (ignoring replacements), between now and 2050 we should build the equivalent of 48,000 carbon-burning power plants (500 MW each), or 24,000 nuclear power plants (1 GW) or 150,000 km2 of PV modules (half the area of Italy), i.e. more than three carbon-burning power plants, or almost two nuclear plants, or 10 km2 of PV modules a day. Such an enterprise does not seem achievable simply because there are obvious limitations in constructing any type of structure, let alone the need to reduce CO2 emissions and the lack of any viable solution for the problem of nuclear waste.
Phasing out fossil fuels will take at least some decades. A sudden stop in their use is unrealistic and would cause collapse of the world's economy.20,168 We must progressively decrease the use of fossil fuels and increase exploitation of alternative energy sources, but at the same time we should realize that there will be not enough energy for rising the living level of poor and developing countries if the affluent countries endlessly increase their levels of energy consumption.3 Besides the equity issue, there is another reason to control energy demand in affluent countries. It has been pointed out that there is a strict parallelism between overconsumption of food and energy,170 and that, as in the case of food, excessive energy uptake is detrimental. Most affluent countries, indeed, are already experiencing energy obesity.3 Therefore, we should concentrate our efforts more on controlling demand rather than on increasing energy supply. Saving energy and using it in more efficient ways are the most important tasks imposed by the energy transition to both governments and citizens. If energy consumption is substantially reduced, the possibility that other energy sources may replace fossil fuels is much more evident. This is indeed what is pursued by the European Union, according to the 20/20/20 EU directive.171
14.2 Producing electricity
Electricity supplies an increasing share of the world's total energy demand and grows faster than fossil fuels in all end-use sectors except transportation. In the period 1990–2007, the annual growth in the global net electricity production (1.9%) outpaced the growth in total energy consumption (1.3%), and this trend is expected to strengthen in the next few decades. In the period 1990–2035, net electricity generation has been projected to increase over three times whereas, for total energy consumption, a two-fold growth is forecasted.29 This appraisal is perhaps rather conservative because the market share of renewable electricity technologies, particularly wind and photovoltaic, has turned out to be much larger than initially predicted.
As discussed above, the main technologies poised to replace fossil fuels, namely nuclear fission and renewables, essentially produce electricity. From a technical viewpoint, if electricity will be mainly produced by nuclear energy the electric network will accentuate the scheme of centralized production and decentralized distribution, whereas exploitation of renewable energies will lead to a more “democratic” system, based on smart grids and storage facilities, in which most consumers will also be producers and will likely feel more responsible for the energy use. How electricity will be produced will have, indeed, several very important consequences for our society.
As mentioned in Section 6 many factors militate against the expansion of nuclear power,3,73 including difficulties to find the huge capitals needed, long and uncertain construction times, uncertainties on availability and cost of uranium, limited industrial capacity, threat of nuclear terrorism and proliferation, anti-nuclear sentiment in many nations, future cost competition with the growing market of renewable energies, and two big unsolved problems that had been completely overlooked in the past: disposal of nuclear waste172,173 and decommissioning.174 The world financial crisis of 2009 has exacerbated these problems, particularly in “newcomer” countries. In the US there is an attempt to revive the nuclear industry but there are several technical, economic and political hurdles to overtake.175 In Europe, the economic and technical difficulties encountered in the construction of the Olkiluoto-3 Finnish reactor by the French company AREVA176 confirm that a nuclear renaissance is unlikely. It should also be pointed out that nuclear energy can play only a very minor role in decreasing greenhouse gas emission in the near future because deployment of new facilities, if any, will be very slow. Nuclear energy is also characterized by many uncertainties,177 unsolved problems,178 and risky features concerning health, environmental sustainability, social stability and international relationships.3 Furthermore, construction of nuclear plants has consequences that extend far into the future, passing a risky mortgage on the shoulders of unacquainted future generations: forty to sixty years of operation, 100 years before dismantling the dismissed plants, thousands years of radioactive waste to safeguard.3
A more realistic option to move towards an electricity-based economy is to rely on renewable energies that are inexhaustible and fairly well distributed all over the planet. With the exception of large hydroelectric plants, they are also safe, because of their low power density. This feature, of course, is a drawback for several applications, but it can be remedied by storage, a technique that can also resolve the other drawback of most renewable energies, namely intermittency. But are energy resources based on Sun, wind, water and Earth abundant enough to supply the huge power that would be needed in 2050 by over 9 billion people? Although it is difficult to estimate the technically exploitable amount of renewable energy resources, there is a general consensus that the answer is yes (Fig. 17).40,63,73,179,180 For example, a plan that could provide 69% of the US electricity and 35% of its total energy with solar power alone by 2050, with annual 1% growing demand, has been proposed.179 The huge subsidy needed ($420 billion) for the development of the PV and CSP plants, and the related electric grid, would be less than the tax subsidies that have been levied to build the country's high speed telecommunication infrastructure in 35 years. Another study claims that it would be technically possible to provide 100% of the world's energy need by as early as 2030 with already available, wind, water and solar technologies.73This plan calls for 3.8 million 5 MW wind turbines,1.7 billion 3 kW PV roofs, 40,000 300 MW solar PV plants, 49,000 300 MW CSP plants, 5350 100 MW geothermal plants, 900 1300 MW hydroelectric plants, and a few hundred thousands wave device and tidal turbine. However, practical, economic and political constraints make it impossible to accomplish a complete replacement of the present conventional energy systems in just two decades.20,168,181 Therefore it is more reasonable to conceive progressive phasing out of fossil fuel and nuclear technologies to stop manufacturing them by 2030 and then carry out complete replacement with renewable technologies by 2050.73,182
 Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the relative amounts of potentially available (large cubes) and technically exploitable (small cubes) renewable energies, compared to the current primary energy consumption (dark grey).63 This is a conservative estimation compared to others.180 
This would be a gigantic effort, but it should be recalled that during WWII, in a few months, the US retooled automobile factories to produce 300,000 aircraft, while other countries produced 486,000 more. An obstacle to such a huge development of renewable energies could perhaps be shortages of special materials (see next section), but the greatest barrier is certainly the lack of political will. World's leaders should understand that the energy challenge is the moral equivalent of a war, as President Carter already stated over three decades ago.183
14.3 Limitations to renewable energy implementation
Estimates of current (2005–2010) and future (2020 and beyond) costs show that onshore wind, hydroelectricity, and geothermal systems already can cost less than typical fossil and nuclear generation and that, in the future, onshore wind power is expected to cost less than any other form of large-scale power generation. If the social cost is considered, which includes the value of air pollution and climate-change damage costs, all the renewable options are projected to cost less than conventional fossil fuel generation in 2030.182
The main challenge of wind and solar energy is the local intermittence, which is completely uncorrelated with the demand. Sometimes the supply will be below the demand, but even the opposite situation can occur. There are several strategies to cope with this issue, which can be used separately or in a concerted way:182 (1) interconnecting geographically disperse variable sources to a common transmission grid;76,91,184(2) complementing variable (e.g. wind, solar) with non variable (geothermal, hydro) sources;91,182(3) connecting power generators and loads through a smart grid (Section 13); (4) storing excess energy at the site of generation (Sections 10.2–10.3);185(5) oversizing generators and use spare capacity to produce H2 (Section 10.8);119 (6) storing electric power at points of end use, for instance in EV batteries of vehicles (vehicles-to grid strategy, V2G), see Section 12.2;186 (7) planning energy supply through weather forecast.187
Implementation of an electricity-powered economy based on renewable energy needs plenty of space, a complete and expensive restructuring of the electric transmission and distribution systems, and large amounts of special materials. We have already mentioned (e.g. Section 10.7) examples concerning materials shortage and we have also pointed out that transformation of our energy system must be accompanied by substantial changes in our lifestyles.
Now, let's see whether there are physical constraints for developing the above mentioned plan aimed at supplying 100% of the world's energy need by 2030.73 Such a plan would produce 11.5 TW end-use electric distributed as follows: 50% by wind turbine, 20% by CSP plants, 14% by PV plants, 6% by roof PV systems, 4% by hydroelectric plants, 4% by geothermal plants, and 1% each by wave devices and tidal turbines.
Concerning space, hydroelectric plants have a large footprint, but most of them are already in place. Roof PV, wave and tidal energy do not require land areas. The bare footprint of the about 4 million wind turbines would be negligible, but including the spacing needed between turbines to minimize interference, about 1.2% of global land area would be occupied.73 It should be considered, however, that the empty space between turbines can be used for agriculture or other activities and that many turbines could be placed offshore. CSP and solar PV plants do have a non-negligible footprint, but they do not need much spacing areas. Altogether, it has been estimated that the above mentioned plan would require an additional area of about 0.74% of the global land surface for footprint and 1.18% for spacing, which reduce to about 0.41% and 0.59%, respectively, if 50% of the wind energy were over the oceans.73 Therefore, although the development of renewable energies requires the use of considerable land areas, it is not limited by space requirement. Restrictions could come, however, from scarcity of key materials, their localized distribution and, as a consequence, their price.
For the development of wind power, limitations will not come from steel, which is virtually 100% recyclable, or other abundant bulk materials like gravel and sand.188 Problems could arise, however, from the scarcity of rare-earth elements like neodymium used in permanent magnets. The annual world production of neodymium oxide (assumed to be 22,000 ton)73 is at least two orders of magnitude smaller than that needed to build the wind turbines of the above mentioned plan. However, large reserves of neodymium and more generally of rare-earth elements are available,189 in principle neodymium can be recycled,190 and different technologies for wind turbines could likely develop.191
The power production of silicon PV technologies is not limited by crystalline silicon, that is fairly abundant.192,193 Rather, problems could arise, e.g., from silver, which is used as an electrode. The amount of silver used, however, can be reduced and silver can be recycled. The limited availability of tellurium194 and indium189 reduces the prospects of cadmium telluride (CdTe) and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) thin cells on a large scale. On the positive side, new research could result in the development of low cost195 and commonly available materials for PV technology.196 Powering transportation by electricity will face three not negligible constraints concerning materials: rare-earth elements for electric motors, lithium for batteries, and platinum as a catalyst for fuel cells. Current hybrid vehicles use electric motors based on permanent magnets containing neodymium, but electric motors that do not use rare-earth elements73 are likely to be further developed in case of scarcity of rare-earths.
There is disagreement on whether the supply of lithium is adequate to support a future global fleet of electric vehicles.197,198 Currently, 75% of the world's known economically recoverable reserves are in Chile (3 million ton), which is also the world's leading producer (12,000 tonin 2008). About half of the global lithium resources are in Bolivia (5.4 million ton), and large reserves have recently been discovered in Afghanistan.199 In a battery electric vehicle with about 100 miles range are contained about 10 kg of lithium.73At 10 kg per vehicle, the production of 26 million battery electric vehicles per year, more than half of the 48 million passenger cars produced in the world in 2009,200 would require 260,000 ton of Li per year which, in the absence of recycling lithium batteries (currently negligible), would exhaust the current reserve base in less than 50 years.73Recycling lithium currently is more expensive than mining virgin material,197but as the price of lithium rises, at some point recycling will become economical. The economics of recycling depend in part on the extent to which batteries are made with recyclability in mind.
In a hydrogen-based economy, demand for platinum, which is the best catalyst for hydrogen fuel cells,119 would substantially increase. The total current world annual production of about 200 ton201 would be sufficient for producing about 20 million 50 kW HFCVs. It has been estimated that there are sufficient available reserves to increase supplies by up to 5–6% per year for the next 50 years.202 Furthermore, platinum can be recycled. It could also occur that research leads to the use of abundant and therefore less costly catalysts.119 Therefore, the limited platinum availability might not substantially affect the development of HFCVs.
In conclusion, although there seems to be no insurmountable material obstacle towards the transition from a fossil fuel to an electricity-powered world based on renewable energies, global exploitation of these resources requires abundant use of several materials that are available in limited amounts.
Other areas of concern should also be taken into consideration. Even renewable energy has an environmental impact and more friendly manufacturing processes should be developed, e.g. for PV panels,203 and recycling or safe disposal of material from dismantled devices should be carefully planned,204 instead of sending waste to developing nations as it used to be done for electronic waste.205
Complete dependence on one finite resource (i.e, lithium for batteries) is intrinsically dangerous. Anytime a finite resource is ripped out of the ground and then sold on the open market a chain of reactions begins that cannot be easily controlled. Impact of mining, recycling and/or waste disposal, economic demands, foreign politic relations will play a role that is difficult to fully forecast. Therefore, research should continue to achieve a wider flexibility concerning the materials used for renewable energy development and electricity harnessing and delivering.
15. Conclusion
Currently, most of the primary energy used by mankind, including that employed to produce electricity, comes from fossil fuels which, in the medium-long term, need to be phased out because they are going to be exhausted and cause environmental and safety problems.6 Furthermore, fossil fuels have indirectly contributed to establish disparities and iniquity in the human society:3 almost half of the total primary energy supply is consumed by about 10% of the population living in rich countries, while the poorest 25% of mankind consumes less than 3% of global energy.3
All the energy technologies that will progressively replace fossil fuels, namely nuclear and renewables (wind, hydro, CSP, PV, biomass, geothermal, tidal, wave), essentially produce electricity. Therefore it is conceivable that we are going to move toward an electricity-based economy, hopefully powered by renewable energies.3,67,206 Such a transition, however, will be neither easy nor fast168 and the time needed will very much depend on technological advances as well as on our capability of changing our often irrational attitude toward energy consumption. This might require a radical change in the way of life of affluent people around the world, which not necessarily will mean a grimmer life. Indeed there is ample scientific evidence that the quality of life is strictly correlated with energy consumption only during basic economic development. However, when the annual primary energy consumption reaches a value of about 2.6 toe (∼100 GJ) per capita, all key indicators (e.g. food availability, infant mortality, life expectancy, etc.) show that there is no additional improvement in the quality of life with further increase in energy consumption.169
From a technical viewpoint, the fossil fuel-powered world works quite well because it can rely on a very efficient and extremely integrated structure for energy production, distribution and use. The rate of the transition to an electricity-powered world will depend on the rate with which a comparatively efficient and integrated structure for producing, delivering, storing, and using electricity will be developed. The production of electricity in large amounts and at affordable prices by renewable energies is a necessary but not sufficient condition. To implement the transition we need not only harvesting solar energy from any kind of external surface, but also smart grids for delivering electricity to informed customers, storage techniques for compensating large and small power fluctuations, lighter and more powerful batteries, a net of easily accessible recharge points, and efficient electric motors. But we will also be forced to accept different mobility schemes, based on smaller cars with more limited range, reduction of air travels over medium distances and construction of extended nets of electric-busses in the cities and fast electric trains within countries as well as across international borders. If electric energy will be converted into hydrogen for storage over long time, reliable and efficient fuel cells will also be needed, another field that requires intensive scientific research. Strong synergic effects can of course be expected among all the above mentioned technological aspects.
Energy saving and energy efficiency, particularly in industrialized countries, will not only help the transition, but could also be the key for its success.177,207,208 People awareness concerning the state of our planet, promoted by an intensive educational effort at any level of the society, and wise political decisions will play a crucial role in accomplishing the energy transition.3,209 Hopefully, an electricity-based economy powered by renewable energies, and particularly by the ubiquitous solar energy, will contribute to preserve the planet and to reduce the social inequalities of the present and past civilizations.
Acknowledgements
We thank the European Commission through FP7 (MC-ITN project FINELUMEN, PITN-GA-2008-215399 and Collaborative Project CELLO, grant agreement 248043), CNR (commessa PM.P04.010, MACOL), University of Bologna and Fondazione Carisbo for financial support. We are further grateful to Filippo Monti for the graphics and illustrations.
References
U. Eberle and R. von Helmolt, Sustainable transportation based on electric vehicle concepts: A brief overview, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 689–699 CAS .

          International Energy Agency, Key world energy statistics,  2010, http://www.iea.org/.

          N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Energy for a sustainable world. From the oil age to a sun powered future, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2011 Search PubMed .

          P. Kruger, Alternative energy resources: The quest for sustainable energy, John Wiley & Sons Inc., Hoboken, NJ,  2006 Search PubMed .

          G. J. Speth, Red sky at morning, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT,  2004 Search PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, The legacy of fossil fuels, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 768–784 CrossRef CAS .

          British Petroleum, BP statistical review of world energy,  2011, http://www.bp.com Search PubMed.
R. M. Baum, The energy commons, Chem. Eng. News, 2006, 84(46), 3 Search PubMed .
G. Hardin, The tragedy of the commons. The population problem has no technical solution; it requires a fundamental extension in morality, Science, 1968, 162, 1243–1248 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rosenberg, The role of electricity in industrial development, Energy Journal, 1998, 19, 7–24 Search PubMed .

          V. Smil, Creating the twentieth century: Technical innovations of 1867-1914 and their lasting impact, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,  2005 Search PubMed .

          P. F. Schewe, The grid: A journey through the heart of our electrified world, Joseph Henry Press, Washington, D.C.,  2007 Search PubMed .

          A. Shah, Poverty facts and stats,  2009, http://www.globalissues.org/article/26/poverty-facts-and-stats Search PubMed.
E. Mills, The specter of fuel-based lighting, Science, 2005, 308, 1263–1264 CrossRef CAS .

          Terna - Rete Elettrica Nazionale, Statistical data, http://www.terna.it.
E. K. Hart and M. Z. Jacobson, A Monte Carlo approach to generator portfolio planning and carbon emissions assessments of systems with large penetrations of variable renewables, Renewable Energy, 2011, 36, 2278–2286 CrossRef .
J. Badcock and M. Lenzen, Subsidies for electricity-generating technologies: A review, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 5038–5047 CrossRef .
D. M. Kammen and S. Pacca, Assessing the costs of electricity, Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour., 2004, 29, 301–344 CrossRef .

          U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Ipcc fourth assessment report: Climate change 2007, http://www.ipcc.ch.

          V. Smil, Energy myths and realities: Bringing science to the energy policy debate, The AEI Press, Washington, D.C.,  2010 Search PubMed .
Saved by sequestration?, Nat. Geosci., 2009, 2, 809–809 CrossRef .
R. S. Haszledine, Carbon capture and storage: How green can black be?, Science, 2009, 325, 1647–1652 CrossRef .

ChemSusChem
            , Special Issue on Carbon Capture and Sequestration, August 2010 Search PubMed .
R. A. Kerr, How much coal remains?, Science, 2009, 323, 1420–1421 Search PubMed .

          World Coal Association, Coal statistics, http://www.worldcoal.org/.

          A. Rojey, Energy and climate. How to achieve a successful energy transition, Wiley-SCI, London, England,  2009 Search PubMed .

          Siemens, USC steam turbine technology for maximum efficiency and operational flexibility, http://www.energy.siemens.com/entry/energy/hq/en/.
J. Johnson, The foul side of ‘clean coal’, Chem. Eng. News, 2009, 87(8), 44–47 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Energy Information Administration, International energy outlook 2010, http://www.eia.doe.gov/ Search PubMed.

          Massachusetts Institute of Technology, The future of coal. An interdisciplinary MIT study,  2007, http://web.mit.edu/coal/ Search PubMed.

          U.S. Energy Information Administration, Coals data, reports, analysis and surveys, http://www.eia.doe.gov/.
R. A. Kerr, Natural gas from shale bursts onto the scene, Science, 2010, 328, 1624–1626 Search PubMed .

          V. Smil, Transforming the twentieth century. Technical innovations and their consequences, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2006 Search PubMed .
D. Lindley, The energy should always work twice, Nature, 2009, 458, 138–141 Search PubMed .

          D. J. C. MacKay, Sustainable energy – without the hot air, UIT Cambridge, Cambridge, UK,  2008 Search PubMed .

          R. M. Dell and D. A. J. Rand, Clean energy, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  2004 Search PubMed .

          World Energy Council, 2010 Survey of energy resources, http://www.worldenergy.org/.
Q. Schiermeier, J. Tollefson, T. Scully, A. Witze and O. Morton, Electricity without carbon, Nature, 2008, 454, 816–823 Search PubMed .

          F. H. Cocks, Energy demand and climate change. Issues and resolutions, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Z. Jacobson and M. A. Delucchi, A path to sustainable energy by 2030, Sci. Am., 2009, 301(5), 58–65 Search PubMed .

          World Commission on Dams, Dams and development - a new framework for decison-making,  2000, http://www.internationalrivers.org/.
B. K. Sovacool, The costs of failure: A preliminary assessment of major energy accidents, 1907-2007, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 1802–1820 Search PubMed .
F. Guerin, G. Abril, S. Richard, B. Burban, C. Reynouard, P. Seyler and R. Delmas, Methane and carbon dioxide emissions from tropical reservoirs: Significance of downstream rivers, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2006, 33, L21407 Search PubMed .

          International Atomic Energy Agency, From Obninsk beyond: Nuclear power conference looks to future,  2004, http://www.iaea.org.

          Greens - European Free Alliance, The world nuclear industry status report 2007, http://www.greens-efa.org/.

          World Nuclear Association, Nuclear power in the world today,  2010, http://www.world-nuclear.org/ Search PubMed.

          World Nuclear Association, Nuclear share figures, 2000-2010,  2011, http://www.world-nuclear.org/ Search PubMed.
A. Grubler, The costs of the french nuclear scale-up: A case of negative learning by doing, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 5174–5188 Search PubMed .
I. N. Kessides, Nuclear power: Understanding the economic risks and uncertainties, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 3849–3864 Search PubMed .

          German Federal Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Reactor Safety, The world nuclear industry status report 2009. With particular emphasis on economic issues, http://www.bmu.de/ Search PubMed.

          World Nuclear Association, http://www.world-nuclear.org/.

          The Oil Drum, The future of nuclear energy: Facts and fiction,  2009, http://europe.theoildrum.com/ Search PubMed.

          International Atomic Energy Agency, Power reactor information system. Nuclear renaissance,  2010, http://iaea.org/programmes/a2/ Search PubMed .
OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, http://www.nea.fr/.

          U.S. Energy Information Administration, International energy outlook 2008 – highlights, 2008, http://www.eia.doe.gov Search PubMed.

          International Atomic Energy Agency, Energy, electricity and nuclear power estimates for the period up to 2030,  2008, http://www-pub.iaea.org/.

          International Energy Agency, World energy outlook 2008,  2008, http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/ Search PubMed.

          International Atomic Energy Agency, Nuclear power plants information,  2011, http://www.iaea.org/ Search PubMed.

          V. Smil, Energy in nature and society: General energetics of complex systems, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,  2008 Search PubMed .
E. Barbier, Geothermal energy technology and current status: An overview, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2002, 6, 3–65 Search PubMed .
K. Kleiner, Promise boiling over, Nature, 2007, 450, 934–935 Search PubMed .

          REN 21-Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century, Renewables global status report - 2010, http://www.ren21.net/.
M. Z. Jacobson, Review of solutions to global warming, air pollution, and energy security, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 148–173 Search PubMed .

          Massachusetts Institute of Technology, The future of geothermal energy - impact of enhanced geothermal systems (EGS) on the United States in the 21st century,  2006, http://geothermal.inel.gov/ Search PubMed.
M. L. Wald, How to build the supergrid, Sci. Am., 2010, 303, 56–61 Search PubMed .

          European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity, http://www.entsoe.eu/.

          T. Bradford, Solar revolution: The economic transformation of the global energy industry, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,  2006 Search PubMed .

          S. Johnson, California officials investigate electric 'megawatt laundering', San Jose Mercury News,  2000, http://www.accessmylibrary.com/article-1G1-121918279/california-officials-investigate-electric.html Search PubMed.

          Testimony of S. David Freeman before the subcommittee on consumer affairs, foreign commerce and tourism of the senate committee on commerce, science and transportation,  May 15, 2002, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/California_electricity_crisis.

          D. C. Johnston, Competitively priced electricity costs more, studies showThe New York Times,  2007 Search PubMed .

          European Wind Energy Association, Pure power - wind energy targets for 2020 and 2030,  2009, http://www.ewea.org/.
X. Lu, M. B. McElroy and J. Kiviluoma, Global potential for wind-generated electricity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 10933–10938 Search PubMed .
M. Z. Jacobson and M. A. Delucchi, Providing all global energy with wind, water, and solar power, Part I: Technologies, energy resources, quantities and areas of infrastructure, and materials, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 1154–1159 Search PubMed .

          Global Wind Energy Council, Statistical data,  2011, http://www.gwec.net.

          European Wind Energy Association, Wind in power - 2009 european statistics,  2010, http://www.ewea.org/.
W. Kempton, F. M. Pimenta, D. E. Veron and B. A. Colle, Electric power from offshore wind via synoptic-scale interconnection, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 7240–7245 Search PubMed .

          GWEC, Global wind capacity increases by 22% in 2010-asia leads growth, Latest News - Global Wind Energy Council,  2011 (Feb. 2), http://www.gwec.net/ Search PubMed.

          Energy Watch Group/Ludwig-Boelkow-Foundation, Renewable energy outlook 2030. Energy watch group global renewable energy scenarios,  2008, http://www.energywatchgroup.org/ Search PubMed .

          M. Kühn, A tailwind for sustainable technology, in Renewable energy. Sustainable energy concepts for the future, ed. R. Wengenmayr and T. Bührke, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2008, pp. 14–20 Search PubMed .
J. Oswald, M. Raine and H. Ashraf-Ball, Will British weather provide reliable electricity?, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 3212–3225 Search PubMed .
C. L. Archer and K. Caldeira, Global assessment of high-altitude wind power, Energies, 2009, 2, 307–319 Search PubMed .
M. Canale, L. Fagiano and M. Milanese, KiteGen: A revolution in wind energy generation, Energy, 2009, 34, 355–361 Search PubMed .
B. W. Roberts, D. H. Shepard, K. Caldeira, M. E. Cannon, D. G. Eccles, A. J. Grenier and J. F. Freidin, Harnessing high-altitude wind power, IEEE Trans. Energy Conversion, 2007, 22, 136–144 Search PubMed .
E. Vance, High hopes, Nature, 2009, 460, 564–566 Search PubMed .
H. B. Gray, Powering the planet with solar fuel, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Powering the planet: Chemical challenges in solar energy utilization, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 Search PubMed .
B. Coelho, A. C. Oliveira and A. Mendes, Concentrated solar power for renewable electricity and hydrogen production from water-a review, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1398–1405 Search PubMed .

          Emerging Energy Research, Global concentrated solar power markets and strategies, 2009-2020,  2009, http://www.docstoc.com/.

          S. Patel, Interest in solar tower technology rising, Power News,  2009, http://www.powermag.com/ Search PubMed .
J. K. Cliburn, Going for solar gigawatts at utilities, Solar Today, 2009,(June 23), 5 Search PubMed .

          The DESERTEC Project, http://www.desertec.org/.
A. E. Becquerel, On electric effects under the influence of solar radiation, C.R. Acad. Sci., 1839, 9, 711–714 Search PubMed .
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, A new silicon p-n junction photocell for converting solar radiation into electrical power, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676–677 Search PubMed .
P. Rappaport, Photoelectricity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1961, 47, 1303–1306 Search PubMed .
R. M. Swanson, A vision for crystalline silicon photovoltaics, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 443–453 Search PubMed .
M. Halper, Sunshine's cloudy days, Time Magazine, 2010, January 25, 43–44 Search PubMed .
A. F. Sherwani, J. A. Usmani and Varun, Life cycle assessment of solar PV based electricity generation systems: A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 540–544 Search PubMed .
J. E. Mason, V. M. Fthenakis, T. Hansen and H. C. Kim, Energy payback and life-cycle CO2 emissions of the BOS in an optimized 3.5 MW PV installation, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 179–190 Search PubMed .
V. M. Fthenakis, H. C. Kim and E. Alsema, Emissions from photovoltaic life cycles, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2168–2174 Search PubMed .
K. Zweibel, Should solar photovoltaics be deployed sooner because of long operating life at low, predictable cost?, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 7519–7530 Search PubMed .
K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson and V. Dutta, Thin-film solar cells: An overview, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 69–92 Search PubMed .
A. Goetzberger, C. Hebling and H.-W. Schock, Photovoltaic materials, history, status and outlook, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2003, 40, 1–46 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Energy Information Administration, Electricity, http://www.eia.doe.gov/.

          European Photovoltaic Industry Association, . 2015. Global market outlook for photovoltaics until 2015,  2011, http://www.epia.org/ Search PubMed.
M. Súri, T. A. Huld, E. D. Dunlop and H. A. Ossenbrink, Potential of solar electricity generation in the European Union member states and candidate countries, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 1295–1305 Search PubMed .
Z. M. Wang and J. M. Chen, A greener future for China's cities, Science, 2010, 327, 1199 Search PubMed .

          First Solar, http://www.firstsolar.com/.

          K. Fehrenbacher, First solar to build world's largest PV solar farm for China, Earth2tech,  2009, http://earth2tech.com/ Search PubMed.
D. Lindley, The energy storage problem, Nature, 2010, 463, 18–20 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science, Basic research needs for electrical energy storage,  2007, http://www.er.doe.gov/bes/reports/files/SEU_rpt.pdf Search PubMed.

          The Electricity Storage Association, Technologies, http://www.electricitystorage.org/.
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Solar energy supply and storage for the legacy and non legacy worlds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 Search PubMed .
P. Denholm and R. Sioshansi, The value of compressed air energy storage with wind in transmission-constrained electric power systems, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 3149–3158 Search PubMed .

          Flybrid Systems, The flybrid kinetic energy recovery system (KERS), http://www.flybridsystems.com/F1System.html Search PubMed.

          Jet Efda, The Joint European Torus, http://www.jet.efda.org/.
A. M. Wolsky, The status and prospects for flywheels and SMES that incorporate HTS, Physica C, 2002, 372–376, 1495–1499 Search PubMed .
P. Jampani, A. Manivannan and P. N. Kumta, Advancing the supercapacitor materials and technology frontier for improving power quality, The Electrochemical Society Interface, 2010, Fall, 57–62 Search PubMed .
M. R. Palacin, Recent advances in rechargeable battery materials: A chemist's perspective, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 Search PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, The hydrogen issue, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 21–38 Search PubMed .
T. Nguyen and R. F. Savinell, Flow batteries, The Electrochemical Society Interface, 2010, Fall, 54–56 Search PubMed .
R. Wagner, M. Schroeder, T. Stephanblome and E. Handschin, A multifunctional energy-storage system with high-power lead-acid batteries, J. Power Sources, 1999, 78, 156–163 Search PubMed .

          Battery Council International, Battery recycling,  2009, http://www.batterycouncil.org/.

          PowerGenix
          Nickel-zinc high discharge battery technology overview, http://www.powergenix.com/service.php Search PubMed.

Can batteries save embattled wind power?, Nikkei Electronics Asia,  2008, http://techon.nikkeibp.co.jp/.
D. H. Doughty, P. C. Butler, A. A. Akhil, N. H. Clark and J. D. Boyes, Batteries for large-scale stationary electrical energy storage, The Electrochemical Society Interface, 2010, Fall, 49–53 Search PubMed .

          Energy Storage News NGK insulators sodium sulfur batteries for large scale grid energy storage, http://energystoragenews.com/.

          ATEA, Zebra batteries, http://atea.it/pdf/Zebra-Battery-Z57.pdf.
R. Teki, M. K. Datta, R. Krishnan, T. C. Parker, T. M. Lu, P. N. Kumta and N. Koratkar, Nanostructured silicon anodes for lithium ion rechargeable batteries, Small, 2009, 5, 2236–2242 Search PubMed .
F. F. Cao, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, X. L. Wu, L. Y. Jiang, R. R. Bi, L. J. Wan and J. Maier, Symbiotic coaxial nanocables: Facile synthesis and an efficient and elegant morphological solution to the lithium storage problem, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1908–1914 Search PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Building better batteries, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 Search PubMed .

          A123 Systems, Enabling +: A new era of sustainable transportation, http://www.a123systems.com/ Search PubMed.
F. M. Zhan, B. Y. Geng and Y. J. Guo, Porous Co3O4 nanosheets with extraordinarily high discharge capacity for lithium batteries, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 6169–6174 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W. J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Fabricating genetically engineered high-power lithium-ion batteries using multiple virus genes, Science, 2009, 324, 1051–1055 Search PubMed .
M. Jacoby, Burning batteries, Chem. Eng. News, 2007, 85(51), 26–28 Search PubMed .
M. Voith, Powerful stuff, Chem. Eng. News, 2009, 87(36), 32–34 Search PubMed .

          BASF team for rechargeable zinc-air battery, Revolt,  2009, http://www.pr-inside.com/.
M. Jacoby, Rechargeable metal-air batteries, Chem. Eng. News, 2010, 88(36), 29–31 Search PubMed .
R. E. Clarke, S. Giddey, F. T. Ciacchi, S. P. S. Badwal, B. Paul and J. Andrews, Direct coupling of an electrolyser to a solar PV system for generating hydrogen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 2531–2542 Search PubMed .
D. Honnery and P. Moriarty, Estimating global hydrogen production from wind, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 727–736 Search PubMed .
F. T. Wagner, B. Lakshmanan and M. F. Mathias, Electrochemistry and the future of the automobile, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2204–2219 Search PubMed .
J. Tollefson, Fuel of the future?, Nature, 2010, 464, 1262–1264 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency, Light's labour's lost - policies for energy-efficient lighting,  2006, http://www.iea.org/ Search PubMed.
J. Johnson, The end of the light bulb, Chem. Eng. News, 2007, 85(49), 46–51 Search PubMed .
D. Appell, Toxic bulbs, Sci. Am., 2007, 297(4), 30–32 Search PubMed .
M. J. Eckelman, P. T. Anastas and J. B. Zimmerman, Spatial assessment of net mercury emissions from the use of fluorescent bulbs, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8564–8570 Search PubMed .
M. H. Crawford, Leds for solid-state lighting: Performance challenges and recent advances, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2009, 15, 1028–1040 Search PubMed .
C. J. Humphreys, Solid-state lighting, MRS Bull., 2011, 33, 459–470 Search PubMed .
J. M. Phillips, M. E. Coltrin, M. H. Crawford, A. J. Fischer, M. R. Krames, R. Mueller-Mach, G. O. Mueller, Y. Ohno, L. E. S. Rohwer, J. A. Simmons and J. Y. Tsao, Research challenges to ultra-efficient inorganic solid-state lighting, Laser Photonics Rev., 2007, 1, 307–333 Search PubMed .
F. So, J. Kido and P. Burrows, Organic light-emitting devices for solid-state lighting, MRS Bull., 2011, 33, 663–669 Search PubMed .

          K. Müllen and U. Scherf, ed., Organic light emitting devices: Synthesis, properties, and applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2006 Search PubMed .

           2009
          Hybrid Cars - Year in Review, http://www.hybridcars.com/2009-hybrid-cars Search PubMed.

          REVA Electric Car, http://www.revaindia.com/.

          Tesla Motors, http://www.teslamotors.com/.

          Pininfarina-BlueCar, http://www.pininfarina.it/index/storiaModelli/Pininfarina-BlueCar.html.
A. Tullo, Auto show, Chem. Eng. News, 2010, 88(4), 50 Search PubMed .
N. Stafford, Germany plugs electric cars, Chem. World-UK, 2009, October, 6, 1 Search PubMed .

          Rocky Mountain Institute, http://www.rmi.org/.
A. R. Holdway, A. R. Williams, O. R. Inderwildi and D. A. King, Indirect emissions from electric vehicles: Emissions from electricity generation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1825–1832 Search PubMed .

          U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, http://www.nrel.gov/ Search PubMed.
C. Harris and J. P. Meyers, Working smarter, not harder: An introduction to the “smart grid”, The Electrochemical Society Interface, 2010, Fall, 45–48 Search PubMed .
B. K. Sovacool and R. F. Hirsh, Beyond batteries: An examination of the benefits and barriers to plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) and a vehicle-to-grid (V2G) transition, Energ. Policy, 2009, 37, 1095–1103 Search PubMed .
D. Charles, Renewables test iq of the grid, Science, 2009, 324, 172–175 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Department of Energy, Smart grid, http://www.oe.energy.gov/smartgrid.htm.
E. Marris, Upgrading the grid, Nature, 2008, 454, 570–573 Search PubMed .
J. Beyea, The smart electricity grid and scientific research, Science, 2010, 328, 979–980 Search PubMed .

          J. Hakes, A declaration of energy independence: How freedom from foreign oil can improve national security, our economy, and the environment, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ,  2008 Search PubMed .
Editorial, The greener grid, Nature, 2008, 454, 551–552 Search PubMed .

          V. Smil, Energy transitions: History, requirements, prospects, Praeger/ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA,  2010 Search PubMed .

          V. Smil, Energy at the crossroads: Global perspectives and uncertainties, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,  2003 Search PubMed .

          I. Illich, Energy and equity, The Trinity Press, Worcester and London,  1974 Search PubMed .

          European Commission, DG Environment, EU climate and energy package, http://ec.europa.eu/environment/climat/climate_action.htm.
J. Johnson, DOE drops Yucca Mountain, Chem. Eng. News, 2009, 87(12), 35 Search PubMed .
J. Johnson, The forever waste, Chem. Eng. News, 2008, 86(18), 15–21 Search PubMed .

          International Atomic Energy Agency, Nuclear safety and security,  2010, http://iaea.org/programmes/a2/ Search PubMed.
J. Johnson, New jolt for nuclear
power, Chem. Eng. News, 2010, 88(8), 31–33 Search PubMed .

Shadow cast over Areva's EPR nuclear reactor
            , Electricity Forum,  2009, http://www.electricityforum.com/.

America's energy future: Technology and transformation, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.,  2009 Search PubMed .

          Massachusetts Institute of Technology, The future of the nuclear fuel cycle,  2010, http://web.mit.edu/ Search PubMed.
V. Fthenakis, J. E. Mason and K. Zweibel, The technical, geographical, and economic feasibility for solar energy to supply the energy needs of the us, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 387–399 Search PubMed .

          H. Kohl, Renewable energy sources on the rise, in Renewable energy. Sustainable energy concepts for the future, ed. R. Wengenmayr and T. Bührke, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008, pp. 4–13 Search PubMed .
B. K. Sovacool, Rejecting renewables: The socio-technical impediments to renewable electricity in the United States, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 4500–4513 Search PubMed .
M. A. Delucchi and M. Z. Jacobson, Providing all global energy with wind, water, and solar power, Part II: Reliability, system and transmission costs, and policies, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 1170–1190 Search PubMed .

          J. Carter, Tv speech, april 18,  1977, http://www.pbs.org/.
C. L. Archer and M. Z. Jacobson, Supplying baseload power and reducing transmission requirements by interconnecting wind farms, J. Appl. Meteorol. Climatol., 2007, 46, 1701–1717 Search PubMed .
I. A. G. Wilson, P. G. McGregor and P. J. Hall, Energy storage in the UK electrical network: Estimation of the scale and review of technology options, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 4099–4106 Search PubMed .
H. Lund and W. Kempton, Integration of renewable energy into the transport and electricity sectors through V2G, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 3578–3587 Search PubMed .

          B. Lange, K. Rohrig, F. Schlögl, U. Cali and R. Jursa, Wind power forecasting, in Renewable electricity and the grid, Chapter 5, ed. G. Boyle, Earthscan, London, UK,  2006, pp. 95–120 Search PubMed .

          US Department of Energy, 20% wind energy by 2030. Increasing wind energy's contribution to U.S. Electricity supply,  2008, http://20percentwind.org/.

          U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral commodity summaries,  2011, http://www.minerals.usgs.gov Search PubMed.
O. Takeda, T. H. Okabe and Y. Umetsu, Recovery of neodymium from a mixture of magnet scrap and other scrap, J. Alloys Compd., 2006, 408–412, 387–390 Search PubMed .
T. Morcos, Harvesting wind power with (or without) permanent magnets, Magnetics and Business Technology, Summer, 2009, 26 Search PubMed .
A. Feltrin and A. Freundlich, Material considerations for terawatt level deployment of photovoltaics, Renewable Energy, 2008, 33, 180–185 Search PubMed .
B. Lloyd and A. S. Forest, The transition to renewables: Can PV provide an answer to the peak oil and climate change challenges?, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 7378–7394 Search PubMed .
K. Zweibel, The impact of tellurium supply on cadmium telluride photovoltaics, Science, 2010, 328, 699–701 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Toward cost-effective solar energy use, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 Search PubMed .
C. Wadia, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Materials availability expands the opportunity for large-scale photovoltaics deployment, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072–2077 Search PubMed .
S. K. Ritter, Future of metals, Chem. Eng. News, 2009, 87(23), 53–57 Search PubMed .
M. Moyer, How much is left?, Sci. Am., 2010, 303(3), 74–81 Search PubMed .

          J. Risen, U.S. Identifies vast mineral riches in Afghanistan, The New York Times,  2010 (June 13), Fall, A1 Search PubMed .

          International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers, 2009 production statistics,  2010, http://oica.net/.
C. J. Yang, An impending platinum crisis and its implications for the future of the automobile, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 1805–1808 Search PubMed .
R. J. Spiegel, Platinum and fuel cells, Transp. Res., Part D: Transp. Environ., 2004, 9, 357–371 Search PubMed .
S. Everts, Making solar panels greener, Chem. Eng. News, 2011, 89(8), 37–38 Search PubMed .

          PV Cycle Association, http://www.pvcycle.eu/.

          E. Grossman, High tech trash: Digital devices, hidden toxics, and human health, Shearwater/Island Press, Washington D.C.,  2006 Search PubMed .

          R. Wengenmayr and T. Bührke, ed., Renewable energy. Sustainable energy concepts for the future, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .

          European Commission Energy efficiency, http://ec.europa.eu/energy/efficiency/index_en.htm.

          American Physical Society, Energy = future: Think efficiency,  2008, http://www.aps.org/energyefficiencyreport/.
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, The future of energy supply: Challenges and opportunities, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Nicola Armaroli	Nicola Armaroli received his PhD in chemical sciences in 1994 from the University of Bologna. After post-doctoral work in the U.S. and Italy, in 1997 he joined the Italian National Research Council (CNR), where he became research director in 2007. His activity concerns the photochemistry and photophysics of molecules and materials targeted at solar energy conversion and lighting devices. He has published three books and over 150 papers and is a consultant on the issues of energy and natural resources. Since 2010 he has served as Chairman of the Working Group on Chemistry and Energy of EUCheMS.
Vincenzo Balzani	Vincenzo Balzani is Emeritus Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna, Italy. He is a fellow of several academies, including the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. His scientific activity is documented by five monographs and more than 550 papers in the fields of photochemistry, supramolecular chemistry, molecular machines, and solar energy conversion. He believes that scientists have great responsability that comes from knowledge, so that it is their duty to find solution for mankind's problems, like the current energy and climate crisis.

Broader context
Phasing out fossil fuels is the grandest scientific, technological, economic and social challenge of the 21st century. Both nuclear energy and most renewable energies (wind, hydro, photovoltaics, geothermal) are utilized to produce electricity, hence we are progressively moving towards an electricity-powered world. This is a most desirable goal given the versatility of electricity and the high efficiency of electric motors. Nuclear energy has been considered an attractive option to generate large amounts of baseload power, but after 60 years of experience, its economic and environmental sustainability has not been demonstrated yet. On the other hand, an ample choice of established electric technologies that exploit renewable energy flows is now available. Some of them are already or will soon be economically competitive towards conventional counterparts, but their extensive implementation will require tremendous efforts in many areas of science and technology accompanied by strong political support and economic investments. This huge challenge represents an extraordinary opportunity to drive the mature industrial systems of the Western economies towards truly innovative sustainable energy concepts by promoting education, science, and technology at all levels. Energy research is the perfect playground where chemistry can play the role of central science by establishing new concepts, materials, and processes, to be applied also in electricity production, storage, distribution, and efficient utilization.


 	Fig. 1  World total electricity generation by source in 2008 (data from IEA, ref. 2). Other includes geothermal, solar, wind, combustible renewables, waste, and heat.	 


Quartz watch	1 μW	24	0.000024 Wh
Clock radio	1 W	24	24 Wh
Compact Fluorescent lamp	21 W	5	105 Wh
Laptop computer	20 W	3	60 Wh
Freezer	90 W	24	2 300 Wh
Incandescent lamp	100 W	5	500 Wh
Desktop computer	150 W	2	300 Wh
TV set	160 W	4	480 Wh
Air conditioning	600 W	3	1 800 Wh
Dishwasher	800 W	0.5	400 Wh
Microwave oven	1 400 W	0.5	700 Wh
Electric oven	3 000 W	0.5	1 500 Wh
Electric cars:
G-Wiz	13.1 kWa	2	9.6 kWhb
Tesla Roadster	185 kWa	2	17.4 kWhc
Electric trains:
ETR 200 (Italy)	1 MWd	—	—
Frecciarossa (Italy)	8 MWd	—	—
Shinkansen (Japan)	13.2 MWd	—	—

 	Fig. 2  The electric power needed to operate a TV set corresponds to that produced by two persons. For operating a dishwasher, the power of 10 people would be needed.	 

 	Fig. 3  Share of the world total final energy consumption in 2008 (data from IEA 2010). Other includes geothermal, solar, wind, heat, etc.	 
The largest wind turbine	Emden, Germany	7 MW
The largest concentrated solar power plant	Guadix, Spain	50 MW
The largest photovoltaic power plant	Sarnia, Ontario, Canada	97 MW
The largest wind farm	Oregon, US	450 MW
The largest group of geothermal power plants	California, US	725 MW
The largest nuclear reactor	Areva EPR	1.65 GW
The largest oil-fired electricity station	Riyadh, Saudi Arabia	3 GW
The largest coal-fired electricity station	Kendal, South Africa	4.1 GW
The largest nuclear power plant	Kashiwazaki-Kariwa, Japan	8.2 GW
The largest hydropower plant	Three Gorges Dam, China	20.3 GW



U.S.	309 045 000	2 286	7.11	3 906	12 724	5 425	17.7
China	1 330 415 000	2 432	1.64	3 017	2 279	7 711	5.8
Russia	148 357 000	691	4.54	858	6 749	1 572	11.2
India	1 172 707 000	524	0.41	601	519	1 602	1.4
Japan	126 810 000	501	3.65	964	6 883	1 098	8.6
Canada	33 760 000	317	9.53	549	16 409	541	16.2
Germany	81 651 000	320	3.52	544	6 613	766	9.3
France	64 768 000	252	3.76	461	7 155	397	6.2
South Korea	48 636 000	255	4.90	402	8 288	528	10.9
Brazil	201 029 000	254	1.14	420	2 113	420	2.1
Ethiopia	88 013 000	2.8	0.03	3.4	39	6.9	0.1
World	6 850 685 000	12 002	1.65	17 445	2 574	30 398.4	4.5

 	Fig. 4  Electricity demand fluctuation in Italy along the days of a week (at 11 am throughout the 2nd week of March 2010).	 

 	Fig. 5  Electricity demand fluctuation in Italy along the hours of a day (3rd Wednesday of August and December 2009).	 

 	Fig. 6  Hourly load demand on the Italian grid in 2009. Base load, intermediate load and peak load are schematically indicated.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic section of a hydroelectric power plant with water reservoir.	 

 	Fig. 8  Historic deployment of nuclear energy. Bars: number of reactors; line: operating capacity.	 

 	Fig. 9  Scheme of the hydrothermal system that enables the exploitation of geothermal heat for energy production. The fluid reservoir is placed between two impermeable rock layers but, at the same time, somehow connected with the Earth's water cycle; the upper impermeable layer is relatively thin. Intrusion of hot molten rock (magma) at relatively shallow depth induces convective circulation of groundwater inside the reservoir permeable layer.	 

 	Fig. 10  Change in the EU power capacity mix from 2000 to 2009. The growth of wind power is noteworthy.	 

 	Fig. 11  Scheme of deployment of renewable facilities in the DESERTEC project across the so-called EUMENA region (Europe-Middle East-North Africa).	 

 	Fig. 12  Theoretical PV potential: surface of PV modules (10%conversion efficiency) mounted at the optimum angle that would be needed to completely satisfy the electricity consumption of some selected European countries, expressed as % of the country's area. The European average is 0.6%.	 

 	Fig. 13  A kinetic energy recovery system (KERS) for a Formula 1 car (Flybrid systems).	 

 	Fig. 14  Specific power as a function of specific energy for various energy storage devices.	 
2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(1) ⇄ PbO2(s) + Pb(s) + 2H2SO4(aq)	(1)
Cd(OH)2 + 2Ni(OH)2 ⇄ Cd + 2NiO(OH) + 2H2O	(2)

 	Fig. 15  Schematic layout of a flow battery. For details, see text.	 
2Br− + Zn2+ ⇄ Zn + Br2 (complexed)	(3)
VO2+ + V3+ + H2O ⇄ VO2+ + V2+ + 2H+	(4)

 	Fig. 16  Hydrogen and electricity as parallel and interchangeable energy carriers. The dashed arrow represents the presently inefficient photochemical water splitting processes.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the relative amounts of potentially available (large cubes) and technically exploitable (small cubes) renewable energies, compared to the current primary energy consumption (dark grey).63 This is a conservative estimation compared to others.180	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
