Characterization techniques for dye-sensitized solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE02732F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE02732F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 672-709Characterization techniques for dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Meysam 
            Pazoki
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ute B. 
            Cappel
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Erik M. J. 
            Johansson
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt
          
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Gerrit 
            Boschloo
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 523, SE 75120 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: gerrit.boschloo@kemi.uu.se
bDivision of Molecular and Condensed Matter Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, 751 20 Uppsala, Sweden
cLabratoary of Photomolecular Science, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, SB-ISIC-LSPM, Chemin des Alambics, Station 6, CH G1 523, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Received 
      20th September 2016
    , Accepted 23rd December 2016First published on 23rd December 2016AbstractDye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have been widely studied in the last two decades and start to be commercialized in the photovoltaic market. Comprehensive characterization is needed to fully understand and optimize the device performance and stability. In this review, we summarize different characterization methods for dye-sensitized solar cells with liquid redox electrolytes or solid state hole transporting materials, most of which can also be used for similar devices such as perovskite based thin film solar cells. Limitations and advantages of relevant methods for studying the energy levels and time scales involved in charge transfer processes as well as charge transport related characteristic lengths are discussed. A summary of recent developments in DSCs and the importance of measured parameters for the device optimization procedure are mentioned at the end.
From right: Erik M. J. Johansson, Meysam Pazoki, Gerrit Boschloo and Ute B. Cappel
From right: Dr Erik Johansson received his PhD degree in Physics at Uppsala University in 2006. After postdoctoral work at Lund University, he was an assistant professor at Uppsala University. He is currently an associate professor in Physical Chemistry at Uppsala University. His research field is nanostructured solar cells including perovskite, quantum dot and dye-sensitized solar cells. His research is spanning from understanding the fundamental processes and the atomic scale structure in these solar cells to the function of the full devices. Dr Meysam Pazoki completed his PhD in Physics at Sharif University of Technology in 2012. He then moved to Uppsala University, where he has held postdoctoral positions in the group of A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo. Currently he is a researcher in the Chemistry department at Uppsala University. His experimental–theoretical research focuses on photo-physics, device characterization and DFT calculations of dye and perovskite solar cell materials. Dr Gerrit Boschloo has more than 20 years of research experience in dye-sensitized solar cells. He leads a research group on hybrid solar cells within physical chemistry at Uppsala University. Besides DSCs, his research topics include advanced photoelectrochemical characterization of semiconductors and perovskite solar cells. He authored more than 190 publications. Dr Ute Cappel received her PhD in Chemistry at Uppsala University in 2011. Following a Marie-Curie fellow at Imperial College London, she is currently a researcher at the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Uppsala University. Her research focuses on the characterization of molecular solar cells, in particular by time-resolved and X-ray based spectroscopies.
Anders Hagfeldt
Anders Hagfeldt is a Professor in Physical Chemistry at EPFL, Switzerland. He obtained his PhD at Uppsala University in 1993 and was a post-doc with Prof. Michael Grätzel (1993–1994) at EPFL. His research focuses on the fields of dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells, and solar fuels. He has published more than 400 articles with over 36000 citations (h-index 95). He is a member of the European Academy of Sciences, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences. He is a visiting professor at Uppsala University and Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

Broader context
Solar energy is a potential candidate to supply the future energy demands with low environmental impact. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are a class of solar cells which are highly efficient in low light and under indoor conditions, with the possibility for low cost fabrication, utilization of flexible substrates and for colorful and transparent devices. Due to the different working principles in comparison to other solar cell technologies, many techniques have been used to characterize the function of DSCs and to understand their properties. However, the understanding of the working mechanism of DSCs is not complete yet, and further improvement of device efficiencies requires a deeper understanding of the materials and processes in DSCs. Therefore, new methods are continuously being developed for the characterization of DSCs to understand how further improvements can be achieved. In this review paper, we summarize the characterization techniques for DSCs in a pedagogical way and also include newly developed techniques that are important for the future development of DSCs.

1. Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells have been widely studied in the last two decades and start to be commercialized in the photovoltaic market. Stability, performance, production cost and colour are the main factors that are considered for the commercialization of dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs).1 The number of registered patents in the DSC field grew exponentially year by year reaching the number of 400 in year 2010.2 So far the topic of new materials has received the most attention in DSC related patents; materials of interest have been tested in order to improve the stability and efficiency and reduce the production costs.3–7
A full understanding of the processes occurring in DSCs is necessary for further optimization and stabilization of the device while the current picture is far from complete and still there are un-answered questions especially in the dye/electrolyte/semiconductor interface6,8–10
Implementation of standard characterization methods is inevitable to elucidate and understand the impacts of each device component on the photovoltaic performance, and also elaborate the processes occurring in the stability tests such as ongoing chemical reactions under long term heating or light illumination conditions. Considering the DSC as a molecular device, energy levels and time scales of electron transfer processes are crucial parameters for estimation of device operation and performance. Besides, optimization of device components towards the best stabilities and efficiencies, also understanding of how overall device efficiency is related to each component and how each component can affect the others can be only accomplished through proper characterization of the device.
Characterization methods for DSCs have been developed from the first years of their invention by Michael Grätzel and Brian O'Regan,11 however limitations and reliability and the degree of non-destructivity of each method have not been comprehensively explored yet. A review of the DSC characterization methods is the topic of the present paper.
There are few reviews about the characterization of DSCs in the literature in which much attention is devoted to a special technique in detail.12–18 Snaith and Yang et al. have reported separately about reliable solar cell efficiency measurements.12,13 Takagi et al. have reported about the IPCE and current–voltage characteristics.14 Barnes et al. have published a review about the photo voltage/current transient and charge extraction methods15 and a review about electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in dye-sensitized solar cells has been published by Fabregat et al.16 Moreover, Johansson et al. have reviewed the application of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in DSC characterization17 and Katoh et al. wrote a review about electron injection efficiency measurements in DSCs.18 In this review we will give an overview and comparison of all the most relevant characterization techniques and how to apply them to obtain relevant information for device optimization. The emphasis of the presented content is on the device characterization, reliability of each method and optimization of the related energy levels/charge transfer time scales. The outline of the paper is as follows: in Section 2 we have a short summary of liquid DSC working conditions, components, energy levels and timescales and introduce the important processes which should be characterized. Almost the same arguments can be used for ssDSCs considering in mind that hole conduction occurs within the hole conductor rather than the liquid electrolyte. Section 3 describes the general techniques for material characterization of DSC components such as electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, scanning tunnelling microscopy, UV-Vis, Raman and FTIR spectroscopies, conductivity measurements and electrochemical methods. Section 4 represents the most important characterization methods for solar cells: voltage–current and IPCE. Special points for proper evaluation of the efficiency are mentioned subsequently. Photo-induced spectroscopy and voltage/current modulation techniques are investigated in Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 is devoted to final remarks about the DSC (liquid, quasi solid state and solid state) development trends and a summary and conclusion is mentioned at the end in which some stability measurements are also discussed.
2. Dye-sensitized solar cells
2.1 Device components
The conventional liquid electrolyte based DSC is a two electrode electrochemical cell in which the counter electrode is fluorine doped tin oxide conductive glass (FTO) coated with a thin layer of the platinum catalyst. The working electrode is a mesoporous layer of titanium dioxide nanoparticles coated on FTO onto which a monolayer of dye molecules is adsorbed. A blocking layer of dense TiO2 may be pre-coated on the FTO to prevent recombination at the FTO substrate/electrolyte interface. The two electrodes are sealed together by polymer sealants and a liquid electrolyte, consisting of the redox mediator, additives and the solvent fills the space between the electrodes.11 Incoming visible light is transmitted by the transparent FTO and wide band gap TiO2 films, but absorbed by the dye molecules. The excited dye molecules inject electrons into the TiO2 conduction band (CB). The oxidized dye molecules are subsequently regenerated by electron transfer from the redox mediator to dyes. Electrons in the mesoporous TiO2 and positive charges (‘holes’) in the electrolyte diffuse to the FTO back contact and counter electrode, respectively. The difference between the Fermi levels of the working and the counter electrode (the latter is defined by the redox potential of the redox mediator at the counter electrode interface and the former is defined by the TiO2 Fermi level at the FTO interface) under illumination results in the electric potential difference between the electrodes by which one can operate electronic devices.6Fig. 1 shows the schematic of a liquid based device based on the cobalt redox mediator. In solid state dye-sensitized solar cells (ssDSCs), a solid hole conductor replaces the liquid electrolyte, regenerates the dye molecules and conducts the holes to the back contact of the solar cell which is a metallic layer of silver or gold.19,20 The Fermi level difference between the working electrode and back contact is equivalent to the potential difference of two electrodes in ssDSCs. In quasi solid state dye solar cells (qssDSCs),21–23 a polymer or a gel electrolyte is implemented instead of a liquid electrolyte in order to improve the long term stability of the device. The same concepts, the energy levels, and charge transfer phenomena are valid for qssDSCs as well.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the DSC device. 
2.2 Device operation and timescales of the processes
Different operational processes in DSCs are illustrated in Fig. 2. Favourable processes such as dye photon absorption resulting in the excitation of an electron from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (1), electron injection from the LUMO to the TiO2 CB (2), dye regeneration by the redox mediators (or hole conductor) (3) and electron/hole transport in the TiO2/electrolyte (or hole conductor layer) (4) should therefore be optimized in terms of energy levels and timescales. There are unfavourable processes (shown by red arrows) consisting of electron recombination to the oxidized species of the dye (5) and the electrolyte (or the oxidized hole conductor) (6) and de-excitation of the dye excited state (7). Minimization of the unfavourable processes is also vital for optimization of device performance. All these processes are coupled together and therefore replacement of one component can have simultaneous impacts on different favourable or unfavourable processes. Description of these processes and their relation to the device component energy levels have been investigated previously and are summarized in several comprehensive reviews.6,24,25
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the electron transfer processes in a liquid electrolyte DSC. 
Under operating conditions there are competitions between the favourable and unfavourable processes:
(1) Electron injection competes with de-excitation of the dye. Different dyes have different time constants for injection/luminescence phenomena. Shorter injection times and longer luminescence life times are favourable for better device performance. The position and the nature of dye LUMO levels and TiO2 CB states, length and nature of the dye acceptor ligand, the adsorption mode of the dye on the TiO2 surface, the presence of adsorbed species at the interface i.e. Li+ ions and the dye/TiO2 surrounding medium can affect the injection rates from the dye to the TiO2 CB according to the Marcus theory.26–29 The nature and position of dye HOMO/LUMO levels and the surrounding medium of the dye can affect the transition probabilities for de-excitation of the dye.30,31 In typical DSCs, electron injection occurs on the time scale of femto to pico seconds, while luminescence life times of typical ruthenium18 and organic32 sensitizers are in the range of nanoseconds and sub nanoseconds, respectively. The injection efficiency (φinj) can thus be determined from the injection (kinj) and relaxation (k0) rates as described in eqn (1). (1)For simplicity of the discussion of all kinetics, all rate constants are assumed to be (pseudo) first order, even though the true kinetics may be more complex.
(2) Electron collection versus electron recombination
Injected electrons inside TiO2 diffuse to the working electrode contacts; it can be modelled by the random walk model.33 Typical diffusion coefficients in the mesoporous films depend on the Fermi level position and are reported to be in the order of 10−3 to 10−6 cm2 per sin DSCs.34 Crystallite size, trap density and its energy level position/physical location, porosity and degree of disorder in the working electrode affect the effective electron diffusion coefficient (and the corresponding transport time).32–37 On the other hand recombination of electrons to the oxidized dye or the oxidized redox mediator in the electrolyte results in lowering the Fermi level and decreasing the current and potential of the device. The time scale of the electron collection inside the mesoporous TiO2 film is in the order of milliseconds, while the recombination to the electrolyte under open circuit conditions is in the order of a few ms.6 Faster collection and slower recombination are favourable for better device performances.
Depth and density of electronic traps in TiO2 and density of electron acceptors in the electrolyte are important factors for determination of the back reaction rate.38–41 Bisquert and co-workers have performed detailed studies on the recombination processes and their corresponding rates in DSCs.40,41 Recombination of electrons to the oxidized dye is also important, however it is less investigated.42–46 At the steady state, both reactions (recombination versus collection) take place and depending on the difference of these two rates, the device PCE would change. The charge collection efficiency (φcol) depends on the transport (ktr) and recombination (krec) rates and can be defined as: (2)The other important factor for charge collection is the dye regeneration process which competes with oxidized dye recombination. The time scale of dye regeneration is in the order of a few microseconds and for electron recombination with the oxidized dye is in the order of several hundred microseconds. The regeneration rate (kreg) of the dye obeys the Marcus theory47 and is dependent on the nature and position of energy levels of the dye as well as the electrolyte redox mediator and also the surrounding solvent medium.48–51 For an efficient device, regeneration efficiency (φreg) should be more than 95% and can be defined as: (3)Higher regeneration rates and lower recombination rates are favourable for better device performance. Short circuit current density (Jsc) of DSCs is proportional to the product of injection, collection and regeneration efficiencies (see Section 4.2). DSC open circuit voltage (Voc) has a logarithmic dependence on the steady state concentration of electrons40 which is dependent on the regeneration and injection efficiencies.25 By detailed characterization of the device and using eqn (1)–(3), one can relate the estimated electron transfer rates of processes directly to current–voltage and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device.25
2.3 Energy levels and the multi trapping model
A DSC is a molecular device in which the PCE depends a lot on the energy levels of its components. The efficiency of the above mentioned electron transfer processes depends on the energy levels of donor and acceptor compounds. In the presence of a liquid electrolyte the energy levels of the dye and excited state dye molecules as well as redox mediators have Gaussian shape distributions (shown in Fig. 2) which is described by the Gerischer model52 (see Section 3.9). The electron diffusion coefficient and transport inside the TiO2 mesoporous film depend strongly on the density, location and position of the semiconductor energy levels.53–55Fig. 2 shows the typical energy levels in the liquid based DSCs. Dye HOMO and LUMO energy levels have key roles in the light absorption and efficiency of the device. Considering the Shockley–Queisser limit for the photovoltaic absorbers, the efficiency of the device strongly depends on the band gap of the absorber.56 Here, optical E0–0 transition of the dye corresponds to the Eg fundamental gap of the semiconductor. A smaller E0–0 distance leads to more light absorption by the dye sensitizer. However, there are limitations for the dye energy levels: in order to have an efficient and rapid electron injection into the TiO2 CB and also rapid dye regeneration by redox mediators, an over-potential of several hundreds mV between the acceptor–donor species levels is needed. Therefore HOMO–LUMO levels should be kept apart sufficiently.6,57 Marcus theory can describe the electron transfer rates in the injection or regeneration processes on which exponential dependence of the electron transfer rate on the free energy difference of acceptor/donor levels is expected.26 Description of Marcus theory and its relation to DSCs (for example electron injection,28 recombination41 and dye regeneration58) is beyond the scope of this article and further relevant information can be found somewhere else.26,59,60
The TiO2 CB can be shifted and in fact tuned by interface dipoles of surface treated films,61 the adsorbed dye molecule dipoles62 and surface adsorbed charges or molecules from the electrolyte.63 By shifting the TiO2 CB, the dye LUMO level should be tuned respectively in order to have an efficient electron injection. Moreover, electrolyte redox potential (E0) depends strongly on the nature of redox mediators and the surrounding ligands in the case of metal organic complexes. For having a high open circuit potential, the dye HOMO level should be tuned according to redox potential or vice versa in order to satisfy the criterion of a high dye regeneration rate as well.57 Reported by Feldt et al.,64 typical energy level values in standard cobalt electrolyte based DSCs are +0.56, +1.04 and −1.14 V vs. NHE for the redox potential of the cobalt bpy mediator, E0(D+/D) and E0(D+/D*) energy levels of the D35 organic dye respectively. The CB edge of TiO2 is considered as −0.5 V vs. NHE.65
Electron diffusion inside the mesoporous nanoparticles obeys the continuous time random walk theory (CTRW). Jenny Nelson has used the CTRW for DSCs for the first time to explain the light intensity dependence of electron transport inside the TiO2 mesoporous films.33 In this theory the semiconductor particles have intra band gap trap states placed in different positions/locations in the energy/space. The traps have exponential distribution of states below the CB: (4)g is density of trap levels with energy level E, mc is trap depth and Ec is the conduction band energy level.
Electrons will experience a random walk in between the traps and diffuse to the working electrode contacts. After trapping in trap states, electrons wait for a certain waiting time and are de-trapped to the CB until they can be trapped again.33
Density and depth of the traps depend on the morphology and preparation procedure of semiconductors66,67 and are the determining factors for the electron transport inside the film as well as for the electron lifetime and DSC open circuit voltage.40,68–70 Lower trap densities cause less trapping–detrapping processes and faster transport inside the film and thus allowing the electrons to reach the electrode contacts efficiently before they experience recombination processes.
Regarding the device efficiency, there are few studies about estimation of maximum achievable efficiency for DSCs.25,71 The 33.7% upper limit of efficiency for thin film solar cells was proposed initially by Shockley and Queisser (SQ) in 1961 by considering the absorption of light and excitation of electrons between the semiconductor energy levels, electron hole recombination and the thermalization of hot charge carriers.56 Snaith has estimated the highest obtainable efficiency for DSCs to be 21%,71 lower than the SQ-limit because of the necessity of over-potentials for efficient dye injection and regeneration. Strategies of further improvements of the PCE from the current record value of 14.7%72 can be pursued and are discussed in Section 7.
3. Materials characterization
3.1 Electron microscopy
The mesoporous morphology of the working electrode is very important for the device performance.5 Dye adsorption and electron recombination are proportional to the working electrode surface area. Electron transport and the effective diffusion coefficient depend on the underlying structure of the working electrode. One dimensional structures and branched structures may have faster electron transport compared to nanoparticulate films73–75 however the interface grain boundaries may limit the conductivity.76
Scattering of high energy electron beams from the surface of nanomaterials is the concept of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to study the surface morphology of nanostructures.77 SEM is the conventional and standard method for microscopy studies of nanostructure film morphologies such as DSC working and counter electrodes.78,79Fig. 3 shows a typical SEM image of a DSC mesoporous TiO2 film. Porosities of 50–65%, pore diameters of 15–20 nm and particle sizes of 20–30 nm are typical and convenient values for DSC working electrodes.80
 Fig. 3  Typical SEM image of TiO2 mesoporous films in the DSC working electrode. The mean pore size and particle size are 15 and 25 nm respectively. Reprinted from Michael Grätzel, Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews, 2003, 4, 145. Copyright (2003), with permission from Elsevier. 
Thicknesses of the layers in a DSC can be measured by cross sectional SEM which is the standard method to estimate the thickness of solid state device layers.19 In solid state devices the thickness of every layer such as the TiO2 porous film, the blocking layer, the metal back contact and the hole conductor capping layer directly affects the photovoltaic performance. The dependence of open-circuit voltage (Voc) and hole conductivity of ssDSCs on the thickness of TiO2 films was investigated by Snaith et al.81,82 Both Voc and hole conductivity are reduced by increasing the TiO2 film thickness while increasing the dye loadings. Therefore high extinction coefficient dyes are employed in the record efficiency ssDSCs.83 A typical cross sectional SEM of a ssDSC is shown in Fig. 4. Furthermore, pixel contrast histograms in cross sectional SEM images have also been used for studying the pore filling of spiro OMeTAD (spiro) in ssDSCs; sharper particle edges and pixels with more contrast show uncovered TiO2 particles.84 Cross sectional SEM is still the most common tool for estimation of pore filling and the thickness of hole conductor capping layers; it can also be considered as a method for evaluation of other relevant parameters for pore filling studies in ssDSCs.82,85–87
 Fig. 4  SEM cross section image of a typical ssDSC device showing the layers of FTO/blocking layer (BL)/TiO2–dye–hole conductor/hole conductor capping layer (CL)/silver back contact (SC). The scale bar is 1 micrometer. 
Compared to the working electrode, the porosity of the counter electrode is less important but in turn affects the efficiency of the device. For example, using different electrochemical deposition routes for a PEDOT (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)) counter electrode, Ellis et al. have obtained different porosities (investigated by SEM) and investigated possible changes in electro-activity of the PEDOT counter electrode in the device.88
Elemental analysis of the films can be done by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX) along the whole thickness of the films. Doping of the semiconductor, composition of composites, co-sensitization of the different dyes along the film thickness, pore filling of the hole conductor in ssDSCs and coverage of perovskite absorber thin films can be studied by EDAX analysis of the working electrode.89–91 Typical resolution of EDAX is in the order of several hundred nanometres. Fig. 5 shows the EDAX analysis of a solar cell showing the uniform penetration of a perovskite hole conductor in the film.89
 Fig. 5  EDAX analysis of the solid state device showing the uniform penetration of perovskite hole conductor to the whole thickness of the film. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Nature (485, 486), Copyright (2012). 
In transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the energy of the electron beam is higher than in SEM and the electron beam is transmitted through the sample which can be used to determine detailed information about a material.92 Features as small as a few nanometers can be observed using TEM. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) can be used to observe even finer details (single crystalline domains and the lattice plane distances) of film crystalline planes as low as a few Angstroms. Other methods such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) are able to investigate the surface morphology of a material but are not as common as SEM or TEM for the DSC research field.
If the wavelength of the electron wave function is short enough (in the case of a high energy electron beam) and in the order of the sample lattice spacing, a diffraction pattern can be formed by which one can study the reciprocal lattice of the sample (called selected area electron diffraction, SAED). If the sample is single crystalline, a series of dots will appear showing the reciprocal lattice of the sample. If it is poly-crystalline, a series of rings will appear. Information about the sample crystal structure is therefore obtained from this technique.92Fig. 6 shows the TEM picture of mesoporous microbeads as well as the SAED pattern.93 Crystallite sizes and preferential crystalline planes have crucial importance and impacts on electron transport and adsorption of dyes on the particles.37,94 The effective catalytic activity of the counter electrode materials depends strongly on the surface area and the details of crystalline planes and defects on their surface have been investigated using HRTEM and TEM.78,95
 Fig. 6  HRTEM graphs of the mesoporous microbeads and their SAED patterns. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 132, 4438). Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
The TEM sample preparation method can have destructing effects on the sample. In order to be investigated by TEM, the nanostructured films should be scratched from the substrate and therefore possible mechanical damage can be imposed on the sample or new surface defects can be formed.
3.2 Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method
The BET method is the standard technique for estimation of the mesoporous film porosity, pore size distribution and its surface area per gram.96 BET theory is based on the physical adsorption/desorption of the gas molecules (N2 inert gas as a standard for this method) and determines the sample surface area and pore volume. Studied by BET, it has been proposed that more organised pore sizes enhance the efficiency of DSCs.97 BET is the conventional method for evaluation of the surface area of new particles/pastes for DSCs as well as new working electrode preparation conditions.93,98,99 Dehong Chen et al. have synthesized mesoporous microbeads with a high surface area and porosity.93 The surface area per gram of the material can be controlled by using different molar ratios of precursors in the sol–gel step or by using different concentrations of ammonia in the solvothermal step. BET has been used to characterize the specific surface area per gram of the as synthesized materials. By engineering the microbead pore size, Dehong Chen et al. overcame the diffusion limited current in bulky cobalt electrolyte based DSCs.100 Furthermore, Zhang et al. have studied the effect of pore size distribution on the performance of polymer based solid state DSCs in which the pore size has a direct effect on the formation of in situ polymerized hole conductor layers in the device.101 This method requires a large area of the material for example some hundred milligrams of powder to be characterized by BET.
3.3 Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)
In STM,102,103 the sample is voltage-biased with respect to the instrument tip which stands above the sample at a certain distance. Scanning the sample by the tip and measuring the tunneling current between the tip and the sample give information about the surface of the sample. Quantum mechanical tunneling current is sensitive to the distance between the tip and the sample surface on the sub nanometer scale. STM can be used for observing the surface or adsorbate molecules (the tunneling current will be different if the electron comes from adsorbed molecules or the metal/semiconductor substrates) as well as estimation of surface density of states.104
There are a few investigations of the dye adsorption on the TiO2 surface reported using STM.105–110 Boschloo et al. have investigated the surface coverage and adsorption of the N719 dye on the TiO2 surface. The dye covered the TiO2 surface completely but the aggregation of the N719 dye was apparent as spherical clusters of 2–4 nm size.107 Ikeda et al. investigated the black dye adsorption on the TiO2(110) surface. Comparing the adsorbed dye heights measured by STM with single dye heights estimated by density functional theory (DFT) calculations, they conclude two possible adsorption modes of the dye on the surface.111
There are reviews about studying the adsorption modes of the dye on different crystalline surfaces of TiO2 including the theoretical investigations by DFT.110,112–114 The adsorption mode of the dye is important not only from the stability issues but also from the device performance point of view. Dyes with bidentate adsorption mode are more difficult to be desorbed from the TiO2 surface, if compared to monodentate mode with the same anchoring group.115 Different binding modes result in different bond lengths from the dye binding group to the surface which affects the electron injection rate. Orientation of the dye is also important for the cobalt electrolyte based DSCs in terms of the electron lifetime within the device.116
Sasahara et al. studied the N3 dye adsorption on the TiO2(110) crystal. Adsorption configurations with two carboxylate groups bound to the surface are in agreement with the measured STM image heights (Fig. 7).108
 Fig. 7  STM images of pivalate precoated TiO2 films immersed in the solution of the N3 dye for 1 and 10 minutes together with related dye height distributions. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 110, 4751). Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society. 
K. Sakamaki et al. have used STM for studying the surface density of states (SDOS) of the single crystalline TiO2(110) surface and found a band gap of 1.6 eV for the rutile (110) surface.104 By changing the bias voltage, from the current–voltage graph of tunnelling current, (dI/dV)/(I/V) expression is responsible for the SDOS of the film and it is independent of the tip to sample distance. Song et al. have measured the SDOS of single TiO2 nanoparticles and explored its dependency on the particle size.117
One limitation of this method is the need for high vacuum and very clean surfaces that necessitate a different adsorption method for dye loading on the surface of TiO2, which is usually accomplished by other methods than conventional solution based methods.106 Also only a small area of a film is investigated. Recently a new technique called scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) has been used to study the dye regeneration in liquid DSCs. SECM has a STM tip which is connected to a potentiostat and the current of the STM tip can be coupled to electrochemical measurements.49 Photo-assisted spatially resolved STM has also been used for investigation of nanoporous traps and their relevant effects on the current of DSC devices.118
3.4 Raman and FTIR spectroscopy
FTIR and Raman spectroscopy techniques are other methods for studying the dye adsorption mode in which each dye binding group has its own finger prints in the FTIR or the Raman spectrum.119–121 Raman and FTIR methods can be utilized for characterization of surface modifications or probing the presence of any absorbed molecules on the surface of TiO2 electrodes122,123 or the characterization of the counter electrode materials.124,125 They have been previously implemented to monitor the evolution of surface adsorbate species during the stability tests.126,127
By a relevant method called ultra high vacuum tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, Raman spectra of a few single molecules and even a single molecule adsorbed on a surface can be acquired.128
3.5 X-Ray diffraction (XRD)
XRD is the conventional method for exploration of the crystalline structure of nanomaterials. The crystalline phase and details of the working electrode semiconductor film lattice structure are determined by XRD. The XRD spectrum presents intensity versus 2-theta (the angle of X-ray to the sample). In X-ray diffraction, an incident beam of X-ray is scattered from the surface and a diffraction pattern is formed as a consequence of the scattering of short wavelength X-ray photons by an electronic cloud of highly ordered positive ion centers within the material. Regularity and ordering of the ions forming a lattice in the sample can be detected as well.129 The Bragg formula dsinθ = nλ is used for determination of lattice spacing in which d is the distance between special crystal planes, θ is the angle of the X-ray beam to the sample, n is an integer number and λ is the wavelength of the X-ray beam (1.54 eV for the standard copper-α beam). Peak broadening can be related to a small crystal size, which was analysed using the Scherrer formula, τ = Kλ/βcosθ, in which θ is considered for a specific XRD peak, K is a dimensionless shape factor close to 1, β is full width at half maximum of the peak and τ is the mean crystallite size for the specific crystal plane of the peak. For example, the effect of doping on the crystallite size of the as grown TiO2 nanoparticles has been investigated.130,131
The TiO2 crystallite size can affect the diffusion coefficient of the electrons inside the mesoporous film.37 Besides, the interface crystalline surfaces affect the dye adsorption to a large extent94 and adsorption of different dyes on the different crystalline planes of anatase TiO2 has been studied.110
Anatase TiO2 is the most commonly used material for DSC photoanodes, it has an indirect band gap of 3.2 eV, which is a little higher than that of the rutile phase of TiO2; allowing more photons to be absorbed by the dye.132 Dye adsorption and electronic transport of rutile and anatase nanocrystals are different.133,134 The CB position and single crystalline conductivity are higher in the anatase compared to the rutile phase.6 In terms of device efficiency, the energy levels of anatase are more appropriate for the superior device efficiency. Rutile is the most stable TiO2 phase; at higher temperatures (more than 600 °C) anatase converts to rutile.132,135 Moreover, the crystalline phase of new counter electrode materials is typically evaluated by XRD.78,95,136
3.6 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
By illumination of the surface with high energy photons (X-rays), electrons can be ejected from the material according to the photoelectric effect. The kinetic energy of the ejected electrons (EK) is measured using photoelectron spectroscopy (PES or XPS) and is equal to the difference in the photon energy (hν) and the energy of the electrons in the material, i.e. the binding energy (EB) and the work function (Φ) of the material. This is described in eqn (5). EB = hν − EK − ϕ(5)Binding energies of energy levels from atom-like orbitals (core levels) are characteristic of each element and therefore one can obtain information about the elemental composition of surface atoms by XPS. XPS is also sensitive to chemical shifts, i.e. to the electronic surroundings of specific atoms and therefore can give information about the chemical state of the material.
The intensity of the measured electrons depends on the cross section for photon absorption by the specific orbital, on the surface density of the elements and on the mean free path of electrons in the material. The mean free path depends on the kinetic energy of the escaping electron and is usually quite short making XPS usually a highly surface sensitive technique. Furthermore, this makes it a requirement for measurements to be carried out under vacuum conditions so that electrons can reach the detector without collisions with molecules in the gas phase. Although XPS is generally a very surface sensitive technique, XPS with very high photon energies (Hard X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, HAXPES) can be used to study the atomic composition deeper inside a material, even for hundred nanometer film thicknesses.17 Another way to analyse deeper into a material is to use sputtering and subsequent XPS analysis.
Different DSC components (i.e. thin films, dye molecules adsorbed on the electrode surfaces or molecules solvated in the electrolyte) can be studied by means of XPS. This information for example can be used for studying the elemental composition of device components, and binding of dye molecules to the electrode. The valence energy levels can also be measured using XPS, which gives further understanding of the energy levels involved in the electron transfer processes in solar cells. It is also possible to study the orbital composition of the valence levels using resonant photoelectron spectroscopy, which is also important for the fundamental understanding of the light to electricity conversion process.17 XPS can also be used for atomic composition analysis of any new implemented DSC components, for example, Shi et al. have used XPS to investigate a new counter electrode material.136
With new technologies it is also possible to use the XPS technique to study liquid systems, in liquid jet XPS, liquid jets are passing the vacuum with very high speeds and therefore it is possible to study the binding and composition of atoms in the liquid electrolyte.137,138
Ericsson et al. have for example studied the formation of new bonds between the tri-iodide and water in water based electrolytes. For the case of water based iodide electrolytes, the XPS measurements show an asymmetry in the I3− solvated ions, hydrogen bond interactions are responsible for the symmetry breaking.137 In DSCs, activation of the I3− ion in asymmetric environments is important for its function through interactions with surfaces and dye molecules.
Another new possibility is to use time resolved photoelectron spectroscopy using pulsed X-rays from free electron lasers or higher harmonic generation light sources for studying the conversion process at an atomic scale with ultrafast time-resolution.17

3.6.1 Core level analysis. 
Different atom-like orbitals and core levels can be specifically useful for studying the elemental composition,86,122,139–141 dye binding configuration and surface coverage116,139,140,142–146 and possible chemical bindings of atoms in electrolytes or on the semiconductor surface.122,137
The dye configuration at the surface may for example be studied for dye molecules containing chemically different atoms of the same element. In that case the surface sensitivity can be used to determine which of the atoms are located closest to the surface and thereby the orientation of the molecule at the surface. This approach has for example been used to study the orientation of organic triarylamine based dye molecules containing nitrogen atoms with different chemical surroundings, which gives different separated N 1s peaks in the measured spectra. By comparing the intensity of the different nitrogen atoms it is then possible to determine the orientation of the molecule on the TiO2 surface.143,144
Since PES is a very surface sensitive technique, the estimation of the dye coverage is true for the outermost surface of the TiO2 film. The orientation and coverage of the dye is very important on the electron lifetime and device performance of cobalt electrolyte based DSCs. The blocking effect of the dye and its effect on electron lifetime have been studied by several groups.147–150
The chemical bond between the dye and the semiconductor surface may also be studied using XPS. The binding group of the dye to the TiO2 surface is usually a carboxylic group and by studying the O 1s core level, it is possible to investigate the dye binding. However, since dye-sensitization in the solar cell is usually not made in a perfectly clean environment (not ultra-high vacuum), contaminants that contain oxygen are also present on the surface, which makes the analysis more difficult. The binding of the carboxylic group to the TiO2 surface has therefore been studied in a UHV for a model-system only containing the ligand with the carboxylic group and a very clean TiO2 surface. The results suggest that the molecule binds with both oxygen atoms in the carboxylic group on the TiO2 surface in a 2-bidentate mode.145,146
The amount of any dopant/surface adsorbate, the percentage of the Ti4+ species and formation of new species in stability tests on the working electrode can be investigated by XPS86,122,139–141,151


3.6.2 Valence electron and molecular orbital analysis. 
The valence electronic structure is involved in the electron transfer reactions occurring in the solar cell, and is therefore of particular interest for the function of the device. For example the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of a dye molecule and the valence band of TiO2 can be measured by photoelectron spectroscopy. The relation between the energy levels of the dye and the semiconductor surface can therefore be determined by this method.17,140,152 The redox potentials of dye molecules are usually determined using electrochemistry and it is usually difficult to determine the energy levels of the semiconductor (TiO2) when the dye is attached to the surface. This may be a problem since the dye may affect the position of the energy levels of the semiconductor and the combined system may therefore show different energy levels compared to the separate materials. By photoelectron spectroscopy it is possible to determine the energy levels of both the dye and the semiconductor simultaneously, which may be advantageous to understand the possible electron transfer reactions.16
Using photoelectron spectroscopy it is also possible to study if there are any filled states within the band gap of the semiconductor, which can be important for electron transport and recombination of the photogenerated charges.17,153 Recently we have reported on the application of mesoporous microbead films in liquid and solid state based DSCs which show higher open circuit voltage and a faster transport time compared to conventional DSCs.154,155 Photoelectron spectroscopy measurement of the films shows that microbead films have less intra band gap states which in part can explain the behaviour of the device in comparison to standard Dye sol paste films (Fig. 8). Intra band gap states are very important for the electron transport, lifetime and device performance of the solar cell. More numerous and deeper traps can slow down the electron transport and increase the back reaction of electrons and act as recombination centres. This will therefore decrease Jsc and Voc of the device. The nature of these traps is not completely understood9,156–158 but the preparation method of semiconductor films affects the density of traps66,156 and consequently chemical capacitance and recombination resistance of the films.67
 Fig. 8  Measured intra band gap sates of microbead and nanoparticulate films by XPS. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It is also possible to measure the elemental composition of the molecular orbitals in the valence electronic structure using resonant PES or measurements with different X-ray energies. For example the elemental contribution in the highest molecular orbitals of ruthenium dyes was determined using resonant PES and also by different photon energies, which enhance or suppress the signal from different elements in the spectra.152,159,160 From the results the contribution from the ruthenium metal centre and the ligand to the highest occupied orbitals can be quantified experimentally.

3.7 UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy
Steady-state absorption spectroscopy of dye-sensitized solar cells can be used to determine the band gap of the different materials, the light harvesting efficiency of the solar cell, a material’s concentration within the device and the extinction coefficients of dyes.
The absorbance of a sample (A(λ)) as a function of the wavelength (λ) is defined by the logarithmic ratio of the incoming light intensity (I0(λ)) and the transmitted light intensity (It(λ)) through a sample: (6)where T(λ) is the transmittance of a sample. Absorption spectra are therefore usually obtained by measuring the light transmitted through the sample and the light transmitted through a non-absorbing reference in the same set-up.
The extinction coefficients (ε(λ)) or concentrations of dyes in solution (C) can be estimated using the Beer–Lambert law: A(λ) = ε(λ)Cl(7)where l is the optical length of the used cuvette (usually 1 cm). For accurate determination of the extinction coefficient, C should be rather low to prevent light scattering and aggregation in the solution. Furthermore, it should be noted that the error in the measurement becomes very large at high absorbance values when the intensity of transmitted light becomes very small.
When measuring the solid samples, the absorption coefficient α tends to be used instead of the extinction coefficient, which is defined as: (8)where d is the thickness of the solid sample. The bandgap energies of semiconductors (Eg) can be determined from measurements of the absorption coefficient. For direct bandgap semiconductors, the absorption coefficient is related to the photon energy (Eph) near the absorption edge by: . For indirect bandgap semiconductors this relation is: .52 Plots of α2 and α1/2vs. Eph can therefore be used to determine whether a semiconductor has a direct or an indirect bandgap and to determine the bandgap from a straight line interpolation to the intercept.
For dye molecules, one typically considers the zero–zero transition energy between the ground and excited electronic states in the lowest vibrational level (E0–0). This energy can be determined from the crossing point of the normalised absorption and emission spectra. Alternatively, an approximate value can be obtained by determining the onset energy of absorption.161
Comparison of the simulated absorption spectra of dyes obtained from DFT calculations with experimental UV-visible absorption data can give insights into what specific transitions are involved in the absorption spectra.157–158,162
The dye coverage on metal oxide surfaces can be estimated using absorption measurements. If dyed films are measured directly the absorbance can be related to the surface coverage (Γ) in units of mol cm−2 using eqn (9):163 A = 1000 × Γ × ε(9)The extinction coefficient usually has to be determined from measurements of the dye in solution and this method therefore relies on the dye’s extinction coefficient and the absorption spectrum not changing upon adsorption to a metal surface. This is often not the case and therefore alternative methods of determining the surface coverage of dyes involve dye desorption from the surface often with basic solutions66 or measurement of the dye bath’s concentration before and after dye adsorption.161 If the surface area of the electrode is known (from the particle size, porosity and film thickness), one can calculate the area of the adsorption site of single dye molecules on the particles.147 Alternatively, if this parameter is known, the measurements may be used to estimate the effective surface area of the electrode.66
Desorption measurements can also be used to estimate the dye adsorption isotherm147 which is important for the evaluation of competitive dye adsorption in the cocktail co-sensitization method.164,165 Other methods such as quartz balance, neutron impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (NICIS) and photocurrent measurement techniques can also be used for this purpose for which special instruments are required.166–168
A comparison between the absorption spectrum of a dye in solution and the absorption spectrum when it is adsorbed to a semiconductor surface can give insights into the impact of binding on the dye molecules. For example, if binding to the surface is accompanied by a large change in the dye structure, this might result in a shift of the dye’s absorption spectrum.161 Furthermore, dye aggregation in solution or on the surface can be observed by absorption spectroscopy. Recording the traces of electrolyte/electrode absorption changes during the stability tests is a tool for understanding possible device changes during aging.169
The light harvesting efficiency (LHE) or absorptance of a solar cell electrode, i.e. the fraction of absorbed photons, can be estimated from its absorbance using the following equation: LHE(λ) = 1 − 10−A(λ)(10)However, as this equation neglects any reflection losses or diffuse transmission, a better measurement of this parameter can be obtained when using an integrating sphere.163–165 In this case, the total transmittance and the total reflectance (R) of a film can be measured and LHE can be calculated using: LHE(λ) = 1 − T(λ) − R(λ).
The light harvesting efficiency is an important parameter for calculating the APCE of a solar cell (see Section 4.2) as well as for scaling the measurement results such as those from transient absorption spectroscopy (see Section 5) by the number of absorbed photons at the excitation wavelength.
A further application of absorption spectroscopy has been to estimate the pore filling of the mesoporous electrodes by a hole conductor in solid state DSCs. This can be achieved by dissolution of the hole conductor from the pores and determination of the hole conductor’s amount by absorption measurements. This method requires knowledge of the hole conductor’s extinction coefficient, the porosity of the mesoporous film and the thickness of the hole conductor’s capping layer on top of the semiconductor film.86
A second method for the estimation of pore filling uses the interference patterns observed in the transmission spectra of thin films. From these patterns, the effective refractive index of the films can be determined and using the Bruggeman effective medium approximation the volume fractions of all components and therefore the pore filling can be estimated.87
3.8 Conductivity measurements
Conductivity of each DSC component is important and the influencing parameter for the optimization procedure of the device PCE is related for sure to the fundamental understanding of the device behaviour.170–186 The thickness of each device component is typically optimized in terms of contribution to the total device series resistance. For example increasing the thickness of the PEDOT counter electrode on glass enhances the conductivity of the film, and in turn limits the transparency of the electrode.88,170 The same argument is true for other device components, i.e. conductivity of metal back contact versus its light scattering properties in ssDSCs that should be optimized regarding the metal contact thickness. In ssDSCs, the hole conductivity is a limiting factor for device PCE and higher conductivities are desired. Conductivity measurements for DSCs include investigation of the hole conductor, the mesoporous semiconductor and redox mediators in the electrolyte as well as the counter electrode.
Applying a voltage on the two (or four) contacts of the material and recording the current is a conventional way for measuring the conductivity. A simple resistor model can be used to estimate the conductivity from current–voltage data in the dark or in different light intensities (i.e. measuring the photo doping effects). Special care should be taken about the length of the top metal contacts and how the total current will distribute to the semiconductor (it defines the effective thickness and area of the semiconductor engaged in electronic conduction). Depending on the metal work function and the position of the Fermi level in the semiconductor, we have contact resistances which can be of the ohmic or Shottky type. Metal contacts should be chosen appropriately to make ohmic contact with the semiconductor and their corresponding contact resistances should be taken into account in the measurement. In the two point probe measurements, this can be estimated by measuring through different channel lengths. However by using the four point probe technique, one applies the current from two contacts and measures the voltage from another two contacts. In this way, the contact resistance is removed from the measurement.
Due to its crucial importance to the device efficiency, hole conductor conductivity has been widely investigated for ssDSCs.172–174,180 Typically two gold electrodes are evaporated on the film (Fig. 9a) and the voltage–current characteristics are recorded. A simple resistor model can be used to determine the conductivity (σ): σ = L/Rwd. L is the channel length, R is resistance obtained from the I–V curve, d is the thickness of the film and w is the channel width.172 As is shown in Fig. 9, the absence of FTO is necessary here to measure the contribution of only the hole conductor and moreover the presence of a mesoporous scaffold is necessary to take into account the film porosity in the real device.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the conductivity measurement used for solid state DSCs. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 130, 12912). Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of a coplanar configuration for conductivity measurement in liquid electrolyte DSCs. 
Conductivity (σ) of a semiconductor is related to the resistivity (ρ) and mobility (μ) through: (11)n is the charge density and e is the fundamental charge of an electron. Using the Einstein relation one can relate the mobility of a semiconductor to the diffusion coefficient (D) of electrons (holes): (12)For spiro, the photo doping effect cannot change the Fermi level noticeably since it is usually p-doped in the device.
Conductivity measurement of a mesoporous TiO2 film is not a simple task. The presence of trap levels with different energies leads to the Fermi level dependent diffusion coefficient of the electrons which can be explained by the random walk and multiple trapping models (Section 2.3). Then conductivity depends on the light intensity and the amount of electrons present in the film.33
Electron transport time measurements for the complete solar cell (see Section 6.2.2) can give the effective diffusion coefficient of the electrons inside the film (eqn (50)). Measuring the transport time in different light intensities gives a description of conductivity inside the mesoporous film (eqn (11) and (12)). Furthermore, the transport resistance of the mesoporous TiO2 film can be estimated by EIS.181
Terahertz spectroscopy is a powerful tool for measuring the real and imaginary parts of the frequency/light intensity dependence of conductivity in mesoporous semiconductor films and studying the charge transport in the film on a short length scale.175,176 In this method there is no electrical contact to the sample and time resolution can be in the order of sub pico seconds. Transmission of far-infra red pulses from the dyed/bare sample is measured after a delay to a visible excitation pulse (in different probe frequencies and pulse intensities). The transmission difference ratio (ΔT(λ)/T(λ)) of the far infrared light at the wavelength λ from the sample depends on the conductivity (σn(λ)) of the sample through:178 (13)Δnt is the excess injected charge and d is the thickness of the film. Nemec et al. have studied the charge transport in the mesoporous TiO2 and ZnO films by terahertz spectroscopy. Sensitization of films by dye significantly affects the charge transport due to dye cation/injected electron electrostatic interactions in ZnO films.176 Tiwana et al. have compared electron conductivity in dyed mesoporous films with undyed films for ssDSCs using terahertz spectroscopy.177 Hendry et al. have studied the electron mobilities in bulk and mesoporous TiO2 films and the effect of local electric fields using terahertz conductivity measurement.187 This technique allows the determination of the electron mobility after carrier thermalization with the lattice but before equilibration with defect trapping states and therefore represents upper limits for conductivities.187
Snaith et al. have used photo-induced charge-conductivity (PICC) modulation spectroscopy to study and model the charge transport in a dyed mesoporous TiO2 film.188 A pulsed laser beam excites the dye molecules that inject electrons inside TiO2. Probing the oxidized dye absorption versus time monitors the density of injected electrons inside the film. Simultaneously a voltage current characteristic of the film through two metallic contacts can be recorded from which conductivity and mobility are estimated.179,188
There are other methods which are common for semiconductors and organic hole conductors such as the Hall effect and time of flight (TOF) method. In TOF the film is sandwiched between two metallic electrodes, and a pulse of charge carriers is created by a voltage pulse or a laser pulse at one electrode; and the travelling time of created charge to the second electrode is measured. Eqn (14) relates the travelling time to the drift velocity and the mobility:189,190 (14)d is the film thickness, ttr is the transit time, E is the electric field and V is the voltage. Halverson et al. investigated the proton intercalation effects on electron-transport of mesoporus TiO2 films in a neat electrolyte using the TOF method.158 Jäger et al. studied doping effects on the conductivity of a triphenyldiamine hole conductor in ssDSCs.189
In space charge limited current (SCLC) measurement, the same configuration setup (simple deposited contacts – Fig. 14a) is used to measure the limiting current of the hole conductor film (suitable for semiconductors with ohmic contacts).182Using eqn (15) one can estimate the mobility (μ) of the charges in the sample:183,191 (15)Contact resistances should be considered here because only two contacts are used rather than four. J, V and d are the limited current density, voltage and thickness of the film, ε and ε0 are relative and absolute vacuum dielectric constants.
In microwave conductivity measurement (MC) ΔP(t)/P is the relative change of the microwave power (P) reflected by the sample induced by a photogenerated change of the conductivity (Δσ(t)) during the time (t).184 The change of the photoconductivity is proportional to the reflected microwave signal: ΔP(t)/P = ĀΔσ(t), where Ā is the proportionality factor. Dunn et al. have measured the trap densities of the TiO2 mesoporous film using the photo induced microwave reflectance method.34,185
Using a coplanar configuration (Fig. 9b) the conductivity of TiO2 porous films was measured using a bi-potentiostat. The TiO2 film sintered on an interdigitated electrode forms two gold supported nanoporous electrodes that are electrically contacted by the TiO2 layer present in the gap between the two gold contacts. The measurement is based on a simultaneous scan of the two nanoporous working electrodes (between −0.0 V and −0.9 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)) while a small constant potential difference between them is maintained. The current flowing across the gap through TiO2 is proportional to its conductivity at each potential.192
Changes in the device temperature should be taken into account during long conductivity measurements especially for methods in which electrical contact is needed (the sample will be heated because of its resistance).
In some materials such as metal–organic perovskites, dielectric constant and consequently conductivity have great dependency on temperature and also applied bias.193
For DSCs with liquid electrolytes, the diffusion of the redox couple is an important and rather rate limiting process for the cell performance. In an electrolyte containing ionic concentration of C, one can define ionic conductivity (κEL) as:194 (16)F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, T absolute temperature, Z and D are charge and diffusion coefficients of the ion. The summation is over ions which contribute to electrochemical current. Cyclic voltammetry and EIS are the main methods to measure the diffusion coefficient of the redox mediators in liquid dye-sensitized solar cells or quasi-solid-state DSCs195,196 (Sections 3.9.1 and 6.1). Low diffusion coefficients lead to mass transport limitations in the bulky redox mediators.
3.9 Electrochemical measurements

3.9.1 Cyclic voltammetry. 
The Nernst equation describes the electrode potential in the solution which depends on the population of acceptor/donor species when an electrochemical electrode is in contact with the electrolyte: (17)E is the electrode potential energy (equal to elemental charge times the potential), E0 is the redox formal energy which depends on the nature of redox species, kB and T are the Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature and Cred and Cox are concentration of reduced and oxidized species. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is the most well-known electrochemical technique and is widely used in DSC research for characterization of dyes, redox mediators and charge transfer processes at interfaces. By scanning the voltage and monitoring the current in a forward and a reverse scan, the formal redox potential, as well as interface charge transfer rates and the diffusion coefficient can be estimated.194 If the scan is begun at a potential well positive of E0, only capacitive current flows until in the vicinity of E0 that the reduction begins and the faradaic current starts to flow. As the electrode potential continues to grow more negative the current increases until the surface concentration of the electroactive species drops nearly to zero, the mass transfer to the surface reaches a maximum rate and then it declines as the depletion effect sets in. The observation is therefore a peaked current–potential curve like that depicted in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms of cobalt–phen complexes in acetonitrile. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 115, 21500). Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
CV is the standard method for measuring the dye formal redox potentials from which the HOMO and LUMO levels of the dye in the solution can be estimated (see Fig. 2). By using a three electrode electrochemical cell one can record the cyclic voltammogram of the dye on the electrode or in the solution. The average of peak (Vp,a)(Vp,c) voltages gives the formal potential of the dye in the solution:121,197–202 (18)If the working electrode is an under-layer free dye loaded mesoporous film on FTO, the CV current corresponds to the hole hopping current (see Section 3.9.2). Moderate scan rates of 10 to 50 mV per second are implemented for evaluation of hole hopping in this experiment. The conventional solvent is acetonitrile which is commonly used for the DSC electrolytes containing 0.1 M supporting salt. Other solvents are also used which can modify the position of dye energy levels to some extent.203 In most of the cases calibration of the reference electrode is needed by adding ferrocene to the electrolyte and measuring the CV spectra of the solution again.121,204 Due to its solvent independence redox potential and high electroactivity, ferrocene is widely used for the calibration of reference electrodes. Dye de-loading from the working electrode (WE) can occur during the CV measurement in the case of very positive or negative applied potentials. This should be taken into account during the measurement. Furthermore in the same way, redox potential of the electrolyte redox mediator is achievable from its CV spectrum in the solution (eqn (18) and Fig. 10)205
The diffusion coefficient of the redox mediators in different solvents can be obtained by CV. A low concentration of redox mediators – for example Co(II)(bpy)3(3PF6)2− – is dissolved in a desired solvent and CV is recorded with different scanning rates. The diffusion coefficient for reversible systems is obtained using the Randles–Sevcik equation:206 (19)Aelectrode is the electrode surface area, C is the concentration of the species under study, n is the number of transferred electrons in the redox reaction, D is the diffusion coefficient and ν is the scanning rate.
Using microelectrodes in CV, one can obtain the diffusion coefficient (D) from the diffusion limited current (Ilim) observed in the voltammogram according to eqn (20):57 Ilim = 4FnDCr(20)F is the Faraday constant, C is the concentration, n the number of transferred electrons (1 for the case of a cobalt electrolyte) and r is the radius of the microelectrode.57 Furthermore, in the Pt sandwich cell filled by the electrolyte, the resultant limiting current (Jlim) from CV can be used to estimate the diffusion coefficient (D): Jlim = 2FDC/dsealant. C, F and dsealant are concentration of the acceptor redox mediator, the Faraday constant and the sealant thickness, respectively.207
Papageorgiou has studied the effect of TiO2 film porosity on the diffusion of iodide mediators by measuring CV of the cell. Different sandwich cells of flat Pt with/without mesoporous TiO2 have been filled by the iodide electrolyte and the CV data have been fitted by the proposed diffusion model and the concentration profile of I− and I3− in the electrolyte has been estimated.208
The Fermi level of the electrolyte (the redox potential) is held between the acceptor and donor states in the electrolyte. The distribution of acceptor (Nox)/donor species (Nred) in the electrolyte (shown in Fig. 2) can be described by:6 (21)E is energy, EF redox potential, Λ reorganization energy, kB Boltzmann constant and T is absolute temperature. Fig. 16 shows the typical CV spectra of famous cobalt(phen) complexes measured in acetonitrile. In certain DSC devices, photocurrent decreases and photovoltage increases by decreasing the redox potential.57
CV has been used for determination of trap density of states (DOS) in the semiconducting electrodes.209 Bisquert et al. introduced a model for describing charge accumulation in mesoporous electrodes in contact with the electrolyte, and interpreted the experimental CV data using the model. Information about the density of states and energy levels could be obtained.209 In the CV spectrum of a bare TiO2 electrode, the changes in the stored charge (dQ) due to the changes in the Fermi level (dV) can be described by:210 (22)I, V and ν are the current, voltage and scanning rate in CV measurement. NA and F are the Avogadro number and the Faraday constant respectively.211
Gao et al. have used the CV method to monitor the changes in electron transfer rates from the electrode to the electrolyte acceptor species for Mg(OOCCH3)2 coated WEs.212
CV can be used for the characterization of counter electrodes as well. By measuring the CV of the counter electrode in the presence of a redox mediator, one can study the electrocatalytic activity and estimate the effective surface area of the counter electrode using the peak current separations and magnitudes or by exchange current density analysis in conventional Tafel plots of symmetrical cells.170,213,214
Low peak separation and higher peak currents are indicative of higher electrocatalytic activity of the counter electrode. It can be interpreted as a higher surface area of the counter electrode or its higher charge transfer rate.
Electrochemical characterization of blocking layers of FTO can be done by measuring the CV of the Ferrocene acceptor ions in liquid electrolytes.215–217 CV data are plotted in the conventional Tafel plots and compared to bare FTO: magnitude of current is indicative of the blocking effect for back charge transfer from the electrode to the electrolyte.217 All the measured energy levels and electron transfer rates in the CV are of crucial importance for device optimization.


3.9.2 Spectroelectrochemistry. 
In spectroelectrochemistry the optical changes of the device components (typically dye covered TiO2 electrodes) under different electrochemical conditions are recorded. The setup consists of a three electrode electrochemical cell in which UV-Vis absorption of the electrode is simultaneously monitored during the electrochemical reactions. Using different applied bias voltages on the dyed electrode in the neat electrolyte, one can alter the populations of the dye/oxidized dyes or hole conductor oxidized molecules according to the Nernst equation (eqn (17)) and monitor the changes in the absorption spectra of the electrode.218,219
By applying a step potential (positive enough to oxidize dye) to the dyed electrode and simultaneously monitoring the oxidation current and absorption changes, coloration efficiency (CE(λ)) and delta extinction coefficient (Δε) can be estimated.85
These data will be of essential importance for transient kinetic absorption spectroscopy in which the fingerprints of the oxidized dye and its extinction coefficient are necessary to quantify the charge recombination and dye regeneration kinetics after the excitation of the dye (see Section 5.1).220
The TiO2 working electrode should be thin enough to minimize the optical reflections and potential drops in the electrode. If the applied potential became too positive, it is possible that each dye is oxidized with more than one electron or even desorbed from the surface that should be taken into account. The extinction coefficient of the reduced dye (which is different from the excited state dye) can be measured in the same way as described above by using a negative reduction potential.
DFT calculations can be combined with spectroelectrochemistry to find out the origin of different absorption changes of the dye in terms of orbital energies and physical locations of donor/acceptors in the dye structure.197,221
Hole hopping is a lateral diffusion of holes in between the dyes in DSC working electrodes. Charge collection efficiency of solid state solar cells can be improved by the hole hopping,222 also the Stark effect is strongly dependent on that (Section 5.3). It can be measured by laser spectroscopy163 and cyclic voltammetry or spectroelectrochemistry.223 Using no under layer on the FTO and measuring the cyclic voltammogram of the dyed electrode, current peak in positive potentials corresponds to the hole hopping current (in positive potentials the TiO2 film is an insulator and the measured current is just from hole hopping between the dyes). The hole hopping rate and its corresponding activation energy, reorganization energy and diffusion coefficient can also be measured by CV.223
In the case of nanostructured semiconducting electrodes with a distribution of intra band gap states below the CB edge, scanning the applied bias from positive to negative potentials, the trap states of un-dyed films will be filled by the electrons. Injected charge to the electrode (from integration of current versus time) in each potential is proportional to density of trap states of un-dyed films in that particular potential.209 Monitoring the absorption spectra changes gives information about the energy position and the extinction coefficient of electrons in those states studied by spectroelectrochemistry.224 For light scattering samples one can use electrolyte electroreflectance (EER) spectroscopy instead.225 Spectroelectrochemistry has also been used to rationalize the Stark effect and oxidized dye contribution in photoinduced spectroscopy of DSCs (see also Section 5.3).226

3.10 Isoelectric point and the zeta potential measurements
Measurements of surface charge and interface potential drops for semiconductor nanoparticles have been implemented to further understand the device performance of liquid electrolyte DSCs. The surface charge of nanoparticles and the so called Helmholtz layer surrounding the particle in contact with the electrolyte cause a certain potential difference between the particle surface and the electrolyte environment. The interaction with the electrolyte results in a potential of the nanoparticle called zeta potential. The zeta potential cannot be directly measured however can be estimated from electrophoretic mobility measurement.227 The isoelectric point is defined as the pH at which the particle statistically has no net surface charge. Zeta potential measurements have been used to evaluate the anion uptake of magnesia (MgO) nanoparticles and their effect on the electron recombination kinetics in the liquid electrolyte DSCs.228 The zeta potential for nanoparticles of a certain metal oxide depends on the electrolyte environment, surface defects, oxygen or metal richness of the surface as well as the preferential crystal planes on the nanoparticle surface. It can directly affect the Helmholtz capacitance and the photoinduced Stark effects (Section 5.3).
A higher isoelectric point of the particle means a more basic surface and the ability of higher dye uptake229,230 (for dyes with carboxylic or phosphonic anchoring groups). The cation and anion uptake for alumina, magnesia and silica nanoparticles and their dependency on the particle isoelectric point in the quasi solid state DSCs have been reported by Mohanty et al.231
4. Device characterization
4.1 Current–voltage measurements
Solar cells are evaluated by power conversion efficiency (PCE) which is calculated from the current–voltage spectrum of the device. PCE is proportional to the amount of delivered electricity and important commercial and also economical parameters of the photovoltaic devices are declared by PCE i.e. efficiency per mass, area or cost. By illuminating the solar cell, scanning the voltage and measuring the current using a potentiostat/sourcemeter, we can plot the current–voltage curve of the cell. The photovoltage at zero current and photocurrent at zero voltage are called open circuit voltage (Voc) and short circuit current (Jsc). PCE of the solar cell is the ratio of maximum solar cell power to the intensity of incoming light. The maximum power point is defined in the point that has a maximum value for the product of current and voltage (Fig. 11). Under standard AM 1.5 conditions we have 100 mW cm−2 power of incoming light and PCE is defined by: (23)Pmax is the product of current and voltage at the maximum power point (MPP). The fill factor (FF) of the device is the ratio of Pmax to the product of Jsc and Voc: (24)Under open circuit conditions there is no current, and electrons have filled the trap states of TiO2 up to the Fermi level and trapped electrons are in equilibrium with conduction band electrons.40 Equilibrium density of electrons depends on the recombination rate krec;232 in Voc, electron generation rate G is equal to the recombination rate. Considering first order kinetic recombination, krec depends on the density of electrons n, and the electron lifetime τ: krec = n/τ, & krec = G(25)The higher the lifetime is, the higher the density of electrons in the film will be. Open circuit voltage of the device is the difference between the Fermi levels of counter and working electrodes, in order to have higher Voc we can reduce the recombination rate or lower the Fermi level of the counter electrode (which is almost equal to the electrolyte Redox potential). For example the redox potential of electrolytes with cobalt complex redox couples is usually more positive than the redox potential of the standard iodide based electrolyte. The electrolytes with cobalt complexes therefore usually result in higher voltages of the solar cell devices. In low surface area working electrodes (nanostructures with dimensions larger than 30 nm) it is possible to have band bending on semiconductor nanostructures in which resulting electric fields can reduce the recombination rate and increase Voc.74,233,234 Equivalently, keeping the recombination rate fixed and increasing the electron generation rate (G) Voc will be increased.
 Fig. 11  Typical IV curve of a DSC. 
Under short circuit conditions the Fermi level at the contacts is basically the same. Theoretical calculations and experimental measurements show that in short circuit there is a gradient of the Fermi level position within the TiO2 film thickness.24,235 The Fermi level difference is a driving force for the electron collection considering that the recombination rate in the short circuit is an order of magnitude lower than open circuit conditions. Here the generated electrons will diffuse to the working electrode and holes to the counter electrode. Diffusion is the rate limiting process in the electronic transport and depends on the light intensity.33 Stronger light harvestings and higher light intensities result in more generated electrons and more filled traps, which means faster transport in DSC working electrodes. The effective diffusion coefficient in the film (Dn) depends on the diffusion coefficient of free electrons in TiO2 (D0) and the trapping rate between trapped and free electrons.40 Lower trap densities and one dimensional structures promote faster transport and higher Fermi levels at the same charge density.75 The most important factor for achieving high current is high light harvesting efficiency; and in efficient nanoparticulate based liquid DSCs the collection efficiency is near 100%.10
The FF depends on the resistance of the device which is mainly composed of series resistance, diffusion resistance and shunt (recombination) resistance. High diffusion and series resistances and lower recombination resistances cause the FF to go down. Near the Jsc point the recombination rate is much lower than that at Voc and the series and diffusion resistances are dominant. Near the Voc point the current is low (low series potential loss) and the dominant resistance is the recombination resistance which can be basically calculated from slope of the tangential line from the current–voltage curve.

4.1.1 Importance of the mask, light source and scan rate. 
For proper evaluation of the efficiency, the size of the mask should be the same as the active area.12,13 The three dimensional hetero-structure of the DSCs can absorb light equally from different incident directions and DSCs are not sensitive to the direction of incoming light. If the incoming light is not 100% perpendicular to the surface, bigger masks allow penetration of excess light (including ambient diffusive light) into the DSC and overestimation of efficiency. A smaller mask can also underestimate the efficiency. In this case, after the dye excitation followed by injection of electrons, the Fermi level in the whole device area is not the same; covered parts can suck some percentage of electrons and lower the efficiency.
Another important factor for the measurement is the light source; the spectrum of the light source should be exactly the same as the solar spectrum. Usually a xenon lamp together with optical filters can simulate the solar spectrum. A stable reference silicon diode with a known spectral response can be used for the calibration of the intensity of the sun simulator. A correction factor is needed to account for the photocurrent differences between reference and test cells.12 There are some edge effects on the edge of the mask and a slightly smaller mask than the active area is the best choice for the IV measurements.12
In the current measurement, voltage is increased step by step with a certain scan rate. After applying a step to increase the voltage, there is a waiting time for the device to reach the current equilibrium. Delay of the scanning rate is very important to be long enough in order to reach equilibrium in the current (due to increasing the voltage). Dependence of cell parameters on the scan rate is discussed in ref. 12. If the scan rate is too fast, there is no time for the photocurrent to be stabilized after the voltage increase and leads to some uncertainties.12 The scan rate of IV measurement is of crucial importance for correct evaluation of perovskite based solar cells which show anomalous hysteresis.236


4.1.2 Dark current measurement and diffusion limited current. 
Under dark conditions, by scanning from zero to negative potentials, after a while and in certain potential (in which DOS of filled traps and electrolyte acceptor states intercepts), the back recombination of electrons to the electrolyte is started and one can see the increase of the dark current. The shape of this curve determines the FF of the device. Back reaction current density (Jr) can be described as:39 Jr = eketCmox(nuα −nuα0)(26)e is the elementary charge of an electron, ket is the back reaction rate, Cox is the concentration of the oxidized species of the electrolyte, n and n0 are the electron concentration at voltage V and voltage 0 in the dark; m, α and u are the reaction rate for the oxidized species and electrons and the electron transfer coefficient respectively. By combining eqn (26) (which comes from the Butler–Volmer equation in electrochemistry194) with the diffusion equation of the electrolyte acceptors, we can express recombination current in terms of the diffusion coefficient and short circuit current of the cell39
Higher acceptor densities near the particle interface, higher electron concentration together with higher surface areas lead to a higher recombination rate. Dark current measurement can be employed for comparison of the back recombination rate of different solar cells.237 Different trends in the dark current lifetime and the photovoltage transient lifetime can give information and insights about the light induced recombination paths i.e. insufficient pore filling of hole conductors in ssDSCs.155 In the light the photocurrent (Jph) is described by: Jph = Jinj − Jr(27)The addition of the dark current with injection current (Jinj) gives the photocurrent. The IV curve will shift to lower potentials (compared to dark current) by considering the product of Jsc and the cell series resistance which is an ohmic loss under working conditions.238
Going further from zero to positive potentials, we can have reverse current to get electrons from the electrolyte donors (which are more abundant compared to acceptor species i.e. concentration of Co(II) compared to Co(III)) back to TiO2. By increasing the voltage to more positive potentials, electrons will come to the film from the electrolyte and the limiting current can be reached at which diffusion of electrolyte species cannot proceed faster than a special rate, which depends on the porosity of the film, the sealant thickness, concentration of the electrolyte redox mediator and its diffusion coefficient.239 For cobalt complexes, mass transport can be a problem in high current devices.100,154,240,241 Comparison of dark limiting current can be a tool for determination of current limitations and evaluation of recombination in different devices. For comparison of limiting current we should have in mind that the dye affects the measured current in positive potentials. Indeed it is possible that we oxidize the dye and electron transfer takes place between the dye and the electrolyte. Comparison of IPCE integrated current and short circuit current is another way to study the mass transport limitation in the cobalt electrolyte based cells. In the case of non-limited current DSCs, Jsc should be linear versus light intensity and equal to integrated IPCE current: (28)Light harvesting efficiency (φLHE), collection efficiency (φcol) and injection efficiency (φinj) are almost independent of light intensity. Charge collection efficiencies can be however dependent on the light intensities for very high recombination rate devices (for example in the case of ferrocene based electrolytes122,242) but on the other hand for iodide and cobalt complexes they are almost independent of light intensity. In the case of diffusion limiting current, the linear curve of J versus G will be flattened in high light intensities and cannot be higher than limiting current (Fig. 12). Then we can see a big difference in efficiency when we measure the IV in 1 Sun or in 20% of 1 Sun. Usually density filters can simply be used to simulate different light intensities.
 Fig. 12  
J
sc
versus light intensity for different films used for the optimization of film porosity in cobalt electrolyte DSCs. Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.3 Simulating the IV curve. 
DSC acts as a hetero-structured p–n junction (there is no space charge layer in DSCs) and its current–voltage characteristics obey the diode equation:238,243 (29.1) (29.2)kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature and n is the diode ideality factor. I, V and R are current–voltage and resistance of the cell. Simulating the experimental data by these equations, one can distinguish series or recombination resistances of the device and compare them for different cells.238,243,244

Fig. 13 shows the typical equivalent circuit used for DSCs.244Rs, D, and Rsh are contact resistance, diode element and shunt resistance.Iph − Ish − Id = 0 Vd = Vsh = Vs + V(t)(30)Iph, Ish and Id are photocurrent, shunt current and load current (delivered current).
 Fig. 13  An equivalent circuit for DSCs. 
 Fig. 14  (a) Typical IPCE spectra of DSCs measured for the D35 organic dye. Normalized IPCE shows that the thicker working electrodes have more light scattering. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 118, 16472). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of an IPCE setup. 

R
sh is employed to denote the interfacial charge recombination losses to both the dye cation and the redox electrolyte (in the case of ssDSCs: it denotes the hole conductor recombination, oxidized dye or under layer recombination). Shunt resistance Rsh takes into account all parallel resistive losses across the photovoltaic device including the leakage current. The photo-generated current Iph is in parallel with the rectifying diode.243
Fitting the IV curve by a model, one can compare different devices in terms of recombination resistance, contact resistance, etc. There are more models for simulating the DSC IV curve in which different components such as the counter electrode and electrolyte Warburg impedance are considered separately in the model.25,238,244 Halme et al. and Fabregat-Santiage et al. proposed separate models and related the device parameters (FF, Voc and Jsc) to different characteristic times and lengths of DSCs and simulate the current–voltage curve and impedance spectra of the device.25 Ni et al. and Park et al. have used the thermionic emission theory for description of the FTO/blocking layer interface and performed IV curve fitting to elaborate device energy losses in liquid based DSCs.245,246 Boschloo et al. have used the mesoporous microbeads in working electrodes of solid state DSCs. If there is no thick spiro capping layer, high roughness of the sub-micron microbead films causes a big shunt resistance between the silver and uncovered TiO2 and reduces the device FF. Using a graphite back contact will decrease the shunt resistance and increase the device FF. Shunt resistance of the device has been obtained by fitting the IV curve of the device.155
Moreover, He et al. have used IV fitting for studying the dependence of device shunt resistance on the bending degree of a flexible DSC.247

4.2 IPCE measurements
The spectral response of a solar cell to the incoming light in terms of current is called IPCE. IPCE stands for incident photon to current conversion efficiency. In the DC IPCE method, the wavelength of incoming monochromatic light is changed step by step and the current of solar cell is measured at each step (shown schematically in Fig. 14b). Device IPCE can be calculated by:248 (31)Intensity of incoming light usually is calibrated to 1 Sun and a standard Si detector is used to measure Pin. Usually the main beam is split into two equal beams, one goes to the Si detector and another goes to the test sample. The same situation of masking for current–voltage measurement needs to be considered here. Temperature control of DSCs for long measurements is essential to measure the correct data in the DC method.248 If the intensity of incoming light is calibrated to 1 Sun (with the same spectra), we can estimate the short circuit current of the cell by the integrated IPCE current. (32)Φin and e are incident photon flux and electron elementary charge. If the integrated IPCE current is not the same as Jsc, one may conclude some ideas about the mass transport limitation inside the cell. In the bulky redox mediators it is possible that IPCE integrated current be higher than Jsc. In the IPCE we have just a portion of real current at each moment and we integrate the current steps to have the total current. But under the sun illumination we just have all the current (resulting from different wavelengths) at the same time and diffusion limitation of the electrolyte can arise and limit the cell current.
On the other hand in the solid state devices with spiro OMeTAD hole conductors, usually we can observe shorter integrated IPCE current compared to short circuit current. In spiro based devices the nonlinearity of current versus light intensity causes disagreement of integrated IPCE current and Jsc.188 To fix the problem, the AC method can be implemented. In this method there is a white bias light keeping the Fermi level at the same level of short circuit conditions, then a chopped light with different wavelengths will be applied to the cell step by step and the current will be measured. The measured current has a DC component which comes from bias light and an AC component which is from chopped light.248Fig. 14a shows the typical IPCE spectrum of a DSC, measured for organic dye D35 on TiO2. In most of the dyes, absorption in the green wavelengths is much better than the red wavelengths that makes the IPCE spectrum in the green region flat (showing the maximum absorption of green photons along the film thickness and limited by the FTO transmittance and charge collection efficiency). Normalizing IPCE to its maximum, one can compare the red wavelength response of the cells and compare the light scattering efficiency within the WEs.154,249,250
Measured current in the IPCE is a product of the charge collection efficiency, electron injection and light harvesting efficiency (eqn (33)). Scattering layers can increase light harvesting efficiency of liquid DSCs.251 The IPCE spectrum mainly indicates any change in DSC light harvesting efficiency caused by any device optical modifications252 such as photonic crystals,249 surface plasmon layers,253 co-sensitization,90,254 diffuse or back scattering layers255–257 as well as tandem cells.258 Absorbed photon to current conversion efficiency (APCE) is the ratio of IPCE and light harvesting efficiency and is an estimate of how the absorbed photons convert to current (eqn (34)). For q-dot sensitized solar cells APCEs higher than 100% are observed due to multi electron injection from one single photon. If the thickness of the film is higher than the diffusion length, by measuring APCE from the counter electrode side with different film thicknesses, one can see the red shift of the peak by increasing the thickness; indicating the diffusion limitations in the device.259 (33) (34)Light harvesting efficiency can be calculated according to optical transmission, absorption and reflection coefficients of device components. IPCE is different when you illuminate the cell from working (φLHE–WE) or counter electrode (φLHE–CE) sides.259
Measuring the IPCE from working or counter electrode sides, and considering the diffusion equation in the DSC for TiO2 electrons, we can estimate the collection efficiency according to the method of Södergren et al.259,260
This method is appropriate for transparent devices without highly scattering films. There is disagreement when you measure the diffusion length using IPCE or transient photovoltage/photocurrent methods.261,262 (See also Section 6.2.2.)
5. Photo-induced spectroscopy
In this section, we will summarize the techniques which measure optical responses of the system following a perturbation by light. We have roughly sub-divided this section into techniques which use short laser pulses for excitation (pulsed laser spectroscopy) such as transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy and techniques, which used an on/off modulated source (photo-induced absorption spectroscopy). We also include the discussion of the Stark effect and electroabsorption spectroscopy in this section as understanding this effect is important for the interpretation of transient and photo-induced absorption spectroscopies.
5.1 Pulsed laser spectroscopy
Pulsed laser techniques are typically used to measure the kinetics of the electron transfer reactions (see Section 2.2) within the solar cell. Electron injection, recombination and dye regeneration times, also dynamics of other photo-induced processes such as the Stark effect can be monitored by these types of methods.
The underlying concept of laser spectroscopy is to use a laser pulse to excite the sample (the pump pulse) and then to follow the induced changes in the sample over time. In time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, the emission from a sample is monitored over time (see Section 5.1.3). In transient absorption spectroscopy, the absorption of a second light beam (the probe) by the sample is monitored. The change in absorbance (ΔA(λ)) is then calculated from the intensity of the transmitted probe beam in the presence of the pump (I(λ)pumped) and the intensity of the transmitted probe beam in the absence of the pump (I(λ)unpumped) according to: ΔA(λ) = −log(I(λ)pumped/I(λ)unpumped)(35)For dye-sensitized solar cells, ΔA may contain contributions from various transient species and processes, such as ground-state bleaching of the dye, absorption of the excited or the oxidised state of the dye, absorption of electrons in TiO2 and holes in the electrolyte/hole conductor, stimulated emission from the excited state of the dye and finally shifts of the ground state absorption spectrum of the dye due to the Stark effect263,264 (Section 5.3). Which species and processes are observed depend on the time scale of the measurement, and TAS can be subdivided into ultrafast TAS and nano-microsecond TAS.
In ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy, both pump and probe pulses are generated from the same (femtosecond) laser and time resolution is achieved through the variation of the relative arrival times of the pulses at the sample (Section 5.1.2). A continuous probe beam can be used for measurements on longer time scales and is typically combined with a nanosecond pulsed laser as the pump (nano-millisecond TAS, Section 5.1.3).

5.1.1 Time resolved fluorescence spectroscopy. 
In time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, a short light pulse is used to excite the sample and the resulting emission of the sample is measured as a function of time. For dye-sensitized solar cells, it is typically of interest to measure the excited state lifetimes of the sensitizer either in solution or attached to films by monitoring its emission. Depending on the desired time-resolution, there are different methods for detecting the fluorescence. For a time resolution of up to nanoseconds, fast-detection electronics can be used.
Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) is a technique for measuring fluorescence lifetimes with a picosecond time resolution.265 In this technique, only one emitted photon can be analysed per laser pulse and histograms of the various arrival times of the emitted photons make up the fluorescence decay curve. The count rate of the measurement has to be kept low, in order to ensure that the decay does not become biased by early arriving photons.
Fluorescence up-conversion spectroscopy can be used to measure fluorescence with sub-picosecond time resolution266 and has been used to study electron injection rates in DSCs.267 In this technique, the sample is excited with a femtosecond laser pulse. The fluorescence of the sample is then frequency mixed in a nonlinear crystal with a probe pulse from the same laser to generate frequency mixed radiation, which is then detected. The frequency mixing only occurs when the probe is present in the crystal and therefore time resolution of the measurement is within the laser pulse width. By varying the arrival time of the probe pulse at the crystal in relation to the excitation, the kinetics of emission can be measured.
Emission from the sensitizers’ excited state is together with non-radiative decay back to the ground state: one of the loss mechanisms competing with electron injection in dye-sensitized solar cells. Emission intensities can therefore be taken as a measure of the excited state concentration at a particular time and emission rate constants (kobs) can be related to injection rates (kinj) by: kobs = kinj + k0(36)where k0 is the rate of excited state relaxation (of both radiative and non-radiative relaxation combined).

k
0 can be determined by measuring the emission of the dye on a substrate in which it cannot inject. For these purposes, typically the wide band gap oxides Al2O3 and ZrO2 have been used.29,268
In principal, the injection efficiency can be calculated from kinj and k0 using:18 (37)which can be re-written in terms of the fluorescence lifetimes (τf = 1/k) determined for the dye on TiO2 and ZrO2 or Al2O3 as (38)In practice it often makes more sense to calculate injection yields from the integrated area under the decays, as the fluorescence decays of the dyes used in DSCs are seldom mono-exponential. In this case, the magnitude of the reduction in emission area on TiO2 relative to the inert substrate is taken as the injection yield.29


5.1.2 Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy. 
Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy (ufTAS) can be used to monitor processes occurring in a dye-sensitized solar cell following from femtoseconds to a few nanoseconds after excitation. Typically, the main process studied in this time regime is electron injection from the dye to the metal oxide18,30,269–271 but also fast regeneration by electrolytes272 or solid state hole conductors220,273,274 has been measured.
A schematic diagram of the main components of a typical ufTAS set-up is shown in Fig. 15. The pulses from a femtosecond Ti-sapphire laser are split into two separate beams to create the pump and the probe for measurement. Typically, an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) is used to change the wavelength of the fundamental laser to a wavelength desired for sample excitation. The pump pulse can then be sent through a chopper before it hits the sample in order to reduce its repetition rate by half, so that there is only a pump pulse at the sample for every second probe pulse. Either the pump or the probe (shown as the probe in Fig. 15) will have a delay state in its path so that the relative arrival times of the two pulses at the sample can be varied. Before reaching the sample, the probe pulse is focussed on a crystal (for example made of sapphire or calcium fluoride) where a white light continuum is generated. What wavelength range is generated depends on the set-up but is most commonly in visible or near infrared wavelengths and could also be infrared for infrared transient absorption spectroscopy or the terahertz frequency regime for terahertz transient absorption spectroscopy. Finally, the transmitted probe light is detected with a suitable detector after the sample and the difference in absorption is calculated from the probe pulses where the pump was presented on the sample and where it was not. By measuring transient absorption spectra at different pump–probe delay times, ΔA can be determined as a function of both wavelength and time. The time resolution of the experiment is determined by the cross-correlation of the pump and probe pulses and can therefore be very high.
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the main components in an ultrafast transient absorption set-up. 
There are different contributions, which can be observed in the ufTAS spectra of dye-sensitized solar cells:
(1) Bleaching of the dye’s ground state due to the depopulation of the ground-state
(2) Absorption of the dye’s excited state due to the population of the excited state by the pump pulse
(3) Stimulated emission from the dye’s excited state back to the ground state. Photons from the probe pulse can induce this process and therefore the emitted photon will travel in the same direction as the probe pulse and be detected. This signal shows up as negative ΔA in the ufTAS spectra with approximately the same shape of the dye’s emission spectrum and gives a measure of the concentration of the excited state.
(4) Absorption of the products formed in electron transfer reactions. These are the oxidized dyes and electrons in TiO2 for electron injection into TiO2. If electron injection is followed by ultrafast regeneration, also the oxidised species of the redox electrolyte or the hole conductor could be observed.
(5) A shift in the ground-state absorption spectrum due to the Stark effect226,263,264 (ΔA) has the shape of the first derivative of the dye’s absorption spectrum (see Section 5.3).

Fig. 16 shows an example of the ultrafast transient absorption spectra of the N3 dye on TiO2.270 In these spectra, positive signals are observed due to the triplet and oxidized state of the N3 dye. Over time, the amount of triplet dye decreases and the amount of oxidized dye increases due to electron injection. In the case of N3, complete intersystem crossing to form the triplet excited state as well as some electron injection occurs within 0.5 ps after excitation, as both species are observed in the first spectrum shown.
 Fig. 16  TAS spectra of N3 dye on TiO2 at time delays of 0.5 (■), 10 (○), and 150 ps (▲) between the pump and probe pulses. Inset: Transient absorption kinetics at 860 nm.270 Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 124, 489). Copyright (2002) American Chemical Society. 
When analysing electron injection kinetics using ufTAS data, care has to be taken when selecting a wavelength for showing the kinetics of the oxidized dye.275 For many dyes, there may be significant overlap between the absorption spectrum of the excited and the oxidized dye. Selecting a wavelength where both species absorb could lead to misinterpretation of injection kinetics. A further issue of transient absorption spectroscopy can be that measurements are carried out under different conditions compared to the working conditions of dye-sensitized solar cells. Many of the studies showing ultrafast electron injection into TiO2 were carried out on dyed films in the absence of an electrolyte. Recent studies have shown that injection times observed for such films do not correspond to electron injection times observed in the presence of an optimized DSC electrolyte.272,275,276 A further drawback of ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy can be that the peak powers used are orders of magnitude higher than 1 Sun illumination. These high laser powers can influence recombination kinetics and thus lead to a skewing of results.
Instead of generating visible or NIR light to be used as probe light, terahertz or mid-IR pulses have been generated and used as probe pulses in transient absorption experiments. Terahertz radiation is absorbed by free charges and terahertz spectroscopy can therefore be used to study the time-resolved conductivity of a sample (Section 3.8). It has been used to study the electron injection of dyes into TiO2 and other semiconductors.277,278
Mid-IR probes can be used to study molecular vibrations279 as well as the concentration of injected electrons at wavelengths where molecular vibrations are absent due to the broad absorption of conduction band electrons in the mid-IR region.272,276,279


5.1.3 Nano- to millisecond transient absorption spectroscopy. 
For transient absorption measurements where a time-resolution of up to nanoseconds is sufficient, kinetics can be measured electronically using fast detectors. Therefore, pump and probe pulses can be generated using separate light sources and delay lines are not required to achieve time resolution. In nano- to millisecond TAS, pump pulses are typically generated by nanosecond lasers such as Nd:YAG lasers or nitrogen-laser pumped dye lasers. The probe light is often provided by a continuous white light source employing monochromators before and/or after the sample. Typical detectors for measurements of time traces are silicon photodiodes or photomultiplier tubes (PMTs).
When measuring the kinetics of dye-sensitized samples on a nanosecond or a longer timescale, electron injection is usually completed and therefore one of the main signals observed in nano- to millisecond TAS are those arising from the oxidized dye.
For sensitized samples in the absence of a redox electrolyte or a hole conductor, TAS has therefore been used to study the kinetics of electron/oxidized dye recombination and the electron injection yields. It has been shown that the kinetics of dye recombination strongly depend on the conduction band position and electron concentration in TiO2 and therefore on the laser power in a TAS experiment.38
The recombination kinetics of the oxidized dye often do not follow simple exponential decays and therefore decay times are often analysed using half times (τhalf), i.e. the time where the initial amplitude has dropped to half or alternatively by fitting data to stretched exponentials according to: (39)where β is the exponential stretch factor.
Electron injection yields can be determined from the initial amplitude of nano- to millisecond TAS traces from sensitized samples in an inert electrolyte or without electrolyte if one assumes that no recombination of injected electrons occurs prior to the nanosecond timescale. The injection yield is then given by the ratio of the number of oxidized dye molecules to the number of absorbed photons and can be calculated using the following equation:18 (40)where λ is the probe wavelength, Iex is the intensity of the pump laser in mol cm−2 and φLHE is the light harvesting efficiency of the sample at the excitation wavelength. εox is the extinction coefficient of the oxidized dyes.
The regeneration kinetics of oxidized dyes by redox electrolytes and yields have been widely studied by nano- to millisecond transient absorption spectroscopy by monitoring the oxidized dye kinetics upon addition of a redox electrolyte48,50,51,57,280 or a polymer electrolyte.21 In this case, the rate of decay (kredox) is given by: kredox = krec + kreg(41)where krec and kreg are the rate of recombination between electrons and oxidized dyes and the rate of oxidized dye regeneration. While krec can be determined from the decay time of the oxidized dye measured for a dyed film in a supporting electrolyte containing all the components but the redox couple as described above, kredox can be determined from the decay time measured for the same dyed film in the presence of a full redox electrolyte (τredox). The regeneration efficiency can then be determined from eqn (3), which can be rewritten as: (42)In cases where regeneration is faster than the time scale of the measurements, which can be for solid state hole conductors, regeneration yields can be calculated from the amplitudes of the TAS traces of samples with and without hole conductors and using the extinction coefficients of the oxidized dye and hole conductor at the probe wavelength.222,281–283 A common mistake when using this method has been to choose a wavelength of analysis where the hole conductor has an absorption peak and the dye shows ground-state bleaching.222,281,282 At such a wavelength, also the Stark shift of the dye is likely to be present,263,264 leading to an underestimation of regeneration yields.

5.2 Photo-induced absorption spectroscopy
Photo-induced absorption spectroscopy is a relatively simple method, which can be used to qualitatively assess injection and regeneration efficiencies of dye-sensitized solar cells.284 Rather than using a short laser pulse as the pump in the experiment, a monochromatic light source with an on–off modulation is used to excite the sample. The change in absorption of a probe light by the sample is measured following this on–off modulation, resulting in the determination of the quasi-steady state spectra of the transient species under illumination. The PIA spectra of complete devices can show what transient species are present during solar cell operation, if pump intensities providing a similar amount of absorbed photons as 1 Sun illumination are used. A schematic diagram of a typical PIA set-up is shown in Fig. 17. The pump light is usually either provided by an LED or by a continuous wave laser, which can be frequency modulated using a frequency generator or a mechanical chopper. A white probe light, which is typically broad enough so that both visible and near-infrared wavelengths can be measured, is transmitted through the sample and focussed into a monochromator, where a wavelength for analysis is selected and focussed on a detector (for example a silicon detector). The signal from the detector is amplified and then analysed in a lock-in amplifier at the frequency of the on–off modulation. Using this method, only the signal with the same frequency as the modulation is analysed allowing for highly sensitive detection of absorption changes of only 10−6. The signal output from the lock-in amplifier is complex, i.e. it contains information about the amplitude of the absorption changes as well as of the phase relative to the modulation. This is most commonly expressed by an in-phase (real) as well as a 90 degrees out-of phase (imaginary) part of the change in absorbance, which is related to the overall amplitude of ΔA by: (43)In a PIA measurement, the change in absorption is therefore determined as a function of wavelength and modulation frequency. Similar to transient absorption spectroscopy, ΔA can be described by a sum of the absorbance of the different transient species (s): (44)where [s] is the concentration of s and Δεs is the difference in the extinction coefficient between the transient species and the corresponding ground-state species. ΔAStark is the change in absorbance caused by the Stark shift of the dye’s absorption spectrum (discussed in Section 5.3).
 Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of a PIA setup. 
In contrast to the initial concentration in a TAS experiment, the concentration of the transient species detected in the PIA experiment will depend on both their generation and recombination rates. Equations for the concentration and therefore the PIA signal of a dyed TiO2 electrode in the absence of redox electrolytes and their derivations can be found in ref. 284 and 285. In general, a species with a longer lifetime will show a much higher PIA signal than a species with a short lifetime. Therefore, a dyed electrode in the absence of a redox electrolyte will show the peaks relating to the oxidized dye absorption and ground-state bleaching. Peaks of excited dye molecules will not be observed due to the short lifetime of the excited dye and therefore low steady-state concentration. Whether oxidized peaks are observed can therefore be a qualitative assessment of efficient electron injection. Fig. 18a shows an example of this for a terrylenemonoimidemonoanhydride (TMIMA) dye on TiO2 with redox-inactive electrolytes containing different sizes of cations. The magnitude of the oxidized dye peaks observed in the PIA spectrum increases with decreasing cation size. This result is explained by a positive shift of the conduction band, which enables electron injection, when smaller cations are present in the electrolyte.286
 Fig. 18  PIA spectra of the terrylenemonoimidemonoanhydride dye on TiO2 (a) in the presence of different cations in a supporting electrolyte solution consisting of 0.5 M (Li, Na, or TBA) triflate in acetonitrile and (b) in the presence of 0.5 M Li triflate, or 0.5 M LiI + 0.05 M I2 in acetonitrile. Reprinted from Chemical Physics, 124, Tomas Edvinsson et al., Photoinduced electron transfer from a terrylene dye to TiO2: quantification of band edge shift effects, 357, Copyright (2009), with permission from Elsevier.290 
Similarly, the efficiency of dye regeneration can be assessed with PIA. If dye regeneration is fast and efficient, the concentration of the oxidized dye should become very low and only signals due to electrons injected into TiO2, the oxidized redox species/holes in the solid state hole conductor and the Stark effect should be observed. Fig. 18b shows an example of the regeneration of TMIMA by iodide. In the presence of a redox electrolyte, the oxidized dye peaks are no longer observed and instead a broad positive signal is observed which is assigned to the absorption of conduction band electrons in titanium dioxide. In the case of incomplete regeneration, signals due to the oxidized dye will still be observed in the PIA spectrum.122,287 For this reason, PIA has also been used as a method to study dye regeneration and pore filling in ssDSCs by hole conductors and conducting polymers.82,85,288,289
5.3 The Stark effect and electroabsorption spectroscopy
The Stark effect occurs when an electric field is applied across a material and is observed as a change in transition energies (ΔE),291–293 given by the following equation: (45.1) where  is the electric field vector and  and Δαpol are the change in the material’s dipole moment and polarisability due to the transition.
In dye-sensitized films, electrons injected into the semiconductor can cause an electric field normal to the surface and a Stark shift of the dye molecules’ absorption spectrum.226,263,264 Dye molecules adsorbed to the surface experience this field on average in the same direction relative to their orientation on the surface and therefore eqn (45.1) can be used in a one-dimensional form (along the z-direction here) to predict the absorption changes, which can then be expressed as:264 (45.2)In particular organic dyes used in DSCs tend to have a large change in the dipole moment between the ground and the excited state which points away from the TiO2 surface. This leads to the observation of a Stark effect due to the first term of eqn (45.2), which has the shape of the first derivative of the absorption spectrum and increases linearly with electric field strength. Fig. 19 shows a schematic representation of the Stark effect behaviour for dye molecules adsorbed to TiO2 with the change in the dipole moment along the z-axis in opposite directions.
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the Stark shift of dye molecules on a TiO2 surface when the change in dipole moment points away from the surface (most common, top) and towards the surface (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 297 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.297 
The Stark effect of DSC dyes can be observed in electroabsorption spectroscopy, in spectroelectrochemistry and in transient and photo-induced absorption spectroscopy.
In electroabsorption spectroscopy, the Stark effect is measured by applying an external electric field across a sample and monitoring the resulting change in absorption. Fig. 20 shows the electroabsorption spectrum of the D149 dye adsorbed to a flat TiO2 layer.264 It can be seen that this spectrum follows the shape of the derivative of the absorption spectrum (Fig. 20b) and it is therefore the first order Stark effect, which is observed.
 Fig. 20  Stark effect of the D149 dye. (a) Electroabsorption spectrum. (b) Absorption spectrum (A) and the first derivative of the absorption spectrum. (c) PIA spectrum in air and in the presence of a redox electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 132, 9096). Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.264 
The Stark effect can also be observed in spectroelectrochemistry of dyed, mesoporous TiO2 films. In this case a potential can be applied to the electrode at which electrons are injected into TiO2 bandgap states or the TiO2 conduction band, which cause a Stark shift of the adsorbed dye molecules. The electric field at the TiO2 surface and therefore the change in absorbance are then proportional to the charge injected into the electrode. The presence of ions in the supporting electrolyte and how they shield the electric field experienced by the dye will have an impact on the magnitude of the observed Stark effect.285 Studying the Stark effect by spectroelectrochemistry is therefore a way of determining at what distance from the TiO2 surface the electric field drops and where counter ions to electrons injected into TiO2 are located in relation to the dye layer.
Finally, the Stark effect is observed in photo-induced and transient absorption spectroscopy. Here, electrons injected from excited dye molecules into the TiO2 due to the pump pulse will cause a Stark effect of dye molecules remaining in the ground state. This occurs both in the presence and absence of a redox electrolyte (Fig. 20c). The Stark effect can therefore mask other signals at wavelengths where the ground state dye absorbs. In the presence of an electrolyte the Stark effect can be partially screened by the ions in the electrolyte. The dynamics of the Stark effect observed in transient and photo-induced absorption spectroscopy can therefore inform about the charge compensation in liquid electrolyte DSCs.226,294,295 Furthermore, the ultrafast dynamics of the Stark effect have been used to study charge migration in solid state DSCs.296
6. Voltage/current modulation techniques
6.1 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is one of the most frequently used characterization techniques for DSCs. In this method a small sinusoidal voltage modulation (dV, typically ∼ 10 mV) is superimposed on the potential that is applied to the DSC by a potentiostat. The resulting current modulation (di) is monitored with respect to both amplitude and phase shift. The complex impedance is defined as z = dV/di; z = z′ + iz′′, where z′ and z′′ represent the real and imaginary parts of the impedance. The real part reflects the resistance, while the imaginary part is affected mainly by capacitance (negative z′′) and inductance (positive z′′). A wide range of frequencies, typically in the range of 105 to 10−2 Hz, is measured to create an impedance spectrum. The impedance spectrum is plotted as a Nyquist plot, (−z′′ vs. z) or as a Bode plot wherein the parameters (z′, z′′, |z|, phase) are plotted versus logarithm of frequency. Equivalent circuits, corresponding to a typical DSC, are used to analyze the impedance spectrum and extract the related information i.e. charge transport or recombination resistances. They are composed of standard electrical components, such as resistors (R) and capacitors (C), as well special components, such as the Warburg impedance that describes diffusion processes.
EIS measurements on DSCs are performed under dark or illumination conditions. Parameters such as the series resistance, chemical capacitance, transport resistance, recombination resistance, counter electrode charge transfer resistance and capacitance, as well as Warburg impedance can be obtained from the EIS spectra.67,298–300Fig. 21 shows a typical EIS spectrum of a liquid electrolyte DSC. If the characteristic time constants of the different processes are well separated, resistances and time constant can be obtained graphically from the EIS spectrum. Usually, fitting with an equivalent circuit is performed for further analysis of DSC parameters. Suitable equivalent circuits have been derived for liquid electrolyte and solid-state DSCs, as well as for perovskite solar cells, which can be used to characterize and simulate device behavior according to its virtual electrical components.301–304 Any virtual electrical component is related to a particular parameter (i.e. a reaction rate or density of states) in the device. The standard model used for fitting of the data is the transmission line model for DSCs, see Fig. 22.305–308 This model can be more simplified when using certain conditions, such as open circuit conditions under illumination. Fabregat et al. have written a comprehensive review about EIS of DSCs, explaining the interpretation of data for different materials in DSCs.16
 Fig. 21  Typical EIS spectrum for liquid electrolyte based DSCs. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 110, 13872). Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 22  Transmission line model for liquid electrolyte based DSCs. Reproduced from ref. 309 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. 
In the transmission line model, the contact and substrate resistances are modelled by a simple resistor Rs, the FTO/blocking layer interface with electrolyte is modelled by a parallel capacitor|resistor combination, in which the capacitor (CBL) is representative of the Helmholtz double layer at the interface and RBL is the charge transfer resistance from the blocking layer to the electrolyte. The mesoporous TiO2 structure is modeled by a series of interconnected nanoparticles, each has a parallel capacitor|resistor element (cμ|rrec) to the electrolyte and a transport resistance (Rtr) in between. The superposition of all these elements gives the mesoporous TiO2 chemical Cμ, its recombination resistance Rrec and its transport resistance Rtr. The diffusion impedance of the redox mediator in the electrolyte is given by the Warburg impedance element (Zd), and the counter electrode is simulated by another parallel resistor/capacitor (CCE|RCE) combination, which is an indicator of the capacitance and charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode (see Fig. 22). The total impedance of the mentioned model can be described in terms of the above mentioned parameters.298 Several important properties can be calculated from the EIS fit parameters, such as the electron lifetime (τe), the effective diffusion coefficient for the electrons in the mesoporous TiO2 (Dn) and the electron diffusion length (Ln):40,298 τe = Rrec × C(46.1) (46.2) (46.3)d is the TiO2 film thickness. Since different processes in DSCs are assigned to electrical components, it would be possible to compare different devices in terms of recombination resistance, series resistance, capacitance, diffusion coefficients of electrons and redox mediators, etc. Dedicated programs are available to analyze and simulate the EIS data. Special care should be taken to check the validity of the fitted parameters, i.e. comparison of the relative error and fitted value. Further details can be found elsewhere.298,300,305,310–315 The importance of the measured parameters for the device performance is mentioned in Section 1 and in ref. 25.
By repeating the EIS measurement at different applied potentials, trends in the recombination resistance and chemical capacitance (density of states) of devices as a function of Fermi level can be studied and compared, and possible band shifts can be pin pointed.305,314 For determination of any band shift, the potential drops due to resistance in the conducting glass, at the counter electrode and in the electrolyte part of the device should be determined and the fitted parameters should be corrected accordingly.314 Series and counter electrode resistances measured using EIS are normally independent of the applied potential on the DSC, but the chemical capacitance, recombination resistance and transport resistance of mesoporous TiO2 electrodes have exponential dependence on the applied potential37,67 The transport resistance was found to be inversely proportional to the density of carriers at the transport level which is governed by the Boltzmann distribution.67
The recombination resistance is different in dark and light:44,66,316 in the dark there is no recombination to oxidized dye molecules, and the recombination processes are between the TiO2 electrons and electrolyte oxidized species only. Furthermore, under light conditions, regeneration of the dye by the redox electrolyte will change the concentration of oxidized species compared to dark conditions. Effects of the working electrode morphology, electrolyte compositions and the dye on the electronic lifetime and transport have been studied with EIS by several groups.317–323 Further details about the concepts and interpretation of EIS for DSCs are beyond the present review and can be found elsewhere.298,300,305,310–313
A slight modification of the transmission line model can be applied to solid state DSC devices324,325 and perovskite solar cells.326 Importantly, the transport resistance of the hole conductor is included in these models. A negative impedance was observed for perovskite devices at very low frequencies. The origin of this effect is unclear.326 Fabregat-Santiago et al. studied solid-state DSCs with spiro-OMe-TAD hole transporting materials using EIS.181 They found that a high recombination rate in these devices and the high resistivity of the spiro layer are the factors that reduce the FF and efficiency of the device.181
The origins of high open circuit voltage in polymer electrolyte DSCs have been investigated recently by Kim et al. using EIS.327 They conclude that the capture of Li+ ions by the electrolyte polymers and the formation of a polymeric passivation layer on the TiO2 nano particle surface cause a CB downward shift and retarded electron recombination kinetics resulting in a high open circuit voltage.
EIS is also a useful method to study the performance of the counter electrode in DSCs. Different counter electrodes show different charge transfer resistances for different redox mediators. To simplify EIS analysis, sandwich cells consisting of two counter electrodes with redox electrolytes in between are frequently used. The equivalent circuit of such a system is shown in Fig. 23,170,328 together with a typical EIS spectrum.213 For porous counter electrodes it is possible to have another semicircle in high frequency parts which belongs to second Nernst diffusion impedance of porous layers in the counter electrode.170,328
 Fig. 23  (a) Equivalent circuit (where CPE is a non-ideal capacitor) and (b) typical EIS spectra of a counter electrode sandwich cell with a redox electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 6, 2074. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
EIS analysis of the TiO2 blocking layer in liquid electrolyte DSCs was performed by Cameron et al.329 Thicker blocking layers can reduce the current (due to higher device series resistance) and lower the back recombination rate.330 For compact semiconductor films, Mott–Schottky analysis can be used: the capacitance of the semiconductor electrode is measured as a function of applied voltage. When a high modulation frequency is used (i.e. 1 MHz to 10 kHz), the measured impedance may be analyzed using a simple RC circuit.331 Using the Mott–Schottky equation and from a plot of 1/C2versus potential, the flat band potential332 and the doping density of the semiconductor can be obtained.333 However, it should be noted that Mott–Schottky analysis is not valid for mesoporous semiconductor electrodes, as it relies on band bending in the semiconductor, which is usually not present in mesoporous electrodes. Larger particles, branched nanostructures and FTO substrates on the other hand can have space charge layers and thus can be analyzed by the Mott–Schottky method. The maximum attainable photovoltage in DSCs can be affected by the band bending and charge accumulation at the FTO/TiO2 interface that can be characterized by the Mott–Schottky or interference reflection method.334
The ionic conductivity of the electrolyte can be obtained from the diffusion coefficient using eqn (16)335 and the ionic conductivity of gel/polymer electrolytes in the quasi-solid state DSCs is usually obtained from an AC impedance spectrum of the gel/polymer electrolyte sandwiched in a symmetrical cell.196
6.2 Small light perturbation photovoltage/current response
Small light perturbation techniques, where a small square-wave, sine wave or pulse of light is added to a much larger constant bias light intensity, and the resulting photovoltage or photocurrent is monitored, offer rapid insight into some of the most important electron transfer reactions in DSCs. If the perturbation is small (<10% of the bias light), electron concentration in the mesoporous TiO2 can be treated as being constant, and electron transfer reactions appear to have simple first order kinetics. Initially, sine wave modulation was mostly used, and the response was analyzed in the frequency domain, similar to EIS. These techniques are known as intensity-modulated photovoltage and photocurrent spectroscopy, IMVS336,337 and IMPS,337,338 respectively. Data are analyzed in a similar way to that in EIS. Usually one or more semicircles are found when the imaginary part of the signal is plotted against the real part. From the frequency (f) at the maximum of the semicircle the characteristic time constant is calculated: (47)Later, time domain techniques, monitoring the pulse or step response, have become more popular, because of their much faster measurement speed.339,340 In this case the response is fitted using an exponential function and a single pseudo first order rate constant k or time constant τ is extracted (τ = 1/k). Compared to EIS, these techniques are more straight-forward and rapid, without further need of models and data fitting. Usually a white LED or a series of white LEDs are used for the bias light. Modulation is provided by the same LED or separate LEDs that can have different color. Uniform light absorption in the whole film is preferred, since this results in the simplest electrical response. Non-uniform excitation results in some initial effects in the photocurrent response due to fast charge reorganization.341 Repeating the measurements at different light intensities and/or at different Fermi levels gives more complete information about the device. By changing the temperature, the activation energy of electron transport in the DSCs can be calculated.342 Influence of cations on charge collection of DSCs,343 the effect of anions in ionic liquid based DSCs,337,344 additives,316 stability under UV irradiation,345 light soaking,346 surface modification of electrodes,123,287 different working electrode morphologies or doping levels,35,66,141,154,347 the reduction mechanism of iodide,348 dye coverage effects147,149,349 as well as different processes of solid state dye sensitized155,288,346,350 and perovskite based351 solar cells have been studied using photovoltage/current transient techniques. O'Regan et al. have written a comprehensive review about transient techniques.15

6.2.1 Electron lifetime measurements. 
For electron lifetime measurements, the photovoltage response of a DSC in a small light perturbation measurement is monitored under open-circuit conditions, or alternatively under any other constant current conditions using a galvanostat. The resulting photovoltage response time is equal to the lifetime of electrons in the mesoporous TiO2, since electron recombination to the redox electrolyte is the only way for the system to adjust its Fermi level to the altered illumination condition. Effects of different electrolyte additives in DSCs,316 different redox mediators352,353 as well as surface modification of electrodes287, different dye structures and coverages147,150 and the working electrode morphology35 have been studied using electron lifetime measurements. Longer lifetimes are always preferred because this will result in higher Voc and FF of DSCs.
An alternative measurement to obtain the electron lifetime is from a Voc decay measurement: the DSC is kept under open-circuit conditions and under illumination and the output voltage is measured as a function of time when the light is turned off. Analysis of the decay gives the electron lifetime:354 (48)It is possible to measure Voc decay in the dark by means of an initial applied potential.355 As mentioned in Section 6.1 lifetimes in the dark and light conditions are different, and comparison of dark and light conditions can give information about the recombination rates to the oxidized dye.44Voc decay measurements have been used to fit the Marcus theory equation and obtain detailed information about electron recombination rates.41


6.2.2 Electron transport time measurements. 
The photocurrent response rate constant, determined from small light perturbation measurements, has contributions from electron transport and electron recombination in DSCs. Under short circuit conditions when the modulation light is switched off, excess electrons have two routes in order to keep the current constant: recombination to acceptors in the electrolyte (ke = 1/τe) or transport to the FTO contact (ktr). The photocurrent response rate constant (kpc) can be described as:356 kpc = ktr + ke(49)Under short-circuit conditions the Fermi level in DSCs with iodide/triiodide electrolytes was found to be about 200 mV lower than that under open circuit conditions, resulting in much longer lifetimes compared to the transport time.357 In that case the photocurrent response time is almost equal to the transport time (ktr ≫ ke, so that kpc ≈ ktr). As electron transport in mesoporous TiO2 is driven by diffusion, the transport time (τtr) is related to the effective diffusion coefficient (Dn) of electrons by:70 (50)where d is the thickness of a mesoporous film. The factor 2.4 is an approximate value, coming from the geometry of the system. A typical value of Dn in a mesoporous TiO2 of a DSC under 1 Sun illumination is ∼10−4 cm2 s−1, which is many orders of magnitude lower than that found in TiO2 single crystals. Furthermore, Dn is found to decrease at lower light intensities, which can be explained using the multiple trapping model. The electron diffusion length can also be determined using transient techniques: (51)The electron diffusion length remains rather constant as a function of light intensity, since transport rates as well as recombination rates change by approximately the same amount as a function of light intensity. Ln can also be determined from steady-state techniques: it can also be extracted from IPCE measurements,260 and from photocurrent measurements of mesoporous films on patterned FTO substrates with different gap sizes.358 There appears, however, to be a difference in values calculated from steady-state IPCE and modulation methods, the latter overestimating it by a factor of 2.359 This can be explained by nonlinear recombination kinetics in DSCs.360
The charge collection efficiency (φcol) can be calculated as follows: (52) It too may be overestimated using small transient techniques.359 The charge collection efficiency can also be estimated using the IPCE data (Section 4.2).259 In liquid electrolyte DSCs, however, charge collection is almost independent of the light intensity which can be seen from the linear dependency of Jsc on the light intensity.8 Charge collection efficiencies in high efficient cells are close to 100%.10
All the above techniques are usually performed under two different specific conditions: open-circuit and short-circuit. It is possible to measure the lifetime or transport time in real working points of the solar cell such as the maximum power point.341,356 Using 1 Sun illumination intensity and coupling the potentiostat/galvanostat to the cell, we can keep the cell in a certain potential or current corresponding to a certain working point from the IV curve. Applying the modulation light to the cell under potentiostatic/galvanostatic conditions will perturb the current/voltage of the cell and its rise and decay times corresponding to the photocurrent response time/electron lifetime of the DSC.

6.3 Large light perturbation photovoltage/current techniques
Additional information on DSCs is obtained from the large light perturbation method, where the light is switched on or off.

6.3.1 Charge extraction. 
Duffy et al. introduced the charge extraction method for DSCs: the cell is illuminated (keeping under certain open (short) circuit conditions) and then the light is switched off, while the cell is switched to short circuit conditions and its current is integrated versus time to give the extracted charge under open (short) circuit conditions (QOC or QSC).361 The amount of stored charge in the working electrode is indicative of the density of states in the mesoporous semiconductor. Comparative studies can indicate band shifts that are important factors for the evaluation of the cell performance.123,357,362,363 Under UV irradiation, photo-induced positive states are formed at TiO2, which can shift the TiO2 CB band as well.286
For charge extraction measurements, recombination of electrons to electrolyte species is a source of error, which can be significant. Because of the high recombination rates for solid-state DSCs, this method is not reliable. A capacity method as developed by Snaith et al. can be used instead: the capacity versus voltage is measured under working conditions and by integration of capacitance versus voltage the charge is calculated.37
Here, the extracted charge is usually exponentially dependent on the potential of DSCs, which reflects the exponential distribution of trap states in the mesoporous TiO2 electrode:347 (53)The trap distribution parameter mc, which is equal to the average trap depth, can be obtained from this equation and is an important parameter in characterization and comparison of different DSCs.
Short circuit charge of the working electrode has a power law dependence on the short circuit current density.69 Furthermore, mc can be obtained from the slope of the logarithmic plots of QSC (charge under short circuit conditions) versus light intensity and the logarithmic plot of transport time versus light intensity (the corresponding slope values are equal to kBT/mc and (kBT/mc − 1) respectively).69 Peter et al. introduced a new method for charge collection efficiency estimation, which is calculated from the ratio of light intensities giving the same charge under OC and SC conditions.261
We can measure mc from logarithmic plots of Vocversus light intensity using eqn (4). Finally, near-infrared transmission measurements can be performed to determine the total electron concentration in mesoporous dye-sensitized solar cells.364


6.3.2 Measurement of the Fermi level in mesoporous electrodes. 
Under short circuit conditions there is a non-uniform distribution of electrons in the film thickness, which results in a Fermi level gradient. This Fermi level is around 200 mV lower than open circuit conditions.357 By using a switching method, the approximate average Fermi level can be determined: the cell is first kept under short circuit conditions under light, then, simultaneously, the light is witched off and the cell is switched to open circuit conditions. This gives a time dependence of the potential that was built up from the remaining electrons in mesoporous TiO2, from which VSC, and average of the Fermi level in the mesoporous electrode for DSCs, kept under short circuit conditions, can be determined.342,347,357 Higher VSC, at the same current density, can be explained by a higher specific surface area of the particles, a lower electronic diffusion coefficient or because of band bending in bigger particles.
An alternative method for measuring VSC requires the deposition of an additional titanium electrode on top of the mesoporous TiO2 films. The surface of the metal is passivated by thermal oxidation and does not lead to an additional recombination pathway for electrons in TiO2. The potential of the additional electrode can be measured under operating conditions and directly gives the quasi-Fermi level at the outside of the mesoporous TiO2 films.365 Both methods give similar results.
Simulations of small/large modulation of light intensity experiments with electron diffusion equations/random walk models have been performed by several groups to understand and rationalize the device performance and its changes under different conditions.8,15,69,235,360,366–368 Most of the described techniques in the present Section 6 are coupled to simulations and models in order to further elucidate information about the DSC parameters (such as reaction orders and activation energies).

7. Remarks on DSC characterization
7.1 Remarks on solid state DSCs
Introduced by Grätzel and Bach, solid state DSCs have an important architecture, which eliminates the need of a liquid electrolyte in the device. In fact, recently developed highly efficient perovskite solar cells are derived from the ssDSC architecture. There are several review reports on the optimization of device components such as the hole conductor, back contact and the dye.19,369–372 For ssDSCs, the same presented characterization methods can be employed for evaluation of LHE, injection and regeneration efficiencies as well as charge collection efficiency in the device. Due to a higher recombination rate in ssDSCs, special care is needed for measuring the transport time in these devices – see Section 6.2.2. ssDSCs are more sensitive to the thickness and conductivity of each component compared to liquid electrolyte based DSCs. Pore filling of the hole conductor, interface recombination and conductivity of the hole conductor are still the main issues to be considered towards fabrication of highly efficient devices.77,370
In ssDSCs, FF losses are because of series resistance (conductivity) of components or recombination losses, while potential losses are mainly due to the overpotential needed for electron injection/dye regeneration; moreover the photocurrent losses stem from limited LHE/photon absorption by the device.369 Since the recombination rate is higher in solid state DSCs, the role of blocking layers is more prominent than in liquid DSCS. Furthermore as a result of a higher recombination rate and poor pore filling of a hole transporter within the mesoporous film, the limited device thicknesses necessitate the use of very high extinction coefficient dyes.83 Thus LHE is an issue which is limited by the device thickness.
Under short circuit conditions, device efficiency is limited by the diffusion length of electrons therefore new TiO2 structures with higher conductivities and larger crystallite sizes together with higher surface areas37,373 are under investigation. On the other hand in the higher charge densities the conductivity of spiro can be a limiting factor and doping of spiro with chemical dopants or employing the photodoping ability of Li is implemented by several groups to achieve high efficiencies.171,174,181,374–376
New dyes with a higher extinction coefficient and broader spectra83 and new hole transport materials are on the way to increase the LHE and lower the overpotential voltage losses in the device.346,350,377 Recently polymer based hole transporters are reaching 6.8% efficiency by using PEDOT polymers.378 Utilizing thicker TiO2 films became possible by means of in situ light driven polymerization of EDOT on the dye sensitized films.379
The best reported ssDSC efficiency so far is 7.7% in which spiro is the hole conductor doped with an additive dopant.380 Studying and optimizing the device continue while the ssDSC concepts are considered as insightful to help obtain higher efficiencies for perovskite solar cells.
7.2 Remarks on liquid–electrolyte DSCs
The only class of DSCs which are really commercialized in the market are liquid–electrolyte DSCs; they have a range of colours and transparencies and benefit from long term stability/high efficiencies in the low light intensities.1,6
The efficiency improvement rate during the last 10 years was so slow although the expected theoretical efficiency for liquid DSCs is about 20% with supposed 920 mV Voc and 30 mA cm−2Jsc.71 Engineering the dyes and electrolytes to reduce the potential losses and employing new redox mediators with more positive redox potentials are the main strategies to further increase the voltage. Voc values of more than 1 volt have been reported and are easily attainable with new metal complex redox mediators,71 although the corresponding potential loss is still too much, i.e. for the record cell dye in the cobalt electrolyte based device it is about 900 mV. At the moment the highest obtained efficiency is 14.7%.72
Improving the TiO2 Fermi level using novel nanostructures with lower trap densities, decreasing the dye regeneration overpotential by either using new redox mediators or dye molecules, reduction of recombination losses by modification of dye linker units, decreasing the thickness of TiO2 films using the higher extinction coefficient dyes are among the recent efforts and strategies to improve the open circuit voltage of the device.
On the other hand, employing new dyes with higher light absorption and higher injection efficiency is the main strategy to improve the photocurrent. Hence, tuning the optical band gap of the dye to harvest enough light and keep Voc high enough is vital. Photocurrent densities of more than 20 mA cm−2 are reported using Ruthenium dyes but for the record efficiency porphyrin dye, Jsc is still below 20 mA cm−2.71 Decreasing the oxidized dye recombination, modification of the dye with electron deficient moieties, harvesting of more photons by changing the E0–0 values of the dye and having the colourful dyes for transparent market applications are some of the hot topics for dye engineering in the DSC field.
Due to the recent success of cobalt complexes as redox mediators in DSCs, the research on other metal complexes381 with less optical absorption, a smaller molecular size and more positive redox potential becomes more prominent recently. The larger size of these complexes compared to iodide necessitates the optimization of working electrode porosity to avoid mass transport limitation in the device.
Nevertheless there is still some ongoing research on the novel metal oxide architectures and advanced photonic managements of the scattering layer, so far the initial mesoporous titanium dioxide films have the best performance and have been used in all reported record efficiencies. IPCEs of close to 90% and charge collection efficiencies of close to 100% are achieved by mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticles, leaving the main bottle neck of efficiency more towards the dyes and redox mediator side.3,5,6,382–390
7.3 Remarks on quasi solid state DSCs
The device structure and the concepts of quasi solid state DSCs (qssDSCs) are similar to liquid DSCs; and in principle similar characterization techniques have been used to investigate and improve the device performance of qssDSCs.391 In qssDSCs, a higher thermal stability is obtained due to the negligible electrolyte vapour pressure and better device stability is achieved through the addition of an inert polymer or a polymer matrix such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)392 or poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF–HFP),393 and/or addition of metal oxide nanostructures such as silica,394 or alumina395 in the liquid electrolyte or gelation of ionic liquid electrolytes.396
The same bottle necks for the device PCE of liquid DSCs are valid for qssDSCs as well. However the maximum reported efficiency of 9.61%397 and maximum achievable current density for qssDSCs are lower than the reported values for liquid DSCs. The presence of metal oxide nano particles or the organic polymers in the electrolyte affects the pore filling and viscosity of the electrolyte and the diffusion of redox mediators which lowers the efficiency. Thus the thinner sealants and smaller redox couples are more preferable. The mass transport is a more prominent issue377,398,399 and the corresponding ionic transport in the electrolyte is evaluated by impedance spectroscopy (Section 6.1), light intensity dependence of current density (Section 4.1.2) or CV (3.9.1).195,196,327,377,391,392,398 Furthermore, the presence of the polymer/nanoparticles in the electrolyte results in new interactions with the TiO2/dye interface and/or ionic species in the electrolyte and thus affects the device efficiency.228,327 Absorption, rheological and thermal (TG) analyses are particularly employed to further characterize the gel electrolytes. The main efforts have been devoted to achieving better ionic conductivities, less mass transport limitations and also reaching better pore filling of the polymer electrolyte in the pores of the photoanode. We refer the reader to a recently published review about the characterization techniques for quasi solid state polymer electrolyte DSCs for further information.196
8. Concluding remarks
As DSC research continues going forward, the need of more fundamental research becomes more clear and essential for developing a low cost, large area, highly stable and efficient solar cell. For stability tests, comprehensive characterization of different light/temperature induced chemical changes and the corresponding impacts on the device efficiency are vital. Under thermal stress DSCs can change from the situation of Rrec ≫ Rtr to Rrec ≪ Rtr and alter the impedance behaviour of the cell changes respectively.320 Relative positions of the redox Fermi level and the CB position, the diffusion coefficient of the redox mediator and the electron lifetime of the TiO2 electrons are dependent on the temperature of the device40,342,400 and can be further altered by temperature induced changes in the long term stability tests. A 20 year lifetime for DSCs is predicted401 and studying high viscous electrolytes such as MPN is currently pursued specially for stability tests.169,402 Besides, in a very recent study, Jiang et al. have reported the 2000 hour stability of cobalt electrolyte based DSCs with acetonitrile.403 Mass spectroscopy can be an interesting method for studying the chemical reaction in stability tests.404
Regarding the presented examples, voltage, current and fill factor losses in the liquid/solid state devices can be classified into topics related to the energy levels, reaction rates and charge transport characteristic lengths. Last but not the least, Tables 1–3 show a summary of different investigated techniques for different processes, components and important parameters of liquid and solid state DSCs.
Table 1 Characterization techniques for the time scales of different DSC processes




DSC processes
Measurement methods
Section(s)




Electron injection
Femtosecond laser/terahertz spectroscopy
5.1.2


Oxidized dye recombination
PIA, nanosecond laser spectroscopy small light modulation, EIS in light and dark
5.2, 5.1.3, 6.2 and 6.1


Dye regeneration
Nanosecond laser spectroscopy, SECM
5.1.3 and 3.3


Electron recombination lifetime
EIS, small light modulation, laser spectroscopy
6.1, 6.2 and 5.1.3


Electron transport time
EIS, small light modulation
6.1 and 6.2


Stark effect
Timed/frequency PIA, EA, nanosecond laser spectroscopy
5.2, 5.3 and 5.1.3




Table 2 Characterization techniques for the energy levels of DSC components




Component energy level
Measurement method
Section(s)




Dye HUMO level
CV, XPS
3.9.1 and 3.6


Dye LUMO level
Emission/UV_Vis and CV
3.7 and 3.9.1


TiO2 CB edge
Light perturbation, Mott Shottky, spectroelectrochemistry
6.2, 6.3, 6.1 and 3.9.2


Fermi level at short circuit
Large light perturbation
6.3.2


TiO2 valence band edge
XPS(UPS), spectroelectrochemistry
3.6 and 3.9.2


Surface density of states
STM
3.3


Intra-band gap density of states
CV, EIS, spectroelectrochemistry
3.9.1, 6.1 and 3.9.2


Redox mediator Fermi level
CV
3.9.1


Hole conductor energy level
CV, XPS
3.9.1 and 3.6


Counter electrode Fermi level
Over-potential estimation from CV and simulations
3.9.1




Table 3 Techniques for measurement of other important parameters of DSCs




Parameter
Technique for measurement
Section(s)




Thickness of working/counter electrode
SEM, profilometry
3.1


Porosity of working/counter electrode
SEM, BET, UV/Vis & SEM, reflectometry
3.1, 3.2, 3.7


Diffusion length of electrons
EIS, small light perturbation, IMPS/IMVS, IPCE
6.1, 6.2, 4.2


Diffusion coefficient of redox mediator
CV, EIS, limited current
3.9.1, 6.1, 4.1


Diffusion coefficient of electrons
EIS, small light perturbation, IMPS/IMVS
6.1 and 6.2


Hole transporter pore filling
PIA, XPS, reflectometry, laser spectroscopy, UV-Vis, SEM
5.2.1, 3.6, 5.1, 3.7, 3.1


Hole transporter conductivity
Four point probe, TOF, terahertz spectroscopy, PICC
3.8


Conductivity of working/counter electrode
Four point probe, TOF, terahertz spectroscopy, PICC
3.8


Light harvesting efficiency
UV-Vis, IPCE
3.7 and 4.2


Electro catalytic efficiency of counter electrode
EIS, CV
6.1 and 3.9.1


Dye coverage
UV-Vis, dye deloading, photocurrent transient, quartz crystal microbalance, NICIS, XPS
3.7 and 3.6


Interface electric field
PIA, EA
5.2 and 5.3


Dye regeneration efficiency
Laser spectroscopy
5.1.3


Electron injection efficiency
Laser spectroscopy, IPCE, PIA
5.1.1, 4.2, 5.2


Charge collection efficiency
EIS, small light perturbation, IMPS/IMVS
6.1, 6.2


Dye adsorption mode
STM, XPS
3.3 and 3.6


Electron density of states
Charge extraction, EIS, CV, XPS
6.3, 6.1, 3.9.1 and 3.6


Recombination rate/charge transfer resistance
EIS, CV
6.1 and 3.9.1


Stored charge in WE
Charge extraction, EIS, CV
6.3, 6.1 and 3.9.1


Redox Concentration changes in stability tests
Mass spectroscopy, small and large light perturbations, EIS
8, 6.2 and 6.3


Limiting current
Dark current
4.1.2


Dye coloration efficiency
Spectroelectrochemistry
3.9.2


WE crystallite size
TEM, XRD
3.1 and 3.5


Dye dipole moment changes
EA/PIA
5.2 and 5.3


Blocking layer charge transfer resistance
CV, EIS
3.9.2 and 6.1


TiO2 flat band potential
Mott–Schottky
6.1




Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the Swedish Energy Agency, the Swedish Research Council (VR), and the ST and UP for Energy program for financial support. We thank Dr Roghayeh Imani for her help in the preparation of the table of content graphic (TOC).
Notes and references
J. B. Baxter, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 20801 Search PubMed .
H. Pettersson, K. Nonomura, L. Kloo and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7376 CAS .
M. Wang, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9394 CAS .
J. F. Yin, M. Velayudham, D. Bhattacharya, H. C. Lin and K. L. Lu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 3008–3035 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tétreault and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8506 Search PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Gorlov and L. Kloo, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10289–10303 RSC .
L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630–2642 RSC .
L. M. Peter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1839–1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1861–1867 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel and B. C. O’Regan, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
X. Yang, M. Yanagida and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 54–66 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 337–340 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takagi, S. Magaino, H. Saito, T. Aoki and D. Aoki, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 14, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, K. Miettunen, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, T. Bessho, M. Grätzel and B. C. O’Regan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1881–1922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083–9118 RSC .
E. M. J. Johansson, R. Lindblad, H. Siegbahn, A. Hagfeldt and H. Rensmo, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1006–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Katoh and A. Furube, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 20, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187–3200 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weisso and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Usui, H. Matsui, N. Tanabe and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, G. Oskam and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 17071–17073 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6601–6612 CAS .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E210–E234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265–322 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1715–1724 CAS .
J. N. Clifford, E. Martínez-Ferrero, A. Viterisi and E. Palomares, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1635–1646 RSC .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O. Regan, P. R. F. Barnes, J. R. Durrant, A. Y. Anderson and B. C. O’Regan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808–4818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Bartelt, R. Schu, A. Neubauer and T. Hannappel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21233–21241 CAS .
A. Listorti, B. O. Regan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3381–3399 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Clifford, A. Forneli, L. López-Arroyo, R. Caballero, P. de la Cruz, F. Langa and E. Palomares, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 344–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15374–15380 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Dunn and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4726–4731 CAS .
R. Mohammadpour, A. Iraji zad, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21487 RSC .
M. Ansari-Rad, Y. Abdi and E. Arzi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3212–3218 CAS .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 698–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Haque, Y. Tachibana, R. L. Willis, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug, J. R. Durrant and Ä. Polytechnique, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 538–547 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichtho, A. J. Nozik, M. Grätzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278–17290 CAS .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Serot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550–13559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Martini, H. Hodak and G. V Hartland, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9104–9111 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Haque, Y. Tachibana, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1745–1749 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, M. Juozapavicius, L. Liu, X. Li, E. Palomares, A. Forneli and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3547–3558 RSC .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O’Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5798–5816 RSC .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, J. Nelson, X. Li, N. J. Long and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5225–5233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Feldt, P. W. Lohse, F. Kessler, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7087–7097 RSC .
A. Y. Anderson, P. R. F. Barnes, J. R. Durrant, B. C. O’Regan and B. C. O. Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2439–2447 CAS .
U. M. Tefashe, K. Nonomura, N. Vlachopoulos, A. Hagfeldt and G. Wittstock, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4316–4323 Search PubMed .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6561–6567 CAS .
K. C. D. Robson, K. Hu, G. J. Meyer and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1961–1971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Memming, Semiconductor Electrochemistry, Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
P. de Jongh and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3427–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, S. Haque, D. Klug and J. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 205321 CrossRef .
J. Villanueva-Cab, G. Oskam and J. a. Anta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 45–50 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Feldt, G. Wang, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21500–21507 CAS .
S. M. Feldt, P. W. Lohse, F. Kessler, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7087–7097 RSC .
R. A. Marcus, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 599–610 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 966–978 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pazoki, N. Nafari and N. Taghavinia, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 301–307 RSC .
E. Ronca, M. Pastore, L. Belpassi, F. Tarantelli and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 183–193 CAS .
H. Kusama, H. Sugihara and K. Sayama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20764–20771 CAS .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, N. Pootrakulchote, R. Li, J. Guo, Y. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17046–17050 CAS .
M. Pazoki, N. Taghavinia, Y. Abdi, F. Tajabadi, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12278 RSC .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Anta and V. Morales-florez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10287–10293 CAS .
J. Van De Lagemaat and a. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4292–4294 CrossRef CAS .
J. Van De Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11194–11205 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. a Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Adachi, R. Tanino, J. Adachi, Y. Mori, K. Tsuchiya and S. Isoda, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 94–100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Orvatinia and R. Imani, Int. J. Nanosci., 2012, 11, 1250032 CrossRef .

          W. Zhou, R. P. Apkarian and Z. L. Wang, Scanning Microscopy for Nanotechnology, Springer,  2007 Search PubMed .
S. Thomas, T. G. Deepak, G. S. Anjusree, T. A. Arun, S. V Nair and A. S. Nair, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4474–4490 CAS .
Q. Zhang and G. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–106 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
H. Snaith, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. Grätzel and M. Chiesa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 045306 CrossRef .
H. J. Snaith, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Chen, I. Cesar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424003 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. J. Moule, C. Klein, K. Meerholz, R. H. Friend and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3372–3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schmidt-Mende and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 500, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
U. B. Cappel, E. A. Gibson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6275–6281 CAS .
I.-K. Ding, N. Tétreault, J. Brillet, B. E. Hardin, E. H. Smith, S. J. Rosenthal, F. Sauvage, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2431–2436 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, A. Hey, S. Guldin, R. Gunning, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 5010–5019 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ellis, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, C. Perruchot, M. Jouini, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, S. W. Park, M. J. Ko, K. Kim and N. Park, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 665–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, L. Qiang, W. Yang and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 254–258 CrossRef CAS .

          D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter, Transmission Electron Microscopy, A Textbook for Materials Science, Springer,  2009 Search PubMed .
D. Chen, L. Cao, F. Huang, P. Imperia, Y.-B. Cheng and R. a Caruso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4438–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wen, Z. Tao, Y. Ishikawa, H. Itoh and Q. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 131906 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. Al-Mamun, P. Liu, Y. Wang, H. G. Yang, H. F. Wang and H. Zhao, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e226 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Emmett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1938, 60, 309 CrossRef .
M. Zukalovà, A. Zukal, L. Kavan, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1789–1792 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qi, J. D. Sorge and D. P. Birnie III, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 1921–1925 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakade, M. Matsuda, S. Kambe, Y. Saito, T. Kitamura, T. Sakata, Y. Wada, H. Mori and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10004–10010 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, Y. Chen, W. Xiang, D. Chen, L. Cao, L. Spiccia, R. a Caruso and Y. B. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13787–13794 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Pazoki, J. Simiyu, M. B. Johansson, O. Cheung, L. Häggman, E. M. J. Johansson, N. Vlachopoulos, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 23–31 CrossRef CAS .
G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1986, 30, 389–409 Search PubMed .
S. W. Hla, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. – Process., Meas., Phenom., 2005, 23, 1351–1360 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakamaki, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1990, 8, 614–617 CAS .
A. R. Kumarasinghe and W. R. Flavell, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zuleta, T. Edvinsson, S. Yu, S. Ahmadi, G. Boschloo, M. Göthelid and A. Hagfeldt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10780–10788 RSC .
M. Zuleta, S. Yu, S. Ahmadi, G. Boschloo, M. Göthelid and A. Hagfeldt, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13236–13244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sasahara, C. L. Pang and H. Onishi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4751–4755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ikeda, N. Koide, L. Han, C. L. Pang, A. Sasahara and H. Onishi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 202, 185–190 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Thomas and K. L. Syres, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4207–4217 RSC .
M. Ikeda, N. Koide, L. Han, A. Sasahara and H. Onishi, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8056–8060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Duncan and O. V Prezhdo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 143–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, I. Mora-Seró, F. De Angelis, J. Bisquert and P. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10095–10130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Martsinovich, F. Ambrosio and A. Troisi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16668–16676 RSC .
K. Kilså, E. I. Mayo, B. S. Brunschwig, H. B. Gray, N. S. Lewis and J. R. Winkler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 15640–15651 CrossRef .
H. Ellis, S. K. Eriksson, S. M. Feldt, E. Gabrielsson, P. W. Lohse, R. Lindblad and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21029–21036 CAS .
Z. Song, J. Hrbek and R. Osgood, Nano Lett., 2005, 7, 1327–1332 CrossRef .
V. Jacobsen, W. Knoll, M. Kreiter, M. Dürr, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 165325 CrossRef .
P. Qin, X. Yang, R. Chen, L. Sun, T. Marinado, T. Edvinsson, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1853–1860 CAS .
K. E. Lee, M. A. Gomez, S. Elouatik and G. P. Demopoulos, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9575–9583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, K. M. Karlsson, E. Gabrielsson, E. M. J. Johansson, M. Quintana, M. Karlsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2944–2952 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Feldt, U. B. Cappel, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10551–10558 CAS .
H. Alarco, M. Hedlund, E. M. J. Johansson, H. Rensmo, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 2007, 13267–13274 Search PubMed .
A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, M. B. Qadir and S. H. Jeong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Dobrzański, P. M. vel Prokopowicz, K. Lukaszkowicz, A. Drygałła and M. Szindler, Journal of Achievements of Materials and Manufacturing Engineering, 2016, 73, 13–20 Search PubMed .
B. Macht, M. Turrión, A. Barkschat, P. Salvador, K. Ellmer and H. Tributsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 73, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Lohrasbi, P. Pattanapanishsawat, M. Isenberg and S. S. C. Chuang, 2013 IEEE Energytech, Energytech 2013, 2013, 9–12.
J. Steidtner and B. Pettinger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 236101 CrossRef PubMed .

          O. H. Seeck, in X-Ray Diffraction: Modern Experimental Techniques, ed. B. Murphy, Pan Stanford,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. K. Chandiran, L. Etgar and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9232–9240 CAS .
X. Lü, X. Mou, J. Wu, D. Zhang, L. Zhang, F. Huang, F. Xu and S. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 509–515 CrossRef .

          R. Imani, M. Pazoki and A. Iglic, Properties and Commercialization, in Handbook of Functional Nanomaterials, ed. M. Aliofkhazraei, Nova Science Publishers, New York, 1st edn,  2014, ch. 14, pp. 4420–4425 Search PubMed .
J. Takahashi, H. Itoh, S. Motai, S. Shimada and N. Tio, J. Mater. Sci., 2003, 8, 1695–1702 CrossRef .
N. G. Park, J. Van De Lagemaat, A. J. Frank and J. van de Lagemaat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8989–8994 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi, K. Deng and L. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Josefsson, S. K. Eriksson, N. Ottosson, G. Öhrwall, H. Siegbahn, A. Hagfeldt, H. Rensmo, O. Björneholm and M. Odelius, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20189–20196 RSC .
B. Winter, R. Weber, W. Widdra, M. Dittmar, M. Faubel and I. V. Hertel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 2625–2632 CrossRef CAS .
T. Marinado, M. Hahlin, X. Jiang, M. Quintana, E. M. J. Johansson, E. Gabrielsson, S. Plogmaker, D. P. Hagberg, G. Boschloo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, H. Siegbahn, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11903–11910 CAS .
E. M. J. Johansson, M. Hedlund, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22256–22263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, Y. Shen, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4611–4617 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Mayor, J. Ben Taylor, G. Magnano, A. Rienzo, C. J. Satterley, J. N. O’Shea and J. Schnadt, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114701 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. J. Johansson, T. Edvinsson, M. Odelius, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 8580–8586 CAS .
M. Hahlin, E. M. J. Johansson, S. Plogmaker, M. Odelius, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1507–1517 RSC .
L. Patthey, H. Rensmo, P. Persson, K. Westermark, L. Vayssieres, A. Stashans, A. Petersson, P. A. Bruhwiler, H. Siegbahn, S. Lunell and N. Martensson, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 5913–5918 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schnadt, A. Henningsson, M. P. Andersson, P. G. Karlsson, P. Uvdal, H. Siegbahn and P. A. Bru, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3114–3122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pazoki, P. W. Lohse, N. Taghavinia, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8503–8508 RSC .
B. C. O'Regan, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Forneli, J. Albero, A. Morandeira, E. Palomares, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2906–2907 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara, T. Nishikawa, Y. Uemura, N. Koumura, K. Hara, A. Mori, T. Abe, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17874–17881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, H. Tian, J. Cong, W. Yang, I. Bora, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 3476–3483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Flasque, A. N. Van Nhien, J. Swiatowska, A. Seyeux, C. Davoisne and F. Sauvage, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1126–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. J. Johansson, M. Hedlund, M. Odelius, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 244303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Westermark, A. Henningsson, H. Rensmo, S. Södergren, H. Siegbahn and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Phys., 2002, 285, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pazoki, N. Taghavinia, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16472–16478 CAS .
M. Pazoki, J. Oscarsson, L. Yang, B. W. Park, E. M. J. Johansson, H. Rensmo, a. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 50295–50300 RSC .
P. T. Hsiao and H. Teng, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 888–893 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nunzi, E. Mosconi, L. Storchi, E. Ronca, A. Selloni, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1221–1229 CAS .
A. F. Halverson, K. Zhu, P. T. Erslev, J. Y. Kim, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2112–2116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. J. Johansson, M. Odelius, P. G. Karlsson, H. Siegbahn, A. Sandell and H. Rensmo, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 184709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. J. Johansson, M. Odelius, S. Plogmaker, M. Gorgoi, S. Svensson, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10314–10322 CAS .
T. Edvinsson, C. Li, N. Pschirer, J. Schöneboom, F. Eickemeyer, R. Sens, G. Boschloo, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15137–15140 CAS .
X. Wang, O. Kitao, H. Zhou, H. Tamiaki and S. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7954–7961 CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15384–15396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Numata, S. Zhang, X. Yang and L. Han, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 1328–1335 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ogomi, S. S. Pandey, S. Kimura and S. Hayase, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 1087–1092 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ghamgosar, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 560, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Harms, N. Tétreault, V. Gusak, B. Kasemo and M. Grätzel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9037–9040 RSC .
L. Ellis-Gibbings, V. Johansson, R. B. Walsh, L. Kloo, J. S. Quinton and G. G. Andersson, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9431–9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, T. Sumitomo, T. Lee, A. Pellaroque, O. Bellon, D. Milliken and H. Desilvestro, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 36–50 CrossRef CAS .
B. Park, M. Pazoki, K. Aitola, S. Jeong, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2074–2079 CAS .
A. Abate, D. J. Hollman, J. Teuscher, S. Pathak, R. Avolio, G. D’Errico, G. Vitiello, S. Fantacci and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13538–13548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3643–3647 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and M. Grätzel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 262114 CrossRef .
B. Xu, J. Huang, H. Agren, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3252–3256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Turner, M. C. Beard and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 11716–11719 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nemec, J. Rochford, O. Taratula, E. Galoppini, P. Kuzel, T. Polívka, A. Yartsev and V. Sundström, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 197401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tiwana, P. Parkinson, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 1365–1371 Search PubMed .
T. T. O. Nguyen, L. M. Peter and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8532–8536 CAS .
A. Petrozza, C. Groves and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12912–12920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abate, T. Leijtens, S. Pathak, J. Teuscher, R. Avolio, M. E. Errico, J. Kirkpatrik, J. M. Ball, P. Docampo, I. McPherson and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2572–2579 RSC .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 558–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, I. Ding, T. Giovenzana, J. T. Bloking, M. D. Mcgehee and A. Sellinger, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1455–1462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bozano, S. a. Carter, J. C. Scott, G. G. Malliaras and P. J. Brock, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1132–1134 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kunst and G. Beck, J. Appl. Phys., 1986, 60, 3558–3566 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Dunn, L. M. Peter, S. J. Bingham, E. Maluta and A. B. Walker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22063–22072 CAS .
I. Abayev, A. Zaban, V. G. Kytin, A. a. Danilin, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 11, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hendry, M. Koeberg, B. O. Regan and M. Bonn, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza, S. Ito, H. Miura, M. Grätzel and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1810–1818 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jäger, D. Haarer, B. Peng and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 6185–6187 CrossRef .
M. Grasruck, a. Schreiber, U. Hofmann, S. Zilker, a. Leopold, S. Schloter, C. Hohle, P. Strohriegl and D. Haarer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 16543–16548 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yasuda, Y. Yamaguchi, D.-C. Zou and T. Tsutsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 41, 5626–5629 CrossRef CAS .
I. Abayev, a. Zaban, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquert, Phys. Status Solidi, 2003, 196, R4–R6 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
H. M. Ng, S. Ramesh and K. Ramesh, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 239–245 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mohamad, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 57–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuang, C. Klein, S. Ito, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, N. Evans, F. Duriaux, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1133–1137 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qin, V. Leen, T. Rohand, W. Dehaen, P. Dedecker, M. Van der Auweraer, K. Robeyns, L. Van Meervelt, D. Beljonne, B. Van Averbeke, J. N. Clifford, K. Driesen, K. Binnemans and N. Boens, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 439–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Baheti, P. Tyagi, K. R. J. Thomas, Y.-C. Hsu and J. T. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8541–8547 CAS .
Y. Ooyama, S. Inoue, R. Asada, G. Ito, K. Kushimoto, K. Komaguchi, I. Imae and Y. Harima, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2010, 2010, 92–100 CrossRef .
K. S. Chen, W. H. Liu, Y. H. Wang, C. H. Lai, P. T. Chou, G. H. Lee, K. Chen, H. Y. Chen, Y. Chi and F.-C. Tung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2964–2974 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 1439–1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Lisensky, R. R. Gagne and C. A. Koval, Inorg. Chem., 1980, 19, 2854–2855 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, T. N. Murakami, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wang, Analytical Electrochemistry, Wiley-VCH, 2nd edn,  2000, vol. 3 Search PubMed .
P. J. Cameron, L. M. Peter, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1447–1453 CrossRef CAS .
N. Papageorgiou, M. Grätzel and P. P. Infelta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 405–438 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 758–768 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. He, G. Boschloo and H. Lindstro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2529–2533 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. C. O’Regan, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21818–21824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, L. Wang, B. Ma, C. Zhan and Y. Qiu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2460–2465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yue, J. Wu, Y. Xiao, M. Huang, J. Lin and J. Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1495–1501 CAS .
M. Wu, X. Lin, T. Wang, J. Qiu and T. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2308–2315 CAS .
S. M. Waita, B. O. Aduda, J. M. Mwabora, G. a. Niklasson, C. G. Granqvist and G. Boschloo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 637, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, M. Zukalova, O. Vik and D. Havlicek, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1056–1061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Unger, F. Spadavecchia, K. Nonomura, P. Palmgren, G. Cappelletti, A. Hagfeldt, E. M. J. Johansson and G. Boschloo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5997–6004 CAS .
W. Kaim and J. Fiedler, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 3373–3382 RSC .
S. J. Marritt, G. L. Kemp, L. Xiaoe, J. R. Durrant, M. R. Cheesman and J. N. Butt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8588–8589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. B. Cappel, A. L. Smeigh, S. Plogmaker, E. M. J. Johansson, H. Rensmo, L. Hammarstrom, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4345–4358 CAS .
C.-P. Hsieh, H. P. Lu, C. L. Chiu, C. W. Lee, S. H. Chuang, C. L. Mai, W. N. Yen, S. J. Hsu, E. W. G. Diau and C. Y. Yeh, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1127–1134 RSC .
J. Melas-Kyriazi, I. K. Ding, A. Marchioro, A. Punzi, B. E. Hardin, G. F. Burkhard, N. Tétreault, M. Grätzel, J.-E. Moser and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moia, V. Vaissier, I. López-Duarte, T. Torres, M. K. Nazeeruddin, B. C. O’Regan, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 281–290 RSC .
G. Boschloo and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2228–2231 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Boschloo, a. Goossens and J. Schoonman, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 428, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. O’Brien and L. R. White, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1978, 74, 1607–1626 RSC .
S. P. Mohanty and P. Bhargava, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 291–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, J. Young Kim, K. Sun Hong, H. Suk Jung, J. K. Lee and H. Shin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2405–2412 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Shi, S. Peng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 197, 260–265 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Mohanty and P. Bhargava, J. Power Sources, 2012, 218, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O’Regan and J. R. Durrant, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1799–1808 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Imani, M. Pazoki, G. Boschloo and A. Iglic, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2014, 4, 21 CrossRef .
M. Quintana, T. Edvinsson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1035–1041 CAS .
U. Würfel, J. Wagner and A. Hinsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20444–20448 CrossRef PubMed .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumuller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690–3698 CAS .
J. H. Yum, E. Baranoff, F. Kessler, T. Moehl, S. Ahmad, T. Bessho, A. Marchioro, E. Ghadiri, J. E. Moser, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 631 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Han, N. Koide, Y. Chiba and T. Mitate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2433–2435 CrossRef CAS .
C. Law, S. C. Pathirana, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, P. R. F. Barnes, A. Listorti, T. H. Ghaddar and B. C. O’Regan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Tsao, P. Comte, C. Yi and M. Grätzel, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2976–2981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, S. B. Ko, I. H. Jang and N. G. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12637–12639 RSC .
T. Daeneke, Y. Uemura, N. W. Duffy, A. J. Mozer, N. Koumura, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hanmin, Z. Xiaobo, Y. Shikui, W. Xiangyan, T. Zhipeng, L. Bin, W. Ying, Y. Tao and Z. Zhigang, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 715–720 CrossRef .
V. Yong, S.-T. Ho and R. P. H. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 143506 CrossRef .
D. Park, Y. Jeong, J. Lee, J. Lee and S. Moon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2734–2739 CAS .
M. Ni, M. Leung, D. Leung and K. Sumathy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2000–2009 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, M. Liu, G. Yang, H. Yao, S. Fan and C. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Guo, Y. H. Luo, Y. D. Zhang, X. C. Huang, D. M. Li and Q. B. Meng, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81, 103106 CrossRef PubMed .
L. I. Halaoui, N. M. Abrams and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, G. Q. (Max) Lu and L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3565–3572 CAS .
J. Ferber and J. Luther, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 54, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, D. Myers, J. Lan, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14982–14998 RSC .
N. Sharifi, S. Dadgostar, N. Taghavinia and A. Irajizad, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Nguyen, H. K. Mulmudi, D. Sabba, S. A. Kulkarni, S. K. Batabyal, K. Nonomura, M. Grätzel and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16182–16186 RSC .
M. Rahman, F. Tajabadi, L. Shooshtari and N. Taghavinia, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 966–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dadgostar, F. Tajabadi and N. Taghavinia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2964–2968 CAS .
F. Huang, D. Chen, X. L. Zhang, R. a. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1301–1305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nattestad, A. J. Mozer, M. K. R. Fischer, Y.-B. Cheng, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle and U. Bach, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halme, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and P. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5623–5637 CAS .
S. Södergren, A. Hagfeldt and S. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5552–5556 CrossRef .
H. Wang and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18125–18133 CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes and B. C. O’Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19134–19140 CAS .
S. Ardo, Y. Sun, A. Staniszewski, F. N. Castellano and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6696–6709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. B. Cappel, S. M. Feldt, J. Schöneboom, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9096–9101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. V. O. Connor and D. Philips, Time-correlated Single Photon Counting, Academic Press, London,  2014 Search PubMed .

          J. Xu and J. R. Knutson, Methods Enzymol., Elsevier Inc., 1st edn,  2008, vol. 450, pp. 159–183 Search PubMed .
J. M. Rehm, G. L. Mclendon, Y. Nagasawa, K. Yoshihara, J. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 9577–9578 CrossRef .
J. Guo, S. Wang, X. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Xiao and C. Teng, Aust. J. Chem., 2015, 68, 1025–1034 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Anderson and T. Lian, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2005, 56, 491–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Benkö, J. Kallioinen, J. E. I. Korppi-Tommola, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 489–493 CrossRef .
Y. Tachibana, K. Hara, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2527–2535 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Antila, P. Myllyperkio, S. Mustalahti, H. Lehtivuori and J. Korppi-Tommola, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7772–7780 CAS .
U. Bach and A. Et, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7445–7446 CrossRef CAS .
I. a. Howard, M. Meister, B. Baumeier, H. Wonneberger, N. Pschirer, R. Sens, I. Bruder, C. Li, K. Müllen, D. Andrienko and F. Laquai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300640 CrossRef .
M. Juozapavicius, M. Kaucikas, S. D. Dimitrov, P. R. F. Barnes, J. J. Van Thor and B. C. O’Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25317–25324 CAS .
M. Juozapavicius, M. Kaucikas, J. J. Van Thor and B. C. O’Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 116–123 CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Ulbricht, S. Derossi, J. N. H. Reek and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2578–2584 CAS .
P. Tiwana, P. Docampo, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5158–5166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Asbury, R. J. Ellingson, H. N. Ghosh, S. Ferrere, A. J. Nozik and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3110–3119 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, A. J. Mozer, Y. Uemura, S. Makuta, M. Fekete, Y. Tachibana, N. Koumura, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16925–16928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Haque, T. Park, A. B. Holmes and J. R. Durrant, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 89–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Kroeze, N. Hirata, L. Schmidt-Mende, C. Orizu, S. D. Ogier, K. Carr, M. Grätzel and J. R. Darrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1832–1838 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moia, U. B. Cappel, T. Leijtens, X. Li, A. M. Telford, H. J. Snaith, B. C. O’Regan, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18975–18985 CAS .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 729–734 CrossRef CAS .

          U. B. Cappel, Characterisation of Organic Dyes for Solid State Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, PhD thesis, Uppsala University,  2011 .
T. Edvinsson, N. Pschirer, J. Schöneboom, F. Eickemeyer, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Phys., 2009, 357, 124–131 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, N. Tetreault, R. Humphry-baker, F. Kessler, E. Barano, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3941–3947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, U. B. Cappel, E. L. Unger, M. Karlsson, K. M. Karlsson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 779–789 RSC .
C. Olson, D. Veldman, K. Bakker and F. Lenzmann, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2011, 2011, 1–11 CrossRef .
T. Edvinsson, N. Pschirer, J. Schöneboom, F. Eickemeyer, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Phys., 2009, 357, 124–131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leone, A. Paoletti and N. Robotti, Physics in Perspective, 2004, 6, 271–294 CrossRef .
G. U. Bublitz and S. G. Boxer, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1997, 48, 213–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Stark, Nature, 1913, 92, 401 CrossRef .
W. Yang, M. Pazoki, A. I. K. Eriksson, Y. Hao and G. Boschloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16744–16751 RSC .
R. M. O’Donnell, S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2817–2821 CrossRef .
M. Meister, B. Baumeier, N. Pschirer, R. Sens, I. Bruder, F. Laquai, D. Andrienko and I. A. Howard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9171–9177 CAS .
U. B. Cappel, S. Plogmaker, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and H. Rensmo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14767–14774 RSC .
M. Adachi, M. Sakamoto, J. Jiu, Y. Ogata and S. Isoda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13872–13880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550–6560 CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef CAS .
G. Paasch, K. Micka and P. Gersdore, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 2653–2662 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lasia, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 397, 27–33 CrossRef .
I. D. Raistrick, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 1579–1586 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 49–72 RSC .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117–131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei-Qing, L. Zhong-Guan, K. Dong-Xing, H. Lin-Hua and D. Song-Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 395–403 CrossRef .

          J. Bisquert and F. Fabregat-santiago, in Dye-sensitized Solar Cells, ed. K. Kalyanasundaram, EPFL Press,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Bisquert, M. Grätzel, Q. Wang and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11284–11290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mora-Seró, S. Giménez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. Azaceta, R. Tena-Zaera and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7162–7169 RSC .
Y. Yoshida, S. Tokashiki, K. Kubota, R. Shiratuchi, Y. Yamaguchi, M. Kono and S. Hayase, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 646–650 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, L. Zhao, Z. Zheng and F. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18730–18733 CAS .
M. Wang, P. Chen, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 290–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, A. Zaban and P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 334–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Samadpour, P. P. Boix, S. Gim, A. I. Zad, N. Taghavinia and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14400–14407 CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, M. Gorlov, G. Boschloo and L. Kloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22330–22337 CAS .
P. Wyss, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24424–24429 RSC .
Y. Alivov and Z. Y. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 63504 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. C. O’Regan, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21818–21824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J.-E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945–14953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lee, D. K. Hwang, P. Guo, S. T. Ho, D. B. Buchholtz, C. Y. Wang and R. P. H. Chang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14582–14591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Jennings, Y. Liu, F. Safari-Alamuti and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1556–1562 CAS .
C. He, Z. Zheng, H. Tang, L. Zhao and F. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10322–10325 CAS .
P. P. Boix, G. Larramona, A. Jacob, B. Delatouche and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 226, 1579–1587 Search PubMed .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2292–2301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl and N. Te, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 362–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Kim, D. Song, E. M. Barea, J. H. Lee, Y. R. Kim, W. Cho, S. Lee, M. M. Rahman, J. Bisquert and Y. S. Kang, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 455–461 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2794–2800 CAS .
P. J. Cameron and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14394–14400 CrossRef CAS .
E. Joanni, E. C. Muniz, R. Savu, T. R. Habeck, P. R. Bueno, F. Fabregat-santiago, R. A. Cti, R. Dom and I. Pedro, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12415–12421 Search PubMed .
R. O. Hayre, M. Nanu, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4809–4814 Search PubMed .
K. Gelderman, L. Lee and S. W. Donne, J. Chem. Educ., 2007, 84, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kawakita, J. Kawakita, Y. Sakka and T. Shinohara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, H65–H68 CrossRef CAS .
M. Turrion, J. Bisquert and P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9397–9403 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Park, J. Lim, Y. S. Kwon, I. Y. Song, J. M. Choi, S. Song and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schlichthörl, S. Y. Huang, J. Sprague and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 8141–8155 CrossRef .
H. Paulsson, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 586, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dloczik, O. Ileperuma, I. Lauermann, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, G. Redmond, N. J. Shaw and I. Uhlendorf, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10281–10289 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O’Regan, K. Bakker, J. Kroeze, H. Smit, P. Sommeling and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17155–17160 CrossRef PubMed .
B. O. Regan, J. Moser, M. Anderson and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8720–8726 CrossRef .
J. Nissfolk, K. Fredin, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17715–17718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12093–12098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fredin, J. Nissfolk, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 609, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fredin, M. Gorlov, H. Pettersson, A. Hagfeldt, L. Kloo and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13261–13266 CAS .
K. Nonomura, Y. Xu, T. Marinado, D. P. Hagberg, R. Zhang, G. Boschloo, L. Sun and A. Hagfeldt, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2009, 2009, 1–9 CrossRef .
L. Yang, B. Xu, D. Bi, H. Tian, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7378–7385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mohammadpour, A. Iraji Zad, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2140–2145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Richards, A. Y. Anderson, S. Martiniani, C. Law and B. C. O’Regan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1980–1984 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Regan and L. Xiaoe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7203 Search PubMed .
E. M. J. Johansson, L. Yang, E. Gabrielsson, P. W. Lohse, G. Boschloo, L. Sun and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18070–18078 CAS .
D. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ben Aribia, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 454–459 RSC .
S. M. Feldt, E. a Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550–13559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sunahara, J. Ogawa and S. Mori, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1420–1422 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O. Regan and F. Lenzmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4342–4350 CrossRef .
G. Boschloo, L. Häggman and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13144–13150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dunn, P. Westin and D. Staff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13932–13937 CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, L. Liu, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, H. Kisserwan, T. H. Ghaddar, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O’Regan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3532–3538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 450–456 CrossRef CAS .
N. Duffy, L. M. Peter, R. M. Rajapakse and K. G. Wijayantha, Electrochem. Commun., 2000, 2, 658–662 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, Q. Feng, G. Zhou, C. H. Huang and Z. S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7190–7195 CAS .
M. Quintana, T. Marinado, K. Nonomura, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 202, 159–163 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18847–18855 CAS .
K. Lobato, L. M. Peter and U. Würfel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16201–16204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ansari-Rad, Y. Abdi and E. Arzi, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 74319 CrossRef .
L. M. Peter, A. B. Walker, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13694–13699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nissfolk, K. Fredin, J. Simiyu, L. Häggman, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 646, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4013–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Hsu, Y. C. Chen, R. Y. Y. Lin, K. C. Ho and J. T. Lin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14099–14109 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Cheng, X. Yin and B. Liu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, N. Noel, V. Sivaram, T. Leijtens, J. A. Alexander-Webber and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 495, 215–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. B. Cappel, T. Daeneke and U. Bach, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4925–4931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Nguyen, C. D. Bailie, E. L. Unger and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10996–11001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N. L. L. Cevey-Ha, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042–18045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Nogueira, C. Longo and M. A. De Paoli, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1455–1468 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. K. Koh, B. Kim, S. H. Ahn, H. Ahn, D. Y. Ryu, J. H. Kim and E. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4633–4639 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Shen, B. Park, Y. Hao, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo, L. Kloo, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, A. Jarboui, C. Perruchot, M. Jouini, N. Vlachopoulos and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16591–16601 CAS .
B. Xu, E. Gabrielsson, M. Safdari, M. Cheng, Y. Hua, H. Tian, J. M. Gardner, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 3, 1402340 CrossRef .
M. Freitag, F. Giordano, W. Yang, M. Pazoki, Y. Hao, B. Zietz, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9595–9603 CAS .
J. Cong, X. Yang, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9180–9194 CAS .
J. Gong, J. Liang and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 5848–5860 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, Y. Fu and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1170–1181 CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Baranoff and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1172–1178 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee and M. Yang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 1142–1160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rita Narayan, Rene, 2012, 16, 208–215 Search PubMed .
G. Hashmi, K. Miettunen, T. Peltola, J. Halme, I. Asghar, K. Aitola, M. Toivola and P. Lund, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3717–3732 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Li and E. W.-G. Diau, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 291–304 RSC .
T. W. Hamann and J. W. Ondersma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 370–381 CAS .
J. Nei de Freitas, A. F. Nogueira and M. A. De Paoli, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5279–5294 RSC .
R. Bendoni, A. L. Barthélémy, N. Sangiorgi, A. Sangiorgi and A. Sanson, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016, 330, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gr, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2972–2973 RSC .
K. C. Huang, R. Vittal and K. C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 675–679 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lim, Y. S. Kang and D. W. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2031–2035 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, I. Exnar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1166–1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, Z. Huo, Y. Ding, Y. Li, S. Dai, L. Wang, J. Zhu, X. Pan, B. Zhang, J. Yao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2344–2352 CAS .
W. Cho, Y. R. Kim, D. Song, H. W. Choi and Y. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17746–17750 CAS .
G. Kalaignan and Y. Kang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2006, 7, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O’Regan and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8544–8547 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 578–583 CrossRef .
M. I. Asghar, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, M. Toivola, K. Aitola and P. Lund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 418–426 CAS .
R. Jiang, A. Anderson, P. R. F. Barnes, L. Xiaoe, C. Law and B. C. O’Regan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4751–4757 CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Ellis, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo, N. Vlachopoulos, A. Hagfeldt, J. Bergquist and D. Shevchenko, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 3942–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

From right: Erik M. J. Johansson, Meysam Pazoki, Gerrit Boschloo and Ute B. Cappel
	From right: Dr Erik Johansson received his PhD degree in Physics at Uppsala University in 2006. After postdoctoral work at Lund University, he was an assistant professor at Uppsala University. He is currently an associate professor in Physical Chemistry at Uppsala University. His research field is nanostructured solar cells including perovskite, quantum dot and dye-sensitized solar cells. His research is spanning from understanding the fundamental processes and the atomic scale structure in these solar cells to the function of the full devices. Dr Meysam Pazoki completed his PhD in Physics at Sharif University of Technology in 2012. He then moved to Uppsala University, where he has held postdoctoral positions in the group of A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo. Currently he is a researcher in the Chemistry department at Uppsala University. His experimental–theoretical research focuses on photo-physics, device characterization and DFT calculations of dye and perovskite solar cell materials. Dr Gerrit Boschloo has more than 20 years of research experience in dye-sensitized solar cells. He leads a research group on hybrid solar cells within physical chemistry at Uppsala University. Besides DSCs, his research topics include advanced photoelectrochemical characterization of semiconductors and perovskite solar cells. He authored more than 190 publications. Dr Ute Cappel received her PhD in Chemistry at Uppsala University in 2011. Following a Marie-Curie fellow at Imperial College London, she is currently a researcher at the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Uppsala University. Her research focuses on the characterization of molecular solar cells, in particular by time-resolved and X-ray based spectroscopies.

Anders Hagfeldt
	Anders Hagfeldt is a Professor in Physical Chemistry at EPFL, Switzerland. He obtained his PhD at Uppsala University in 1993 and was a post-doc with Prof. Michael Grätzel (1993–1994) at EPFL. His research focuses on the fields of dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells, and solar fuels. He has published more than 400 articles with over 36000 citations (h-index 95). He is a member of the European Academy of Sciences, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences. He is a visiting professor at Uppsala University and Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

Broader context
Solar energy is a potential candidate to supply the future energy demands with low environmental impact. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are a class of solar cells which are highly efficient in low light and under indoor conditions, with the possibility for low cost fabrication, utilization of flexible substrates and for colorful and transparent devices. Due to the different working principles in comparison to other solar cell technologies, many techniques have been used to characterize the function of DSCs and to understand their properties. However, the understanding of the working mechanism of DSCs is not complete yet, and further improvement of device efficiencies requires a deeper understanding of the materials and processes in DSCs. Therefore, new methods are continuously being developed for the characterization of DSCs to understand how further improvements can be achieved. In this review paper, we summarize the characterization techniques for DSCs in a pedagogical way and also include newly developed techniques that are important for the future development of DSCs.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the DSC device.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the electron transfer processes in a liquid electrolyte DSC.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Typical SEM image of TiO2 mesoporous films in the DSC working electrode. The mean pore size and particle size are 15 and 25 nm respectively. Reprinted from Michael Grätzel, Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews, 2003, 4, 145. Copyright (2003), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM cross section image of a typical ssDSC device showing the layers of FTO/blocking layer (BL)/TiO2–dye–hole conductor/hole conductor capping layer (CL)/silver back contact (SC). The scale bar is 1 micrometer.	 

 	Fig. 5  EDAX analysis of the solid state device showing the uniform penetration of perovskite hole conductor to the whole thickness of the film. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Nature (485, 486), Copyright (2012).	 

 	Fig. 6  HRTEM graphs of the mesoporous microbeads and their SAED patterns. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 132, 4438). Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  STM images of pivalate precoated TiO2 films immersed in the solution of the N3 dye for 1 and 10 minutes together with related dye height distributions. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 110, 4751). Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society.	 
EB = hν − EK − ϕ	(5)

 	Fig. 8  Measured intra band gap sates of microbead and nanoparticulate films by XPS. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(6)
A(λ) = ε(λ)Cl	(7)
	(8)
A = 1000 × Γ × ε	(9)
LHE(λ) = 1 − 10−A(λ)	(10)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the conductivity measurement used for solid state DSCs. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 130, 12912). Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of a coplanar configuration for conductivity measurement in liquid electrolyte DSCs.	 
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)

 	Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms of cobalt–phen complexes in acetonitrile. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 115, 21500). Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 
	(18)
	(19)
Ilim = 4FnDCr	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)
krec = n/τ, & krec = G	(25)

 	Fig. 11  Typical IV curve of a DSC.	 
Jr = eketCmox(nuα −nuα0)	(26)
Jph = Jinj − Jr	(27)
	(28)

 	Fig. 12  
J
sc
versus light intensity for different films used for the optimization of film porosity in cobalt electrolyte DSCs. Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(29.1)
	(29.2)
Iph − Ish − Id = 0
Vd = Vsh = Vs + V(t)	(30)

 	Fig. 13  An equivalent circuit for DSCs.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Typical IPCE spectra of DSCs measured for the D35 organic dye. Normalized IPCE shows that the thicker working electrodes have more light scattering. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 118, 16472). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of an IPCE setup.	 
	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
	(34)
ΔA(λ) = −log(I(λ)pumped/I(λ)unpumped)	(35)
kobs = kinj + k0	(36)
	(37)
	(38)

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the main components in an ultrafast transient absorption set-up.	 

 	Fig. 16  TAS spectra of N3 dye on TiO2 at time delays of 0.5 (■), 10 (○), and 150 ps (▲) between the pump and probe pulses. Inset: Transient absorption kinetics at 860 nm.270 Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 124, 489). Copyright (2002) American Chemical Society.	 
	(39)
	(40)
kredox = krec + kreg	(41)
	(42)
	(43)
	(44)

 	Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of a PIA setup.	 

 	Fig. 18  PIA spectra of the terrylenemonoimidemonoanhydride dye on TiO2 (a) in the presence of different cations in a supporting electrolyte solution consisting of 0.5 M (Li, Na, or TBA) triflate in acetonitrile and (b) in the presence of 0.5 M Li triflate, or 0.5 M LiI + 0.05 M I2 in acetonitrile. Reprinted from Chemical Physics, 124, Tomas Edvinsson et al., Photoinduced electron transfer from a terrylene dye to TiO2: quantification of band edge shift effects, 357, Copyright (2009), with permission from Elsevier.290	 
	(45.1)
	(45.2)

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the Stark shift of dye molecules on a TiO2 surface when the change in dipole moment points away from the surface (most common, top) and towards the surface (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 297 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.297	 

 	Fig. 20  Stark effect of the D149 dye. (a) Electroabsorption spectrum. (b) Absorption spectrum (A) and the first derivative of the absorption spectrum. (c) PIA spectrum in air and in the presence of a redox electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of American Chemical Society, 132, 9096). Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.264	 

 	Fig. 21  Typical EIS spectrum for liquid electrolyte based DSCs. Reprinted with permission from (Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 110, 13872). Copyright (2006) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Transmission line model for liquid electrolyte based DSCs. Reproduced from ref. 309 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.	 
τe = Rrec × C	(46.1)
	(46.2)
	(46.3)

 	Fig. 23  (a) Equivalent circuit (where CPE is a non-ideal capacitor) and (b) typical EIS spectra of a counter electrode sandwich cell with a redox electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 6, 2074. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 
	(47)
	(48)
kpc = ktr + ke	(49)
	(50)
	(51)
	(52)
	(53)

Electron injection	Femtosecond laser/terahertz spectroscopy	5.1.2
Oxidized dye recombination	PIA, nanosecond laser spectroscopy small light modulation, EIS in light and dark	5.2, 5.1.3, 6.2 and 6.1
Dye regeneration	Nanosecond laser spectroscopy, SECM	5.1.3 and 3.3
Electron recombination lifetime	EIS, small light modulation, laser spectroscopy	6.1, 6.2 and 5.1.3
Electron transport time	EIS, small light modulation	6.1 and 6.2
Stark effect	Timed/frequency PIA, EA, nanosecond laser spectroscopy	5.2, 5.3 and 5.1.3

Dye HUMO level	CV, XPS	3.9.1 and 3.6
Dye LUMO level	Emission/UV_Vis and CV	3.7 and 3.9.1
TiO2 CB edge	Light perturbation, Mott Shottky, spectroelectrochemistry	6.2, 6.3, 6.1 and 3.9.2
Fermi level at short circuit	Large light perturbation	6.3.2
TiO2 valence band edge	XPS(UPS), spectroelectrochemistry	3.6 and 3.9.2
Surface density of states	STM	3.3
Intra-band gap density of states	CV, EIS, spectroelectrochemistry	3.9.1, 6.1 and 3.9.2
Redox mediator Fermi level	CV	3.9.1
Hole conductor energy level	CV, XPS	3.9.1 and 3.6
Counter electrode Fermi level	Over-potential estimation from CV and simulations	3.9.1

Thickness of working/counter electrode	SEM, profilometry	3.1
Porosity of working/counter electrode	SEM, BET, UV/Vis & SEM, reflectometry	3.1, 3.2, 3.7
Diffusion length of electrons	EIS, small light perturbation, IMPS/IMVS, IPCE	6.1, 6.2, 4.2
Diffusion coefficient of redox mediator	CV, EIS, limited current	3.9.1, 6.1, 4.1
Diffusion coefficient of electrons	EIS, small light perturbation, IMPS/IMVS	6.1 and 6.2
Hole transporter pore filling	PIA, XPS, reflectometry, laser spectroscopy, UV-Vis, SEM	5.2.1, 3.6, 5.1, 3.7, 3.1
Hole transporter conductivity	Four point probe, TOF, terahertz spectroscopy, PICC	3.8
Conductivity of working/counter electrode	Four point probe, TOF, terahertz spectroscopy, PICC	3.8
Light harvesting efficiency	UV-Vis, IPCE	3.7 and 4.2
Electro catalytic efficiency of counter electrode	EIS, CV	6.1 and 3.9.1
Dye coverage	UV-Vis, dye deloading, photocurrent transient, quartz crystal microbalance, NICIS, XPS	3.7 and 3.6
Interface electric field	PIA, EA	5.2 and 5.3
Dye regeneration efficiency	Laser spectroscopy	5.1.3
Electron injection efficiency	Laser spectroscopy, IPCE, PIA	5.1.1, 4.2, 5.2
Charge collection efficiency	EIS, small light perturbation, IMPS/IMVS	6.1, 6.2
Dye adsorption mode	STM, XPS	3.3 and 3.6
Electron density of states	Charge extraction, EIS, CV, XPS	6.3, 6.1, 3.9.1 and 3.6
Recombination rate/charge transfer resistance	EIS, CV	6.1 and 3.9.1
Stored charge in WE	Charge extraction, EIS, CV	6.3, 6.1 and 3.9.1
Redox Concentration changes in stability tests	Mass spectroscopy, small and large light perturbations, EIS	8, 6.2 and 6.3
Limiting current	Dark current	4.1.2
Dye coloration efficiency	Spectroelectrochemistry	3.9.2
WE crystallite size	TEM, XRD	3.1 and 3.5
Dye dipole moment changes	EA/PIA	5.2 and 5.3
Blocking layer charge transfer resistance	CV, EIS	3.9.2 and 6.1
TiO2 flat band potential	Mott–Schottky	6.1

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
