Potential for improved transport in core–shell CuInS 2 nanoparticle solar cells from an Ag surface termination   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CE00728D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CE00728D
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 3381-3387Potential for improved transport in core–shell CuInS2 nanoparticle solar cells from an Ag surface termination†

        
          
            Yicong 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rob 
            Patterson
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Lee-Chin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianghui 
            Zheng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ning 
            Song
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Long 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gavin 
            Conibeer
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shujuan 
            Huang
          
        
      
School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia 2033. E-mail: robert.j.patterson@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      4th May 2018
    , Accepted 26th May 2018First published on 28th May 2018AbstractA major factor limiting the performance of nanostructured CuInS2 photovoltaic devices is the current density, pointing to poor charge carrier transport in CuInS2 nanoparticle films. In a typical CuInS2 core/shell structure synthesis, ZnS is typically chosen as a shell material for CuInS2 core passivation, which leads to a significant enhancement of the photoluminescence quantum yield from the CuInS2 nanoparticles. While typically a marker for excellent photovoltaic performance, in this case the increased photoluminescence likely signals increased charge carrier confinement and reduced transport through any thin films fabricated from the nanoparticles. Here we show that replacing the typical divalent Zn cation surface termination with a monovalent Ag cation leads to small improvements in charge carrier transport through nanostructured films. This surface termination intentionally introduces lower energy electronic states directly at the surface of the CuInS2 nanoparticles, reducing charge carrier confinement and thus increasing charge carrier mobility between nanoparticles. The study assessed appropriate Ag molar ratios to be used in synthesis, with an 8% Ag:Cu ratio found to be optimal. The passivation offered by Ag surface termination appears comparable to that from Zn with strong photoluminescence observed in both cases. Slight improvements in the performance of all-solid-state nanoparticle CuInS2 photovoltaic devices are obtained, with current densities in the Ag surface terminated case being increased by just under 10%. These findings outline a potential strategy for the synthesis of type II core–shell CuInS2 quantum dot thin film devices with improved charge transport.
1. Introduction
The CuInSxSe2−x material system has shown excellent performance in both physically deposited thin films1–4 and nanoparticle sensitized photovoltaic structures employing thick mesoporous TiO2,5 with efficiencies in sensitized device structures of over 11% having been demonstrated. However, relative to these results, so-called planar structure nanoparticle solar cells remain unoptimized with maximum efficiencies of fully solution processed cells having reached only 1.5%.1 Open circuit voltage (Voc) values in the planar structures are quite competitive, being on the order of 0.6 or 0.7 eV.1 However short circuit current density (Jsc) values lag considerably behind state of the art PbS planar structures, which typically are on the order of 25 mA cm−2,6 and nanoparticle CuInS2-sensitized solar cells having current densities of a similar magnitude.5,7 In the sensitized case, charge separation across the CuInS2 nanoparticle and transport to the mesoporous TiO2 and the polysulfide electrolyte solution occurs across a few nanometers, whereas in the case of the planar structure transport through a relatively thick CuInS2 nanoparticle film spanning a few hundred nanometers is required in order to achieve optimal light absorption. This suggests that charge transport through CuInS2 nanoparticle thin films is the limiting factor to achieving efficiency improvements in planar photovoltaic devices based on this material.
CuInS2 is known to have a relatively small Bohr radius of 4.1 nm,8 similar to that of silicon.9 This may be an intrinsic problem for transport in liganded nanoparticle thin films, though related materials such as AgBiS2 also have small Bohr radii and show reasonable photovoltaic performance.10,11 The properties of bulk CuInS2 are known to be very suitable for photovoltaic applications, with charge carrier lifetimes in the microsecond regime.12
Photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) is often used as a figure of merit to determine which semiconductors have the potential to yield high efficiency in solar cell applications. To obtain excellent PLQY from CuInS2 nanocrystals typically a surface passivation step to create a thin ZnS shell has been employed.13,14 While a core–shell ZnS:CuInS2 structure can give exceptional luminescence efficiencies of up to ∼70%,13 the presence of the wide bandgap shell likely further exacerbates transport problems in all-solid-state solar cell structures. Therefore, it is of interest to find alternative materials that can effectively passivate the surface of CuInS2 nanoparticles without introducing a large potential barrier in this small Bohr radius material system.
Silver compounds have recently been of considerable interest in the solar cell community, with Ag having been used alongside Bi in so-called “double perovskites”.15 Silver alloys are a part of the I–III–VII family of compounds, to which CuInS2 belongs, that includes materials such as AgBiS2, AgSbS2, etc.16,17 Pure silver sulphide has been explored previously in solar applications18 and is known to crystallize in a monoclinic structure with a bandgap of approximately 1 eV.19 Silver is also a larger, heavier atom than both Cu and Zn. By simple arguments any substitutional effects Ag may have in the material have some possibility of increasing the Bohr radius of electronic states that participate in inter-particle transport, particularly near the surface.
Here, we report an initial investigation into the potential replacement of the typical ZnS shell with an Ag-surface termination on CuInS2 nanoparticles (Ag:CuInS2), in an effort to improve transport through compact CuInS2 nanoparticle thin films. Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram of the bulk band offsets for ZnS:CuInS2 and Ag2S:CuInS2 in a core–shell structure. While a ZnS surface termination provides an approximately 1 eV barrier for electrons and holes, an Ag surface termination nominally extracts electrons and holes to the surface for transport. The synthesis recipe for Ag:CuInS2 is a modified method based on state of the art syntheses for CuInS2 with ZnS.7,20–22 It was found that Ag:CuInS2 does indeed show significant photoluminescence (PL), suggesting that surface defects are suppressed through the application of a thin Ag surface termination on the CuInS2 nanocrystals despite the potentially lower bandgap of the surface terminating layer. Solar cells were fabricated using the Ag:CuInS2 and slight improvements in transport were observed. This suggests that with further optimization an Ag surface treatment on CuInS2 nanoparticles could lead to significant improvements in all-solid-state, low temperature solution processed nanoparticle solar cells in this high performance material system.
 Fig. 1  The bulk band offsets and barrier heights for ZnS:CuInS2 core–shell nanoparticles as well as the expected band offsets for Ag2S:CuInS2 nanoparticles. No barriers to inter-particle charge carrier transport exist in the Ag2S:CuInS2 case. (b) Schematic diagram showing monovalent Ag cation surface termination on the CuInS2 surface. 
2. Experimental
2.1 Nanoparticle synthesis
CuInS2 nanoparticles were fabricated according to a recipe published previously.21 A mixture of 0.8 mmol CuI and 1 mmol indium acetate in 7.5 mL of trioctylphosphine (TOP), 9 mL of oleylamine (OLA) and 15 mL of octadecene (ODE) was degassed in a three-necked flask for 30 min, heated and stirred until dissolution at 100 °C for another 30 min under vacuum. A clear solution was obtained after approximately the first 10 minutes of stirring. Then the temperature of the solution was raised to 170 °C. Hot injection at this temperature was performed using 310 μL of bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide (TMS) as a sulphur source. The TMS had been dissolved in 7.5 mL of ODE that had been degassed prior to its dissolution. On injection, the solution immediately cooled to 150 °C and the heater power to the reaction vessel is adjusted to maintain this temperature for 15 minutes to grow the nanoparticles. During the growth phase the colour of the solution changed from clear to yellow then red and finally black over a few seconds. Then the reaction was finished by quenching the flask in an ice bath. The product was recovered by centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 5 minutes using 5 mL of toluene to resuspend the nanoparticles and 70 mL of absolute ethanol as an anti-solvent in 5 separate centrifuge tubes. The centrifugation steps were repeated only once before ligand exchange to prevent excessive removal of the surface ligands. Finally the nanoparticles were suspended in 6 mL of toluene.
The shell precursor in an amount of 1 mmol for Zn acetate and amounts between 0.0625 mmol and 0.25 mmol for Ag acetate were dissolved in 3 mL oleic acid (OLAc) and 6 mL ODE and then degassed at 80 °C for 30 min. The CuInS2 nanoparticle solution was then injected into this shell precursor solution and left to react for 30 minutes at 80 °C. The solution was again quenched using a water bath. The nanoparticles were then purified via the following centrifugation steps. The nanoparticles were suspended in 5 mL of toluene and 40 mL of acetone as a solvent and anti-solvent respectively. The solution was purified by centrifugation once at 3500 rpm for 5 minutes. Then 4 mL of toluene and 10 mL of methanol were used as the solvent and anti-solvent and the centrifugation was repeated. Then the solvent amounts were reduced to 2 and 5 mL respectively and centrifugation repeated. This product was dissolved in 2 mL of toluene and centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 minutes and the supernatant was collected, with any precipitates discarded. The nanoparticles were finally resuspended in toluene with a final concentration of about 80 mg mL−1.
2.2 Device fabrication
A compact TiO2 layer was deposited on a pre-cleaned FTO coated glass substrate (Pilkington, 14 ohms per square) by a spray coating and annealing method using an ethanolic solution of Ti-isopropoxide as the Ti precursor.23 The spray coating was then dried on a hotplate at 150 °C for 5 minutes. A mesoporous TiO2 layer was then deposited on top of the compact layer by spin coating (3000 rpm, 30 s) a commercial TiO2 paste (90T) from Dyesol (GreatCell) at a volume ratio of 1:6 paste to ethanol respectively. The mesoporous TiO2 film was then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min with a ramp rate of 40 °C min−1 and allowed to cool naturally to room temperature.
Thin films of CuInS2 nanoparticles were spin-coated on top of the previously deposited TiO2 films at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds using a Laurell spin coater from the colloidal solutions described above. Solid state ligand exchange to link the nanoparticles was performed using a solution containing 2 vol% formic acid in methanol according to the method from Konstantatos's.21 Spin-coated films were rinsed using methanol and toluene between deposition and linking steps. The nanoparticle deposition procedure was repeated 18 times. Then a layer of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-pmethoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) was deposited as a hole transporting layer (HTL) by spin-coating a Spiro-OMeTAD solution at 3000 rpm. The solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg Spiro-OMeTAD, 31.2 μL, 4-tertbutylpyridine and 17.4 μL lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide solution (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) in 1 mL chlorobenzene. Finally Au contacts were evaporated onto the back surface of the device.
2.3 Characterisation
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed on the nanoparticles using a Phillips CM200. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken using a field emission SEM (NanoSEM 230). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were measured using the Empyrean thin film Xpert Materials Research diffractometer system with a triple axis goniometer and analysed using standard High Score Plus software. Raman scattering on drop-cast films was measured on an Invia microRaman system at an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The PL of the suspended CuInS2 colloid was measured on a micro-PL system also at an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were made using a solar cell testing system from Abet Technologies, Inc. (using class AAA solar simulator) under an illumination power of 100 mW cm−2.
Results and discussion
In most cases knowledge of the precise role that the new atomic species (Zn or Ag) plays in the shell formation is not clear and in principle many possible locations for these atoms in the final material are possible. The additional atoms may bond to exposed surface sulphur, may diffuse into the material or perform some kind of substitution through cation exchange (e.g. In and Cu) and may also grow into legitimate shells with relatively well defined interfaces. Clearly there is a dependence on growth time and temperature in the final atomic configuration and to some degree all three mechanisms can be expected to participate in this relatively complicated quaternary material system.

Fig. 2 shows XRD data from syntheses of Ag:CuInS2 nanoparticles for different times and initial Ag precursor concentrations at a fixed temperature of 80 °C. Small concentrations of Ag introduced into the reaction vessel do not appear to lead to measurable formation of a secondary material phase that is separate from the CuInS2 nanoparticles. This also appears to be true for short annealing times at a fixed initial precursor amount of 0.0625 mmol. This is consistent with the Ag attaching onto the surface of the CuInS2 nanoparticles as nucleation points for further material growth, without introducing a new crystal phase (surface termination or very thin shell formation). For longer growth times and higher concentrations with the Ag precursor present, XRD peaks corresponding to the formation of a new phase of pure Ag2S are evident. A concentration of 0.125 mmol and growth time of 30 minutes appear not to lead to the formation of the secondary Ag2S phase. XRD peaks from CuInS2 remain in the XRD results on the growth of the secondary phase, though they grow weaker for large Ag-precursor concentrations and longer growth times. For small amounts of the Ag-precursor, limited or no phase segregation or additional phases are visible in the XRD. This is consistent with a very thin Ag surface termination on the CuInS2 nanoparticles. This also appears to be true for relatively short growth times at low concentrations of the Ag precursor. For long growth times or high concentrations of the Ag precursor, the new Ag2S phase is clearly evident. This is consistent with both cation exchange to produce an Ag2S shell on CuInS2 nanoparticles or the consumption of the sulphur in CuInS2 to produce phase segregated Ag2S nanoparticles. JCPDS cards for CuInS2 and monoclinic Ag2S are also shown in Fig. 2 for comparison to the XRD spectra.
 Fig. 2  XRD results for Ag:CuInS2 nanoparticles synthesized by the recipe described in ref. 24 and modified for Ag, (a) using different initial amounts of the Ag-precursor from 0.0625 mmol to 0.25 mmol and synthesis times of 30 min, (b) having different growth times at a constant Ag-precursor concentration of 0.125 mmol. 
We also observed that the stability of the colloid was greatly improved by the introduction of a shell, with time periods before agglomeration increasing from several days for uncoated CuInS2 to months for Zn:CuInS2 and Ag:CuInS2.
To assess phase segregation, TEM microscopy of the optimal synthesis was performed, looking for changes in the particle morphology. Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the TEM images of the CuInS2 nanoparticles for two Ag-precursor amounts and growth periods. For high Ag precursor concentrations of 0.25 mmol (Fig. 3b) a distinct change in the morphology of the particles was observed. Relatively large “dark” particles having significant increases in beam scattering appeared in the final colloid that was obtained, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Longer growth times at ∼80 °C did not lead to this same particle morphology, consistent with the formation of an Ag surface termination (Fig. S1a†). The XRD results exclude the possibility that this new phase is an Ag–Cu–In–S alloy or solid solution, which would have been possible for significant internal diffusion of the surface terminating cation. Longer growth periods at high temperature lead to more of the secondary, segregated Ag2S phase being formed. As seen in Fig. 3(b, inset), dimer-like nanoparticles appear in the colloid, in addition to phase segregated particles.
 Fig. 3  TEM images showing the morphology of Ag:CuInS2 synthesized at 80 °C for 30 min with (a) 0.125 mmol, (b) 0.25 mmol of the Ag precursor. The image in (a) shows the beginning of the formation of the new phase and (b) clearly shows the emergence of a different morphology, attributed to a new Ag2S phase consistent with the XRD results. The trend with increasing Ag concentration toward the production of these larger particles is clear. The image in (a) inset shows fringe a spacing that match well to the (112) planes in CuInS2. In (b) the inset shows a fringe spacing consistent with the (120) plane of Ag2S, again consistent with the XRD results. 

Fig. 4 shows a comparison between the photoluminescence (PL) and absorption spectrum obtained from an Ag:CuInS2 sample, fabricated with 0.125 mmol of silver precursor and a growth time of 30 min such that secondary Ag2S phases should not form, and a ZnS:CuInS2 (Zn:CuInS2) sample fabricated following ref. 21. The main PL peak compares well with the onset of the absorption in both the Zn and Ag terminated cases and can be attributed to band-to-band luminescence from a CuInS2 core at approximately 1.70 eV for Zn and 1.65 eV in the Ag terminated cases. However, complex PL with many shoulders and sub-peaks are observed. For small amounts of shell species (Zn or Ag), these are consistent with various degrees of surface coverage and alloying in the overall group of nanoparticles. Some CuInS2 nanoparticles may have slightly higher degrees of penetration of the shell species into the core regions, forming shallow defect levels. The insets in Fig. 3(a) and (b) show higher magnification TEM images of individual nanoparticles and show that the nanoparticles may not be single crystalline. Some regions of the nanoparticle show crystalline fringes while others do not. This is consistent with the PL results. Small bandgap increases relative to the bulk CuInS2 material may result from a small contribution from quantum confinement effects for the 3 nm diameter nanoparticles. At least two low energy shoulders are visible in the PL spectra, showing that these nanostructures likely have more than one radiative shallow electronic state. The low energy shoulder centred at approximately 1.5 eV may be introduced by an Ag–S surface state, as this shoulder appears to move to higher energies (∼1.6 eV) in the Zn terminated case. The Zn:CuInS2 peak is also visibly asymmetric, likely indicating appreciable radiative transitions from shallow states. Any Ag–S states at the surface may be expected to have slightly lower energies since to the bulk bandgap of Ag2S is measurably lower than that of CuInS2, at 1.0 eV. This may also contribute to the slight decrease in the PL peak location in the Ag-terminated case relative to the Zn-terminated one. That transitions from shallow defect states are radiative suggests long lifetimes for carriers occupying these states and that the Ag surface termination has provided reasonably good passivation. In fact, though the peaks shown in Fig. 4 are normalized for comparison, the Ag:CuInS2 colloid showed almost an order of magnitude higher PL intensity than did the Zn:CuInS2 material, for comparable fabrication conditions and the same nanoparticle concentration.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of Ag:CuInS2 nanoparticles and Zn:CuInS2 nanoparticles: (a) PL and absorption as well as (b) Raman spectra. In the PL, a clear peak for both materials that matches well with the onset of the absorption was observed, implying luminescence from the CuInS2 core. The Raman data shown in (b) corresponds to CuInS2 (ref. 25) and demonstrates that despite exposure to the different metal ion, Zn or Ag, the core CuInS2 phase appears to be intact after the synthesis with 0.125 mmol Ag precursor and 30 min growth time. 
The Raman data in Fig. 4(b), after a synthesis with 0.125 mmol of the Ag precursor and 30 min of growth time, show that the CuInS2 core is still intact, corresponding well with XRD data. This provides further evidence of the Zn and Ag treatments indeed terminating the surface of the nanoparticles and that any alloying is minimal for a synthesis method that does not produce secondary phases.

Fig. 5 shows the J–V curves of solar cells made from an optimal Zn:CuInS2 and Ag:CuInS2 nanoparticles, using 0.125 mmol of the surface terminating precursor and a 30 min growth time. Typical for these materials, the Voc values are quite reasonable at 0.6 to 0.7 eV. However, the current densities are low, similar to the results shown by Konstantatos and well below those obtained from a sensitized structure.1,7,21 Cells fabricated in this work show that the use of Ag:CuInS2 nanoparticles slightly improve the Jsc, suggesting improved transport through the film. However, fill factors (FF) appear to suffer with the introduction of the Ag, which may be a consequence of the relatively deep surface states induced by Ag surface termination as visible in the PL data. Surprisingly, despite terminating the surface with a nominally lower bandgap material, Voc values remain comparable to Zn:CuInS2 devices. This is consistent with the CuInS2 core determining the overall optoelectronic properties of the material, such as the splitting in quasi-Fermi levels. This also suggests that band offsets and doping levels are similar in the Ag and Zn cases, which is interesting due to the significantly different energetics they could be expected to contribute at the nanoparticle's surface from the Zn or Ag atoms.
 Fig. 5  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the layers in the final device. From bottom to top, a bright layer of FTO is visible, followed by a thin ∼50 nm thick compact TiO2 layer. Above that, the CuInS2 nanoparticle layer incorporated into mesoporous TiO2 is present. Finally, a layer of Spiro-OMeTAD caps the absorber layer before the metal contact layer. (b) J–V curves of Zn:CuInS2 and Ag:CuInS2 solar cells showing a small improvement in the Jsc value for films of CuInS2 with an Ag surface termination. Overall efficiencies remain modest, to be compared against results from ref. 1, 7 and 21. 
Conclusions
Initial work regarding the synthesis of Ag surface terminated CuInS2 nanoparticles as an improved nanoparticle material for all-solid-state solar energy conversion has been presented. A threshold time and Ag-precursor content in the synthesis, such that secondary phases detrimental to the CuInS2 phase do not form, has been reported. An interesting shallow state is likely present in the Ag:CuInS2, leading to the significant low energy shoulder observed in the PL. This smaller PL peak may be due to radiative transitions from shallow surface states introduced by Ag. Similar charge carrier lifetimes appear to have been obtained from Ag-terminated CuInS2 nanoparticles, with PL intensities equivalent to or larger than the Zn-terminated case observed. In a complete photovoltaic device, slight improvements in short-circuit current density for the Ag:CuInS2 device were obtained. This implies that the passivation from an Ag surface termination may be comparable to the passivation provided by Zn. With further optimization there is significant potential to improve charge carrier transport in CuInS2 nanoparticle thin films through Ag surface treatments.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Yicong Hu gratefully acknowledges funding from the University Postgraduate Award (UPA) scholarship for support. The group thanks the Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Project scheme (DP140102073) and the University of New South Wales (UNSW) Silver Star Award for supporting the work.
Notes and references
J. E. Halpert, F. S. Morgenstern, B. Ehrler, Y. Vaynzof, D. Credgington and N. C. Greenham, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5857–5867 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Stahl, H. Azimi and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14116–14120 Search PubMed .
A. Uhl, J. Katahara and H. Hillhouse, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 130–134 Search PubMed .
B.-S. Lee, Y. Hwang, H. N. Pham, J. Y. Kim, M. H. Song and D.-K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15889–15896 Search PubMed .
J. Du, Z. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun and X. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201–4209 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, O. Voznyy, R. Sabatini, F. Arquer, R. Munir, A. H. Balawi, X. Lan, F. Fan, G. Walters and A. R. Kirmani, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 258–263 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Pan, I. N. Mora-Seró, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203–9210 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Czekelius, M. Hilgendorff, L. Spanhel, I. Bedja, M. Lerch, G. Müller, U. Bloeck, D.-S. Su and M. Giersig, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 643–646 CrossRef .
L. T. Canham, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 57, 1046–1048 CrossRef .
M. Bernechea, N. C. Miller, G. Xercavins, D. So, A. Stavrinadis and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 521–525 CrossRef .
P.-C. Huang, W.-C. Yang and M.-W. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18308–18314 Search PubMed .
P. J. Whitham, A. Marchioro, K. E. Knowles, T. B. Kilburn, P. J. Reid and D. R. Gamelin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17136–17142 Search PubMed .
Z. Bai, W. Ji, D. Han, L. Chen, B. Chen, H. Shen, B. Zou and H. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1085–1091 CrossRef .
H. Zang, H. Li, N. S. Makarov, K. A. Velizhanin, K. Wu, Y.-S. Park and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1787–1795 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1233–1240 CrossRef .
M. Bernechea, N. C. Miller, G. Xercavins, D. So, A. Stavrinadis and K. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 521–525 CrossRef .

          J. Capistrán-Martínez, M. Nair and P. Nair, MRS Online Proceedings Library Archive,  2014, vol. 1670 Search PubMed .
C. Ji, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Wang, H. Shen, W. Gao, Y. Wang and W. Y. William, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 065602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Du, B. Xu, T. Fu, M. Cai, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1470–1471 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meinardi, H. McDaniel, F. Carulli, A. Colombo, K. A. Velizhanin, N. S. Makarov, R. Simonutti, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 878–885 CrossRef PubMed .
D. So, S. Pradhan and G. Konstantatos, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16776–16785 RSC .
L. Li, T. J. Daou, I. Texier, T. T. Kim Chi, N. Q. Liem and P. Reiss, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2422–2429 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, M. Zhang, C. Lau, X. Deng, J. Kim, Q. Ma, C. Chen, M. Green, S. Huang and A. Baillie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 168, 165–171 CrossRef .
L. Li, A. Pandey, D. J. Werder, B. P. Khanal, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1176–1179 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, P. Yin, L. Wang and Y. Qian, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7217–7221 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ce00728dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The bulk band offsets and barrier heights for ZnS:CuInS2 core–shell nanoparticles as well as the expected band offsets for Ag2S:CuInS2 nanoparticles. No barriers to inter-particle charge carrier transport exist in the Ag2S:CuInS2 case. (b) Schematic diagram showing monovalent Ag cation surface termination on the CuInS2 surface.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD results for Ag:CuInS2 nanoparticles synthesized by the recipe described in ref. 24 and modified for Ag, (a) using different initial amounts of the Ag-precursor from 0.0625 mmol to 0.25 mmol and synthesis times of 30 min, (b) having different growth times at a constant Ag-precursor concentration of 0.125 mmol.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images showing the morphology of Ag:CuInS2 synthesized at 80 °C for 30 min with (a) 0.125 mmol, (b) 0.25 mmol of the Ag precursor. The image in (a) shows the beginning of the formation of the new phase and (b) clearly shows the emergence of a different morphology, attributed to a new Ag2S phase consistent with the XRD results. The trend with increasing Ag concentration toward the production of these larger particles is clear. The image in (a) inset shows fringe a spacing that match well to the (112) planes in CuInS2. In (b) the inset shows a fringe spacing consistent with the (120) plane of Ag2S, again consistent with the XRD results.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of Ag:CuInS2 nanoparticles and Zn:CuInS2 nanoparticles: (a) PL and absorption as well as (b) Raman spectra. In the PL, a clear peak for both materials that matches well with the onset of the absorption was observed, implying luminescence from the CuInS2 core. The Raman data shown in (b) corresponds to CuInS2 (ref. 25) and demonstrates that despite exposure to the different metal ion, Zn or Ag, the core CuInS2 phase appears to be intact after the synthesis with 0.125 mmol Ag precursor and 30 min growth time.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the layers in the final device. From bottom to top, a bright layer of FTO is visible, followed by a thin ∼50 nm thick compact TiO2 layer. Above that, the CuInS2 nanoparticle layer incorporated into mesoporous TiO2 is present. Finally, a layer of Spiro-OMeTAD caps the absorber layer before the metal contact layer. (b) J–V curves of Zn:CuInS2 and Ag:CuInS2 solar cells showing a small improvement in the Jsc value for films of CuInS2 with an Ag surface termination. Overall efficiencies remain modest, to be compared against results from ref. 1, 7 and 21.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ce00728d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
