Engineering nanointerfaces for nanocatalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60389J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60389J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7870-7886Engineering nanointerfaces for nanocatalysis

        
          
            Zhi-cheng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Biao 
            Xu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xun 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: wangxun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +8610 62792791;   Tel: +8610 62792791
Received 
      31st October 2013
    First published on 17th April 2014AbstractThe interface, referred to as the boundary between two phases, has been demonstrated to play a critical role in catalysis. Fundamental understanding of interfacial phenomena occurring in catalysis will favor the rational design of high-performance catalysts. With the thriving of nanoscience, the nanointerface has also received tremendous attention in nanocatalysis. In this review, we focus on the recent advances in the delicate design and the fine control of various complex nanomaterials with well-defined interfaces based on progress in nano-synthetic methodologies, including metal–metal oxide, metal–metal, metal–non-oxide and metal in confined spaces. Then the challenging issues in the synthetic control of a nanointerface, based on the authors' experiences, are discussed. Finally, the prospects and outlooks for engineering nanointerfaces for nanocatalysis towards renewable energy are presented.
Zhi-cheng Zhang
Zhicheng Zhang is currently a postdoc researcher in Professor Xun Wang's group in the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, China. He received his bachelor's degree at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Southwest Petroleum University, China (2007), and his PhD degree from College of Chemical Engineering, China University of Petroleum, Beijing, China (2012). His current research interests include the synthesis, characterization and applications of noble metal-based nanocrystals.
Biao Xu
Biao Xu is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Xun Wang's group. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Tsinghua University in 2009. His research interests include the synthesis, properties and applications of water-soluble compound semiconductor nanocrystals.
Xun Wang
Professor Xun Wang received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 2004. He then joined the faculty of the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 2004, and was promoted to associate professor and full professor in 2005 and 2007, respectively. His current research interests include the synthetic methodology, formation mechanism, and properties of monodisperse nanocrystals.
1 Introduction
The interface, which is generally referred as the boundary between two domains, has been demonstrated to exhibit fundamentally different properties from those of its bulk counterparts.1–3 In the case of catalysis, when optimizing catalysts to improve the catalytic performance for an idiographic reaction, one usually has to carefully consider the predominant role of the interface in the binding, transformation and transport of surface species such as electrons, adsorbents, and intermediates between two domains.4–6 So far, to achieve better reaction activity, selectivity, and stability, a great number of research efforts have been devoted to the interfacial effect in catalysis with the aid of advanced spectroscopies, density functional theory (DFT) calculations in model systems, and other surface/interface probes at the molecular/atomic level. However, due to the ill-defined structure and wide size distribution of the different components, it sometimes becomes difficult for researchers to understand the reaction mechanism, and thus causes some uncertainty and even debate concerning the precise mechanism of the studied catalysts. For example, there have been several reported results from different research groups that remain controversial and even partly contradictory, concerning the exposed Au–support interface bearing the responsibility for low-temperature CO oxidation.7–11 In this context, the rational design and engineering of phases with well-defined shapes, sizes, and structures is highly desirable. In the past few decades, thanks to great progresses in modern synthetic chemistry, it is presently feasible to design nanoparticles (NPs) and complex nanomaterials with uniform shapes and sizes, which is really helpful for gaining more deep insights in the catalytic mechanism. For instance, in the case of heterogeneous catalysis, the wide size distribution of noble metals on supports as prepared by the conventional impregnation method, usually makes it impossible to precisely recognize the interface effect on catalytic reactivity, while developed colloidal synthesis approaches are able to solve this size-control problem, and thus allow us to isolate the catalytic effect of each individual parameter involved in anchored metal catalysts.
Currently, economical and effective alternative catalysts have been generally recognized as the core of various green technologies to meet renewable energy demands as urgently expected in our society, which provides higher requirements for the production of various kinds of complex nanomaterials. To enhance the catalytic properties and endow nanomaterials with multifunctionality in terms of specific area such as photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, heterocatalysis, and so on, many types of advanced complex nanomaterials with tunable interfaces have been built up including the metal–metal interface, metal–oxide interface, metal–non-oxide interface (e.g. chalcogenide, carbide, nitride, carbon, and coordination polymer, etc.), and other interfaces (e.g., oxide–oxide, oxide–chalcogenide, phosphate–tungstate, etc.). However, it is noteworthy that although more and more isolated reports on the construction of well-defined nanointerfaces with superior properties have emerged in recent years, a comprehensive overview of their synthetic strategies, unique and tailored properties, and various applications in nanocatalysis has not been well summarized. While concerning the experimental and theoretical research on physical and chemical properties, and function principles of the fabricated interfaces based on traditional methods, one can read some nice review papers in the literature.12,13 Our understanding here for engineering nanointerfaces for nanocatalysis is from a new viewpoint, referring to nanomaterial science. The combination of the efforts presented in this review is believed to pave the way to a wide range of catalytic reactions occurring on interfacial sites.
2 Rational design and control of nanointerfaces for enhanced nanocatalysis
2.1 Metal and oxide interface
Heterogeneous catalysts, usually consisting of a support (typically metal oxides) and supported phases (typically noble metal NPs), have been employed in a variety of important fields involving chemical industry, pollution prevention, and energy technology.14–18 It is generally accepted that metal oxides can not only serve as a support to disperse metal NPs, but also improve the catalytic properties through interaction with the metal NPs, i.e. the so called strong metal–support interaction (SMSI).19,20 Such interactions can sometimes become so prominent that the critical role of the metal–oxide interface is often highlighted by many experimental and theoretical studies.21–25 Recently, such a situation of strong interaction has been particularly disclosed in the case of oxide supported noble metal clusters or even single atoms.26,27 Additionally, further complicating the matter is that when pre-synthesized metal–metal or metal–oxide heterophases are subsequently deposited on the oxides, more structural factors need to be taken into account involving mixed metal–metal and metal–oxide interfaces. In this sense, the rational design and careful construction of well-defined metal–oxide interfaces may thus help us to obtain better catalysts for a desired reaction.

Effect of size control and support type on interfacial reactivity. 
Heterogeneous catalysis is a complex chemical process occurring at nanosized, multicomponent and dynamic solid surfaces. It has been demonstrated that the catalytic activity and selectivity are highly dependent on the shape, size, and surface structure of supported metal NPs as well as oxides.28–31 Nevertheless, as real working catalysts, heterogeneous catalysts are such complex systems that the effects of the aforementioned influencing parameters on the overall performance have to be individually investigated. In previous works with respect to surface science and catalysis, the catalytic reaction occurring on interfacial sites has already been revealed and extensively investigated. However, for most heterogeneous catalysts prepared by conventional preparation methods such as impregnation, co-precipitation, and even deposition–precipitation, the wide size distribution of metal NPs may prevent us from drawing unambiguous conclusions about the metal–oxide interface effect in catalysis. To overcome this problem, the fine size-control of metal NPs to realize a monodisperse nature is urgently needed. In recent decades, with the rapid development of modern synthetic methodologies, many strategies have been developed to obtain metal NPs with uniform sizes and shapes on oxide supports. This then can simplify research on interface-involved catalysis and make researchers better understand the reaction mechanism. In the literature, the most typical approach to obtain uniform metal NPs is based on wet-chemical synthesis routes, then the colloidal deposition method is often adopted to prepare the oxide supported metal NPs.32–38 For example, Stucky and Zheng33 successfully prepared monodisperse noble metal (Au, Ag, Au–Ag, Pt, Pd) NPs, then deposited these noble metal NPs on different types of oxide supports (Fe2O3, TiO2, ZnO, Al2O3, and SiO2) to unambiguously study the interface effect between noble metal and metal oxide in the selective oxidation of ethanol by oxygen. Very recently, by depositing size-tunable metal NPs on oxide supports, Murray and co-workers35 found that the length of the CeO2–metal interfaces could be tailored by the use of monodisperse Ni, Pd, and Pt, in which the relative fraction of interfacial sites was varied on the CeO2 support. In CO oxidation, these CeO2-based catalysts were demonstrated to be size-dependent, with direct participation in the reaction of metal atoms at the perimeter and the CeO2 oxygen lattice (Fig. 1). Through the colloidal deposition method, many supported catalyst systems have been developed and investigated in order to deeply understand the interface effect in heterogeneous catalysis. Nevertheless, in these synthetic systems, organic capping agents (typically surfactants, polymers, biomolecules) are often used in order to obtain metal NPs with uniform sizes and shapes, which may block the exposure of catalytically active sites. As a consequence, thermal treatments are usually required to remove the capping agent covered on the surface of the metal NPs. This process may lead to the agglomeration of metal NPs and thus ultimately complicate the research of the interface effect in catalysis. Based on this consideration, the development of effective methods that allow the direct synthesis of metal NPs with a clean surface is promising and highly desirable. Recently, Zheng and co-workers39 presented a surfactant-free strategy to prepare monodisperse Pt NPs from molecular [Pt3(CO)3(μ2-CO)3]52− clusters, then depositing the as-synthesized Pt NPs on various oxides (TiO2, CeO2, Fe2O3, and SiO2). The results show that Fe2O3 was the most effective support to make the Pt NPs the most active in CO oxidation, revealing that the interfaces between Pt and Fe2O3 are the active sites for O2 activation in the catalytic reaction. Similar works have also been previously reported for other catalyst systems.40,41
 Fig. 1  HRTEM images of Pd/CeO2 catalysts with different sizes of Pd NPs: (a) small, (b) medium, and (c) large samples. (d) Physical model of metal supported on CeO2 to show the distribution of surface, perimeter, and corner atoms in contact with the support. (e) Calculated number of sites with a particular geometry (surface and perimeter or corner atoms in contact with the support) as a function of diameter and TOF at 80 °C of the nine ceria-based samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2013, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


Shape, size, and composition control of metal–oxide hybrid nanostructures. 
The above results reveal that the size of supported metal NPs and the type of oxides can influence the interaction between metal and oxide. Further, recent research has shown that the morphologies and surface structures of oxide supports can also affect the loading manner or depositing behavior of metal NPs on them. This further indicates the critical role of interfacial interaction, which can be governed by many influencing factors. For instance, Yang and co-workers42 found that by using CeO2 with different shapes as supports, the growth behavior of Pt could be finely controlled on the CeO2via an e-beam evaporation strategy. HRTEM images showed that Pt clusters epitaxially grow on CeO2 nanooctahedra and randomly grew on CeO2 nanorods. In the CO oxidation reaction, Pt/CeO2 nanorods are more active than Pt/CeO2 nanooctahedra. In cyclohexene dehydrogenation, Pt/CeO2 nanorods also exhibit a higher activity and selectivity to benzene compared with Pt/CeO2 nanooctahedra. Given the importance of morphology-controlled SMSI in the catalytic reactions, as another case, Tsang and co-workers43 demonstrated morphology-dependent interactions of ZnO with Cu NPs at their interface in the selective hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol. They found that the exposed polar (002) facet in the ZnO plate exerts a stronger electronic interaction with Cu than other crystal facets, giving a higher methanol yield in CO2 selective hydrogenation. Very recently, similar work has also been reported in the case of Pd and a Ga2O3 plate by his group, which makes it more selective for CO2 activation and hydrogenation.44 In addition, Li and co-workers45 reported that, through the site-selective growth of noble metals on concave Cu2O seeds, Pd could solely nucleate on the cavities of concave Cu2O (Fig. 2a, inset), while Ag mainly grew on edges and vertices of concave Cu2O (Fig. 2b, inset). This is because the nucleation of metallic components on a substrate usually prefers to occur on highly active sites of defects or surfaces with a large curvature, which has also been demonstrated in other complex systems such as noble metal–semiconductor, metal–oxide, metal–metal, and so on. In the aerobic oxidative arylation of phenylacetylene, the highly improved catalytic activities of these hybrid nanostructures were investigated relative to the single component counterpart and their physical mixtures (Fig. 2). With the help of XPS spectra and DFT calculation results, they considered that the synergistic effect of the hybrid nanostructures in which the electron transfer from the noble metal part to the Cu2O host may be responsible for the enhancement in catalytic activity.
 Fig. 2  Catalytic activity of (a) Pd–Cu2O and (b) Ag–Cu2O hybrid nanostructures as a function of reaction time in the aerobic oxidative arylation of phenylacetylene. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In contrast to oxide supported metal NPs, metal–oxide heterostructures (typically dumbbell) may provide a convenient way to accurately control the interaction between two dissimilar nanoscale domains, as well as their composition and size at the nanoscale tuning capability. This strategy can allow us to isolate the catalytic effect of each individual parameter involved in oxide supported metal catalysis. At present, the approaches to construct the heterostructures are mainly based on seed-mediated methods. In the case of a dumbbell structure, noble metal NPs are usually preformed as seeds, then the oxide epitaxially grows on the surface of the metal NPs to form core–shell structures. Upon annealing, the metal nanoparticle is finally partially bound to the metal oxide domain. Sun and co-workers46 pioneered the synthesis of Au–Fe3O4 dumbbell NPs. In their system, the size of the NPs can be tuned from 2 to 8 nm for Au and 4 to 20 nm for Fe3O4. Since then, the dumbbell nanostructures have been further developed and extensively studied in catalysis, including Au–Fe3O4,47–52 Pt–Fe3O4,48,53 AuAg–Fe3O4,48 PtPb–Fe3O4,54 PtPd–Fe3O4,55 FePt–Fe3O4,56 Ag–Fe3O4,48,57,58 Au(Ag)–MnO,59 Co–TiO2,60 AuPd–FexOy.61 In these catalyst systems, the enhancement in catalytic activities is proposed to arise from the partial charge or electron transfer at the nanoscale interface, either from oxide to metal or from metal to oxide. In heterogeneous catalysis, to further improve the catalytic performance, the dumbbell NPs are usually deposited onto the support. In that case, two kinds of interface effect in catalysis then have to be considered. It is believed that the interface between metal NP and oxide inside the dumbbell nanostructure can ensure structural stability and prevent the sintering of the metal domains, while the interface between dumbbell NP and support can be controlled to enhance the catalytic performance (Fig. 3). Therefore, coupled with metal–metal heterostructures, metal–oxide dumbbell nanostructures are emerging as a fascinating class of hybrid nanomaterials to study the interface effect in catalysis and are expected to expand the diversity of nanomaterials and range of potential applications.
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of Pt–Fe3O4 dumbbell NPs. (b) ORR mass activity for amorphous carbon supported 5 nm Pt and 5–17 nm Pt–Fe3O4 dumbbell NPs in 0.5 M H2SO4 with the RDE rotation speed at 1600 rpm and sweeping rate at 10 mV s−1. (c) TEM image of AuPd–Fe3O4 dumbbell NPs. (d) CO oxidation specific rate (mmol converted CO/mmol metal loading per second) for both AuPd/ and AuPd–FexOy/Al2O3. Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and ref. 61. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


Multiple metal–metal oxide interfaces—a tandem catalyst. 
In heterogeneous catalysis, a fundamental understanding of relationships between structures and properties of oxide supported metal catalysts is of great importance to identify the catalytically active sites. Whereafter, one can design and construct a sophisticated catalyst for a desired reaction. In this regard, several assembly structures with well-defined shapes have been successfully constructed, during which the multi-interfaces between different domains have been demonstrated to play a crucial role in the catalytic process. During the past several years, to obtain high-performance, multifunctional nanostructured catalysts for multiple-step chemical reactions, new concepts for the rational design and assembly of multiple metal–metal oxide interfaces referring to a tandem catalyst have been proposed. For example, by the repeated use of the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method, a CeO2–Pt–SiO2 tandem catalyst was successfully prepared (Fig. 4). The CeO2–Pt interface catalyzed methanol decomposition to produce CO and H2, which were subsequently used for ethylene hydroformylation catalyzed by the nearby Pt–SiO2 interface. Hence, propanal was produced selectively from methanol and ethylene on the nanocrystal bilayer tandem catalyst.62 Similar concepts have also been introduced in other catalyst systems such as TiO2–Au–SiO2,63,64 MnOx–Au–SiO2,65 TiO2–Au–Fe3O4,51 SiO2–Pt–TiO2,66 CeO2–Au–SiO2.67 Inspired by this progress, we anticipate that the design of multicenter and multifunctional nanostructures to optimize catalytic performance can also be achieved in multicomponent core–shell structures with multi-shells.
 Fig. 4  Assembly process for the preparation of a nanocrystal bilayer ‘tandem catalyst’. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 


Oxides confined on metal nanoparticles—an inverse catalyst. 
Traditional heterogeneous catalysts are usually composed of metal NPs supported on metal oxides. In sharp contrast, recent studies indicate that reducible transition metal oxides covering noble metal surfaces to form inverse catalysts could remarkably improve the catalytic performance when controlled in a proper way, in which the active oxide phase can be confined by the oxide–metal interface.68–72 Taking advantage of this newly developed concept, several groups have design various highly efficient oxide/metal catalysts, including TMOx/Pt (TM= Fe, Co, and Ni),68,69 FexOy/Rh,70 and the NiO1−x/Pt/Ni sandwich structure.71 It is believed that this strategy will undoubtedly expand great opportunities and stimulate extensive investigations for the rational design of oxide/metal catalysts, referring to the concept of nanosynthesis.

2.2 Metal and metal interface
Based on the mixing pattern of two different components, three major types of structures can be formed for bimetallic nanocrystals (NCs): (1) core–shell structure; (2) heterojunction structure; (3) intermetallic or alloyed structures.73 Bimetallic NCs have already been attracting extensive scientific and technological interest because of their superior properties relative to their individual components, and wide use in numerous important fields from science and engineering to technology.74,75 Previous studies have shown that the shape, size, composition, and surface/interface structure of bimetallic NCs can influence their catalytic properties.76–84 In this regard, the shape-controlled synthesis of bimetallic NCs is highly desired to regulate their performance for various catalytic applications. The two metal components in a bimetallic system can induce a synergistic effect, which is often advantageous to the enhancement in catalytic performance due to their unique properties including charge transfer, atomic arrangement, interfacial stabilization, and so on.76 As follows, we concentrate our discussions of the metal–metal interfacial effect in catalysis on core–shell and heterojunction structures, due to the presence of well-defined interfaces in the two structures.

Metal–metal core–shell structures. 
According to the reported literature, the seed-mediated growth method has been viewed as the most effective route to fabricate core–shell structures, based on which the shape, composition, and size of the core and shell can be intentionally varied to achieve better catalytic properties.85–88 For example, Sun and co-workers89 have recently reported a seed-mediated growth approach to prepare core–shell FePtM–FePt (M = Pd, Au) nanowires with 2.5 nm FePtM seeds and 0.3–1.3 nm thick FePt shells (Fig. 5a–d). In the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), they found that these FePtM–FePt nanowires exhibit enhanced activity and durability compared with their corresponding alloy, and show shell thickness and core composition-dependent electrocatalytic activity. Moreover, FePtPd–FePt nanowires exhibit a higher activity than FePtAu–FePt nanowires (Fig. 5e and f). The authors consider that the possible electronic effect of Pd on FePt may facilitate O2 adsorption, activation and desorption. The highest mass and specific activity observed from FePtPd–FePt nanowires with a shell thickness of 0.8 nm may arise from the electronic effect and strain effect. Furthermore, the nanoscale architectural control of the metal–metal interface can be used to tune the geometric and electronic structure of the active sites, while these characteristic properties can determine the d-band center. For instance, as shown in Fig. 6, Tsung and coworkers90 used cubic Pd NPs as seeds to successfully prepare Pd–Rh core-island–shell NPs. Then by using a post-synthesis method to control metal migration at the atomic level, Pd–Rh nanoboxes and Rh nanoframeworks can be obtained. In the electrocatalytic evaluation (i.e., CO-stripping, formic acid oxidation, ethanol oxidation, and oxygen reduction reactions), they found that the lattice strain and composition at the surface/interface were the most important factors influencing the catalytic behavior. More recently, Li and co-workers91 developed an effective strategy to achieve the atomic-level design of tri- or multimetallic core–shell structures, referring to the newly developed concept of defect-dominated shape recovery of NCs (Fig. 7). They used concave octahedral Pt3Ni as seeds, whose surfaces possess a high density of atomic steps and defects. They then demonstrated that the third metal having the same crystal structure and similar atomic radius to the seed can selectively nucleate on the defect sites to achieve the rational design of trimetallic Pt3Ni@M core–shell structures (M = Au, Ag, Cu, Rh, Ni). In subsequent catalytic reactions, by controlling the depositing behavior and coverage density of the third metal, they confirmed that these multicenter and multifunctional nanostructures could significantly improve catalytic performance due to the geometrical and electronic effects between seed and the third metal. In addition to the seed-mediated growth method, some other encouraging approaches have been recently developed to achieve the sophisticated design of bi- or multimetallic core–shell nanostructures, involving underpotential deposition replacement, electrochemical de-alloying and chemical-reaction-driven reconstruction.92 Because of the flexibility in composition and geometric structure, these multimetallic core–shell and even multi-shell complex nanostructures are becoming increasingly appealing and will offer new opportunities for wide scientific communities.
 Fig. 5  TEM images of (a) FePtPd–FePt-0.8 and (b) FePtAu–FePt-0.8. (c) HAADF-STEM and (d) STEM-EELS mapping images of FePtPd–FePt-0.8. (e) ORR specific and (f) mass activity summaries of the FePtPd–FePt-0.8, FePtAu–FePt-0.8, FePt, and FePtPd nanowires as well as the commercial Pt NPs at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl (4 M KCl). Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 6  TEM images of (a, e) Pd nanocubes, (b, f) Pd–Rh core-island–shell nanocubes, (c, g) Pd–Rh nanoboxes, and (d, h) Rh cubic nanoframes. The scheme in (i) shows a model for the structural evolution from Pd nanocube to Rh cubic nanoframe. Adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 7  (a–c) SA-corrected HRTEM images of (a) Pt3Ni@Au0.5, (b) Pt3Ni@Au2, and (c) Pt3Ni@Au8. (d–f) Elemental maps of (d) Pt3Ni@Au0.5, (e) Pt3Ni@Au2, and (f) Pt3Ni@Au8. (g) Schematic illustration of the evolution from octahedral PtNi3 to Pt3Ni@M8 (M = Rh, Au, Ag, Cu). (h) Schematic illustration of the growth of Au on the Pt surface. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


Metal–metal heterostructures. 
Compared with metal–metal core–shell structures with only one metal exposed, metal–metal heterojunction structures with both two metals and their interface exposed are more suitable structures to study metal–metal interfacial reactivity, and thus have attracted tremendous research interest.76 Up to now, several strategies have been developed to construct metal–metal heterojunction structures: (1) the seed-mediated growth approach;93–97 (2) the galvanic replacement reaction;98–100 and (3) the successive or simultaneous reduction of metal precursors in one-step synthesis.101,102 By using these methods, all kinds of metal–metal heterostructures with different dimensions, sizes, and/or compositions have been designed and adequately demonstrated to show enhanced catalytic or electrocatalytic properties, due to the synergetic effects of two metals in charge transfer, interfacial collaboration, or structural strain. Inspired by the promotional effect of a metal–metal interface in catalysis, it is pivotal to statistically acquire as many interfaces as possible.103,104 With this aim, Yu and Cui104 recently developed a one-step electrodeposition route on an anodic aluminum oxide template to fabricate Pd–Au bimetallic NP tubes with a tunable interface (Fig. 8). Pd and Au NPs are homogeneously dispersed in the tubes and thus can provide numerous interfaces. Moreover, the interface sites can be qualitatively controlled by tuning the proportion of Pd and Au NPs. In the electro-oxidation of ethanol, they found that the activity is principally relative to the interface sites and has no direct relation with the single metal component in the tube. This significantly enhanced effect of Pd and Au may be ascribed to the electronic structure and local reactivity and a significant coupling of d orbitals at the Pd–Au interfaces.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (b) EDX mapping images of Pd–Au bimetallic NP tubes. (c) Simplified schematic illustration of the interface increase with increasing Au ratio. HRTEM images of (d) overlapped Pd–Au particles near the edge of the pore area, and (e) Au–Au particle interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 

2.3 Metal and non-oxide interfaces

Metal–carbon interface. 
Carbon, as another conventionally used support, has also received renewed attention since the thriving of nanoscience. New polymorphs of carbon materials such as 1D carbon nanotubes (CNTs),105 2D graphene,106 and analogs of graphitic carbon such as C3N4 (ref. 107) have all attracted enormous interest. Unlike their metal-like conducting graphite counterpart, these new forms of carbon materials exhibit tunable electronic structures, ranging from metal, semi-metal to semiconducting. For example, CNTs could be tuned to metal-like or semiconducting through different rolling styles.105 Single layer graphene is a semi metal, while upon layer engineering, doping, or oxidation, the electronic structure could be altered.106 This provides many possibilities to tune the catalytic performance through support–metal interactions. These carbon-supported noble metal catalysts have been reviewed by a series of excellent papers108,109 and the readers can refer to them.


Metal–metal chalcogenides/nitride/carbide interfaces. 
Apart from the most commonly used carbon and metal oxide supports, some other binary compounds (chalcogenides, nitrides, carbides), most of which are semiconductors, can also be utilized as electronic-active support materials. In terms of nanosynthesis, chalcogenides are the most convenient to tackle. It is quite difficult to tune the mesostructure of nitrides and carbides through wet chemical routes due to the high energy barrier for formation of the phases. Usually high-temperature solid state routes are utilized to prepare a nitride110 or carbide support.111 Subsequent deposition of noble metal NPs afforded excellent catalysts, in a wide range of applications, as exemplified by electrocatalysts. Recently, a colloidal route was established for nitride112 and phosphide113 NCs, which opened up the possibility for constructing nanointerfaces between these binary compounds and metals. However, in this section, we will still mainly concentrate on chalcogenides due to the well-developed synthetic strategies.
Chalcogenides have usually been regarded as poisons in catalysis because sometimes the leached chalcogen species strongly coordinate with the noble metal atoms and block the active sites.114 However, under low-temperature conditions especially in photocatalysis or electrocatalysis, this drawback might be avoided.
In the field of photocatalysis, chalcogenide materials have been widely used for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.115 To enhance the separation of hole and electron under illumination, noble metals, especially Pt were deposited onto the surface of semiconducting chalcogenides.116–120 The underlying mechanism could also be regarded as the modulation of cold electrons. With the advances in nanosynthesis, the structure of the photocatalysts could be finely tuned as exemplified by the recent work of Alivisatos and Amirav.121 They prepared CdS nanorods and CdSe NP@CdS nanorod core–shell structures (Fig. 9) with precise engineering of the size of the CdSe core and aspect ratio of the CdS nanorods. The introduction of the CdSe core constructed an inverse Type I band alignment through the CdSe–CdS interface and facilitated the separation of electron and hole. Furthermore, with the quantum confinement effect, the size variation also modulated the band structure of the CdSe and hence tuned the band alignment at the CdSe–CdS interface. The performance of these nano structures strongly depended on the radius of the CdSe core and the aspect ratio of the nanorods. The deposition of Pt NPs on the tip of the CdS nanorod significantly enhanced the activity of the photocatalysis. In a subsequent work, Zamkov et al.122 etched CdS away in the vicinity of the CdSe core and acquired even better performance. Aside from the modulation of semiconductors, the size control of Pt is also very important and even governs the photocatalytic activity. For example, Rogach and co-workers123 recently demonstrated that CdS nanorods decorated with subnanometer sized Pt clusters exhibit excellent activity for photocatalytic hydrogen production, as compared to those with large Pt nanoparticles (Fig. 10). The results presented here also indicate a substantial reduction of material costs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schemes of band alignment of CdSe@CdS–Pt nanostructure and (b) corresponding bright-field and dark-field TEM images, (c, d) TEM images of different-length nano-heterostructures (NHSs), (e) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance of different NHSs, (f) time course of hydrogen evolution of different NHSs, (g) apparent quantum yield and UV-Vis spectra of the NHSs, (h) rate of hydrogen evolution under different powers of illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 10  (a) HAADF-STEM image of non-decorated CdS nanorods, (b) HAADF-STEM image of CdS nanorods decorated with Pt clusters, (c) TEM and (d) HAADF-STEM images of CdS nanorods decorated with both Pt clusters and a Pt nanoparticle. (e) Photocatalytic hydrogen generation (in mmol of H2 per gram of CdS; more than 99% of incoming light is absorbed by the sample) from an aqueous solution containing CdS nanorods non-decorated (1) and decorated with Pt (2). The curve (2) presents both the samples as shown in b and d (or c). (f) Schematic illustration of the hydrogen generation process. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2010, AIP. 
Apart from the improvement of the chalcogenides by noble metals, the chalcogenides could also serve as a support to enhance the functionality of the noble metals. Similar to oxide supports, electron communication between the chalcogenide and noble metals explained the synergic effects. For instance, Ying and Yang reported a general synthesis of nano silver sulfide (Ag2S)-supported noble metal electrocatalysts via a phase-transfer method,124 including Ag2S–Pt, Ag2S–Au–Pt, Ag2S–Au–Os, Ag2S–Pt–Os, Ag2S–Au–Pt–Os nanocomposites, etc. (Fig. 11). The noble metals were grown on Ag2S NPs as small islands, as evidenced by TEM, HRTEM, HAADF-STEM and EDX analyses. The oil–water interface was crucial for the control of these nanostructures, through well-regulated mass-transfer and reaction. They carried out XPS investigation on Pt and proposed that electrons flow to Pt and bring about the improvement in performance and stability in CO-stripping and methanol oxidation reactions. Further studies also incorporated these metal–sulfide-based heterostructures into the thermal catalysis of a three-component coupling reaction and the interface between metal sulfide (CdS, PbS) and gold also facilitated the activation of alkynes. These sulfide supported noble metal catalysts stand as alternatives toward conventional oxide-supported catalysts in terms of convenient wet-chemical processing and structure-tunability.
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM, and (c) HAADF-STEM images and (d) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Au–Pt nanocomposites. (e) TEM, (f) HRTEM, and (g) HAADF-STEM images and (h) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Au–Os nanocomposites. (i) TEM, (j) HRTEM, and (k) HAADF-STEM images and (l) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Pt–Os nanocomposites. (m) TEM, (n) HRTEM, and (o) HAADF-STEM images and (p) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Au–Pt–Os nanocomposites. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2011, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition to traditional chalcogenide NPs, recently, graphene-like, layered transition metal chalcogenides (such as MoS2, WS2) have attracted lots of attention in electrocatalysis, especially in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).125 The tendency to grow in two dimensions also initiates the possibility to tune the sulfide–metal interface through crystal-facet engineering of both parts. Zhang et al. realized the epitaxial growth of noble metal NCs (Pd, Ag, Pt) with diameters below 10 nm on a single-layer MoS2 nanosheet (Fig. 12).126 They analyzed the epitaxial orientation and found that the nanostructures show major (111) and (101) orientations on the MoS2(001) surface. The as-obtained Pt–MoS2 composite exhibited enhanced performance towards the HER reaction when compared with both the single components. XPS was carried out to reveal that there existed electron transfer between Pt and MoS2. The authors proposed that the defined crystal facets and the selective orientation at the interface would be beneficial for its functionality. However, further control experiments based on systematic control of different exposed facets or crystal axes through the interface are required to verify the assumption.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM and (b) SAED pattern of the Pd-single layer MoS2 heterostructure, (c) corresponding HRTEM images, (d) digital graph of dispersion of Pd–MoS2 NHSs, (e) I–V scans and (f) Tafel plots of commercial Pt–C, MoS2 and Pt–MoS2 electrocatalysts, in 0.5 M H2SO4. Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
In the last decades, hot electrons from excitation by photons have received emerging attention due to the clean and sustainable feature of solar energy.127 Metal–semiconductor nano-junctions stand as an efficient platform to utilize hot electrons. In a recent work by Park et al.,128 single-tipped and double-tipped Pt–CdSe matchstick-like nanoheterostructures were successfully synthesized (Fig. 13). Pump–probe experiments revealed that platinum NPs efficiently extracted electrons from the CdSe nanorods. Then CO oxidation was tested on this heterostructure and it was found that upon photo excitation, the TOF values increased significantly in a wide range of temperatures. As a proof of concept, if the platinum NPs were grown on an insulating silica substrate, such a photo enhancement in reactivity disappeared. Furthermore, differently doped n-type and p-type GaN substrates were also tested to prove the hot-electron effect in platinum based metal–semiconductor junctions.
 Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of hot-electron formation and catalysis in CO oxidation by O2, TEM image of (b) singly and (c) doubly tipped Pt on CdSe nanorod, (d) pump–probe experiments of Pt–CdSe and CdSe, (e) plots and (f) column graphs of the catalytic performance of Pt–CdSe at different temperatures, (g) data on catalysis of CO oxidation by Pt–SiO2, (h) TOF values under different intensities of illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
As a future prospect on metal–chalcogenide nanointerfaces, we would like to highlight the recent progress in size, composition and shape controlling of the metal nanoparticle in a metal–chalcogenide heterojunction. As is known for size-,129 composition-130 and shape-82 tuning single metal nanoparticles, these factors have been proven to be quite crucial for catalytic performance. However, in a metal–sulfide heterostructure, the fine tuning of these features remains fresh and undeveloped. Yang et al. demonstrated the growth of Pt based alloy NPs, such as PtNi and PtCo on the tip of CdS nanorods (Fig. 14).131 Ryan et al. reported the size-selective growth of Au NPs on the tips of CdSe nanorods (Fig. 14).132 Alivisatos et al. realized the deposition of Pt nanocubes and the exposure of their {001} facets on CdS nanorods (Fig. 14).133 However, no further contributions on the property–structure relationships were carried out on these delicate nanostructures. We foresee that with the future thriving in the synthesis of size, composition and facet-controlled metal–sulfide nanoheterostructures, their functionalities will be exploited.
 Fig. 14  (a–f) TEM and EDX analysis of PtNi and PtCo on CdS nanorods, (g–i) growth of different-size gold tips on CdS nanorods, (j) growth of a Pt nanocube on a CdS nanorod, (k) HRTEM and SAED analysis on the crystal orientation. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2010, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Furthermore, it is noted that, apart from the decoration of semiconductors with noble metals for nanocatalysis, some co-catalytic systems like CdS–MoS2,134 CdSe–MoS2,135 and other hybrid nanomaterials136 have also received increasing interest, especially in the area of photocatalysis. In such a context, very recently, our group has successfully synthesized 1D–2D helical CdS–ZnIn2S4 nano-heterostructures (Fig. 15). It was proposed that the mismatches in lattice and dangling bonds between the 1D and 2D units are responsible for the formation of nano-heterostructures. The resultant well-defined interface between the CdS nanowire and ZnIn2S4 nanosheet induces the delocalized interface states, thus facilitating the charge transfer and enhancing the performance in the photoelectrochemical cells.137 The results presented here are expected to open up exciting opportunities for the construction of more complex 1D–2D hybrid nanostructures with multifunctionalities. In view of the key role of noble metals in nanocatalysis, as a proof of concept, occasionally subsequent deposition of noble metals on these hybrid nanostructures could further enhance their catalytic performance.138
 Fig. 15  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM, (c) model images of helical CdS nanowire/ZnIn2S4 nanosheet heterostructures. (d) The atom arrangement after DFT relaxation at the interface. Cd green, S yellow, Zn blue, In brown. (e) Comparison of photocurrents. (f) I–V scans of samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

2.4 Confined space nanointerfaces as nanoreactors
Finally, we would like to note some new types of nanointerfaces, especially the interface in a confined space. These confined spaces can introduce benefits such as enhanced stability or activity.

Metal on the inner wall of nanotubes. 
The first example involves a noble metal catalyst located on the inner surface of a CNT. In CNTs, due to the rolling and corresponding stress, the pi-electron wave-function can differ between the inner and the outer wall of the CNT.139 The incorporation of metal NPs inside this type of electron-conducting support would cause significantly different properties that do not only come from spatial confinement, as compared to a conventional electron-insulating support, such as mesoporous silica. Based on this concept, Bao et al.140 realized the site-selective deposition of RhMn NPs through capillary forces in the tubes by a wet chemical approach (Fig. 16). The site-selective deposition of RhMn NPs inside the CNT leads to a one order of magnitude increase in reactivity for production of ethanol from CO and H2. While the selectivity toward CH4, a byproduct, also significantly decreased. The authors proposed that because the inner wall of the CNT was more electron-deficient, the dissociation of the C–O bond became easier, thus the overall TOF was increased. This brings to light new opportunities in the development of high-performance heterogeneous catalysts via confinement of metal NPs inside CNTs.141–143
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of Rh in CNT nanostructures, (b) yield of ethanol and selectivity of CH4 at different temperatures for Rh in CNTs and Rh on CNT structures, (c) schematic illustration of the catalysis process inside a CNT. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides CNTs, inorganic nanotubes could also be adopted to construct a nanointerface in confined space. Recently, Gong et al.144 utilized Cu NPs inside copper phyllosilicate (Cu2Si2O5(OH)2) nanotubes (Fig. 17) as an efficient catalyst for the hydrogenation of dimethyl oxalate to produce ethanol. The selective loading of copper species inside or outside the nanotube was also controlled by capillaries. The authors checked that the Cu NPs were efficiently loaded inside the tube by tilted-angle TEM. Similar to the case of CNTs, this new type of nanoreactor showed enhanced reactivity and stability over the Cu-outside-nanotube catalyst. The authors discussed the possible reason for the enhancement might be the suitable [Cu(0)]/([Cu(0)] + [Cu+]) ratio and the prolonged contact of the reactant gas with the copper NPs. The tunable length of the nanotube reactor would also influence the selectivity toward ethanol.
 Fig. 17  (a–d) TEM at different tilted angles, (e) yield of ethanol at different reaction times, for different catalysts, (f) scheme for the formation process of Cu-in-CuPSNTs catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 


Metal inside 3D porous support. 
During the last two decades, mesoporous materials have been widely adopted as support materials in catalysis science.145 The benefits from a mesoporous support include higher thermal stability toward sintering, pore-size induced molecular selectivity and lower pack density, etc.146 As this field has been intensively reviewed, we will not mention them. Recently, metal organic frameworks (MOFs),147 a new type of porous materials, have attracted tremendous attention in the field of catalysis. Metal-inside-MOF materials are also intriguing and novel materials. By confining noble metal NCs inside MOF structures, these porous materials may provide well-designed interfaces between reactants and the target catalysts, based on which the catalytic efficiency and selectivity of noble metal NCs may be enhanced. For example, Xu and co-workers148 recently reported the use of a “double solvents” approach to incorporate ultrafine Pt NPs into the cavities of MOFs (Pt@MIL-101), which show superior catalytic performance for solid-phase (ammonia borane thermal dehydrogenation), liquid-phase (ammonia borane hydrolysis), and gas-phase (CO oxidation) reactions. In fact, similar work has also been previously reported.149–151 These results open up an opportunity to tune catalytic performance via the incorporation of ultrafine metal NPs (cluster) within highly porous MOFs. Another delicate example of fine tuning a metal-inside-MOF was presented recently by Huo et al.152 Through the addition of pre-synthesized PVP-capped NPs into a synthetic solution of ZIF-8, various types of NPs, such as noble metal (Au, Pt), semiconductor (CdTe), magnetic (Fe3O4), upconversion (NaYF4:Yb) and polymer (polystyrene) were successfully encapsulated into well-controlled ZIF-8 NPs (Fig. 18). The authors proposed that PVP, as a polymer, played a crucial role in this process as an efficient glue-like connector. The selective catalytic hydrogenation of alkenes with different molecular shapes by the Pt NPs and selective luminescent quenching of CdTe quantum dots were demonstrated. However, when using these types of materials in catalysis, high temperatures should be avoided otherwise the organic part would deteriorate.
 Fig. 18  (a) Catalytic conversion of hexene and cyclooctene by different catalysts, ZIF-8, Pt/ZIF-8, T-Pt@ZIF-8, Pt/CNT, (b) magnetic properties of Fe3O4@ZIF-8, (c) upconversion spectra of NaYF4@ZIF-8, (d) fluorescence spectra of CdTe/ZIF-8, (e) scheme for the incorporation of NPs into ZIF-8 NCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 
Very recently, our group successfully prepared a series of well-defined MOF (MOF-5, FeII-MOF-5, FeIII-MOF-5) and FeIII-based infinite coordination polymer (ICP) hollow nanocages through a one-pot solvothermal method. Impressively, by adding pre-synthesized noble metal NPs into the synthetic solution of these hollow nanocages, yolk–shell noble metal@MOF nanostructures can be fabricated. In the liquid-phase selective hydrogenation of 1-chloro-2-nitrobenzene, these yolk–shell structures show superior catalytic performance relative to the pure yolk (Fig. 19), which may arise from hydrogen enrichment in the MOF shells accelerating the hydrogenation process, or the construction of hollow nanostructures serving as confined nanoreactors for catalysis.153 Similar works for developing this concept have also been recently reported.154–156 Considering that MOF-based materials with tunable sizes and even chiral pore structures have been well developed, great research potential can be expected in this field.
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM images of PdCu@FeIII-MOF-5 yolk–shell structures produced by the encapsulation of pre-synthesized NPs in the FeIII-MOF-5 hollow structures, (b) yield (%) as a function of time in the selective hydrogenation of 1-chloro-2-nitrobenzene with PdCu dendrites and PdCu@FeIII-MOF-5 yolk–shell structures. Adapted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

2.5 Methods for controlling well-defined interfaces
Rationally engineering interfaces to achieve high-performance catalysts has been demonstrated in various types of composite nanomaterials. To date, a wide variety of strategies have been developed towards the rational design and fine control of complex nanomaterials with well-defined interfaces. In the following discussion, we focus our attention on the most commonly used and newly developed techniques for controlling well-defined interfaces, irrespective of the specific nanomaterial.

Direct deposition of pre-synthesized nanocrystals on supports with or without well-defined shapes. 
It is well known that heterogeneous catalysts are complex systems, in which at least several parameters including particle size, structure, and composition of the supported NCs together with support usually strongly govern the performance of the catalysts. In most cases, it is inherently difficult to simultaneously optimize the catalysts by tuning these parameters for a desired reaction. Hence, in order to separate these complex factors in catalyst formulation and study them individually in a systematic manner, it is extremely meaningful to aforehand synthesize the single component in well-defined shapes. Then one can deposit the preformed NCs onto a support to investigate the interfacial effect in catalysis, in which the support with or without a well-defined shape can be used in view of specific purposes. If the deposition process does not change the size and shape of the supported NCs, then the effect of the support on the catalytic activity can be isolated from other factors, and vice versa. Currently, the colloidal deposition method has been applied to allow the deposition of a metal on various support nanomaterials involving conductors, semiconductors, insulators, and so on.


Seed-based epitaxial growth. 
As a solution-phase analogue of conventional vapor-phase heteroepitaxial deposition, seed-based epitaxial growth has been commonly employed to fabricate composite nanomaterials with well-defined shapes, in which the seed serves as the primary substrate center for accommodating a secondary component. In most cases, core–shell and heterojunction nanostructures are often prepared by this approach. Uniform coverage of the secondary component on the preformed seed during the growth favors the formation of core–shell nanostructures, while the nucleation and growth of the epitaxial component on specific sites of the seed yields heterojunctions or other hybrid nanostructures. What's more, the multi-shells on original seeds as a core can be fabricated by repeatedly using the seeded process, which can endow nanomaterials with multifunctionality. In the seed-mediated growth process, the morphology of the final nanostructures is strongly guided by the structure, shape, and size of the seeds, and the seeded growth environment (e.g., reducing agent, solvent, capping agent, etc.). In the case of bimetallic NCs, it has been demonstrated that the interactions between the epitaxial domain and the preformed seed are highly dependent on several physical parameters such as lattice match, atomic radii, bond dissociation energies, correlation of surface and interfacial energies. In addition to the colloidal synthesis of bimetallic NCs, the epitaxial growth of noble metals on other substrates such as metal oxides/chalcogenides/carbides/nitrides has also been reported, which is generally driven by lattice match or interfacial energy between noble metal and substrate.


Shape-evolution of catalysts driven by lattice match or reactions. 
It is known that nanometer-sized particles are usually thermally unstable relative to their bulk counterparts. In some cases, changes in structure, size and surface composition of NPs can be apparently observed during a catalytic reaction in different reaction environments or at an elevated temperature,157–160 which may thus lead to the reconstruction of an interface between two domains. In the case of catalysis, these changes can endow nanomaterials with distinctive reactivity. For example, Somorjai and co-workers157 demonstrated that the surface composition and chemical state of core–shell Rh0.5Pd0.5 NPs can undergo dramatic and reversible changes in response to oxidizing or reducing conditions. Recently, inspired by the Deacon catalyst in which RuO2 can form epitaxial layers on the surfaces of rutile TiO2, our group recently investigated the shape evolution process of RuO2 NPs on the surface of P25 TiO2. It was found that size effects take place in this process and RuO2 NPs with sizes ∼sub-2 nm can be transformed into epitaxial layers while NPs with larger sizes are not inclined to modulate their morphologies. Based on a thermodynamic model, we consider that the surface tension and interfacial lattice match between the NPs and substrates could be responsible for such a transformation process (Fig. 20).161 Recently, with the help of a DFT study, similar phenomena could have been found in other binary rutile MO2 compounds (M = Ir, Ru, Sn, and Ti).162 Based on the above facts, careful characterization and in situ monitoring of the size, morphology, and surface/interface structure of the studied catalysts during the reaction are very important, and significant for the fundamental understanding of interface effect in catalysis.
 Fig. 20  Mechanism analysis of the stability of RuO2 nanostructures on the surface of TiO2. (a) Interfacial tensions at the boundary between the TiO2 substrate and RuO2 epitaxial nanoparticle with a large contact angle, modeling the surface structure of the initial catalyst prepared via the hydrothermal method. (b) Surface structure of lattice-matched RuO2 epilayer on the surface of TiO2, where the surface tension of the substrate (cs) is approximately equal to that of the epilayer (ce) because of the high degree of lattice match between RuO2 and rutile. (c) Free energy diagram for the phase transition of a nanoparticle explaining the instability of the sub-2 nm RuO2 catalyst. (d) Effect of particle shape on the phase transition tendency of epitaxial layers on substrates expressed by the varied free energy change (DG). The inset is the diagram of angular factor f(h), the function of contact angle that depicts the equilibrium particle shape on a substrate. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2012, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 


Polymer-assisted epitaxial growth as a possible candidate. 
In comparison with conventional physical and chemical vapour-phase deposition techniques used for the epitaxial growth of noble metals or metal oxides on a bulk substrate, wet-chemical epitaxial growth has recently received considerable interest due to several advantages such as its relatively low cost, ease of manipulation and versatility. As one of several chemical solution deposition approaches, polymer assisted epitaxial growth has attracted increasing attention and has been viewed as the most promising route, where metal ions are bound to polymers as the film precursor. At present, this route has been extensively applied to produce high-quality films for a wide range of materials such as metal–oxides, metal–nitrides, metal–carbides, and single elements.163–165 Moreover, the deposition of epitaxial phases can occur on the exterior and interior surfaces of the substrate regardless of the size and shape. The advantages of this technique lie in the homogeneous distribution of metal precursors in the solution and thus the ready formation of crack-free epitaxial films on the substrates in a conformal fashion. More importantly, to obtain improved functionalities, the composite nanomaterials can be coated on the surface of the substrates based on this method.

3 Conclusion and prospect
Nowadays, among the various green chemistry and low environmental impact technologies for renewable energy, catalysis has been regarded as the focus of such greener technologies, which in turn facilitates the production of nanomaterials, especially metal-based composite nanomaterials. Traditionally, it has been difficult to gain a deep insight into the interfacial effect on catalytic performance in real working catalysts, arising from the coexistence of complex factors (shape, size, support effects, etc.). Thanks to the successful introduction of nanoscience to material synthesis, it has now become possible to isolate the catalytic impact of each individual factor involved in supported catalysts. Meanwhile, regarding the design of novel and efficient catalysts towards renewable energy, it is crucial to maximize the interfacial area. Fundamental understanding of the interactions between two domains as well as their structural properties is essential for the successful design and manipulation of complex nanomaterials with well-defined interfaces. The combination of different nanomaterials makes it possible to produce novel and/or enhanced functionalities that the individual component does not possess. To date, wet-chemical synthesis has been recognized as one of the most promising strategies towards the fine control of complex nanomaterials with well-defined interfaces, involving metal–oxide, metal–metal, metal–non-oxide (e.g., chalcogenide, carbide, nitride, carbon, coordination polymer), and other interfaces. In the case of nanocatalysis, the prominent role of the interface between two components has been demonstrated by many experimental and theoretical investigations. Having said that, much more research efforts still have to be dedicated to unveil the intrinsic catalytic mechanism involved in complex reactions.
In the literature, it has been established that the interactions between a metal and the attached domain generally arise from several factors such as electronic, steric, lattice strain or ensemble effects. However, in spite of previous research efforts, an ambiguous or inconclusive reaction mechanism over the studied catalysts is still usually proposed, resulting from inadequate nanomaterial characterization and the interference of numerous complicated factors such as organic capping agent, structure change, reaction conditions, and so on. In particular, it should be mentioned that in most cases the capping ligands are often used to direct the synthesis of uniform nanomaterials, which may hinder the catalytic activity to some extent. Therefore, developing a surfactant-free synthesis or surface-clean strategies to design high-performance catalysts is especially required and deserves more study. Furthermore, to meet the versatile demand in catalysis, the accurate construction of complex nanomaterials with multiple synergic functions remains a major challenge and still need to be extensively explored, which requires developing a higher degree of synthetic ingenuity and creativity.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSFC (91127040, 21221062), CPSF (2013M540085), and the State Key Project of Fundamental Research for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (2011CB932402).
Notes and references
M. Stratakis and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4469–4506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. De Teresa, A. Barthélémy, A. Fert, J. P. Contour, F. Montaigne and P. Seneor, Science, 1999, 286, 507–509 CrossRef CAS .
T. Akita, M. Kohyama and M. Haruta, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1773–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cargnello, J. J. D. Jaén, J. C. H. Garrido, K. Bakhmutsky, T. Montini, J. J. C. Gámez, R. J. Gorte and P. Fornasiero, Science, 2012, 337, 713–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. X. Green, W. Tang, M. Neurock and J. T. Yates, Science, 2011, 333, 736–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Costello, M. C. Kung, H. S. Oh, Y. Wang and H. H. Kung, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 232, 159–168 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Kung, M. C. Kung and C. K. Costello, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 425–432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, Faraday Discuss., 2011, 152, 11–32 RSC .
Y. Y. Wu, N. A. Mashayekhi and H. H. Kung, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2881–2891 CAS .
M. M. Schubert, S. Hackenberg, A. C. van Veen, M. Muhler, V. Plzak and R. J. Behm, J. Catal., 2001, 197, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu and T. Wagner, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 431–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gong, Z. Nie and X. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11985–11987 RSC .
A. Chen and P. Holt-Hindle, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3767–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mizuno and M. Misono, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 199–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. C. Bond, Heterogeneous Catalysis: Principles and Applications, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2nd edn,  1987, p. 57 Search PubMed .

          C. N. Satterfield, Heterogeneous catalysis in industrial practice, 2nd edn,  1991 Search PubMed .
S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung and R. L. Garten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Goodman, Catal. Lett., 2005, 99, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
D. Matthey, J. G. Wang, S. Wendt, J. Matthiesen, R. Schaub, E. Lægsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, Science, 2007, 315, 1692–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. X. Green, W. Tang, M. Neurock and J. T. Yates, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10186–10189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mudiyanselage, S. D. Senanayake, L. Feria, S. Kundu, A. E. Baber, J. Graciani, A. B. Vidal, S. Agnoli, J. Evans, R. Chang, S. Axnanda, Z. Liu, J. F. Sanz, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez and D. J. Stacchiola, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5101–5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. López and F. Illas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1430–1436 CrossRef .
X. Nie, H. Qian, Q. Ge, H. Xu and R. Jin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6014–6022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-C. Zhang, X. Zhang, Q.-Y. Yu, Z.-C. Liu, C.-M. Xu, J.-S. Gao, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem. - Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2639–2645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujita, P. Guan, K. McKenna, X. Lang, A. Hirata, L. Zhang, T. Tokunaga, S. Arai, Y. Yamamoto, N. Tanaka, Y. Ishikawa, N. Asao, Y. Yamamoto, J. Erlebacher and M. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 775–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Wang and B.-Q. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9678–9683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Panigrahi, S. Basu, S. Praharaj, S. Pande, S. Jana, A. Pal, S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4596–4605 CAS .
H. Lee, S. E. Habas, S. Kweskin, D. Butcher, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7824–7828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zheng and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14278–14280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Comotti, W.-C. Li, B. Spliethoff and F. Schüth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 128, 917–924 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cargnello, V. V. T. Doan-Nguyen, T. R. Gordon, R. E. Diaz, E. A. Stach, R. J. Gorte, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, Science, 2013, 341, 771–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Fang and S. Zou, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 638–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Peng, S. Yang, F. T. Wagner and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4984–4985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. Jin, H. Liu, J. Wang, M. J. Kim, D. Yang, Z. Xie, J. Liu and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8212–8222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, H. Yang, B. Wu, Y. Zheng and N. Zheng, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 12699–12705 RSC .
E. Higuchi, A. Taguchi, K. Hayashi and H. Inoue, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 663, 84–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Higuchi, K. Adachi, S. Nohara and H. Inoue, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2009, 35, 985–995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, D. Hoang, C.-K. Tsung, W. Huang, S.-Y. Lo, J. Wood, H. Wang, J. Tang and P. Yang, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 61–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Liao, Y. Q. Huang, J. W. Ge, W. R. Zheng, K. Tedsree, P. Collier, X. L. Hong and S. C. Tsang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2162–2165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Zhou, J. Qu, F. Xu, J. P. Hu, J. S. Foord, Z. Y. Zeng, X. L. Hong and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1747–1749 RSC .
L. Li, X. Chen, Y. Wu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, G. Zhou and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11049–11053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, M. Chen, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang, R. L. White and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 379–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, C. Wang, H. Zhu, S. H. Overbury, S. Sun and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4357–4359 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Yin, S. Dai and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, A. Loew and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 755–761 CrossRef .
C. Xu, B. Wang and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4216–4217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, H. Zhang, C. Chen, S. Lin and N. Zheng, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 975–983 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, L. Jin, P. Wang and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8268–8270 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Daimon and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1493–1496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Bradley, A. J. Biacchi and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1886–1892 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, S. Guo, Y. Liu and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4859–4863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Figuerola, A. Fiore, R. Di Corato, A. Falqui, C. Giannini, E. Micotti, A. Lascialfari, M. Corti, R. Cingolani, T. Pellegrino, P. D. Cozzoli and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1477–1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gu, Z. Yang, J. Gao, C. K. Chang and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 127, 34–35 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pan, J. Gao, B. Zhang, X. Zhang and B. Xu, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 4184–4187 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. Choi, H. B. Na, Y. I. Park, K. An, S. G. Kwon, Y. Jang, M.-h. Park, J. Moon, J. S. Son, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15573–15580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Casavola, V. Grillo, E. Carlino, C. Giannini, F. Gozzo, E. Fernandez Pinel, M. A. Garcia, L. Manna, R. Cingolani and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1386–1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. George, A. Genovese, A. Casu, M. Prato, M. Povia, L. Manna and T. Montanari, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 752–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, C.-K. Tsung, W. Huang, Z. Huo, S. E. Habas, T. Soejima, C. E. Aliaga, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 372–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Horváth, A. Beck, A. Sárkány, G. Stefler, Z. Varga, O. Geszti, L. Tóth and L. Guczi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15417–15425 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ma, S. Brown, J. Y. Howe, S. H. Overbury and S. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9448–9457 CAS .
H. Yin, Z. Ma, S. H. Overbury and S. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8349–8358 CAS .
P. Lu, C. T. Campbell and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4957–4962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Horváth, A. Beck, G. Stefler, T. Benkó, G. Sáfrán, Z. Varga, J. Gubicza and L. Guczi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20388–20398 Search PubMed .
Q. Fu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1692–1701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Yu, D. Hua and S. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7294–7302 CAS .
L. Chen, C. K. S. Choong, Z. Zhong, L. Huang, T. P. Ang, L. Hong and J. Lin, J. Catal., 2010, 276, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mu, Q. Fu, H. Xu, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, Z. Jiang, S. Zhang, D. Tan and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1978–1986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez, J. Graciani, J. Evans, J. B. Park, F. Yang, D. Stacchiola, S. D. Senanayake, S. Ma, M. Pérez, P. Liu, J. F. Sanz and J. Hrbek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8047–8050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1044–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 574–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu and N. Zheng, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 168–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yuan, Z. Zhou, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1491–1493 RSC .
Z.-C. Zhang, J.-F. Hui, Z.-G. Guo, Q.-Y. Yu, B. Xu, X. Zhang, Z.-C. Liu, C.-M. Xu, J.-S. Gao and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2633–2639 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, F. Nosheen, P. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Small, 2013, 9, 3063–3069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yuan, Z. Zhou, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2395–2402 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nosheen, Z.-c. Zhang, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3660–3663 RSC .
Q. Yuan and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2328–2335 RSC .
F. J. Vidal-Iglesias, A. Lopez-Cudero, J. Solla-Gullon and J. M. Feliu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 964–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373–2433 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. Habas, H. Lee, V. Radmilovic, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 692–697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, Y. W. Lee, S. B. Lee and S. W. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 159–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Lu, K. S. Prasad, H.-L. Wu, J.-a. A. Ho and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14546–14553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, D.-Y. Liu, Y.-F. Wu, S. Duan, Z.-X. Xie, Z.-Y. Jiang and Z.-Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6949–6951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Zhang, D. Su and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13879–13884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Sneed, C. N. Brodsky, C.-H. Kuo, L. K. Lamontagne, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, F. Tao, W. Huang and C.-K. Tsung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14691–14700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, D. Wang, X. Chen, G. Zhou, R. Yu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12220–12223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2674–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-R. Zhang, D. Zhao, Y.-Y. Feng, B. Zhang, D. S. Su, G. Liu and B.-Q. Xu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2226–2236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, J. He, H. Wang, Y. Y. Tay, H. Sun, L. Zhu and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2004–2007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-s. Choi, Y.-w. Jun, S.-I. Yeon, H. C. Kim, J.-S. Shin and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15982–15983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lim, H. Kobayashi, T. Yu, J. Wang, M. J. Kim, Z.-Y. Li, M. Rycenga and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2506–2507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. C. Camargo, Y. Xiong, L. Ji, J. M. Zuo and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15452–15453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Vinod, M. Yang, J. Kim and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13545–13550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4602–4603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6280–6281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Nemoto and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9674–9677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Cui, J.-W. Yu, H.-H. Li, M.-R. Gao, H.-W. Liang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4211–4218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Cui and S.-H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1427–1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Wildgoose, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Small, 2006, 2, 182–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
M. Yang, Z. Cui and F. J. DiSalvo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1088–1092 RSC .
Z. Qiu, H. Huang, J. Du, T. Feng, W. Zhang, Y. Gan and X. Tao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13770–13775 CAS .
D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3604–3606 RSC .
L. De Trizio, F. De Donato, A. Casu, A. Genovese, A. Falqui, M. Povia and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3997–4005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Tong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8195–8209 RSC .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 35–54 CrossRef .
J. F. Reber and M. Rusek, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 824–834 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dukovic, M. G. Merkle, J. H. Nelson, S. M. Hughes and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4306–4311 CrossRef CAS .
E. Elmalem, A. E. Saunders, R. Costi, A. Salant and U. Banin, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4312–4317 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vaneski, A. S. Susha, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, M. Berr, F. Jackel, J. Feldmann and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2011, 21, 1547–1556 CAS .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1051–1054 CrossRef CAS .
E. Khon, K. Lambright, R. S. Khnayzer, P. Moroz, D. Perera, E. Butaeva, S. Lambright, F. N. Castellano and M. Zamkov, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2016–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. S. Susha, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, M. Doblinger, F. Jackel, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 093108 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4637–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng, S. Bao, M. Wang, X. Qi, Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1444 CrossRef PubMed .
R. T. Ross and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Physiol., 1982, 53, 3813–3818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kim, S. J. Lee, S. H. Kim, S. Kwon, K. J. Yee, H. Song, G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, E. Boone and M. A. El-Sayed, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 4921–4925 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Z. Liu, H. Yang, Q. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Fang, S. Zou and K. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4217–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Habas, P. Yang and T. Mokari, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3294–3295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O'Sullivan, R. D. Gunning, C. A. Barrett, A. Singh and K. M. Ryan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7875–7880 RSC .
H. Schlicke, D. Ghosh, L.-K. Fong, H. L. Xin, H. Zheng and A. P. Alivisatos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 980–982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. P. Wu, G. J. Ma, F. Y. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Frame and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10628–10633 CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, P. L. He, H. L. Liu, P. P. Wang, G. Zhou and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2339–2343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Wang, G. Liu, L. Z. Wang, Z. G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 42–46 CrossRef .
X. Blase, L. X. Benedict, E. L. Shirley and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 72, 1878–1881 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, Z. Fan, W. Chen, Y. Ding, H. Luo and X. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 507–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pan and X. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6271–6281 RSC .
X. Pan and X. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 553–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. C. Guo, Z. C. Zhang, J. S. Gao and C. M. Xu, J. Catal., 2012, 292, 213–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yue, Y. Zhao, S. Zhao, B. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2339–2346 Search PubMed .
A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 2373–2420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Q. Yue, Y. Deng and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5128 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Zhou, J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 673–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aijaz, A. Karkamkar, Y. J. Choi, N. Tsumori, E. Ronnebro, T. Autrey, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13926–13929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. EI-Shall, V. Abdelsayed, A. E. R. S. Khder, H. M. A. Hassan, H. M. EI-Kaderi and T. E. Reich, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7625–7631 RSC .
C. Wang, K. E. deKrafft and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7211–7214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schroder, D. Esken, M. Cokoja, M. W. E. Van den Berg, O. I. Lebedev, G. V. Tendeloo, B. Walaszek, G. Buntkowsky, H.-H. Limbach, B. Chaudret and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6119–6130 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lu, S. Li, Z. Guo, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, X. Qi, Y. Wang, X. Wang, S. Han, X. Liu, J. S. DuChene, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Ma, S. C. J. Loo, W. D. Wei, Y. Yang, J. T. Hupp and F. Huo, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 310–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-C. Zhang, Y.-F. Chen, X.-B. Xu, J.-C. Zhang, G.-L. Xiang, W. He and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Zhao, K. Deng, L. C. He, Y. Liu, G. D. Li, H. J. Zhao and Z. Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1738–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liu, W. N. Zhang, S. Z. Li, C. L. Cui, J. Wu, H. Y. Chen and F. W. Huo, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1119–1125 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. He, Y. Liu, J. Z. Liu, Y. S. Xiong, J. Z. Zheng, Y. L. Liu and Z. Y. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3741–3745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tao, M. E. Grass, Y.-W. Zhang, D. R. Butcher, J. R. Renzas, Z. Liu, J. Y. Chung, B. S. Mun, M. Salmeron and G. A. Somorjai, Science, 2008, 322, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tao, S. Dag, L.-W. Wang, Z. Liu, D. R. Butcher, H. Bluhm, M. Salmeron and G. A. Somorjai, Science, 2010, 327, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez and D. W. Goodman, Science, 1992, 257, 897–903 CAS .
S. Hu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5577–5594 RSC .
G.-L. Xiang, X.-J. Shi, Y.-L. Wu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 801–806 Search PubMed .
G. Novell-Leruth, G. Carchini and N. Lopez, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 194706–194716 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-F. Zou, J. Zhao, H.-M. Luo, T. M. McCleskey, A. K. Burrell and Q.-X. Jia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 439–449 RSC .
Q.-X. Jia, T. M. Mccleskey, A. K. Burrell, Y. Lin, G. E. Collis, H. Wang and A. D. Q. Li, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 529–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Burrell, T. M. McCleskey and Q. X. Jia, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1271–1277 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Zhi-cheng Zhang
	Zhicheng Zhang is currently a postdoc researcher in Professor Xun Wang's group in the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, China. He received his bachelor's degree at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Southwest Petroleum University, China (2007), and his PhD degree from College of Chemical Engineering, China University of Petroleum, Beijing, China (2012). His current research interests include the synthesis, characterization and applications of noble metal-based nanocrystals.

Biao Xu
	Biao Xu is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Xun Wang's group. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Tsinghua University in 2009. His research interests include the synthesis, properties and applications of water-soluble compound semiconductor nanocrystals.

Xun Wang
	Professor Xun Wang received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 2004. He then joined the faculty of the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 2004, and was promoted to associate professor and full professor in 2005 and 2007, respectively. His current research interests include the synthetic methodology, formation mechanism, and properties of monodisperse nanocrystals.

 	Fig. 1  HRTEM images of Pd/CeO2 catalysts with different sizes of Pd NPs: (a) small, (b) medium, and (c) large samples. (d) Physical model of metal supported on CeO2 to show the distribution of surface, perimeter, and corner atoms in contact with the support. (e) Calculated number of sites with a particular geometry (surface and perimeter or corner atoms in contact with the support) as a function of diameter and TOF at 80 °C of the nine ceria-based samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2013, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  Catalytic activity of (a) Pd–Cu2O and (b) Ag–Cu2O hybrid nanostructures as a function of reaction time in the aerobic oxidative arylation of phenylacetylene. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of Pt–Fe3O4 dumbbell NPs. (b) ORR mass activity for amorphous carbon supported 5 nm Pt and 5–17 nm Pt–Fe3O4 dumbbell NPs in 0.5 M H2SO4 with the RDE rotation speed at 1600 rpm and sweeping rate at 10 mV s−1. (c) TEM image of AuPd–Fe3O4 dumbbell NPs. (d) CO oxidation specific rate (mmol converted CO/mmol metal loading per second) for both AuPd/ and AuPd–FexOy/Al2O3. Adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and ref. 61. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Assembly process for the preparation of a nanocrystal bilayer ‘tandem catalyst’. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of (a) FePtPd–FePt-0.8 and (b) FePtAu–FePt-0.8. (c) HAADF-STEM and (d) STEM-EELS mapping images of FePtPd–FePt-0.8. (e) ORR specific and (f) mass activity summaries of the FePtPd–FePt-0.8, FePtAu–FePt-0.8, FePt, and FePtPd nanowires as well as the commercial Pt NPs at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl (4 M KCl). Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of (a, e) Pd nanocubes, (b, f) Pd–Rh core-island–shell nanocubes, (c, g) Pd–Rh nanoboxes, and (d, h) Rh cubic nanoframes. The scheme in (i) shows a model for the structural evolution from Pd nanocube to Rh cubic nanoframe. Adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) SA-corrected HRTEM images of (a) Pt3Ni@Au0.5, (b) Pt3Ni@Au2, and (c) Pt3Ni@Au8. (d–f) Elemental maps of (d) Pt3Ni@Au0.5, (e) Pt3Ni@Au2, and (f) Pt3Ni@Au8. (g) Schematic illustration of the evolution from octahedral PtNi3 to Pt3Ni@M8 (M = Rh, Au, Ag, Cu). (h) Schematic illustration of the growth of Au on the Pt surface. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (b) EDX mapping images of Pd–Au bimetallic NP tubes. (c) Simplified schematic illustration of the interface increase with increasing Au ratio. HRTEM images of (d) overlapped Pd–Au particles near the edge of the pore area, and (e) Au–Au particle interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schemes of band alignment of CdSe@CdS–Pt nanostructure and (b) corresponding bright-field and dark-field TEM images, (c, d) TEM images of different-length nano-heterostructures (NHSs), (e) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance of different NHSs, (f) time course of hydrogen evolution of different NHSs, (g) apparent quantum yield and UV-Vis spectra of the NHSs, (h) rate of hydrogen evolution under different powers of illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) HAADF-STEM image of non-decorated CdS nanorods, (b) HAADF-STEM image of CdS nanorods decorated with Pt clusters, (c) TEM and (d) HAADF-STEM images of CdS nanorods decorated with both Pt clusters and a Pt nanoparticle. (e) Photocatalytic hydrogen generation (in mmol of H2 per gram of CdS; more than 99% of incoming light is absorbed by the sample) from an aqueous solution containing CdS nanorods non-decorated (1) and decorated with Pt (2). The curve (2) presents both the samples as shown in b and d (or c). (f) Schematic illustration of the hydrogen generation process. Adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2010, AIP.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM, and (c) HAADF-STEM images and (d) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Au–Pt nanocomposites. (e) TEM, (f) HRTEM, and (g) HAADF-STEM images and (h) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Au–Os nanocomposites. (i) TEM, (j) HRTEM, and (k) HAADF-STEM images and (l) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Pt–Os nanocomposites. (m) TEM, (n) HRTEM, and (o) HAADF-STEM images and (p) EDX analysis of Ag2S–Au–Pt–Os nanocomposites. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2011, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM and (b) SAED pattern of the Pd-single layer MoS2 heterostructure, (c) corresponding HRTEM images, (d) digital graph of dispersion of Pd–MoS2 NHSs, (e) I–V scans and (f) Tafel plots of commercial Pt–C, MoS2 and Pt–MoS2 electrocatalysts, in 0.5 M H2SO4. Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of hot-electron formation and catalysis in CO oxidation by O2, TEM image of (b) singly and (c) doubly tipped Pt on CdSe nanorod, (d) pump–probe experiments of Pt–CdSe and CdSe, (e) plots and (f) column graphs of the catalytic performance of Pt–CdSe at different temperatures, (g) data on catalysis of CO oxidation by Pt–SiO2, (h) TOF values under different intensities of illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–f) TEM and EDX analysis of PtNi and PtCo on CdS nanorods, (g–i) growth of different-size gold tips on CdS nanorods, (j) growth of a Pt nanocube on a CdS nanorod, (k) HRTEM and SAED analysis on the crystal orientation. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2010, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM, (c) model images of helical CdS nanowire/ZnIn2S4 nanosheet heterostructures. (d) The atom arrangement after DFT relaxation at the interface. Cd green, S yellow, Zn blue, In brown. (e) Comparison of photocurrents. (f) I–V scans of samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of Rh in CNT nanostructures, (b) yield of ethanol and selectivity of CH4 at different temperatures for Rh in CNTs and Rh on CNT structures, (c) schematic illustration of the catalysis process inside a CNT. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a–d) TEM at different tilted angles, (e) yield of ethanol at different reaction times, for different catalysts, (f) scheme for the formation process of Cu-in-CuPSNTs catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Catalytic conversion of hexene and cyclooctene by different catalysts, ZIF-8, Pt/ZIF-8, T-Pt@ZIF-8, Pt/CNT, (b) magnetic properties of Fe3O4@ZIF-8, (c) upconversion spectra of NaYF4@ZIF-8, (d) fluorescence spectra of CdTe/ZIF-8, (e) scheme for the incorporation of NPs into ZIF-8 NCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM images of PdCu@FeIII-MOF-5 yolk–shell structures produced by the encapsulation of pre-synthesized NPs in the FeIII-MOF-5 hollow structures, (b) yield (%) as a function of time in the selective hydrogenation of 1-chloro-2-nitrobenzene with PdCu dendrites and PdCu@FeIII-MOF-5 yolk–shell structures. Adapted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  Mechanism analysis of the stability of RuO2 nanostructures on the surface of TiO2. (a) Interfacial tensions at the boundary between the TiO2 substrate and RuO2 epitaxial nanoparticle with a large contact angle, modeling the surface structure of the initial catalyst prepared via the hydrothermal method. (b) Surface structure of lattice-matched RuO2 epilayer on the surface of TiO2, where the surface tension of the substrate (cs) is approximately equal to that of the epilayer (ce) because of the high degree of lattice match between RuO2 and rutile. (c) Free energy diagram for the phase transition of a nanoparticle explaining the instability of the sub-2 nm RuO2 catalyst. (d) Effect of particle shape on the phase transition tendency of epitaxial layers on substrates expressed by the varied free energy change (DG). The inset is the diagram of angular factor f(h), the function of contact angle that depicts the equilibrium particle shape on a substrate. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2012, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
