Investigation of the photoinduced electron injection processes for p-type triphenylamine-sensitized solar cells    - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01638E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01638E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4537-4549Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInvestigation of the photoinduced electron injection processes for p-type triphenylamine-sensitized solar cells†‡

        
          
            Julien 
            Preat
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Eric A. 
            Perpète
          
        
      d
aPostdoctoral Researcher of the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research, Unité de Chimie Physique Théorique et Structurale (UCPTS), Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix (FUNDP), rue de Bruxelles, 61, 5000, Namur, Belgium. E-mail: julien.preat@fundp.ac.be
bDepartment of Physical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Box 579, SE-751 23, Uppsala, Sweden
cDepartment of Chemistry, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Teknikringen 30, SE-1044, Stockholm, Sweden
dSenior Research Associate of the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research, UCPTS, FUNDP
Received 
      6th May 2011
    , Accepted 15th June 2011First published on 16th August 2011AbstractWe have carried out theoretical investigation aiming at modelling the assessment of mechanisms of photoinduced processes in a recent p-type organic metal-free dye derived from the triphenylamine (P-1) structure. In the P-1 system, one uses the triphenylamine moiety as the electron donor, malononitrile as the electron acceptor, and a thiophene that plays the role of the conjugated chain. Basically, the difference between the P-1 dye and the common organic dyes used in the n-type DSSC field is the anchoring group located on the electron donor group. In a first step, DFT and TDDFT approaches have been exploited to calculate the key parameters controlling both the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) and hole transfer rate constants in the Gurney-Gerischer-Marcus (GGM) formalism, for either a solvent-controlled adiabatic or a nonadiabatic electron transfer. These are: (i) the electronic coupling; (ii) the reorganization energies; and (iii) the variation of the Gibbs energy. The gathered results are in agreement with the experimental trends. (i) The vertical ICT excited states energy has been calculated at 2.67 eV, in perfect line with the experiment (2.65 eV). (ii) Two mechanisms can be conceived for the hole transfer and regeneration process. The first deals with the reduction of dye molecule at the excited state followed by an electron transfer from the reduced dye to the oxidized regenerator. The second implies a redox reaction between the excited dye and the oxidized regenerator, followed by an electron transfer from the cathode to the oxidized dye. (iii) Our theoretical investigation suggests that the first mechanism is dominant. Secondly, we propose structural modifications improving the TPA-based DSSCs hole transfer efficiency and we show that an additional –CN graft on the malononitrile unit combined to the functionalisation of the TPA moieties by –OMe groups (to give P-1b) should significantly improve the key parameters related to the electron injection. Indeed, for P-1b, we have noticed an increase of both the RLHE factor (0.907) and the injection driving force (−0.33 eV). This dye is therefore expected to be a very promising molecule in the p-type DSSC field.

Broader context
In the present manuscript, we have carried out a theoretical investigation aiming at model the assessment of mechanisms of photoinduced processes in a recent p-type organic metal-free dye derived from the triphenylamine structure. In a first step, DFT and TDDFT approaches have been exploited to calculate the key parameters controlling both the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) and hole transferrate constants in the Gurney-Gerischer-Marcus formalism, for either a solvent-controlled adiabatic or a nonadiabatic electron transfer. These are: (i) the electronic coupling; (ii) the reorganization energies; and (iii) the variation of the Gibbs energy. The gathered results are in agreement with the experimental trends. (i) The vertical ICT excited states energy has been calculated at 2.67 eV in line with the experiment (2.65 eV). (ii) Two mechanisms can be conceived for the hole transfer and regeneration process. The first deals with the reduction of dye molecule at the excited state followed by an electron transfer from the reduced dye to the oxidized regenerator. The second implies a redox reaction between the excited dye and the oxidized regenerator, followed by an electron transfer from the cathode to the oxidized dye. (iii) Our theoretical investigation suggests that the first mechanism is dominant. Secondly, we propose structural modifications improving the TPA-based DSSCs hole transfer efficiency.

1. Introduction
The current energetic and environmental crisis has stimulated the interest in the design of renewable energy sources, and solar photovoltaic devices are likely to be leading technologies in a promising “low-carbon level” future.1–7 Because solar energy is the most abundant renewable energy resource, the close connection between human activity and global warming has strengthened the interest in the photovoltaic field. In this framework, the photosensitization of semiconductors by molecular dyes strongly changes the photovoltaic landscape. These dyes-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are made of (i) a wide band gap semiconductor (SC) deposited on a translucid conducting substrate; (ii) an anchored molecular sensitizer; (iii) and a redox electrolyte (usually the I−/I−3 couple).8–17
Since the crucial contribution by Grätzel et al. in 1991,18,19 DSSCs have attracted a great deal of attention. In the DSSC field, the Ru-based photosensitizers where the most popular category of dyes over the last 20 years as they show an average solar power conversion efficiency (SPCE) of ca. 10%. In spite of such a fair SPCE, the interest in Ru-derived sensitizers tends to fall off due to the very huge production costs of these dyes, as ruthenium is not that abundant in nature. Consequently, metal free sensitizers such as organic dyes and natural dyes have been investigated as alternative molecules for DSSC applications. The interest for purely organic DSSCs as substitutes for Ru complexes raised in recent years due to the many advantages they present, amongst which a high molar extinction coefficient, simple and relatively inexpensive preparation processes, and a good compliance with environmental and health issues, as well.20 Moreover, several solid-state DSSCs based on organic dyes show higher performances than ruthenium complexes, suggesting promising commercial applications.21–31 The majority of the investigations, both experimental and theoretical, in the DSSC field are based on the sensitization of a n-type SC-based solar cell consisting of a photoactive anode and a passive cathode. However, aside these common DSSCs based on wide band-gap n-type metal oxide SC, systems in which the cathode is photoactive (p-type) can be envisaged. Indeed, the development of photocathodes can provide an access to the design of “tandem” solar cells with both electrodes active.18,19,32–39 Whereas the theoretical upper limit of solar energy conversion efficiency for a cell containing only one active electrode is about 30%, the limit for a system presenting two photoactive electrodes is ca. 43%.39 Therefore, the production of “tandem” DSSCs whose energy levels and band gaps of the dyes and the semiconductors have been optimized should provide a new way to improve the energy conversion efficiency of the solar cells. Without a doubt, a better understanding of the energy conversion mechanism in p-type DSSCs will help to improve their efficiency.
The pattern of most of the organic sensitizers used in p- or n-type DSSC is an electron donor (D), a bridge (B, typically a π spacer), and an electron acceptor (A) (see Scheme 1), that are usually combined following a D-π-A rod-like configuration in order to improve the efficiency of the UV/Vis (UV/Visible) photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer (ICT). Generally, the critical factors governing the sensitization of a p-type DSSC are: (i) the dye's highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) must be below the energy level of the top of the SC's valence band (VB), combined to a dye's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) that has to be higher in energy than the redox system I−/I−3 (measured at −4.8 eV ± 0.1 eV);38 (ii) the light harvesting ability of the dye must be large enough to reach a substantial photocurrent response; (iii) the conjugation across the donor and anchoring group has to be maximized, as it determines the large photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer amplitude; (iv) obviously, the electronic coupling strength between the final (SC+-DBA−) and initial states (SC-DBA*) is a key parameter to obtain an efficient hole injection from the dye onto the semiconductor surface. In general, mishaps leading to low conversion efficiencies are either the formation of dye aggregates, or charge recombination which is at the source of the “dark” current of the DSSC;40–42 (v) the bridging groups steer the light absorption regions of the DSSCs28,40,43 and subsequently the scale of the charge transfer from the excited state of the dyes to the semiconductor surface. Of course, the balance between these processes is essential to achieve a high performance, and it is obvious that both the rate and the efficiency of the full procedure tremendously depend upon the nature of the sensitizer dye and semiconductor film. To further design and develop more efficient metal-free dyes for DSSCs, appropriate DBA systems that feature finely tuned properties by applying the adequate structural modifications are urgently needed.19,40,44
 Scheme 1  Sketch of the two sub-systems used in a D-(π)-A edifice. In this scheme, we have a triphenylamine-based donor and a malononitrile-based acceptor (1,1′-dicyano-ethylene). 
In recent years, many studies have been devoted to the characterisation of the mechanisms of long-range charge transfer processes taking places from D to A through the molecular bridge in a rod-like DBA assembly. Theoretical investigations based on a variety of quantum chemical (QM) techniques have provided insights into the possible pathways for intramolecular charge transfer and the resulting electron transfer. These QM techniques are efficient and very attractive tools for the interpretation of the experimental data. The availability of huge CPU resources now allows to study, at correlated levels of approximation, the absorption spectra of large molecular species such as the DSSCs dyes.45–50 These studies underline the crucial role of the electronic coupling between the reagent and the product (VRP) in the description of the electron transfer reactions. For the electronic excited states calculations, one of the most popular approaches remains the time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) as it commonly provides results that qualitatively agree with experimental data at reasonable computational costs, especially when hybrid functionals are used.51–69 Nevertheless, it is known that “cyanine-like” structures such as triphenylamine derivatives present a large CT-character electronic excitation (with sometimes a multideterminental nature), and that makes them sometimes difficult to study with DFT.70,71
The ICT process plays a crucial role in achieving higher SPCE and though it has been largely described for n-type DSSCs, the thorough understanding of the more uncommon p-type solar cells is far less converged and remains a seminal topic of research. To unveil the working principles of p-type organic metal-free DSSCs, we focus on the novel organic dye P-1 (see Scheme 2). In this system, one uses the triphenylamine moiety as the electron donor and the malononitrile as the electron acceptor, while a thiophene plays the role of the conjugated chain, and the p-type SC is NiO. Basically, the difference between the P-1 dye and the common organic dyes used in a n-type DSSC is that the anchoring group is now on the electron donor group. The present investigation aims at helping the design of efficient organic dyes in the future by using a computational procedure that delivers qualitatively good descriptions of the excited states of D-π-A rod-like organic dyes.72,73 Up to now, very few investigations have dealt with the sensitization of p-type SC, whereas a large amount of works devoted to the characterisation and theoretical study of n-type sensitized SCs have already been published. This contribution is, to our knowledge, the first theoretical study of the mechanisms implied in the photoinduced electron transfer from a p-type SC to an excited dye.
 Scheme 2  Sketch of the P-1 dye and its three derivatives (P-1a, P-1b and P-1c). 
In section 2, we explain the induced ICT electron transfer mechanisms that occur for P-1. In section 3, we first define the set of parameters required to study the rate constant related to the hole injection mechanism. Secondly, we describe the theoretical methodology used to evaluate these parameters. The calculated rate constants are compared to the corresponding experimental insights in section 4, and we assess the nature of the possible involved mechanisms. Finally in section 5, we investigate potential structures derived from P-1, providing better hole injection parameters.
2. Description of the operational principle for the P-1-based DSSC
We here discuss the UV/Vis characterisation of P-1 and we describe the principle on which a p-type DSSC works.38,39
For P-1, the “active” transition (λmax), i. e. the excitation that is related to the largest IPCE (Incident Photon-to-current Conversion Efficiency) estimated at 18%,74 is measured at 468 nm (2.65 eV) in acetonitrile. Fig. 1 depicts the molecular orbitals (MOs) obtained for P-1 grafted onto NiO. Similarly to the model recently proposed by Peng et al.,75 we consider as a first approximation that the dye is connected to one Ni atom, and a hydroxyl ligand is required to ensure the whole complex neutrality. This 2.65 eV “active” electronic excitation corresponds to a HOMO → LUMO transition with a strong charge transfer character from the NiO to the dye, that causes the hole injection (λICTmax).
 Fig. 1  LUMO (top) and HOMO (bottom) involved in the ICT excitation occurring at 468 nm for P-1-SC edifice. These orbitals have been obtained at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory with a contour threshold of 0.03 |e|. 
The DSSCs' detailed operating is still extensively studied in order to identify the processes that actually limit their performance.18,19,46,73,76–81 A schematic representation of the principles ruling a DSSC is given in Fig. 2. The “core” of the system is made of a mesoporous oxide layer (NiO, in our case) on which a monolayer of the sensitizer dye is grafted, and the photoexcitation [step (1)] of the dye (that gives dye*) results in the injection [step (2)] of an electron from the p-type SC to the dye (hole injection). During the absorption, the dye is excited and two mechanisms for the electron transfer can be conceived:
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the operation principle of the P-1-based DSSC. We provide here the dye's ICT excitation energy (2.64 eV), the levels of the involved molecular orbitals as well as the energies related to the valence band (VB) and the conducting band (CB) of NiO. The energies are expressed in eV. 
1. A transfer from the NiO valence band to dye* form, followed by a electron transfer from the reduced dye to I−3 in the electrolyte. For this first mechanism, the electron transfer process is initiated by a photoexcitation of the grafted dye. This vertical electronic transition from the ground state (denoted as DBA-NiO) in its equilibrium geometry (QS0) to the excited state DBA*-NiO, is followed by a nuclear relaxation on the excited state potential curve, towards a minimal energy generalized coordinate (QSICT). Then, the injection from the relaxed DBA*-NiO (QSICT as reactant can also be noted Qr) to the charge-separated state DBA−-NiO+ (Qp, as the product of the injection) can take place, and the geometric relaxation of DBA* proceeds faster than the hole injection form the SC.
2. An electron transfer that first occurs from dye* to I−3 to give DBA+-NiO(Qr), followed by a reduction of the oxidized dye (dye+). As depicted in Figure SI. 1, such a reduction step is associated to an electron transfer from the SC to the dye and formally, we can write the following reaction: DBA+-NiO(Qr) → DBA-NiO+(Qp).
These two possible mechanisms for the “dye → SC” charge transfer have their own rate constant and their evaluation help ranking the probable involved mechanisms of injection from the NiO matrix to the excited dye. Ultrafast spectroscopy suggests that the first mechanism is dominant for similar systems.38,39
3. Methodology
In this section we define the set of parameters required to study the rate constant related to both ICT electron transfer mechanisms and then we describe the theoretical methodology used to evaluate them.
3.1 Key parameters evaluation

3.1.1 Intramolecular charge transfer and hole injection. 
In the description of the electron transfer from a dye to a semiconductor, the rate of the charge transfer process can be derived from the general classical Marcus theory,46–50 (1)
In eq. (1), kinject. is the rate constant (in s−1) of the electron injection form NiO to the excited dye, kBT is the Boltzmann thermal energy, ℏ is the Planck constant (h/2π), ΔGinject. is the free energy of injection and χ is the reorganization energy of the system, VRP is the coupling constant between the reagent and the product potential curves. VRP allows the evaluation of the (non)adiabaticity of the reaction implying the two diabatic R and P potential energy curves. Such an adiabatic electron injection corresponds to the limit in which the electronic coupling is more important than the reorganization energy or the thermal energy spacing. For the nonadiabatic or weak coupling limit (VRP < χ or thermal energy spacing) the splitting at the barrier top (the crossing point in Fig. 3) is small, and the Fermi's golden rule for radiationless transitions can be employed to compute kinject.. Note that the analysis of the relative adiabaticity/nonadiabaticity of the electron injection process, as well as the development of a general formalism smoothly bridging adiabatic and nonadiabatic limits remains an undoubtedly major challenge in theoretical studies of electron transfer reactions.
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the reagents (R) and products (P) potential energy curves. We depict in this figure the χi terms which describe the i contributions to the internal relaxation energy and the electronic coupling VRP. 
Both adiabatic and nonadiabatic Marcus' formalisms fail to correctly estimate the injection rate at high potential (for which kinject. tends to be constant). This region which is not covered by the original Marcus theory is actually the region of the photovoltaic cell operation.46 For the electron injection at high potential (i. e., when −ΔGinject. ≫ χ) on usually uses the more refined Gurney-Gerischer-Marcus' (GGM) relationship. Note that, comparatively to the Marcus' theory, one can also define nonadiabatic and adiabatic limits in the GGM general framework. Within the weak coupling limit we have, (2)where EVB − EF is the energy difference between the bottom of the conduction band and the NiO Fermi level, that is 0.4 eV.46,82Eq. (2) is only valid for an exergonic process and if −ΔGinject. > (EVB − EF − χ). With increasing VRP, the oscillation frequency of the slowest nuclear motion of the system (i. e. the solvent reorganization component) becomes the rate determining step, and the rate constant becomes VRP-independent, (3)Here the prefactor depends on the longitudinal dielectric relaxation time of the solventτsolventL.83
Note that both the nonadiabatic and adiabatic GGM formalisms are practical if one assumes that the injection is restricted to energy levels close to the SC valence band edge, and that the SC density of donor states in this energy range remains constant.46 Of course, the higher kinject., the best SPCE factor and most efficient the DSSC.
Since the electron injection occurs in solvent-phase, the inner reorganization energy includes a solute part (the dye) and a solvent part. The parameter χ is therefore expressed with two components,46,84 (4)where χdye is the energy required to accommodate the nuclear rearrangements during the injection when going from the reagent to the product (see Fig. 3), and can be estimated as the average value of the χdye1 and χdye2 associated to the two states in Fig. 3.85χsolvent describes the solvent reorganization energy.86
The coupling constant value (see Fig. 3) is provided by |VRP| = 〈ΨR|H|ΨP〉(5)where ΨR and ΨP are the wavefunctions respectively associated to the reagent and product states, whereas H is the operator describing all the interactions between the particles composing the investigated system. The value of VRP defines the adiabatic or non adiabatic character of the electron transfer, these two descriptions conveniently setting the limiting cases of a transition state formalism. We refer the reader to the seminal papers dealing with this topic.46,84 The use of the Generalized Mulliken-Hush formalism (GMH) allows to evaluate |VRP| for a photoinduced charge transfer.47,48,87
For the first mechanism (see Fig. 2), the injection driving force in Eq. (14) can be formally expressed within Koopmans' approximation as,88 ΔERP = [EdyeLUMO + 2EdyeHOMO] − [EdyeLUMO + EdyeHOMO + ENiOVB](6)where ENiOVB is the NiO valence band edge. Though it is often difficult to accurately determine ENiOVB, because it is highly sensitive to the conditions (e.g., the pH of the solution), the ESCVB of several materials have been reported, and we have been using ENiOVB = −4.96 eV. This experimental value refers to conditions where the semiconductor is in contact with aqueous redox electrolytes of pH = 7.0.18,19,32–39 More quantitatively for a closed-shell system EdyeLUMO corresponds to the reduction potential of the dye (EdyeRED), whereas the HOMO energy is related to the potential of first oxidation (i. e., −EdyeHOMO = EdyeOX). As a result, eq. (6) becomes, ΔERP = EdyeHOMO − ENiOVB = −[EdyeOX + ENiOVB](7)
Note that eq. (7) can also be rewritten by using a more refined formalism, ΔERP = Edye0–0 − [2EdyeOX + EdyeRED + ENiOVB](8)
Commonly, we assume that electron injection dominantly occurs after relaxation of the excited state from DBA*-NiO(QS0) → DBA*-NiO(QSICT),73,78,89 and we have to evaluate Edye0–0, which is the 0-0 transition energy between the ground state and the excited state related to λmax. To calculate the 0-0 “absorption” line, we need both the S0 (singlet ground state) and the SICT equilibrium geometries.90

Eq. (7) and (8) provide ΔERP of −0.82 eV and −0.98 eV, respectively, and this 0.16 eV difference can be explained by the fact that eq. (7) does not take into account the weight of the LUMO energy in the energetic balance involving to the injection process, whereas in eq. (8), the energetic contribution of the electron lying in the LUMO is taken into account in both the E0–0 and EdyeRED terms. For this reason, we have selected the second result for the injection driving force.
On the other hand, the transition dipole moment (μRP) related to the first mechanism can be easily obtained from the transition densities computed for the first excited state within the TDDFT framework,91 whereas μR (μP) are the permanent dipoles of the optimized ICT excited state and the anionic dye, respectively.
For the second mechanism (see Figure SI. 1) we have a charge transfer from the NiO to the dye+ and the driving force is expressed as (9)where  and  are the energies related to the neutral and cationic forms of the dye, respectively.  is the reduction potential of the cationic dye, resulting from the oxidation of dye* by the regenerator. By using eq. (9) we estimate the injection driving force for the second mechanism at −0.82 eV, which is identical to one of the two limiting cases evoked for the first mechanism (eq. (7)).
Moreover for this mechanism, we postulate μR (μDBA–NiO+) = μP (μDBA+–NiO). Indeed, it is reasonable to assume that during the hole transfer process the magnitude of the permanent dipole moment remains constant (is independent of the hole localisation in the [DBA-NiO]+ system), and accordingly this assumption, Eq. (14) becomes48 (10)


3.1.2 Computational level. 
All calculations have been performed with the Gaussian 03 and Gaussian 09 packages,92,93 following a three-step procedure: (i) the optimization of the ground state geometry with DFT using a tight threshold that corresponds to rms (residual mean square) forces smaller than 10−5 a.u., (ii) the determination of the vertical electronic excitation energies and their corresponding oscillator strengths (f), and (iii) the ESICT(QSICT) optimization by means of TDDFT, as well as the evaluation of .94
For the first and third step, we have used the popular three-parameter B3LYP functional,95 in which the exchange is a combination of Hartree–Fock exchange, Slater functional, and Becke's generalized gradient approximation (GGA) correction,96 whereas the correlation part combines local and Lee–Yang–Parr (LYP) functionals.97 For the vertical excitation calculations as well as for f, we used CAM-B3LYP which is the Handy and coworkers' long range corrected version of B3LYP using the Coulomb-attenuating method.59,98
At this stage of the computational details description, we must warn the reader about the eventual lack of reliability that B3LYP could present for modelling the key parameters. Indeed, the DFT approaches are known to badly describe ICT and CT states and in particular when B3LYP is employed. For instance, Wanko et al.99 have shown that for this functional, the force field for a ICT or a CT excited state in organic chromophores may be fully wrong, while excitation energies are still nicely reproduced. This means that, while vertical excitations turns out to give an apparently correct result, optimizations on ICT excited states could lead to completely wrong structures. In order to avoid any doubt about the validity of B3LYP for the evaluation of P-1's key parameters, we did perform an optimization of the ICT of interest using the more reliable PBE0 hybrid,93,99,100 and we did compare the optimized structure with the B3LYP one. It turns out that:101 (i) both B3LYP and PBE0 functionals provide geometries presenting a similar conformation and (ii) very close Mulliken charges with an averaged absolute deviation evaluated at 0.025 |e|, (iii) the average TPA C–N bond length values 1.41 and 1.40 Å, for B3LYP and PBE0, respectively whereas the cyano C–N averaged bond length values 1.17 Å, for the two hybrids (the B3LYP and PBE0xyz geometries are provided in the Suppl. Info. part), (iv) the ICT dipole moment for the optimized excited state values 6.90 and 7.14 Debye (D) for B3LYP and PBE0, respectively, (v) the difference between the vertical excitation energy and the E0–0 is estimated at 0.33 eV whereas it is computed at 0.34 eV with PBE0. The B3LYP (PBE0) λmax/E0–0 values 2.11/1.78 eV (2.22/1.88 eV).
Clearly, from this validation study, we can conclude that B3LYP provides a correct description of the ICT geometry for P-1 and this hybrid can be considered as a reliable tool for modelling the key parameters related to the hole injection process. Moreover, for the sake of consistency, it has been decided to compute the key parameters using the B3LYP/CAM-B3LYP pair (rather than the PBE0/CAM-B3LYP combination), as these two hybrids share a similar description for the correlation part.
We have selected the 6-31G(d,p)102 basis set (BS) for the excited-state optimizations and 6-311G+(2d,2p)102 for the vertical TDDFT calculations performed upon a ground state geometry optimized with 6-311G(d,p), as these BSs have been shown to return converged λmax for a series of TPA, while a smaller BS would give too short λmax (in nm).73 The evaluation of  and  was performed by using the restricted and unrestricted formalisms of B3LYP with 6-31G(d,p). On the other hand, EdyeOX (EdyeRED) corresponds to ΔGdyeOX (ΔGdyeRED) and the free energy G of the neutral, anionic, as well as cationic forms of P-1 has been extracted from the frequency calculations at the PCM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory within the restricted and unrestricted formalisms, respectively.
All the theoretical λmax reported in the following correspond to the singlet excited state with a huge dipole-allowed transition from the ground state. The iodine/iodide couple is used as regenerator of the DSSC, assuming that the solar cells work in solvent phase. This is why the UV/Vis experimental data for triphenylamine-based dyes are reported in solution and the polarisable continuum model (PCM)54,103,104 has been used for evaluating bulk solvent effects on both the geometry and the UV/Vis spectrum. In PCM, one usually divides the problem into a solute part (the dye) lying inside a cavity, and a solvent part. By solving the Poisson's equation at the interface, PCM gives a valid approximation of solvent effects. For the vertical excitation energies, we have selected the so-called non-equilibrium PCM solutions54 and according to the experimental set up, we selected acetonitrile (MeCN) for which the longitudinal dielectric relaxation time has been fixed on 0.2 ps.105
For the first mechanism, the transition dipole moment, μRP, has been evaluated at the PCM-TDCAM-B3LYP/6-311G+(2d,2p) level of theory for the ICT optimized excited state.

4. Results
In this section, we first compare the theoretical and experimental key parameters for P-1 that have been used to estimate the injection rate constant. The EdyeOX, EdyeRED, λICTmax and Edye0–0 have also been compared to related experimental measurements in order to validate the methodology. Secondly, we present the ΔGExpinject and computed rate constants for both the first and second mechanism, and we assess the nature of the possible involved mechanisms. Eventually, we propose structural modifications improving the hole injection efficiency in p-type TPA-based DSSCs.
4.1 Photoinduced ICT and injection

Table 1 lists the experimental and theoretical key parameters (EdyeOX, EdyeRED, λICTmax, Edye0–0) obtained for P-1 and these results show that: (i) the procedure underestimates the oxidation potential. It is well-known that for extended conjugated organic systems, the DFT framework tends to overestimate the delocalisation and therefore underestimate the ionisation potential, so that such a 0.35 eV deviation was awaited;45 (ii) in order to assess the nature of the EdyeOX, we did compute the P-1 oxidation potential with the more refined CAM-B3LYP (5.40 eV) functional and the basic Hartree–Fock (3.58 eV) scheme. Consequently, we have demonstrated that the dynamic correlation must be taken into account for a more consistent EdyeOX determination, and this effect is about 2.00 eV; (iii) moreover, we have not noticed any accuracy gain for the oxidation potential evaluation when going from B3LYP to CAM-B3LYP, and this result call attention to the limitation of our model. For instance, we do not consider the static correlation effect that is quite important for the TPA-based dyes.106 This could be fixed by using more refined methods like CAS-SCF (or CAS-PT2)107 which currently remains unaffordable for a systematic study targeted upon large systems we are dealing with in the present contribution. Also, long-range corrected functionals could reduce the DFT errors (though apparently not for cyanine like systems);108 (iv) in a recent contribution,45 De Angelis and coworkers have shown that increasing the fraction of Hartree–Fock exchange from 20% to 50% does not improve the accuracy on EdyeOX and they have reported deviations from the experimental values ranging from 0.15 to 0.50 eV. Therefore, the authors concluded that choice of the correlation part of the functional seems to be crucial in this type of calculations. Moreover, they also underlined that a properly calibrated DFT approach is capable of providing a description of the oxidation potential and the resulting key-parameters of relevant interest for the DSSCs technology, with an accuracy of the order of 0.2–0.3 eV, which is probably close to the inherent accuracy of current DFT-based methods; (v) these observations are in complete agreement with our results. However, the 0.2 to 0.3 eV error on the EdyeOX might be awkword, particularly for the p-tye DSSCs which show low charge injection driving force. We have to underline that as we previously showed, because it shows higher free enthalpies for the electron injection, the DFT level of accuracy for the EdyeOX evaluation is high enough for the n-type DSSCs description of the key-parameters;73,79–81 (vi) on the other hand, our methodology reproduces with a very good accuracy the P-1/P-1−reduction potential with a trifling deviation (0.03 eV); (vii) also, TDDFT provides a excellent description of the vertical excitation energy as well as for the Edye0–0 with an experiment-theory absolute deviation of 0.03 eV in average.
Table 1 Electronic and spectroscopic parameters obtained for P-1: (i) λ(ICT)max is provided by PCM(CH3CN)-TDCAM-B3LYP//6-311+G(2d,2p); (ii) Edye0–0 is obtained at the PCM(CH3CN)-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level; (iii) EdyeRED and EdyeOX have been evaluated by using the same framework with both the restricted and unrestricted formalisms of B3LYP, and the corresponding deviations are relative to experimental data (MAE).a,109 We also provide the experimental injection driving forces obtained from eq. (8) and (9), i. e., ΔE(1)−ExpRP and ΔE(2)−ExpRP, for the first and second mechanisms, respectively.38




 
EdyeOX
EdyeRED

λ
(ICT)max

Edye0–0b
ΔE(1)−ExpRP
ΔE(2)−ExpRP


Theory
Exp.38
Theory
Exp.38
Theory
Exp.38
Theory
Exp.38





a Energies are expressed in eV.
b EreorgSICT has been evaluated at the PCM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level and amounts to 0.40 eV.





 
5.43
5.78
−3.34
−3.37
2.67
2.65
2.27
2.25
−0.98
−0.82



MAE

 
0.35
 
0.03
 
0.02
 
0.02
 
 





Table 1 also provides the driving force related to the hole injection at the semiconductor-dye interface, i. e. −0.98 eV and −0.82 eV, for the first and second mechanisms, respectively. The first mechanism ha thus a larger (by 0.16 eV) driving force. In Table 2, we have the panel of the key-parameters required to evaluate the rate constant corresponding to the first and second mechanism. As stated in section 3, we have evaluated the inner-sphere reorganization energies under the assumption that one-charge transfer occurs between the donor and acceptor units. For both mechanisms, the reorganization energy contribution from the dye is relatively small (0.07 eV at maximum) compared to the driving force and remains comparable to the solvent component (0.10 eV). The small χdye value we calculated for both DBA*-NiO → DBA−-NiO+ and DBA+-NiO → DBA-NiO+ transfer for the first and second mechanism is due to the negligible geometric deformations underwent by the dye upon charge injection from the SC. Although CH3CN is a highly polar solvent (with a ε0 = 36.64), its part in the total reorganization energy is rather weak (equivalent to χdye) and has been estimated at 0.10 eV. Note that χCH3CN increases with the spatial separation between the donor and the acceptor [Eq. (13)] and remains quite small for very short distances (i. e. R inferior to 10 Å).47 The electronic coupling VRP between the DBA*-NiO and DBA−-NiO+ states values 0.48 eV and is very close (0.01 eV discrepancy) to , therefore confirming the “adiabatic” character of the injection process from the ICT excited state. Analysis of the molecular parameters entering the Mulliken-Hush expression of VRP reveals that for the first mechanism, the charge transfer driving force is the key factor determining the strength of the coupling between the DBA*-NiO and DBA−-NiO+ states. Indeed, for this mechanism, the reactant and the product are characterised by dipole moments of similar magnitude (6.90 D vs. 7.06 D). In other words, the coupling factor magnitude is independent of the overlap magnitude between the initial and final wavefunctions. Moreover, the first mechanism is characterised by an electronic coupling slightly higher (0.07 eV) than that computed for the hole injection governed by the second mechanism.
Table 2 
χ
dye
             (in eV), χCH3CN (in eV), VRP (in eV), ΔGExp.inject. (in eV) and kinject. (in s−1) and the corresponding τ (injection lifetime in s) obtained for two different injection processes at 298 K [mechanism (i) in this Table, see section 2 for more details]





i


χ
dye


χ
CH3CN
c


V
RP

ΔGExpinject.38

k
(i)inject


k
(i)inject/k(1)inject


τ





eq. (3)






a 
                      For the first mechanism, P(Qp) corresponds to the final DBA−-NiO+ state resulting from the electron injection into the dye.  and  is obtained by performing a SCF calculation (using a −1 |e| charge and a doublet spin state) on the optimized DBA* geometry at the PCM-UB3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level. Similarly,  and which is evaluated via a PCM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) SCF calculation upon the TDDFT gradient on the optimized DBA* geometry. R(Qr) corresponds to the initial DBA*-NiO state obtained after the photoexcitation. μR (μP) corresponds to the optimized excited state (ground state anionic form) dipole moment and has been evaluated 6.90 (7.06) D. ΔERP and μRP are −0.98 eV and 40.71 D, respectively.
                    
b 
                      For the second scheme, P(Qp) is associated to the final DBA-NiO+ state. ,  is evaluated via a PCM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) SCF calculation upon the DBA+ geometry.  (P(Qp)) is obtained by performing a SCF calculation (using a +1 |e| charge and a doublet spin state) on the optimized DBA geometry at the PCM-UB3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level. R(Qr) corresponds to the initial DBA+-NiO state obtained after the reaction with the regenerator. ΔERP is −0.82 eV.
                    
c 
                      RD = 4.31 Å, RA = 3.00 Å, R = 10.19 Å, ε∞ = 1.81,92 and ε0 = 36.64.92





1a
0.06
0.10
0.48
−0.98
4.56 1013
1.00
2.19 10−14


2b
0.07
0.10
0.41
−0.82
3.99 1013
0.88
2.51 10−14




The comparison between the total reorganization energy and the coupling constant (VRP) allows us to conclude that we are facing a solvent-controlled adiabatic-type reaction, the ratio  being much more larger than the unity for both mechanisms (i. e., it values 3.0 and 2.4 for the first and second reaction path, respectively). Plugging all the key-parameters into the appropriate Gurney-Gerischer-Marcus' relationship gives the injection rates at high potential (when −ΔGinject. ≫ χ) and these rate constants are evaluated at 4.56 and 3.99 10−13s−1, for the first and second mechanism, respectively. This corresponds to injection lifetimes of about 0.022 and 0.025 picoseconds at 298 K. The comparison of kinject. and the related key-parameters for the two mechanisms allows us to conclude that the decrease in kinject. when going from the first to the second mechanism is mostly driven by the reduction in the driving force. Note that if eq. (3) delivers a more realistic evaluation of the injection rate constants, the square root function probably tends to overestimate these rate constants. Nevertheless, these results are in line with the previous experimental trends which validate a direct injection, i. e., a transfer from the valence band of NiO to dye*, followed by an electron transfer from the reduced dye to I3− in the electrolyte.38 Another obviousness strengthening the hypothesis of the preponderance of the first mechanism is that the direct SC → dye* electron injection is in competition with the reaction implying the dye* and the regenerator. As the lifetime for the latter is about a microsecond, it is therefore much more slower than kinject.(1).
4.2 New structures
We now propose structural modifications that could improve the hole injection efficiency in p-type TPA-based DSSCs, considering a process governed by the first mechanism, that is a direct electron injection from the SC to the excited dye. We impose that the dyes possess at least a terminal –COOH group on the acceptor side, as the carboxylic group is necessary to anchor the dye to the semiconductor surface.18,19,32–39,44 We consider three criteria: (i) a high exergonic free energy related to the electron injection in NiO. Indeed, the larger −ΔGinject., the faster the electron injection from the valence band of the SC. Moreover, it is also well-established that the more exergonic the injection, the slower the recombination reaction;46 (ii) the reduction potential of the dyes must be higher than the I−/I3−redox couple (−4.8 eV ± 0.1 eV), ensuring that there is enough driving force for a fast and efficient regeneration of the dye cation radical; (iii) the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) of the dye has to be as large as possible to maximize the photocurrent response. Basically, eq. (8) shows that a increase of the injection driving force for the first mechanism can be possible if we have a decrease of Edye0–0 and/or an increase of the [γ = 2 EdyeOX + EdyeRED + ENiOVB] term. EdyeOX and EdyeRED being intimately correlated, it is difficult to increase the first one without altering the second one, so it will be difficult for us to cat on the γ term. The best solution to optimize γ remains the red-shifting the P-1 absorption spectrum, without modifying the redox characteristics of the dye.
In a previous investigation, we have shown for n-type TPA-based dyes that a functionalisation of the triphenylamine moiety by –OMe and –CN groups significantly improves the key parameters related to the electron injection.73 The transposition of these conclusions to p-type P-1 leads to three additional dyes (P-1a, P-1b and P-1c) for which the ground and excited state parameters are provided in Table 3. Of course, for these three new compounds, we have checked that they indeed have a reduction potential higher than the I−/I3−redox potentials.109P-1a and P-1b are quite similar, the latter with an additional –CN group on the acceptor side, whereas P-1c has an extended bridge to the thiophene units.
Table 3 EdyeOX, EdyeRED, λ(ICT)max and E0–0, ΔE(1)RP and the RLHE factor obtained for P-1, P-1a, P-1b and P-1c.a




Compounds
EdyeOXb
EdyeREDb

λ
(ICT)max
b

E0–0114
ΔE(1)RP

                    RLHE
                    c





a Energies are expressed in eV.
b We deal with the internal energy change for the evaluation of the oxidation and reduction potentials.
c The light harvesting efficiency factor (LHE) of a dye is related to its oscillator strength (f) and is equal to 1–10−f. This factor has to be as high as possible to maximize the photocurrent response of the cell. For P-1, f values 2.2046. The RLHE is defined as 1–10−(f/fP-1).






                    P-1
                  
5.35
−3.16
2.67
2.27
−0.31
0.900



                    P-1a
                  
5.27
−3.16
2.60
2.20
−0.22
0.911



                    P-1b
                  
5.43
−3.80
2.17
1.77
−0.33
0.907



                    P-1c
                  
4.95
−3.20
2.53
2.13
0.39
0.931




From Table 3, we can gather the following trends: (i) the LHE factor is similar for all the compounds and we calculate TDCAM-B3LYP oscillator strength f values of 2.3193, 2.2726 and 2.5528 for P-1a, −1b and −1c, respectively. The large f value for P-1c is to be related to the extension of the bridge between TPA and the acceptor group, which is also at the origin of a huge dipole moment (14.70 D instead of 8.84 D for P-1); (ii) only for P-1b, we have an improvement of the exergonic character of the injection involving a huge variation (−0.50 eV) of the excitation energy (ΔEdye0–0) combined to a moderate modification of the γ value (Δγ) term which varies from 2.58 eV for P-1 to 2.10 for P-1b. This gives a higher −ΔERP value (0.33 eV); (iii) when going from P-1 to P-1a, Δγ and ΔEdye0–0 are −0.16 eV and −0.07 eV, respectively and this results in a decrease of the injection driving force; (iv) extending the bridge unit from one to two thiophene units leads to a drastic decrease of the oxidation potential and to an endergonic character of the injection; (v) certainly, the –OMe functionalization of the TPA moiety combined to the grafting of three –CN groups on the acceptor (P-1b) provides a remarkable improvement of the properties related to the injection. Indeed, we observe an increase of −ΔERP combined to a huge LHE factor, and a reduction potential that is superior to the regenerator's redox potential.
To get further insights into the molecular structures and electronic distributions of the optimal P-1b dye, we have performed a molecular orbital analysis (MOA) at the PCM(CH3CN)//B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) level of theory. The electron distributions for the HOMO and LUMO of P-1b are depicted in Fig. 4. It is clearly shown that the HOMO is essentially localized on the central nitrogen atom whereas the LUMO is located on the acceptor groups and more specifically on the three –CN functions. It is also important to highlight that, in views of the frontier orbitals topology of P-1b, the HOMO → LUMO excitation induced by light irradiation could move the electron distribution from the TPA moiety (and the –COOH anchoring group) to the modified malononitrile units, and should therefore favour the injection of an electron from the NiO VB to the dye. Furthermore, similarly to P-1 the LUMO in P-1b is mainly centered on the malononitriles and is therefore isolated from the –COOH anchoring group. Consequently in P-1 and P-1b, the recombination of the injected electron with the NiO valence band via the carboxyl group remains limited.
 Fig. 4  LUMO (top) and HOMO (bottom) involved in the ICT excitation occurring at 571 nm for P-1b. These orbitals have been obtained at the PCM(CH3CN/)/B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) level of theory with a contour threshold of 0.05 |e|. 
We present in Fig. 5 and 6 the dye-NiO MO-DOS [(molecular orbitals)-(density of states)] and the dye-projected MO-DOS (i. e., the DOS related to the dye's electronic structure). From these DOS, it can be seen that the SC induces a stabilisation of both the HOMO and the LUMO. For P-1, we evaluate a change of −0.27 eV and −0.19 eV for the HOMO and LUMO, respectively, which results in a blue-shift of the absorption band when the dye is grafted on the SC. These trends are in complete agreement with the TDB3LYP results showing a 0.07 eV increase of the excitation energies when going from P-1 (λ(ICT)maxat 2.06 eV) to P-1b (λ(ICT)max at 2.13 eV). Moreover, grafting the dye on the NiO induces an increase of the DOS related to both the valence and low-energy unoccupied states, leading to a combined broadening of the absorption spectrum and an increase of the LHE factor, as experimentally observed.38Fig. 7 depicts the liquid-phase dye-NiO DOS and the adsorbed projected DOS for P-1 (blue) and P-1b (red), as well as the respective HOMO and LUMO states in offset. From this Figure, it is clear that the red-shift of the absorption spectrum (−0.07 eV, see Table 3) when going from P-1 to P-1b is mainly related to the important LUMO stabilisation (−0.66 eV), the difference between P-1 and P-1b HOMO energies being relatively less important (computed at −5.46 eV and −5.57 eV, respectively). Note that the lowering of the HOMO energy level observed when modifying P-1 to give P-1b leads to a increase of the hole injection driving force, as observed in Table 3.
 Fig. 5  Liquid-phase P-1-NiO DOS (red) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (blue) for P-1, as well as the respective HOMO states in offset.115 
 Fig. 6  Liquid-phase P-1b-NiO DOS (red) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (blue) for P-1b, as well as the respective HOMO states in offset.115 
 Fig. 7  Liquid-phase dye-NiO DOS and the adsorbed-projected DOS for P-1 (blue) and P-1b (red), as well as the respective HOMO and LUMO states in offset. NiOVB is the valence band edge of the semiconductor which is estimated at −4.98 eV.38,115 
In order to complete the P-1b characterisation, we have computed the P-1/P-1b charge difference110 assigned to several key-atoms constituting the dyes: the NTPA atom in the TPA moiety, the two thiophene S atoms, and the N−CN atoms of the terminal –CN groups. When going from P-1 to P-1b, we observe an increase of the positive charge carried by S atoms (from 0.24 |e| to 0.19 |e|), while the charge on NTPA and N−CN remains constant (they are computed at −0.64 |e| and −0.56 |e| in average respectively).
To sum up, all the above evoked points let us suggest that P-1b is therefore expected to be e very promising molecule in the p-type DSSC field.
5. Conclusions
In order to realise the full promise of DSSCs as high efficiency energy conversion devices T. W. Hammann et al. suggested in a recent publication,76 that it is often necessary to simultaneously modify at least two of the four major components (the dye, the redox shuttle, the SC photoanode and the cathode). In this context, we have presented in this article a fundamental-level understanding of the electronic excitation and electron injection processes, paving the way towards a smart optimization strategy. We not only managed not only to gain insights into the geometrical and electronic structures of triphenylamine (P-1) organic dyes, but also we brought out pertinent structural modifications for optimising the properties of the p-type TPA-based DSSCs. Within a (TD)DFT framework, we have calculated the key parameters controlling the photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) injection and the related rate constants for two assumed mechanisms: (i) an electron transfer from the valence band of NiO to dye* followed by a shift from the reduced dye to I3− in the electrolyte or (ii) an electron transfer from dye* to I3−, followed by a reduction step associated to an electron transfer from the SC to the cationic dye.
In full agreement with the experimental trends: (i) the ICT vertical transition of interest has been calculated at 2.67 eV (that is 0.02 eV error); (ii) for this excited state, the reorganization energy is estimated to be 0.40 eV and the resulting Edye0–0 is predicted at 2.27 eV with an experiment-theory absolute deviation of 0.03 eV; (iii) we have shown that the standard Marcus model is most likely unable to deliver realistic rate constants for electron injections at high potential; (iv) on the other hand, the more refined Gurney-Gerischer-Marcus' relationship helps to calculate valuable injection time scales; (v) when P-1 is excited at 468 nm, the CT between the resulting relaxed excited state and the semiconductor directly takes place immediately (first mechanism), and the probability of reaction between the excited dye and the regenerator is weak (second mechanism); (vi) the Gurney-Gerischer-Marcus model gives rate constants of 4.56 and 3.99 1013s−1 for the first and second mechanism, respectively.
We also aimed at improving the SC → dye electron injection process, for which we have proposed structural modifications associated to an improvement of the electron injection efficiency in P-1 DSSCs. We predict that grafting an additional –CN on the malononitrile unit, combined to a functionalisation of the TPA moieties by –OMe groups, to give P-1b, should significantly improve the key parameters related to the electron injection. Indeed for P-1b, we have a noticeable increase of both the RLHE factor (0.907) and the injection driving force (−0.33 eV) and this dye is therefore expected to be promising in the p-type DSSC field. These assumption is confirmed by the MO-DOS and charge analysis.
Undoubtedly, the close future of organic solar cells relies on their economic potential that depends upon several critical factors like the efficiency, the manufacturing costs, as well as sustainability, weight, scalability or lifetime. At this point, a couple of conditioning techniques can be foreseen: solvent or solvent-free processings. The first process offers a remarkable efficiency for low-cost cells. However, these cells rely on volatile solvents in their electrolytes, which is problematic for outdoor solar panels applications, in views of the need of a robust encapsulation. Therefore, solvent-free ionic liquids have been looked as attractive alternatives. Device efficiencies of over 8% were recently achevied by using some low-viscosity formulations containing a ternary melt of imidazolium iodure.111 This result is of great importance in the perspective of a large-scale real-life applications of DSSCs. Whilst such a strategy has been widely applied for Ru(II)-based organic cells, this process has still to be transfered to metal-free organic solar cells like triphenylamine. In that context, a fundamental-level understanding of the interactions between the dye and the ionic solvent would be warmly welcomed to allow a clear optimization strategy.111–113
Acknowledgements
J.P. and E.A.P thank the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (FRS-FNRS) for their respective positions. All calculations have been performed on the Interuniversity Scientific Computing Facility (ISCF), installed at the Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix (Namur, Belgium), for which the authors gracefully acknowledge the financial support of the FNRS-FRFC and the “Loterie Nationale” for the convention number 2.4578.02 and of the FUNDP.
References
J. P. Holden, Science, 2008, 319, 424 CrossRef CAS .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): Climate Change 2007-Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK,  2007 Search PubMed .

          M. C. Green, Power to the People: Sunlight to electricity using Solar Cells, University of South Wales Press, Sydney, Australia,  2000 Search PubMed .
K. Zweibel and J. Mason, Sci. Am., 2008, 298, 64 CrossRef .
R. F. Service, Science, 2005, 309, 548 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kammen and S. Pacca, Annu. Rev. Environ. Science, 2004, 301, 29 Search PubMed .
E. A. Alsema, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2000, 8, 17 Search PubMed .
T. A. Heimer, E. J. Heilweil, C. A. Bignozzi and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4256 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1161 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, M. Haria and S. Hotchandani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5166 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, S. Ruehle and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8106 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, R. Katoh, T. Yoshihara, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12583 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 944 RSC .
J. Tang, W. Wu, J. Hua, J. Li, X. Li and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 982 RSC .
M. Planells, L. Pellejà, J. N. Clifford, M. Pastore, F. D. Angelis, N. Lòpez, S. R. Marder and E. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1820 RSC .
P. Sonar, J. P. F. Lim and K. L. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1558 RSC .
Z. Ning, Y. Fu and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1170 RSC .
B. O. Reagan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, K. J. Jiang, Y. F. Li, S. L. Li and L. M. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11591 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, T. Bessho and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Wang, Y. Cui, K. Hara, Y. Dan Oh, C. Kasada and A. Shinpo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1138 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Wong and J. G. Codaro, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 214703 CrossRef .
K. Sayama, K. Hara, N. Mori, M. Satsuki, S. Suga, S. Tsukagochi, Y. Abe, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1173 RSC .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, T. Horiguchi, T. Kinoshita, K. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 64, 115 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stathatos, P. Lianos, A. Laschewsky, O. Ouari and P. Van Cleuvenberg, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3888 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, X. Yang, H. Tian, X. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4007 CrossRef CAS .
C. Baik, D. Kim, M. S. Kang, K. Song, O. K. Sang and J. Ko, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 5302 Search PubMed .
S. Ferrere, A. Zaban and B. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4490 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferrere and B. Gregg, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1155 RSC .
R. Memming and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem., 1971, 75, 562 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakabayashi, N. Otha and A. Fujishima, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 3993 RSC .
C. A. N. Fernando, A. Kitagawa, M. Suzuki, K. Takahashi and T. Komura, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 33, 301 Search PubMed .
J. He, H. Lindström, A. Hagfeldt and L.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8940 CrossRef CAS .

          J. He, H. Lindström, A. Hagfeldt and L.-E. Lindquist, S.
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3039 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin an, Z. Hongjun, T. Edvinsson, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8570 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mornadeira, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Hammarström, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 891 RSC .
D. Liu, R. W. Fessenden, G. L. Hug and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4490 CrossRef CAS .
B. Burfeindt, T. Hannappel, W. Storck and F. Willig, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 16463 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, S. Tsukagochi, K. Hara, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpou, Y. Abe, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1363 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Marinado, K. M. Karlsson, K. Nonomura, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 9550 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, Q. Zhang, W. Wu, H. Pei and H. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 73, 3791 Search PubMed .
M. Pastore, S. Fantacci and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22742 Search PubMed .
D. Matthews, P. Infelta and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 119 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pourtois, J. Beljonne, M. A. Ratner and J. L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hsu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 509 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 599 CrossRef CAS .
M. Higendorff and V. Sundström, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10505 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jamorski Jödicke and H. P. Lüthi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 252 CrossRef .
C. Jamorski Jödicke and H. P. Lüthi, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 4146 CrossRef .
G. Pourtois, J. Beljonne, M. A. Ratner and J. L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4436 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cossi and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 4708 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adamo and V. Barone, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 330, 152 CrossRef CAS .
W. Adam and O. Krebs, Chem. Res., 2003, 103, 4131 Search PubMed .
E. J. Baerends, G. Ricciardi, A. Rosa and S. J. A. van Gisbergen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 230, 5 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jacquemin, J. Preat, V. Wathelet, M. Fontaine and E. A. Perpète, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2072 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jacquemin, V. Wathelet, E. A. Perpète and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 2420 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tawada, T. Tsundeda, S. Yanagisawa, T. Yanai and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 8425 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamiya, H. Sekino, T. Tsuneda and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 234111 CrossRef .
M. Chiba, T. Tsuneda and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 144106 CrossRef .
M. J. G. Peach, P. Benfield, T. Helgaker and D. J. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 044118 CrossRef .
M. A. Rohrdanz and J. M. Herbert, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 034107 CrossRef .
C. A. Bertolino, A. M. Ferrari, C. Barolo, G. Viscardi, G. Caputo and S. Coluccia, Chem. Phys., 2006, 330, 52 Search PubMed .
J. B. Prieto, F. L. Arbeloa, V. M. Martinez and I. L. Arbeloa, Chem. Phys., 2003, 13, 298 Search PubMed .
J. Preat, C. Michaux, A. Lewalle, E. A. Perpète and D. Jacquemin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 451, 37 CrossRef CAS .
J. Preat, D. Jacquemin, V. Wathelet, J. M. André and E. A. Perpète, Chem. Phys., 2007, 335, 177 Search PubMed .
D. Jacquemin, J. Preat, V. Wathelet and E. A. Perpète, Chem. Phys., 2006, 328, 324 Search PubMed .
S. Grimme and F. Neese, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 154116 CrossRef .
M. Schreiber, V. Bub and M. P. Fülscher, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 3906 RSC .
D. Jacquemin, E. A. Perpète, G. E. Scuseria, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Preat, C. Michaux, D. Jacquemin and E. A. Perpète, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16821 CrossRef CAS .

λ
max is the wavelength of maximal absorption for which one measures the highest IPCE value.
B. Peng, S. Yang, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 034305 CrossRef .
T. W. Hamman, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 RSC .
S. Iwa, K. Hara, S. Mutara, R. Katoh, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 3366 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, T. Yoshihara, K. Hara, G. Fujihashi, S. Takano, S. Mutara, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4818 CrossRef CAS .
J. Preat, D. Jacquemin and E. A. Perpète, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 891 RSC .
J. Preat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16716 Search PubMed .
J. Preat, D. Jacquemin and E. A. Perpète, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 5666 Search PubMed .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783 CrossRef CAS .
H. Heitele, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 359 CrossRef .
P. F. Barbara, T. J. Meyer and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13148 CrossRef CAS .
Moreover, χsolute1 and χsolute2 can be defined to a very good approximation as  and  where ER and EP is the reagent and the product energy, respectively. Qr and Qp correspond to the R and P cartesian coordinates of minimal energy. Note that the SC reorganization energy has been neglected. This can be justified by the large size of SC crystal lattice that remains unperturbed when the electron is injected from the valence band.
A standard estimate for χsolvent was obtained by Marcus by modelling reagents and products as spheres, and the solvent as a dielectric continuum: where RD, RA, R, ε∞ and ε0 are the radii of the donor and acceptor, the distance between their centers (i. e., between the TPA and the malononitrile moiety geometric centers), and the optical frequency and zero-frequency relative dielectric constants of the solvent, respectively. Δq is the amount of charge transferred (i. e., +1 for the injection of one electron from the semiconductor VB to the dye). The donor and acceptor radii are inferred from spherical PCM cavities computed at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level and by using CH3.CN as solvent.

where μRP is the transition dipole moment, ΔERP is the driving force (ΔG) and μR (μP) is the reagent (product) permanent dipole.
Within the Koopmans approximation which states that in closed-shell Hartree–Fock theory, the first ionization energy of a molecular system is equal to the negative of the energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital. Koopmans' theorem is exact in the context of restricted Hartree–Fock theory with the frozen orbital approximation.
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and A. Selloni, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424002 CrossRef .
More precisely, the 0–0 transition energy is calculated as  where  and QS0 and QSICT are the equilibrium geometries for the S0 and Si states, respectively. ESICT(QS0) and ESICT(QS thrmICT) denote the internal energies for the SICT state calculated at QS0 and QSICT, respectively, whereas ΔESICT is the S0 → SICT excitation energy.
Within the Condon approximation, the electronic coupling is assumed to be independent from the nuclear coordinates.

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., T. Vreven, K. N. Kudin, J. C. Burant, J. M. Millam, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, M. Cossi, G. Scalmani, N. Rega, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, M. Klene, X. Li, J. E. Knox, H. P. Hratchian, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, P. Y. Ayala, K. Morokuma, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, V. G. Zakrzewski, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, M. C. Strain, O. Farkas, D. K. Malick, A. D. Rabuck, K. Raghavachari, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, Q. Cui, A. G. Baboul, S. Clifford, J. Cioslowski, B. B. Stefanov, G. Liu, A. Liashenko, P. Piskorz, I. Komaromi, R. L. Martin, D. J. Fox, T. Keith, M. A. Al-Laham, C. Y. Peng, A. Nanayakkara, M. Challacombe, P. M. W. Gill, B. Johnson, W. Chen, M. W. Wong, C. Gonzalez and J. A. Pople, Gaussian DVP, Revision D.02, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2005 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, N. Rega, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, J. E. Knox, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, V. G. Zakrzewski, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, Ě. Farkas, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, J. Cioslowski, and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 09, Revision A.1, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2009 Search PubMed .
F. Furche and R. Ahlrichs, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 7433 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 1372 CrossRef CAS .
D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1988, 38, 3098 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, W. Yang and R. G. Parr, Phys. Rev. B, 1988, 37, 785 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yanai, D. Tew and N. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393, 51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wanko, M. Garavelli, F. Bernardi, T. A. Niehaus, T. Frauenheim and M. Elstner, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 1674 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adamo and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 6158 CrossRef CAS .
The optimized PBE0 and B3LYP ICT geometries are obtained at the PCM(CH3CN)/6-31G(d,p) level of theory.
R. Krishnan, J. S. Binkley, R. Seeger and J. A. Pople, J. Chem. Phys., 1980, 72, 650 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tomasi, B. Mennucci and R. Cammi, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2999 CrossRef CAS .
J. Preat, P. F. Loos, X. Assfeld, D. Jacquemin and E. A. Perpète, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2007, 107, 574 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 5183 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pastore, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7205 CrossRef CAS .
K. Andersson, P. A. Malmqvist and B. O. Roos, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 1218 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Peach, P. Benfield, T. Helgaker and D. J. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 044118 CrossRef .
H. Tian, X. Yang, J. Pang, R. Chen, M. Liu, Q. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3461 CrossRef CAS .
The Mulliken charge densities have been used in this analysis.
Y. Bai, Y. Cao, J. Zhang, M. Wang, R. Li, P. Whang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 626 CrossRef CAS .
P. Whang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry Baker and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2694 CrossRef CAS .
P. Whang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, R. Humphry Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7164 CrossRef CAS .
Since the four structures are quite similar (i. e., we have the same chromophoric unit and the different molecular edifices are built with the same donor and acceptor moieties), we postulate that the reorganization energy for the ICT excited state of P-1a, P-1b and P-1c are identical to the one obtained for P-1.
The DOS has been built up using Lorentzians with a full width at half maximum of 0.25 eV.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: [DETAILS]. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01638e‡ This article was submitted following the ICCES Clean Energy Conference in Dalian, China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
In the present manuscript, we have carried out a theoretical investigation aiming at model the assessment of mechanisms of photoinduced processes in a recent p-type organic metal-free dye derived from the triphenylamine structure. In a first step, DFT and TDDFT approaches have been exploited to calculate the key parameters controlling both the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) and hole transferrate constants in the Gurney-Gerischer-Marcus formalism, for either a solvent-controlled adiabatic or a nonadiabatic electron transfer. These are: (i) the electronic coupling; (ii) the reorganization energies; and (iii) the variation of the Gibbs energy. The gathered results are in agreement with the experimental trends. (i) The vertical ICT excited states energy has been calculated at 2.67 eV in line with the experiment (2.65 eV). (ii) Two mechanisms can be conceived for the hole transfer and regeneration process. The first deals with the reduction of dye molecule at the excited state followed by an electron transfer from the reduced dye to the oxidized regenerator. The second implies a redox reaction between the excited dye and the oxidized regenerator, followed by an electron transfer from the cathode to the oxidized dye. (iii) Our theoretical investigation suggests that the first mechanism is dominant. Secondly, we propose structural modifications improving the TPA-based DSSCs hole transfer efficiency.


 	Scheme 1  Sketch of the two sub-systems used in a D-(π)-A edifice. In this scheme, we have a triphenylamine-based donor and a malononitrile-based acceptor (1,1′-dicyano-ethylene).	 

 	Scheme 2  Sketch of the P-1 dye and its three derivatives (P-1a, P-1b and P-1c).	 

 	Fig. 1  LUMO (top) and HOMO (bottom) involved in the ICT excitation occurring at 468 nm for P-1-SC edifice. These orbitals have been obtained at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory with a contour threshold of 0.03 |e|.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the operation principle of the P-1-based DSSC. We provide here the dye's ICT excitation energy (2.64 eV), the levels of the involved molecular orbitals as well as the energies related to the valence band (VB) and the conducting band (CB) of NiO. The energies are expressed in eV.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the reagents (R) and products (P) potential energy curves. We depict in this figure the χi terms which describe the i contributions to the internal relaxation energy and the electronic coupling VRP.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
|VRP| = 〈ΨR|H|ΨP〉	(5)
ΔERP = [EdyeLUMO + 2EdyeHOMO] − [EdyeLUMO + EdyeHOMO + ENiOVB]	(6)
ΔERP = EdyeHOMO − ENiOVB = −[EdyeOX + ENiOVB]	(7)
ΔERP = Edye0–0 − [2EdyeOX + EdyeRED + ENiOVB]	(8)
	(9)
	(10)



 	5.43	5.78	−3.34	−3.37	2.67	2.65	2.27	2.25	−0.98	−0.82

MAE
	 	0.35	 	0.03	 	0.02	 	0.02	 	 



1a	0.06	0.10	0.48	−0.98	4.56 1013	1.00	2.19 10−14
2b	0.07	0.10	0.41	−0.82	3.99 1013	0.88	2.51 10−14



                    P-1
                  	5.35	−3.16	2.67	2.27	−0.31	0.900

                    P-1a
                  	5.27	−3.16	2.60	2.20	−0.22	0.911

                    P-1b
                  	5.43	−3.80	2.17	1.77	−0.33	0.907

                    P-1c
                  	4.95	−3.20	2.53	2.13	0.39	0.931

 	Fig. 4  LUMO (top) and HOMO (bottom) involved in the ICT excitation occurring at 571 nm for P-1b. These orbitals have been obtained at the PCM(CH3CN/)/B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) level of theory with a contour threshold of 0.05 |e|.	 

 	Fig. 5  Liquid-phase P-1-NiO DOS (red) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (blue) for P-1, as well as the respective HOMO states in offset.115	 

 	Fig. 6  Liquid-phase P-1b-NiO DOS (red) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (blue) for P-1b, as well as the respective HOMO states in offset.115	 

 	Fig. 7  Liquid-phase dye-NiO DOS and the adsorbed-projected DOS for P-1 (blue) and P-1b (red), as well as the respective HOMO and LUMO states in offset. NiOVB is the valence band edge of the semiconductor which is estimated at −4.98 eV.38,115	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: [DETAILS]. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01638e
‡ This article was submitted following the ICCES Clean Energy Conference in Dalian, China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
