Access to small molecule semiconductors via C–H activation for photovoltaic applications   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CC02706D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CC02706D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7322-7325Access to small molecule semiconductors via C–H activation for photovoltaic applications†

        
          
            Sanchari 
            Shome
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Surya Prakhash 
            Singh
          
        
      *ab
aPolymers and Functional Materials Division, CSIR- Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad-500007, India. E-mail: spsingh@iict.res.in
bAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India
Received 
      4th April 2018
    , Accepted 5th June 2018First published on 5th June 2018AbstractThe first methodology of ruthenium carboxylate-catalysed single step oxidative cross coupling that challenges the conventional Stille and Suzuki coupling reactions, affording BT and MFBT derivatives in the absence of protecting groups, was developed. Both mono and bi-arylated derivatives are formed in moderate to high yields (30–75%). Innately high selectivity, low catalyst loading and lack of formation of regio-isomers ensure the large-scale synthesis of various photonic and electronic materials employing this method.
Heteroarenes containing benzothiadiazole (BT) moieties possess a range of unique optical properties showing outstanding characteristics of functional materials.1 The use of fluorinated benzothiadiazole (FBT) has gained immense interest in the recent past because of the small size and high electronegativity of the fluorine atom that imparts good optoelectronic properties to the system.2 The benzothiadiazole–thiophene motif is based on a donor–acceptor assembly developed for high performance optoelectronic materials.3 Substitution of the BT moieties with strong electron withdrawing groups helps in lowering the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels and thereby increasing the power conversion efficiency (PCE). The PCE of FBT was found to increase much more compared to that of simple benzothiazole4 because of the presence of the electron withdrawing fluorine atom. Several transition metal catalysed reactions have been developed for the coupling of benzothiadiazole molecules, where either one of the coupling partners has been pre-functionalised with a metal and the other with halides.5 However, the atom economical C–C cross-coupling reactions are attractive and sustainable approaches towards the synthesis of functional materials. The traditional route to synthesize these donor–acceptor motifs includes the Suzuki and Stille coupling reactions with substituted benzothiadiazoles and their stannyl or boronyl thiophene counterparts.6 Although, this method is a widely established one, it suffers from several drawbacks. Firstly, stannyl derivatives are highly toxic and leave behind environmentally hazardous by-products. Secondly, in the case of the boronic acid derivatives the reaction procedure involves a number of steps including the halogenation and borylation of benzothiadiazole and its coupling partner. It is in fact a challenging task to perform controlled halogenation as always a mixture of mono and bi halogenated compounds is obtained that upon further treatment with a stannyl or boronyl derivative leads to different products. Thirdly, the scope of this method is restricted mainly to symmetrical products thereby limiting its diverse applications.7
A recent report by Zhang et al. on the selective thienylation of fluorobenzothiadiazole derivatives requires the blocking of every active site of FBT keeping only one C–H bond available for reaction.8
The selectivity of the catalytic system did not seem to be sufficient to react at one particular active site in the presence of others. This reaction can also be performed in the absence of blocking groups using main group catalysts along with bis(dibenzylideneacetone)Pd0 as reported by Paul and co-workers.9 However, one of the major drawbacks like synthesis and stability of the main group metal catalysts makes the process less suitable for large-scale synthesis.10 Grignard reagents used in this process are highly moisture sensitive and require immense care while being maintained under intense inert conditions. In order to overcome these drawbacks, we have tried to use catalysts that are moderately reactive, less sensitive but more selective in nature as depicted in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Summary of previous reports in contrast to the present work. 
Earlier our group had studied the effect of bulky Ru(MesCO2)2p-cymene on the alkenylation of nitrogen directing inactivated aryl moieties11 and we further wanted to explore the catalytic capability of Ru(MesCO2)2p-cymene on inactivated benzothiadiazoles. As ruthenium catalysts are less reactive but more selective in nature compared to other transition or main group metals generally used as catalysts, the addition of a bulky acid group however, enhanced their reactivity. The present work reports the sp2–sp2 coupling between the unsubstituted benzothiadiazole and thiophene counterpart in the presence of a catalyst and an oxidant.
The initial screening reaction was performed with benzothiadiazole (1) and 2-bromothiophene (2a) with catalyst [Ru(p-cymene)Cl2]2, oxidant AgOAc and toluene as the solvent. However, the negative result of the above reaction motivated us to change the solvent from non-polar to highly polar and high boiling solvents like DMF, DMSO etc. (Fig. 2). The change in the solvent from toluene to DMF increased the yield of 3a to 32% and a remarkable increase to 56% was found on using DMSO as a solvent.12
 Fig. 2  Representative optimisation reaction. 
Product 3a emphasizes the fact that the reaction is tolerant to the bromo group and therefore the coupling involved H–H removal instead of H–Br removal. The yield of this product was further improved to 65% upon changing the catalyst to Ru(p-cymene)(MesCO2)2. The detailed optimization table is mentioned in the ESI,† Table S1. The carboxylic acid based ruthenium catalyst sets off the attack of the coupling partner directly to the ortho-position of the directing group.13 The bulkiness of the acid group helps in the easy formation of a thermodynamically favoured 6-membered transition state.14 Although silver acetate is a renowned oxidizing agent for ortho-arylation,15 we found better results on using silver oxide, a milder oxidizing agent. Surprisingly enhanced yield of 3a (70%) was found on increasing the catalyst loading to 20 mol%. However excess catalyst loading up to 25 mol% diminished the yield of 3a (67%) probably due to catalyst deactivation as shown in the ESI,† Table S1.
A further increase in the yield of 3a to 74% was observed when the oxidant loading was increased to 15 mol%. A combination of DMSO and piperidine as a solvent leads to higher yields when piperidine, a base, is added in a minimal amount (1–2 drops). Addition of a catalytic amount of piperidine in DMSO (pKa = 0.5) helps in the easy abstraction of the less acidic C–H bond of the BT and FBT.16 A scale up reaction was carried out for the 3a derivative in order to affirm the applicability of this methodology in commercial grounds. The reaction of 3a was performed on a scale of 2 mmol, 5 mmol, 8 mmol and 10 mmol, where the yields ranged from 65% to 75% (see the ESI†). This confirms the availability of this reaction on a few milligram scales for the large scale synthesis. The formation of 3b, 3j and 3i required around 12 h for completion along with residual starting material. Further prolonging the reaction time for these derivatives did not help in any improvement of their respective yields. Substrates containing fluorine 3p, 3q, 3r and 3x required less reaction time (4 h) than their non-fluorine counterparts. This may depend on the lability of the C–H bond adjacent to the nitrogen atom. The homo-coupling product of 1 in Fig. 2 was not observed under the above reaction conditions thereby making this method a more versatile one. Coupling of a range of thiophenes and substituted thiophenes under the optimised reaction conditions resulted in mono-substituted derivatives with high yields. Thiophenes with a variety of substitutions like bromides, acids, aldehydes and cyano showed excellent functional group tolerance resulting in products (3a, 3c, 3g–3i, 3m–3o, and 3r) with moderate to high yields as shown in Fig. 3. The products with aldehyde and acid at the terminal end (3c, 3h, 3n, 3o, and 3r) are utilized as potential co-sensitizer precursors for dye sensitized solar Cells (DSSCs). Similarly, bisthiophene and thienothiophene (3b, 3e, and 3j), obtained in good yields, can be used in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells and field effect transistors.17 Compounds like 3e, 3g, and 3t can be easily synthesized in one-step using an excess amount (4 equiv.) of the thiophene partner. The unreacted thiophene or thiazole was recovered from the reaction mixture through column chromatography.
 Fig. 3  Representative examples of the synthetic schemes with heteroarenes. 
Further exploration observed that the selective synthesis of the mono-thienylated product required the use of an excess amount of BT (3–4 equiv.). The tuning of the ratio of 1 to 2a (as depicted in Fig. 2) can lead to successful formation of mono (3a) and bi coupled (3g) products. In this process, we observed around 62% of the bi-arylated compound and 12% of the mono arylated compound. This significantly contrasts to the other traditional methods where 4,7-diiodoFBT18 is reacted with stannyl thiophene, followed by bromination.19 We can overcome the demerits of the conventional methods like toxicity, harsh conditions and an increased number of steps using the previously mentioned procedure. This can also be useful for the synthesis of unsymmetrical FBT derivatives in one pot provided that the addition of the second thiophene partner was made after assuring the complete reaction with the first thiophene (see the ESI† for the synthesis of 3ac). The unreacted BT if any was easily separated using column chromatography and hence there is no loss of starting material.
Since benzothiadiazole–dibenzene structural motifs have found immense application as optoelectronic materials, their synthesis was performed under the developed reaction conditions. Upon optimisation, it was realised that the standardised reaction conditions mentioned earlier in this communication were not favourable for the coupling of benzothiadiazole with benzene. The reason may be the lesser reactivity of the unsubstituted benzene in comparison to other heterocycles.
Another set of reactions were performed using 1.0 equiv. of BT or FBT and 4–8 equiv. of benzene in 1 ml of DMSO along with 0.2 ml of piperidine, which were found to be facile reaction conditions for mono and di-arylation (Fig. 4). Unlike thienylation, arylation using benzene required excess piperidine because of the unavailability of acidic hydrogens on either coupling partner. The yields of the final products (3v–3y) dramatically improved from low to moderate on replacing Ag2O with AgOAc.
 Fig. 4  Synthetic scheme for the reaction of BT or FBT with benzene. 
The plausible mechanism of the reaction is illustrated in Fig. S1,ESI,† where it is expected that the initial hydrogen abstraction from the benzothiadiazole takes place with the help of a catalytic amount of piperidine that is added in the reaction mixture and the electron rich benzothiadiazole species is attacked by the ruthenium complex that is electron deficient, thereby forming a 16e− species which undergoes oxidative addition. Earlier reports on the mechanistic studies of the ruthenium (p-cymene) catalyst by Fabre et al. have clearly mentioned that the oxidative addition takes place on the 16e− ruthenium species.20 The addition of thiophene leads to the formation of complex C that is indicated in the HRMS spectra. In the later stage the complex undergoes reductive elimination to give the desired product and a ruthenium complex that undergoes one electron reduction in the presence of silver to regenerate the catalyst.
Upon synthesis of the above molecules we explained its possible application in DSSCs as a co-sensitizer. The metal free organic sensitizers are an exemplary candidate for co-sensitized DSSCs,21 because of their high molar extinction coefficients, easy structural modification, and facile synthetic process. Earlier, some groups have reported small organic dyes highlighting a simple donor–π–acceptor structure using benzothiadiazole as a core moiety, which successfully enhanced the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of a black dye (BD) in the UV region of a co-sensitized DSSC.22 However, improvements in the spectral response require harvesting of the maximum light matching the commercial needs. Therefore, the synthesis of several organic dyes employed showed a reasonable absorbance in the UV-Vis region successfully to increase the photocurrent in co-sensitized DSSCs.23
Based on the above strategy, syntheses of a series of light harvesting dyes were conducted for application in dye-sensitized solar cells. Here we have shown a few different applications of the synthesized derivatives in solar cells. Co-sensitization is one of the most prominent techniques to enhance the PCE of DSSCs. Research groups across the globe including ours have been working on this technique to achieve higher PCE.24–30 In addition to our efforts in the coupling of FBT or BT with heteroarenes, we also derivatized products 3c and 3r to their respective cyanoacetic acids (FBT–CAA and BT–CAA) (Fig. 5). These molecules were used as co-sensitizers with ruthenium complex N749 (black dye) as a base dye to construct DSSC devices.
 Fig. 5  Scheme for the synthesis of cyanoacetic acid co-sensitizers. 
These molecules (3c and 3r) showed a very high PCE of 11.55% with a high Jsc of 23.41 mA cm−2 (detailed in Fig. S4 and Table S4, ESI†). It is noteworthy to mention that our aim was not to achieve high efficiency but just to confirm that our catalytic protocol may be utilized for more appropriate and highly efficient organic compounds. Finally, this methodology could also be employed to develop several small molecules having thienothiophene31 and thienogermole32 moieties for their various solar cell applications.
In summary, we have accomplished highly selective one-step cross thienylation and arylation of benzothiadiazole and fluorobenzothiadiazole using ruthenium as a catalyst. The reaction pathway ended up with high regio and chemoselectivity. The coupling with selenophene as well as benzoselenadiazole afforded high yields, which also proves to be tolerant to diverse functional groups with good efficacy. Even coupling with thieno[3,2b]thiophene gave better results which otherwise is difficult to synthesise following the conventional methods. On extending the derivatives for further applications in DSSCs, high efficiency was observed. These inspiring results help us to conclude that the use of the studied methodology as a replacement for the conventional techniques leads to the synthesis of complex molecules for solar cell applications thereby making this method versatile for large-scale production.
SPS and SS thank the DST Fast Track Young Scientist Project (CS-83/2012) for funding. SS also thanks the AcSIR for PhD registration. CSIR-IICT Communication no: IICT/pubs./2018/200.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Notes and references

  (a) F. Babudri, G. M. Farinola, F. Naso and R. Ragni, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1003 RSC ; 
  (b) R. Berger, G. Resnati, P. Metrangolo, E. Weber and J. Hulliger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3496 RSC .
P. Guo, J. Sun, S. Sun, J. Li, J. Tong, C. Zhao, L. Zhu, P. Zhang, C. Yang and Y. Xi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 22845 RSC .
H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. C. Stuart, S. C. Price, S. Liu and W. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2995 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. Stuart, J. R. Tumbleston, H. Zhou, W. Li, S. Liu, H. Ade and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1806 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, L. Ding, K. Shi, Y.-Z. Dai, N. Ai, J. Wang and J. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 957 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yan and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Peng, X. Liu, D. Su, G. Fu, J. Xu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4554 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. He, C.-Z. Wu, Y.-L. Zhua and X. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1317 RSC .
Z. Silvia, L. Heinz and K. Paul, Synthesis, 2011, 1302 Search PubMed .
E. M. Leitao, T. Jurca and I. Manners, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 817 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shome and S. P. Singh, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 6025 CrossRef .

  (a) B. A. Steinho and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4348 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Kobayashi, A. Sugie, M. Takahashi, K. Masui and A. Mori, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 5083 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ackermann, R. Vicente and A. Althammer, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 2299 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Anderson, M. Crespo and J. M. Tanski, Organometallics, 2010, 29, 2676 CrossRef .
R. Samanta and A. P. Antonchick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5217 CrossRef PubMed .
I.-H. Um, E.-J. Lee and S.-E. Jeon, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2002, 15, 561 CrossRef .

  (a) C. Kanimozhi, N. Yaacobi-Gross, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian, T. D. Anthopoulos and S. Patil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16532 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. H. Park, E. H. Jung, J. W. Jung and W. H. Jo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2583 CrossRef PubMed .

          W. You, WO Pat. WO/2011/156,478,  2011 Search PubMed .
N. Wang, Z. Chen, W. Wei and Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17060 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Fabre, N. von Wolff, G. Tan Le Duc, E. F. Flegeau, C. Bruneau, P. H. Dixneuf and A. Jutand, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 7595 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Joly, L. Pellejà, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, T. Meyer, Y. Kervella, P. Maldivi, J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares and R. Demadrill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2010 RSC .
Md. Akhtaruzzaman, H. T. Chowdhury, C. Qin, L. Han, I. M. Bedja, R. Stalder, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4616 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ooyama and Y. Harima, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2009, 2903 CrossRef .
S. P. Singh, M. Chandrasekharam, K. S. V. Gupta, A. Islam, L. Han and G. D. Sharma, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1237 CrossRef .
Md. Akhtaruzzaman, A. Islam, F. Yang, N. Asao, E. Kwon, S. P. Singh, L. Han and Y. Yamamoto, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12400 RSC .
F. S. Qiang, C. Kim, B. Fang, L. K. Xing, Y. G. Jun, L. C. Jiu, J. J. Kim and J. Ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7747 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Wang, B. Chen, W. J. Wu, X. Li, W. H. Zhu, H. Tian and Y. S. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 10955 CrossRef .
L. G. Wei, Y. Na, Y. L. Yang, R. Q. Fan, P. Wang and L. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1273 RSC .
Y. Numata, S. Zhang, X. Yang and L. Han, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 1328 CrossRef .
S. Fan, X. Lu, H. Sun, G. Zhou, Y. J. Chang and Z. S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 932 RSC .
C. McDowell, K. Narayanaswamy, B. Yadagiri, T. Gayathri, M. Seifrid, R. Datt, S. M. Ryno, M. C. Heifner, V. Gupta, C. Risko, S. P. Singh and G. C. Bazan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 383 RSC .
V. Gupta, L. F. Lai, R. Datt, S. Chand, A. J. Heeger, G. C. Bazan and S. P. Singh, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8596 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc02706dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Summary of previous reports in contrast to the present work.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representative optimisation reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representative examples of the synthetic schemes with heteroarenes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthetic scheme for the reaction of BT or FBT with benzene.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme for the synthesis of cyanoacetic acid co-sensitizers.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc02706d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
