Defect engineering in photocatalysis: formation, chemistry, optoelectronics, and interface studies  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA04297H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA04297H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18560-18604Defect engineering in photocatalysis: formation, chemistry, optoelectronics, and interface studies

        
          
            Dileep 
            Maarisetty
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Saroj Sundar 
            Baral
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, BITS Pilani, K.K. Birla Goa Campus, Goa 403726, India. E-mail: ssbaral75@gmail; dileepnaidu59@gmail.com
Received 
      23rd April 2020
    , Accepted 25th August 2020First published on 1st September 2020AbstractDefect engineering in photocatalytic materials has recently attracted substantial attention owing to the profound influence of defects on light absorption, charge separation, and interfacial reactions. However, the ambiguity regarding the role of defects in modifying the photocatalytic properties remains a long-standing problem. In this review, defect engineering in photocatalytic materials is comprehensively discussed with a focus on the classification, formation, and characterization of defects and their roles in photocatalytic systems. A systematic study of charge density, rate of charge recombination, and dissociative adsorption in defect-rich photocatalysts is also presented. Defects have the ability to alter the mechanisms of photocatalytic reactions, although the triggering of undesired thermodynamically favored back reactions by excess defects can lead to diminished photocatalytic activity. Furthermore, the critical roles of defects in photocatalytic degradation, H2 production, and bifunctional systems are reviewed. Finally, the challenges and future potential of defect engineering are considered.Dileep MaarisettyDileep Maarisetty received his B. Tech and ME degrees in Chemical Engineering from Sri Venkateswara University College of Engineering and BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa campus respectively. Then, he continued his PhD at BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa campus from 2016. Currently, he is working on the topic “The effect of point defects on photocatalytic behaviour of semiconductor photocatalysts”. His research interests include photocatalysis, photo-electrochemistry, heterogeneous catalysis and development of photocatalysts and related materials.Saroj Sundar BaralSaroj Sundar Baral is an Associate professor and Heading the Department of Chemical Engineering at BITS Pilani, K. K. Birla Goa Campus. He received his PhD in chemical engineering jointly from NIT, Rourkela in 2008. He completed his B.E. chemical engineering at Indira Gandhi Institute of Technology, Sarang in 2001. He joined as an assistant professor in the chemical engineering group of BITS in 2008. His research interests include photocatalysis, biofuels, adsorption, waste water treatment and renewable energy for sustainable future systems.
1. Introduction
The sustainable conversion of solar energy into chemical energy is a promising strategy for addressing both environmental issues and the energy crisis. Among the various types of photochemical reactions, photocatalysis is of particular importance and has a wide range of applications in numerous fields, such as organic synthesis, water and air treatment, and the automotive industry.1 However, challenges relating to improving the charge separation and transport limit the broader application of photocatalytic reactions. As photocatalysis involves a series of phenomena under non-equilibrium conditions, a comprehensive understanding of the dynamics of photoexcited carriers is crucial. Single photocatalytic systems such as TiO2, ZnO, CeO2, and ternary compounds like BiVO4 have attracted considerable attention owing to their high activity.2 However, these photocatalysts suffer from poor light absorption in the visible region, rapid recombination of the photoexcited charge carriers, and slow surface reaction kinetics. Therefore, tailoring the optoelectronic and interfacial properties of existing catalysts to overcome these limitations is of significant interest. The effects of various facets, phases, and morphologies on photocatalytic performance have been investigated in numerous previous studies.3 The overall efficiency of a photocatalytic process is dependent on multiple factors, such as the type of precursor, synthetic method, heat treatment parameters, and type and concentration of dopants, thus complicating photocatalyst optimization.4 Takanabe5 reported that the defect density, carrier concentration, and interface greatly influence the overall process efficiency even for the same reaction and catalyst. Interestingly, all three of these parameters are dependent on the defect concentration, highlighting its dominating role in photocatalysis. Recent developments concerning novel defect-rich semiconductor photocatalysts are impressive. Nonetheless, detailed information regarding the local surface microstructure, band structure, carrier transport, carrier concentration, and interface properties often remains elusive.6 Surface defect engineering has emerged as a promising strategy for tuning the photocatalytic properties of a catalyst by the formation of surface dipoles,7 adjustment of the position of the Fermi level,8 improvement of dissociative adsorption,9 and modulation of the band edge (Fig. 1).10
 Fig. 1  The effect of defects involving modifications in the band structure, electronic properties, interface properties and photocatalytic mechanism. 
Defect chemistry began to attract attention when researchers observed changes in electrical properties due to crystal imperfections. The physics of crystal imperfections started to develop after Schottky and Wagner investigated the statistical thermodynamics of vacancies.11 Recent studies have indicated that rock salt represents an ideal system for understanding the influence of defects on interface properties. Furthermore, it was concluded that point defects and higher electrical conductivity in the bulk have no relationship with the surface properties. Kong et al. differentiated surface and subsurface defects using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) images and observed higher photocatalytic efficiencies in samples with a lower bulk-to-surface defect ratio.12
In this regard, a higher photocurrent generation was also observed in photocatalysts with low bulk-to-surface defect ratio.13 Despite this remarkable finding, the electronic structure, interface properties, and energy bands are still worth exploring. Theoretical studies have indicated that the light absorption capability in the near-infrared (NIR) region can be enhanced by modulating the bulk-to-surface defect ratio.14 Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the recombination of electron–hole pairs is probable at bulk sites while surface defects improve the reactivity by promoting the adsorption of O2 and H2O.15,16 The corrugated surfaces (at defect sites) with the difference in charge density (due to the dipole moment) bind the adsorbates strongly and drive the photocatalytic reactions.17 However, the exact functioning of the defects underlying the above results was not discussed.
Merely increasing the defect concentration promotes the thermodynamically favored backward reactions.18 In this regard, cocatalysts may reduce the energy offsets and improve the charge transport, thereby arresting the reverse reactions.19 Systematic investigations based on first-principles calculations and advanced characterization tools can play a crucial role in elucidating the relationship between defects and photocatalysis.20 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that p-type and n-type conductivity can be ascribed to shallow acceptors (metal vacancies) and shallow donors (oxygen vacancies), respectively.21 Furthermore, these acceptor and donor states in the forbidden gap undergo ionization to form electronic defects, i.e., quasi-free electrons and holes. At higher concentrations, these defects form as large defect aggregates,22 which eventually leads to defect disorder. In a similar context, increasing the density of oxygen vacancies exerted a detrimental effect on charge transfer (at the interface) owing to the interaction between dipoles.23 As mentioned previously, although some reviews have reported the influence of defects on photocatalytic behavior, their intrinsic role in enhancing the overall process efficiency remains an open question that requires comprehensive analysis.21,24 Conversely, there are numerous reports of defects hampering photocatalytic activity owing to the low lifetime of charge carriers,20 greater recombination at excess defect density,25 and lower crystallinity.26
More importantly, new strategies for the rational design of photocatalysts based on a combination of advanced modeling and a comprehensive knowledge of defect chemistry are needed. For instance, surface dipole moments, which are responsible for charge separation in defect-rich catalysts, can play an important role in improving the product selectivity, although a comprehensive understanding is required to increase yields.27 Recently, several reports have appeared concerning the enhanced visible–light activity of photocatalysts due to polarization.28–31 The application of various synthesis techniques has suggested that different mechanisms may affect electrical conductivity, charge carrier mobility, and magnetic properties. Consequently, it remains challenging to identify the dominant factors that determine the emergent optoelectronics and interface phenomena. Yu and Zunger proposed a polarity-induced defect mechanism to account for the origin of both conductivity and magnetism at an interface on the basis of first-principles calculations.32 Subsequently, theoretical and experimental results were combined to examine the relationship between defects and reactivity. Given the advantages that defects can offer in photocatalytic applications, a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between defects and activity would be of great value. In this review, defect engineering in photocatalytic materials is comprehensively discussed with a focus on defect classification (Section 2), defect engineering and characterization (Section 3), the numerous roles of defects in photocatalytic systems (Section 4), the photocatalytic activity of defective materials (Section 5), the future potential of defect engineering (Section 6), and current challenges (Section 7).
2. Classification of defects
As different types of defects exert distinct effects on photocatalytic activity, it is necessary to draw a distinction between them. Thus, structural irregularities or imperfections can be divided into four main categories, as summarized in Table 1. The various types of structural disorder and heterogeneities that may interrupt the uniform arrangement of atoms have been reviewed for several materials.33–35 Structural distortions are often the cause of cation and anion vacancies and these have been thoroughly studied for TiO2,36 BiO2,37 WO3,38 ZnO,39 and CeO2 (ref. 40) owing to the intrinsic photocatalytic activity and stability of these materials. Bai et al. reported statistical data for various types of defects in photocatalysts and concluded that major lattice disorder is often accompanied by point defects such as oxygen vacancies.41 As an example, Fig. 2a depicts a TiO2 lattice in which the oxygen defect (OV) is accompanied by two Ti3+ ions (due to the pair of excess electrons caused by the OV) and the titanium vacancy (VTi) is surrounded by four O− ions. In contrast, doping involves the replacement of host atoms in the lattice or the occupation of interstitial sites depending on the ionic radii of the host and foreign atoms.42 A typical example of this is nitrogen doping to TiO2, in which the interstitial locations are first saturated prior to substitution of the oxygen atoms. Fig. 2b presents schematic diagrams of the various types of defects (self-doped). However, to confine the discussion to photocatalytic applications, only four of them are highlighted here. Among these defects, point defects are very important in semiconductor photocatalysts and can be further divided into anion and cation vacancies.43 As mentioned above, foreign-atom doping (for instance, in the case of TiO2) can be accomplished with both cations and anions, such as iron,44 tin,45 carbon,46 boron,47 and sulfur,48 which is also the case for photocatalysts based on covalent compounds.
Table 1 Summary of cause and identification of different types of defects reported in photocatalytic interest




Type
Examples
Cause and identification
Reference




Point defects
Doping and vacancies
Cause: replacement of atom in the lattice either by doping or vacancy due to heat treatments

49 and 50



Identification: absence of spots or bright spots in the lattice owing to atoms of different atomic numbers


Line defects
Screw and edge dislocations
Cause: plastic deformation of the crystal lattice

41 and 51



Identification: HR-TEM; lost crystallographic registry


Planar defects
Grain boundaries
Cause: stacking and antiphase boundaries

10, 52 and 53



Identification: HR-TEM; continuous lattice fringes interrupted or broken by interfaces


Volume defects
Disorder in lattice and voids
Cause: clustering of defects

54 and 55



Identification: (1) voids – Nano size pores in bulk. (2) Lattice disorder: regions can be visible in HR-TEM images with lattice disorders or amorphous structures




 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of point defects in TiO2 lattice structure where VTi, VO, Tiint and Oint corresponds to Ti vacancy, oxygen vacancy, Ti interstitial and O interstitial respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (b) Schematics of various types of defects attributed to unique atomic arrangement structures in materials (reprinted with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
Comprehensive studies on the relationship between anion vacancies and light-harvesting capabilities have been reported for TiO2 (white to blue color, Fig. 3a),56 WO3 (light blue to deep blue color),57 ZnO (white to yellow color),58 and BiOI (dark red to orange).59 Yang et al. found that placing hydrogen at the defect site led to the formation of a new subvalence band and improved the photocatalytic efficiency under visible light.56 As shown in Fig. 3a, the color of white anatase TiO2 changed to blue or red upon the formation of conventional oxygen-deficient TiO2 (OV-TiO2) and hydrogen-mediated oxygen-deficient TiO2 (OVH-TiO2), respectively. In the case of OV-TiO2, only the absorption tail in the visible region became stronger while the intrinsic bandgap remained constant, whereas for OVH-TiO2 the bandgap significantly decreased (Fig. 3b and c).
 Fig. 3  (a) Color change from white TiO2 to blue and red by introduction of hydrogen free-oxygen and hydrogen filled-oxygen vacancies respectively in TiO2 lattice along with their associated atomic structure images. Titanium, oxygen, and hydrogen are indicated by blue, red and green balls in order. (b and c) Bandgap comparison between OV-TiO2 and OVH-TiO2 in reference to pristine TiO2. (d, e) Photocurrent density measurements of OV-TiO2 and OVH-TiO2 under visible light irradiation, where the cell comprises TiO2, Pt and Ag/AgCl as photoanode, a counter electrode and reference electrodes respectively. Atomic structures of OVH-TiO2: (f) ABF-STEM image. (g) The corresponding exaggerated image of the dark yellow rectangle in the rainbow-colored scale. (h) The intensity line profile obtained from (g), depicting the distance between two Ti columns i.e., 3.74 angstroms. (i) Estimation of electron population near Ti, O, H atoms by their electronegative values. The dashed red circle represents O-vacancy (reprinted with permission from ref. 56, Copyright 2018 Wiley). 
The results of photoelectrochemical experiments were consistent with the absorption spectra, with both pure TiO2 and OV-TiO2 exhibiting poor photocurrent response (Fig. 3d) due to negligible absorption in the visible range. Some other studies also reported similar results, where oxygen defects did not lead to significant photoactivity.60,61 However, under the same irradiation conditions, the unusual visible absorption band of OVH-TiO2 afforded a remarkable photocurrent response (Fig. 3e), demonstrating the important role played by dopants in anion-defect-rich photocatalysts. Furthermore, annular bright-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ABF-STEM) images of OVH-TiO2 revealed no structural distortions, reflecting the excellent ability of OVH-TiO2 to accommodate the two extra electrons (Fig. 3f–h). The charge redistribution caused by oxygen vacancies (due to the electronegativity of the atoms) was restored by the hydrogen atoms at the defect sites in OVH-TiO2 Although this compensation by hydrogen atoms was significant, the electronegativity values of the titanium atoms in pristine TiO2 (2.23 eV) are greater than those in OVH (2.13 eV), as indicated in Fig. 3i, contributing to the formation of Ti3+. The enhanced surface reactivity at Ti3+ to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) has been reported in numerous recent studies.9,62,63 Hence, tailoring the bandgap width by using different “occupied atoms” at anion vacancies is anticipated to be an effective strategy in defect engineering.
2.1. Cation vacancies
Cation vacancies also modulate the electronic structure of a photocatalyst64,65 by introducing acceptor states into the forbidden gap and contributing to p-type conductivity.36,66 During synthesis, the decomposition of interlayer organic compounds at high temperatures can lead to oxygen-rich structures and consequently form cation vacancies by lattice distortion.43 The most common cation vacancies reported include titanium, cobalt, zinc, indium, nickel, and bismuth.2,67,68 In recent studies, the calcination of metal glycerolates resulted in the formation of TiO2, ZnO, and Co3O4 containing metal vacancies owing to the oxygen-rich structures.66,69,70 In MnCo3−xO4, the coexistence of both manganese and cobalt vacancies was observed, in which manganese occupied octahedral sites while cobalt occupied tetragonal and octahedral sites (Fig. 4a).71 This selective occupation by manganese and cobalt was ascribed to the metal vacancies present in the material.
 Fig. 4  (a) Spinel crystal structure (reprinted with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2017 Wiley). (b) Mn and Covalence states recorded from XANES analysis. (c) Oxygen reduction reaction polarization curves at different rpms in oxygen saturated 0.1 M KOH (ZnCo1.4Mn0.6O4). (d) Oxygen reduction reaction polarization curves of ZnCoxMn2−xO4 (at 1600 rpm). (e) Tafel plots of ZnCoxMn2−xO4. (f) Potentials at 25 μA cm−2 for spinel ZnCoxMn2−xO4 catalysts (reprinted with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2018 Wiley). 
Consequently, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity has been reported to increase at these adsorption sites.72,73 The interaction between manganese and cobalt, i.e., the charge density redistribution between Mn3+ and Co3+ (reflected as the increase in valence state in Fig. 4b), at octahedral positions causes the octahedral metal cations to play a dominant role in the ORR activity.74 The critical role that the valence state plays in modifying the mode of interaction with adsorbed oxygen was discussed in a recent study.75 Here, both spinel and perovskite structures possess geometric symmetry in the form of edge-sharing and corner-sharing octahedra, respectively. In this regard, an effective interlink between edge sharing and corner sharing may be crucial in driving the ORR. Moreover, the eg orbital state of the active manganese changes upon the replacement of manganese with cobalt, which is a crucial factor in enhancing the ORR activity (Fig. 4c–f). Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4f, which depicts the potential required to drive a given specific current density of 25 μA cmox−2, where manganese acts as a major active transition metal species to catalyze the ORR as compared to cobalt. The optimal results were observed for ZnCoxMn2−xO4 when the cobalt content (x) was in the range of 0.6–1.8 (Fig. 4c–f). In addition, it could be inferred that the suppressed ORR activity at the tetrahedral sites was attributable to a lower O2-binding capacity compared to the cubic phase.76,77
2.2. Coexistence of cation and anion vacancies
The concurrent existence of cation and anion vacancies leads to a p–n homojunction that generates a built-in electric field.78 By considering TiO2 as a prototype and proof of concept, Bai et al. reported the differences in band bending at the junction interface for different particle sizes.79 The formation of a homophase junction due to the simultaneous existence of cation and anion vacancies results in efficient spatial separation of the charge carriers, thereby inhibiting recombination.80–83 Moreover, the photocatalytic yield can dramatically increase compared to heterojunction-based strategies. By controlling the calcination temperature for TiO2, a metastable anatase phase in an amorphous/anatase composite could be formed (Fig. 5a). Notably, the coexistence of oxygen and titanium vacancies led to the establishment of a p–n homojunction (in TiO2-350).84Fig. 5b shows the distortion attributed to the cation and anion vacancies that generated the crystalline/amorphous interface. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), DFT calculations, and transient photocurrent response measurements (Fig. 5c–f) were used to elucidate the changes in the chemical environment, photocurrent response, and phases of the amorphous/anatase composite containing both cation and anion vacancies with respect to single-phase TiO2. Furthermore, the excess electrons from the vacancies were transferred to atoms neighboring oxygen vacancies rather than atoms near titanium vacancies (Fig. 5g). It was also inferred that the normal sites in pristine materials collected a lower charge density compared with TiO2-350, where the cation and anion vacancies promoted efficient electron transfer at the interface (Fig. 5h).85–87
 Fig. 5  (a) Mechanism depicting photocatalytic properties of homojunction (crystalline-amorphous) TiO2. (b) Inverse FFT (fast Fourier transform)-TEM images showing crystalline, nano fusion phase and semi-crystalline or amorphous phase. Light yellow (left), dark yellow (middle) and brown (right) corresponds to ordered lattice, slightly distorted and disordered defect respectively. (c) Chemical shifts in Ti 2p3/2 (XPS spectra) of the samples heated at different temperatures in reference to TiO2-A (anatase). (d) Transient photocurrent responses of the respective samples under UV-vis light irradiation. (e) Chemical shifts in Ti 2p3/2 and O 1s spectra of samples heated at 350 and 550 °C. (f) Geometric structures of TiO2 with OV and VTi junctions. The charge densities in homo-junction TiO2 (g) and normalTiO2 (h) (reprinted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2018 Wiley). 
3. Defect engineering and characterization
3.1. Synthetic strategies
Careful tailoring of defective photocatalysts with the desired defect type, location, and concentration is difficult but holds paramount importance for achieving enhanced photocatalytic activity.88 As mentioned previously, reduction methods involving heat treatment and chemical reducing agents have been widely employed for the introduction of anion vacancies.57,84,89,90 The defect concentration has been reported to increase with increasing amount of reducing agent, although an excessive defect concentration can lead to a deterioration in photocatalytic activity owing to undesired favorable backward reactions,18 greater recombination,91,92 and the formation of inactive phases.93 In this section, we discuss the various methods that can be employed to fabricate defective photocatalysts. The main objectives include achieving a higher number of active sites, improved charge dynamics, and favorable oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) activities. Razavi-Khosroshahi et al. reported the synthesis of nanostructured oxygen-deficient ZnO using the high-pressure torsion (HPT) method.94 The formation of localized states and identification of different emission colors in the photoluminescence (PL) spectra confirmed an appreciable tail absorbance due to the application of high pressure (ca. 3 GPa) during sample processing.95,96
In the HPT method, oxygen vacancies in the samples are stabilized using high pressure, which induces strains in the lattice. These large plastic strains alter the thermodynamic stabilities of phases, even at ambient temperature. The generation of oxygen vacancies during HPT processing has also been attributed to continuous lattice strain and the effects of high pressure on subduing the annihilation and migration of the defects.97,98 Manthiram and Alivisatos reported the use of a plasma technique to improve the light-harvesting ability of WO3−x, where the localized electrons contributed to the enhanced optoelectronic properties.99 Subsequent reports also described broadening of the absorption range as well as the emission of hot electrons due to surface plasmon resonance.100,101 In another report, the adsorption and activation of N2 on oxygen vacancies were achieved by fine-tuning the surface vacancies using atomic layer deposition.102 Similarly, a thin protective layer of amorphous TiO2 was introduced on the surface of P25 to promote hole transfer in the protective layer and hence arrest recombination.103
Feng et al. reported the ultrahigh-vacuum synthesis of defective rutile TiO2 that displayed improved durability and stability in alkaline medium.104 In another report, vacuum-treated TiO2 exhibited a higher optical response under visible light owing to the presence of oxygen vacancies.105 The vacancy formation was rationalized using reasoned by the nanoscale thermodynamic effects106 Moreover, higher electronic conductivities and discharge capacities compared with pristine TiO2 were also observed from galvanostatic charge and coulombic efficiency plots, respectively. Wang et al. described the optimization of the trade-off between efficient charge separation and improved light absorption for defect-rich BiVO4 synthesized via the electrodeposition method.107 A major focus in this work was improving the film transparency while maintaining a high photocurrent density, and the obtained photoelectron catalytic performance was the best value reported to date for a BiVO4 photoanode.108–110 Owing to their diverse electron and orbital distributions, cation defects can facilitate the formation of more active sites than anion defects and thus afford higher catalytic performance.111
Although cation-defective materials are challenging to synthesize, there are numerous reports dedicated to them in the field of photocatalysis.112,113 In a typical procedure, glycerol is added to the metal precursor to create a metal–oxygen–metal lattice, and excess glycerol is removed during the calcination process.66 Liu et al. studied a one-step cation-exchange method, in which the concentration of copper vacancies was controlled via the Cu+/Cu2+ concentration and reaction temperature (between 75–95 °C).114 This approach resulted in displacement of the plasmonic band of Cu2−xS toward shorter wavelengths and afforded enhanced optoelectronic performance. Notably, this study demonstrates the exploitation of localized surface plasmon resonance in the NIR region due to cation vacancies.115 Nonetheless, the tuning ability was limited, as excess vacancies induced a blue shift and increased the recombination rate when x = 1.
Di et al. accomplished the selective reduction of CO2 to CO on defective BiOBr, in which bismuth vacancies contributed to an altered interfacial and electronic structure.116 In contrast to the previous report, a red shift in the absorption spectrum was observed. However, the improved photocatalytic activity was ascribed to an increase in the electron population, selective adsorption of CO2, and desorption of CO at the bismuth vacancies. Arooj et al. reported that hydrogen treatment of In2O3 at 400 °C altered the intrinsic electronic and optical properties and shifted the emission range from blue to green-yellow.117 However, in this case, the hydrogen treatment (to generate indium vacancies) did not lead to any crystallographic change, in contrast to the oxygen vacancies discussed above.
Huang et al. studied the role of glycerol in creating metal voids in a cobalt(II) precursor, which improved the charge density in the vicinity of the conduction band.87 Furthermore, electron delocalization resulted in efficient electron transfer to the adsorbed molecules. Here, the excess defect density pushed the position of the Fermi level closer to the conduction band. This situation gives rise to the Moss–Burstein effect, thereby increasing the bandgap of the photocatalyst. In another report, the influence of metal vacancies arising from plasma etching on the optoelectronic performance was studied for CoAl layered double hydroxides; cobalt is a single active site and aluminum possesses etching behavior.118 The advantages of plasma etching originate from its ability to preferentially introduce metal vacancies and expose a more amorphous surface layer, thereby improving the surface reactivity.119 This behavior has been ascribed to the lower-coordinated atoms resulting from plasma etching. Table 2 summarizes the effects of the synthetic procedure and the corresponding modifications on the catalytic activity. It can be seen in several cases that the final result is heavily dependent on the synthetic method employed, even when the vacancy types are similar.
Table 2 Depiction of various synthesis strategies for defect formation, defect type and their corresponding role in enhancing the photocatalytic properties




Catalyst
Fabrication method
Type of defect
Modifications attributed to defects
Applications
Ref.




Cu/CeO2−x
Hydrothermal method with thermal reduction
Oxygen vacancy
Enhancement in visible light absorption, efficient charge separation and transport, more active sites and improved dissociative adsorption
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2

120



α-Zn–Ge–O
Ion exchange route in the presence of NaBH4
Oxygen vacancy
Enhancement in visible light absorption, narrowing of bandgap, efficient charge separation and transport, higher carrier lifetime, improved chemisorption
Photocatalytic splitting of H2O, NO, CO2

121



Co3O4/kaolinite
Solution-based method with thermal calcination
Oxygen vacancy
Higher charge separation/transfer and distinctive photocurrent density, higher electrical conductivity
Orange II dye

122



PrBaCo2O6−x
Sol–gel
Oxygen vacancy
Change in structural symmetry, charge transport
Photocatalytic water oxidation

123



BiOCl
Solvothermal treatment
Oxygen vacancy
Improved charge separation and wider absorption of visible light, enhanced charge migration, higher charge density
Photocatalytic oxidation of NO

124



BiOBr
Hydrothermal treatment with surfactant assistance
Oxygen vacancy
Enhanced charge separation by reducing the energy barrier for charge transfer, effective adsorption and activation of target molecule, bandgap narrowing
Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation

125



BiSbO4
Hydrothermal treatment with UV-light-induced breaking down of Bi–O and Sb–O bonds
Oxygen vacancy
Improved photo-response, higher charge separation
Photocatalytic oxidation of NO

126



NiS@ g-C3N4
Hydrothermal treatment
Sulfur vacancy
Photothermal effect, intensive near-infrared light absorption, higher charge separation and transport, enhanced hydrophilicity
Photocatalytic hydrogen production

127



MoS2
Hydrothermal treatment with annealing in inert atmosphere
Sulfur vacancy
Crystal structure, increasing the active sites
Electro catalytic hydrogen production

128



Mo0.1Ni0.1Cd0.8S
Hydrothermal treatment with thermal calcination
Sulfur vacancy
Adsorption and activation of N2, promote interfacial charge transfer, improved charge separation and higher carrier lifetime
Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation

129



ZnS
Time adjusted hydrothermal treatment
Sulfur vacancy
Decreased recombination
Photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB)

130



CdS@ g-C3N4
Hydrothermal treatment with thermal treatment in an inert atmosphere
Sulfur vacancy
Bandgap narrowing, higher rate of charge separation
Photocatalytic degradation of VOC and photocatalytic H2 production

131



Mo–S nano crystals
Liquid exfoliation and disintegration of MoS2
Sulfur vacancy
Avoided fast charge recombination, better charge transport, improved light harvesting
Photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB) and methylene orange (MO)

132



ZnO
Solvothermal method with calcination
Zn vacancy
P-type ness, room temperature ferromagnetism, higher charge transport
Photocatalytic degradation of RhB

70



ZnS
Acid etching of commercial ZnS
Zn vacancy
Lowering of energy barrier for CO2 reduction reaction, suppressing the proton adsorption, decreasing the photo-generated charge recombination
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2

133



Bi3O4Br
Surfactant polyvinyl pyrrolidone self-assembly strategy
Bi vacancy
Regulated O vacancies for optimum photocatalytic performance, tuning local atomic arrangement and electronic structure, improved charge separation
Photocatalytic H2 production and N2 fixation

134



BaSO4
Precipitation method
Ba vacancy
Imparted semiconductor properties to insular BaSO4, improved adsorption and activation of NO, charge carrier distribution to facilitate higher electron transfers to adsorbed molecules
Photocatalytic removal of NO in air

135



NixCo3−xS4/Ni3S2/NF
By cation exchange reaction in a hydrothermal reactor
Co vacancy
Higher current density, better charge separation and transport
Electro catalytic hydrogen production and OER

136



α-Fe2O3
Hydrothermal process
Fe vacancy
Higher mobility of charge carriers, suppressed recombination, narrow band gap, improved adsorption of O2
Photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol A (BPA)

137



Cu2−xS
Precipitation method
Cu vacancy
Higher carrier concentration
Photocatalytic degradation of RhB and MO

138



TiO2
Solvothermal method with thermal calcination
Ti vacancy
P-type conductivity, room temperature ferromagnetism, structural changes inducing physiochemical properties that favors adsorption, increase in carrier concentration near conduction band, decreased recombination, higher charge transport
Photocatalytic degradation of RhB, MO and phenol

36





3.2. Identification of defects
Understanding the relationship between defects and catalytic activity at both the qualitative and quantitative levels is essential for the rational design of photocatalysts. This section summarizes the various characterization tools that can be used to identify defects and evaluate their influence on the lattice, optoelectronic performance, chemical shifts, and adsorption/desorption properties. The atomic arrangements in photocatalysts have been examined using electron microscopy techniques such as high-resolution noncontact atomic force microscopy (NC-AFM) and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM).139 Catalysis demands an atomic-scale view of potential energy surfaces owing to the very short range of chemical forces relating to adsorption, desorption, and molecular diffusion over the surface. NC-AFM along with STM is useful for identifying both metal and oxygen atoms in these catalysts. The combination of these techniques can reveal the atomic-defect-induced changes in reactivity and work function values and permits mapping of the charge transfer within the molecules (Fig. 6).140
 Fig. 6  (a) Structural model structure of Cu (100)–O surface, with bright orange, dark orange and grey spheres corresponds to surface Cu, subsurface Cu, O respectively. (b) Chemical interactions on Cu(100)–O surface represented in a 3D map. (c) Horizontal map of interaction forces obtained from 3D map and (d) simultaneously recorded constant height tunneling map. (e) A structural model for the surface area covered by (c) and (d). NC-AFM images of CeO2(111) with (f) surface OV and (g) subsurface OV. The line profile showing surface OV surrounded by 6O atoms (f) and subsurface OV surrounded by the triangular arrangement of O atoms (g) (projecting outward). The associated structural models are shown in (h) and (i) respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
The missing oxygen atoms on a Cu(100) surface (Fig. 6a) with varying chemical interaction forces (acquired as a three-dimensional map; Fig. 6b) can be observed in Fig. 6c and d. The differences in the interaction forces of the oxygen atoms could be explained by modification of the structural and electronic environments due to defects.141Fig. 6e presents a structural model corresponding to the microscopy image shown in Fig. 6d. In another work, NC-AFM was employed to identify surface and subsurface oxygen vacancies in CeO2.142 The oxygen defects resulted in a remarkable selectivity toward CO owing to the enhanced activation of CO2 on the defect sites. The precision of NC-AFM for detecting surface and subsurface defects can be observed in Fig. 6f and g. The oxygen vacancies appear as dark spots with six surrounding oxygen atoms and form a triangular arrangement of protruding atoms at the surface and subsurface, respectively. The structural models in Fig. 6h and i depict the reduction of the cations from Ce4+ ions to Ce3+ on the surface, which is very common in the case of TiO2.14,62
HAADF-STEM images also facilitate the visualization of defects and impregnated cocatalysts on the base catalysts. Fig. 7a and b show TEM images depicting the thin sheet-like structure of Bi2WO6 ([020] and [200]) with in-plane lattice fringes.143 In Fig. 7c, a Bi2WO6 unit cell containing a tungsten vacancy is indicated by the blue box, where the missing tungsten atom is indicated by the dotted white circle, and the orange box indicates an adjacent defect-free unit cell. These regions were also examined through intensity analysis, where the periodic intensities of the bismuth and tungsten atoms indicate their arrangements in the orange (Fig. 7d) and blue boxes (Fig. 7e). In another report, Wu et al. applied HAADF-STEM to investigate the surface reorganization due to termination in defective BiOCl sheets possessing a layered structure.144Fig. 7f and j show the HAADF-STEM images of the (001) and (100) facets of black BiOCl, respectively, and Fig. 7i shows the crystal structure, which consisted of stacked sheets of Cl–Bi–O–Bi–Cl with weak van der Waals forces. The uneven distribution of bismuth atoms (Fig. 7g) was attributed to migration stemming from surface reorganization (Fig. 7h, where the red dots indicate bismuth atoms). This structural distortion, and hence defect formation, due to the breaking of bonds on the surface of black BiOCl during migration was further confirmed by the ABF-STEM images shown in Fig. 7k and l.
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM and (b) HR-TEM of defective Bi2WO6. (c) STEM-HAADF image of defect-rich Bi2WO6 with [100] and [001] facets as depicted in the inset. Intensity profiles in the orange rectangular box (d) and green box (e) associated with STEM-HAADF image in (c) (reprinted with permission from ref. 143, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society). (f) HAADF-STEM image of (001) facet. Atomic structure images of (g) outer layer and (h) grain interior. (i) Schematic representation of BiOCl crystal structure. HAADF-STEM image of (100) facet (j) and atomic structure images of (k) outer layer and (l) grain interior (reprinted with permission from ref. 144, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Recently, electron spin polarization has attracted substantial attention in photocatalysis owing to its precision for the identification of defects.66,145–147 Pan et al. reported spin-dependent modifications of the electronic structure of defective materials (titanium vacancies) using X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS).148 The intensities of the L3 and L2 peaks in the titanium L-edge spectra associated with spin–orbit coupling splitting were compared to determine the spin-up and spin-down electrons due to the unpaired electrons from the defect sites, where L3 and L2 corresponded to the spin-up (spin quantum number, ms = +1/2, 2p3/2) and spin-down (ms = −1/2, 2p1/2) electrons, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 8a and b, the optimal catalyst (TiO2-10, Ti15O32) contained a greater amount of spin-down electrons compared with TiO2-20 and TiO2-30, where excess titanium vacancies led to electron depolarization. As shown in Fig. 8c, a decrease in the dipole moment was also observed in the density of states (DOS). Furthermore, the negative spatial spin polarization (Fig. 8d) in the supercell (VTi = 6.25%) left little possibility of the reversal of electron polarization at the Fermi level. The samples were also examined using titanium K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) alongside a sample lacking titanium vacancies (TiO2-0) and the results (pre-edge peaks at ca. 4964–4980 eV) revealed no obvious changes between the spectra, although high phase purity was observed for the defective samples.149 Interestingly, the intensity at ca. 4981 eV increased with increasing titanium vacancy concentration (Fig. 8e). Here, the titanium vacancies could be identified by decreased intensities of the peaks associated with oxygen 2p and titanium 4p. Yet another challenge in the characterization of defects is determining the ratio of surface and bulk defects; the former improve photocatalytic activity, whereas the latter enhance recombination.150 In this respect, electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) (in conjunction with STEM) can be used to determine the ratio of bulk to surface vacancies by performing systematic measurements at various depths (Fig. 8f).104 Here, a decrease in the t2g/eg peak ratio along with less eg splitting (intensity) indicates an increase in the Ti3+ concentration from the bulk to the surface, where the Ti3+ occurs due to oxygen vacancies.
 Fig. 8  (a) Ti L-edge. (b) High resolution L2 XAS spectra. (c) DOS (calculated). (d) Three dimensional spatial distributions of spin polarization ((001)-planar) of defect-rich Ti15O32 model consisting 6.25% of Ti interstitials. (e) XANES of TiO2, TiO2-5, TiO2-10, TiO2-20, TiO2-30 (reprinted with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2020 Nature). Electron energy loss spectroscopy for identifying defect concentration at 3 different depths using Ti-L edge spectra (f) (reprinted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Other methods of defect characterization, such as electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy, XPS, Raman spectroscopy, and positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS), can be used to obtain a greater qualitative and quantitative understanding of vacancies and other defects, especially in combination with the techniques discussed above. In particular, ESR is a sensitive technique for studying unpaired electrons in terms of their g-factors. Mohajernia et al. used ESR measurements conducted in the X-band frequency regime (9.15–9.16 GHz) to characterize various types of defects introduced into TiO2 photocatalysts by annealing under different atmospheres, including air, argon, argon/H2, and H2.151Fig. 9a–d show the ESR spectra of the photocatalysts annealed under different atmospheric conditions. Embedded lattice Ti3+ ions, surface-exposed Ti3+ ions (at ca. g = 1.93), and trapped holes or oxygen-based radicals (at ca. gavg > 2.0023) were found to be prevalent in the samples annealed in air (Fig. 9a), whereas oxygen-based radicals were dominant in the samples annealed under argon (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  X-band EPR spectra collected at 123 K for TiO2 photocatalysts treated at different atmosphere compositions and annealing temperatures. (a) Air treated TiO2 samples annealed at 300, 500, 700, 900 °C. (b) Ar treated TiO2 samples annealed at 300, 500, 700, 900 °C. (c and d) H2 and Ar/H2 treated TiO2 samples heated at 300, 500, 700, 900 °C. (e) Experimentally deduced spin concentration vs. annealing temperature (T, °C) of the different TiO2 samples depicted in (a–d). (f) Hydrogen evolution rate of all the TiO2 samples considered in the above cases. (g) Hydrogen evolution rate of samples treated in variant atmospheric conditions at 500 °C (optimum temperature value) under visible and UV light irradiation. (h) Hydrogen evolution rate of optimum sample i.e., (500 °C, Ar/H2) annealed for different time periods (reprinted with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The resonance features of the samples annealed under H2 and argon/H2 were similar to those of the samples annealed in air (Fig. 9c and d). The difference between the samples annealed under H2 and argon/H2 lay in the degree of spin, as shown by the comparison presented in Fig. 9e for samples annealed at 500 °C. Despite the Ti3+ concentrations being identical in both cases, the spin density of the sample annealed under H2 atmosphere was 1.64 times higher than that of the sample annealed under argon/H2. It should be noted that the effects of temperature and annealing time on the defects or spin states were not examined in this study, as the focus was on using ESR spectra to identify the various forms of Ti3+ ions. As oxygen-based radicals hinder electron transfer to H+ ions, their role in diminishing the HER activity must be acknowledged and controlled. The large variations in H2 evolution (Fig. 9f–h) were ascribed to enhanced charge separation in the samples annealed in a reducing environment as opposed to rapid recombination in the samples annealed in air or argon, which can presumably be attributed to the already existing electric field to attract holes.
Surface property measurements using XPS have been employed extensively as they permit simultaneous determination of the defect type, chemical state, and resulting band structure modifications.10,152 As mentioned previously, oxygen vacancies act as adsorptive sites for O2 and H2O and assist the formation of ROS. Li et al. used XPS to study the adsorption of H2O on oxygen vacancies at BiOCl(010) and BiOCl(001) surfaces and conclusively demonstrated that the former were more effective in promoting O–H bond cleavage via proton removal and also better facilitated electron transfer to dissociate the adsorbed water.153
The XPS spectra revealed a remarkably high hydroxyl group concentration on the BiOCl(010) surface after water exposure compared to its counterpart (Fig. 10a). In addition, a change in the electronic structure was observed in the bismuth 4f spectra for BiOCl(010), with depopulation of the two shoulder peaks corresponding to bismuth vacancies (Bi(3−x)+) at approximately 163.3 and 157.5 eV, reflecting a decrease in the concentration of oxygen vacancies (Fig. 10b). This reduction in Bi(3−x)+ was ascribed to the re-oxidation of these ions by adsorbed water via charge donation from oxygen vacancies to form hydroxyl groups.
 Fig. 10  BiOCl photocatalysts with oxygen vacancies obtained before and after exposure to H2O (a) O 1s spectra, (b) Bi 4f spectra (reprinted with permission from ref. 153, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). XPS spectra of Bi2WO6 and defect-rich Bi2WO6 (c) O 1s spectra, (d) Bi 4f spectra and (e) W 4f to determine the location of defects (reprinted with permission from ref. 154, Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Valence band spectra of monolayer and nano-plates BiO2−x (reprinted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2018 Wiley). 
In another study, the surface chemical states, compositions, and vacancy concentrations of BiW2O6 and VO-BiW2O6 were compared using oxygen 1s, bismuth 4f, and tungsten 4f spectra (Fig. 10c–e).154 The peak corresponding to the oxygen-deficient region (ca. 531.82 eV)155 was substantially higher for VO-BiW2O6 than for BiW2O6, whereas those corresponding to oxygen in the lattice (ca. 530.02 eV) and surface-adsorbed O2 (ca. 532.78 eV) remained unchanged (Fig. 10c). Specifically, XPS can be useful for locating vacancies when two different metals are present in a catalyst, as in the case of VO-BiW2O6. In general, positive and negative shifts in binding energy can be attributed to electron loss and electron gain, respectively. Thus, the shift of the peaks in the bismuth 4f spectra to lower energy (Fig. 10d) for VO-BiW2O6 was ascribed to electron gain from oxygen vacancies (pair of electrons). In contrast, no analogous shift was observed in the tungsten 4f spectra (Fig. 10e), indicating that the oxygen vacancies were situated near the bismuth atoms. Furthermore, the influence of vacancies on the band structure was examined for the defective catalyst BiO2−x (Fig. 10f). The valence band maximum (VBM) tail shifted toward the Fermi level owing to the formation of new energy states attributed to defects.21 This upward shift of the VBM in the forbidden region is typically accompanied by bandgap reduction and has been previously reported for defective photocatalysts.10,156–158
The lifetime of charge carriers determines the probability of surface photocatalytic reactions. The relationship between the volume of defects and charge lifetime can be examined using PALS, where the photons generated by positron–electron annihilation are employed as an indicator of the charge lifetime. When the positrons are injected into regions of low electron density, e.g., vacancies, positron–electron annihilation is delayed, thus prolonging the charge lifetime.159 Notably, a larger defect size (higher volume) is associated with a longer charge carrier lifetime.160 Hence, positron trapping at the vacancy sites of a photocatalyst results in an increased lifetime. Jiang et al. reported the positron lifetime components τ1 (annihilation of positrons with electrons), τ2 (positrons trapped by defects of larger size), and τ3 (attributed to orthopositronium created in defects) and their associated intensities I1, I2, and I3, respectively, for pristine (P25) and hydrogenated TiO2 (H–P25).161 As the value of the shorter component τ1 and its associated intensity I1 in P25 (τ1 = 140.5 ps) and H–P25 (τ1 = 188.1 ps) varied by 33%, the latter was suggested to contain Ti3+ (oxygen vacancies due to reduction by H2 treatment). As τ2 is dependent on the defect size, the larger value of this parameter for H–P25 (378.7 ps) compared with P-25 (376.9 ps) (Fig. 11a) could be ascribed to a lower probability of electrons in larger defects compared to smaller ones.162 Another interesting conclusion is that the I2 values were dominant for both of the catalysts, which was ascribed to higher boundary-like defects. Finally, the longest lifetime component τ3 was not observed for P-25. However, it accounted for a small share (ca. 0.25%) for H–P25, indicating a smaller number of large voids.
 Fig. 11  (a) PALS of P25 and H–P25 with blue and red fitting lines respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 161, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (b and c) Raman spectra of CeO2 and defective CeO2 obtained from DFT calculations where red, yellow and gold spheres indicate O, Ce, Ce3+ ions/atoms in order (reprinted with permission from ref. 166, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (d) Raman spectra of cocatalysts doped TiO2 resulting in defect formation (samples in the inset: T-TiO2, TZ-TiO2/ZnS (10%) composite, TZG-TiO2/ZnS/rGO (2.5%), TZG (5%)-TiO2/ZnS/rGO with 5% graphene doping). (e) Graphene oxide and rGO characteristic peaks to measure ID/IG ratios in TZG and TZG (5%); an indicator of defect density in connection to rGO concentration. (f) Raman spectra of fresh and recycled catalysts i.e., before and after photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB). “-U” indicates the corresponding recycled catalysts (reprinted with permission from ref. 158, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society). 
Raman spectroscopy is one of the most sensitive and informative techniques for detecting crystal symmetry breakage or disorder.163 Nevertheless, identifying oxygen defects at the atomic level using Raman spectra has long been problematic.164,165 Xu et al. studied oxygen defects in a CeO2-based composite catalyst using the Raman peak at ca. 566 cm−1.166 An observed red shift of the Raman peak at 459 cm−1 to 452 cm−1 due to the elongation of Ce–O bonds167 in CeO1.875 was concluded to indicate an increase in the lattice size (Fig. 11b and c). In Raman spectra, the peak intensity is determined by the number of collisions between incident photons and phonons, which result in the scattering of molecules. The peak intensity and the absorption coefficient of a material generally increase with increasing defect concentration.168,169 In our previous work, oxygen and sulfur defects in ZnS doped TiO2 (TZ) and TiO2–ZnS–rGO (TZG) were explored in terms of both dopant concentration and type.158 In Fig. 11d, the wavenumber shift from 141.2 to 153.2 cm−1 was attributed to lattice deformation (defects) with ZnS and rGO doping. In addition, peak shifting was also observed upon increasing the degree of rGO doping from 2% to 5%.170 Furthermore, an increase in the defect concentration in TZG (5%) was confirmed from the ID/IG ratio, where the G and D bands correspond to the vibrations of the sp2 carbons in the hexagonal structure and defects respectively (Fig. 11e).171 Another striking advantage of Raman spectroscopy is its ability to distinguish fresh and recycled catalysts by the presence of surface modifications in the latter following photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 11f). Oxygen defects in recycled catalysts can be healed by favorable oxygen or water adsorption on the vacant sites during concurrent H2O splitting and MB degradation, and similar results have been reported in numerous studies.9,63,172,173
4. Role of defects in charge distribution and dynamics
4.1. Fermi level, chemical state, and work function
The position of the Fermi level determines the surface potential of a semiconductor photocatalyst and any variation of the surface may influence the charge transport.174 The Fermi level can be regarded as a hypothetical energy level of an electron, which has 50% probability of being occupied at any given time (at thermodynamic equilibrium). The work function (WF) is defined as the minimum energy required to remove an electron from the Fermi level to the vacuum level and can be understood to hold an inverse relationship with the position of the Fermi level; the higher the Fermi level, the lower the values of the WF and electrical resistance for effective charge separation.175 Oxygen defects in the forbidden gap act as donor states and induce an upward shift in the Fermi level that decreases the WF value. However, the results can be intriguing as other factors such as the formation of cation vacancies during synthesis should also be considered.176 The orbitals of d0 oxides are usually filled by electrons from defect states177 (d-bands) when the Fermi level is in proximity to the conduction band.178,179 This can be observed as a decrease in the WF value using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra.62,180
Apart from oxide reduction, changes in the oxidation states of metal cations also influence the Fermi level. In this regard, filling the d-bands leads to a semimetallic nature, thereby improving the conductivity. This effect was previously observed in WO3 and MoO3.181,182 However, it was understood that the electronegativity of the metal is directly linked to the WF value. Greiner et al. reported no exception for semiconductors and binary oxides (Fig. 12a and b) by demonstrating a strong relationship between the electronegativity (χ), Fermi level (EF), electron affinity (EA), and ionization energy (IE).183 According to Mulliken, the electronegativity is equal to the midgap level and thus represents a reasonable approximation for the Fermi level in undoped semiconductors.184 For binary compounds, the electronegativity can be calculated using the geometric mean of the constituent elements (χAB = (χAχB)1/2) and EF = (χAmχBn)1/(m+n), where m and n are the stoichiometric coefficients, indicating proportionality between the electronegativity and oxidation state of the cation. Fig. 12c and d depict the band structure of OV-rich MoO3 with the Fermi level close to the conduction band and the UPS spectra of OV-MoO3, respectively.
 Fig. 12  Schematic band structure (energy level) representation of (a) semi-conductor, (b) metal oxide. The electronegativity values of metal cation and oxygen anion are indicated as χMn+ and χO2− respectively. (c) Schematic energy level diagram of defect-rich MoO3. EF = Fermi level. Ultra-violet Photoemission spectra (UPS) of defective MoO3 (oxygen vacancies): (d) secondary electron cut-off (ESC), (e) valence band, (f) exaggerated view of shallow valence features where “d” refers to the gap ascribed to oxygen vacancies. (g) XPS spectra of MoO3 (Mo 3d), indicating an increase in oxygen concentration with Mo5+ amount (top to bottom). (h) Relation of work function with oxygen deficiency, ϕ = measured work function of defective MoO3; ϕ0 = reference stoichiometric oxide work function; Δϕχ = Work function changes attributed to low electronegativity of cations; Δϕd = Work function changes attributed to donor states. Plots depicting the change of WF values with (i) electronegativity, and (j) donor states (reprinted with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2012 Wiley). 
The WF value for stoichiometric MoO3 was ca. 6.9 eV and this was observed to decrease upon increasing the OV concentration by noble gas sputtering. The oxygen 2p valence band (VB) in the VB spectra shifted to higher energy owing to the removal of O2− ions. Fig. 12e and f show the UPS spectra of defective MoO3, where the small peak at ca. 1 eV is an indicator of oxygen defects. It can also be noted that the gap states increased with increasing vacancy concentration, and the previously empty molybdenum 4d orbitals started to fill with excess electrons facilitated by the defects. The existence of Mo5+ ions was confirmed in the molybdenum 3d spectra (Fig. 12g) by the appearance of shoulder peaks at ca. 231.5 eV. Furthermore, the dependence of the WF on the donor states is depicted in Fig. 12h–j. For example, Fig. 12j reveals a sudden increase in the initial stage followed by a gradual decrease to a constant value. On the other hand, the linear decrease observed in Fig. 12i for Δϕx was ascribed to cations of lower electronegativity. Therefore, the WF value is controlled by donor states at low OV concentrations and by lower cation oxidation states at higher OV concentrations. It should also be noted that changes in the Fermi level position due to defects have not been explored from a photocatalytic perspective, and thus other applications were used for reference (Table 3).
Table 3 List of works depicting the modifications in the Fermi level attributed to defects in various applications




Material
Type of vacancy
Description
Application
Ref.




Fe2O3
Cation vacancy
Quasi Fermi level shifts
Photocatalytic water splitting

185



Beta-Ga2O3
Both anion and cation vacancies
Oxygen rich and oxygen deficient environments resulted in mid-gap Fermi level pinning, while optimum defects up-shifted the Fermi level
Opto-electronics; where WF values determine the charge transport

186



Pb1−xBiTe, Pb1+xTe
Complex defect cluster formation (VTe, Pbint)
Tuning the Fermi level for optimal carrier concentration
Thermoelectric performance and can be extended to many chalcogenide material systems

187



As, Br substituted MoSe2
Se vacancy
Fermi level pinning at interface between metal electrodes and 2D materials
High performing 2D materials in nano electronics

188



MoSe2
Mo and Se vacancies
Fermi level shift from semiconductor to metal attributed to Mo vacancies, while Se vacancies reduces band gap
Optoelectronic and spintronic

189



AgxBi2−xSe
Bi vacancy
Tuning the Fermi level by hole doping as Ag is substituted for Bi
Enhanced charge transport properties

190



TiO2 nanotubes
O vacancy
Up-shift of Fermi level leading to enhanced charge separation
Photocatalytic water splitting

191



TiO2 at (001) and (101) facets
O vacancy
Higher charge separation of charge carriers attributed to up-shift in Fermi level and subsequent decrease in WF values
Photocatalytic and solar cell applications

192



TiO2-IO
O vacancy
Up-shift of Fermi level close to conduction band attributed to the donor levels induced by O vacancies, accompanied by increase in photo-anodic current
Photocatalytic water splitting

193



ZnO
O vacancy
O vacancy pushing Fermi level towards conduction band minimum and exhibiting n-type behavior. Also aided in charge separation
Photocatalytic degradation of MO

194





4.2. Surface dipoles
The differences in electron density around defect sites force the subsurface atoms to contribute electrons to compensate for the excess positive charge at the surface defect sites. This leads to a dipole moment perpendicular to the surface.195 Surface dipoles also play a substantial role in determining the WF value and represent the major cause of significant differences in catalyst surface potentials.196,197 The positive charge at defect sites is favorable for water dissociation, as described in numerous reports.198–200 The formation of surface dipoles modulates not only the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nature of the catalyst but also the band structure.201
Jinnouchi et al. reported that nitrogen doping induced surface dipole moments in Ta2O5 that caused an upward shift of the conduction band.202 Here, the conduction band of Ta2O5 was lower than the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the ruthenium complex (cocatalyst), making it unfeasible to inject electrons into the latter. Chun et al. noted no significant difference in the conduction band minimum (CBM) of TaON and Ta3N5 in comparison to Ta2O5.203 However, it was concluded from DFT calculations that the electrostatic potential gap arising from the dipole moments shifted the CBM and VBM values toward the vacuum level (Fig. 13a). The strong water adsorption at the vacancy sites on solid polar surfaces with surface dipoles stems from a drastic reduction of steric exclusion between the H2O molecules and charge dipoles.204 This is not solely restricted to oxygen defects, as two different cases support the strong binding between them to result in hydrophilicity (Fig. 13b). First, the hydrogen atoms in H2O bind with negative charges in the vicinity of vacancies. Second, the oxygen atoms in H2O bind with positive charges around negatively charged vacancies. In another work, Chen et al. concluded that the higher internal electric field (IEF) generation in Bi8(CrO4)O11 originated from surface dipoles and resulted in enhanced charge separation for the photocatalytic degradation of phenol.205
 Fig. 13  (a) Demonstration of favorable conduction band position (up-shift) for effective electron transfer attributed to N-doping in Ta2O5 (reprinted with permission from ref. 202, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (b) The representation of enhanced water adsorption on the polarized surface (due to the presence of dipoles) resulting from the vacancy formation (reprinted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (c) Side view of the difference in charge density and planar averaged electron density difference Δρ(z) (yellow and green locations represent electron depletion and abundancy in order). (d) Surface potential pictures (dark state). (e) Cross-section of surface potential distribution along blue line ab and cd in (d), and existing relationship among dipole moments, built-in electric field, surface photo voltage and ultimate photocatalytic activities of Bi8(CrO4)O11 and Bi14CrO24 (f) (reprinted with permission from ref. 205, Copyright 2020 Oxford University Press). 
The uneven electron distribution between Bi–O and Cr–O in the defect-induced surface dipoles of Bi8(CrO4)O11 (Fig. 13c) can be rationalized by the higher IEF. Kelvin probe force microscopy was employed to compare the IEF distributions, which revealed that the IEF of Bi8(CrO4)O11 was 8.4 times higher than that of Bi14CrO24 (Fig. 13d and e). The correlation between the dipole moment, IEF, surface photovoltage, and ultimately photocatalytic activity was compared for Bi8(CrO4)O11 and Bi14CrO24 (Fig. 13f). Furthermore, the role of multiple defects in inducing the surface dipoles was elegantly studied for different facets of CaCu3Ti4O12, where the IEF generated by the dipoles promoted charge separation.206 In a similar context, a systematic arrangement of dipoles significantly reduced the bandgap to below 1.23 eV in MoSSe/XN heterostructures owing to electron redistribution near the VBM and CBM.207
4.3. Carrier concentration
In the previous sections, changes in the optical and electronic properties due to defects were comprehensively discussed with numerous examples. However, the influence of these defects on photocurrent generation holds the key to enhancing the quantum yield.5 Sopha et al. explored the relationship between the photocatalytic efficiency and photocurrent for modified TiO2 nanotubes.208 As discussed previously, the number of charge carriers is strongly dependent on the position of the Fermi level. Pan et al. reported an increase in the charge carrier concentration from 1.8 × 1019 (pristine TiO2) to 5.9 × 1019 cm−3 for TiO2 annealed at 800 °C.209 Notably, the latter value is very close to the electron concentration in the conduction band reported for pristine TiO2 (7 × 1020 cm−3).210
Ghimire et al. reported a significant modulation of the photocurrent in MoTe2 upon changing the number of active trap states.211Fig. 14a shows the photocurrent response as functions of the laser light intensity and gate-source voltage (Vgs). The schematic diagram in Fig. 14b depicts the electron and hole trapping process under an applied voltage.212 In Fig. 14c, the closed and open orange circles indicate electron and hole trapping, while the open and closed black circles indicate ionized and neutral trap states, respectively. It can be understood that the filling or vacating of gap states is dependent on the Fermi level, where the closed black and open black circles can be regarded as filled and potential trap states, respectively. The photocurrent decrease with the change in Vgs from 5.5 to −3 V was ascribed to the presence of a greater number of shallow states than deep states owing to the lower formation energy of the former.213,214
 Fig. 14  (a) Vgs-sweep-dependent photocurrent vs. laser power at different conditions under visible-NIR irradiation (λ = 638 nm). (b and c) Schematics diagrams of charge trapping, (e–h) recombination in defect induced energy states (in the forbidden regions) and at different Vgs respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 211, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 
It should be noted that the generated photocurrent is the sum of the numbers of holes and electrons. When the electrons and holes are trapped in the defect states, the photocurrent continuously drops and reaches a minimum value when the Fermi level is close to the recombination center (Fig. 14c). The total drop in photocurrent (Fig. 14a) was ascribed to the faster charge recombination compared to carrier trapping, leading to a drastic reduction in the number of charge carriers.215 When Vgs was further increased to 3 V, the photocurrent reached a new higher value. As all of the states near the VBM were filled, the holes populated in the VB were completely accessible for photocurrent generation (Fig. 14c).
On the other hand, this upward shift of the Fermi level close to the conduction band increased the concentration of electrons owing to the lack of ionized states. Hence, the photocurrent significantly increased with increasing defect concentration. This Fermi level position (close to conduction band) leads to the Moss–Burstein effect in semiconductors and induces a blue shift in the absorption spectrum. Interestingly, numerous reports have indicated a close link between higher photocurrent generation and enhanced charge separation efficiency, as in the above example.216–219 In a similar context, the Fermi level position shifts upward with increasing defect concentration up to a certain optimal point of maximum photocurrent density. However, as the defect concentration increases beyond the optimal value, the Fermi level moves in the opposite direction, thereby hampering photocurrent generation. This behavior is attributed to Fermi-level pinning,186 a situation that is favorable for trap-assisted recombination. Therefore, this is a likely explanation for the numerous reports emphasizing the importance of optimal dopant and defect concentrations for achieving higher photocatalytic yields. Furthermore, the synergistic effect of defects in enhancing light absorption and photocurrent generation has been considered in recent times.220 Therefore, the strategic and systematic exploration of defects may aid in determining the relationship between charge carrier dynamics and photocatalytic behavior.
5. Photocatalytic activity of defective materials
5.1. Overcoming the distribution of defects
The location of defects greatly influences the electron transfer dynamics.221 For instance, surface defects offer advantages in terms of improved charge separation and dissociative adsorption of incoming target molecules. On the other hand, bulk defects act as recombination centers, hence the need for fine-tuning of the surface and bulk defects as discussed in Section 3. Here, a major focus is modulation of the band structure using defects. In contrast to surface defects, the formation of bulk defects is highly dependent on temperature and O2 pressure (during annealing) owing to the higher formation energy of bulk defects in comparison to surface and subsurface defects.222 Fu et al. emphasized the importance of controlling the bulk-to-surface defect ratio for extending the optical absorption from the UV region to the NIR region.223 Zhang et al. examined the difference between bulk and surface defects based on their contributions to modulating the conduction band tail below and above the H+/H2 redox potential, respectively.224 To achieve this, surface and bulk defects were preferentially generated under H2 and N2 atmospheres, respectively. The HER activity of the surface-defect-rich catalyst was found to be higher than that for its bulk-defect-rich counterpart. Nevertheless, as H2 treatment is typically conducted at higher temperatures, the effect of temperature on the defect formation mechanism must also be explored.
It is commonly considered that photoredox reactions occur when electrons and holes reach the surface. However, in the presence of surface or bulk defects, the situation is more complicated. Photogenerated holes that are trapped by bulk defects act as recombination centers for the photoexcited electrons. In contrast, the holes trapped in surface defects not only aid in arresting recombination but also promote photocatalytic reactions by reacting with electron donors.225 Besides charge separation, the higher reduction potential of surface-defect-rich catalysts boosts water-splitting reactions. Chen et al. demonstrated the realization of stepwise carrier transport by appropriate tailoring of the defect locations and thus achieved faster charge carrier transport.226 The process involved two steps, namely, (1) the transfer of charge from bulk to shallow states in the subsurface region, and (2) transport to acceptors on the surface.
A special band alignment acting as a bridge between bulk and surface traps was designed by fine-tuning the defect distribution. Moreover, this defect-engineered TiO2 exhibited an HER activity that was 120 times higher than that of anatase TiO2 under sunlight. This phenomenon of step-by-step transport of charge carriers is shown in Fig. 15a and b. Fig. 15c and d show a performance comparison for the defective and anatase TiO2 specimens, where the former was composed of a crystalline core surrounded by a defective shell. In the defective TiO2 specimen, the oxygen atom concentration decreased with increasing depth, in contrast to the crystalline TiO2 sample, which possessed a constant oxygen atom concentration. Furthermore, electron energy loss spectra revealed a high concentration of Ti3+ ions in the defective TiO2 specimen, and the relatively lower t2g–eg distance in the defect-rich TiO2 was also ascribed to Ti3+ (Fig. 15e). As shown in Fig. 15f, ESR spectra indicated the presence of subsurface Ti3+ ions in the defect-rich TiO2, further confirming the stepwise carrier transport process. Fig. 15g shows a schematic depiction of the modulation of the VBM tail for the defective and anatase TiO2 specimens. As mentioned previously, upward modulation of the VBM tail in defective TiO2 can lead to enhanced light-harvesting capability and bandgap narrowing.156,157 Although numerous reports have indicated that surface defects may afford higher quantum efficiencies, other studies have also found that bulk defects can result in improved charge separation and photocatalytic activity.227,228 However, more commonly, optimizing the ratio of surface and bulk defects leads to enhanced photocatalytic yields.230,231 This conundrum concerning surface versus bulk defects was recently explored for various TiO2 nanoparticle sizes.229 Notably, the photocatalytic activity was improved by bulk defects for particle diameters exceeding 10 nm and by surface defects for particle diameters of less than 10 nm. Furthermore, the aspect ratio of surface-defective nanorods was also reported to exert a remarkable effect on photocatalytic activity owing to greater charge separation for higher aspect ratios.231 Moreover, the increased delocalization of electrons in conjunction with fewer interparticle junctions at higher aspect ratios contributed to the separation of electron–hole pairs.
 Fig. 15  Comparison of photocatalytic activity (a) and charge carrier transfer mechanism (b) among defective TiO2 with defects at the surface, sub-surface, at the surface and sub-surface and reference P25. (c) HR-TEM image comparison between defective and P25, and (d) TOF-SIMS depth profiles depicting the oxygen concentration in P25 and defective TiO2, observing a gradual decrease in O concentration towards the surface as compared to bulk (0–8 nm). (e) EELS spectra indicating oxygen vacancies in the form of Ti3+ ions, followed by a reduction from Ti4+ ascribed to extra electrons at defect sites. (f) ESR spectra depicting the presence of surface and subsurface oxygen vacancies in defect-rich TiO2 (g) Graphical representation of modulation in valence band tail and up-shift of Fermi level due to an increase in density of states (reprinted with permission from ref. 226, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 
5.2. Defects optimality
The preceding discussion conclusively demonstrates the profound impact of defects on photocatalytic behavior. However, at higher concentrations, defects may serve as recombination centers and thus reduce the process yield.78,93 For example, Shi et al. reported that the immobilization of charge carriers due to excessive defect states reduced the photocurrent generation and photocatalytic activity of ZnxCd1−xS.232 Other studies have reported similar findings and attributed these detrimental effects to reduced charge separation and poor current density.233–235 Nonetheless, further research into photocatalytic mechanisms with respect to defect type and density is crucial for obtaining a better understanding. Some previous efforts to narrow the bandgaps of photocatalysts have afforded excessively defective materials with poor crystallinity.236,237 Consequently, these materials are vulnerable to not only thermodynamically favored back reactions but also charge recombination via trap states.18
Wang et al. studied the influence of excess defect density in Ta3N5/KTaO3 and reduced the degree of defect formation by simply exposing the photocatalyst to an ammonia atmosphere, which resulted in the replacement of oxygen vacancies with nitrogen atoms.238 The enhanced charge transport dynamics and water splitting mechanism for the optimally defective catalyst are shown in Fig. 16a and b for the Ta3N5/KTaO3 samples before and after nitridation, respectively. As shown in Fig. 16a, the catalyst with the higher defect density displayed charge entrapment (i) and inadequate energy offsets for promoting the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions (ii). Furthermore, it triggered energetically favored back reactions such as the ORR (iii), which could interfere with water splitting reactions. It should be noted here that, although the ORR is favorable for pollutant degradation, the insufficient reduction potential may lower the driving force and accelerate trap-assisted recombination. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 16b, the engineered catalyst contained fewer bulk trap states owing to its lower defect density (iv), thus favoring charge separation with a minimum energy offset at the junction interface (v). Moreover, the minimal defect concentration also mitigated the thermodynamically favored photocatalytic reactions that are undesirable from a water splitting perspective (vi).
 Fig. 16  Photocatalytic mechanism in catalysts (in the inset): at (a) higher defect density and (b) optimal defect concentration. 
The HER and OER activities of the Ta3N5/KTaO3 samples were evaluated with respect to the nitridation time. The effect of a cocatalyst on the HER was also examined for different nitridation times. The observed decrease in the HER activity after nitridation for 4 h was ascribed to a combination of a sudden increase in the number of trap centers or defects and a larger grain size due to the prolonged exposure to NH3 at high temperatures. A larger grain size may lengthen the migration pathway for photoexcited electrons and holes, thereby increasing their probability of recombination.239,240Table 4 summarizes the detrimental effects of an increased number of trap states on the photocatalytic yield for a variety of defect-rich photocatalyst systems.
Table 4 The negative effect of excess defect density on the photocatalytic activity and their identification using various characterization tools




Photocatalyst
Validation and additional insight
Reduced photocatalytic activity
Reference




Se doped TiO2
Increased PL intensity (trap-assisted recombination)
RhB degradation

247



TiO2 and ZnO
XRD, Raman spectra. Here, PL spectra did not probe the defect concentration due to limitations from penetration depth (as they are bulk defects)
MB degradation

248



ZnO
XPS study; by calculation O/Zn atomic ratios on the surface. The thermal shocks modified the surface properties without affecting structure, phase and morphology of the catalyst
MB degradation

249



TiO2
HAADF-STEM images for crystallinity check. Improved crystallinity enhanced the H2 yield
H2 production from water splitting reaction

250



SrTiO3
XRD, and UV-DRS analysis. The OV concentration was optimized by controlling the Sr/Ti ratio (to 1.1). The photocatalytic activity increased with defect concentration
Photocatalytic oxidation of NOx

251



Al doped ZnO
XRD and PL analysis. Excessive doping of Al increased the defect concentration and reduced the photocatalytic activity
Methylene orange (MO) degradation

252



Cd doped ZnO
PL. Improved recombination attributed to narrowing of space charge layer; as the penetration depth of light into ZnO is higher than width of space charge layer
MB degradation

253



Tb doped TiO2
PL. Increased recombination of electron–hole pair at higher OV concentration attributed to excess Tb doping
MB degradation

254



Er3+ doped TiO2
PL. Excessive Er doping (increased OV) resulted in the degeneracy near the conduction band and caused a blue shift in the absorption spectra. The increased defect density besides affecting electro–hole separation also reduced the charge carrier concentration and decreased the photocatalytic activity
Flowing gas phase VOCs

218



Perovskite SrTiO3
XPS, EPR. OV was instrumental in improving the light absorption properties of catalysts (band edge modulation). Excess defects created higher trap states and resulted in lowering the mobility of free carriers and photocatalytic activity
H2 production from water splitting reaction

255



SnS2/TiO2
PL, EIS. Higher defect concentration (excess Ti3+) increased trap assisted recombination and reduced the density of photocurrent
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO

220



GO doped O rich TiO2
Photocatalytic results. The higher adsorption of water molecules on defect sites were comprehensively studied.256 This selective adsorption of water over CO2 on surface of catalysts greatly hampered the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4. Defects can play a significant role in the selectivity of products
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O

257



Li doped TiO2
EPR, XPS (Ti3+ formation). Excessive Li doping increased the defect density and acted as recombination centers
Photocatalytic degradation of RhB and H2 production

258



Sr2−xNaxNbO4
XPS and Raman spectra
RhB degradation

259





Furthermore, Meng et al. demonstrated the importance of regulating the defect concentration to ensure higher photocatalytic activity for WO3.241 In this case, samples were treated under various methods, such as air cooling (WO3-A), furnace cooling (WO3-F), and water cooling (WO3-W), and compared with an untreated sample (WO3-N). ESR spectra revealed that the WO3-W sample contained the highest concentration of oxygen defects, while the photocatalytic performance decreased in the following order: WO3-A > WO3-F > WO3-W > WO3-N. Furthermore, recombination experiments confirmed better charge separation in WO3-A compared with WO3-W, indicating the dual role played by oxygen vacancies, i.e., donor densities and recombination centers. It was also suggested that oxygen vacancies may serve as donors at optimal defect concentrations but as recombination centers when the defect density is too high. Coleto et al. observed higher PL emission in the NIR region owing to excess defects at the CaO/SrTiO3 interface, which led to an increased bandgap.242 It was also suggested that for highly photoactive materials, absorption bands in the blue, green, and red regions can contribute to improved photocatalytic yields.
Zhao et al. also demonstrated the importance of optimal defect concentration for achieving superior photocatalytic activity by analyzing the incident photon-to-current efficiency for rutile TiO2 nanorods.243 At higher defect densities, it was found that the photoexcited electrons and holes were permanently lost owing to defect-assisted recombination. Similarly, Hui et al. reported the trapping effect of defects at higher concentrations despite a seemingly high charge carrier mobility.244 In addition, the gradual decrease of the conduction band edge observed with increasing vacancy concentration was found to be detrimental for HER activity. It should be noted that, in many cases, the dopant concentration is closely related to the vacancy concentration, as doping induces defects in a sample. Furthermore, numerous reports have demonstrated the necessity of optimal dopant concentration for achieving superior photocatalytic efficiency.245 In conclusion, it has been well documented that introducing the optimal concentration of defects can improve the photocatalytic properties of a catalyst and lead to higher quantum yields.62,63,158,246
5.3. Defect environment and reaction pathways
In perfect materials, the adsorption of organic pollutants is usually favorable on the stable facets of photocatalysts.260 In contrast, defect-rich materials contain lower-coordinated atoms resulting from vacancies and can exhibit higher adsorption energies.261,262 For example, a fivefold-coordinated surface can strongly adsorb water species and promote the formation of ROS in defect-rich photocatalysts.263 The major benefit of such surface reconstruction is the improved electron transfer to the adsorbates, particularly in the presence of an electron cocatalyst.60 However, the most striking aspect is the change in reaction mechanism associated with a decrease in the coordination number of atoms.264 Chen et al. explored the low-coordination environment induced by defects as the best potential alternative for replacing expensive materials in a recent review and readers are encouraged to go through it.265 This strategy can be applied to systems where selectivity is a major concern or where one reaction hinders another. Liu et al. reported mechanistic differences due to defects for CO2 reduction towards the formation of CO266 In the absence of vacancies, the mechanism proceeded via a pathway involving HCO3− to afford two different products. Moreover, in the two branches of this pathway, it was further observed that hydrogenation to CH4 was assisted by surface defects.267 As shown in Fig. 17a, upon iron doping the TiO2 was transformed from octahedral to tetrahedral due to the lower coordination of atoms.152 Notably, this transformation shifted the reaction mechanism from photooxidation to photoreduction.
 Fig. 17  (a) Formation of tetrahedrally coordinated Ti4+ from octahedron coordination due to oxygen vacancy generation in TiO2. (b) Plausibe mechanism depicting selective reduction of NO over Fe–TiO2. (c) Comparison of photocatalytic performance between TiO2 and Fe–TiO2 under UV light irradiation (reprinted with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Favorable adsorption and dissociation (direct) at defect sites. (e) CO2 dissociation through hydrogenation (to COOH). Spheres colored blue-O2 atoms of molecule, red-O atoms of TiO2, black-carbon atoms, grey-Ti atoms (reprinted with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (f) Enhanced water adsorption at a low coordinated Ti–OH sites (highly curved structures of the surface) with simultaneous hole trapping, which is assisted by water (reprinted with permission from ref. 270, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Moreover, the selectivity toward NO was promoted at the expense of NO2 owing to lower adsorption and activation energies in defect-rich TiO2. Oxygen defects can serve as hosts for not only adsorbates but also cocatalyst atoms. The deposition of cocatalysts at defect sites facilitates intimate contact between the two and results in enhanced charge transfer.268Fig. 17b depicts the mechanism of N2 and O2 formation in the perfect and lower-coordinated TiO2 samples under UV light. This reaction proceeded via the following steps: (1) preferential adsorption of oxygen molecules at the catalytic centers, i.e., oxygen vacancies; (2) formation of N2 by reaction with neighboring O–N species; (3) formation of O2 with the release of trapped oxygen from the lattice; and (4) re-oxidation of the newly formed neutral sites to their normal +2 state by photogenerated holes. Fig. 17c shows the corresponding photocatalytic conversion of NO2 to N2 and O2.
Ji and Luo reported a higher rate of hydrogenation at OV sites compared with titanium sites in TiO2.269 Specifically, defects were found to greatly lower the energy barrier for deoxygenation by mediating the direct dissociation of CO2 to CO (Fig. 17d and e). In particular, low-coordinated atoms were more active when situated at edges or corners owing to a higher rate of electron transfer to the adsorbate molecules.271,272 Shirai et al. demonstrated water-assisted hole trapping at the low-coordinated Ti–OH sites of highly curved nanospheres.270 The increase in water adsorption at the defect sites is shown in Fig. 17f and was ascribed to a lower free energy of adsorption.273 Consequently, a stronger attraction toward small adsorbate molecules can be expected.
This superior water adsorption on defect sites is not only applicable to TiO2-based materials. Zhang et al. reported the spontaneous dissociation of water on defect-rich WO3 (oxygen vacancies), whereas molecules adsorbed on crystalline WO3(001) remained unbroken at various coverages.199 Lackner et al. observed the strong adsorption of water at defect sites in ZrO2(111)/Pt3Zr(0001) using STM images and confirmed this finding via DFT calculations.274 In another report, the water dissociation on defective PuO2(111) was ascribed to hybridization of the frontier orbitals of H2O with the electronic states of oxygen vacancies.275 The dissociated H2O subsequently hydrogenated the PuO2(111) by occupying the defect sites, irrespective of water coverage. Furthermore, it was noticed that these vacancies diffused owing to interactions between the oxygen atoms and H2O molecules on the surface. Consequently, the water molecules dissociate into hydroxyl groups with proton transfer to the bridging oxygen atoms. This enhancement in the rate of reaction at defect sites is not only limited to the dissociation of water but also applicable to CO2 reduction,276 as mentioned in the above examples.
The understanding that surfaces with lower-coordinated atoms exhibit higher photocatalytic activity can be attributed to their lower activation energy for reactant molecules at defect sites. On the other hand, single-atom photocatalysts have also shown promising results with respect to lower activation energies and higher photocatalytic reaction rates.277 Accordingly, efforts have been made to reduce the particle size from the nanoscale to single-atom catalysts.278 However, despite the appreciable attention recently devoted to single-atom photocatalysts, their broad application has not yet been realized owing to significant drawbacks.279,280
5.4. Activity of defects in bifunctional photocatalytic systems
The demand for exploiting single-photocatalyst systems to address the environmental and energy crisis has continued to increase.281,282 In bifunctional photocatalytic systems, the internal chemical energy of organic pollutants is transformed into an alternative form of energy, which provides a favorable approach for addressing the problems associated with climate change.283,284 Hence, the influence of defects on the photocatalytic behavior of multiple-photocatalyst systems is worthy of investigation.285 Ye et al. realized concurrent H2 production and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural degradation using sulfur-vacancy-rich ZnxCd1−xS.286 Notably, the photocatalytic activity was ca. 72 and 7.5 times higher than that of ZnS and CdS, respectively. The sulfur vacancies lying in the forbidden gap simultaneously induced an upward shift of the Fermi level and acted as trap centers to increase the charge density and lifetime of the carriers.
Belhadj et al. reported the concurrent photocatalytic HCHO degradation and HER on Pt/TiO2.287 The cocatalysts (Pt) were selectively deposited on the vacant sites to promote charge separation. This preferential placement of platinum on the defect sites was previously reported in numerous studies.152,288,289 The enhanced HER activity was attributed to a higher rate of electron transfer to the platinum on the oxygen vacancies.290,291 It should be noted that the HER and degradation reactions (by ORR) compete with each other for electrons. As shown in Fig. 18a, fewer hydroxyl radicals were observed at the platinum atoms on the defect sites compared to platinum atoms on a normal surface. The higher electronegativity of platinum on the defect sites repelled hydroxyl ions and promoted the reaction rate. An application of this method could be the construction of Z-scheme photocatalysts with an additional cocatalyst. Zou et al. demonstrated the Z-scheme mode of charge transfer with two cocatalysts BiVO4 and platinum on S-vacancy-rich CdS292 Owing to the greater ionic radius of Cd2+ (153 pm) compared with Bi+3 (117 ppm), the penetration of the latter into the lattice of the former is more favorable. This replacement introduces sulfur vacancies that the platinum cocatalyst can stably occupy, thereby accounting for the improved H2 production and ORR activity (Fig. 18b).
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic demonstration of differences in interface properties defect sites (oxygen vacancy) and the normal surface owing to Pt loading. This modification enhances the rate of oxygen reduction reaction due to efficient electron transfer to Pt at defect sites (reprinted with permission from ref. 290, Copyright 2017 Nature). (b) Schematic diagrams of photocatalytic degradation of organic dye and photocatalytic hydrogen production on CdS/BiVO4via Z-scheme mode of charge transfer. (c) Comparative EIS Nyquist plots of photocatalysts to validate Z-scheme and extent of charge separation in composite photocatalyst i.e., CdS/BiVO4 composites (reprinted with permission from ref. 292, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 

Fig. 18(c) depicts the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) plot for the catalysts, where the enhancement in charge separation was observed after the cocatalysts (BiVO4 and Pt) were deposited on vacancy rich CdS. Furthermore, the introduction of noble metals such as platinum to induce cation vacancies and give rise to weakly bonded oxygen atoms is another potential solution for achieving higher quantum efficiencies.293,294 To date, no reports examining the role of these additional defects induced by noble metal doping have appeared to the best of our knowledge. Table 5 summarizes the recent studies concerning bifunctional photocatalysis using defective materials. This comparison allows us to evaluate the potential of photocatalysis for addressing the environmental and energy crises. It should be noted that H2 production activity associated with the elimination of organic compounds and the role of the latter in reducing HER activity are not discussed here.
Table 5 A brief history of defects in dual-functional photocatalytic systems




Photocatalysts
Type of vacancy
Photocatalytic H2 generation accompanied by degradation of pollutant
Activity
References




Pt/TiO2
O vacancy
Oxalic acid
HER, 2850 μmol h−1 g−1

295



Cr2O3/Rh/SrTiO3
O vacancy
4-Chlorophenol
HER, 800 μmol h−1 g−1

296



Ag/Co3O4/CuO
O vacancy
RhB
HER, 97.2 μmol h−1 g−1

282



MoS2 QDs@ZnIn2S4@RGO
S vacancy
RhB
HER, 37.8 μmol h−1 g−1

297



Carbon-doped TiO2
O vacancy
Lactic acid
HER, 373.8 μmol h−1 g−1

298



Pt/STO:Rh
O vacancy
Phenol
HER, 1.9 μmol h−1 g−1

283



Ni/CdS
S vacancy
Furfural alcohol
HER, 56.25 mL h−1 g−1

299



CdS/CdOx
O vacancy
Polylactic acid
HER, 64.3 mL h−1 g−1

300



rGO/PbTiO3
O vacancy
RhB
HER, 12 μmol h−1 g−1

301



Au/TiO2
O vacancy
Juice production waste waters (saccharides)
HER, 115 μmol h−1 g−1

302



Black TiO2
O vacancy
MB degradation
2.3 times higher than pristine TiO2

303



Pt/GO/TiO2–P
O vacancy
4-Chlorophenol
HER, 10 μmol h−1 g−1

304



Pt/CdS/TiO2
S and O vacancy
Simultaneous degradation of organic and inorganic compounds
HER, 55 μmol h−1 g−1

305



MoS2/NiFe LDH
S vacancy
RhB
HER, 552 μmol h−1 g−1

306



SrTiO3/(Ag/Fe3O4)/g-C3N4 (SFC)
O vacancy
Levofloxacin
HER, 4200 μmol h−1 g−1

307





6. Future potential of replacing conventional technologies by defect engineering
Alcohols such as CH3OH and C2H5OH hold great potential for H2 storage as they exist in the liquid phase at room temperature and can be easily obtained from biomass. The major constraint in conventional processes for H2 production is the high energy requirement.308,309 This section focuses on recent efforts to reduce the high energy barrier by strategic defect engineering of photocatalyst materials. In this regard, the H2 production temperature was greatly lowered using Pt/MoC photocatalysts in a recent study.310 However, the limitations of this method include a low theoretical maximum H2 yield (for one photon; i.e., 0.5)311,312 due to the different time scale of events (from light absorption to production formation) in the overall photocatalytic process. Zhou et al. reported the achievement of photoreduction and photooxidation in close proximity by deliberately introducing defects at the Pt/TiO2 interface via the photodeposition method (Fig. 19a).313 In addition to improving stability, this unique metal/oxide interface decreased the blocking of the active sites on platinum by CO.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of photo-generated charge trapping at oxygen vacancy sites with OV acting as a bridge between Pt and TiO2 interface. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism involving exclusive “interface” provoked photocatalytic cycle.313 (c) Schematics of higher rate of charge transfer and reactions (electron–hole pair) following the deposition of Rh at defect sites. Photo-reduction at Rh; and photo-oxidation at O2−. 
In this system, the photoredox reactions occurred in close proximity, thus increasing the H2 per photon yield to 1.28 (from 0.5). Shusaku et al. studied methane reforming using a defect-rich Rh/STO photocatalyst that afforded a lower energy barrier, where the lattice oxygen mediated the reaction (Fig. 19b).314 The presence of rhodium on the STO resulted in the simultaneous creation and stabilization of oxygen vacancies.315 As discussed previously, the close proximity associated with rhodium deposition on oxygen defects facilitated improved electron transfer to CO2 to form O2− (ref. 316) and CO as products (Fig. 19c). Meanwhile, the holes trapped at the metal/oxide interface reacted with CH4 and O2− from the previous reaction to form two moles of H2 and one mole of CO.
7. Summary and outlook
The numerous roles of defects in photocatalytic degradation, H2 production, and various other applications have been discussed with a focus on the latest progress in the field. The novel properties displayed by cation and anion vacancies, or combinations of the two, have been systematically reviewed to unveil their unique roles that change the dynamics of existing photocatalytic theory. Advanced characterization techniques coupled with DFT have helped to provide a more comprehensive insight for determining the physical, chemical, and structural changes. Defects introduce new energy levels into the forbidden gap and contribute to modulating the band structure. These modifications were demonstrated in terms of changes in the work function values, surface dipoles, charge density, and surface chemistry of defective photocatalysts. The necessity of achieving an optimal defect concentration must also be acknowledged to avoid triggering undesired thermodynamically favored photocatalytic reactions. The ability of defects to serve as hosts for noble metal atoms and consequently improve concurrent photocatalytic degradation and hydrogen production in an efficient Z-scheme approach has also been briefly discussed. Despite these great efforts reported in the literature, the relationship between defects and photocatalysis has yet to be comprehensively resolved. Meanwhile, the ongoing development of efficient photocatalysts is crucial. With respect to future challenges, systematic investigations into the identity and distribution of defects before and after photocatalytic reactions may help to consolidate the various theories regarding the roles of vacancies. Moreover, there have been hardly any reports examining the in situ species that could serve as the real active sites.
Another important aspect is the stability of defects under light illumination and after photocatalytic reactions. The adsorption of species on defect sites reduces the defect concentration after every recycling step. Therefore, efforts should be made to address the stabilization of defects. First, a comprehensive examination of the relationship between defects and photocatalytic activity based on both experimental and theoretical results is urgently needed. However, at the outset, the controlled synthesis of vacancy-rich catalysts that ensures both activity and stability must be achieved. Next, advanced characterization techniques that meet the above requirements must be developed to verify synthetic strategies and stability during photocatalytic reactions. Third, exploring the synergy of defect-rich photocatalysts and cocatalysts to form Z-scheme systems that not only facilitate the spatial separation of charge carriers but also enhance the driving force for photocatalytic reactions by increasing the redox potentials would be of great value.
For instance, consider the case of photocatalytic CO2 reduction in aqueous solutions. Owing to the low solubility of CO2 in H2O, the activation of the former is more difficult than the latter. Moreover, because of the multi-electron nature of the steps involved in CO2 reduction, the selectivity toward various products is hindered by the combined effects of a low charge carrier lifetime and competition for electrons from protons. However, it should also be noted that CO2 reduction in aqueous medium displays higher selectivity and yields compared to that in gaseous environments.317 This is because water both acts as an electron donor and transfers protons to CO2 species. Developing defect-rich composite photocatalysts may be useful for improving the photocatalytic yields. In this regard, the selection of cocatalysts is also important, as selectivity greatly depends on the type of catalyst and its redox potential. Some cocatalysts that display different selectivities when doped to host catalysts are listed below:318
(i) Formate: Pb, Hg, Sn, Bi
(ii) CO: Au, Ag, Pd, Zn
(iii) H2: Ti, Ni, Fe, Pt.
In one study, defect-rich Pt/Cu2O displayed improved selectivity toward CO alongside reduced HER activity.319 In a similar context, the selectivity of Pt/TiO2 was switched from CO to CH4 while maintaining high HER rates due to oxygen defects.320 Notably, these differences in activities were attributed to the binding affinities of the intermediates and CO2 on different defective materials. This highlights the need to evaluate the synergy of defect and cocatalyst combinations. In addition, mechanistic studies are crucial for improving the selectivity toward reaction intermediates. Following on from this, the Fermi levels of the cocatalysts should also be considered, as these dictate the photocurrent density and conductivity. Therefore, it is important to tune the work function values by defect engineering.321 In this regard, the work function of the cocatalyst must be higher than that of the base catalyst to achieve electron transfer from the former to the latter. Finally, selectively depositing the cocatalysts on defect sites can assist in achieving higher electron transfer between the two owing to the intimate contact. Improving the surface contact and bonding strength between the cocatalyst and host and the use of interfacial mediators are some possible strategies for enhancing these interactions.322
The combination of careful cocatalyst design, judicious defect engineering, and advanced in situ characterization techniques is anticipated to afford modern photocatalysts for a broad range of energy and environmental applications. Moreover, future discoveries concerning defects are expected to reveal new photocatalytic mechanisms, some of which may significantly reduce the energy barriers for certain high-thermal-energy processes. In conclusion, it is hoped that additional innovative works relating to the design of defective photocatalysts will appear in the future and contribute to the ongoing development of photocatalytic technology.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Director of BITS-Pilani, K. K. Birla Goa Campus, for support in using the institutional infrastructure during the preparation of this paper. We also express our sincere gratitude toward SERB-DST (EMR/2016/003370), the Government of India, for funding our work. We also like to thanks Charlesworth Author Services of RAC for editing the language in the manuscript.
References
D. Spasiano, R. Marotta, S. Malato, P. Fernandez-Ibañez and I. Di Somma, Solar Photocatalysis: Materials, Reactors, Some Commercial, and Pre-Industrialized Applications. A Comprehensive Approach, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170–171, 90–123,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2014.12.050 .
Y. C. Zhang, N. Afzal, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Structure-Activity Relationship of Defective Metal-Based Photocatalysts for Water Splitting: Experimental and Theoretical Perspectives, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6(10), 1900053,  DOI:10.1002/advs.201900053 .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Heterojunction Photocatalysts, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(20), 1–20,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201601694 .
K. Takanabe, Solar Water Splitting Using Semiconductor Photocatalyst Powders, Top. Curr. Chem., 2015, 73–103,  DOI:10.1007/128 .
K. Takanabe, Photocatalytic Water Splitting: Quantitative Approaches toward Photocatalyst by Design, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(11), 8006–8022,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.7b02662 .
C. Xu, P. Ravi Anusuyadevi, C. Aymonier, R. Luque and S. Marre, Nanostructured Materials for Photocatalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48(14), 3868–3902,  10.1039/c9cs00102f .
H. J. Lee, A. C. Jamison and T. R. Lee, Surface Dipoles: A Growing Body of Evidence Supports Their Impact and Importance, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48(12), 3007–3015,  DOI:10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00307 .
P. Bampoulis, R. Van Bremen, Q. Yao, B. Poelsema, H. J. W. Zandvliet and K. Sotthewes, Defect Dominated Charge Transport and Fermi Level Pinning in MoS2/Metal Contacts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(22), 19278–19286,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b02739 .
D. N. Pei, L. Gong, A. Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. J. Chen, Y. Mu and H. Q. Yu, Defective Titanium Dioxide Single Crystals Exposed by High-Energy {001} Facets for Efficient Oxygen Reduction, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–10,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms9696 .
A. Naldoni, M. Allieta, S. Santangelo, M. Marelli, F. Fabbri, S. Cappelli, C. L. Bianchi, R. Psaro and V. Dal Santo, Effect of Nature and Location of Defects on Bandgap Narrowing in Black TiO 2 Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(18), 7600–7603,  DOI:10.1021/ja3012676 .
C. S. Fuller, The Chemistry of Imperfect Crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1964, 86(20), 4514–4515 CrossRef .
M. Kong, Y. Li, X. Chen, T. Tian, P. Fang, F. Zheng and X. Zhao, Tuning the Relative Concentration Ratio of Bulk Defects to Surface Defects in TiO2 Nanocrystals Leads to High Photocatalytic Efficiency, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(41), 16414–16417,  DOI:10.1021/ja207826q .
M. Lau, S. Reichenberger, I. Haxhiaj, S. Barcikowski and A. M. Müller, Mechanism of Laser-Induced Bulk and Surface Defect Generation in ZnO and TiO 2 Nanoparticles: Effect on Photoelectrochemical Performance, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(10), 5366–5385,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.8b00977 .
B. Fu, W. Wu, L. Gan and Z. Zhang, Bulk/Surface Defects Engineered TiO2 Nanotube Photonic Crystals Coupled with Plasmonic Gold Nanoparticles for Effective in Vivo Near-Infrared Light Photoelectrochemical Detection, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 14611–14617,  DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03733 .
G. Ahmed, F. Raziq, M. Hanif, J. Khan, K. S. Munawar, M. Wu, X. Cao and Z. Liu, Oxygen-Cluster-Modified Anatase with Graphene Leads to Efficient and Recyclable Photo-Catalytic Conversion of CO2 to CH4 Supported by the Positron Annihilation Study, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 1–8,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-019-49694-w .
K. Appavoo, M. Liu, C. T. Black and M. Y. Sfeir, Quantifying Bulk and Surface Recombination Processes in Nanostructured Water Splitting Photocatalysts via in Situ Ultrafast Spectroscopy, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(2), 1076–1082,  DOI:10.1021/nl504035j .
M. Giesen, An Atomistic View on Fundamental Transport Processes on Metal Surfaces, AIP Conf. Proc., 2007, 916, 115–135,  DOI:10.1063/1.2751912 .
T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Reaction Systems for Solar Hydrogen Production via Water Splitting with Particulate Semiconductor Photocatalysts, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2(5), 387–399,  DOI:10.1038/s41929-019-0242-6 .
B. Mei, K. Han and G. Mul, Driving Surface Redox Reactions in Heterogeneous Photocatalysis: The Active State of Illuminated Semiconductor-Supported Nanoparticles during Overall Water-Splitting, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(10), 9154–9164,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b02215 .
S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, J. Zhang, B. Ding, C. K. Chen, C. J. Chen, R. S. Liu, A. D. Bristow, J. Bright, P. Zheng and N. Wu, Effects of Defects on Photocatalytic Activity of Hydrogen-Treated Titanium Oxide Nanobelts, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(3), 1742–1748,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.6b02177 .
J. Xiong, J. Di, J. Xia, W. Zhu and H. Li, Surface Defect Engineering in 2D Nanomaterials for Photocatalysis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(39), 1–19,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201801983 .
J. Nowotny, M. A. Alim, T. Bak, M. A. Idris, M. Ionescu, K. Prince, M. Z. Sahdan, K. Sopian, M. A. Mat Teridi and W. Sigmund, Defect Chemistry and Defect Engineering of TiO2-Based Semiconductors for Solar Energy Conversion, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(23), 8424–8442,  10.1039/c4cs00469h .
O. Gershevitz, C. N. Sukenik, J. Ghabboun and D. Cahen, Molecular Monolayer-Mediated Control over Semiconductor Surfaces: Evidence for Molecular Depolarization of Silane Monolayers on Si/SiOx, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125(16), 4730–4731,  DOI:10.1021/ja029529h .
P. Niu, M. Qiao, Y. Li, L. Huang and T. Zhai, Distinctive Defects Engineering in Graphitic Carbon Nitride for Greatly Extended Visible Light Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 73–81,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.11.059 .
L. B. Hoch, P. Szymanski, K. K. Ghuman, L. Hea, K. Liao, Q. Qiao, L. M. Reyes, Y. Zhu, M. A. El-Sayed, C. V. Singh and G. A. Ozin, Carrier Dynamics and the Role of Surface Defects: Designing a Photocatalyst for Gas-Phase CO2 Reduction, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113(50), E8011–E8020,  DOI:10.1073/pnas.1609374113 .
W. Cen, T. Xiong, C. Tang, S. Yuan and F. Dong, Effects of Morphology and Crystallinity on the Photocatalytic Activity of (BiO)2CO3 Nano/Microstructures, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53(39), 15002–15011,  DOI:10.1021/ie502670n .
F. Chen, H. Huang, L. Guo, Y. Zhang and T. Ma, The Role of Polarization in Photocatalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(30), 10061–10073,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201901361 .
H. Li, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu, Ferroelectric-Enhanced Z-Schematic Electron Transfer in BiVO4-BiFeO3-CuInS2 for Efficient Photocatalytic Pollutant Degradation, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 591–599,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.03.043 .
W. Li, F. Wang, M. Li, X. Chen, Z. Ren, H. Tian, X. Li, Y. Lu and G. Han, Polarization-Dependent Epitaxial Growth and Photocatalytic Performance of Ferroelectric Oxide Heterostructures, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 304–310,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.01.002 .
Y. Yu, W. Yan, X. Wang, P. Li, W. Gao, H. Zou, S. Wu and K. Ding, Surface Engineering for Extremely Enhanced Charge Separation and Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution on G-C 3 N 4, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(9), 1–8,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201705060 .
J. Li, X. Zhang, F. Raziq, J. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Sun, R. Yan, B. Qu, C. Qin and L. Jing, Improved Photocatalytic Activities of G-C3N4 Nanosheets by Effectively Trapping Holes with Halogen-Induced Surface Polarization and 2,4-Dichlorophenol Decomposition Mechanism, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 60–67,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.06.038 .
L. Yu and A. Zunger, A Polarity-Induced Defect Mechanism for Conductivity and Magnetism at Polar-Nonpolar Oxide Interfaces, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–9,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms6118 .
S. Selcuk, X. Zhao and A. Selloni, Structural Evolution of Titanium Dioxide during Reduction in High-Pressure Hydrogen, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17(10), 923–928,  DOI:10.1038/s41563-018-0135-0 .
K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Composition, Structure, and Stability of (Formula Presented) as a Function of Oxygen Pressure, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65(3), 1–11,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.65.035406 .
R. Radha, Y. R. Kumar, M. Sakar, K. R. Vinod and S. Balakumar, Understanding the Lattice Composition Directed in Situ Structural Disorder for Enhanced Visible Light Photocatalytic Activity in Bismuth Iron Niobate Pyrochlore, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 386–396,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.12.004 .
S. Wang, L. Pan, J. J. Song, W. Mi, J. J. Zou, L. Wang and X. Zhang, Titanium-Defected Undoped Anatase TiO2 with p-Type Conductivity, Room-Temperature Ferromagnetism, and Remarkable Photocatalytic Performance, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(8), 2975–2983,  DOI:10.1021/ja512047k .
J. Li, X. Wu, W. Pan, G. Zhang and H. Chen, Vacancy-Rich Monolayer BiO2−x as a Highly Efficient UV, Visible, and Near-Infrared Responsive Photocatalyst, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(2), 491–495,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201708709 .
M. Park, J. H. Seo, H. Song and K. M. Nam, Enhanced Visible Light Activity of Single-Crystalline WO3 Microplates for Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(17), 9192–9199,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b00389 .
D. Chen, Z. Wang, T. Ren, H. Ding, W. Yao, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, Influence of Defects on the Photocatalytic Activity of ZnO, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(28), 15300–15307,  DOI:10.1021/jp5033349 .
R. A. C. Amoresi, R. C. Oliveira, N. L. Marana, P. B. De Almeida, P. S. Prata, M. A. Zaghete, E. Longo, J. R. Sambrano and A. Z. Simões, CeO2 Nanoparticle Morphologies and Their Corresponding Crystalline Planes for the Photocatalytic Degradation of Organic Pollutants, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(10), 6513–6526,  DOI:10.1021/acsanm.9b01452 .
S. Bai, N. Zhang, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Defect Engineering in Photocatalytic Materials, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 296–336,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.08.058 .
J. Zhang, Y. Wu, M. Xing, S. A. K. Leghari and S. Sajjad, Development of Modified N Doped TiO2 Photocatalyst with Metals, Nonmetals and Metal Oxides, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3(6), 715,  10.1039/b927575d .
M. Long and L. Zheng, Engineering Vacancies for Solar Photocatalytic Applications, Chinese Journal of Catalysis, 2017, 38(4), 617–624,  DOI:10.1016/S1872-2067(17)62821-3 .
S. George, S. Pokhrel, Z. Ji, B. L. Henderson, T. Xia, L. Li, J. I. Zink, A. E. Nel and L. Mädler, Role of Fe Doping in Tuning the Band Gap of TiO2 for the Photo-Oxidation-Induced Cytotoxicity Paradigm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(29), 11270–11278,  DOI:10.1021/ja202836s .
M. Xu, P. Da, H. Wu, D. Zhao and G. Zheng, Controlled Sn-Doping in TiO2 Nanowire Photoanodes with Enhanced Photoelectrochemical Conversion, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(3), 1503–1508,  DOI:10.1021/nl2042968 .
X. Chen and C. Burda, The Electronic Origin of the Visible-Light Absorption Properties of C-, N- and S-Doped TiO2 Nanomaterials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(15), 5018–5019,  DOI:10.1021/ja711023z .
S. In, A. Orlov, R. Berg, F. García, S. Pedrosa-Jimenez, M. S. Tikhov, D. S. Wright and R. M. Lambert, Effective Visible Light-Activated B-Doped and B,N-Codoped TiO2 Photocatalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(45), 13790–13791,  DOI:10.1021/ja0749237 .
H. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Huo and J. Zhu, Supercritical Preparation of a Highly Active S-Doped TiO2 Photocatalyst for Methylene Blue Mineralization, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(12), 4410–4414,  DOI:10.1021/es062680x .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Understanding TiO2photocatalysis: Mechanisms and Materials, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(19), 9919–9986,  DOI:10.1021/cr5001892 .
N. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ye, S. Chen, H. Ju, D. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Ye, C. Wang, Q. Xu, J. Zhu, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Oxide Defect Engineering Enables to Couple Solar Energy into Oxygen Activation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(28), 8928–8935,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.6b04629 .
S. I. Cha, K. H. Hwang, Y. H. Kim, M. J. Yun, S. H. Seo, Y. J. Shin, J. H. Moon and D. Y. Lee, Crystal Splitting and Enhanced Photocatalytic Behavior of TiO2 Rutile Nano-Belts Induced by Dislocations, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(2), 753–758,  10.1039/c2nr33028h .
R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Formation of Rutile Nuclei at Anatase {112} Twin Interfaces and the Phase Transformation Mechanism in Nanocrystalline Titania, Am. Mineral., 1999, 84(5–6), 871–876,  DOI:10.2138/am-1999-5-621 .
W. Feng, Z. Fang, B. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. Huang, S. Weng and P. Liu, Grain Boundary Engineering in Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Semiconductor ZnS(En)0.5 for Visible-Light Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(4), 1387–1393,  10.1039/c6ta09633f .
X. Chen, L. Liu, Z. Liu, M. A. Marcus, W. C. Wang, N. A. Oyler, M. E. Grass, B. Mao, P. A. Glans, P. Y. Yu, J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Properties of Disorder-Engineered Black Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles through Hydrogenation, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–7,  DOI:10.1038/srep01510 .
A. Folger, P. Ebbinghaus, A. Erbe and C. Scheu, Role of Vacancy Condensation in the Formation of Voids in Rutile TiO2 Nanowires, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(15), 13471–13479,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b01160 .
Y. Yang, L. C. Yin, Y. Gong, P. Niu, J. Q. Wang, L. Gu, X. Chen, G. Liu, L. Wang and H. M. Cheng, An Unusual Strong Visible-Light Absorption Band in Red Anatase TiO2 Photocatalyst Induced by Atomic Hydrogen-Occupied Oxygen Vacancies, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(6), 1–8,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201704479 .
J. Song, Z. F. Huang, L. Pan, J. J. Zou, X. Zhang and L. Wang, Oxygen-Deficient Tungsten Oxide as Versatile and Efficient Hydrogenation Catalyst, ACS Catal., 2015, 5(11), 6594–6599,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.5b01522 .
J. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Oxygen Vacancy Induced Band-Gap Narrowing and Enhanced Visible Light Photocatalytic Activity of ZnO, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4(8), 4024–4030,  DOI:10.1021/am300835p .
X. Zhang and L. Zhang, Electronic and Band Structure Tuning of Ternary Semiconductor Photocatalysts by Self Doping: The Case of BiOI, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(42), 18198–18206,  DOI:10.1021/jp105118m .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, X. Wang, L. Cheng, H. Lu, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Enhanced Photoactivity of Oxygen-Deficient Anatase TiO2 Sheets with Dominant {001} Facets, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(52), 21784–21788,  DOI:10.1021/jp907749r .
L. Li, J. Yan, T. Wang, Z. J. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Gong and N. Guan, Sub-10 Nm Rutile Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles for Efficient Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 1–10,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms6881 .
D. Maarisetty and S. S. Baral, Defect-Induced Enhanced Dissociative Adsorption, Optoelectronic Properties and Interfacial Contact in Ce Doped TiO2: Solar Photocatalytic Degradation of Rhodamine B, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(17), 22253–22263,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.07.251 .
D. Maarisetty and S. S. Baral, Synergistic Effect of Dual Electron-Cocatalyst Modified Photocatalyst and Methodical Strategy for Better Charge Separation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 930–942,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.06.029 .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Xie, S. Feng, D. Liu, M. Shao and S. Wang, Layered Double Hydroxide Nanosheets with Multiple Vacancies Obtained by Dry Exfoliation as Highly Efficient Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(21), 5867–5871,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201701477 .
J. Du, C. Li, X. Wang, X. Shi and H. P. Liang, Electrochemical Synthesis of Cation Vacancy-Enriched Ultrathin Bimetallic Oxyhydroxide Nanoplatelets for Enhanced Water Oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(29), 25958–25966,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b07164 .
R. Zhang, Y. C. Zhang, L. Pan, G. Q. Shen, N. Mahmood, Y. H. Ma, Y. Shi, W. Jia, L. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Xu and J. J. Zou, Engineering Cobalt Defects in Cobalt Oxide for Highly Efficient Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(5), 3803–3811,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b01046 .
X. Fu, X. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, D. Y. C. Leung, L. Wu and X. Fu, Photocatalytic Performance of Tetragonal and Cubic β-In2S3 for the Water Splitting under Visible Light Irradiation, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95(3–4), 393–399,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2010.01.018 .
Y. Zhao, X. Jia, G. Chen, L. Shang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. Ohare and T. Zhang, Ultrafine NiO Nanosheets Stabilized by TiO2 from Monolayer NiTi-LDH Precursors: An Active Water Oxidation Electrocatalyst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(20), 6517–6524,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.6b01606 .
K. Li, R. Zhang, R. Gao, G. Q. Shen, L. Pan, Y. Yao, K. Yu, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Metal-Defected Spinel MnxCo3-XO4 with Octahedral Mn-Enriched Surface for Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 536–545,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.11.072 .
L. Pan, S. Wang, W. Mi, J. Song, J. J. Zou, L. Wang and X. Zhang, Undoped ZnO Abundant with Metal Vacancies, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 71–79,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2014.06.029 .
C. Wei, Z. Feng, G. G. Scherer, J. Barber, Y. Shao-Horn and Z. J. Xu, Cations in Octahedral Sites: A Descriptor for Oxygen Electrocatalysis on Transition-Metal Spinels, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(23), 1–8,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201606800 .
J. Xiao, Q. Kuang, S. Yang, F. Xiao, S. Wang and L. Guo, Surface Structure Dependent Electrocatalytic Activity of Co 3O4 Anchored on Graphene Sheets toward Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–8,  DOI:10.1038/srep02300 .
Q. Tang, L. Jiang, J. Liu, S. Wang and G. Sun, Effect of Surface Manganese Valence of Manganese Oxides on the Activity of the Oxygen Reduction Reaction in Alkaline Media, ACS Catal., 2014, 4(2), 457–463,  DOI:10.1021/cs400938s .
Y. Zhou, S. Sun, S. Xi, Y. Duan, T. Sritharan, Y. Du and Z. J. Xu, Superexchange Effects on Oxygen Reduction Activity of Edge-Sharing [CoxMn1−xO6] Octahedra in Spinel Oxide, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(11), 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201705407 .
K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, B. Han and Y. Shao-Horn, Recent Insights into Manganese Oxides in Catalyzing Oxygen Reduction Kinetics, ACS Catal., 2015, 5(10), 6021–6031,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.5b01444 .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Metal-Air Batteries: From Oxygen Reduction Electrochemistry to Cathode Catalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41(6), 2172–2192,  DOI:
 .
F. Cheng, J. Shen, B. Peng, Y. Pan, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Rapid Room-Temperature Synthesis of Nanocrystalline Spinels as Oxygen Reduction and Evolution Electrocatalysts, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3(1), 79–84,  DOI:10.1038/nchem.931 .
J. Liu, Z. Wei and W. Shangguan, Defects Engineering in Photocatalytic Water Splitting Materials, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11(24), 6177–6189,  DOI:10.1002/cctc.201901579 .
Y. Bai, Y. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, F. Wang, C. Chen, C. Li, R. Li and C. Li, Homophase Junction for Promoting Spatial Charge Separation in Photocatalytic Water Splitting, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(4), 3242–3252,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b05050 .
L. Guo, Z. Yang, K. Marcus, Z. Li, B. Luo, L. Zhou, X. Wang, Y. Du and Y. Yang, MoS2/TiO2 Heterostructures as Nonmetal Plasmonic Photocatalysts for Highly Efficient Hydrogen Evolution, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(1), 106–114,  10.1039/c7ee02464a .
K. Ogawa, A. Nakada, H. Suzuki, O. Tomita, M. Higashi, A. Saeki, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, Flux Synthesis of Layered Oxyhalide Bi 4 NbO 8 Cl Photocatalyst for Efficient Z-Scheme Water Splitting under Visible Light, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(6), 5642–5650,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b06411 .
Y. Wang, G. Zhu, W. Cai, X. Gao, Y. Yang, J. Yuan, Z. Shi and H. Zhu, On-Chip Photonic System Using Suspended p–n Junction InGaN/GaN Multiple Quantum Wells Device and Multiple Waveguides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108(16), 162102,  DOI:10.1063/1.4947280 .
K. H. Reddy, K. Parida and P. K. Satapathy, CuO/PbTiO3: A New-Fangled p–n Junction Designed for the Efficient Absorption of Visible Light with Augmented Interfacial Charge Transfer, Photoelectrochemical and Photocatalytic Activities, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(38), 20359–20373,  10.1039/c7ta05206e .
S. M. Wu, X. L. Liu, X. L. Lian, G. Tian, C. Janiak, Y. X. Zhang, Y. Lu, H. Z. Yu, J. Hu, H. Wei, H. Zhao, G. G. Chang, G. Van Tendeloo, L. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang and B. L. Su, Homojunction of Oxygen and Titanium Vacancies and Its Interfacial n–p Effect, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(32), 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201802173 .
S. Wang, C. Y. Huang, L. Pan, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, Fazal-e-Aleem and J.-J. Zou, Controllable Fabrication of Homogeneous ZnO P-n Junction with Enhanced Charge Separation for Efficient Photocatalysis, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 151–159,  DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2018.10.059 .
L. Meng, D. Rao, W. Tian, F. Cao, X. Yan and L. Li, Simultaneous Manipulation of O-Doping and Metal Vacancy in Atomically Thin Zn 10 In 16 S 34 Nanosheet Arrays toward Improved Photoelectrochemical Performance, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130(51), 17124–17129,  DOI:10.1002/ange.201811632 .
G. Huang, Z. Xiao, R. Chen and S. Wang, Defect Engineering of Cobalt-Based Materials for Electrocatalytic Water Splitting, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(12), 15954–15969,  DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b04397 .
Q. Xie, Z. Cai, P. Li, D. Zhou, Y. Bi, X. Xiong, E. Hu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Layered Double Hydroxides with Atomic-Scale Defects for Superior Electrocatalysis, Nano Res., 2018, 11(9), 4524–4534,  DOI:10.1007/s12274-018-2033-9 .
Y. Wang, T. Zhou, K. Jiang, P. Da, Z. Peng, J. Tang, B. Kong, W. B. Cai, Z. Yang and G. Zheng, Reduced Mesoporous Co 3 O 4 Nanowires as Efficient Water Oxidation Electrocatalysts and Supercapacitor Electrodes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(16), 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201400696 .
X. Han, J. Huang, X. Jing, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, P. Li and Y. Chen, Oxygen-Deficient Black Titania for Synergistic/Enhanced Sonodynamic and Photoinduced Cancer Therapy at Near Infrared-II Biowindow, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(5), 4545–4555,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.8b00899 .
J. Wang, Y. Xia, H. Zhao, G. Wang, L. Xiang, J. Xu and S. Komarneni, Oxygen Defects-Mediated Z-Scheme Charge Separation in g-C 3 N 4/ZnO Photocatalysts for Enhanced Visible-Light Degradation of 4-Chlorophenol and Hydrogen Evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 406–416,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.01.067 .
J. Fang, H. Fan, Y. Ma, Z. Wang and Q. Chang, Surface Defects Control for ZnO Nanorods Synthesized by Quenching and Their Anti-Recombination in Photocatalysis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 332, 47–54,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.01.139 .
Z. Zhao, H. Tan, H. Zhao, Y. Lv, L. J. Zhou, Y. Song and Z. Sun, Reduced TiO2 Rutile Nanorods with Well-Defined Facets and Their Visible-Light Photocatalytic Activity, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(21), 2755–2757,  10.1039/c3cc49182j .
H. Razavi-Khosroshahi, K. Edalati, J. Wu, Y. Nakashima, M. Arita, Y. Ikoma, M. Sadakiyo, Y. Inagaki, A. Staykov, M. Yamauchi, Z. Horita and M. Fuji, High-Pressure Zinc Oxide Phase as Visible-Light-Active Photocatalyst with Narrow Band Gap, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(38), 20298–20303,  10.1039/c7ta05262f .
H. Liu, F. Zeng, Y. Lin, G. Wang and F. Pan, Correlation of Oxygen Vacancy Variations to Band Gap Changes in Epitaxial ZnO Thin
Films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102(18), 181908,  DOI:10.1063/1.4804613 .
A. Asok, M. N. Gandhi and A. R. Kulkarni, Enhanced Visible Photoluminescence in ZnO Quantum Dots by Promotion of Oxygen Vacancy Formation, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(16), 4943–4946,  10.1039/c2nr31044a .
K. Edalati, M. Arimura, Y. Ikoma, T. Daio, M. Miyata, D. J. Smith and Z. Horita, Plastic Deformation of BaTiO 3 Ceramics by High-Pressure Torsion and Changes in Phase Transformations,Optical and Dielectric Properties, Mater. Res. Lett., 2015, 3(4), 216–221,  DOI:10.1080/21663831.2015.1065454 .
B. Oberdorfer, E. M. Steyskal, W. Sprengel, W. Puff, P. Pikart, C. Hugenschmidt, M. Zehetbauer, R. Pippan and R. Würschum, In Situ Probing of Fast Defect Annealing in Cu and Ni with a High-Intensity Positron Beam, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105(14), 1–4,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.146101 .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, Tunable Localized Surface Plasmon Resonances in Tungsten Oxide Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(9), 3995–3998,  DOI:10.1021/ja211363w .
T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Selective Dinitrogen Conversion to Ammonia Using Water and Visible Light through Plasmon-Induced Charge Separation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(12), 3942–3946,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201511189 .
M. Ali, F. Zhou, K. Chen, C. Kotzur, C. Xiao, L. Bourgeois, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Nanostructured Photoelectrochemical Solar Cell for Nitrogen Reduction Using Plasmon-Enhanced Black Silicon, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–5,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms11335 .
C. Li, T. Wang, Z. J. Zhao, W. Yang, J. F. Li, A. Li, Z. Yang, G. A. Ozin and J. Gong, Promoted Fixation of Molecular Nitrogen with Surface Oxygen Vacancies on Plasmon-Enhanced TiO2 Photoelectrodes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(19), 5278–5282,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201713229 .
H. H. Pham and L. W. Wang, Oxygen Vacancy and Hole Conduction in Amorphous TiO2, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(1), 541–550,  10.1039/c4cp04209c .
H. Feng, Z. Xu, L. Ren, C. Liu, J. Zhuang, Z. Hu, X. Xu, J. Chen, J. Wang, W. Hao, Y. Du and S. X. Dou, Activating Titania for Efficient Electrocatalysis by Vacancy Engineering, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(5), 4288–4293,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b00719 .
T. Xia, W. Zhang, J. B. Murowchick, G. Liu and X. Chen, A Facile Method to Improve the Photocatalytic and Lithium-Ion Rechargeable Battery Performance of Tio2 Nanocrystals, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3(11), 1516–1523,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300294 .
Y. Melek and O. U. Aytun, An Energy Benchmarking Model Based on Artificial Neural Network Method Utilizing US Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS) Database, Int. J. Energy Res., 2007, 31, 135–147,  DOI:10.1002/er .
S. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Bai, J. H. Yun, G. Liu and L. Wang, New BiVO4 Dual Photoanodes with Enriched Oxygen Vacancies for Efficient Solar-Driven Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(20), 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201800486 .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, A Front-Illuminated Nanostructured Transparent BiVO4 Photoanode for >2% Efficient Water Splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(2), 2–8,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201501645 .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P. C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Efficient Solar-Driven Water Splitting by Nanocone BiVO4-Perovskite Tandem Cells, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(6), e1501764,  DOI:10.1126/sciadv.1501764 .
K. H. Ye, Z. Wang, J. Gu, S. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, W. Mai and S. Yang, Carbon Quantum Dots as a Visible Light Sensitizer to Significantly Increase the Solar Water Splitting Performance of Bismuth Vanadate Photoanodes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(3), 772–779,  10.1039/c6ee03442j .
D. Yan, Y. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. Dai and S. Wang, Defect Chemistry of Nonprecious-Metal Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reactions, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(48), 1–20,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201606459 .
S. Ippolito, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Tailoring the Physicochemical Properties of Solution-Processed Transition Metal Dichalcogenides via Molecular Approaches, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(61), 8900–8914,  10.1039/c9cc03845k .
P. N. Rudd and J. Huang, Metal Ions in Halide Perovskite Materials and Devices, Trends Chem., 2019, 1(4), 394–409,  DOI:10.1016/j.trechm.2019.04.010 .
P. H. Liu, M. Wen, C. S. Tan, M. Navlani-García, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Yamashita and L. J. Chen, Surface Plasmon Resonance Enhancement of Production of H2 from Ammonia Borane Solution with Tunable Cu2−xS Nanowires Decorated by Pd Nanoparticles, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 57–63,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2016.10.064 .
A. Comin and L. Manna, New Materials for Tunable Plasmonic Colloidal Nanocrystals, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(11), 3957–3975,  10.1039/c3cs60265f .
J. Di, C. Chen, C. Zhu, P. Song, J. Xiong, M. Ji, J. Zhou, Q. Fu, M. Xu, W. Hao, J. Xia, S. Li, H. Li and Z. Liu, Bismuth Vacancy-Tuned Bismuth Oxybromide Ultrathin Nanosheets toward Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(34), 30786–30792,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b08109 .
S. Arooj, T. Xu, X. Hou, Y. Wang, J. Tong, R. Chu and B. Liu, Green Emission of Indium Oxide: Via Hydrogen Treatment, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(21), 11828–11833,  10.1039/c8ra00654g .
L. Huang, R. Chen, C. Xie, C. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Zeng, D. Chen and S. Wang, Rapid Cationic Defect and Anion Dual-Regulated Layered Double Hydroxides for Efficient Water Oxidation, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(28), 13638–13644,  10.1039/c8nr04402c .
D. Chen, M. Qiao, Y. R. Lu, L. Hao, D. Liu, C. L. Dong, Y. Li and S. Wang, Preferential Cation Vacancies in Perovskite Hydroxide for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(28), 8691–8696,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201805520 .
M. Wang, M. Shen, X. Jin, J. Tian, M. Li, Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Shi, Oxygen Vacancy Generation and Stabilization in CeO2- x by Cu Introduction with Improved CO2 Photocatalytic Reduction Activity, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(5), 4573–4581,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b03975 .
B. Wang, X. Wang, L. Lu, C. Zhou, Z. Xin, J. Wang, X. K. Ke, G. Sheng, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Oxygen-Vacancy-Activated CO2 Splitting over Amorphous Oxide Semiconductor Photocatalyst, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(1), 516–525,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.7b02952 .
Q. Zhao, L. Fu, D. Jiang, J. Ouyang, Y. Hu, H. Yang and Y. Xi, Nanoclay-Modulated Oxygen Vacancies of Metal Oxide, Communications Chemistry, 2019, 2(1), 1–10,  DOI:10.1038/s42004-019-0112-9 .
X. Miao, L. Wu, Y. Lin, X. Yuan, J. Zhao, W. Yan, S. Zhou and L. Shi, The Role of Oxygen Vacancies in Water Oxidation for Perovskite Cobalt Oxide Electrocatalysts: Are More Better?, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(10), 1442–1445,  10.1039/c8cc08817a .
L. Wang, D. Lv, F. Dong, X. Wu, N. Cheng, J. Scott, X. Xu, W. Hao and Y. Du, Boosting Visible-Light-Driven Photo-Oxidation of BiOCl by Promoted Charge Separation via Vacancy Engineering, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(3), 3010–3017,  DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b04454 .
X. Xue, R. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Hu, Q. Ding, Z. Liu, L. Ma, G. Zhu, W. Zhang, Q. Yu, J. Liu, J. Ma and Z. Jin, Oxygen Vacancy Engineering Promoted Photocatalytic Ammonia Synthesis on Ultrathin Two-Dimensional Bismuth Oxybromide Nanosheets, Nano Lett., 2018, 18(11), 7372–7377,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b03655 .
M. Ran, H. Wang, W. Cui, J. Li, P. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Sheng, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, Light-Induced Generation and Regeneration of Oxygen Vacancies in BiSbO4for Sustainable Visible Light Photocatalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47984–47991,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b18154 .
L. Lu, X. Xu, K. An, Y. Wang and F. N. Shi, Coordination Polymer Derived NiS@g-C 3 N 4 Composite Photocatalyst for Sulfur Vacancy and Photothermal Effect Synergistic Enhanced H 2 Production, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(9), 11869–11876,  DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b02153 .
L. Li, Z. Qin, L. Ries, S. Hong, T. Michel, J. Yang, C. Salameh, M. Bechelany, P. Miele, D. Kaplan, M. Chhowalla and D. Voiry, Role of Sulfur Vacancies and Undercoordinated Mo Regions in MoS2 Nanosheets toward the Evolution of Hydrogen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(6), 6824–6834,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.9b01583 .
Y. Cao, S. Hu, F. Li, Z. Fan, J. Bai, G. Lu and Q. Wang, Photofixation of Atmospheric Nitrogen to Ammonia with a Novel Ternary Metal Sulfide Catalyst under Visible Light, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(55), 49862–49867,  10.1039/c6ra08247e .
J. Lee, S. Ham, D. Choi and D. Jang, Facile Fabrication of Porous ZnS Nanostructures Enhanced Photocatalytic Performances, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14254–14263,  10.1039/c8nr02936a .
Y. Wang, X. Xu, W. Lu, Y. Huo and L. Bian, A Sulfur Vacancy Rich CdS Based Composite Photocatalyst with G-C 3 N 4 as a Matrix Derived from a Cd-S Cluster Assembled Supramolecular Network for H 2 Production and VOC Removal, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(12), 4219–4227,  10.1039/c7dt04912a .
L. Lin, N. Miao, J. Huang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, D. D. Horsell, P. Ghosez, Z. Sun and D. A. Allwood, A Photocatalyst of Sulphur Depleted Monolayered Molybdenum Sulfide Nanocrystals for Dye Degradation and Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 544–552,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.06.008 .
H. Pang, X. Meng, P. Li, K. Chang, W. Zhou, X. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Jevasuwan, N. Fukata, D. Wang and J. Ye, Cation Vacancy-Initiated CO2 Photoreduction over ZnS for Efficient Formate Production, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(6), 1387–1393,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.9b00711 .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. F. Chisholm, J. Zhong, C. Chen, X. Cao, F. Dong, Z. Chi, H. Chen, Y. X. Weng, J. Xiong, S. Z. Yang, H. Li, Z. Liu and S. Dai, Defect-Tailoring Mediated Electron–Hole Separation in Single-Unit-Cell Bi3O4Br Nanosheets for Boosting Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution and Nitrogen Fixation, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(28), 1–8,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201807576 .
W. Cui, L. Chen, J. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Sun, G. Jiang, S. C. Lee and F. Dong, Ba-Vacancy Induces Semiconductor-like Photocatalysis on Insulator BaSO4, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 253, 293–299,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2019.04.070 .
Y. Wu, Y. Liu, G. D. Li, X. Zou, X. Lian, D. Wang, L. Sun, T. Asefa and X. Zou, Efficient Electrocatalysis of Overall Water Splitting by Ultrasmall NixCo3−xS4 Coupled Ni3S2 Nanosheet Arrays, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 161–170,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.03.024 .
S. qi Guo, Z. Hu, M. Zhen, B. Gu, B. Shen and F. Dong, Insights for Optimum Cation Defects in Photocatalysis: A Case Study of Hematite Nanostructures, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118506,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2019.118506 .

          X. Shao, T. Zhang, B. Li, Y. Wu, X. Ma, J. Wang and S. JiangCu-Deficient Plasmonic Cu2−xS Nanocrystals Induced Tunable Photocatalytic Activities.  2019.  10.1039/c9ce01501a.
R. Manzorro, W. E. Celín, J. J. Calvino and S. Trasobares, Improving the Activity and Stability of YSZ-Supported Gold Powder Catalyst by Means of Ultrathin, Coherent, Ceria Overlayers. Atomic Scale Structural Insights, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(6), 5157–5170,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b04412 .
E. I. Altman, M. Z. Baykara and U. D. Schwarz, Noncontact Atomic Force Microscopy: An Emerging Tool for Fundamental Catalysis Research, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48(9), 2640–2648,  DOI:10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00166 .
M. Z. Baykara, M. Todorović, H. Mönig, T. C. Schwendemann, Ö. Ünverdi, L. Rodrigo, E. I. Altman, R. Pérez and U. D. Schwarz, Atom-Specific Forces and Defect Identification on Surface-Oxidized Cu(100) with Combined 3D-AFM and STM Measurements, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87(15), 155414,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.87.155414 .
S. Torbrügge, M. Cranney and M. Reichling, Morphology of Step Structures on CeO2(111), Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(7), 073112,  DOI:10.1063/1.2969790 .
H. Huang, C. Zhou, X. Jiao, H. Yuan, J. Zhao, C. He, J. Hofkens, M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. Long and J. A. Steele, Subsurface Defect Engineering in Single-Unit-Cell Bi2 WO6 Monolayers Boosts Solar-Driven Photocatalytic Performance, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(2), 1439–1443,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.9b04789 .
S. Wu, W. Sun, J. Sun, Z. D. Hood, S.-Z. Yang, L. Sun, P. R. C. Kent and M. F. Chisholm, Surface Reorganization Leads to Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity in Defective BiOCl, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(15), 5128–5136,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b01629 .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, A Perovskite Oxide Optimized for Oxygen Evolution Catalysis from Molecular Orbital Principles, Science, 2011, 334(6061), 1383–1385,  DOI:10.1126/science.1212858 .
S. Chen, Z. Kang, X. Hu, X. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Xie, X. Zheng, W. Yan, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Delocalized Spin States in 2D Atomic Layers Realizing Enhanced Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(30), 1701687,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201701687 .
J. Gracia, R. Sharpe and J. Munarriz, Principles Determining the Activity of Magnetic Oxides for Electron Transfer Reactions, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 331–338,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcat.2018.03.012 .
L. Pan, M. Ai, C. Huang, L. Yin, X. Liu, R. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Jiang, X. Zhang, J.-J. Zou and W. Mi, Manipulating Spin Polarization of Titanium Dioxide for Efficient Photocatalysis, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 418,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-020-14333-w .
P. C. Angelomé, L. Andrini, M. E. Calvo, F. G. Requejo, S. A. Bilmes and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Mesoporous Anatase TiO2 Films: Use of Ti K XANES for the Quantification of the Nanocrystalline Character and Substrate Effects in the Photocatalysis Behavior, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(29), 10886–10893,  DOI:10.1021/jp069020z .
Synergetic Catalysis Enhancement between H2O2 and TiO2 with Single-Electron-Trapped Oxygen Vacancy.
S. Mohajernia, P. Andryskova, G. Zoppellaro, S. Hejazi, S. Kment, R. Zboril, J. Schmidt and P. Schmuki, Influence of Ti 3+ Defect-Type on Heterogeneous Photocatalytic H2 Evolution Activity of TiO2, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(3), 1432–1442,  10.1039/C9TA10855F .
X. Pan, M. Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, Defective TiO2 with Oxygen Vacancies: Synthesis, Properties and Photocatalytic Applications, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(9), 3601–3614,  10.1039/c3nr00476g .
H. Li, J. Shang, H. Zhu, Z. Yang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Oxygen Vacancy Structure Associated Photocatalytic Water Oxidation of BiOCl, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(12), 8276–8285,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.6b02613 .
Q. Li, X. Zhu, J. Yang, Q. Yu, X. Zhu, J. Chu, Y. Du, C. Wang, Y. Hua, H. Li and H. Xu, Plasma Treated Bi2 WO6 Ultrathin Nanosheets with Oxygen Vacancies for Improved Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 597–602,  10.1039/C9QI01370A .
D. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Yu, B.-H. Zhao, W. Wang, Y. Du and B. Zhang, Understanding the Nature of Ammonia Treatment to Synthesize Oxygen Vacancy-Enriched Transition Metal Oxides, Chem, 2019, 5(2), 376–389,  DOI:10.1016/j.chempr.2018.11.001 .
X. Chen, L. Liu and F. Huang, Black Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) Nanomaterials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(7), 1861–1885,  10.1039/C4CS00330F .
S. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Wang, Z. Hu, H. Zhao and W. Xie, A Facile Approach to Prepare Black TiO2 with Oxygen Vacancy for Enhancing Photocatalytic Activity, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(4), 245,  DOI:10.3390/nano8040245 .
D. Maarisetty, S. Mahanta, A. K. Sahoo, P. Mohapatra and S. S. Baral, Steering the Charge Kinetics in Dual-Functional Photocatalysis by Surface Dipole Moments and Band Edge Modulation: A Defect Study in TiO2 -ZnS-RGO Composites, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(10), 11679–11692,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b22418 .
M. Fang, N. Bartholomew and A. Di Fulvio, Positron Annihilation Lifetime Spectroscopy Using Fast Scintillators and Digital Electronics, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2019, 943, 162507,  DOI:10.1016/j.nima.2019.162507 .
X. Li, Z. Guo and T. He, The Doping Mechanism of Cr into TiO2 and Its Influence on the Photocatalytic Performance, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15(46), 20037,  10.1039/c3cp53531b .
X. Jiang, Y. Zhang, J. Jiang, Y. Rong, Y. Wang, Y. Wu and C. Pan, Characterization of Oxygen Vacancy Associates within Hydrogenated TiO2: A Positron Annihilation Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(42), 22619–22624,  DOI:10.1021/jp307573c .
L. Vimala Devi, S. Sellaiyan, T. Selvalakshmi, H. J. Zhang, A. Uedono, K. Sivaji and S. Sankar, Synthesis, Defect Characterization and Photocatalytic Degradation Efficiency of Tb Doped CuO Nanoparticles, Adv. Powder Technol., 2017, 28(11), 3026–3038,  DOI:10.1016/j.apt.2017.09.013 .
M. S. Dresselhaus, A. Jorio, A. G. Souza Filho and R. Saito, Defect Characterization in Graphene and Carbon Nanotubes Using Raman Spectroscopy, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368(1932), 5355–5377,  DOI:10.1098/rsta.2010.0213 .
M. Kumar, A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan and Q. Qiao, Strategic Review of Secondary Phases, Defects and Defect-Complexes in Kesterite CZTS–Se Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(11), 3134–3159,  10.1039/C5EE02153G .
K. Wang, Y. Chang, L. Lv and Y. Long, Effect of Annealing Temperature on Oxygen Vacancy Concentrations of Nanocrystalline CeO2 Film, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 164–168,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.05.122 .
Y. Xu, F. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Luo, B. Teng, M. Fan and X. Liu, Resolving a Decade-Long Question of Oxygen Defects in Raman Spectra of Ceria-Based Catalysts at Atomic Level, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(31), 18889–18894,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b00633 .
J. R. McBride, K. C. Hass, B. D. Poindexter and W. H. Weber, Raman and X-ray Studies of Ce1− x RExO2− y , Where RE=La, Pr, Nd, Eu, Gd, and Tb, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76(4), 2435–2441,  DOI:10.1063/1.357593 .
J. Wu, H. Zhao, Y. Li, D. Ohlberg, W. Shi, W. Wu, H. Wang and P. Tan, Monolayer Molybdenum Disulfide Nanoribbons with High Optical Anisotropy, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4(5), 756–762,  DOI:10.1002/adom.201500707 .
H. Yuan, X. Zhou, Y. Cao, Q. Bian, Z. Zhang, H. Sun, S. Li, Z. Shao, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, Z. Mao, W. Ji and M. Pan, Raman Detection of Hidden Phonons Assisted by Atomic Point Defects in a Two-Dimensional Semimetal. Npj 2D Mater, Appl, 2019, 3(1), 12,  DOI:10.1038/s41699-019-0093-7 .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, Theory of Carbon Doping of Titanium Dioxide, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(26), 6656–6665,  DOI:10.1021/cm051921h .
G. Jiang, Z. Lin, C. Chen, L. Zhu, Q. Chang, N. Wang, W. Wei and H. Tang, TiO2 Nanoparticles Assembled on Graphene Oxide Nanosheets with High Photocatalytic Activity for Removal of Pollutants, Carbon, 2011, 49(8), 2693–2701,  DOI:10.1016/j.carbon.2011.02.059 .
B. Bharti, S. Kumar, H.-N. Lee and R. Kumar, Formation of Oxygen Vacancies and Ti3+ State in TiO2 Thin Film and Enhanced Optical Properties by Air Plasma Treatment, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(1), 32355,  DOI:10.1038/srep32355 .
Y. Yamamoto, S. Kasamatsu and O. Sugino, Scaling Relation of Oxygen Reduction Reaction Intermediates at Defective TiO2 Surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(32), 19486–19492,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b03398 .
M. F. Aygüler, A. G. Hufnagel, P. Rieder, M. Wussler, W. Jaegermann, T. Bein, V. Dyakonov, M. L. Petrus, A. Baumann and P. Docampo, Influence of Fermi Level Alignment with Tin Oxide on the Hysteresis of Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(14), 11414–11419,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b00990 .
Q. Xu, L. Zhang, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and M. Jaroniec, Direct Z-Scheme Photocatalysts: Principles, Synthesis, and Applications, Mater. Today, 2018, 21(10), 1042–1063,  DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2018.04.008 .
T. Zacherle, P. C. Schmidt and M. Martin, Ab Initio Calculations on the Defect Structure of β -Ga 2 O 3, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87(23), 235206,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.87.235206 .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. Hofmann and J. Sauer, Oxygen Vacancies in Transition Metal and Rare Earth Oxides: Current State of Understanding and Remaining Challenges, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62(6), 219–270,  DOI:10.1016/j.surfrep.2007.03.002 .
J. Meyer, K. Zilberberg, T. Riedl and A. Kahn, Electronic Structure of Vanadium Pentoxide: An Efficient Hole Injector for Organic Electronic Materials, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110(3), 033710,  DOI:10.1063/1.3611392 .
J. Meyer, M. Kröger, S. Hamwi, F. Gnam, T. Riedl, W. Kowalsky and A. Kahn, Charge Generation Layers Comprising Transition Metal-Oxide/Organic Interfaces: Electronic Structure and Charge Generation Mechanism, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96(19), 193302,  DOI:10.1063/1.3427430 .
D. Maarisetty and S. S. Baral, Synergistic Effect of Dual Electron-Cocatalyst Modified Photocatalyst and Methodical Strategy for Better Charge Separation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 930–942,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.06.029 .
M. Vasilopoulou, L. C. Palilis, D. G. Georgiadou, S. Kennou, I. Kostis, D. Davazoglou and P. Argitis, Barrierless Hole Injection through Sub-Bandgap Occupied States in Organic Light Emitting Diodes Using Substoichiometric MoOx Anode Interfacial Layer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100(1), 013311,  DOI:10.1063/1.3673283 .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. Soultati, D. G. Georgiadou, T. Stergiopoulos, L. C. Palilis, S. Kennou, N. A. Stathopoulos, D. Davazoglou and P. Argitis, Hydrogenated Under-Stoichiometric Tungsten Oxide Anode Interlayers for Efficient and Stable Organic Photovoltaics, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(6), 1738–1749,  10.1039/C3TA13975A .
M. T. Greiner, L. Chai, M. G. Helander, W.-M. Tang and Z.-H. Lu, Transition Metal Oxide Work Functions: The Influence of Cation Oxidation State and Oxygen Vacancies, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22(21), 4557–4568,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201200615 .
R. S. Mulliken, Electronic Structures of Molecules XI. Electroaffinity, Molecular Orbitals and Dipole Moments, J. Chem. Phys., 1935, 3(9), 573–585,  DOI:10.1063/1.1749731 .
C. Lohaus, A. Klein and W. Jaegermann, Limitation of Fermi Level Shifts by Polaron Defect States in Hematite Photoelectrodes, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 4309,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-06838-2 .
B. R. Tak, S. Dewan, A. Goyal, R. Pathak, V. Gupta, A. K. Kapoor, S. Nagarajan and R. Singh, Point Defects Induced Work Function Modulation of β-Ga2O3, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 465, 973–978,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.09.236 .
M. H. Lee, S. Park, J. K. Lee, J. Chung, B. Ryu, S.-D. Park and J.-S. Rhyee, Fine Tuning of Fermi Level by Charged Impurity-Defect Cluster Formation and Thermoelectric Properties in n-Type PbTe-Based Compounds, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(27), 16488–16500,  10.1039/C9TA04220B .
L. Huang, L. Tao, K. Gong, Y. Li, H. Dong, Z. Wei and J. Li, Role
of Defects in Enhanced Fermi Level Pinning at Interfaces between Metals and Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96(20), 205303,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.96.205303 .
A. Shafqat, T. Iqbal and A. Majid, A DFT Study of Intrinsic Point Defects in Monolayer MoSe2, AIP Adv., 2017, 7(10), 105306,  DOI:10.1063/1.4999524 .
E. Uesugi, T. Uchiyama, H. Goto, H. Ota, T. Ueno, H. Fujiwara, K. Terashima, T. Yokoya, F. Matsui, J. Akimitsu, K. Kobayashi and Y. Kubozono, Fermi Level Tuning of Ag-Doped Bi2Se3 Topological Insulator, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 5376,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-019-41906-7 .
L. K. Preethi, R. P. Antony, T. Mathews, L. Walczak and C. S. Gopinath, A Study on Doped Heterojunctions in TiO2 Nanotubes: An Efficient Photocatalyst for Solar Water Splitting, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 14314,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-14463-0 .
S. Kashiwaya, J. Morasch, V. Streibel, T. Toupance, W. Jaegermann and A. Klein, The Work Function of TiO2, Surfaces, 2018, 1(1), 73–89,  DOI:10.3390/surfaces1010007 .
R. Yew, S. K. Karuturi, J. Liu, H. H. Tan, Y. Wu and C. Jagadish, Exploiting Defects in TiO2 Inverse Opal for Enhanced Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Opt. Express, 2019, 27(2), 761,  DOI:10.1364/OE.27.000761 .
T. K. Maji, D. Bagchi, P. Kar, D. Karmakar and S. K. Pal, Enhanced Charge Separation through Modulation of Defect-State in Wide Band-Gap Semiconductor for Potential Photocatalysis Application: Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Computational Studies, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 332, 391–398,  DOI:10.1016/j.jphotochem.2016.09.017 .
O. T. Hofmann, H. Glowatzki, C. Bürker, G. M. Rangger, B. Bröker, J. Niederhausen, T. Hosokai, I. Salzmann, R.-P. Blum, R. Rieger, A. Vollmer, P. Rajput, A. Gerlach, K. Müllen, F. Schreiber, E. Zojer, N. Koch and S. Duhm, Orientation-Dependent Work-Function Modification Using Substituted Pyrene-Based Acceptors, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(44), 24657–24668,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08451 .
M. Miyazaki, H. F. Wen, Q. Zhang, Y. Adachi, J. Brndiar, I. Štich, Y. J. Li and Y. Sugawara, Imaging the Surface Potential at the Steps on the Rutile TiO2 (110) Surface by Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2019, 10, 1228–1236,  DOI:10.3762/bjnano.10.122 .
M. V. Lebedev, P. A. Dementev, T. V. Lvova and V. L. Berkovits, Modification of the P-GaP(001) Work Function by Surface Dipole Bonds Formed in Sulfide Solution, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(24), 7327–7335,  10.1039/C9TC00210C .
R. Ovcharenko, E. Voloshina and J. Sauer, Water Adsorption and O-Defect Formation on Fe2 O3 (0001) Surfaces, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(36), 25560–25568,  10.1039/C6CP05313K .
L. Zhang, B. Wen, Y.-N. Zhu, Z. Chai, X. Chen and M. Chen, First-Principles Calculations of Water Adsorption on Perfect and Defect WO3(0 0 1), Comput. Mater. Sci., 2018, 150, 484–490,  DOI:10.1016/j.commatsci.2018.04.056 .
H. Heydari, M. Elahifard and R. Behjatmanesh-Ardakani, Role of Oxygen Vacancy in the Adsorption and Dissociation of the Water Molecule on the Surfaces of Pure and Ni-Doped Rutile (110): A Periodic Full-Potential DFT Study, Surf. Sci., 2019, 679, 218–224,  DOI:10.1016/j.susc.2018.09.014 .
H. J. Lee, A. C. Jamison and T. R. Lee, Surface Dipoles: A Growing Body of Evidence Supports Their Impact and Importance, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48(12), 3007–3015,  DOI:10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00307 .
R. Jinnouchi, A. V. Akimov, S. Shirai, R. Asahi and O. V. Prezhdo, Upward Shift in Conduction Band of Ta2 O5 Due to Surface Dipoles Induced by N-Doping, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(48), 26925–26936,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b06932 .
W.-J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, Conduction and Valence Band Positions of Ta2 O5 , TaON, and Ta3 N5 by UPS and Electrochemical Methods, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(8), 1798–1803,  DOI:10.1021/jp027593f .
Y. Qiu, Y. Liu, Y. Tu, C. Wang and Y. Xu, Defect-Induced Wetting Behavior on Solid Polar Surfaces with Small Charge Dipole Length, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(32), 17365–17370,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b05476 .
X. Chen, Y. Xu, X. Ma and Y. Zhu, Large Dipole Moment Induced Efficient Bismuth Chromate Photocatalysts for Wide-Spectrum Driven Water Oxidation and Complete Mineralization of Pollutants, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 7(3), 652–659,  DOI:10.1093/nsr/nwz198 .
R. Hailili, Z.-Q. Wang, X.-Q. Gong and C. Wang, Octahedral-Shaped Perovskite CaCu3Ti4O12 with Dual Defects and Coexposed {(001), (111)} Facets for Visible-Light Photocatalysis, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 86–97,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2019.03.086 .
W. Yin, B. Wen, Q. Ge, D. Zou, Y. Xu, M. Liu, X. Wei, M. Chen and X. Fan, Role of Intrinsic Dipole on Photocatalytic Water Splitting for Janus MoSSe/Nitrides Heterostructure: A First-Principles Study, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2019, 29(3), 335–340,  DOI:10.1016/j.pnsc.2019.05.003 .
H. Sopha, M. Krbal, S. Ng, J. Prikryl, R. Zazpe, F. K. Yam and J. M. Macak, Highly Efficient Photoelectrochemical and Photocatalytic Anodic TiO2 Nanotube Layers with Additional TiO2 Coating, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 104–110,  DOI:10.1016/j.apmt.2017.06.002 .
Z. Pan, J. A. Röhr, Z. Ye, Z. S. Fishman, Q. Zhu, X. Shen and S. Hu, Elucidating Charge Separation in Particulate Photocatalysts Using Nearly Intrinsic Semiconductors with Small Asymmetric Band Bending, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3(3), 850–864,  10.1039/C9SE00036D .
I. A. Digdaya, L. Han, T. W. F. Buijs, M. Zeman, B. Dam, A. H. M. Smets and W. A. Smith, Extracting Large Photovoltages from A-SiC Photocathodes with an Amorphous TiO2 Front Surface Field Layer for Solar Hydrogen Evolution, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(5), 1585–1593,  10.1039/C5EE00769K .
M. K. Ghimire, H. Ji, H. Z. Gul, H. Yi, J. Jiang and S. C. Lim, Defect-Affected Photocurrent in MoTe2 FETs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(10), 10068–10073,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b00050 .
F. Stöckmann, On the Classification of Traps and Recombination Centres, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1973, 20(1), 217–220,  DOI:10.1002/pssa.2210200121 .
Y. Wang, D. Wu, L.-M. Fu, X.-C. Ai, D. Xu and J.-P. Zhang, Density of State Determination of Two Types of Intra-Gap Traps in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells and Its Influence on Device Performance, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(23), 11626–11632,  10.1039/C4CP00779D .
A. Di Bartolomeo, A. Grillo, F. Urban, L. Iemmo, F. Giubileo, G. Luongo, G. Amato, L. Croin, L. Sun, S.-J. Liang and L. K. Ang, Asymmetric Schottky Contacts in Bilayer MoS2 Field Effect Transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(28), 1800657,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201800657 .
K. Chen, R. Ghosh, X. Meng, A. Roy, J.-S. Kim, F. He, S. C. Mason, X. Xu, J.-F. Lin, D. Akinwande, S. K. Banerjee and Y. Wang, Experimental Evidence of Exciton Capture by Mid-Gap Defects in CVD Grown Monolayer MoSe2, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1(1), 15,  DOI:10.1038/s41699-017-0019-1 .
Y. Xu, S. Wu, P. Wan, J. Sun and Z. D. Hood, Introducing Ti 3+ Defects Based on Lattice Distortion for Enhanced Visible Light Photoreactivity in TiO2 Microspheres, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(52), 32461–32467,  10.1039/C7RA04885H .
T. Hu, W. Wang, D. Han and W. Dong, Enhanced Photocurrent and Photocatalytic Degradation of Methyl Orange in Cobalt Hydroxide Loaded Titanium Dioxide Film, AIP Adv., 2019, 9(5), 055122,  DOI:10.1063/1.5098399 .
Z. Rao, X. Xie, X. Wang, A. Mahmood, S. Tong, M. Ge and J. Sun, Defect Chemistry of Er 3+ -Doped TiO2 and Its Photocatalytic Activity for the Degradation of Flowing Gas-Phase VOCs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(19), 12321–12334,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b02093 .
F. Khurshid, M. Jeyavelan, M. S. L. Hudson and S. Nagarajan, Ag-Doped ZnO Nanorods Embedded Reduced Graphene Oxide Nanocomposite for Photo-Electrochemical Applications, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2019, 6(2), 181764,  DOI:10.1098/rsos.181764 .
A. Han, M. Li, S. Zhang, X. Zhu, J. Han, Q. Ge and H. Wang, Ti3+ Defective SnS2/TiO2 Heterojunction Photocatalyst for Visible-Light Driven Reduction of CO2 to CO with High Selectivity, Catalysts, 2019, 9(11), 927,  DOI:10.3390/catal9110927 .
R. T. Ako, P. Ekanayake, D. J. Young, J. Hobley, V. Chellappan, A. L. Tan, S. Gorelik, G. S. Subramanian and C. M. Lim, Evaluation of Surface Energy State Distribution and Bulk Defect Concentration in DSSC Photoanodes Based on Sn, Fe, and Cu Doped TiO2, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 950–961,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.06.015 .
Q. Lu, G. Vardar, M. Jansen, S. R. Bishop, I. Waluyo, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Surface Defect Chemistry and Electronic Structure of Pr0.1 Ce0.9 O2−δ Revealed in Operando, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(8), 2600–2606,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b05129 .
B. Fu, W. Wu, L. Gan and Z. Zhang, Bulk/Surface Defects Engineered TiO2 Nanotube Photonic Crystals Coupled with Plasmonic Gold Nanoparticles for Effective in Vivo Near-Infrared Light Photoelectrochemical Detection, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91(22), 14611–14617,  DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03733 .
H. Zhang, J. Cai, Y. Wang, M. Wu, M. Meng, Y. Tian, X. Li, J. Zhang, L. Zheng, Z. Jiang and J. Gong, Insights into the Effects of Surface/Bulk Defects on Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution over TiO2 with Exposed {001} Facets, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 126–136,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.08.046 .
J. Yan, G. Wu, N. Guan, L. Li, Z. Li and X. Cao, Understanding the Effect of Surface/Bulk Defects on the Photocatalytic Activity of TiO2: Anatase versus Rutile, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15(26), 10978,  10.1039/c3cp50927c .
J. Chen, G. Wu, T. Wang, X. Li, M. Li, Y. Sang and H. Liu, Carrier Step-by-Step Transport Initiated by Precise Defect Distribution Engineering for Efficient Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(5), 4634–4642,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b14700 .
X. Liu, G. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Yuan, T. Lin and F. Huang, Progress in Black Titania: A New Material for Advanced Photocatalysis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(17), 1600452,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201600452 .
Z. Pei, S. Weng and P. Liu, Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity by Bulk Trapping and Spatial Separation of Charge Carriers: A Case Study of Defect and Facet Mediated TiO2, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 463–470,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2015.06.045 .
Z. Wu, S. Cao, C. Zhang and L. Piao, Effects of Bulk and Surface Defects on the Photocatalytic Performance of Size-Controlled TiO2 Nanoparticles, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(27), 275706,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/aa7374 .
F. Wang, W. Ge, T. Shen, B. Ye, Z. Fu and Y. Lu, The Effect of Bulk/Surface Defects Ratio Change on the Photocatalysis of TiO2 Nanosheet Film, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 410, 513–518,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.03.142 .
X. Zhang, J. Qin, Y. Xue, P. Yu, B. Zhang, L. Wang and R. Liu, Effect of Aspect Ratio and Surface Defects on the Photocatalytic Activity of ZnO Nanorods, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4(1), 4596,  DOI:10.1038/srep04596 .
J. Shi, H. Cui, Z. Liang, X. Lu, Y. Tong, C. Su and H. Liu, The Roles of Defect States in Photoelectric and Photocatalytic Processes for Znx Cd1−x S, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(2), 466–470,  10.1039/C0EE00309C .
X. Hao, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Cui, Y. Wang and Z. Zou, Zinc Vacancy-Promoted Photocatalytic Activity and Photostability of ZnS for Efficient Visible-Light-Driven Hydrogen Evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 302–311,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.09.006 .
S. Lukic, G. W. Busser, S. Zhang, J. Menze, M. Muhler, C. Scheu and M. Winterer, Nanocrystalline Ga–Zn Oxynitride Materials: Minimized Defect Density for Improved Photocatalytic Activity?, Z. Phys. Chem., 2019 DOI:10.1515/zpch-2019-1432 .
L. Yuliati, J.-H. Yang, X. Wang, K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, Highly Active Tantalum(v) Nitride Nanoparticles Prepared from a Mesoporous Carbon Nitride Template for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution under Visible Light Irradiation, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20(21), 4295,  10.1039/c0jm00341g .
S. Chen, S. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Qi, F. Zhang and C. Li, Interface Engineering of a CoOx/Ta 3 N 5 Photocatalyst for Unprecedented Water Oxidation Performance under Visible-Light-Irradiation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(10), 3047–3051,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201409906 .
E. Nurlaela, A. Ziani and K. Takanabe, Tantalum Nitride for Photocatalytic Water Splitting: Concept and Applications, Materials for Renewable and Sustainable Energy, 2016, 5(4), 18,  DOI:10.1007/s40243-016-0083-z .
Z. Wang, Y. Inoue, T. Hisatomi, R. Ishikawa, Q. Wang, T. Takata, S. Chen, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Overall Water Splitting by Ta3N5 Nanorod Single Crystals Grown on the Edges of KTaO3 Particles, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1(10), 756–763,  DOI:10.1038/s41929-018-0134-1 .
F. E. Osterloh, Inorganic Nanostructures for Photoelectrochemical and Photocatalytic Water Splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(6), 2294–2320,  10.1039/C2CS35266D .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Grätzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Nanomaterials for Renewable Energy Production and Storage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41(23), 7909,  10.1039/c2cs35230c .
J. Meng, Q. Lin, T. Chen, X. Wei, J. Li and Z. Zhang, Oxygen Vacancy Regulation on Tungsten Oxides with Specific Exposed Facets for Enhanced Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalytic Oxidation, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(6), 2908–2915,  10.1039/C7NR08590G .
U. Coleto, R. A. C. Amoresi, C. A. M. Pereira, A. Z. Simões, M. A. Zaghete, E. S. Monteiro Filho, E. Longo and L. A. Perazolli, Influence of Defects on Photoluminescent and Photocatalytic Behavior of CaO/SrTiO3 Heterojunctions, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(12), 15244–15251,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.05.013 .
Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Liu, D. Qu, X. Miao, P. Feng and Z. Sun, Effect of Defects on Photocatalytic Activity of Rutile TiO2 Nanorods, Nano Res., 2015, 8(12), 4061–4071,  DOI:10.1007/s12274-015-0917-5 .
J. Hui, G. Zhang, C. Ni and J. T. S. Irvine, Promoting Photocatalytic H2 Evolution by Tuning Cation Deficiency in La and Cr Co-Doped SrTiO3, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53(72), 10038–10041,  10.1039/C7CC05144A .
A. A. Murashkina, P. D. Murzin, A. V. Rudakova, V. K. Ryabchuk, A. V. Emeline and D. W. Bahnemann, Influence of the Dopant Concentration on the Photocatalytic Activity: Al-Doped TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(44), 24695–24703,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b06252 .
D. Maarisetty, J. Komandur, S. Sharma, S. S. Baral and P. Mohapatra, Unravelling the Rate Controlling Step in Degradation of Phenol on a Higher Potential Photocatalyst, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(4), 103938,  DOI:10.1016/j.jece.2020.103938 .
W. Xie, R. Li and Q. Xu, Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Se-Doped TiO2 under Visible Light Irradiation, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8(1), 8752,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-27135-4 .
C. A. Aggelopoulos, M. Dimitropoulos, A. Govatsi, L. Sygellou, C. D. Tsakiroglou and S. N. Yannopoulos, Influence of the Surface-to-Bulk Defects Ratio of ZnO and TiO2 on Their UV-Mediated Photocatalytic Activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 292–301,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.12.023 .
T. K. Le, T. L. Nguyen, C. N. Hoang, D. K. A. Nguyen, T. Lund, H. K. H. Nguyen and T. K. X. Huynh, Formation of Surface Defects by Thermal Shock Method for the Improved Photocatalytic Activity of ZnO Nanoparticles, Journal of Asian Ceramic Societies, 2020, 1–10,  DOI:10.1080/21870764.2020.1720900 .
H. Li, S. Wu, Z. D. Hood, J. Sun, B. Hu, C. Liang, S. Yang, Y. Xu and B. Jiang, Atomic Defects in Ultra-Thin Mesoporous TiO2 Enhance Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution from Water Splitting, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 145723,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.145723 .
U. Sulaeman, S. Yin and T. Sato, Effect of Sr/Ti Ratio on the Photocatalytic Properties of SrTiO3, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2011, 18(3), 032018,  DOI:10.1088/1757-899X/18/3/032018 .
F. Yu, H. Hu, B. Wang, H. Li, T. Song, B. Xu, L. He, S. Wang and H. Duan, Effects of Al Doping on Defect Behaviors of ZnO Thin Film as a Photocatalyst, Mater. Sci.-Pol., 2019, 37(3), 437–445,  DOI:10.2478/msp-2019-0050 .
K. P. Ghoderao, S. N. Jamble and R. B. Kale, Hydrothermally Synthesized Cd-Doped ZnO Nanostructures with Efficient Sunlight-Driven Photocatalytic and Antibacterial Activity, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30(12), 11208–11219,  DOI:10.1007/s10854-019-01466-y .
Z. Wang, Y. Song, X. Cai, J. Zhang, T. Tang and S. Wen, Rapid Preparation of Terbium-Doped Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles and Their Enhanced Photocatalytic Performance, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2019, 6(10), 191077,  DOI:10.1098/rsos.191077 .
H. Tan, Z. Zhao, W. Zhu, E. N. Coker, B. Li, M. Zheng, W. Yu, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Oxygen Vacancy Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Pervoskite SrTiO3, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(21), 19184–19190,  DOI:10.1021/am5051907 .
B. Lin, G. Yang and L. Wang, Stacking-Layer-Number Dependence of Water Adsorption in 3D Ordered Close-Packed G-C3 N4 Nanosphere Arrays for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131(14), 4635–4639,  DOI:10.1002/ange.201814360 .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Photocatalytic Reduction of CO 2 with H 2 O over Graphene Oxide-Supported Oxygen-Rich TiO 2 Hybrid Photocatalyst under Visible Light Irradiation: Process and Kinetic Studies, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 248–255,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2016.09.050 .
G. Ou, Y. Xu, B. Wen, R. Lin, B. Ge, Y. Tang, Y. Liang, C. Yang, K. Huang, D. Zu, R. Yu, W. Chen, J. Li, H. Wu, L.-M. Liu and Y. Li, Tuning Defects in Oxides at Room Temperature by Lithium Reduction, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1302,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-03765-0 .
H. Pan, B. Wang, F. Zhang, W. Zhang and G. Li, Preparation and Physical and Photocatalytic Activity of a New Niobate Oxide Material Containing NbO4 Tetrahedra, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2018, 2018, 1–6,  DOI:10.1155/2018/8516356 .
S. S. Tafreshi, A. Roldan, N. Y. Dzade and N. H. de Leeuw, Adsorption of Hydrazine on the Perfect and Defective Copper (111) Surface: A Dispersion-Corrected DFT Study, Surf. Sci., 2014, 622, 1–8,  DOI:10.1016/j.susc.2013.11.013 .
S. S. Tafreshi, A. Roldan and N. H. de Leeuw, Density Functional Theory Study of the Adsorption of Hydrazine on the Perfect and Defective Copper (100), (110), and (111) Surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(45), 26103–26114,  DOI:10.1021/jp5078664 .
R. C. Amaral, P. Tereshchuk, Y. Seminovski and J. L. F. Da Silva, The Role of Low-Coordinated Sites on the Adsorption of Glycerol on Defected Ptn/Pt(111) Substrates: A Density Functional Investigation within the D3 van Der Waals Correction, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(6), 3445–3454,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b12238 .
S. S. Tan, L. Zou and E. Hu, Kinetic Modelling for Photosynthesis of Hydrogen and Methane through Catalytic Reduction of Carbon Dioxide with Water Vapour, Catal. Today, 2008, 131(1–4), 125–129,  DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2007.10.011 .
Q. Wu and R. van de Krol, Selective Photoreduction of Nitric Oxide to Nitrogen by Nanostructured TiO2 Photocatalysts: Role of Oxygen Vacancies and Iron Dopant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(22), 9369–9375,  DOI:10.1021/ja302246b .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Single-Atom Catalysts: Synthetic Strategies and Electrochemical Applications, Joule, 2018, 2(7), 1242–1264,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2018.06.019 .
X. Liu, M. Ye, S. Zhang, G. Huang, C. Li, J. Yu, P. K. Wong and S. Liu, Enhanced Photocatalytic CO2 Valorization over TiO2 Hollow Microspheres by Synergetic Surface Tailoring and Au Decoration, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(47), 24245–24255,  10.1039/C8TA09661A .
J. C. S. Wu and C.-W. Huang, In Situ DRIFTS Study of Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction under UV Irradiation, Front. Chem. Eng. China, 2010, 4(2), 120–126,  DOI:10.1007/s11705-009-0232-3 .
J. Wan, W. Chen, C. Jia, L. Zheng, J. Dong, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yan, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Defect Effects on TiO2 Nanosheets: Stabilizing Single Atomic Site Au and Promoting Catalytic Properties, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(11), 1705369,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201705369 .
Y. Ji and Y. Luo, New Mechanism for Photocatalytic Reduction of CO2 on the Anatase TiO2 (101) Surface: The Essential Role of Oxygen Vacancy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(49), 15896–15902,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.6b05695 .
K. Shirai, G. Fazio, T. Sugimoto, D. Selli, L. Ferraro, K. Watanabe, M. Haruta, B. Ohtani, H. Kurata, C. Di Valentin and Y. Matsumoto, Water-Assisted Hole Trapping at the Highly Curved Surface of Nano-TiO2 Photocatalyst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(4), 1415–1422,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.7b11061 .
U. Ulmer, T. Dingle, P. N. Duchesne, R. H. Morris, A. Tavasoli, T. Wood and G. A. Ozin, Fundamentals and Applications of Photocatalytic CO2 Methanation, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 3169,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-10996-2 .
G. Fang, J. Liu, J. Wu, M. Li, X. Yan and D. Wang, A Generic Strategy for Preparation of TiO2/BixMyOz (M = W, Mo) Heterojunctions with Enhanced Photocatalytic Activities, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 475, 785–792,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.12.297 .
C. T. Campbell, The Energetics of Supported Metal Nanoparticles: Relationships to Sintering Rates and Catalytic Activity, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46(8), 1712–1719,  DOI:10.1021/ar3003514 .
P. Lackner, J. Hulva, E.-M. Köck, W. Mayr-Schmölzer, J. I. J. Choi, S. Penner, U. Diebold, F. Mittendorfer, J. Redinger, B. Klötzer, G. S. Parkinson and M. Schmid, Water Adsorption at Zirconia: From the ZrO2 (111)/Pt3 Zr(0001) Model System to Powder Samples, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(36), 17587–17601,  10.1039/C8TA04137G .
C. Zhang, Y. Yang and P. Zhang, Water Dissociation on the Reduced PuO2(110) Surface from First Principles, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2019, 62(10), 107002,  DOI:10.1007/s11433-018-9369-4 .
S. Lee, S. Jeong, W. D. Kim, S. Lee, K. Lee, W. K. Bae, J. H. Moon, S. Lee and D. C. Lee, Low-Coordinated Surface Atoms of CuPt Alloy Cocatalysts on TiO2 for Enhanced Photocatalytic Conversion of CO2, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(19), 10043–10048,  10.1039/C6NR02124G .
C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Heterogeneous Single-Atom Photocatalysts: Fundamentals and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2020 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00840 .
C. Gao, J. Wang, H. Xu and Y. Xiong, Coordination Chemistry in the Design of Heterogeneous Photocatalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(10), 2799–2823,  10.1039/C6CS00727A .
J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. Pereira Hernandez, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Thermally Stable Single-Atom Platinum-on-Ceria Catalysts via Atom Trapping, Science, 2016, 353(6295), 150–154,  DOI:10.1126/science.aaf8800 .
P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. Zang, B. Wu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Photochemical Route for Synthesizing Atomically Dispersed Palladium Catalysts, Science, 2016, 352(6287), 797–800,  DOI:10.1126/science.aaf5251 .
S. Kampouri and K. C. Stylianou, Dual-Functional Photocatalysis for Simultaneous Hydrogen Production and Oxidation of Organic Substances, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(5), 4247–4270,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.9b00332 .
Z. Lin, L. Li, L. Yu, W. Li and G. Yang, Dual-Functional Photocatalysis for Hydrogen Evolution from Industrial Wastewaters, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(12), 8356–8362,  10.1039/C7CP00250E .
D. Li, J. C.-C. Yu, V.-H. Nguyen, J. C. S. Wu and X. Wang, A Dual-Function Photocatalytic System for Simultaneous Separating Hydrogen from Water Splitting and Photocatalytic Degradation of Phenol in a Twin-Reactor, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 268–279,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.08.010 .
L. Zhang, D. Jiang, R. M. Irfan, S. Tang, X. Chen and P. Du, Highly Efficient and Selective Photocatalytic Dehydrogenation of Benzyl Alcohol for Simultaneous Hydrogen and Benzaldehyde Production over Ni-Decorated Zn0.5Cd0.5S Solid Solution, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 30, 71–77,  DOI:10.1016/j.jechem.2018.03.014 .
T. H. Jeon, M. S. Koo, H. Kim and W. Choi, Dual-Functional Photocatalytic and Photoelectrocatalytic Systems for Energy- and Resource-Recovering Water Treatment, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(12), 11542–11563,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b03521 .
H.-F. Ye, R. Shi, X. Yang, W.-F. Fu and Y. Chen, P-Doped ZnxCd1−xS Solid Solutions as Photocatalysts for Hydrogen Evolution from Water Splitting Coupled with Photocatalytic Oxidation of 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 70–79,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.03.060 .
H. Belhadj, S. Hamid, P. K. J. Robertson and D. W. Bahnemann, Mechanisms of Simultaneous Hydrogen Production and Formaldehyde Oxidation in H2 O and D2 O over Platinized TiO2, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(7), 4753–4758,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.7b01312 .
J. Liu, T. Ding, H. Zhang, G. Li, J. Cai, D. Zhao, Y. Tian, H. Xian, X. Bai and X. Li, Engineering Surface Defects and Metal–Support Interactions on Pt/TiO2 (B) Nanobelts to Boost the Catalytic Oxidation of CO, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8(19), 4934–4944,  10.1039/C8CY01410H .
S. Jayashree and M. Ashokkumar, Switchable Intrinsic Defect Chemistry of Titania for Catalytic Applications, Catalysts, 2018, 8(12), 601,  DOI:10.3390/catal8120601 .
B.-J. Hsieh, M.-C. Tsai, C.-J. Pan, W.-N. Su, J. Rick, J.-F. Lee, Y.-W. Yang and B.-J. Hwang, Platinum Loaded on Dual-Doped TiO2 as an Active and Durable Oxygen Reduction Reaction Catalyst, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9(7), e403,  DOI:10.1038/am.2017.78 .
X. Pan and Y.-J. Xu, Defect-Mediated Growth of Noble-Metal (Ag, Pt, and Pd) Nanoparticles on TiO2 with Oxygen Vacancies for Photocatalytic Redox Reactions under Visible Light, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(35), 17996–18005,  DOI:10.1021/jp4064802 .
L. Zou, H. Wang and X. Wang, High Efficient Photodegradation and Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production of CdS/BiVO4 Heterostructure through Z -Scheme Process, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5(1), 303–309,  DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b01628 .
B. D. Mukri, U. V. Waghmare and M. S. Hegde, Platinum Ion-Doped TiO2: High Catalytic Activity of Pt 2+ with Oxide Ion Vacancy in Ti4+1– x Pt 2+ x O2– x Compared to Pt 4+ without Oxide Ion Vacancy in Ti 4+ 1– x Pt4+xO2, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25(19), 3822–3833,  DOI:10.1021/cm4015404 .
K. R. Priolkar, P. Bera, P. R. Sarode, M. S. Hegde, S. Emura, R. Kumashiro and N. P. Lalla, Formation of Ce1-x Pdx O2-δ Solid Solution in Combustion-Synthesized Pd/CeO 2 Catalyst: XRD, XPS, and EXAFS Investigation, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14(5), 2120–2128,  DOI:10.1021/cm0103895 .
Y. Li, G. Lu and S. Li, Photocatalytic Production of Hydrogen in Single Component and Mixture Systems of Electron Donors and Monitoring Adsorption of Donors by in Situ Infrared Spectroscopy, Chemosphere, 2003, 52(5), 843–850,  DOI:10.1016/S0045-6535(03)00297-2 .
Y.-J. Cho, G. Moon, T. Kanazawa, K. Maeda and W. Choi, Selective Dual-Purpose Photocatalysis for Simultaneous H2 Evolution and Mineralization of Organic Compounds Enabled by a Cr2 O3 Barrier Layer Coated on Rh/SrTiO3, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52(62), 9636–9639,  10.1039/C6CC04260K .
S. Zhang, L. Wang, C. Liu, J. Luo, J. Crittenden, X. Liu, T. Cai, J. Yuan, Y. Pei and Y. Liu, Photocatalytic Wastewater Purification with Simultaneous Hydrogen Production Using MoS 2 QD-Decorated Hierarchical Assembly of ZnIn 2 S 4 on Reduced Graphene Oxide Photocatalyst, Water Res., 2017, 121, 11–19,  DOI:10.1016/j.watres.2017.05.013 .
Y. Li, L. Kuang, D. Xiao, A. R. Badireddy, M. Hu, S. Zhuang, X. Wang, E. S. Lee, T. Marhaba and W. Zhang, Hydrogen Production from Organic Fatty Acids Using Carbon-Doped TiO2 Nanoparticles under Visible Light Irradiation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(9), 4335–4346,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.01.042 .
G. Han, Y.-H. Jin, R. A. Burgess, N. E. Dickenson, X.-M. Cao and Y. Sun, Visible-Light-Driven Valorization of Biomass Intermediates Integrated with H2 Production Catalyzed by Ultrathin Ni/CdS Nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(44), 15584–15587,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.7b08657 .
T. Uekert, M. F. Kuehnel, D. W. Wakerley and E. Reisner, Plastic Waste as a Feedstock for Solar-Driven H2 Generation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(10), 2853–2857,  10.1039/C8EE01408F .
C. Wang, L. Shan, D. Song, Y. Xiao and J. Suriyaprakash, Hydrothermal Synthesis of RGO/PbTiO3 Photocatalyst and Its Photocatalytic H2 Evolution Activity, J. Nanomater., 2019, 2019, 1–9,  DOI:10.1155/2019/4869728 .
M. Imizcoz and A. V. Puga, Assessment of Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production from Biomass or Wastewaters Depending on the Metal Co-Catalyst and Its Deposition Method on TiO2, Catalysts, 2019, 9(7), 584,  DOI:10.3390/catal9070584 .
N. T. Tho, C. M. Thi, L. Van Hieu and P. Van Viet, Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalysis for Methylene Blue Degradation and Hydrogen Evolution Reaction: A Case of Black TiO2 Nanotube Arrays, J. Aust. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 1–9,  DOI:10.1007/s41779-019-00405-8 .
Y.-J. Cho, H. Kim, S. Lee and W. Choi, Dual-Functional Photocatalysis Using a Ternary Hybrid of TiO2 Modified with Graphene Oxide along with Pt and Fluoride for H2-Producing Water Treatment, J. Catal., 2015, 330, 387–395,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcat.2015.07.007 .
V. M. Daskalaki, M. Antoniadou, G. Li Puma, D. I. Kondarides and P. Lianos, Solar Light-Responsive Pt/CdS/TiO2 Photocatalysts for Hydrogen Production and Simultaneous Degradation of Inorganic or Organic Sacrificial Agents in Wastewater, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44(19), 7200–7205,  DOI:10.1021/es9038962 .
S. Nayak, G. Swain and K. Parida, Enhanced Photocatalytic Activities of RhB Degradation and H2 Evolution from in Situ Formation of the Electrostatic Heterostructure MoS2/NiFe LDH Nanocomposite through the Z-Scheme Mechanism via p–n Heterojunctions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(23), 20923–20942,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b06511 .
A. Kumar, A. Rana, G. Sharma, Mu. Naushad, A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, C. Guo, A. Iglesias-Juez and F. J. Stadler, High-Performance Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production and Degradation of Levofloxacin by Wide Spectrum-Responsive Ag/Fe3 O4 Bridged SrTiO3/g-C3 N4 Plasmonic Nanojunctions: Joint Effect of Ag and Fe3 O4, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(47), 40474–40490,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b12753 .
G. A. Deluga, Renewable Hydrogen from Ethanol by Autothermal Reforming, Science, 2004, 303(5660), 993–997,  DOI:10.1126/science.1093045 .

          R. D. Cortright, R. R. Davda, and J. A. Dumesic, Hydrogen from Catalytic Reforming of Biomass-Derived Hydrocarbons in Liquid Water, In Materials For Sustainable Energy: A Collection of Peer-Reviewed Research and Review Articles, Nature Publishing Group,  2011, pp. 289–292 Search PubMed .
L. Lin, W. Zhou, R. Gao, S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Zheng, Z. Jiang, Q. Yu, Y.-W. Li, C. Shi, X.-D. Wen and D. Ma, Low-Temperature Hydrogen Production from Water and Methanol Using Pt/α-MoC Catalysts, Nature, 2017, 544(7648), 80–83,  DOI:10.1038/nature21672 .
T. A. Kandiel, I. Ivanova and D. W. Bahnemann, Long-Term Investigation of the Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production on Platinized TiO2: An Isotopic Study, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(4), 1420,  10.1039/c3ee41511b .
N. Strataki, V. Bekiari, D. I. Kondarides and P. Lianos, Hydrogen Production by Photocatalytic Alcohol Reforming Employing Highly Efficient Nanocrystalline Titania Films, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 77(1–2), 184–189,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2007.07.015 .
Y. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Z. Fang, M. Qiu, L. Ling, J. Long, L. Chen, Y. Tong, W. Su, Y. Zhang and J. C. Wu, Defect Engineering of Metal–Oxide Interface for Proximity of Photooxidation and Photoreduction, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2020, 116(21), 10232–10237 CrossRef .
S. Shoji, X. Peng, A. Yamaguchi, R. Watanabe, C. Fukuhara, Y. Cho, T. Yamamoto, S. Matsumura, M. W. Yu, S. Ishii and T. Fujita, Photocatalytic Uphill Conversion of Natural Gas beyond the Limitation of Thermal Reaction Systems, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3(2), 148–153 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, J. Cen, K. R. Goodman, M. G. White, G. Ramakrishnan and A. Orlov, Understanding the Interactions of CO2 with Doped and Undoped SrTiO3, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(14), 1889–1897,  DOI:10.1002/cssc.201600498 .
R. Watanabe, Y. Sakamoto, K. Yamamuro, S. Tamura, E. Kikuchi and Y. Sekine, Role of Alkali Metal in a Highly Active Pd/Alkali/Fe2O3 Catalyst for Water Gas Shift Reaction, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 457, 1–11,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcata.2013.03.010 .
N. Shehzad, M. Tahir, K. Johari, T. Murugesan and M. Hussain, A Critical Review on TiO2 Based Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction System: Strategies to Improve Efficiency, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 98–122,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcou.2018.04.026 .
X. Li, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and X. Chen, Cocatalysts for Selective Photoreduction of CO2 into Solar Fuels, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119(6), 3962–4179,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00400 .
Q. Zhai, S. Xie, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Photocatalytic Conversion of Carbon Dioxide with Water into Methane: Platinum and Copper(I) Oxide Co-Catalysts with a Core-Shell Structure, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(22), 5776–5779,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201301473 .
S. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, MgO- and Pt-Promoted TiO2 as an Efficient Photocatalyst for the Preferential Reduction of Carbon Dioxide in the Presence of Water, ACS Catal., 2014, 4(10), 3644–3653,  DOI:10.1021/cs500648p .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nanostructured Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Electrocatalysts for CO2 Reduction in Ionic Liquid, Science, 2016, 353(6298), 467–470,  DOI:10.1126/science.aaf4767 .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Graphene in Photocatalysis: A Review, Small, 2016, 12(48), 6640–6696,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201600382 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Dileep Maarisetty	Dileep Maarisetty received his B. Tech and ME degrees in Chemical Engineering from Sri Venkateswara University College of Engineering and BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa campus respectively. Then, he continued his PhD at BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa campus from 2016. Currently, he is working on the topic “The effect of point defects on photocatalytic behaviour of semiconductor photocatalysts”. His research interests include photocatalysis, photo-electrochemistry, heterogeneous catalysis and development of photocatalysts and related materials.
Saroj Sundar Baral	Saroj Sundar Baral is an Associate professor and Heading the Department of Chemical Engineering at BITS Pilani, K. K. Birla Goa Campus. He received his PhD in chemical engineering jointly from NIT, Rourkela in 2008. He completed his B.E. chemical engineering at Indira Gandhi Institute of Technology, Sarang in 2001. He joined as an assistant professor in the chemical engineering group of BITS in 2008. His research interests include photocatalysis, biofuels, adsorption, waste water treatment and renewable energy for sustainable future systems.

 	Fig. 1  The effect of defects involving modifications in the band structure, electronic properties, interface properties and photocatalytic mechanism.	 

Point defects	Doping and vacancies	Cause: replacement of atom in the lattice either by doping or vacancy due to heat treatments	
49 and 50

Identification: absence of spots or bright spots in the lattice owing to atoms of different atomic numbers
Line defects	Screw and edge dislocations	Cause: plastic deformation of the crystal lattice	
41 and 51

Identification: HR-TEM; lost crystallographic registry
Planar defects	Grain boundaries	Cause: stacking and antiphase boundaries	
10, 52 and 53

Identification: HR-TEM; continuous lattice fringes interrupted or broken by interfaces
Volume defects	Disorder in lattice and voids	Cause: clustering of defects	
54 and 55

Identification: (1) voids – Nano size pores in bulk. (2) Lattice disorder: regions can be visible in HR-TEM images with lattice disorders or amorphous structures

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of point defects in TiO2 lattice structure where VTi, VO, Tiint and Oint corresponds to Ti vacancy, oxygen vacancy, Ti interstitial and O interstitial respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (b) Schematics of various types of defects attributed to unique atomic arrangement structures in materials (reprinted with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Color change from white TiO2 to blue and red by introduction of hydrogen free-oxygen and hydrogen filled-oxygen vacancies respectively in TiO2 lattice along with their associated atomic structure images. Titanium, oxygen, and hydrogen are indicated by blue, red and green balls in order. (b and c) Bandgap comparison between OV-TiO2 and OVH-TiO2 in reference to pristine TiO2. (d, e) Photocurrent density measurements of OV-TiO2 and OVH-TiO2 under visible light irradiation, where the cell comprises TiO2, Pt and Ag/AgCl as photoanode, a counter electrode and reference electrodes respectively. Atomic structures of OVH-TiO2: (f) ABF-STEM image. (g) The corresponding exaggerated image of the dark yellow rectangle in the rainbow-colored scale. (h) The intensity line profile obtained from (g), depicting the distance between two Ti columns i.e., 3.74 angstroms. (i) Estimation of electron population near Ti, O, H atoms by their electronegative values. The dashed red circle represents O-vacancy (reprinted with permission from ref. 56, Copyright 2018 Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Spinel crystal structure (reprinted with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2017 Wiley). (b) Mn and Covalence states recorded from XANES analysis. (c) Oxygen reduction reaction polarization curves at different rpms in oxygen saturated 0.1 M KOH (ZnCo1.4Mn0.6O4). (d) Oxygen reduction reaction polarization curves of ZnCoxMn2−xO4 (at 1600 rpm). (e) Tafel plots of ZnCoxMn2−xO4. (f) Potentials at 25 μA cm−2 for spinel ZnCoxMn2−xO4 catalysts (reprinted with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2018 Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Mechanism depicting photocatalytic properties of homojunction (crystalline-amorphous) TiO2. (b) Inverse FFT (fast Fourier transform)-TEM images showing crystalline, nano fusion phase and semi-crystalline or amorphous phase. Light yellow (left), dark yellow (middle) and brown (right) corresponds to ordered lattice, slightly distorted and disordered defect respectively. (c) Chemical shifts in Ti 2p3/2 (XPS spectra) of the samples heated at different temperatures in reference to TiO2-A (anatase). (d) Transient photocurrent responses of the respective samples under UV-vis light irradiation. (e) Chemical shifts in Ti 2p3/2 and O 1s spectra of samples heated at 350 and 550 °C. (f) Geometric structures of TiO2 with OV and VTi junctions. The charge densities in homo-junction TiO2 (g) and normalTiO2 (h) (reprinted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2018 Wiley).	 

Cu/CeO2−x	Hydrothermal method with thermal reduction	Oxygen vacancy	Enhancement in visible light absorption, efficient charge separation and transport, more active sites and improved dissociative adsorption	Photocatalytic reduction of CO2	
120

α-Zn–Ge–O	Ion exchange route in the presence of NaBH4	Oxygen vacancy	Enhancement in visible light absorption, narrowing of bandgap, efficient charge separation and transport, higher carrier lifetime, improved chemisorption	Photocatalytic splitting of H2O, NO, CO2	
121

Co3O4/kaolinite	Solution-based method with thermal calcination	Oxygen vacancy	Higher charge separation/transfer and distinctive photocurrent density, higher electrical conductivity	Orange II dye	
122

PrBaCo2O6−x	Sol–gel	Oxygen vacancy	Change in structural symmetry, charge transport	Photocatalytic water oxidation	
123

BiOCl	Solvothermal treatment	Oxygen vacancy	Improved charge separation and wider absorption of visible light, enhanced charge migration, higher charge density	Photocatalytic oxidation of NO	
124

BiOBr	Hydrothermal treatment with surfactant assistance	Oxygen vacancy	Enhanced charge separation by reducing the energy barrier for charge transfer, effective adsorption and activation of target molecule, bandgap narrowing	Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation	
125

BiSbO4	Hydrothermal treatment with UV-light-induced breaking down of Bi–O and Sb–O bonds	Oxygen vacancy	Improved photo-response, higher charge separation	Photocatalytic oxidation of NO	
126

NiS@ g-C3N4	Hydrothermal treatment	Sulfur vacancy	Photothermal effect, intensive near-infrared light absorption, higher charge separation and transport, enhanced hydrophilicity	Photocatalytic hydrogen production	
127

MoS2	Hydrothermal treatment with annealing in inert atmosphere	Sulfur vacancy	Crystal structure, increasing the active sites	Electro catalytic hydrogen production	
128

Mo0.1Ni0.1Cd0.8S	Hydrothermal treatment with thermal calcination	Sulfur vacancy	Adsorption and activation of N2, promote interfacial charge transfer, improved charge separation and higher carrier lifetime	Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation	
129

ZnS	Time adjusted hydrothermal treatment	Sulfur vacancy	Decreased recombination	Photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB)	
130

CdS@ g-C3N4	Hydrothermal treatment with thermal treatment in an inert atmosphere	Sulfur vacancy	Bandgap narrowing, higher rate of charge separation	Photocatalytic degradation of VOC and photocatalytic H2 production	
131

Mo–S nano crystals	Liquid exfoliation and disintegration of MoS2	Sulfur vacancy	Avoided fast charge recombination, better charge transport, improved light harvesting	Photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB) and methylene orange (MO)	
132

ZnO	Solvothermal method with calcination	Zn vacancy	P-type ness, room temperature ferromagnetism, higher charge transport	Photocatalytic degradation of RhB	
70

ZnS	Acid etching of commercial ZnS	Zn vacancy	Lowering of energy barrier for CO2 reduction reaction, suppressing the proton adsorption, decreasing the photo-generated charge recombination	Photocatalytic reduction of CO2	
133

Bi3O4Br	Surfactant polyvinyl pyrrolidone self-assembly strategy	Bi vacancy	Regulated O vacancies for optimum photocatalytic performance, tuning local atomic arrangement and electronic structure, improved charge separation	Photocatalytic H2 production and N2 fixation	
134

BaSO4	Precipitation method	Ba vacancy	Imparted semiconductor properties to insular BaSO4, improved adsorption and activation of NO, charge carrier distribution to facilitate higher electron transfers to adsorbed molecules	Photocatalytic removal of NO in air	
135

NixCo3−xS4/Ni3S2/NF	By cation exchange reaction in a hydrothermal reactor	Co vacancy	Higher current density, better charge separation and transport	Electro catalytic hydrogen production and OER	
136

α-Fe2O3	Hydrothermal process	Fe vacancy	Higher mobility of charge carriers, suppressed recombination, narrow band gap, improved adsorption of O2	Photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol A (BPA)	
137

Cu2−xS	Precipitation method	Cu vacancy	Higher carrier concentration	Photocatalytic degradation of RhB and MO	
138

TiO2	Solvothermal method with thermal calcination	Ti vacancy	P-type conductivity, room temperature ferromagnetism, structural changes inducing physiochemical properties that favors adsorption, increase in carrier concentration near conduction band, decreased recombination, higher charge transport	Photocatalytic degradation of RhB, MO and phenol	
36


 	Fig. 6  (a) Structural model structure of Cu (100)–O surface, with bright orange, dark orange and grey spheres corresponds to surface Cu, subsurface Cu, O respectively. (b) Chemical interactions on Cu(100)–O surface represented in a 3D map. (c) Horizontal map of interaction forces obtained from 3D map and (d) simultaneously recorded constant height tunneling map. (e) A structural model for the surface area covered by (c) and (d). NC-AFM images of CeO2(111) with (f) surface OV and (g) subsurface OV. The line profile showing surface OV surrounded by 6O atoms (f) and subsurface OV surrounded by the triangular arrangement of O atoms (g) (projecting outward). The associated structural models are shown in (h) and (i) respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM and (b) HR-TEM of defective Bi2WO6. (c) STEM-HAADF image of defect-rich Bi2WO6 with [100] and [001] facets as depicted in the inset. Intensity profiles in the orange rectangular box (d) and green box (e) associated with STEM-HAADF image in (c) (reprinted with permission from ref. 143, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society). (f) HAADF-STEM image of (001) facet. Atomic structure images of (g) outer layer and (h) grain interior. (i) Schematic representation of BiOCl crystal structure. HAADF-STEM image of (100) facet (j) and atomic structure images of (k) outer layer and (l) grain interior (reprinted with permission from ref. 144, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Ti L-edge. (b) High resolution L2 XAS spectra. (c) DOS (calculated). (d) Three dimensional spatial distributions of spin polarization ((001)-planar) of defect-rich Ti15O32 model consisting 6.25% of Ti interstitials. (e) XANES of TiO2, TiO2-5, TiO2-10, TiO2-20, TiO2-30 (reprinted with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2020 Nature). Electron energy loss spectroscopy for identifying defect concentration at 3 different depths using Ti-L edge spectra (f) (reprinted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  X-band EPR spectra collected at 123 K for TiO2 photocatalysts treated at different atmosphere compositions and annealing temperatures. (a) Air treated TiO2 samples annealed at 300, 500, 700, 900 °C. (b) Ar treated TiO2 samples annealed at 300, 500, 700, 900 °C. (c and d) H2 and Ar/H2 treated TiO2 samples heated at 300, 500, 700, 900 °C. (e) Experimentally deduced spin concentration vs. annealing temperature (T, °C) of the different TiO2 samples depicted in (a–d). (f) Hydrogen evolution rate of all the TiO2 samples considered in the above cases. (g) Hydrogen evolution rate of samples treated in variant atmospheric conditions at 500 °C (optimum temperature value) under visible and UV light irradiation. (h) Hydrogen evolution rate of optimum sample i.e., (500 °C, Ar/H2) annealed for different time periods (reprinted with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  BiOCl photocatalysts with oxygen vacancies obtained before and after exposure to H2O (a) O 1s spectra, (b) Bi 4f spectra (reprinted with permission from ref. 153, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). XPS spectra of Bi2WO6 and defect-rich Bi2WO6 (c) O 1s spectra, (d) Bi 4f spectra and (e) W 4f to determine the location of defects (reprinted with permission from ref. 154, Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Valence band spectra of monolayer and nano-plates BiO2−x (reprinted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2018 Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) PALS of P25 and H–P25 with blue and red fitting lines respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 161, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (b and c) Raman spectra of CeO2 and defective CeO2 obtained from DFT calculations where red, yellow and gold spheres indicate O, Ce, Ce3+ ions/atoms in order (reprinted with permission from ref. 166, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (d) Raman spectra of cocatalysts doped TiO2 resulting in defect formation (samples in the inset: T-TiO2, TZ-TiO2/ZnS (10%) composite, TZG-TiO2/ZnS/rGO (2.5%), TZG (5%)-TiO2/ZnS/rGO with 5% graphene doping). (e) Graphene oxide and rGO characteristic peaks to measure ID/IG ratios in TZG and TZG (5%); an indicator of defect density in connection to rGO concentration. (f) Raman spectra of fresh and recycled catalysts i.e., before and after photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB). “-U” indicates the corresponding recycled catalysts (reprinted with permission from ref. 158, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic band structure (energy level) representation of (a) semi-conductor, (b) metal oxide. The electronegativity values of metal cation and oxygen anion are indicated as χMn+ and χO2− respectively. (c) Schematic energy level diagram of defect-rich MoO3. EF = Fermi level. Ultra-violet Photoemission spectra (UPS) of defective MoO3 (oxygen vacancies): (d) secondary electron cut-off (ESC), (e) valence band, (f) exaggerated view of shallow valence features where “d” refers to the gap ascribed to oxygen vacancies. (g) XPS spectra of MoO3 (Mo 3d), indicating an increase in oxygen concentration with Mo5+ amount (top to bottom). (h) Relation of work function with oxygen deficiency, ϕ = measured work function of defective MoO3; ϕ0 = reference stoichiometric oxide work function; Δϕχ = Work function changes attributed to low electronegativity of cations; Δϕd = Work function changes attributed to donor states. Plots depicting the change of WF values with (i) electronegativity, and (j) donor states (reprinted with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2012 Wiley).	 

Fe2O3	Cation vacancy	Quasi Fermi level shifts	Photocatalytic water splitting	
185

Beta-Ga2O3	Both anion and cation vacancies	Oxygen rich and oxygen deficient environments resulted in mid-gap Fermi level pinning, while optimum defects up-shifted the Fermi level	Opto-electronics; where WF values determine the charge transport	
186

Pb1−xBiTe, Pb1+xTe	Complex defect cluster formation (VTe, Pbint)	Tuning the Fermi level for optimal carrier concentration	Thermoelectric performance and can be extended to many chalcogenide material systems	
187

As, Br substituted MoSe2	Se vacancy	Fermi level pinning at interface between metal electrodes and 2D materials	High performing 2D materials in nano electronics	
188

MoSe2	Mo and Se vacancies	Fermi level shift from semiconductor to metal attributed to Mo vacancies, while Se vacancies reduces band gap	Optoelectronic and spintronic	
189

AgxBi2−xSe	Bi vacancy	Tuning the Fermi level by hole doping as Ag is substituted for Bi	Enhanced charge transport properties	
190

TiO2 nanotubes	O vacancy	Up-shift of Fermi level leading to enhanced charge separation	Photocatalytic water splitting	
191

TiO2 at (001) and (101) facets	O vacancy	Higher charge separation of charge carriers attributed to up-shift in Fermi level and subsequent decrease in WF values	Photocatalytic and solar cell applications	
192

TiO2-IO	O vacancy	Up-shift of Fermi level close to conduction band attributed to the donor levels induced by O vacancies, accompanied by increase in photo-anodic current	Photocatalytic water splitting	
193

ZnO	O vacancy	O vacancy pushing Fermi level towards conduction band minimum and exhibiting n-type behavior. Also aided in charge separation	Photocatalytic degradation of MO	
194


 	Fig. 13  (a) Demonstration of favorable conduction band position (up-shift) for effective electron transfer attributed to N-doping in Ta2O5 (reprinted with permission from ref. 202, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (b) The representation of enhanced water adsorption on the polarized surface (due to the presence of dipoles) resulting from the vacancy formation (reprinted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (c) Side view of the difference in charge density and planar averaged electron density difference Δρ(z) (yellow and green locations represent electron depletion and abundancy in order). (d) Surface potential pictures (dark state). (e) Cross-section of surface potential distribution along blue line ab and cd in (d), and existing relationship among dipole moments, built-in electric field, surface photo voltage and ultimate photocatalytic activities of Bi8(CrO4)O11 and Bi14CrO24 (f) (reprinted with permission from ref. 205, Copyright 2020 Oxford University Press).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Vgs-sweep-dependent photocurrent vs. laser power at different conditions under visible-NIR irradiation (λ = 638 nm). (b and c) Schematics diagrams of charge trapping, (e–h) recombination in defect induced energy states (in the forbidden regions) and at different Vgs respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 211, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison of photocatalytic activity (a) and charge carrier transfer mechanism (b) among defective TiO2 with defects at the surface, sub-surface, at the surface and sub-surface and reference P25. (c) HR-TEM image comparison between defective and P25, and (d) TOF-SIMS depth profiles depicting the oxygen concentration in P25 and defective TiO2, observing a gradual decrease in O concentration towards the surface as compared to bulk (0–8 nm). (e) EELS spectra indicating oxygen vacancies in the form of Ti3+ ions, followed by a reduction from Ti4+ ascribed to extra electrons at defect sites. (f) ESR spectra depicting the presence of surface and subsurface oxygen vacancies in defect-rich TiO2 (g) Graphical representation of modulation in valence band tail and up-shift of Fermi level due to an increase in density of states (reprinted with permission from ref. 226, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  Photocatalytic mechanism in catalysts (in the inset): at (a) higher defect density and (b) optimal defect concentration.	 

Se doped TiO2	Increased PL intensity (trap-assisted recombination)	RhB degradation	
247

TiO2 and ZnO	XRD, Raman spectra. Here, PL spectra did not probe the defect concentration due to limitations from penetration depth (as they are bulk defects)	MB degradation	
248

ZnO	XPS study; by calculation O/Zn atomic ratios on the surface. The thermal shocks modified the surface properties without affecting structure, phase and morphology of the catalyst	MB degradation	
249

TiO2	HAADF-STEM images for crystallinity check. Improved crystallinity enhanced the H2 yield	H2 production from water splitting reaction	
250

SrTiO3	XRD, and UV-DRS analysis. The OV concentration was optimized by controlling the Sr/Ti ratio (to 1.1). The photocatalytic activity increased with defect concentration	Photocatalytic oxidation of NOx	
251

Al doped ZnO	XRD and PL analysis. Excessive doping of Al increased the defect concentration and reduced the photocatalytic activity	Methylene orange (MO) degradation	
252

Cd doped ZnO	PL. Improved recombination attributed to narrowing of space charge layer; as the penetration depth of light into ZnO is higher than width of space charge layer	MB degradation	
253

Tb doped TiO2	PL. Increased recombination of electron–hole pair at higher OV concentration attributed to excess Tb doping	MB degradation	
254

Er3+ doped TiO2	PL. Excessive Er doping (increased OV) resulted in the degeneracy near the conduction band and caused a blue shift in the absorption spectra. The increased defect density besides affecting electro–hole separation also reduced the charge carrier concentration and decreased the photocatalytic activity	Flowing gas phase VOCs	
218

Perovskite SrTiO3	XPS, EPR. OV was instrumental in improving the light absorption properties of catalysts (band edge modulation). Excess defects created higher trap states and resulted in lowering the mobility of free carriers and photocatalytic activity	H2 production from water splitting reaction	
255

SnS2/TiO2	PL, EIS. Higher defect concentration (excess Ti3+) increased trap assisted recombination and reduced the density of photocurrent	Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO	
220

GO doped O rich TiO2	Photocatalytic results. The higher adsorption of water molecules on defect sites were comprehensively studied.256 This selective adsorption of water over CO2 on surface of catalysts greatly hampered the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4. Defects can play a significant role in the selectivity of products	Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O	
257

Li doped TiO2	EPR, XPS (Ti3+ formation). Excessive Li doping increased the defect density and acted as recombination centers	Photocatalytic degradation of RhB and H2 production	
258

Sr2−xNaxNbO4	XPS and Raman spectra	RhB degradation	
259


 	Fig. 17  (a) Formation of tetrahedrally coordinated Ti4+ from octahedron coordination due to oxygen vacancy generation in TiO2. (b) Plausibe mechanism depicting selective reduction of NO over Fe–TiO2. (c) Comparison of photocatalytic performance between TiO2 and Fe–TiO2 under UV light irradiation (reprinted with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Favorable adsorption and dissociation (direct) at defect sites. (e) CO2 dissociation through hydrogenation (to COOH). Spheres colored blue-O2 atoms of molecule, red-O atoms of TiO2, black-carbon atoms, grey-Ti atoms (reprinted with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (f) Enhanced water adsorption at a low coordinated Ti–OH sites (highly curved structures of the surface) with simultaneous hole trapping, which is assisted by water (reprinted with permission from ref. 270, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic demonstration of differences in interface properties defect sites (oxygen vacancy) and the normal surface owing to Pt loading. This modification enhances the rate of oxygen reduction reaction due to efficient electron transfer to Pt at defect sites (reprinted with permission from ref. 290, Copyright 2017 Nature). (b) Schematic diagrams of photocatalytic degradation of organic dye and photocatalytic hydrogen production on CdS/BiVO4via Z-scheme mode of charge transfer. (c) Comparative EIS Nyquist plots of photocatalysts to validate Z-scheme and extent of charge separation in composite photocatalyst i.e., CdS/BiVO4 composites (reprinted with permission from ref. 292, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

Pt/TiO2	O vacancy	Oxalic acid	HER, 2850 μmol h−1 g−1	
295

Cr2O3/Rh/SrTiO3	O vacancy	4-Chlorophenol	HER, 800 μmol h−1 g−1	
296

Ag/Co3O4/CuO	O vacancy	RhB	HER, 97.2 μmol h−1 g−1	
282

MoS2 QDs@ZnIn2S4@RGO	S vacancy	RhB	HER, 37.8 μmol h−1 g−1	
297

Carbon-doped TiO2	O vacancy	Lactic acid	HER, 373.8 μmol h−1 g−1	
298

Pt/STO:Rh	O vacancy	Phenol	HER, 1.9 μmol h−1 g−1	
283

Ni/CdS	S vacancy	Furfural alcohol	HER, 56.25 mL h−1 g−1	
299

CdS/CdOx	O vacancy	Polylactic acid	HER, 64.3 mL h−1 g−1	
300

rGO/PbTiO3	O vacancy	RhB	HER, 12 μmol h−1 g−1	
301

Au/TiO2	O vacancy	Juice production waste waters (saccharides)	HER, 115 μmol h−1 g−1	
302

Black TiO2	O vacancy	MB degradation	2.3 times higher than pristine TiO2	
303

Pt/GO/TiO2–P	O vacancy	4-Chlorophenol	HER, 10 μmol h−1 g−1	
304

Pt/CdS/TiO2	S and O vacancy	Simultaneous degradation of organic and inorganic compounds	HER, 55 μmol h−1 g−1	
305

MoS2/NiFe LDH	S vacancy	RhB	HER, 552 μmol h−1 g−1	
306

SrTiO3/(Ag/Fe3O4)/g-C3N4 (SFC)	O vacancy	Levofloxacin	HER, 4200 μmol h−1 g−1	
307


 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of photo-generated charge trapping at oxygen vacancy sites with OV acting as a bridge between Pt and TiO2 interface. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism involving exclusive “interface” provoked photocatalytic cycle.313 (c) Schematics of higher rate of charge transfer and reactions (electron–hole pair) following the deposition of Rh at defect sites. Photo-reduction at Rh; and photo-oxidation at O2−.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
