Enhanced photovoltaic performance of polymer-filled nanoporous Si hybrid structures  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP07413H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP07413H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5121-5126Enhanced photovoltaic performance of polymer-filled nanoporous Si hybrid structures

        
          
            Minjae 
            Gang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Joo-Hyoung 
            Lee
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jhyoung@gist.ac.kr
Received 
      30th October 2016
    , Accepted 24th January 2017First published on 31st January 2017AbstractWe propose a novel hybrid structure for improving the efficiency of crystalline silicon solar cells. By employing first-principles calculations, we demonstrate that ordered, nanoporous silicon (np-Si), when filled with polythiophene (PT) inside the pores, exhibits a substantially enhanced absorption coefficient compared to both np-Si and the bulk, which makes the np-Si/PT heterojunction a superior light absorbing material. In addition, the PT-filled porous structure forms a staggered gap, or type II, heterojunction at the interfaces, where the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum of the composite reside on PT and np-Si, respectively. Moreover, the pore-filling polymer brings about a highly dispersive valence band, which provides a major pathway for hole transport. These results suggest that such a hybrid structure, which may be easier to scale up than nanowire-based approaches, will efficiently dissociate photo-induced electron–hole pairs and reduce the amount of material for light absorption, thus leading to a cost-effective and high-performance solar cell.
1 Introduction
Silicon has been utilized as the active layer material of choice for photovoltaic (PV) applications since the first solar cell based on a p–n junction device was introduced in the 1950’s.1,2 Yet, despite an enormous reduction in the cost of silicon-based PV devices since that time3 – by a factor of 10 – the price of solar-to-electric conversion is still larger than other renewable technologies.4 While PV technologies based on other materials, such as dye-sensitized TiO2,5–7 polymer/organic semiconductor heterojunction blends,8,9 thin films of CdTe10–12 or Cu-In-Ga-Se,13–15 or halide perovskites,16–18 hold promise for cost reduction, Si remains by far the most widely used PV material due to its abundance, high efficiency, stability and existing infrastructure.19 In spite of these appealing attributes, however, our ability to continue to push the cost of Si PV cells down substantially further will require solutions to several major bottlenecks. First of all, while crystalline bulk Si (c-Si) cells have the right size of the band gap to absorb the visible range, their indirect nature necessitates thick (∼100 μm) active layers for sufficient light absorption, which stimulated various attempts to control the electronic structure and band gap through nanostructuring.20,21 In addition, high spatial intermixing of electron (e−) and hole (h+) states makes it likely for photo-generated e−–h+ pairs to recombine, which requires a high quality material so that charge carriers can reach the metal contacts without recombination.
In recent years, there has been great interest in Si/polymer hybrid structures for both reducing the thickness of the active layer and retaining the high efficiency of Si solar cells. A promising approach along this direction is based on Si nanocones (SiNCs) and organic polymers:22–27 the composites formed with pyramid-shaped Si structures and poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) were reported to show a power conversion efficiency higher than 11%. A similar efficiency has been observed in hybrid solar cells employing Si nanowires (SiNWs, ∼13%)28,29 or Si nanopillars (SiNPs, ∼10.6%)30 and PEDOT:PSS.
Essentially, the underlying principle of Si/polymer hybrid configurations is to merge aspects of bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) in organic PV cells with those of traditional p–i–n junctions to take advantage of their strengths: to maximize the light absorption with structural engineering and utilize the high electron molibity of Si and, at the same time, to achieve low-temperature processibility through combination with organic materials.22 By controlling the size and shape of nanostructures such as SiNCs or SiNWs, the magnitude of the band gap can be tuned to allow as much light absorption as possible in the visible range, where the photon flux becomes the strongest. Recently, Si nanostructures with cylindrical pores, nanoporous Si, have also been shown to possess property tunability through varying the porosity, which leads to a superior light absorption and PV conversion efficiency compared to the bulk.31 Besides, solution-processible organic materials can build a heterojunction with Si at the interface that may replace the p–n junction, which is necessary for efficiently separating e−–h+ pairs but requires expensive and high-temperature processes. Moreover, such structural hybridization can be combined with other optimization techniques to produce enhancement in the cell performance.32
It should be noted that property engineering so far has been devoted mostly to the inorganic side of the composite through nanostructuring for improved light absorption. But, in spite of being an important constituent, polymers have not been paid much attention for such structural optimization and remain entangled in the cells, which is particularly disadvantageous for charge transport. Indeed, increased structural uniformity can significantly impact charge collection and transport in polymers: the carrier mobility of a polymer chain can show an order-of-magnitude enhancement when the crystallinity of the polymer increases33–36 and photo-generated charges were collected with over 90% efficiency in polymer/porous TiO2 composites.37 These observations make it highly desirable to achieve structural regularity in polymers, and it is with this in mind that we propose a hybrid solar cell structure based nanoporous Si with aligned polymers within pores (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  (a) Structure of the np-Si/PT heterojunction. Si atoms are represented in orange, C in cyan, S in yellow and H in white. A solid square represents a unit cell of the hybrid structure. Schematic diagrams in (b), (c) and (d) represent a solar cell with p–i–n structure, a bulk heterojunction solar cell, and the proposed solar cell structure based on np-Si/PT, respectively. 
In this arrangement, the Si framework plays the role of the acceptor whereas the donor is the pore-filling polymer. By hybridizing the p–i–n and BHJ PV frameworks with such a high structural regularity, we may be able to further improve the efficiency of Si/polymer hybrid solar cells. Indeed, our density functional theory (DFT) calculations demonstrate that nanoporous Si filled with a simple polymer, polythiophene (PT), forms a type II (staggered) heterojunction at the nanoporous Si/polymer interface, drawing holes into the polymer while leaving electrons in the Si region. In so doing, a new transport channel is developed by PT in the valence band, which implies that holes can be efficiently extracted through the polymer. In addition, while photo-generated electrons and holes form strongly bound excitons in BHJs, nanoporous Si/PT hybrid structures possess a high dielectric constant so that the e−–h+ pairs can easily be dissociated. Furthermore, it is shown that the polymer chain substantially contributes to overall light absorption in the visible range, which makes the ordered composite an excellent material for high-performance solar cell applications.
2 Computational methodology
Nanoporous Si (np-Si) is formed by incorporating a [001]-oriented cylindrical pore of 10 Å diameter into 3 × 3 × 3 unit cells, and Si atoms at the pore surface are passivated with H atoms to remove the resulting dangling bonds. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the np-Si/PT hybrid cell is constructed with np-Si containing PT chains inside the pores, which are aligned along the pore axis. All DFT calculations are carried out with the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP),38 using a 400 eV plane-wave cutoff and the projector augmented wave (PAW) method.39 To perform the Brillouin zone integration, Gaussian smearing is employed with a smearing parameter of 0.05 eV and 14 k-points in the irreducible wedge. The atomic positions are optimized until the energy difference between successive atomic configurations is less than 1 meV. At structural equilibrium, the PT chains are found to be attracted toward the Si surface so that the shortest vertical distance between the chain and the pore surface (δ in Fig. 1(a)) is 3.48 Å.
3 Results and discussion
The band structure of np-Si is presented in Fig. 2(a). As is seen from the figure, the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) of np-Si are located at Γ and X point, respectively, with the band gap of 1.13 eV. However, the energy difference between the Γ and X points in the lowest conduction band is as little as 10 meV, making the gap quasi-direct. In contrast, the band is highly dispersive in the Γ → Z direction in the conduction band, which implies that the electrons will be efficiently transported along the pore axis. On the valence band side, however, the PT chains within the pores give rise to a major modification in the electronic structure. As is shown in Fig. 2(b), while the energy bands of np-Si/PT around the CBM are nearly unchanged compared to those without PT, a new band above the highest valence band of np-Si is developed, which leads to the reduction of the gap by 18% (0.92 eV). Although the PT-induced band is flat along Γ → X, it is more dispersive than the original band in the [001] direction, which will be particularly advantageous for hole transport.
 Fig. 2  Band structure of (a) np-Si and (b) np-Si/PT. The red curve in (b) represents the contribution from the polymer chain. 
In order to examine the optical absorption, the complex dielectric function ε(ω) is calculated within random phase approximation,40 and the reflectivity () and absorption coefficient (α) are computed as a function of the photon frequency ω using (1)and (2)Here, ñ(ω) = n(ω) + iκ(ω) is the complex refractive index, which is related to ε(ω) through ε(ω) = [ñ(ω)]2.41 As is seen from Fig. 3(a), the reflectivity of the porous structures is lower than that of bulk Si in the entire range of the photon energy (ħω). The reduction in (ω) from the bulk is 24% on average and is preserved even when the pore is filled: the average difference in the reflectivity between np-Si and the hybrid structure is as small as 4%. Low reflectivity enables more lights to be transmitted into the material for absorption, which is described by α(ω) in Fig. 3(b). As is clear from Fig. 3(b), the α(ω) of np-Si is very close that of c-Si for the photon energy less than 2.6 eV, beyond which bulk Si has a higher absorption coefficient. When the pore is filled with PT chains, however, the α(ω) of the hybrid structure becomes the highest among the three cases for ℏω ≤ 2.5 eV (inset of Fig. 3(b)). Especially, the maximum enhancement in the absorption coefficient is by a factor of five compared to c-Si near ℏω ∼ 1.35 eV, and examining the absorption properties of the PT chains reveals that the improvement in α(ω) is contributed by the polymer, which has a peak in α(ω) at the same photon energy. Combined with low (ω), high α(ω) makes the np-Si/PT composites an attractive material for photovoltaic applications, but to successfully function as a solar cell, it is required to efficiently separate the photo-generated electron and hole pairs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Reflectivity () of np-Si (blue) and the np-Si/PT heterojunction (red) as a function of photon energy and (b) absorption coefficients (α). Inset: α near the absorption edge. The results for c-Si (black) are presented for comparison. 
To investigate the dissociation of e−–h+ pairs, we compute the electron density distributions at the VBM and CBM of both np-Si and np-Si/PT, which are presented in Fig. 4. It is clear from Fig. 4(a) and (b) that the electron densities of np-Si at the VBM and CBM are spatially well-distributed and substantially mixed, implying that the e−–h+ pairs are likely to recombine, and such intermixture in density will be a nontrivial hindrance for efficient electron–hole separation. Forming a heterojunction between np-Si and PT, however, causes a significant change in the electron density distribution.
 Fig. 4  Contour plots of electron densities in the (a) VBM and (b) CBM of np-Si, respectively. (c) and (d) Are the same as (a) and (b) for np-Si/PT. In each case, the isosurfaces are plotted at ρave + σ(ρ), where ρave and σ(ρ) are the spatial average and standard deviation of the density, respectively. 
As is presented in Fig. 4(c) and (d), the VBM and CBM of the np-Si/PT heterostructure are located on the PT chain and Si side, respectively, which leads to a spatial separation of the charge density. It should be noted that in forming the interface, the H-terminated pore surface does not produce localized electron states near the pore surface, implying that the electron transport is predominantly governed by the spatially distributed CBM state as in np-Si cases. When isolated, PT has the energy gap (ΔEPT) of 1.10 eV in our calculations, whereas the corresponding gap of np-Si (ΔEnp-Si) is 1.13 eV. When forming a heterojunction, however, both the VBM and CBM states of PT are positioned higher in energy than those of np-Si, respectively, resulting in a type II interface with a gap of 0.92 eV between the VBM of PT and CBM of np-Si as is schematically depicted in Fig. 5(a). It should be noted that dangling bonds can exist at the pore surface in actual devices, which might then create a localized state that impacts the hole transport on the polymer side. Due to their highly reactive nature, however, the density of the dangling bonds is expected to be very low and thus the electronic structure of the np-Si/PT compound would not be strongly affected.
 Fig. 5  (a) Energy level alignment at the np-Si/PT interface (in units of eV) and (b) conversion efficiency (eqn (3)) of c-Si (black), np-Si (blue) and np-Si/PT hybrid solar cells (red), respectively. 
One of the key parameters that determine the efficiency of a photovoltaic device is the open circuit voltage (Voc). Previous studies demonstrated that Voc is given as a function of the energy gap between the CBM of the acceptor and VBM of the donor (ΔD/A),42 which should be tuned to maximize the efficiency. In standard BHJ solar cells, ΔD/A is determined by the choice of component materials and their interface morphology, and modifying its value poses a nontrivial task. In contrast, np-Si/polymer heterojunctions provide an additional axis of tunability of ΔD/A. Since the CBM of the acceptor, Si in the present case, can be modified separately via quantum confinement, by varying the pore size and density, this additional control over ΔD/A expands the opportunities to optimize Voc.
It should be noted that the dissociation efficiency of the bound e−–h+ pair at the donor–acceptor interface is crucial in determining the photocurrent. In polymer/organic semiconductor solar cells, low dielectric constants (εM) make an e−–h+ pair strongly bound by the Coulomb interaction across the interface, causing only 60% of the created e−–h+ pairs to be dissociated.43 However, our linear response calculations show that the εM of np-Si and PT is 7.7 and 1.9, respectively, which leads to much more weakly bound electron–hole pairs across the interface in the present heterojunction and will result in a high dissociation efficiency of the e−–h+ pairs. Indeed, it was recently reported that Si nanocrystal/poly(3-hexylthiophene) films exhibit an increased exciton dissociation at the interface, which was confirmed through photoluminescence lifetime and scanning electron microscopy/energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy measurements.35
In addition to generating and separating electron–hole pairs, it is also necessary to effectively transport and collect the created charge carriers to produce a photovoltage. To assess the transportability, we compute the effective mass along the pore axis, mz, which is inversely proportional to the mobility. From mz = (1/ℏ2)∂2E(k)/∂2kz, it is found that the effective mass of an electron (mez) in np-Si is 0.20m0 in the lowest conduction band, where m0 is the free electron mass. When forming the interface with PT, mez remains the same as that of np-Si, indicating that the electron transport is not affected by the formation of the heterojunction. Regarding the hole transport, the effective mass of a hole, mhz, is found to be 0.32m0 for np-Si in the highest valence band. In the np-Si/PT hybrid structure, on the other hand, mhz = 0.14m0, which is contributed from the PT band as is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). This value is comparable to that of c-Si, 0.17m0 in our calculations, which makes the aligned polymers serve as an efficient transport channel for the hole collection.
The absorption properties of np-Si/PT combined with effective e−–h+ separation and high hole mobility could lead to improved overall efficiencies in Si solar cells. To estimate the cell efficiency, we calculate the absorbed photon energy flux in percent, η, as a function of the cell thickness (d), which is defined as (3)and presented in Fig. 4(b) for the c-Si, np-Si and np-Si/PT cases. In eqn 3, S(ε) is the solar spectral irradiance at Air Mass 1.544 and ΔD/A/ε represents the fraction of the photon energy converted to the excitation energy of an e−–h+ pair,31 respectively.
As is clear from Fig. 4(b), the η(d) of np-Si is substantially increased from that of c-Si by over 2.4 times on average: the η of c-Si remains less than 15% in the entire thickness range, whereas it becomes 20% for d as small as 0.6 μm in np-Si cases and reaches as high as 33% when d = 5 μm. Since the absorption coefficient of np-Si is close to that of c-Si for ℏω < 2.6 eV, the enhancement in η originates from the reduced reflectivity of the porous structure as is seen from Fig. 3(a). When the pore is filled, η(d) exhibits a further improvement from the np-Si cases and the average increase is as large as 18% with 29% maximum near 0.39 μm thickness. Unlike the np-Si structure, the enhancement in η(d) of the hybrid structure arises from the high α(ω) rather than low reflectivity as is shown in Fig. 3. Assuming that an absorbed photon produces one e−–h+, which is completely separated and collected, η(d) constitutes an appropriate measure of the power conversion efficiency and our calculations demonstrate that np-Si/PT hybrid cells can be at least twice as efficient as c-Si cells.
4 Conclusions
In this work we present a novel route for enhancing the efficiency of silicon solar cells and reducing the required amount of material by constructing a heterojunction between nanoporous Si and organic polymers. Our first-principles density functional theory calculations demonstrate that a type II heterojunction is formed at the interface, where PT and np-Si act as an electron donor and acceptor upon light absorption, respectively. While the absorption coefficient α(ω) of the porous structure remains nearly the same as that of c-Si in the visible range, the contribution from PT makes α(ω) larger than those of both c-Si and np-Si, resulting in the sharply enhanced optical absorption.
Recently, hybrid structures based on conjugated polymers interfaced with Si have received enormous attention for solar cell applications due to their characteristics. This approach combines the processibility of polymers with high charge carrier mobility of the inorganic material, and the conversion efficiency of the Si/polymer hybrid cells is normally around 13%.28,29,45 While these values appear promising, they are still much lower than the efficiency of c-Si.19 In previous Si/polymer heterojunctions, structural engineering has been focused on the Si side as in the form of nanowires, nanocones or nanocrystals for higher optical absorption, but polymers remain mostly entangled, which imposes a strong limitation on the charge extraction.
In contrast, the present np-Si/PT hybrid structure contains aligned polymer chains which will serve as an excellent pathway for hole transport in the device by creating a highly dispersive band. In addition, the large dielectric constant of Si makes the majority of photo-excited charges nearly free carriers as opposed to strongly bound excitons with short lifetimes and thus a requirement of high interface density would not be as stringent. Moreover, the np-Si/PT composite is an inherently connected 3-dimensional structure as opposed to nanowires or nanocones, which allows the charge carriers to be transported throughout the material for extraction. Since a number of experimental studies have reported not only inexpensive and scalable routes for fabricating aligned nanoporous materials, such as superlattice nanowire pattern transfer46 or deep reactive ion etching,47 but also promising approaches to infiltrate polymers into nanopores,34 our results present a novel pathway for high-performance, cost-effective Si-based hybrid solar cell applications. Finally, we note that while in this work an organic polymer was used as the acceptor material, other suitable choices could be used, including those based on inorganic materials, provided they can form a type II junction and have high hole mobility.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) with the grant NRF-2015R1D1A1A01060480 and by the DGIST R&D Program of the Ministry of Science (16-BD-01).
References
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676–677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, A. Wang, M. A. Green and F. Ferrazza, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991–1993 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Swanson, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2006, 14, 443–453 Search PubMed .
Annual Energy Outlook 2015, DOE/EIA-0383.
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2000, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan and G. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2136–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Britt and C. Ferekides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 2851–2852 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gloeckler, I. Sankin and Z. Zhao, IEEE J. Photov., 2013, 3, 1389–1393 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Z. Li, Y. Wang, A. Compaan, T. Ren and W.-J. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2907–2911 CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, M. Yuan, W. Liu, A. J. Kellock, S. J. Chey, V. Deline and A. G. Schrott, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3657–3662 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Chen, W. T. Chen, Y.-T. Yen, T. S. Kao, T.-Y. Chuang, Y.-K. Liao, K.-H. Wu, A. Yabushita, T.-P. Hsieh, M. D. B. Charlton, D. P. Tsai, H.-C. Kuo and Y.-L. Chueh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9341–9348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Friedlmeier, P. Jackson, A. Bauer, D. Hariskos, O. Kiowski, R. Menner, R. Wuerz and M. Powalla, Thin Solid Films, 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2016.08.021 .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 CAS .
S. Collavini, S. F. Völker and J. L. Delgado, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9757–9759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Battaglia, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1552–1576 CAS .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, H. Li, J. Y. L. Ho, M. Wong and H. S. Kwok, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2563–2568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, E. C. Garnett, S. Wang, Z. Yu, S. Fan, M. L. Brongersma, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2971–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Wang and Rusli, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 191 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nahor, I. Shalev, A. Sa’ar and S. Yitzchaik, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 1212–1217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kou, K. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Chi, S. Lu, S. Yue, Y. Li, S. Qu and Z. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 42341–42345 RSC .
S. Jäckle, M. Liebhaber, J. Niederhausen, M. Büchele, R. Félix, R. G. Wilks, M. Bär, K. Lips and S. Christiansen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8841–8848 Search PubMed .
E. Johlin, A. Al-Obeidi, G. Nogay, M. Stuckelberger, T. Buonassisi and J. C. Grossman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15169–15176 CAS .
K.-T. Park, H.-J. Kim, M.-J. Park, J.-H. Jeong, J. Lee, D.-G. Choi, J.-H. Lee and J.-H. Choi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, X. Shen, X. Mu, J. Zhang, B. Sun, L. Zeng, L. Yang, Y. Wu, H. He and D. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Pudasaini, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, M. Sharma, D. Elam, A. Ponce and A. A. Ayon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9620–9627 CAS .
G. Shi and E. Kioupakis, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Fang, F. Zhang, T. Song and B. Sun, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 345–347 CrossRef CAS .
K. Coakley, B. Srinivasan, J. Ziebarth, C. Goh, Y. Liu and M. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1927–1932 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rawolle, K. Sarkar, M. A. Niedermeier, M. Schindler, P. Lellig, J. S. Gutmann, J.-F. Moulin, M. Haese-Seiller, A. S. Wochnik, C. Scheu and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 719–729 CAS .
D. Kajiya and K. Saitow, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15780–15788 RSC .
V. Skrypnychuk, G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, P. I. Gordiichuk, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. Herrmann, M. F. Toney and D. R. Barbero, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2359–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abrusci, I.-K. Ding, M. Al-Hashimi, T. Segal-Peretz, M. D. McGehee, M. Heeney, G. L. Frey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3051–3058 CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
M. Gajdoš, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 045112 CrossRef .

          P. Yu and M. Cardona, Fundamentals of Semiconductors, Springer, 4th edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
X. Zhu and A. Khan, MRS Bull., 2010, 35, 443–448 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 216601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
ASTM G173-03(2012), Standard Tables for Reference Solar Spectral Irradiances: Direct Normal and Hemispherical on 37° Tilted Surface, ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA, 2012, http://www.astm.org.
R. Liu, S.-T. Lee and B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6007–6012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-K. Yu, S. Mitrovic, D. Tham, J. Varghese and J. R. Heath, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 718–721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, H.-T. Wang, D. H. Lee, M. Fardy, Z. Huo, T. P. Russell and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4279–4283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Structure of the np-Si/PT heterojunction. Si atoms are represented in orange, C in cyan, S in yellow and H in white. A solid square represents a unit cell of the hybrid structure. Schematic diagrams in (b), (c) and (d) represent a solar cell with p–i–n structure, a bulk heterojunction solar cell, and the proposed solar cell structure based on np-Si/PT, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Band structure of (a) np-Si and (b) np-Si/PT. The red curve in (b) represents the contribution from the polymer chain.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Reflectivity () of np-Si (blue) and the np-Si/PT heterojunction (red) as a function of photon energy and (b) absorption coefficients (α). Inset: α near the absorption edge. The results for c-Si (black) are presented for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 4  Contour plots of electron densities in the (a) VBM and (b) CBM of np-Si, respectively. (c) and (d) Are the same as (a) and (b) for np-Si/PT. In each case, the isosurfaces are plotted at ρave + σ(ρ), where ρave and σ(ρ) are the spatial average and standard deviation of the density, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Energy level alignment at the np-Si/PT interface (in units of eV) and (b) conversion efficiency (eqn (3)) of c-Si (black), np-Si (blue) and np-Si/PT hybrid solar cells (red), respectively.	 
	(3)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
