Electrode–electrolyte interfaces in lithium-based batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE02555F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE02555F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 527-543Electrode–electrolyte interfaces in lithium-based batteries

        
          
            Xingwen 
            Yu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Arumugam 
            Manthiram
          
          
        
      *
      Materials Science & Engineering Program and Texas Materials Institute, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX78712, USA. E-mail: manth@austin.utexas.edu
Received 
      6th September 2017
    , Accepted 9th January 2018First published on 9th January 2018AbstractThe electrode–electrolyte interface has been a critical concern since the birth of lithium(Li)-based batteries (lithium or Li+-ion batteries) that are operated with liquid electrolytes and in recent years to increase the operating voltages. The electrode–electrolyte interfacial behavior has also been in sharp focus with respect to intensively pursued solid-electrolyte-based (polymer- or ceramic-electrolyte) lithium and Li+-ion batteries. Understanding the relevant chemical/electrochemical reactions, structural/compositional characteristics, and thermodynamic/kinetic behaviors at the electrode–electrolyte interface is of paramount importance for the development of strategies to enhance overall battery performances. Although the relevant research has been emphasized for many years, both a fundamental understanding of the interfacial phenomena and the practical strategies for enhancing the interfacial properties are still limited or vague. Due to the complexity involved in the interfacial behavior, the future research and development require collaborative efforts involving the disciplines of chemistry, physics, materials science, nanoscience/nanotechnology, as well as computational modeling/simulation. This review presents the key findings, recent progress, current status, and a bold perspective/vision for further understanding and manipulating the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in lithium and Li+-ion batteries. The information provided in this review is expected to benefit the current Li+-ion technologies and future-generation solid-state lithium and Li+-ion batteries that are based on polymer electrolytes or ceramic solid electrolytes.
Xingwen Yu
Xingwen Yu is a research associate at the Texas Materials Institute at the University of Texas at Austin. He has 12 years of R&D experience in battery and fuel cell technologies. He is currently working on multiple research programs in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Arumugam Manthiram
Arumugam Manthiram is a Professor and holder of the Cockrell Family Regents Chair in Engineering at the University of Texas at Austin. He is also the Director of the Texas Materials Institute and the Materials Science and Engineering Program. His research interests are in the area of rechargeable batteries and fuel cells, including novel synthesis approaches for nanomaterials and nanocomposites.

Broader context
Lithium-ion (Li+-ion) batteries have empowered the wireless revolution of modern electronic devices. Due to their relatively high energy density, Li+-ion batteries are appealing for electric vehicles and grid energy storage as well. Commercially available Li+-ion batteries are generally developed with liquid organic electrolytes. In these batteries, the electrode–electrolyte interface has long been recognized as one of the most critical issues. On the other hand, due to the safety concerns of flammable organic electrolytes, the development of lithium(Li)-based batteries (lithium or Li+-ion batteries) with solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) is becoming increasingly attractive. The SSEs used for the development of Li-based batteries usually include two major classes of Li+-ion conductive materials: organic polymers and inorganic ceramics. In either the polymer or ceramic electrolyte case, the electrode–electrolyte interfacial behavior has always been considered as a challenge. As a matter of fact, the interfacial behavior in lithium-based batteries is extremely complex. Future research and development require collaborative efforts involving multiple disciplines. Therefore, we herein aim to provide a timely review to the scientific community with respect to the progress and current status in understanding and manipulating the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in Li-based batteries. Future research and development directions are also suggested.

1. Introduction
Since the 1970s, rechargeable batteries based on lithium have undergone a brilliant evolution involving the knowledge of intercalation chemistry and lithium-metal chemistry.1–3 Due to the safety problems posed by metallic lithium anodes, lithium-ion (Li+-ion) battery technology based on an insertion-compound anode and cathode was introduced in the 1990s, benefiting from a series of important fundamental and applied research in the 1970s and 1980s.4–8 To date, Li+-ion batteries have been developed as a well-established energy storage technology and are currently supporting modern society as a predominant lightweight power source for portable or home electronics. Due to the depletion of fossil fuels and the increasing concern about environmental pollution, endeavors to electrify vehicles and to efficiently utilize renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind, are currently opening two vast markets for Li+-ion technology. However, the use of Li+-ion batteries to electrify the transportation sector (including hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and electric vehicles) or to integrate solar/wind energy into electricity grids demands even longer cycle life and better safety than their current use in small-scale portable electronics.9–15
The well-established traditional Li+-ion batteries operate by shuttling Li+ ions between the insertion-type positive and negative electrodes with non-aqueous aprotic electrolytes as a Li+-ion medium.16–20 In addition to the crucial cell components (electrodes and electrolytes), reactions occurring at the electrode–electrolyte interface and the interfacial characteristics/features play a critical role in the cycle life and safety of Li+-ion batteries.21–25
Although the Li+-ion insertion strategy at the anode has led to the revolutionary success of Li+-ion batteries for their applications in small-scale portable electronics, enhanced safety was achieved by a significant sacrifice in the energy density since the intrinsic capacity of the Li+-ion host graphite (372 mA h g−1) is only about one-tenth of that of Li metal (3800 mA h g−1).26 At the current development stage, Li+-ion batteries are appealing for both vehicle and grid storage applications.11 The major concern for large-scale energy storage systems for stationary applications is the power density, which may be able to be achieved by proper selection of insertion-compound electrodes.15 However, for the electric vehicle applications, both the power density and the energy density are concerns.10 To enhance the energy density, the use of a metallic lithium anode is an attractive strategy.27 Therefore, with the research and development in electrolytes and other cell components, batteries based on a lithium-metal anode are being intensively reconsidered.27,28 However, the safe use of Li-metal anodes is still extremely challenging due to the inhomogeneous nucleation and deposition of Li metal during the charge process. The resulting Li dendrite formation has a significant negative impact on the cell performance in terms of Coulombic efficiency, safety, and energy density. Actually, the nucleation and growth of Li dendrites are directly related to the features of the interphase (composition, structure, and morphology) between the nonaqueous electrolyte and the Li-metal anode.29–34
Safety has always been a significant concern for the traditional Li+-ion batteries with nonaqueous organic electrolytes. Due to the flammable nature of organic electrolytes, the Li-based cells pose risks of fire hazard or even explosion if a short-circuit occurs or if the cell is overcharged.35 Related accidents have previously been reported throughout the world. Motivated by the above safety concerns, the incorporation of solid-state electrolytes into lithium and Li+-ion batteries has been attempted since the 1980s.36 There are two major classes of solid-state electrolyte materials that have been used in Li-based batteries. One is based on organic lithium-ion-conductive polymer materials. The other is based on inorganic lithium-ion-conductive ceramic materials. After a polyethylene oxide (PEO)-based polymer electrolyte was discovered, the concept of polymer Li+-ion batteries was proposed.37–39 Encouraged by the results obtained from the initial research efforts, more Li+-ion conductive polymers including PVDF (poly(vinylidene fluoride)),40 PAN (poly(acrylonitrile)),41,42 and PMMA (poly(methyl methacrylate)),43,44 have been studied for the exploration of polymer Li+-ion batteries. However, the instability of the electrode–electrolyte interface has been one of the most serious concerns for the development of polymer Li+-ion batteries.45,46
Since the 1990s, inorganic ceramic material-based solid-state electrolytes have been introduced to Li+-ion battery research after a thin-film lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON) material was developed.47,48 Afterward, a series of metal oxide Li+-ion conductive ceramics, such as the NASICON-type,49,50 garnet-type,51–53 perovskite-type,54 and sulfide55,56 materials have been investigated as solid electrolytes for the development of all-solid-state Li+-ion batteries. One of the most important issues that is hampering the development of inorganic–electrolyte-based all-solid-state Li+-ion batteries is the management of the ionic interface between the solid electrolyte and the electrode.57–59
This article first reviews the key findings of and research progress in electrode–electrolyte interphase (EEI) layers in traditional lithium and Li+-ion batteries that are based on nonaqueous liquid electrolytes. The relevant fundamental and applied research on the EEI layers on the Li-metal anode, carbon-based anodes, and insertion-type metal oxide cathodes are summarized and discussed. Then the advances in the investigation of interfacial phenomena between the Li-metal electrodes and the polymer electrolytes in polymer-electrolyte-based lithium and Li+-ion batteries are reviewed. Afterward, the challenges at the solid–solid interface between the electrode and ceramic electrolyte of the all-solid-state lithium and Li+-ion batteries in which the electrolytes are based on inorganic ceramic materials are discussed. The recent advances in both the fundamental understanding and the practical efforts to enhance the ionic interfaces in all-solid-state Li-based batteries are summarized. Finally, future research and development directions in the above areas are suggested. The major topics discussed in this review with respect to the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in different Li-based battery systems are outlined in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Major topics regarding the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in various lithium-based battery systems. (a) Traditional lithium and Li+-ion batteries with nonaqueous liquid electrolytes. (b) Polymer-electrolyte Li-based batteries. (c) All-solid-state Li-based batteries with inorganic solid-state ceramic electrolytes. 
2. The electrode–electrolyte interface in traditional lithium and Li+-ion batteries with nonaqueous liquid electrolytes
The well-developed traditional Li+-ion batteries operate with nonaqueous electrolytes containing organic solvents and Li salts.60,61 The interfacial phenomena between the solid electrode and the liquid electrolyte have great impact on the electrochemical performances of Li+-ion batteries. Understanding the reactions/features/characteristics at the electrode–electrolyte interface is crucial for the development of effective strategies to improve the cycling performance and enhance the safety of Li+-ion batteries.62 Although the relevant research has been emphasized for about 40 years, there is still a lack of true understanding in terms of the components, structure, and the formation mechanism of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layers formed at the electrode–electrolyte interface, as well as how they influence the properties of the integrated cell.
The electrode–electrolyte interface in traditional Li+-ion batteries lies with respect to two aspects: (1) the interface at the negative electrode and the electrolyte and (2) the interface at the positive electrode and the electrolyte. Ideally, to ensure high Coulombic and energy efficiencies, long cycle life, and high safety, the SEI layer formed during cell cycling should be chemically/electrochemically stable, Li+-ion conductive, and electronically insulating.63–65 A mechanistic understanding of the chemical and electrochemical reactions between the electrodes and electrolytes, which impact the structure, composition, and properties of the SEI is critical to develop a stable/ideal SEI. This section summarizes/discusses the historical development of the SEI studies on various anodes (Li-metal and carbon anodes) and insertion-type metal oxide cathodes.
The concept of the SEI had been proposed for about 40 years since 1979 when Peled first observed the formation of a single-layer SEI on alkali or alkaline earth metals upon their contact with organic electrolytes.21 The SEI layer was found to have similar properties to a solid electrolyte that is ionically conductive but electronically nonconductive. A few years later in 1983, Peled proposed that the SEI had a double-layer structure comprising a thin but compact layer near the electrode and a thick but porous layer near the electrolyte (as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2a).66 Afterward, the composition of the SEI was studied by various groups in the 1980s and 1990s.67–71 Based on the important findings, a so called “mosaic structure” of the SEI was proposed in the late 1990s72 and has widely been accepted till today (as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2b). In the mosaic structure, the SEI comprises multiple organic and inorganic layers. The thin compact layers close to the electrode surface are composed of inorganic lithium compounds, such as Li2O, Li2CO3, and LiF. These inorganic species are thermodynamically compatible with lithium metal. The layers farther from the electrode (close to the electrolyte) comprise mainly oligomer organic compounds, such as semicarbonates and polyolefins.72,73 It has been found that the impedance of a SEI is greatly influenced by the lithium salts in nonaqueous electrolytes since the salts could change the structure and/or composition of the SEI. The anion counter parts of the lithium salts increase the impedance of the SEI in the order PF6− > SO3CF3− ∼ BF4− > AsF6− > ClO4−.74,75 This is because that the inorganic products formed from the decomposition of different anions have huge impact on the impedance of the SEI. The relatively higher impedance for LiBF4 and LiPF6 is due to the formation of highly resistive LiF in the SEI. In addition, the SEI formation in AsF6− > ClO4− electrolytes is relatively faster than that in other salts.74,75 On the other hand, although variation of the solvent does influence the SEI composition, it does not affect the impedance significantly. The SEI products formed in ether-based solvents, such as dimethyl ether or tetrahydrofuran, are majorly lithium alkoxides (ROLi). In ester-based solvents, such as γ-butyrolactone and methyl formate, the major SEI products are lithium carboxylates (RCO2Li).76,77 As for the most commonly used carbonate solvents, the predominant SEI species are Li carbonate (Li2CO3), Li semicarbonates (ROCO2Li), and Li dicarbonates ((ROCO2Li)2).69,78–80
 Fig. 2  Models of the solid electrolyte interfaces (SEIs) on lithium or graphite electrodes. (a) Early proposed double-layer structure model.66 (b) Mosaic model (on Li-metal or graphite anode) proposed at the end of the 1990s.72 (c) Mosaic model on graphite anode.83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 (Copyright 1983, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 72 (Copyright 1997, The Electrochemical Society), and ref. 83 (Copyright 2006, Elsevier Publisher). 
Unlike the natural formation of an SEI on the Li metal surface upon its direct contact with organic electrolytes, the SEI forms on the carbon (graphite) surface under a potential less than 1.0 V vs. Li+/Li. Intercalation of Li into graphite is a reversible process in ethylene carbonate (EC)-based electrolytes but an irreversible process in polyethylene carbonate (PC)-based electrolytes.81,82 It has been proposed that the SEI formed on carbon/graphite electrodes in EC electrolytes has a similar “mosaic structure,” as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2c,83 and compositions similar to those formed on Li metal anodes based on a series of fundamental studies with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),84–86 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR),87–89 scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM),90–93 scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM), and atomic force microscopy (AFM).94,95 The composition of the SEI on the carbon surface in EC electrolytes is mainly Li ethylene dicarbonate (CH2OCO2Li)2 species.87,96–98 For fundamental research, the SEI formed on carbon electrodes had also been widely studied with model samples, such as highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). It has been found that the composition and thickness of the SEI are different on the basal and edge planes of HOPG, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 3.22,86,99 The SEI on the basal plane is mainly composed of organic species (reduction products of solvent). On the other hand, the SEI formed on the edge planes consists of majorly inorganic reduction products of the salt.86,99 Similar to that formed on the Li metal electrode or the HOPG model samples, the SEI on the graphite also exhibits a bilayer structure with an organic soft upper layer and an inorganic dense salt-based layer near the electrode (Fig. 2c).83,100 The composition of the SEI formed on the carbon anode materials has been found to be more complicated than that on the Li-metal anode. In addition to the ROLi-type species, other Li compounds, such as lithium oxalate, Li succinate, acetals, orthocarbonates, orthoesters etc. have been observed on the carbon surface.101–103 The mechanism regarding why there are significant differences in the SEI formed on the basal and the edge of the HOPG surfaces has not yet been well established. There have been a few mechanisms proposed so far. One general thought is that with the desolvation and intercalation of Li+-ions at the edge (between the graphite layers), the salt anions (the counter part of Li+) would decompose into inorganic species at the edge. On the other hand, since the basal planes are exposed to an environment with fewer unsolvated anions but with more solvent molecules, it would accordingly form more organic-compound species.104 Another proposed mechanism is that the solvated Li-solvent complexes intercalate and decompose in-between the graphene layers forming the SEI at the edge.105,106 Recent studies have also supported this latter mechanism.107,108 In addition, the electrochemical reaction kinetics on the edge plane and that on the basal plane were supposed to be different. A relatively faster charge transfer at the edge is expected to facilitate the electrolyte decomposition.109–113 However, all the above mechanisms are only hypotheses which have yet to be solidly verified. Therefore, more intensive investigations are required to clearly understand how the SEI forms.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the SEI formed on the basal (top) and edge (bottom) planes of the HOPG model sample. The SEI on the basal plane consists mostly of solvent decomposition products (organic), whereas the edge plane is composed mainly of salt decomposition products (inorganic).22 Reproduced with permission from ref. 22 (Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
In addition to experimental methodologies, theoretical calculations and modelling also play a very important role in understanding the SEI formation and surface chemistry of electrodes.114 By focusing on the SEI growth as the canonical degradation mechanism, Pinson et al. developed a simple single-particle model, which could accurately explain the experimental phenomena observed with regard to the capacity fade in Li+-ion batteries based on graphite anodes. This model could also predict the capacity fade of Li+-ion batteries based on limited accelerated aging data.115 Density functional theory (DFT) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation methodologies have successfully been used to gain a fundamental understanding of the correlation between the electrolyte and the SEI layer.116 The application of ab initio molecular dynamics has successfully extended the MD capability by combining Newton's equations with Schrödinger wave equations.117 Using DFT, Qi et al. studied the SEI with Li2CO3. They found that the prominent migration carrier in Li2CO3 below the voltage range of the SEI formation was the excess interstitial Li+-ion.118 Nagaoka et al. investigated the SEI stability with MD. Their results indicated that the SEI film formed in the EC electrolyte was dense, but the PC-based SEI film was sparse.117 The MD method was also introduced by Zhang et al. to explore the electrolytes. They found that high-rate lithium stripping/plating could be achieved with an increased concentration of Li+ ions in the electrolyte.119 Yushin et al. adopted quantum chemistry studies to reveal the mechanism of SEI formation. They discovered that in the LiFSI based electrolytes, the formation of the SEI was initiated by in situ generated FSI(-F) anion radicals.120 Although theoretical calculations can provide an understanding of the SEI layers at the atomic scale, the calculations are generally based on ideal environments and with assumptions. Therefore, there could be gaps between the real working conditions and the ideal environments. Much more optimized methodologies need to be developed in the future to simulate the SEI layer under the real working conditions.
On the anode, the aprotic electrolytes in Li+-ion batteries are thermodynamically unstable under electrochemical reduction conditions. In contrast, in most cathode materials, electro-oxidation of electrolyte is not a thermodynamically simultaneous process. However, surface films formed on the positive electrodes have also been widely observed before. Goodenough et al. first suggested the existence of electrode–electrolyte interphase (EEI) layers on a positive electrode in the 1980s.121 A number of studies have been performed since to try to understand its origin. It has been observed that the EEI layers formed on the cathode materials consist of similar components as those observed on the anodes, which are from the decomposition of solvents and/or salts.122–125 Although the research on the EEI layers on the cathode side is relatively scarce, recently, there have been increasing mechanistic studies towards understanding the composition, structure, and the formation mechanism of the EEI layers on different cathode materials. The representative EEI layer models on the cycled metal oxide positive electrodes that have recently been proposed are summarized in Fig. 4.126–129 Generally, there have been mainly four chemical conclusions with regard to how the different reaction products form on transition-metal oxide positive electrodes: (1) the formation, composition, and properties of the EEI layers are related to the decomposition reactions of the electrolyte salts;130–133 (2) changes in the electronic and/or structural properties on the cathode surface, such as changes in the oxidation state of the transition metal and/or surface reconstruction upon exposure to the electrolyte, influence the properties of the EEI layer formed on the surface of the positive electrodes;134–138 (3) nucleophilic attack of the electrolytes on the surface of the cathodes has a huge impact on the impedance and reactivity of the EEI layer formed on the surface of the positive electrodes;139–146 and (4) oxygen products, such as O2 gas, peroxide species (O22−), and superoxide species (O2−) have big effects on the EEI layers.147–156
 Fig. 4  The EEI layer models on cycled positive electrodes that have been previously proposed. (a) EEI layer model of cycled oxide electrode composites developed from the XPS studies.126 (b) EEI layer model of the AlPO4-coated LiCoO2 and the uncoated LiCoO2 cathode.127 (c) Schematics of the surface reaction mechanisms in the LixNi0.13Co0.13Mn0.54O2−δ composite electrodes consisting of the active material, acetylene black, and PVdF.128 (d) Schematics of the Li+ deintercalation from the cathode material. The lowering Ef below the HOMO of the electrolyte would result in hole-metal oxides and the compounds of the decomposed electrolyte.129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 (Copyright 2002, American Chemical Society), ref. 127 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society), ref. 128 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society), and ref. 129 (Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
The inactive additives, such as carbon conductive matrices, in composite metal-oxide/carbon electrodes have recently been recognized to have a complex impact on the interfacial behavior at the cathode. Due to the limitation of conventional surface-sensitive diagnostic tools, such as X-ray and infrared spectroscopies, the relevant studies are quite scarce. Our group recently did such research with time-of-flight–secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) and investigated the role of conductive carbon in influencing the electrode–electrolyte interface on a Ni-rich LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 cathode.157 The results suggest that the carbon-driven interphase layer formed on LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 acts as a passivating film against deleterious interfacial reactions with the electrolyte.157 A recent in situ study with feedback-mode scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) revealed that the surface layers formed on a LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode or on a Li1+x(Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3)1−xO2 cathode exhibited unexpectedly an electronic conducting behaviour. However, there was an electronically insulating layer formed on the aluminium current collector, which was believed to be influenced by the electrolyte.158
The relationship between the electrolyte and the SEI layer has always been a focus of interest. In addition to the solvent and salt, electrolyte additive development is also an important research direction toward improving the SEI layer with appropriate properties.159 The surface morphology of the electrodes can be effectively improved through the addition of a small amount of additives. The effective additives are generally involved in the interfacial redox reactions prior to the electrolytes. The additives in Li+-ion batteries not only improve the properties of SEI, but also enhance the safety and ionic conductivity of the electrolytes.61,160 The electrolyte additives that have been developed so far can be classified according to their unique functions in forming desired SEI layers on specific electrode materials. For the anode additives, the SEI inducing additives are usually reduced at relatively higher potentials than the electrolyte solvents. The formed SEI layer passivates the surface of the electrode and prevents the reduction of the solvents.161–163 For the cathode additives, the SEI forming electrolyte additives are generally oxidized prior to the solvents. The SEI layer covers the surface of the electrode preventing the decomposition of the electrolyte solvents.164–168 Additives for enhancing the safety of Li+-ion batteries are generally classified as flame retardants and redox shuttles. The flame retardant additives usually have the ability to terminate the reactions and scavenge radicals,169–171 while the redox shuttle additives are electrochemically reversible.172–174 In general, the electrolyte additives demonstrated to date have shown their specific advantages in improving the properties of the SEI layer, the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte, and the safety of Li+-ion batteries. The development of electrolyte additives will be an important research direction in the future.
3. The electrode–electrolyte interface in polymer Li-based batteries
Research in Li-based batteries that are operated with solid-state polymer electrolytes started in the 1980s after the observation of Li+-ion conduction in a poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) material.36–39 Although there has been much remarkable progress in the development of high energy density polymer Li-based batteries over the past few decades, there are still many challenges that need to be overcome before making the polymer Li-based battery technology widely viable. The issue regarding how to enhance the compatibility of the electrode–electrolyte interface is one of the most important aspects toward the viability of polymer Li-based batteries.
The interfacial properties between the Li-anode and the polymer electrolyte, such as charge-transfer reactions at the interface and formation/conversion of the passivation layer on the Li electrode surface, greatly influence the electrochemical performances of the polymer Li-based batteries in terms of cycle life, Coulombic efficiency, voltage efficiency etc. A deep insight into the interfacial phenomena not only helps in understanding the reaction mechanisms at the electrode/electrolyte interface, but also provides guidance for developing effective strategies towards the enhancement of the cycling performances of polymer Li-based batteries.
Investigation of the interfacial properties of polymer Li-based batteries can be dated back to 1983. Sequeira et al. first studied the electrochemical behavior of Li-metal electrodes against a polymer electrolyte (PEO)xLiF3CSO3, in which a reversible behavior of Li deposition was observed.175 With direct current (DC) polarization methodologies, Munichandraiah,176 Xu & Farrington,177 and Christie & Vincent178 investigated lithium stripping and deposition in polymer electrolytes. All the above investigations proved the existence of a passivation film on the surface of the Li metal.175–178
Alternating current (AC) methodologies have been widely used to study the lithium–polymer electrolyte interfaces as well. Fauteux first studied the Li/PEOx–LiCF3SO3 interface with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and noted that the interfacial impedance of the electrode–electrolyte system increased with the prolonged exposure time.179 After that, more EIS investigations have been performed towards the understanding of the polymer–Li interfaces. It has commonly been recognized with the EIS techniques that the interfacial impedance increases continuously after exposing the Li metal to the polymer electrolyte. The interfacial impedance can be even higher than that of the polymer electrolyte itself.179–183 Based on his own and others’ EIS studies, Peled et al. proposed a SEI (formed between the Li metal and the polymer electrolyte) model and an EIS equivalent circuit for the SEI, as illustrated in Fig. 5a. In this model, a “contact fraction” of Li/polymer (i.e., effective contact area between the Li electrode and the polymer) is considered, which is proposed to be related to the temperature, pressure and surface morphology of Li and the fabrication process of the electrode–electrolyte assembly.183 With this model, they preliminarily determined the apparent thickness of the SEI (LSEI), the resistance of SEI (RSEI), the apparent conductivity (σSEI), and the apparent energy of activation for conduction (EaSEI).183
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic demonstration of the Li/polymer electrolyte (Li/PE) interfaces and their equivalent circuit. (a-I) The Li/PE interface with the native thin film (A), fresh SEI (B), void (C), CPE (composite polymer electrolyte) or PE (D). (a-II) A magnified segment of SEI with the native film (A), LiF or LiCl (B), nonconductive polymer (C), and Li2CO3 or Li2CO3-R (D), (a-III) an equivalent circuit of the Li/PE interface. GB: grain boundary, CA(B,C,D) and RA(B,C,D): capacitance and resistance of each particle.183 (b) Schematic demonstration of the surface layer formed on the Li metal after its contact with (top) LiTFSI or (bottom) LiBF4.188 Reproduced with permission from ref. 183 (Copyright 1995, Elsevier Publisher) and ref. 188 (Copyright 2001, Elsevier Publisher). 
The results obtained from the traditional electrochemical techniques usually reflect the statistical and/or the average information of the electrode–electrolyte interface. For investigating the interfacial phenomena, spectroscopic techniques are sometimes more effective, especially the in situ spectroscopic methodologies.
Scherson et al. first studied the reactivity and relevant interfacial properties of an Li-metal electrode with the PEO-/LiCIO4 solid polymer electrolyte with an in-house designed in situ attenuated total reflection – Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) experimental platform.184,185 The obtained results revealed that the deposited metallic Li reacted with PEO simultaneously, which resulted in the formation of an irreversible cleavage of the ether functionality and generated a series of alkoxides as reaction products.184,185 Afterwards, Chusid et al. performed an in situ FTIR study in a single internal reflectance mode.186 They conducted their studies with a polyvinylidene difluoride-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-HFP)/EC–PC–LiClO4 gel polymer electrolyte system and a poly[ethylene oxide-2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl glycidyl ether] (P(EO/MEEGE))/LiX solid polymer electrolyte system (X = LiClO4, LiAsF6, LiN(SO2CF3)2). They found that in the case of the gel polymer contacting the electrolyte, the surface chemistry of the Li anode is dominated by the reduction of alkyl carbonate solvent to ROCO2Li surface species. In the PEO-based solid polymer case, reduction reactions of lithium salt and/or water (trace) were dominant surface reactions on Li electrodes.186 Using the in situ FTIR techniques, surface chemistries of lithium electrodes in other polymer electrolyte systems, such as PVDF-HFP/EC/DEC/LiPF6, PAN/DMF/LiClO4etc. have also been studied.187 Li2CO3 and ROCO2Li have been detected as major reaction products.187
In addition to FTIR, XPS has widely been used for the investigation of polymer–lithium electrode interfaces. A representative study was performed by Watanabe et al.188 The surfaces of metallic Li electrodes were analyzed before and after being in contact with polymer electrolytes containing different lithium salts (LiN(SO2CF3)2 or LiBF4). The SEI model they proposed is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5b. LiF was detected on the Li electrode surface after contacting with the polymer electrolyte. The LiTFSI-containing polymer electrolyte generated an extremely thin surface layer with limited porosity, whereas the LiBF4-containing polymer yielded a relatively thick surface layer with high porosity.188 However, since the XPS analysis needs to be performed under a super high vacuum condition, in situ experiments are not quite available at present. In addition, since the X-ray and the ion beam sputtering may change/destroy the surface layer of the Li electrode, information obtained from the XPS results may not be absolutely reliable.
Combining with traditional electrochemical techniques, a spectroscopic ellipsometer was previously used to investigate polymer electrolyte/Li interfaces.189In situ ellipsometric spectra could be recorded when operating the Li/polymer electrode–electrolyte assembly systems under different electrochemical conditions, such as under open-circuit potentials, different polarization conditions, AC impedance analysis conditions etc. Both the optical characteristics and the reaction products on the Li metal electrodes could be measured. With a typical Li/PEO–LiN(CF3SO2)2 system, McLarnon et al. found that the results obtained from the ellipsometric spectra are consistent with the previously proposed compact interfacial structure. The naturally formed (under non-electrochemical conditions) interphase layer of Li/PEO–LiN(CF3SO2)2 was about 12 nm thick and was composed mostly of Li and Li2O with >60 vol% Li. Upon discharge, the thickness of the interfacial film increased and the content of Li2O increased to >60 vol%.189
In addition to the spectroscopic methodologies, microscopic techniques, such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM), have also been used to characterize the Li/polymer electrolyte interfaces.190–192 However, these methodologies are relatively limited due to the difficulty of performing in situ experiments.
In order to improve the cyclability of the Li anode in polymer Li-based batteries, enhancements in the reversibility of the Li anode and in the interfacial compatibility of the Li anode and the polymer electrolyte are a must. That means a stable and low-impedance interphase layer needs to be formed between the Li anode and the polymer electrolyte. In this regard, many efforts have been attempted to strategically improve the interfacial properties from either the Li electrode side or the polymer electrolyte side.
From the Li anode aspect, pre-treatment of the electrode to properly control the passivation film to be formed is believed to be an effective way. It has been reported that addition of CO2 or HF to the electrolyte could improve the formation of the passivation film and also could inhibit the formation of Li dendrites.193,194 Addition of SnI2 or AlI3 also had a significantly positive effect for improving the reversibility of the Li anode.195 The formation of an organic thin film on the surface of Li could prevent the “second passivation” of the electrode.196–198 Takehara et al. reported that a plasma polymerization (1,1-difluoroethene) surface modification film efficiently improved the cyclability of polymer Li-based batteries.196 Choi et al. reported a protective layer which was developed using an ultraviolet (UV) radiation-curing technique with a mixture of liquid electrolyte (EC/PC/LiClO4), crosslinking agent (1,6-hexanediol diacrylate), and photoinitiator (methyl benzoylformate).197 The interfacial properties of the cell were enhanced by the generation of the protection layer.197 With electrochemical methods, Sotomura et al. tried to stabilize the Li anode in polymer Li-based batteries by applying a “preliminary voltage cycling”.198 Upon voltage cycling, the thin dense LiF surface layer broke into a relatively thicker LiF–LiOH layer, which effectively stabilized the electrode–polymer interface.198
From the electrolyte aspect, a proper surface modification of the polymer could improve the electrode–electrolyte interfacial properties. In contrast to the super active Li metal electrode, it was relatively easier to perform surface modifications of the polymer materials. Another significant advantage regarding the modification of polymers, rather than the Li metal, is the possibility of designing multiple functional groups on the polymer. Table 1 lists the important research work with respect to the surface modifications of polymer electrolytes with a variety of self-assembly monolayers (SAM) towards enhancing the electrode–electrolyte interfaces.191,192,199,200 Generally, it showed that the adsorption of SAM layers on the surfaces of polymer electrolytes could improve the stability of the interface between the Li metal electrode and the polymer electrolyte. Furthermore, a more stable interphase layer could hinder the growth of “bad” passivation films, which inhibits the Li+-ion transport between the polymer electrolyte and the electrode. The molecular composition of the adsorbed layer also had influence on the interface stability.199,200 For the SAMs formed with compounds in the forms of R-(CH2CH2O)-H, the critical factor is that the R group could form a well-ordered continuous layer that does not allow the direct contact of lithium with the polymer electrolyte, thus preventing reactions that can destabilize the interface.199
Table 1 Compounds adsorbed at the Li/polymer electrolyte (PE) interfaces and their influence on the property of the Li/PE interface (summarized from ref. 191, 192, 199 and 200)




Chemical formula of the absorbed compounds
Stabilize Li/polymer interface or not




H(CH2)50OH
No





No


H(CH2)32(CH2CH2O)3H
Yes


H(CH2)32(CH2CH2O)10H
Yes


H(CH2)40(CH2CH2O)3H
Yes


H(CH2)40(CH2CH2O)13H
Yes





Yes





Yes





Yes




4. The electrode–electrolyte interface in inorganic ceramic electrolyte Li-based batteries
Operation of Li-based batteries with stable and non-flammable inorganic solid electrolytes has been considered as one of most important strategies to address the safety issues of Li-based batteries.201,202 It is generally recognized that the key challenge of developing ceramic electrolyte-based lithium and Li+-ion batteries lies in how to overcome the charge-transfer resistance barrier at the solid–solid interface between the electrodes and the electrolyte.203,204 The contact area between the electrode/electrolyte plays a key role in determining the interfacial resistance.205,206 In addition, three major aspects need to be considered towards building a favorable solid–solid interface in ceramic electrolyte-based Li-based batteries, including the wetting ability of both the electrode and electrolyte materials, interfacial stability between the electrode and the electrolyte, and the ionic (Li+-ion) transport across the interface. During charging–discharging of a cell, volume change of the electrodes is a common issue, which may induce strain and stress in the electrode. As a result, the structure of the electrolyte/electrode interface may change due to the strain and stress of the electrodes. On the other hand, poor chemical compatibility between the electrode and the solid electrolyte may lead to the formation of a passivation layer at the interface and result in a high resistance.
Dynamic characterization of the electrode/electrolyte interface can provide helpful/instructive information to understand the sources of interfacial resistance and to improve the battery performance through materials design and nano-engineering approaches. TEM was used as an ex situ characterization tool to study the solid–solid interface.207 A “nano-battery” sample was prepared with a focused ion beam (FIB) process crossing the section of a cycled thin film battery. An in situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) platform has recently been developed for studying the interfacial characteristics in all-solid-state Li+-ion batteries with a simultaneous galvanostatic biasing.208 The all-solid-state Li+-ion battery samples in this study were prepared with a 2 μm LiCoO2 cathode, a 1.5 μm LIPON electrolyte, and an 80 nm amorphous silicon anode. A disordered interphase layer between the LIPON electrolyte and the LiCoO2 cathode was observed by STEM-EELS, which accumulated Li and evolved a rock salt CoO after cycling.208 An experimental platform by coupling the TEM with a quantitative electron holography (EH) method was developed by Yamamoto et al.209 With this combined methodology, the electric potential distribution at the interface of the solid electrolyte and the LiCoO2 cathode was observed. In order to overcome the limitation of the quantitative electron holography (EH), recently, an even more effective experimental platform has been developed by Yamamoto et al. with a spatially-resolved (SR) EELS in TEM mode.210,211 With the SR-TEM-EELS, the profiles of lithium concentrations in the in situ formed interphase layer between the solid electrolyte and the anode could be obtained. Actually, during the experiment on applying an electrochemical process to the cell, the nanoscale elemental distribution, the crystal structure of the interphase layer, and the electronic structure of the interphase layer could be measured simultaneously.211
In addition to TEM-based experimental platforms, a depth-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy (DR-XAS) has also been considered as an effective technique to study the interfacial phenomena in all-solid-state Li-based batteries. Okumura et al. measured the local structure and the chemical states of the interphase layer formed between the solid electrolyte and the LiCoO2 electrode.212 With this study, they noticed that introducing a NbO2 interlayer significantly reduced the interfacial resistance of the solid electrolyte and the LiCoO2 cathode. However, introducing ZrO2 and MoO2 interlayers increased the interfacial resistance. The changes in the local structure and the electronic structure of the LiCoO2 electrode could be analyzed with the DR-XAS. The NbO2 layer prevented the large Co–O bond from significantly changing at the interface and mitigated the stress at the interface during lithiation/delithiation.212 The major representative fundamental research methodologies with sophisticated ex situ and in situ experimental platforms are summarized in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Major fundamental research methodologies recently developed with sophisticated ex situ and in situ experimental platforms: (a) ex situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization of the electrode–electrolyte interface in a “nano-battery” prepared with a focused ion beam (FIB) tool.207 (b) A quantitative electron holography (EH) methodology to directly observe the potential distribution resulting from lithium-ion diffusion in all-solid-state Li+-ion batteries operated within a transmission electron microscope (TEM).209 (c) A depth-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy methodology to characterize the electrode–electrolyte interface.212 (d) A modified electron holography (EH) – transmission electron microscopy (TEM) methodology to characterize the electrode–electrolyte interface.210 (e) SR-TEM-EELS (spatially-resolved transmission electron microscope electron energy loss spectroscopy in TEM mode) technique of the investigation of the electrode–electrolyte interface.211 (f) In situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) coupled with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS).208 Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 (Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society), ref. 209 (Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons Publisher), ref. 212 (Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry), ref. 210 (Copyright 2012, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 211 (Copyright 2014, Elsevier Publisher), and ref. 208 (Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society). 
In addition to the sophisticated experimental platforms, mathematical modelling also plays an important role in understanding the interfacial phenomena in all-solid-state Li-based batteries. Kurijt et al. proposed a series of equivalent electronic network models to describe and quantify the electrochemical and physical processes in a number of all-solid-state Li-based batteries.213–215 A mathematical model developed by Notten et al. could be applicable to describe a lot of critical electrochemical and physical characteristics in all-solid-state Li-based batteries under a broad range of operating conditions.216 The model involved a variety of important characteristics in all-solid-state Li-based batteries, including Li+-ion diffusion in the electrode/electrolyte interface and charge-transfer kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface. The model predictions matched very well with the experimental results.216
From a battery development point of view, overcoming the charge-transfer resistance barrier at the solid/solid interface between the electrode and the electrolyte is a huge challenge. There has been much progress in improving the solid/solid interface of all-solid state Li-based batteries. Surface treatment/modification approaches, such as ball-milling, softening glassing, and pulsed laser deposition (PLD)-coating have been determined as effective techniques in enhancing the electrode/electrolyte contact area.206,217–220 With a mechanochemical method, Hayashi et al.206,217 prepared electrode–electrolyte nanocomposites with a high Li+-ion conductivity by embedding a nano-sized NiS electrode into a Li2S–P2S5 electrolyte. Softening glassing has been found to be an effective surface coating methodology.218 Typically, in this method, a mixture of a glass electrolyte and an active electrode material is heated up to the temperature of the glass-transition point of the electrolyte. A favorable electrolyte–electrode contact could be achieved after the electrode–electrolyte assembly is cooled down.218,221 The pulsed laser deposition (PLD) approach has been explored by Sakuda et al. by coating LiCoO2 cathode particles with a Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte.219,220 With this method, an effective solid electrode–electrolyte interface was achieved for rechargeable all-solid-state Li-based batteries. The rate capability of the ceramic electrolyte-based Li-based batteries are undoubtedly determined by the contact area of the cell components in a composite electrode. A composite positive electrode fabricated using a mixture of a NiS-VGCF (vapor grown carbon fiber) and sulfide-based solid electrolyte particles was developed by Aso et al. The batteries prepared with the as-such prepared cathode improved the cycling performance.222 Coating the LiCoO2 cathode with LiNbO3, Li4Ti5O12, LiTaO3, Li2OSiO2 or Al2O3 has been proven to be able to reduce the interfacial resistance of the all-solid-state Li-based batteries with sulfide-type solid electrolytes.223–228
At the anode side, surface treatment of the lithium anode has also been an effective methodology. Han et al. recently developed a novel strategy to address the interfacial issue between a garnet-type solid electrolyte Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 (LLCZN) and the Li-metal anode by introducing an ultrathin Al2O3 atomic layer deposition (ALD) film in between.229 The interfacial impedance of the Li/LLCZN was greatly reduced due to a conformal interface of LLCZN/Li enabled by the ALD Al2O3 layer.229
Interlayer approaches have also been studied towards reducing the interfacial resistance between the solid electrolyte and the electrodes. A thin Nb interlayer between a Li7La3Zr2O12 electrolyte and a LiCoO2 cathode has been proven to be able to lower the interfacial resistance and improve both the rate capability and cathodic capacity of the cell.230 At the anode side, introducing a Li-alloy thin interlayer231–234 or a vacuum-evaporation induced Au thin interlayer235 between the solid electrolyte and the Li metal could ensure a stable Li deposition and dissolution. Application of a polymer electrolyte interlayer between the electrodes and the ceramic solid electrolyte could offer a strategy to improve the interfacial properties of the all-solid-state Li-based batteries. A polymer/ceramic/polymer sandwich electrolyte assembly has recently been reported, which showed an improved Coulombic efficiency of the cell. Such an electrode/electrolyte architecture could block the transport of anions and modify the double-layer electrical field at the electrode/polymer interface.236
In order to eliminate the high interfacial resistance, an interesting strategy for fabricating a homogenous single-layer electrode/electrolyte with mixed conductivity has recently been introduced to develop all-solid-state Li-based batteries.237 In this study, Han et al. demonstrated a Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS)-based solid-state cell with a single material. The Ge–S and Li–S components in the Li10GeP2S12 served as the anode and the cathode, respectively. The working function was quite similar to a cell with a GeS2 anode and a Li2S cathode.237 The single-layer cell showed low interfacial impedance due to the modified interfacial interactions, improved interfacial contact, and released stress/strain at the interface.237 The major representative practical approaches towards the enhancement of the interfacial properties in all-solid-state Li-based batteries are summarized in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Major strategies towards the enhancement of the electrode–electrolyte interface in all-solid-state Li-based batteries with inorganic solid electrolytes. (a) Ball milling synthetic route for the preparation of nanocomposites of the NiS electrode and the Li2S–P2S5 electrolyte.206 (b) Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method for the preparation of a composite of electrode/solid electrolyte (NiS/Li2S–P2S5).220 (c) A homogenous single-layer electrode/electrolyte Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) with mixed conductivity for the development of all-solid-state Li-based batteries.237 (d) An Au thin interlayer approach between the Li electrode and the solid electrolyte.235 (e) Enhancement of the electrode/solid electrolyte interface with a polymer (cross-linked) interlayer approach.236 (f) An atomic layer deposition (ALD)-coating approach to enhance the electrode/solid electrolyte interface.229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 (Copyright 2008, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 220 (Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society), ref. 237 (Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons Publisher), ref. 235 (Copyright 2016, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 236 (Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society), and ref. 229 (Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group). 
5. Conclusions and future directions
This review surveyed the key findings, recent progress, current status, and the understanding of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in Li-based batteries that are based on various types of electrolytes, including nonaqueous liquid electrolytes, polymer electrolytes, and inorganic ceramic solid electrolytes.
Li-based batteries with nonaqueous electrolytes
For the traditional Li-based batteries with nonaqueous liquid electrolytes, cumulative findings on the structure, composition, and properties of the SEI layers formed on both the anodes (Li metal or carbon) and cathodes (insertion-type metal oxide materials) were summarized. While the SEI formed on the Li-metal or carbon anodes has been widely studied during the past four decades, the investigation and understanding of SEI layers on the cathode side are relatively scarce. There has been significant progress in understanding the SEI morphology, components, and the formation mechanism on the negative electrode (Li metal or carbon). Effective strategies to achieve the SEI with desired/proper properties at the anode/electrolyte interface have also been cumulatively proposed and validated. However, to date, there is still a lack of deep understanding of what components are formed at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces and how they impact the overall cell performances. In addition, there is an increasing need to understand the reactions of the positive electrodes with the electrolyte and the characteristics of the SEI layers formed on the positive electrodes toward increasing the cell operating voltages. Future efforts in the following aspects are suggested:
(1) A deep insight into the functionality of the SEI: so far, the exact function of the SEI components has not yet been clarified well. The knowledge of the exact role of the SEI in influencing the battery cycling performances is still inadequate and vague.
(2) Understanding the dynamic nature/aspect of the SEI layer: the dynamic information of the SEI includes the formation kinetics of the SEI and the Li+-ion crossing process in the SEI layer. To accomplish the dynamic studies, advanced/sophisticated in operando and in situ techniques are to be developed to capture the dynamic information of the SEI layers under real battery working conditions.
(3) Modulation of the SEI layers with controllable modification methods: although many strategies have been proposed with respect to the modification of the SEI structure on the negative electrodes, the key features of the SEI layer, such as ion conductivity, structure, density, thickness etc., are not able to be well controlled and rationally designed. Effective strategies are required to develop robust and predictable SEI layers that can promote Li+-ion conduction and reduce the interfacial resistance.
Polymer-electrolyte Li-based batteries
For the polymer electrolyte Li-based batteries, the progress in understanding the interfacial phenomena between the Li-metal electrode and the polymer electrolytes (PE) was summarized. This includes the electrochemical reactions at the Li/PE interface and the influence of the interphase layer on the performances of Li-based batteries, sophisticated/advanced electrochemical techniques and spectroscopic methodologies, especially in situ analysis techniques for studying the Li/PE systems, and the approaches for improving the Li/PE interfaces. Future efforts are suggested in the following:
(1) Molecular-scale studies: although much understanding has been obtained with electrochemical spectroscopic techniques, investigations on the molecular scale are needed in order to obtain more reliable SEI layer information.
(2) In operando electroanalytical techniques: to understand the time-dependent and spatial-dependent changes of the SEI layer under various complicated chemical/electrochemical conditions, sophisticated in operando electroanalytical techniques with advanced combinational functions must be developed, especially electrochemical-combined in situ spectroscopic techniques.
(3) From an applied research point of view, effective approaches for improving the Li/PE interfacial properties, especially strategic surface modification approaches for the metallic Li anode need to be developed.
All-solid-state Li-based batteries with ceramic electrolytes
For the all-solid-state Li-based batteries with inorganic ceramic solid electrolytes, minimizing the interfacial impedance between the electrode and the solid electrolyte is a principal challenge. Favourable interfaces between the electrodes and the solid electrolytes are actually difficult to build due to the existence of voids and grain boundaries on the surface of solid electrolytes. We reviewed the recent progress in both the fundamental understanding of the interfacial behavior in all-solid-state Li-based batteries and the recent developments in strategically enhancing the interfacial properties. The major problems are summarized herein. Interfacial compatibility of the solid electrolyte and the electrode is an issue. Upon an initial charge, a high solid-to-solid interfacial impedance is commonly observed in all-solid-state Li-based batteries. This is usually caused by the high strain or stress generated at the interface due to the large volume changes of the electrodes during lithiation/delithiation. Also, a mechanistic understanding of the interfacial processes occurring during charge–discharge of the all-solid-state Li-based batteries is still inadequate. The evolution of the interphase layer and the transport of Li+-ions across the interphase layer are critical for operating all-solid-state Li-based batteries. A deep insight into the elemental distribution, electronic structure, and crystalline structure of the interphase layers under electrochemical conditions is of great challenge at the current stage. In addition, there is a lack of effective strategies for rational design and performance optimization of the solid electrolyte–electrode systems.
To overcome the above challenges, future research efforts are suggested as follows:
(1) A fundamental understanding of the solid electrolyte–electrode systems with both experimental and theoretical calculation: a submolecular-scale and atomic-level understanding of the interface is essential. Advanced in situ characterization techniques, such as in situ TEM, in situ XRD, ToF-SIMs, etc., are promising methodologies to identify the interphase layer evolution during charge–discharge cycles.
(2) Modification and optimization of the electrode–electrolyte interface to reduce the interfacial resistance: architecture tailoring, grain-boundary engineering, and interfacial modification are promising strategies to enhance the ionic conductivity of the interphase layers. Combination of high-throughput experimental techniques with theoretical calculation methods, such as density functional theory (DFT) calculations, or other mathematical calculation methods is expected to provide a favorable platform for the optimization of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces.
(3) Optimization of battery configuration design: strategic cell configuration design would help to reduce the interfacial resistance and manufacturing costs of the all-solid-state Li-based batteries; monolithic cell configuration is one example. Modern fabrication techniques, such as 3D printing, may also be employed to optimize the microstructures of the electrode–electrolyte assembly to achieve low interfacial resistance. In addition, flexible micro metal-supports may possibly be integrated for the fabrication of the electrode–electrolyte assemblies in all-solid-state Li-based batteries.
Overall, the electrode–electrolyte interface is a crucially important issue, influencing the cycling performances and safety of Li-based batteries operated with either nonaqueous liquid electrolytes or polymer or ceramic solid electrolytes. Both a deep fundamental understanding of the interfacial phenomena and practical strategies for enhancing the interfacial properties are still limited; in-depth scientific and engineering explorations are necessary to tackle the issues. Future research and development require collaborative efforts involving the disciplines of chemistry, physics, material science, nanoscience/nanotechnology, as well as computational modelling/simulation. The information provided in this review along with the bold perspective on future research and development directions presented are expected to benefit both the current Li+-ion technologies and future-generation solid-state Li-based batteries operated with polymer or ceramic solid electrolytes.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under award number DE-SC0005397.
References
M. S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126–1127 CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1978, 12, 41–99 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Murphy and P. A. Christian, Science, 1979, 205, 651–656 CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1983, 18, 461–472 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lazzari and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 773–774 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hunter, J. Solid State Chem., 1981, 39, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Gabano, P. Bro, Z. Takehara and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 1987, 20, 345–356 CrossRef .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, K. Chemelewski and E. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1339–1350 CAS .
A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, MRS Bull., 2016, 41, 624–630 CrossRef .
D. Deng, Energy Sci. Eng., 2015, 3, 385–418 CrossRef .
M. G. S. R. Thomas, W. I. F. David, J. B. Goodenough and P. Groves, Mater. Res. Bull., 1985, 20, 1137–1146 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Wang, S. Nakamura, M. Ue and P. B. Balbuena, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11708–11718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novak, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725–763 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gauthier, T. J. Carney, A. Grimaud, L. Giordano, N. Pour, H. H. Chang, D. P. Fenning, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, C. Bauer, F. Magia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4653–4672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao, F. Wei, J. G. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500213 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and P. Singh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2387–A2392 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, H. D. Abruna, C. E. Chidsey, L. R. Faulkner, S. W. Feldberg, K. Itaya, M. Majda, O. Melroy, R. W. Murray, M. D. Porter, M. P. Soriaga and H. S. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 7147–7173 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. L. Wang, F. Ding, X. L. Chen, E. Nasybutin, Y. H. Zhang and J. G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 CAS .
Q. Chen, K. Geng and K. Sieradzki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2004–A2007 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fleury, J. N. Chazalviel, M. Rosso and B. Sapoval, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 290, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Chazalviel, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1990, 42, 7355–7367 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J. N. Chazalviel, P. Baudry and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 1569–1574 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosso, T. Gobron, C. Brissot, J. N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97-8, 804–806 CrossRef .
X. B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7207–7209 CAS .
N. Togasaki, T. Momma and T. Osaka, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 588–592 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. S. Wainwright, Science, 1994, 264, 1115–1118 CAS .
F. M. Gray, J. R. Maccallum and C. A. Vincent, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18-9, 282–286 CrossRef .
D. E. Fenton, J. M. Parker and P. V. Wright, Polymer, 1973, 14, 589 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gorecki, R. Andreani, C. Berthier, M. Armand, M. Mali, J. Roos and D. Brinkmann, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18-9, 295–299 CrossRef .
I. E. Kelly, J. R. Owen and B. C. H. Steele, J. Power Sources, 1985, 14, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choe, J. Giaccai, M. Alamgir and K. M. Abraham, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2289–2293 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and M. Alamgir, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 1657 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wang, B. Y. Huang, H. Huang, L. Q. Chen, R. J. Xue and F. S. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 1443–1446 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Appetecchi, F. Croce and B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 991–997 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iijima, Y. Toyoguchi and N. Eda, Denki Kagaku, 1985, 53, 619–623 CAS .
W. L. Qiu, X. H. Ma, Q. H. Yang, Y. B. Fu and X. F. Zong, J. Power Sources, 2004, 138, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, M. H. Ervin, K. Xu and T. R. Jow, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3339–3345 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Dudney, J. B. Bates, R. A. Zuhr, C. F. Luck and J. D. Robertson, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53, 655–661 CrossRef .
J. B. Bates, N. J. Dudney, G. R. Gruzalski, R. A. Zuhr, A. Choudhury, C. F. Luck and J. D. Robertson, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53, 647–654 CrossRef .
J. B. Goodenough, H. Y. P. Hong and J. A. Kafalas, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 203–220 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Subramanian, R. Subramanian and A. Clearfield, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18-9, 562–569 CrossRef .
E. J. Cussen, Chem. Commun., 2006, 412–413 RSC .
H. M. Kasper, Inorg. Chem., 1969, 8, 1000–1002 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Inaguma, L. Q. Chen, M. Itoh, T. Nakamura, T. Uchida, H. Ikuta and M. Wakihara, Solid State Commun., 1993, 86, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mazza, Mater. Lett., 1988, 7, 205–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy, S. Sahami, S. W. Shea and Z. M. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18-9, 368–371 CrossRef .
J. H. Kennedy and Y. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 2437–2438 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Herbert, W. E. Tenhaeff, N. J. Dudney and G. M. Pharr, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
J. van den Broek, S. Afyon and J. L. M. Rupp, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600736 CrossRef .
C. Hansel, S. Afyon and J. L. M. Rupp, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18412–18420 RSC .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Li, B. H. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006–3059 RSC .
A. J. Smith, J. C. Burns, S. Trussler and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A196–A202 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shim, R. Kostecki, T. Richardson, X. Song and K. A. Striebel, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. Menkin, D. Golodnitsky and E. Peled, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 1983, 9, 253–266 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nazri and R. H. Muller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 2050–2054 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nazri and R. H. Muller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 1385–1387 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, M. L. Daroux, P. W. Faguy and E. Yeager, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1611–1620 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, H. Tamura and Z. Takehara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 333, 127–142 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, H. Tamura, S. Shiraishi and Z. Takehara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 394, 49–62 CrossRef .
E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky and G. Ardel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L208–L210 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, B. Markovsky, A. Shechter, Y. EinEli and H. Cohen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3809–3820 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, I. Weissman, A. Zaban and O. Chusid, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 51–71 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zaban, E. Zinigrad and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 3089–3101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, A. Zaban, Y. Gofer, Y. E. Ely, I. Weissman, O. Chusid and O. Abramson, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
O. Chusid, Y. E. Ely, D. Aurbach, M. Babai and Y. Carmeli, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43, 47–64 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky, C. Menachem and D. Bar-Tow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3482–3486 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Gofer, M. Benzion and P. Aped, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 339, 451–471 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. V. Zhuang, K. Xu, H. Yang, T. R. Jow and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17567–17573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fong, U. Vonsacken and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2009–2013 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, Z. Phys. Chem., 2009, 223, 1395–1406 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Kristina Edström and D. P. Abraham, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 380–384 CrossRef .
E. Peled, D. B. Tow, A. Merson, A. Gladkich, L. Burstein and D. Golodnitsky, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97-8, 52–57 CrossRef .
V. Eshkenazi, E. Peled, L. Burstein and D. Golodnitsky, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 170, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, D. B. Towa, A. Merson and L. Burstein, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2000, 3, 319–326 CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Eineli, B. Markovsky, A. Zaban, S. Luski, Y. Carmeli and H. Yamin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2882–2890 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, B. Markovsky, I. Weissman, E. Levi and Y. Ein-Eli, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 67–86 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Eineli, B. Markovsky, D. Aurbach, Y. Carmeli, H. Yamin and S. Luski, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 2559–2569 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zampardi, E. Ventosa, F. La Mantia and W. Schuhmann, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9347–9349 RSC .
H. Bulter, F. Peters, J. Schwenzel and G. Wittstock, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10531–10535 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zampardi, F. La Mantia and W. Schuhmann, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31166–31171 RSC .
G. Zampardi, F. La Mantia and W. Schuhmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 58, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Jeong, M. Inaba, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A989–A993 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inaba, Z. Siroma, A. Funabiki, Z. Ogumi, T. Abe, Y. Mizutani and M. Asano, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1535–1540 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, M. D. Levi, E. Levi and A. Schechter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2195–2206 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, A. Zaban, Y. Ein-Eli, I. Weissman, O. Chusid, B. Markovsky, M. Levi, E. Levi, A. Schechter and E. Granot, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Eineli, O. Chusid, Y. Carmeli, M. Babai and H. Yamin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 603–611 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bar-Tow, E. Peled and L. Burstein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 824–832 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhang, J. F. Qian, W. Xu, S. M. Russell, X. L. Chen, E. Nasybulin, P. Bhattacharya, M. H. Engelhard, D. H. Mei, R. G. Cao, F. Ding, A. V. Cresce, K. Xu and J. G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6889–6896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Augustsson, M. Herstedt, J. H. Guo, K. Edstrom, G. V. Zhuang, P. N. Ross, J. E. Rubensson and J. Nordgren, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 4185–4189 RSC .
N. Leifer, M. C. Smart, G. K. S. Prakash, L. Gonzalez, L. Sanchez, K. A. Smith, P. Bhalla, C. P. Grey and S. G. Greenbaum, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A471–A480 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lu, C. Li, E. W. Schneider and S. J. Harris, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 896–903 CAS .
A. Funabiki, M. Inaba and Z. Ogumi, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 227–231 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wagner, J. H. Albering, K. C. Moeller, J. O. Besenhard and M. Winter, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Y. F. Lam, S. S. Zhang, T. R. Jow and T. B. Curtis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7411–7421 CAS .
I. A. Shkrob, Y. Zhu, T. W. Marin and D. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 19255–19269 CAS .
I. A. Shkrob, Y. Zhu, T. W. Marin and D. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 19270–19279 CAS .
K. R. Kneten and R. L. Mccreery, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 2518–2524 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bedrov, G. D. Smith and A. C. T. van Duin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 2978–2985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, G. R. V. Zhuang, J. L. Allen, U. Lee, S. S. Zhang, P. N. Ross and T. R. Jow, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7708–7719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Sloop, J. K. Pugh, S. Wang, J. B. Kerr and K. Kinoshita, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A42–A44 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, S. Nakamura, K. Tasaki and P. B. Balbuena, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4408–4421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Pinson and M. Z. Bazant, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A243–A250 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled and S. Menkin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1703–A1719 CrossRef CAS .
N. Takenaka, Y. Suzuki, H. Sakai and M. Nagaoka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10874–10882 CAS .
S. Q. Shi, P. Lu, Z. Y. Liu, Y. Qi, L. G. Hector, H. Li and S. J. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15476–15487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Qian, W. A. Henderson, W. Xu, P. Bhattacharya, M. Engelhard, O. Borodin and J. G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, F. X. Wu, J. T. Lee, N. Nitta, H. T. Lin, M. Oschatz, W. I. Cho, S. Kaskel, O. Borodin and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401792 CrossRef .
M. G. S. R. Thomas, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 1521–1528 CrossRef CAS .
K. Edstrom, T. Gustafsson and J. O. Thomas, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 397–403 CrossRef .
R. Dedryvere, H. Martinez, S. Leroy, D. Lemordant, F. Bonhomme, P. Biensan and D. Gonbeau, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 462–468 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, B. Markovsky, A. Rodkin, E. Levi, Y. S. Cohen, H. J. Kim and M. Schmidt, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4291–4306 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dedryvere, D. Foix, S. Franger, S. Patoux, L. Daniel and D. Gonbeau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10999–11008 CAS .
T. Eriksson, A. M. Andersson, C. Gejke, T. Gustafsson and J. O. Thomas, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3609–3619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lu, A. N. Mansour, N. Yabuuchi and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4408–4424 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Yoshii, S. T. Myung, I. Nakai and S. Komaba, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4404–4419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cherkashinin, M. Motzko, N. Schulz, T. Spath and W. Jaegermann, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2875–2887 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, S. Toriyama, S. Shiraishi, M. Ohashi and Z. Takehara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 419, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, I. Weissman, A. Schechter and H. Cohen, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 3991–4007 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, A. Zaban, A. Schechter, Y. Eineli, E. Zinigrad and B. Markovsky, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2873–2882 CrossRef CAS .
E. Markevich, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1298–1304 CrossRef CAS .
D. Takamatsu, Y. Koyama, Y. Orikasa, S. Mori, T. Nakatsutsumi, T. Hirano, H. Tanida, H. Arai, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11597–11601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, I. M. Markus, D. Nordlund, T. C. Weng, M. D. Asta, H. L. L. Xin and M. M. Doeff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3529 Search PubMed .
S. K. Jung, H. Gwon, J. Hong, K. Y. Park, D. H. Seo, H. Kim, J. Hyun, W. Yang and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300787 CrossRef .
S. Hwang, W. Chang, S. M. Kim, D. Su, D. H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, K. Y. Chung and E. A. Stach, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1084–1092 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boulineau, L. Simonin, J. F. Colin, E. Canevet, L. Daniel and S. Patoux, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3558–3566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, Y. J. Kim and B. Park, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3788–3791 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Levi, G. Salitra, B. Markovsky, H. Teller, D. Aurbach, U. Heider and L. Heider, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 1279–1289 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, B. Markovsky, G. Salitra, E. Markevich, Y. Talyossef, M. Koltypin, L. Nazar, B. Ellis and D. Kovacheva, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 491–499 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin, C. Locati and G. Pacchioni, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 642–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ensling, G. Cherkashinin, S. Schmid, S. Bhuvaneswari, A. Thissen and W. Jaegermann, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3948–3956 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Wang, E. Rus, T. Sakuraba, J. Kikuchi, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruna, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 6197–6201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, H. D. Lim, M. Lee, S. W. Kim, H. Kim, S. T. Oh, G. C. Chung and K. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2692–2697 CrossRef CAS .
F. La Mantia, F. Rosciano, N. Tran and P. Novak, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38, 893–896 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathiya, J. B. Leriche, E. Salager, D. Gourier, J. M. Tarascon and H. Vezin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Koga, L. Croguennec, M. Menetrier, P. Mannessiez, F. Weill, C. Delmas and S. Belin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5700–5709 CAS .
H. Koga, L. Croguennec, M. Menetrier, K. Douhil, S. Belin, L. Bourgeois, E. Suard, F. Weill and C. Delmas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A786–A792 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, N. Li and S. A. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2257–2267 RSC .
D. Y. W. Yu, K. Yanagida, Y. Kato and H. Nakamura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A417–A424 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, A. D. Robertson and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 275–280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guilmard, L. Croguennec and C. Delmas, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4484–4493 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, Y. T. Kim, H. H. Li and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4936–4951 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dupre, M. Cuisinier, E. Legall, D. War and D. Guyomard, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 231–240 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, M. Blanco, S. Zecevic, K. Sasaki, J. Uddin, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12399–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, A. Dolocan, P. Oh, H. Celio, S. Park, J. Cho and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14589 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zampardi, R. Trocoli, W. Schuhmann and F. La Mantia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 28381–28387 RSC .
A. M. Haregewoin, A. S. Wotango and B. J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1955–1988 CAS .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1379–1394 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, B. Kaplan, T. Ohtsuka, Y. Kataoka, N. Kumagai and H. Groult, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 378–382 CrossRef .
Y. EinEli, S. R. Thomas and V. R. Koch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Leggesse and J. C. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 11025–11033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Yang, P. Zhao, Y. M. Shang, L. Wang, X. M. He, M. Fang and J. L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 121, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Burns, N. N. Sinha, G. Jain, H. Ye, C. M. VanElzen, W. M. Lamanna, A. Xiao, E. Scott, J. Choi and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1095–A1104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pires, L. Timperman, A. Castets, J. S. Pena, E. Dumont, S. Levasseur, R. Dedryvere, C. Tessier and M. Anouti, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 42088–42094 RSC .
Y. B. Liu, L. Tan and L. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, Z. H. Chen, H. S. Lee, X. Q. Yang and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15202–15206 CAS .
J. K. Feng, P. Ma, H. X. Yang and L. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 688–692 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Wang, P. Ping, J. H. Sun and C. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7457–7461 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Rollins, M. K. Harrup, E. J. Dufek, D. K. Jamison, S. V. Sazhin, K. L. Gering and D. L. Daubaras, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 66–74 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Chen and K. Amine, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 703–707 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Moshurchak, W. M. Lamanna, M. Bulinski, R. L. Wang, R. R. Garsuch, J. W. Jiang, D. Magnuson, M. Triemert and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A309–A312 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Huang, I. A. Shkrob, P. Q. Wang, L. Cheng, B. F. Pan, M. N. He, C. Liao, Z. C. Zhang, L. A. Curtiss and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7332–7337 CAS .
C. A. C. Sequeira and A. Hooper, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 9-10, 1131–1138 CrossRef CAS .
N. Munichandraiah, L. G. Scanlon, R. A. Marsh, B. Kumar and A. K. Sircar, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 379, 495–499 CrossRef .
J. Xu and G. C. Farrington, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 74, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Christie and C. A. Vincent, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1996, 26, 255–267 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fauteux, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1199–1210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, K. S. Siow, Z. Q. Gao and S. Y. Lee, Solid State Ionics, 1998, 112, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Sloop and M. M. Lerner, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1292–1297 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43, 9–19 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky, G. Ardel and V. Eshkenazy, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2197–2204 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Zhuang, K. L. Wang, G. Chottiner, R. Barbour, Y. Y. Luo, I. T. Bae, D. Tryk and D. A. Scherson, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ichino, B. D. Cahan and D. A. Scherson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, L59–L61 CrossRef CAS .
O. Chusid, Y. Gofer, D. Aurbach, M. Watanabe, T. Momma and T. Osaka, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97-8, 632–636 CrossRef .
C. Hu, L. Tao and Y. Yong, Prog. Chem., 2006, 18, 542–549 Search PubMed .
I. Ismail, A. Noda, A. Nishimoto and M. Watanabe, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 1595–1603 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Kong and F. McLarnon, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 180–189 CrossRef CAS .
F. Orsini, A. Du Pasquier, B. Beaudoin, J. M. Tarascon, M. Trentin, N. Langenhuizen, E. De Beer and P. Notten, J. Power Sources, 1998, 76, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. Le Granvalet-Mancini, T. Hanrath and D. Teeters, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Le Granvalet-Mancini, L. Honeycutt and D. Teeters, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1491–1500 CrossRef CAS .
T. Osaka, T. Momma, T. Tajima and Y. Matsumoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1057–1060 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shiraishi, K. Kanamura and Z. I. Takehara, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1999, 29, 869–881 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishikawa, S. Machino and M. Morita, Electrochemistry, 1999, 67, 1200–1202 CAS .
Z. Takehara, Z. Ogumi, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda and H. Yoshida, J. Power Sources, 1993, 44, 377–383 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Choi, Y. M. Lee, J. H. Park and J. K. Park, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 610–616 CrossRef .
T. Sotomura, K. Adachi, M. Taguchi, M. Iwaku, T. Tatsuma and N. Oyama, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 192–199 CrossRef .
M. Le Granvalet-Mancini and D. Teeters, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97-8, 624–627 CrossRef .
R. N. Mason, M. Smith, T. Andrews and D. Teeters, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 118, 129–133 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 759–770 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, L. Q. Zhang, R. Z. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2226–2229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16103 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, P. Maire and P. Novak, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6332–6341 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashi, Y. Nishio, H. Kitaura and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1860–1863 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brazier, L. Dupont, L. Dantras-Laffont, N. Kuwata, J. Kawamura and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2352–2359 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Santhanagopalan, W. Zhang, F. Wang, H. L. L. Xin, K. He, J. C. Li, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3760–3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, Y. Iriyama, T. Asaka, T. Hirayama, H. Fujita, C. A. J. Fisher, K. Nonaka, Y. Sugita and Z. Ogumi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4414–4417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, Y. Iriyama, T. Asaka, T. Hirayama, H. Fujita, K. Nonaka, K. Miyahara, Y. Sugita and Z. Ogumi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 113–116 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, R. Yoshida, T. Sato, H. Matsumoto, H. Kurobe, T. Hamanaka, T. Kato, Y. Iriyama and T. Hirayama, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 414–421 CrossRef CAS .
T. Okumura, T. Nakatsutsumi, T. Ina, Y. Orikasa, H. Arai, T. Fukutsuka, Y. Iriyama, T. Uruga, H. Tanida, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10051–10060 RSC .
W. S. Kruijt, H. J. Bergveld and P. H. L. Notten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3764–3773 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. L. Notten, W. S. Kruijt and H. J. Bergveld, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3774–3783 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Bergveld, W. S. Kruijt and P. H. L. Notten, J. Power Sources, 1999, 77, 143–158 CrossRef CAS .
D. Danilov, R. A. H. Niessen and P. H. L. Notten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A215–A222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10015–10020 RSC .
H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 118–124 RSC .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A73–A75 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aso, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 686–690 CAS .
T. Minami, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 2715–2720 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6735–6741 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, I. Sakaguchi, L. Q. Zhang, R. Z. Ma, K. Fukuda, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1486–1490 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, L. Q. Zhang, R. Z. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2226–2229 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, N. Ohta, L. Q. Zhang, K. Fukuda, I. Sakaguchi, R. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A27–A32 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A1–A3 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Woo, J. E. Trevey, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. S. Choi, S. C. Kim, S. M. George, K. H. Oh and S. H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1120–A1124 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, Y. Gong, K. Fu, X. He, G. T. Hitz, J. Dai, A. Pearse, B. Liu, H. Wang, G. Rubloff, Y. Mo, V. Thangadurai, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 572–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kato, T. Hamanaka, K. Yamamoto, T. Hirayama, F. Sagane, M. Motoyama and Y. Iriyama, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 292–298 CrossRef CAS .
D. Santhanagopalan, D. Qian, T. McGilvray, Z. Y. Wang, F. Wang, F. Camino, J. Graetz, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 298–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 734–736 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okita, K. Ikeda, H. Sano, Y. Iriyama and H. Sakaebe, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2135–2142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiratani, K. Miyauchi and T. Kudo, Solid State Ionics, 1988, 28, 1406–1410 CrossRef .
A. Kato, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2016, 309, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Zhou, S. F. Wang, Y. T. Li, S. Xin, A. Manthiram and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9385–9388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Han, T. Gao, Y. J. Zhu, K. J. Gaskell and C. S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3473–3483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Xingwen Yu
	Xingwen Yu is a research associate at the Texas Materials Institute at the University of Texas at Austin. He has 12 years of R&D experience in battery and fuel cell technologies. He is currently working on multiple research programs in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

Arumugam Manthiram
	Arumugam Manthiram is a Professor and holder of the Cockrell Family Regents Chair in Engineering at the University of Texas at Austin. He is also the Director of the Texas Materials Institute and the Materials Science and Engineering Program. His research interests are in the area of rechargeable batteries and fuel cells, including novel synthesis approaches for nanomaterials and nanocomposites.

Broader context
Lithium-ion (Li+-ion) batteries have empowered the wireless revolution of modern electronic devices. Due to their relatively high energy density, Li+-ion batteries are appealing for electric vehicles and grid energy storage as well. Commercially available Li+-ion batteries are generally developed with liquid organic electrolytes. In these batteries, the electrode–electrolyte interface has long been recognized as one of the most critical issues. On the other hand, due to the safety concerns of flammable organic electrolytes, the development of lithium(Li)-based batteries (lithium or Li+-ion batteries) with solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) is becoming increasingly attractive. The SSEs used for the development of Li-based batteries usually include two major classes of Li+-ion conductive materials: organic polymers and inorganic ceramics. In either the polymer or ceramic electrolyte case, the electrode–electrolyte interfacial behavior has always been considered as a challenge. As a matter of fact, the interfacial behavior in lithium-based batteries is extremely complex. Future research and development require collaborative efforts involving multiple disciplines. Therefore, we herein aim to provide a timely review to the scientific community with respect to the progress and current status in understanding and manipulating the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in Li-based batteries. Future research and development directions are also suggested.


 	Fig. 1  Major topics regarding the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in various lithium-based battery systems. (a) Traditional lithium and Li+-ion batteries with nonaqueous liquid electrolytes. (b) Polymer-electrolyte Li-based batteries. (c) All-solid-state Li-based batteries with inorganic solid-state ceramic electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Models of the solid electrolyte interfaces (SEIs) on lithium or graphite electrodes. (a) Early proposed double-layer structure model.66 (b) Mosaic model (on Li-metal or graphite anode) proposed at the end of the 1990s.72 (c) Mosaic model on graphite anode.83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 (Copyright 1983, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 72 (Copyright 1997, The Electrochemical Society), and ref. 83 (Copyright 2006, Elsevier Publisher).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the SEI formed on the basal (top) and edge (bottom) planes of the HOPG model sample. The SEI on the basal plane consists mostly of solvent decomposition products (organic), whereas the edge plane is composed mainly of salt decomposition products (inorganic).22 Reproduced with permission from ref. 22 (Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  The EEI layer models on cycled positive electrodes that have been previously proposed. (a) EEI layer model of cycled oxide electrode composites developed from the XPS studies.126 (b) EEI layer model of the AlPO4-coated LiCoO2 and the uncoated LiCoO2 cathode.127 (c) Schematics of the surface reaction mechanisms in the LixNi0.13Co0.13Mn0.54O2−δ composite electrodes consisting of the active material, acetylene black, and PVdF.128 (d) Schematics of the Li+ deintercalation from the cathode material. The lowering Ef below the HOMO of the electrolyte would result in hole-metal oxides and the compounds of the decomposed electrolyte.129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 (Copyright 2002, American Chemical Society), ref. 127 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society), ref. 128 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society), and ref. 129 (Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic demonstration of the Li/polymer electrolyte (Li/PE) interfaces and their equivalent circuit. (a-I) The Li/PE interface with the native thin film (A), fresh SEI (B), void (C), CPE (composite polymer electrolyte) or PE (D). (a-II) A magnified segment of SEI with the native film (A), LiF or LiCl (B), nonconductive polymer (C), and Li2CO3 or Li2CO3-R (D), (a-III) an equivalent circuit of the Li/PE interface. GB: grain boundary, CA(B,C,D) and RA(B,C,D): capacitance and resistance of each particle.183 (b) Schematic demonstration of the surface layer formed on the Li metal after its contact with (top) LiTFSI or (bottom) LiBF4.188 Reproduced with permission from ref. 183 (Copyright 1995, Elsevier Publisher) and ref. 188 (Copyright 2001, Elsevier Publisher).	 

H(CH2)50OH	No


	No
H(CH2)32(CH2CH2O)3H	Yes
H(CH2)32(CH2CH2O)10H	Yes
H(CH2)40(CH2CH2O)3H	Yes
H(CH2)40(CH2CH2O)13H	Yes


	Yes


	Yes


	Yes

 	Fig. 6  Major fundamental research methodologies recently developed with sophisticated ex situ and in situ experimental platforms: (a) ex situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization of the electrode–electrolyte interface in a “nano-battery” prepared with a focused ion beam (FIB) tool.207 (b) A quantitative electron holography (EH) methodology to directly observe the potential distribution resulting from lithium-ion diffusion in all-solid-state Li+-ion batteries operated within a transmission electron microscope (TEM).209 (c) A depth-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy methodology to characterize the electrode–electrolyte interface.212 (d) A modified electron holography (EH) – transmission electron microscopy (TEM) methodology to characterize the electrode–electrolyte interface.210 (e) SR-TEM-EELS (spatially-resolved transmission electron microscope electron energy loss spectroscopy in TEM mode) technique of the investigation of the electrode–electrolyte interface.211 (f) In situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) coupled with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS).208 Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 (Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society), ref. 209 (Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons Publisher), ref. 212 (Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry), ref. 210 (Copyright 2012, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 211 (Copyright 2014, Elsevier Publisher), and ref. 208 (Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  Major strategies towards the enhancement of the electrode–electrolyte interface in all-solid-state Li-based batteries with inorganic solid electrolytes. (a) Ball milling synthetic route for the preparation of nanocomposites of the NiS electrode and the Li2S–P2S5 electrolyte.206 (b) Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method for the preparation of a composite of electrode/solid electrolyte (NiS/Li2S–P2S5).220 (c) A homogenous single-layer electrode/electrolyte Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) with mixed conductivity for the development of all-solid-state Li-based batteries.237 (d) An Au thin interlayer approach between the Li electrode and the solid electrolyte.235 (e) Enhancement of the electrode/solid electrolyte interface with a polymer (cross-linked) interlayer approach.236 (f) An atomic layer deposition (ALD)-coating approach to enhance the electrode/solid electrolyte interface.229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 (Copyright 2008, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 220 (Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society), ref. 237 (Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons Publisher), ref. 235 (Copyright 2016, Elsevier Publisher), ref. 236 (Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society), and ref. 229 (Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
