Current approaches, emerging developments and functional prospects for lignin-based catalysts – a review  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3GC00072A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3GC00072A
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2023, 25, 2896-2929Current approaches, emerging developments and functional prospects for lignin-based catalysts – a review

        
          
            Mehdi 
            Mennani
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meriem 
            Kasbaji
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Anass 
            Ait Benhamou
          
          
        
      acd, 
      
        
          
            Abdelghani 
            Boussetta
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ayoub Abdelkader 
            Mekkaoui
          
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Nabil 
            Grimi
          
          
        
      g and 

        
          
            Amine 
            Moubarik
          
          
        
      *a
aChemical Processes and Applied Materials Laboratory, Polydisciplinary Faculty, Sultan Moulay Slimane University, PB: 592, Beni Mellal, Morocco. E-mail: a.moubarik@usms.ma
bEngineering in Chemistry and Physics of Matter Laboratory, Faculty of Science and Technologies, Sultan Moulay Slimane University, PB: 523, Beni Mellal, Morocco
cMaterials Science, Energy and Nanoengineering (MSN) Department, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University, Lot 660 – Hay Moulay Rachid, 43150, Ben Guerir, Morocco
dMaterials Sciences and Process Optimization Laboratory, Faculty of Science Semlalia, Cadi Ayyad University, 40000, Marrakech, Morocco
eLaboratoire de Chimie Moléculaire, Equipe de Chimie de Coordination et de Catalyse, Département de Chimie, Faculté des Sciences Semlalia, Université Cadi Ayyad, BP 2390, 40001 Marrakech, Morocco
fLaboratoire des Sciences des Matériaux, Mathématiques et Environnement, Université Sultan Moulay Slimane, Faculté Polydisciplinaire de Khouribga, BP 145, 25000 Khouribga, Morocco
gSorbonne Université, Université de Technologie de Compiègne, Laboratoire Transformations Intégrées de la Matière Renouvelable (UTC/ESCOM, EA 4297 TIMR), Centre de recherches Royallieu, CS 60 319, 60 203, Compiègne Cedex, France
Received 
      6th January 2023
    , Accepted 20th February 2023First published on 22nd February 2023AbstractBiopolymer functionalization is perceived as an innovative approach to revolutionizing bio-catalyzed chemical transformations. Lignin, the chief natural source of polyphenols, has an aromatic structure with plenty of beneficial chemical groups. Accordingly, lignin can be functionalized, copolymerized, or recombined with different types of chemicals to produce highly efficient catalysts. Moreover, the stability and biodegradability of lignin make it an efficient bio-immobilizer for diverse metals (Pt, Pd, Ag, Cu, Co, Fe, etc.), which are known for their excellent catalytic performances. In addition, the solid nature of the lignin-derived catalysts has excellent advantages in terms of simple catalyst recovery and reuse over consecutive cycles with high stability. The present work compiles the newly adopted approaches to valorize lignin in the field of catalysis. Lignin-derived acid and base catalysts, lignin metal-free catalysts, and lignin-supported metal catalysts have demonstrated the full potential of lignin in hydrolysis, esterification, oxidation, condensation, hydration, and multicomponent reactions. The synthesis methods, properties, and catalytic capacity of lignin-based catalysts were assessed and contrasted with conventional catalysts. Attractively, the inclusion of lignin in catalysis appeared as a novel upgrading strategy that offers eco-friendly and profitable materials, leading to simple and green chemical synthesis, as well as a revolutionary shift in the industrialization of biomass-derived materials generally, and functionalized lignin-based catalysts specifically.Mehdi MennaniMr Mehdi Mennani is a PhD candidate at the Polydisciplinary Faculty of Beni Mellal, Sultan Moulay Slimane University. His main research focuses on the valorization of municipal and agro-industrial lignocellulosic residues into high value-added lignin-based materials, most notably in the field of catalysis and adhesives. His research is focused on the design, synthesis and functionalization of new lignin-based catalytic systems by direct physicochemical processing, which could meet the ongoing demand for eco-compatible and cost-effective materials for catalyzed transformations.Meriem KasbajiMme Meriem Kasbaji is a PhD candidate at the Faculty of Science and Technology of Beni Mellal. Her current main research activities are related to the extraction and valorization of biopolysaccharides from lignocellulosic wastes (agricultural, food and marine sources) and their use in composite adsorption systems for environmental decontamination, bio-remediation and protection applications. She is also active in the valorization of lignin as an efficient and reliable natural polymer in bio-adsorption and bio-catalysis.Anass Ait BenhamouDr Anass Ait Benhamou, is a young researcher affiliated with the Materials Science and Nanoengineering (MSN) Department, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University (UM6P). He recently defended his PhD thesis, in January 2023, at the Faculty of Sciences Semlalia at Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech, Morocco. Upon successful completion, he was awarded his doctorate degree in physico-chemistry and materials science. His research focuses on the extraction, characterization, and valorization of biopolymers, including cellulose, lignin, chitosan and chitin, from renewable source-derived materials; chemical modifications of these biopolymers; and the development of polymer and biopolymer-based bio-nanocomposites: processing, characterization and applications in food packaging, catalysis, and storage energy.Abdelghani BoussettaAbdelghani Boussetta obtained his PhD in Materials Chemistry at the laboratory of chemical processes and applied materials, Sultan Moulay Slimane University, Morocco. His research is focused on the valorization of biomasses, including those generated from industrial activities and agricultural waste, contributing to over 18 publications. His research interests encompass several areas, including bio-polymer extraction, polymer and materials engineering, bio-composites, and nanocomposites. Dr Boussetta's focus is on green chemistry for sustainable technology through innovation and all aspects of the extraction of bio-polymers. He is particularly interested in the potential industrial uses of different biopolymers and their utilization in the elaboration of high-value materials, as well as for catalysis applications.Ayoub Abdelkader MekkaouiProf. A. Mekkaoui is an Assistant Professor in Organic & Catalytic Chemistry at the Chemistry Department, Faculty of Sciences Semlalia Marrakech, Cadi Ayyad University. He is a former postdoctoral researcher in Organic & Green Chemistry at the CBS-GPE Department, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University. He is also a former MAECI alumnus at the Politecnico di Torino. He has obtained a PhD in Organic Chemistry & Catalysis at University Sultan Moulay Slimane. His research interest focuses on developing novel nanomaterials, especially heterogeneous nanocatalysts for catalytic eco-friendly processes, as well as the valorization of natural resources and waste materials in agreement with circular economy and green chemistry principles.Nabil GrimiProf. Nabil Grimi, is a professor in the process engineering department and head of the agro-industrial technologies group at the University of Technology of Compiègne. He obtained his PhD (2009) and Habil. Dr (2020) in process engineering at the University of Technology of Compiègne. His research interests encompass the electric field effects in bio- and food materials (microalgae, lignocellulosic biomass, etc.). He has published 120 journal papers in peer-reviewed journals (h-index = 43, Google Scholar), and 5 review chapters in books. Nabil Grimi has delivered many international keynote lectures and taught many courses in food engineering. He was the co-supervisor of 13 PhD theses. Nabil Grimi is a member of the editorial boards of several journals (Foods, Molecules, etc.). He has participated as a member of the organizing committee for many international conferences and he has been involved as a leader or participant in several projects.Amine MoubarikProf. Amine Moubarik (02/02/1983, Morocco) obtained his PhD degree in polymer chemistry and physics at the Université de Pau et des Pays de l'Adour (Pau, France) and Habil. Dr Science in Polymer and Composite Materials at the Faculté des Sciences et Techniques (Béni Mellal, Morocco). His research interests encompass polymer rheology, bio-adhesive formulation, polymer chemistry and composites. He has published 63 journal papers (51 Scopus) in peer-reviewed journals (h-index = 17, Scopus). Amine Moubarik is an associate editor of the Nutrition and Food Science Technology journal. He has participated as a member of the organizing committee for many international conferences (>20). He is a reviewer for different high-impact journals (more than 10 different journals).
1. Introduction
Modern technological progress is inherently based on fossil fuels, which have a significant and dramatic ecological impact. In fact, global climate concerns and the exhaustion of fossil-based feedstocks for fuels and chemicals have driven the demand for viable alternatives to produce sustainable materials.1–5 As the most accessible and recyclable carbon resource on Earth, lignocellulosic biomass is recognized as the key renewable material for an alternative and sustainable technology.6–8 Increasingly, lignocellulosic materials are integrated into different technologies via several physicochemical conversions to produce a variety of sustainable and ecological materials in different fields.9–12 Polysaccharides including cellulose and hemicellulose are well-developed and used in many sectors for functional bio-based chemicals,13–16 while lignin and its derivatives are less explored and deserve more comprehensive research to reveal their full value. It is estimated that only 5% of lignin is utilized for low-value purposes or burned for energy and electrical uses.17 In addition, less than 2% of industrial lignin is commercially processed, and most of it is present in the form of lignosulfonates that are employed as additives in building materials, while the rest is either consumed as low-grade fuel or merely dismissed as waste.1,17
Lignin is the major source of phenols in nature and represents the second most abundant bio-macromolecule after cellulose, which provides a substantial aromatic feedstock for ecological and bioeconomic activities.18–20 The biochemical analysis of lignin reveals a complex bio-polymerized structure involving three phenylpropanoids (p-coumaryl, coniferyl and sinapyl), which are connected by several types of bonds, forming an amorphous and hetero-macromolecule with numerous functional groups such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, carbonyl and methoxyl.21,22 The abundance of these chemical groups, the natural character of lignin, as well as its polyphenolic structure, make it a promising material for the development and production of a wide range of biomass-based products that can be used in many applications. Traditionally, the focus of most lignin applications has been on its use as a raw material, depolymerized, or functionalized polymer. In fact, unmodified and modified lignin has been widely used in wood-adhesive materials,6,23 composites,24,25 biomedical products,2,26 flame retardants27,28 and bio-adsorption applications.29,30 Still, the implementation of lignin in catalysis is to date rarely introduced due to its complex structure and heterogeneous properties, with only relatively few studies devoted to extending the values of lignin in catalysts as a support or functional polymer in certain catalytic reactions.
Catalysts are organic and inorganic compounds commonly used in a variety of chemical transformations to improve the selectivity and yield, reduce the production costs, and minimize waste or by-product formation. Catalytic systems are intrinsically important contributors to the ongoing innovation of technology leading to durable and beneficial industrial applications.19,31–33 Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts, including H2SO4, HCl, KOH, NaOH, zeolite, aluminum and silica oxides, metal-based catalysts, as well as polymer-based catalysts, are commonly used to synthesize a wide range of products in many research and industrial areas. However, solid catalysts are mostly preferred due to their ease of separation from the reaction products, but also for their merit of reusability over many cycles, giving them high economic performance compared with their homogeneous counterparts.34–38 More recently, the synthesis of biopolymeric heterogeneous catalysts has been seriously envisaged given the inherent biodegradability, ease of processing, recoverability, good conversion efficiency and possibility of replacing traditional catalytic systems.39–42 Many researchers have investigated the catalytic performance of these natural polymers in multiple reactions. Cellulose,43 chitosan,44 glucose,45 alginates46 and carbon nanotubes40 have been used as bio-based supports for different catalysts, although these materials are not yet economically sustainable.47
Attractively, the design of lignin-based catalysts is an innovative approach to valorize this lignocellulosic material, due to its phenolic character, accessibility, biodegradability, and reasonable production cost, as well as the presence of desirable functional groups which are enriched in both carbon and oxygen. Lignin has been successfully applied as a renewable carrier material to produce reliable metal-free solid catalysts,41,47–50 as well as lignin-immobilized metal catalysts.36,39,51–53 These lignin-derived catalysts offer high product efficiency, continuous operation, a clean environment, lower corrosive impact, ease of separability, and reusability, and can significantly reduce the cost of the process. The development of bio-supported catalysts functionalized on lignin depends on the source, structure and properties of the lignin. In fact, a high surface area, porous character, and good thermal, mechanical and chemical stability are the most desired attributes in lignin to develop efficient bio-based catalysts.36,40,54 Accordingly, lignin can enhance catalytic performances by restricting the leaching of catalyst molecules and contributing to the catalytic process through its functional reactive sites. Furthermore, metal catalysts, which are known for their high catalytic rate, can agglomerate due to their small particle size and are difficult to recover, while being expensive. In this regard, the introduction of lignin supports is an attractive way to develop effective and recoverable lignin-immobilized metal catalysts.55–58
This review is designed to provide a more in-depth depiction of the structure–performance relationship of lignin-based catalysts as natural catalytic systems in various transformations, as well as to emphasize the futuristic opportunities for the high beneficiation of lignin via chemical processing, to develop more versatile catalysts that have the great merit of reusability. Previous reviews have largely focused on strategies for lignin valorization, through its isolation methods, characterization and application in various sectors, including biomedical applications,1 nanotechnology,59 composites,60 adhesives,61 remediations22 and energy storage.62 Regardless, systematic reviews devoted to lignin-based catalysts are infrequently addressed, and studies on the valorization of lignin in catalytic systems are quite limited so far. In particular, we provide in this work a description of the lignin background, its role in natural lignocellulose, its structure, and its main properties. Subsequently, the benefits of different lignin-based catalysts in green technology are roughly discussed and contrasted with traditional catalysts to assess their performances and potential substitution for expensive and petroleum-based catalysts. Lastly, the review outlines the ongoing concerns and prospects for green lignin-derived catalysts that ultimately have yet to be approached to meet the upcoming catalysis demand.
2. Lignin chemistry
2.1 Lignin – the leading bio-polyphenol in nature
After nitric acid and alkali treatments of wood by Anselme Payen in 1838, he noticed that, apart from the main insoluble residue (cellulose), an encrusting material with a substantial carbon content was detected as a second major byproduct of wood processing, which was later termed “lignin” by Candolle.17,63 In the ensuing years, the development of polymer science concepts brought tremendous advances in the comprehension of the physicochemical features of lignin, and its potential beneficiation in various fields. The obscure nature of lignin is currently quite elucidated, and the valorization of this biopolymer as the second most abundant macromolecule on the planet is one of the most studied aspects. Lignin, an aromatic and heteropolymer material, has the capacity to displace synthetic polymers in many scientific and technological industrial end-uses, thereby diminishing the worldwide consumption of petroleum-based resources.21 Lignin and tannin are the most widespread bio-polyphenols in biomass materials. Both are natural phenolic compounds in the vegetal cell wall and have been widely used in antioxidants and wood-based resins.13,64–67 However, the ease of extraction, the occurrence of multiple functional groups, the large molecular weight and the high recovery rate of lignin from biomass over tannin make it a particularly unique and ubiquitous bio-based polyphenol in nature.
Basically, about 150 billion tons of lignin are biosynthesized by terrestrial plants annually, accounting for 95 billion tons of carbon in the Earth's crust and around 0.082% of all solar radiation that reaches the Earth's surface.17,18 The paper industry is a leading generator of lignin. Globally, pulp and paper processing industries yield an annual production of 50–70 million tons of lignin, and by 2030, it is expected that lignin production will potentially reach 225 million tons per year. The majority of lignin is removed during the paper manufacturing process, and it is subsequently discarded as waste in effluent/wastewater. About 98–99% of generated lignin is utilized for energy production (heat and electricity). Meanwhile, an estimated 1 million tons of lignin is isolated annually and marketed for industrial purposes.22,68 These insights bear out the considerable interest that lignin is presently drawing, both at the academic and industrial levels. Indeed, a recognizable growth in public eco-awareness is evident through the volume of scientific studies dealing with lignin. As can be seen in Fig. 1a, based on ScienceDirect data, the number of reports on lignin in different fields has grown exponentially over the last two decades. Active research approaches in this field are increasing immensely, driven by technological advances and new extraction and characterization techniques, as well as the continued demand for eco-compatible materials in polymer-based applications. In this sense, lignin-based materials are promising to fulfill the aspects of green chemistry and enhance the shift from synthetic and fossil products to natural materials. However, as a primary source of phenol in biomass, lignin is considered a multifunctional feedstock for biorefineries that requires further research to provide competitive and high-value-added materials for structural upgrades, facilitating the evolution of a bio-based economy.18,68
 Fig. 1  (a) Available published works on “lignin” and “lignin-based catalyst” as per a ScienceDirect database survey for 2010–2022 (search date: 01.02.2023). (b) The main structures of lignocellulosic biopolymers in the plant cell wall (drawn by the author). 
2.2 Lignin properties and isolation approaches
The global generation of plant biomass waste is around 200 × 109 tons, of which 90% is considered to be lignocellulose.69 Lignocellulosic biomass is a complex natural composite found in the cell wall of plants. Predominantly, lignocellulosic materials are composed of three biopolymers, cellulose (30–50%), hemicellulose (20–30%), and lignin (15–30%), that are arranged in a complex and irregular 3D configuration, with different proportions and various combinations (Fig. 1b), plus minor levels of ash, wax, protein, and minerals, depending on the type and environment of the raw material.6,70,71 Generally, the lignin percentage is 25–38% for softwood, 20–30% for hardwood, 11–20% for agro-industrial residues and 8–15% for grasses. Table 1 summarizes the chemical composition of various lignocellulosic materials. Lignin is clearly abundant in these biomass-based materials; however, the percentage of lignin varies among plant sources, tissues, ages, and cell wall types, as well as depending on the feedstock nature and lignin isolation process.22,69
Table 1 Percentage contents of predominant biopolymers in common lignocellulosic materials (% w/w)




Lignocellulosic sources
Lignin (%)
Cellulose (%)
Hemicellulose (%)
Ref.




Corn stover
19
38
26

75



Sugarcane bagasse
18–25
44–55
16–26

76



Rice straw
21.2
32.7
15.6

77



Wheat straw
18
45.5
25.5

78



Cactus seeds by-product
37.25
27.2
0.01

79



Hardwood stems
18–25
40–55
24–40

75



Softwood stems
25–35
45–50
25–35

75



Waste papers from chemical pulps
5–10
60–70
10–20

22



Coconut husk
29.8
39.3
16.1

80



Eucalyptus by-product
27.2
43.9
14.1

81





From a chemical standpoint, lignin is a complex organic macromolecule and a natural polymer with a 3D cross-linked structure that contains three randomly recurring monomers (G, H and S units). These monolignols are densely interlinked by a system of C–C and C–O links, resulting in an amorphous and heterogeneous structure of the lignin with a brown to dark brown aspect induced by a variety of chromophores, and a molecular weight of 1000–20000 g mol−1 (Fig. 1b).17,72 Unlike cellulose and hemicellulose, the structure of lignin is inherently non-uniform, as it depends on the nature of the lignin origin, the biosynthetic route, the position in the plant, the age, the geological and biological environment, as well as the lignin recovery process used. In addition, the occurrence of H, G, and S units and their polymerization provides numerous chemical functional groups that typically characterize lignin, specifically phenolic and aliphatic groups –OH, –COOH, –OMe, –CO, and –CHO.18,71 Lignin is a sort of natural adhesive that maintains the cellulose fiber assembly in the plant structure, and it is regarded as a major supporting and transporting agent, as well as a biological protectant of the lignocellulosic complex, which prevents biological, chemical and mechanical degradation.17,21,73 In addition, lignin exhibits a wide range of specific properties, such as biodegradability, biocompatibility and chemical activity, as well as antioxidant, antimicrobial, and anti-UV properties, which are also needed in several other bio-based polymers.1 The connections between the lignin entities and the extensive functional groups confer special responsiveness to various chemical processes and, consequently, great capabilities for the chemical modification of lignin.
Effective methods for lignin isolation with high purity, cost-effectiveness, structural stability and acceptable yields are essential. In general, lignin isolation processes can be categorized into sulfur-containing methods (Kraft lignins and lignosulfonates) and sulfur-free methods (soda lignins, organosolv and steam explosion), as well as other treatments such as hydrolysis, pyrolysis and green generation using ionic liquids or deep eutectic solvents.1,18,68,69,74Table 2 lists the main lignin isolation processes and their characteristics. Sulfite market pulping processes, Kraft and lignosulfonates are the main lignins generated until now. However, the high sulfur content (1–8%) and the percentage of refractory C–C linkages complicate the treatment, increase the cost, and raise environmental and health concerns. To surmount these issues, the pulping and paper industry is moving towards a biorefinery concept, focusing on cellulose extraction as well as hemicellulose and lignin production. Considerably, acid or enzymatic hydrolysis, organic salts, deep eutectic solvents, and alkaline treatments are well-established to produce high yields of pure lignin, with high thermal stability and reasonable costs. Nevertheless, the industrial implementation of these alternative processes to produce lignin on a large scale is so far limited and requires further research. Interestingly, the separation of lignocellulose into three distinct biopolymers, lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose, continues to be a serious concern, notwithstanding the ongoing development of various techniques. Specifically, the inhomogeneous and recalcitrant structure of lignin is a major challenge in isolation methods that must be inherently understood for the application of lignin-based materials.
Table 2 Summary of lignin recovery processes and their main advantages, disadvantageous and operational conditions




Lignin types
Key points
Merits
Demerits
Ref.




Lignosulfonate
Hydrolytic treatment with NaOH and Na2SO3 at 120–180 °C.
- Soluble lignin in water, polar organic solvents and amines.
- Non-selective for lignin recovery.

1 and 82


- Applicable for wood biomass.
- Difficult to apply for biomedical purposes because of the high sulfur level.


Kraft
NaOH and Na2S treatment at 150–180 °C.
- Low ash content.
- Long-duration processing (1–2 h).

69 and 83


- Lignin soluble in alkali solutions and polar solvents.
- Black liquor with elevated sugar concentration.


Klason
Acid hydrolysis with concentrated H2SO4.
- High lignin yield.
- Change in the structure of lignin.

69 and 84


- Reduced levels of carbohydrates.
- Expensive acid treatment.


Organosolv
Hydrothermal treatment with solvent (25–75%), at a temperature of 90–120 °C.
- Sulfur-free lignin.
- Additional steps for solvent recovery.

85 and 86


- Minor alteration in the structure of the lignin.
- Additional solvent cost.


- Alkali-soluble lignin.


Soda
Alkali treatment with NaOH/KOH (T = 90–150 °C).
- Sulfur-free lignin.
- Lignin structure change.

70 and 74


- Low ash content.
- Low purity due to the presence of carbohydrates.


Hydrolysis
Acidic or enzymatic hydrolysis at 170–210 °C
- High-quality and sulfur-free lignin.
- Severe acidic conditions of the treatment.

87 and 88


- Minor degradation.
- Expensive acid treatment.


Pyrolysis
Thermal treatment at high temperatures (>450 °C)
- Short vapor residence time (2 s).
- High carbohydrate consumption.

68 and 89


- Sulfur-free lignin.
- Low average molecular weight.


Ionic liquids
Hydrothermal solvent fractionation at 70–100 °C.
- Low changes in the structure of the lignin.
- Expensive ionic liquids.

69 and 74


- Sulfur-free lignin.
- Interference between the residual ionic liquid and the enzymatic and microbial activities.


Deep eutectic solvents
Mixtures of hydrogen-bond acceptors (HBA) or hydrogen-bond donors (HBD) at 120 °C for 6 h.
- Pure lignin with high yield.
- High cost.

68 and 90


- No complicated synthesis is needed.
- Energy demand.


- Further optimizations and studies are required.




3. Classical fields of lignin processing
With an accessible 300 billion tons and a yearly growth of about 20 billion tons, lignin is the most frequent amorphous bio-polymer in nature, accounting for roughly 15 to 25% of woody plants’ entire dry weight.17,74 The different properties arising from the H, G and S units open the possibility of using lignin to produce many added-value compounds.68,91 Over the years, raw and modified lignin has been used as a bio-based material to prepare a wide range of bioproducts in various fields as shown in Table 2. Particularly, in the early 2000s, there was a rather substantial increase in the interest in lignin functionalization in order to extend the value of this worthwhile biopolymer to other areas of application, to confer the necessary enhanced physicochemical properties for specific applications and to integrate lignin products into the market for economic and ecologic benefits (Fig. 2). Considerably, lignin, the natural glue of biomass materials, has gained greater attention because of its bio-phenolic nature, which makes it an attractive filler for adhesives.61,73,92 Many researchers have confirmed the multifunctional applications of lignin in the development of bio-adhesives for wood-based products (Table 3). For instance, lignin binders are produced through formaldehyde substitution in phenol-formaldehyde (PF) resins using raw and modified lignin owing to its similar structural framework,23,73 and also via copolymerization to fill other common synthetic resins, mainly, urea-formaldehyde (UF), melamine urea-formaldehyde (MUF), epoxy, and polyurethane.93–95 The physicochemical properties, the rheological behavior and the mechanical performances of lignin-based resins were found to be enhanced due to the high cure and crosslinking of lignin with the neat resin matrix.6 Interestingly, FE (formaldehyde emissions) decrease markedly from the wood composites prepared with lignin-modified adhesives, allowing for the enhancement of air quality.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of various structural modifications of lignin for enhancing the reactivity in different practical end-uses (drawn by the author). 
Table 3 Summary of different lignin types and their conventional range of applications




Lignin type/source
Applications
Key findings
Ref.




Sugar cane bagasse lignin
Lignin–phenol-formaldehyde (PF) wood resin
- With 30 wt% of lignin:PF, the dry tensile strength and wood fracture increased from 1.2 MPa and 70% to 1.8 MPa and 75%, respectively, compared with pure PF resin. Also, the formaldehyde released from wood shows a drastic decrease of up to 30%.

70



Kraft and organosolv lignin
Lignin–polycarboxylate polyether (PCE) adhesives
- Organosolv lignin with a molecular weight of 1270 g mol−1 and an OH content of 7.08 mmol g−1 gives competitive adhesive performance to commercial PSA.

104



Kraft lignin
Injected-moulded biocomposites
- The bio-composite incorporating 12% of Kraft lignin and corn cob showed the maximum flexural strength (84 MPa).

24



Alkali lignin
Lignin-based flame retardants
- When 20% lignin-based flame retardant was included, the carbon residue of the epoxy resin was raised by 15.3% and the oxygen index limit value was enhanced by 35.2%.

27



Softwood Kraft lignin
Corrosion inhibitor
- SEM and AFM analysis revealed that the carbon steel surface is unaffected by the HCl solution containing lignin-AA.

105



Kraft lignin
Drug carrier
- In vitro cell line analysis indicates that BLNPs are suitable for use in normal and lung cancer cells, including highly concentrated levels, and can therefore be safely used as drug vectors with excellent encapsulation performance.

26



Bagasse lignin
Antioxidant
- The rich phenolic, syringyl (S) and guaiacyl (G) contents in DAKL (dilute acid–alkali-treated lignin) enhanced its antioxidant activity (IC50: 38.5 μg ml−1).

2



- DAKL showed a superior antibacterial effect on Staphylococcus aureus (96.71%) and Escherichia coli (100%) as a result of its low molecular weight (756 g mol−1) plus the availability of multiple phenolic compounds.


Alkali lignin
Functionalized lignin–phenol-formaldehyde resin
- 50 wt% of phenol substituted with functionalized lignin in phenol-formaldehyde resins for particleboard bonding.

23



- PF filled with maleic anhydride and ionic liquid lignin had low formaldehyde generation and high mechanical strength when used to glue wood panels.


Corn stalks lignin
Lithium-ion batteries
- The outstanding electrochemical performance can be ascribed to the high purity of the acetone-extracted lignin, the surface oxygen-containing functional groups and the relatively high graphitization rate of the reduction sample.

106



Commercial lignin
Removal of Congo red
- 20 wt% lignin/chitosan beads revealed an adsorption capacity of 173 mg g−1, with a removal percentage of 86.5%.

30





Lignin abundancy and other desirable properties promote its implementation in bio-based composites to improve biodegradability and hydrophobicity, reduce toxicity and sustain a circular economy.24,96 Lignin-based composites can be produced by using lignin as a fill, nucleating material, compatibilizer and coupling agent in combination with synthetic and natural polymers,96,97 and their uses are widespread in the packaging, automotive, flame retardant and biomedical sectors. As such, numerous studies have been conducted to investigate the use of lignin as bio-reinforcement with different copolymers and matrices, including polyvinyl acetate,98 polylactic acid,24 polypropylene,99 cellulose100 and chitosan.101 The inclusion of lignin as a binder and copolymer in these materials presented ideal ductility and mechanical performance, good thermal properties, high biodegradability, good interfacial compatibility and also economic competitiveness with petroleum-based composites.24,25,102 Nevertheless, the involvement of lignin in composite materials is limited by its low miscibility, leading to agglomeration and phase splitting, and therefore can cause insufficient mechanical properties. Additionally, the structural complexity and non-uniformity of lignin can raise its hydrophilic character.96,103 To overcome these shortcomings, several techniques have been developed to enhance the compatibility of lignin and guarantee high performance. Surface functionalization and the use of compatibilizer agents are the most used approaches.96,102
Overall, the versatility of lignin can lead to the functionalization of several lignin-derived materials through chemical alterations to process biomaterials for various practical end uses (Table 3).1,74 Interestingly, the search for sustainable lignin sources with high reactivity, good homogeneity and biocompatibility may prompt future advances in the beneficiation and successful utility of lignin on an industrial scale.
4. The value-added implementations of lignin as a bio-based catalyst
4.1 General aspects
The fundamental approach of green chemistry involves the reduction or elimination of chemicals and processes that negatively affect the environment.107 For several years, catalysts and catalyzed processes, which represent a vital aspect of green chemistry, have drawn tremendous emphasis in search of significant opportunities in various sectors.108,109 Basically, the catalyst is a chemical compound that performs a crucial function in uncountable chemical protocols in laboratory and industrial contexts. It essentially increases the rate of the reaction, minimizes the temperature and the reagent waste, and improves the selectivity of the transformation. Catalysts are used in polymers, drugs, fuels, lubricants, adhesives, organic synthesis and numerous other highly useful applications, rendering the industry more affordable and sustainable.48,110 Depending on the nature of the catalyst, catalytic systems can be divided into three major systems: homogeneous, heterogeneous, and enzymatic.34,36
In general, homogeneous catalysis refers to the catalyst being in the identical phase to the reactants and the products of the catalyzed process. They offer excellent activity and selectivity, yet they can cause corrosion of materials and have significant separation and recycling complications. It is noteworthy that the facility of recuperation and stability of the catalyst, which proves the catalytic benefits for green and safe synthesis, promotes research toward the elaboration and involvement of heterogeneous catalysis.36,48,111 Typically, a heterogeneous catalyst is a kind of catalyst that is in a totally different phase from the reagents, and its greatest merit is its ability in recovery and recyclability.112 Heterogeneous catalysts can be metal oxides, including Mo, Zr, Cu, Cr, and Zn, or supported metal zeolites, and also sulfonated resins, aluminum and silica oxides, and biomass-derived catalysts.33,36,42,113,114 However, such systems may have lower catalytic activity and need longer reaction times and higher temperatures than homogeneous catalysts. As well, catalysts generally can exhibit limited energetic efficiency, quick catalyst deactivation, poor syngas selectivity, and the formation of undesired sub-products.114 The development of biocatalytic systems has drawn substantial focus on the production of effective and profitable bioprocesses and chemical treatments in a variety of end-uses.109,115 Biocatalysts and natural-based polymers including enzymes,115 biomass tar,114 natural fibers116 and lignocellulosic derivatives43,48 were used to synthesize high-valued source chemicals with huge potential applications in diverse sectors.54,109 In fact, over the last few years, tremendous attention has been rekindled towards using cellulose, starch, alginate, chitin, chitosan and lignin as bio-based catalysts, due to their biologic nature, significant selectivity, non-toxicity, reduced consumption of energy, biocompatibility, higher yields and prospect of recyclability.41,43,44,109,117 However, concerns about stability, the presence of by-products and inhibitors, catalytic deactivation, and limited substrate specificity, as well as the increased expense involved in industrial-scale processes, are concerns that have yet to be addressed.115,118,119
4.2 Lignin-derived catalysts
Even though lignin offers promising interest for biomaterial elaboration, given its high availability, non-toxicity and inherent biodegradability, to this point it still has limited practical and commercial high-value purposes. The major unresolved questions for lignin beneficiation arise from its heterogeneity and the transformation procedures that require further investigation. Numerous functionalization processes have been used to enhance the reactivity of lignin to develop novel bio-based materials.1,53,61,73,120 In fact, the presence of hydroxyl, methoxyl, carbonyl, and carboxyl in lignin units increases the potential for functionalization to expand the accessibility and reactivity of these sites, allowing for new efficient and more reactive macromonomers.21,68,74,121 Attractively, the aromatic character of lignin drives its use as a natural support and as a precursor to develop different types of bio-based catalysts. The presence and abundance of numerous functional groups (OH, COC, CO, COOH, OCH3, etc.) in lignin fragments, being accountable for its reactivity, encourage the capacity for functionalization and chemical processing in specific catalytic applications.50,54,60,122,123 Interestingly, the use of lignin as a natural substrate for the production of industrial catalysts is considered to be one of the most innovative and recent approaches to revalorizing biomass lignocellulosic materials. The past few years have witnessed new approaches targeting the use of lignin as a natural polymer to develop a variety of biomass-based catalysts. In fact, the use of lignin as a catalytic converter can demonstrate great technological opportunities and promote a cleaner environment by using a sustainable feedstock instead of classic metal, acid, or base catalysts (Pd, Pt, Ni, Cu, Co, Ru, KOH, NaOH, H2SO4, etc.).41,54,123,124 Given its rich surface functional groups, lignin can be used as a suitable precursor for the preparation of innovative, ecofriendly and energy-efficient catalysts with outstanding reuse benefits.
Based on the literature assessment, lignin has been involved in different types of catalysts through the combination with a variety of catalytic active species, including acids, bases, and metals. Metal-free lignin-based catalysts, including solid-supported acid and base catalysts, as well as metal-based catalysts, have been reported (Fig. 3). The resulting lignin-based catalysts have been applied in various catalyzed processes, which are widely used on an industrial scale in chemical synthesis through conventional catalysts. Hydrogenation, (de)hydration, (trans)esterification, condensation, hydrolysis, and environmental remediation are among the main catalytic implementations of different types of lignin-based catalysts, which have shown high catalytic performance, biocompatibility, cost-effectiveness, and reuse potential.40,48,125–129 Specifically, Table 4 summarizes the catalytic application of different lignin-based catalysts, the main results and the reuse performance. It should be noted that different types of unmodified lignins practically exhibit no responsivity in various catalytic reactions, as a result of the complexity of the macromolecules, the presence of impurities, the low surface-to-volume ratio, and the limited amount of catalytic active sites in the structure of pristine lignin.54 Meanwhile, multiple lignin functionalization approaches have been introduced to develop efficient and catalytically active lignin-based materials for a wide range of applications. Lignin-derived acidic and basic heterogeneous catalysts, lignin-supported catalysts, and lignin-immobilized catalysts have demonstrated excellent performance in various imperative and essential reactions and processes in chemical synthesis, leading to a variety of high-value products, including biologically active compounds, therapeutic drugs, natural products, functional polymers, platform chemicals, biofuels, nanomaterials, and wood resins.47,50,122,125,130–132 Attractively, the shift towards such lignin-based catalytic systems may provide new ways to utilize lignin as a valuable feedstock in sustainable chemical synthesis, as it is essential for economically efficient upgrading in various industrial fields. However, the scale-up of lignin-based catalysts is still limited, and the real-world implementation of lignin-derived catalysts has not yet been well addressed, due to the heterogeneity of lignin, its insufficient mechanical properties, the lack of a reliable source of high-purity lignin, the possibility of extensive leaching of catalytic active sites, as well as the fact that there have been limited studies on the implementation of lignin-derived catalysts on the academic and industrial scales. We present herein an overview of different lignin-based catalysis processes, their catalytic properties, applications, recyclability, and regeneration potential, as well as the main limitations and challenges of using these bio-derived catalysts in different fields, to provide a more profitable, economical, and ecological implementation of catalysis.
 Fig. 3  Overview of the leading developed lignin-based catalysts and their catalytic implementations (drawn by the author). 
Table 4 Lignin-derived catalysts and their practical benefits in different catalytic applications




Lignin-based catalysts
Applications
Key notes
No. of reuses
Ref.




Lignin-derived heterogeneous base catalyst
Organic synthesis
- The yield of a Michael addition/dehydration tandem reaction reached 91% using 1.2 mol% lignin-based catalyst, whereas it was 98% for the Knoevenagel and Glaser reactions using 1 mol% and 10 mol% lignin-derived catalyst, respectively.
3

133



Lignin solid acid catalyst
Hydrolysis of cellulose into glucose and nanocellulose
- Lignin-based catalysis generated 64% glucose with a selectivity of 91.7, and also 8.1% cellulose nanofibrils by hydrolyzing 69.8% of the raw cellulose.
—

125



Lignosulfonate-based acidic carbon catalyst
Synthesis of furan derivatives for biofuels
- The lignin-based catalysis, with an –SO3H density of 1.33 mmol g−1, exhibited good catalytic efficiency for the preparation of 5-ethoxymethylfurfural (EMF) in ethanol, yielding 86%, 57%, and 47% from 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), fructose, and inulin, respectively.
4

134



Lignin heterogeneous acid catalyst
Biodiesel production
- 10 wt% acid catalyst derived from sulfonated olive cake lignin was used to esterify spent vegetable oil with a transformation rate of about 92%, as well as converting 57% waste vegetable oil to fatty acid methyl esters (FAME).
10

132



Soda lignin catalyst
Cycloaddition of epoxides and CO2
- Soda lignin with rich dimeric hydrogen bonds and β-O-4′ aryl ethers displayed the greatest catalytic reactivity with five cycles. The yield of the cycloaddition reached 91% under the optimal conditions of 80 °C and 10 h with 0.1 KI as a co-catalyst.
5

126



Lignin–Pt catalyst
Oxidative transformations
- A high number of the oxygen-containing groups on the surface of the new catalyst promotes good Pt deposition, exposing the surface to the reaction system, which improves the catalytic performance compared to commercial Pt and Ru-based catalysts.
—

52



Lignin-based activated carbon catalyst
Transformation of fructose into 5-hydroxy-methylfurfural (HMF)
- With a high specific surface area of 1629.96 m2 g−1, the new catalyst effectively converts 75.7% of fructose to HMF using DMSO as a solvent.
5

135



Lignin-based solid acid catalyst
Production of cellulose nanofibers and platform chemicals
- The lignin-based catalyst with 0.60 mmol g−1 sulfonic density and 4.62 mmol g−1 total acid density yielded 90.8% of CNFs with 82% crystallinity index over five reusability cycles, as well as 3.9% glucose and 2.1% formic acid.
6

47



Lignin-derived polyacid catalyst
Catalyze the curing process of the UF wood resin
- By using 5% lignin catalysis in wood resins, the water resistance was significantly improved as compared with the commercial additive (NH4Cl), as well as good mechanical properties and decreased formaldehyde release.
—

122



Lignin–chitosan magnetic beads
Preparation of aryl nitriles and biaryls
- PdNPs@Fe3O4/lignin/chitosan was formulated by dispersing nano-palladium on lignin/chitosan magnetic beads and used for aryl nitrile and biaryl preparation.
7

131



- The conversion rates of aryl nitrile and biaryl reached 97% and 98%, respectively, which were higher than conventional Pd-based catalysts. Also, due to the magnetic nature of the catalyst, it was easily retrieved by a magnet for later usage.


Single cobalt atom lignin catalyst
Naproxen (NPX) pollutant degradation
- With extremely low Co loading (2.45 wt%), the single-atom Co sites functioned as the key active sites for NPX degradation via peroxy-monosulfate activation, resulting in an outstandingly high turnover frequency of NPX (4.82 min−1).
4

57



Lignin sulfonated carbon catalyst
Benzylation
- The characterization revealed a porous nature and many active sulfonic, hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on the surface, resulting in a high catalytic performance (the conversion rate of BA reached 99% and remained consistently high after 12 recycling tests).
12

48






4.2.1 Lignin-derived acid catalysts. 
Acid catalysis in industrial processes has played a vital role in many critical reactions and chemical treatments. However, substituting liquid acid with solid acid in catalytic transformations has the potential to greatly facilitate catalyst recovery, which can improve the purity, as well as the ability to reuse the solid catalyst in further cycles.136 Lignin-derived solid acid supports and catalysts are the most used metal-free lignin catalysts. Generally, they can exhibit unique properties because of lignin's aromatic nature and its three-dimensional interpenetrating matrix construction, resulting in outstanding stability and high performance.35,48,54,132,134 However, unmodified lignin is unresponsive in catalytic transformations due to the occurrence of impurities, its large complexity and inhomogeneity, the unsatisfactory surface-to-volume ratio, and the lack of catalytic active sites.126 Acid activation of lignin-based catalysis is one of the most widely used techniques in this context as a beneficial chemical activation, which can deliver great porosity as well as abundant catalytic active sites. Acidic moieties such as sulfonic and phosphoric groups can be reliably surface-grafted onto lignin-derived substrates (Fig. 4a), to synthesize a variety of greenery-based lignin catalysts and improve the rate of many catalytic transformations in various fields (Table 5). In fact, the elaboration of lignin-based acid catalysts is an appealing concept to recover this lignocellulosic material considering its bio-polyphenolic potential, affordability, biodegradability, and acceptable production economics, as well as the availability of useful functional groups like methoxy, hydroxyl, carboxyl, ketones and aldehydes, which are enriched in carbon and oxygen, are highly reactive and can prompt the implementation of lignin-based materials in various catalyzed transformations.47,48,50,135,137 Moreover, lignin-derived catalysts exhibit a high output of the product, continuous operation, a clean environment, a reduced corrosive footprint, facility of removal, and recoverability, and can considerably decrease the cost of the process. Indeed, the heterogeneity of lignin-based acid catalysts is of particular relevance as it allows easy extraction by filtration or centrifugation, thereby maximizing its recovery potential.
 Fig. 4  (a) H2SO4 and H3PO4 surface activation in lignin-derived catalysis. (b) The main catalytical implementations of solid acid catalysts derived from lignin (drawn by the author). 
Table 5 Properties and applications of lignin-based solid acid catalysts




Lignin types
Catalyst properties
Catalytic transformations
Ref.


Carbonization T (°C)/t (h)
Activation
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Applications
Catalyst load

T (°C)/t (h)
Products
Yields (%)



T (°C)/t (h)
Acid/rate (mmol g−1)




Alkaline lignin
200/5
105/10
FeS/—
21.61
Cellulose conversion to levulinic acid
7.5%
200/2
Levulinic acid
35.64

49



Alkali lignin
900/0.5
150/24
H2SO4/0.56
475
Hydrolysis of cellulose
160 mg
150/24
Glucose
64

125



CNF
8.1


Dealkaline lignin
180/1
150/10
H2SO4/1.41
391.7
Biodiesel production
5%
80/5
Biodiesel
95.5

138



Masson pine alkali lignin
450/1.5
80/6
H3PO4/—
488.4
Micro-crystalline cellulose hydrolysis
0.1 g
180/3
Glucose
69.7

139



180/12
H2SO4/0.88


Olive cake lignin
400/1
RT/1
H3PO4/—
10.73
Esterification and trans-esterification
10%
65/8
Biodiesel
94

132



150/10
H2SO4/0.69


Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin
400/1
150/10
H2SO4/—
234.61
Dehydration of fructose
50 mg
130/0.6
5-Hydroxy-methyl-furfural
100

140



Kraft lignin
200–500/1
120/6
H2SO4/1.11
5.4
Synthesis of furan derivatives
0.2 g
110/15
5-Ethoxy-methyl-furfural
86

134



Commercial lignin
500/2
180/8
H2SO4/1.06
1193.8
Esterification
5%
80/6
Biodiesel
92.3

35



Corn stalk lignin
400/2
150/10
H2SO4/0.60
1.88
Hydrolysis of cellulose
0.2–0.4 g
160/12
CNFs
90.8

47



Glucose
3.9


Formic acid
2.1


Sugarcane bagasse lignin
240/6
150/14
CH4O3S/—
3.04
Esterification of stearic acid
5%
240/0.16
Methyl stearate
89.2

141



Alkaline lignin
400/1
150/10
H2SO4/0.61
63
Benzylation of benzene ring compounds
0.05 g
150/2
Diphenyl-methane
100

48





4.2.1.1 Lignin-derived sulfonate catalysts. 
Sulfonation or H2SO4 activation is a well-addressed approach to prepare heterogeneous lignin-based catalysts with high acidic and catalytic attributes. It mainly consists of a carbonization pretreatment of lignin at high temperatures (400–900 °C) to produce biochar, releasing free phenols, volatiles (CO and CO2) and water, resulting in a porous structure. The rich macroporosity presents an important mass transfer benefit, allowing for excellent reachability of the reagents to the functional sulfonic acid groups.54,142 Afterward, the biochar is activated by concentrated H2SO4 at high temperatures, which induces a covalent bond of sulfonic functional groups (SO2 and SO3H) on the surface of the activated catalyst derived from lignin, giving rise to stable amorphous phenylpropane polymers with sulfonic sites (Fig. 4a).20,50,54,125,142 Sulfated lignin catalysts exhibit significant activity in a wide range of selective reactions via the acidic active sites on the surface, translating into good thermal stability and high-performance catalytic conversion.
The useful implementation of this type of functionalized catalyst in various bio-catalyzed processes has been reported by many researchers, especially in hydrolysis and (trans)esterification reactions. Zhang et al. used a heterogeneous lignosulfonate-based sulfonic acid catalyst (LF) to hydrolyze the glycoside bonds of polysaccharides.20 Through the catalytic active sites in LF (–SO3H, –COOH, and –OH), successful hydrolysis of polysaccharides (cellobiose, maltose, sucrose, inulin, starch) to monosaccharides (glucose and fructose) was achieved with 75–98% yield. Interestingly, the catalytic hydrolysis of cellobiose to glucose on LF does not show other by-products, such as levulinic acid, unlike other acidic catalysts, such as H-mordenites, H-ZSM-5, sulfonated zirconia, and titanium oxide. The latter also showed less catalytic activity compared with LF. As well, the kinetic study revealed that the apparent activation energy of cellobiose hydrolysis by the LF catalyst was 98.5 kJ mol−1, whereas it reached 110–138 kJ mol−1 for mineral acids, organic acid homogeneous catalysts and grafted sulfonic acids. The LF catalyst retained its high activity and selectivity after four recycles. The decrease in LF activity was attributed to sulfonic acid leaching and loss of porosity, as revealed by the N2 adsorption isotherm. S. Hu et al. prepared a mesoporous solid lignin-based acid catalyst, via a carbonization step at 900 °C followed by sulfonation with H2SO4, for the hydrolysis of highly crystalline rice straw cellulose.125 Under the optimum conditions of 150 °C and 5 atm, the catalysts selectively convert 69.8% of the cellulose into 64% glucose and 8.1% cellulose nanofibrils simultaneously. The great advantage of the developed catalyst is its ability to be easily separated and used repeatedly to hydrolyze the residual cellulose. In addition, the performance of the lignin-based catalysis was comparable to or better than other conventionally used hydrolysis systems, including zeolite, Zn–Ca–Fe oxide nanoparticles, and TEMPO.
In related work, Zhu et al. managed to develop an efficient lignin-modified sulfated heterogeneous catalyst for cellulose hydrolysis into nanofibers (CNFs) and valuable base chemicals (glucose, fructose, 5-HMF, levulinic and formic acids).47 Lignin was carbonized at 400 °C for 2 h under N2 and sulfonated with concentrated H2SO4 at a high temperature to incorporate –SO3H groups. The morphological characteristics of the lignin-derived catalyst after sulfonation (Fig. 5a) revealed that the particle surface was smoother with fewer ridges and that the particle size decreased to 1–500 μm due to the corrosion and dehydration induced through H2SO4 oxidation. The catalyst initiates a hydrolytic cleavage of β-1,4-glycosidic linkages when used to hydrolyse cellulose for 12 h at 160 °C. The yield of glucose and formic acid reached 8.8% and 5.4%, respectively. In addition, cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) were prepared by micro-fluidization, resulting in unique morphological characteristics (length: 200–800 nm, width: 20–35 nm, aspect ratio: 10–28) (Fig. 5a). The yield of CNFs was 92.46% with a crystallinity index of 82%, and also their elastic modulus and tensile strength were 2.3 GPa and 3.2 MPa, respectively. Convincingly, cellulose molecules can diffuse and be exposed to the available acidic sites on the catalyst surface and undergo hydrolysis to oligosaccharides (between 3 and 10 sugar residues) and glucose units. In fact, the beneficial adsorption and contact interaction between the cellulose chains and the lignin-derived acid catalyst are owed to the CH–π hydrogen bonds between the hydrophobic C–H groups of cellulose and the hydrophobic aromatics of the lignin acid catalyst. In addition, the polarized OH–O hydrogen bonds between the cellulosic hydroxyl and the oxygen-containing functional acids of the catalyst (OH, COOH, and SO3H) are responsible for breaking the β-1,4-glycosidic links of cellulose (Fig. 4b), resulting in an efficient hydrolysis of cellulose to glucose, fructose, formic acid, etc.47,139,143
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM images of lignin-based sulfonated catalyst (1 and 2) and cellulose nanofibers (3). AFM height images (4) and size distribution of cellulose nanofibers (5) (adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, Elsevier). (b) Recyclability of lignin-based acid catalyst in the esterification of oleic acid (reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2020, Elsevier). (c) Hydroxy-methylation of lignin (drawn by the author). (d) The bond line physicochemical interactions between the wood surface and lignin-UF resin (drawn by the author). (e) Immobilization and leaching of acidic catalytic species on lignin (drawn by the author). 
Acid- and base-catalyzed esterification and transesterification have been widely used in chemical synthesis and play a vital role in biofuel production to date, using H2SO4, H3PO4, KOH, NaOH, NaHCO3, etc. However, these homogeneous catalysts can yield a lot of contaminants, apart from causing equipment corrosion and soap/emulsion formation, as well as poor separation and recycling.47,132,144,145 Heterogeneous catalysts such as zeolite, sulfonated resins and zirconia are currently some of the leading alternative catalysts for esterification and biodiesel production.20,35,54,142,146 Interestingly, the incorporation of lignin-derived sulfonate catalysts is one of the most ecological routes to synthesize cost-effective biodiesel via esterification. Indeed, owing to the availability of OH, COOH and SO3H groups on the surface of the lignin-functionalized sulfonate catalyst, efficient catalytic esterification can take place (Fig. 4b), resulting in significant ester conversion rates with high purity, as well as great advantages of recyclability. In this view, Sandouqa et al. prepared a solid lignin acid catalyst by the incomplete carbonization and sulfonation of alkaline lignin to catalyze the esterification and transesterification of spent vegetable oil.132 The lignin-derived acid catalyst had an optimum surface area of 10.73 m2 g−1, and SO3H and total acid densities of 0.69 and 4.55 mmol g−1, respectively. The catalytic reaction was undertaken at 65 °C for different durations (2, 4, 6, and 8 h), with a catalyst loading of 5, 7, 10, and 15 wt%, and a MeOH/oil molar ratio of 1:35–55. The transesterification rate reached 92% with a conversion of 56.86%, under the optimal conditions (1 h sulfonation time, 10% catalyst, 35:1 methanol/oil molar ratio, 65 °C reaction temperature and 6 h reaction time). Moreover, the lignin-based acid catalyst was able to be repeatedly used 10 times with FFA conversion up to 75%. Ma et al. similarly synthesized a microporous solid lignin-based acid catalyst by ZnCl2 activation, heat treatment and sulfonation in order to promote the esterification of oleic acid and methanol to produce biodiesel.35 The prepared lignin-based catalyst exhibited a well-porous structure (BET surface area of 1193.8 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 0.68 cm3 g−1), providing excellent catalytic performance and making its reactive sites more reachable. By optimizing the reaction conditions and using 5% of catalyst, the esterification reaches a conversion of 92.3%, yet after five cycles, the esterification rate was even more than 72.9% (Fig. 5b). Recently, Dou et al. reported a one-step carbonization sulfonation of sodium lignosulfonate to prepare an efficient catalyst (SCSLS) for the esterification of adipic acid and methanol to synthesize dimethyl adipate.146 The SCSLS exhibited an –SO3H group density of 1.811 mmol g−1, and a total acid rate of 4.778 mmol g−1. The optimum reaction conditions were: SCSLS load of 20%, ratio of alkyd to acid of 8:1, stirring speed of 600 rpm, temperature of 72.85 °C, and time 120 min. This exhibited high catalytic activity (99% yield and conversion). Furthermore, when recycled for 5 cycles, the catalysts maintained high performance with 85% yield.
4.2.1.2 Lignin-derived phosphoric acid catalyst. 
An additional type of metal-free catalyst is the lignin-derived phosphoric acid catalyst, mainly synthesized by functionalizing lignin with concentrated phosphoric acid (H3PO4). Unlike sulfonation, activation by phosphorylation treatment has received less focus, yet this activation method can lead to an acidic nature and features cation exchange properties analogous to those of oxidized carbon. Interestingly, within this treatment, the acidic compounds generated are strongly linked to the carbon network as polyphosphates with a C–O–P binding, being chemically and thermally stable as compared with those inserted by oxidative treatments (Fig. 4a).54,147 Typically, phosphorus activation is used to load phosphorus groups through the formation of phosphate and polyphosphate ester bonds on the surface of the lignin structure, leading to the attachment and cross-linking of the lignin moieties, as well as inhibiting the temperature-induced contraction of the framework, and thus enabling the establishment of a porous catalyst structure.54,148,149
Zhu et al. synthesized a heterogeneous alkali lignin-based acid catalyst by heat treatment at 450 °C for 1.5 h and chemical activation with H3PO4 (40%), for the catalytic hydrolysis of microcrystalline cellulose (MCC).139 The catalyst exhibits a porous texture with 488.4 m2 g−1 of surface area and 0.281 cm3 g−1 of the total pore volume, whereas the phenolic and carboxylic extents of the lignin phosphate catalyst were 0.96 and 1.68 mmol g−1, respectively. The pore characteristics of the catalyst, as well as the abundant functional groups with high density, lead to the formation of significant hydrogen bonds with the OH groups of the MCC, and attached to the β-1,4-glycosidic linkages on the MCC chains in water, and as such, MCC is successfully hydrolyzed. At the optimal reaction temperature of 180 °C over 3 hours with an MCC concentration of 6 mg mL−1, the conversion efficiency was 69.7% for MCC, with a yield of total reducing sugars (TRS) of 50.8%.
Considering the presence of many phosphorus functions such as C-OPO3 and C-PO3 on its surface, a lignin-modified catalyst via phosphoric acid activation can be used to promote organic synthesis reactions. Bedia et al. used a stable phosphorus-doped lignin catalyst in the dehydration reaction of an alcohol (2-propanol) to produce olefins (propylene), a reaction that is preferentially promoted by the structural features, acidic and electronic properties of the catalyst.147 Alcell lignin was soaked in 85% (w/w) aqueous H3PO4 at chamber temperature and dried for 24 h at 60 °C, followed by carbonization under N2 flow at 500 °C for 2 h. Quantitative XPS analysis revealed a mass surface level of carbon and phosphorus of up to 87.88% and 3.7%, respectively, suggesting successful thermal activation and phosphorus doping into the lignin-modified catalyst. In addition, the catalyst surface shows significant remnants of phosphate (C-PO3) and polyphosphate esters (C-OPO3), all of which are stable at high temperatures (<700 °C), referring to the acidic character of the catalyst sites. These phosphate moieties on the catalyst surface acted as Brønsted acid groups via the intramolecular dehydration of 2-propanol, yielding propylene as a dominant product at high temperatures, and selectively inhibiting the formation of secondary products, including di-isopropyl ethers and ketones via dehydrogenation. The selective catalytic transformation of alcohol by the lignin-based acid catalyst followed first-order kinetics with an activation energy of 103.3 kJ mol−1. Overall, the phosphate-activated lignin-based catalysts can demonstrate a thermostable surface acidic nature without additional sulfonation treatment, which can minimize the energy, time and expense involved in the synthesis of the lignin-based acid catalysts.
It can be noted that the majority of the lignin-based solid acid catalysts were elaborated by energetic transformation, i.e. thermal treatment, pyrolysis, or carbonization under a free-oxygen atmosphere, in addition to the chemical treatment by strong acids, mainly sulfonation and phosphorylation. Although these lignin-based heterogeneous catalysts exhibit good catalytic performance, they do require a high processing energy and are time-consuming.50,150 The current novelty consists of functionalizing lignin by modifying the nature and properties of its functional groups with no prior treatment. In fact, lignin presents a great opportunity for chemical functionalization through its multifunctional structure and its reactive sites (OMe, OH, COOH, CO, etc.).41,74 Still, the amorphous nature of lignin, as well as its complexity and inhomogeneity, are major concerns to address for its full valorization in the catalysis sector. Noteworthy, work devoted to studying the catalytic behavior of lignin without any prior energetic treatment is relatively scarce. Gao et al. synthesized a lignin-based polyacid catalyst by hydroxy-methylation treatment and subsequent esterification using maleic anhydride to increase the hydroxyl content of lignin (Fig. 5c).122 The prepared lignin-based catalyst was used in UF (urea-formaldehyde) resin formulation. The application of these lignin-modified resins to bond medium-density fiberboards and plywood displayed a satisfactory inhibition of water adsorption and high mechanical performance. Using 5% of the lignin-based polyacid demonstrated a strong acidic nature with a faster curing rate (2 min 50 s). Also, the dry shear strength increased from 1.04 MPa to 1.72 MPa. The improved mechanical properties of wood panels bonded with lignin-UF resin could be due to the physicochemical bonds established between the hydroxyls on the wood surface and the reactive sites of the resin through the bond line (Fig. 5d). Moreover, it was found that formaldehyde discharge was reduced when the lignin-based polyacid catalyst was included in the UF resin formulation (0.19 mg L−1 over 1.08 mg L−1 for the control). Overall, lignin-derived acid catalysts can provide an excellent green alternative to conventional catalysts in a variety of catalyzed reactions across diverse fields. In fact, the acidic catalytic active species (–SO2, –SO3H, PO3, –OPO3, etc.) can be covalently attached to the lignin-based carbon network, making them stable and effectively increasing the acidic character of lignin-based catalysts (Fig. 5e). Lignin, as a biological support, is quite effective in immobilizing these catalytic moieties given the abundance of chemically reactive functional groups (phenol, carboxyl, methoxyl, ester, ketone, aldehyde, etc.), the good specific surface area, the functional aromatic structure that tends to conform to a carbon-rich composite matrix, the desirable porous morphology, as well as the good thermal and mechanical stability.47,48,138,142,146,147
The real-world implementation of lignin-derived acid catalysts is not yet well deployed. In fact, commercial and conventional catalysts are still predominantly used in the laboratory and in industry. Noteworthy, carbon-based catalysts and nanostructure carbon materials such as activated carbon, graphene, carbon nanotubes, etc. are widely used in the field of catalysis due to their best-defined morphology and chemical composition, porous nature and high surface area, as well as their ability to anchor catalytic species to the surface through covalent bonds.151–153 Besides, these carbon nanostructures have a porous structure, and a unique nanoscale structure, while lignin can exhibit a more complex structure.17,154 Carbon-based catalysts were used in various catalytic reactions, including hydrogenation, esterification, hydrolysis, and condensation, to name a few.152,153,155 Suriyachai et al. used a heterogeneous H3PO4-activated carbon for the hydrolysis of lignocellulose polysaccharides into valuable biofuels and chemicals.156 The catalyst showed 84.6% recovery of pentoses, and a 58.3% yield of hexose, with >80% activity after reuse in 5 successive batch runs. Sulfonated magnetic carbon nanotubes were also used for the catalytic hydrolysis of polysaccharides.157 The glucose yield was 31% with a high selectivity of 60%, as well as good reusability and excellent magnetic stability. Graphene derivatives have been used as catalysts for biodiesel production owing to their outstanding physical, electronic and mechanical features.158,159 These catalysts have high stability, a large surface area, and a porous structure, and can be readily removed from the reaction mixture by filtration and recycled for many cycles. However, non-reversible agglomeration, sheet re-stacking, poor bulk density leading to a low catalyst mass/reactor volume ratio, and a low potential dispersibility of carbon-based catalysts through many organic solvents are significant concerns, limiting their use as catalysts or heterogeneous catalyst supports, in addition to costly extraction and processing methods, non-green resources and feedstocks, as well as toxicity and safety issues.158,160 In addition to its cost-effectiveness and recyclability, lignin has been shown to possess high catalytic performance in a variety of processes, rendering it a valuable material for use as a catalyst.50,54,56 Indeed, lignin is a biodegradable waste from the pulp and paper industry, in addition to lignocellulosic residues from municipal or agro-industrial waste, which encourages its isolation and processing in the field of catalysis without the time and energy-consuming treatments involved in the processing of carbon nanostructures. In addition, lignin has the potential for direct functionalization through its polyphenolic units and different functional groups (hydroxyl, carboxyl, carbonyl, methoxyl, etc.) to produce high catalytic activity materials with minimal energy consumption, efficient and cost-effective processing, as well as direct physicochemical modifications for use in various catalytic transformations. In effect, emerging approaches in this line are being conducted by researchers to unlock the multifunctionality of lignin fragments and chemical groups, without carbonization or pyrolysis, in order to produce reliable, efficient and cost-effective lignin-based catalysts with high activity in different applications.50,55,150,161–163

Table 6 summarizes the different catalysts used in various applications, compared with the emerging lignin-based acid catalysts. Many homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts, including activated carbon, carbon nanostructures, functionalized zeolite, silica, inorganic acids and bases, as well as metal-based and metal oxide-supported catalysts, have shown high catalytic performance in different reactions.112,164–167 These catalysts could offer comparable or higher selectivity and catalytic activity than lignin-based catalysts, which provides an incentive to develop bio-based catalysts derived from lignin given their natural origin, biodegradability, cost-effectiveness, and regeneration potential. In addition, conventional catalysts have a number of limitations, including cost control, non-ecological support materials, impact on human health and the environment, energy consumption during preparation, and poor recovery and reuse potential.41,47,48,138,146 The durability and stability of solid acid catalysts are the main indicators for the estimation of catalyst efficiency, while the major concern is to isolate the catalyst from the products without loss of purity or catalytic activity. In general, the stability and regeneration of lignin-based catalysts are essential for commercial upgrading and actual industrialization. Nevertheless, their catalytic performance decreases significantly with increasing and continuous catalytic cycles. The major concerns of these bio-based catalysts are stability during recycling, mass loss, and leaching of catalytic active species (Fig. 5e). Significantly, the depletion of acid groups and catalyst mass loss in the recovery phase is inherently responsible for the reduction in conversion rate.35,47,54,138,146 With this in mind, undoubtedly lignin-based acid catalysts require further research to overcome these problems. In all, lignin-based acid catalysts have the ability to efficiently and selectively catalyze multiple reactions in a similar or superior manner to many conventional catalysts. In addition, the ease of recovery and reuse in subsequent repetitive reactions makes these lignin-functionalized catalysts excellent candidates for many catalytic transformations, and promising materials for the industrialization of biomass-based catalysts.
Table 6 Comparison of the performances of lignin-derived acid catalysts with other catalytic systems in various applications




Catalytic uses
Catalytic systems
Feedstocks
Products/yields
Reaction temperature (°C)/time (h)
No. of reuses
Ref.




Hydrolysis of poly-saccharides
Sulfonated lignin-based activated carbon
Rice straw
Glucose (64%)
150/24
—

125





CNF (8.1%)


Lignin-based sulfide acid (LC-SO3H)
Cellulose
Glucose (3.9%)
160/12
5

47



Formic acid (2.1%)


CNF (90.8%)


Ru–Cu/zeolite-Y
Cellulose
γ-Valerolactone (49.8%)
250/5
6

166



Hetero-polyacid graphitic carbon nitride
Cellulose
5-HMF (58.6%)
140/10
10

168



Sulfonated magnetic carbon nanotube arrays
Corn stalk
Glucose (31%)
150/2
4

157



Esterification and trans-esterification
Lignin-derived carbon-based solid acid
Oleic acid and methanol
Biodiesel (92.3%)
80/6
5

35



Sodium lignosulfonate-based acid
Adipic acid and methanol
Dimethyl adipate (99%)
72.85/2
5

146



Acidic ion-exchange resins (Amberlyst 15)
Waste cooking oil and methanol
Biodiesel (78%)
64.85/9
3

169



Sulfuric acid (H2SO4)
Karanja/mahua and methanol
Biodiesel (98.6%)
55/1
—

170



Silane-functionalized graphene oxide
Ethylene carbonate
Dimethyl carbonate (96.2%)
70/4
6

159



Dehydration
Magnetic (Fe3O4) lignin-based carbonaceous
Fructose
5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (100%)
130/0.6
5

140



Lignin-based carbon solid acid
Fructose
5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (99%)
180/4
5

135



Silica-supported phosphotungstic acid
Glucose
5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (78.31%)
160/2.33
5

171



Graphene oxide
Fructose
5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (99%)
100/5
—

172



Benzylation
Lignin-based sulfonated carbon
Benzene
Diphenylmethane (100%)
90/2
12

48



Iron phosphate nanotubes (FeP-NT)
Benzyl alcohol
Diphenylmethane (100%)
80/1
5

173



Cationic gold(I)
2-Benzyloxyethanol
1,2-Bis(benzyloxy)-ethane (82%)
80/25
—

174



Reduced graphene oxide nanosheets
Quinoline
1-Benzyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline (97%)
100/5
—

175



Benzaldehyde


Condensation
Lignosulfonic acid
Creosol
Lignin-derived bisphenol (52.7%)
100/6
4

176



Hybrid organosiliceous with amine groups and Pd nanoparticles
Furfural and methyl isobutyl ketone
1-(Furan-2-yl)-5-methylhexan-3-one (99%)
100/12
1

177



Silica-rich perlite base catalyst
Benzaldehyde and acetophenone
Benzylidene acetophenone (96%)
5/4
4

178



Sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON)
Formaldehyde and acetic acid
Acrylic acid (50.2%)
360/2
30

179



Methyl acrylate (9.40%)


FeNPs/diethylene-triamine@reduced graphene oxide
Aldehyde
2-Nitrovinyl-benzene (92.3)
50/3
4

180



Nitromethane






4.2.2 Lignin-derived base catalyst. 
Solid acid catalysts are the most frequently used catalysts to date, while solid base catalysts remain uncommonly addressed, although solid base catalysts are environmentally safe, easily removed from the product, and reusable, yield reduced amounts of by-products and can provide high conversion rates.54,178 Considerably, chemicals including KOH, NaOH, K2CO3, Na2CO3, Ba(OH)2 and KCl are the most commonly utilized activators for such applications that can lead to well-established porous materials with high BET surfaces.181–183 The base activation involves the impregnation of lignin in KOH, NaOH, etc. with a certain ratio and subsequent pyrolysis at high temperatures. During this treatment, multiple reactions can occur between lignin carbon and alkali metal hydroxides, resulting in the formation of H2O, metal–oxide compounds and volatiles like CO and CO2 (Fig. 6a). These chemicals play a vital role as co-activators at high pyrolysis temperatures that lead to the development of porous features of the produced lignin-derived catalysts.54,184 Interestingly, the performances of these activation approaches can be significantly impacted by the type of activator, the lignin/activator ratio, the temperature and the processing time.54,181–183,185 Although this activation of lignin can provide high-porous carbon materials, it is necessary to introduce further functionalization for their catalytic implementation given the insufficient availability of active sites. In this respect, grafting additional functional reactive sites onto the surface of lignin-derived carbon is considered to be a key strategy for the development of these types of lignin-derived catalysts.54,122
 Fig. 6  (a) Base surface activation of lignin-derived catalysts (drawn by the author). (b) Biodiesel production by lignin-derived solid-base catalytic transesterification (drawn by the author). (c) Flow chart of the proposed industrial implementation of lignin-derived base catalyst for biofuel production (adapted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2022, Elsevier); (d) Knoevenagel reaction catalyzed by a lignin-derived base catalyst (drawn by the author). 
Li et al. used potassium carbonate to activate a Kraft lignin (KL)-derived carbon, which was subjected to further thermal treatment at up to 900 °C for 2 h under nitrogen flow.184 The prepared lignin-supported solid base catalyst was used to catalyse the rapeseed oil–methanol transesterification reaction (Fig. 6b). The catalyst prepared by 0.6 of K2CO3/lignin mass ratio and activation at 800 °C (0.6 K2CO3/KL-800) exhibited a surface area and pore volume of 41 m2 g−1 and 0.02 cm3 g−1, respectively, while the same catalyst activated at 900 °C (0.6 K2CO3/KL-900) showed a significant increase in these BET characteristics (surface area of 440 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 0.22 cm3 g−1). However, a 3% (0.6 K2CO3/KL-800) catalyst yielded 97.6% biodiesel compared with 91.1% when the 0.6 K2CO3/KL-900 catalyst was used under the same investigative conditions (65 °C, 2 h and 15:1 methanol to oil molar ratio). This decrease in yield is attributed to the fact that K2CO3 decomposed and reduced at higher temperatures. Remarkably, the recyclability tests showed that the optimal lignin-derived catalyst can be reutilized 4 additional times and the biodiesel recovery was consistently above 82.1% in the fourth cycle. Interestingly, the XRD and TGD/DTA analyses reveal that the K2CO3 molecules are highly dispersed in the pore structure of the lignin carrier and are almost indistinguishable from the KL particles, owing to the high surface area and pore volume favored by the lignin carbonization. However, the reduced catalytic efficiency after 4 runs resulted from the loss of the catalyst throughout the centrifugation, activation and recuperation, apart from the aggregation of the catalyst particles after the reuse.
Recently, Yang et al. applied a ball-milling method for transesterification using K2CO3 stabilized by Kraft lignin-activated carbon catalyst as an energy-efficient and performant technique for biofuel production.186 The FAME yield reached 100% in 25 min at 25 °C using 0.5 g of lignin carbon functionalized potassium carbonate. XRD analysis and SEM images reveal that the ball-milled lignin-based catalyst was converted to small particles with 4 mm balls, which promotes high binding between the lignin-activated carbon and potassium carbonate and improves the contact between the catalyst and reactants. The ball-milling process, which can transform electrical energy into mechanical energy, has been found to be a reliable alternative to previous thermo-catalytic methods that are time-consuming (1–6 h) and require heating conditions (60–65 °C), neither of which is ideal for industrial applications from the economical and safety aspects. Alternatively, ball-milling, which exhibited a lower power demand (38 vs. 201 kW h mol−1 for the thermo-catalytic process), can be regarded as a new beneficial lignin-based catalytic transesterification for biofuel in prospective industrial implementations. The suggested flowchart for the process is presented in Fig. 6c, which can promote the large-scale and commercial appeal of these green lignin-based catalysts. In effect, the industrial development of biofuels can be inherently reliant on a direct deployment of heterogeneous lignin-derived materials in the catalyzed production of FAMEs.
Interestingly, esterification and transesterification have been well addressed through the involvement of other relevant catalysts. In fact, both homogeneous and heterogeneous base catalytic agents, including alkali and acid catalysts, metal-based catalysts and carbon nanomaterial catalysts, are quite effective in these reactions. Table 7 shows the main catalysts used in this regard compared with emerged lignin-derived base catalysts. MgO/K2CO3/hydroxyapatite derived from poultry skeletal waste was used as a catalyst for biodiesel production from non-edible Moringa oleifera oil.187 The reaction yield reached 99.3% under the optimized reaction conditions (4 wt% of the catalyst, reaction time of 200 min, methanol to oil weight ratio of 0.69, at 70 °C). The reusability tests showed that the catalyst can be reused for 9 cycles, with a loss of 40% of its ability, which is explained by the leaching of potassium ions, as well as the fact that air moisture and CO2 can deactivate the catalyst. In related work, Cao et al. used MgO@CNT@K2CO3 as a catalyst in a two-step transesterification process.145 The used catalyst yielded a 98.25% rate, at a load of 4%, 65 °C, and a methanol/oil ratio of 20:1 after 4 h. On the other hand, combined CaO and CaO derivatives are known as effective heterogeneous base catalysts, since they are cheap, easy to obtain, and stable, and exhibit high basicity. However, they have a low surface area, are readily soluble in methanol, and can generate much soap and Ca(OH)2, which impacts negatively the yield, purity, and process material.188 To bridge these problems, CaO can be functionalized with metal oxides to produce CaO. ZnO, CaO–ZrO2, and CaO–CeO2 are capable of increasing the catalytic activity and shortening the reaction time. Other metal oxide-based catalysts including Al2O3, SnO, SnO2, ZnO, ZnO/zeolite and PbO/zeolite exhibited good activity for the (trans)esterification reactions.189–191 Furthermore, various functionalized carbon-based nanomaterials, such as modified graphene, functionalized activated carbon, and carbon nanotube-supported catalysts, have been used as highly efficient catalysts in these reactions in the laboratory and at a large scale.145,192–194 The high surface area of these materials allows efficient use of catalytic sites, which enhances the reaction kinetics and selectivity. In addition, they are stable and robust, permitting their use under harsh reaction conditions. Despite this, these carbonaceous materials tend to agglomerate in a hydrophilic environment, which increases the extraction and processing costs and ecological impacts.158,160,195 As a renewable resource, lignin can be an environmentally friendly alternative to carbon nanomaterials. Lignin-based catalysts are cost-effective since lignin is a waste product of the pulp manufacturing process and is readily available from various types of generated lignocellulosic waste. Besides, lignin has a porous structure that allows it to be a highly active catalyst with low toxicity and a reduced generation of unwanted by-products. This makes it an attractive alternative to carbon nanomaterials, which are known for their high cost and low durability. As such, the use of lignin-based catalysts is an innovative approach that offers several benefits, such as ecological sustainability, cost-effectiveness, and high catalytic activity in the energy, chemical engineering, and environmental remediation applications.47,50,54,122,196 This makes lignin a favorable alternative in the field of catalysis, with comparable physicochemical features to carbon nanomaterials and a high regeneration potential, in addition to its totally natural feedstock and biodegradability. Alkaline bases (KOH, NaOH) are also widely used for the production of FAME. The efficiency, catalytic performance, relatively low temperature and pressure, and ease of processing make these reagents quite affordable and useful, and they might show higher activity than lignin-derived catalysts. Moreover, they are mainly used in pilot and large-scale production to date,189,197 although the inability to be regenerated, soap formation, increasing cost, low durability and sustainability are the main drawbacks of these catalysts, which makes lignin-derived base catalysts very attractive to reduce the environmental and economic shortcomings of conventional catalysts, as they feature high performance, recoverability and regeneration potential. However, these types of lignin-based catalysts require further development, and their catalytic transformation and deactivation mechanisms still need to be investigated, to overcome the technical and economic limitations, as well as to prevent or reduce the leaching of catalytic species.
Table 7 Comparison of the lignin-supported base catalyst with other catalytic systems used in (trans)esterification




Catalysts
Feedstocks
Alcohol type
Reaction conditions
Yields (%)
Ref.


Temperature (°C)
Time
Alcohol to oil molar ratio
Catalyst amount




K2CO3/Kraft lignin
Soybean oil
Methanol
25
25 min
18:1
0.5 g
100

186



MgO@CNT@K2CO3
Waste edible oil
Methanol
65
4 h
20:1
4%
98.25

145



CaO·ZnO
Sunflower seed oil
Methanol
60
3 h
10:1
2%
99

202



Au/ZnO
Octanal (1)
Ethanol
100
3 h
—
0.1 g
100

203



CoFe2O4@graphene oxide
Waste edible oil
Methanol
64.75
55.75 min
16.05:1
5.22%
98.17

192



CaO–CeO2
Palm oil
Methanol
65
4 h
12:1
5%
95

204



KOH/ZrO2
Waste Adansonia digitata oil
Methanol
60
90 min
14:1
6%
96.7

205



NaOH/chitosan–Fe3O4
Waste cooking oil (WCO)
Methanol
25
60 min
6:1
1%
92

206



Activated carbon supported nano-CaO
Soybean oil
Methanol
65
3 h
9:1
2%
98.4

193



KOH
Used frying oils (UFO)
Ethanol
18
60 min
6:1
1%
95.95

164



Novozym 435

Hermetia illucens oil
Methanol
39.5
12 h
14.64:1
17.58%
96.97

207



NaOH

Citrullus vulgaris seed oil
Methanol
60
120 min
5:1
0.13 g
70

208



KOH
Used frying oils (UFO)
2-Propanol
18
60 min
6:1
1%
20.2

164



Graphene oxide doped MgO
Waste cooking oil (WCO)
Methanol
63
174.2 s
2.67:1
3.9%
99.23

194



KOH
Waste Adansonia digitata oil
Methanol
60
60 min
8:1
1%
95.1

205



Diatomaceous earth (DE-AC)
Propanoic acid
Ethanol
80
3 h
1:1
40 g l−1
60.4

209





Liu et al.198 reported that nitrogen-doped carbon derived from Eucalyptus lignin is an efficient and useful metal-free catalyst for the catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP), which is a toxic and pollutant compound, to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) by NaBH4.198 The lignin-based N-doped catalyst was synthesized using g-C3N4 (SBET = 1200 m2 g−1, 57.1% N content and DTG peak = 710 °C) as a template and lignin as a biological carbon structure, via an evaporation-induced deposition process and subsequent annealing at 1100 °C for 2 h. Kinetic tests of the 4-NP reduction in the presence of a lignin-based N-doped catalyst show that it follows first-order reaction kinetics with a kapp = 4.77 min−1 and specific mass activity of 361 mol kgcat−1 h−1. Density functional theory (DFT) computation was used to study the influence of nitrogen dopants on the electronic skeleton of the catalyst. The doped N atoms provided a strong local positive charge density and spin density to the adjacent surface C atoms, which positively activates the carbon atoms, allowing for a metal-like d-band electronic structure, thereby providing desirable catalytic behavior. The reaction of 4-NP using the metal-free lignin catalyst potentially prevents the secondary contamination that can be induced by using metal catalysts such as Pb/C through metal leaching. In addition, the prepared catalyst has shown great stability and was used for six continuous cycles with no decrease in the catalytic performance.
One such extensively studied approach to producing carbon–carbon bonds throughout the history of chemistry is the Knoevenagel reaction.199 The latter is basically an aldol reaction between carbonyl substrates that contain activated methylene groups (CH2 attached to two electro-attractant groups), which produces alkene derivatives. The Knoevenagel reaction is an extremely important method used to produce many industrial products in polymer synthesis, biology and fine chemistry. The catalytic systems involved in this reaction are mainly homogeneous weak bases (amines, pyridine, urea and basic salts) and ionic liquids (ILs).199,200 The search for novel technological opportunities to produce valuable C–C-based materials drives the incorporation of new lignocellulosic-based catalysts as eco-efficient materials with high reproducibility performances.41 In this view, Sun et al. reported an efficient ammonium lignosulfonate-based catalyst (LS-IL@NH2) prepared by ion exchange of ammonium lignosulfonate (NH4LS) with amine-functionalized imidazolium-based IL, for catalytic Knoevenagel condensation.133 The reaction was conducted in ethanol at RT for 0.5 h, using 4-chloro-benzaldehyde and malononitrile with 1 mol% of the lignin-supported catalyst (Fig. 6d). The yield of the product reached 98% in the first cycle, and 97% in the third one, demonstrating high catalytic activity over a commercially natural base catalyst (chitosan). In fact, negatively charged lignosulfonate was applied as an anionic support for the decoration of cationic NH2 species by an ion exchange procedure. The latter ensures that imidazolium cations fully adhere to the positions that are readily available in the support (Fig. 6d). The performance of the lignin-based catalyst is therefore due to the ion exchange process that promotes the stability and accessibility of the imidazolium cations in the lignin carrier, resulting in a consistent and uniform contact of the substrate with the NH2 groups in the catalyst, which provide an efficacious transformation rate. As such, LS can be deemed a multi-functional support for the immobilization of homogeneous catalytically active species.
Catalytic condensation is one of the most widely used reactions at the laboratory and engineering scale, which has been performed using various catalytic agents. Table 8 summarizes the conditions and performance of Knoevenagel condensation using different types of catalyst. The use of highly efficient catalyst systems in the Knoevenagel reaction has been well studied. Functionalized carbon-based materials, zeolites, ammonium bicarbonate, Zn-coordinated polymers, ammonium salts, ionic liquids and metal oxide catalysts are among the major systems used in this regard.130,200,201 Interestingly, lignin-derived catalysts exhibit high performance, can avoid waste generation, and promote eco-compatibility, biodegradability and high recyclability, due to their solid nature. Importantly, lignin-derived catalysts have a superior catalytic lifespan and stability compared with homogeneous catalysts. The demand for more environmentally friendly, easily processed, and efficient catalysts is substantial and is reflected in the current and ongoing interest in developing biomass-derived catalyst systems.39,41,53,186 However, it is noteworthy that lignin bio-based catalysts remain undiscovered and bear further investigation for the successful incorporation of biomass/lignin derivatives into the field of industrial catalysis.
Table 8 Performances and properties of the lignin-derived catalysts compared with other catalyzing agents in Knoevenagel reactions




Reactions
Catalytic systems
Yields (%)
No. of reuses
Ref.







Ammonium lignin-based catalyst (LS-IL@NH2)
98
3

133






Ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3)
100
—

210






Zn(II) coordination polymer
100
3

200






Y zeolite type containing alkyl-ammonium
73
—

211






APTES graphene oxide
94
5

212






Alkaline-doped multiwall carbon nanotubes
89
3

213






Fe3O4@chitosan
92.3
5

214






Amine-grafted Na-LTA zeolite
64.2
4

201






Chol-MSN/Prol-MSN
99
10

215







4.2.3 Lignin-supported catalysts. 
The conventional chemo-catalytic approaches for chemical synthesis have been thoroughly studied in the past. Interestingly, the catalytic implementation of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts has concentrated on the use of metals such as Zn, Ni, Fe, Co, Pt, Pd, V, Cr, etc., as well as metal catalysts supported on zeolites, aluminum and silica oxides, all of which have been used to produce a variety of chemicals and products in many research and industrial fields.216–219 In fact, these catalytic systems can provide selective and active catalytic transformations with high yields and conversion rates. Yet, these materials are characteristically expensive, intensely toxic, corrosive and poorly recoverable when they are homogeneous.36,131 Supported catalysts and metal-based heterogeneous catalysts are therefore highly preferable, given their beneficial advantages of being separable and recoverable from the reaction by filtration, centrifugation, or magnetization, as well as the potential further use for many cycles. In general, the catalyst activity and surface area can be even more improved by synthetic or natural support materials, including char, silica, alumina, graphene, zeolite, gum, alginate, lignin, cellulose and chitosan.41,44,117 The main role of the support is to reduce the amount of expensive active species in a good dispersion and distribution, enhance the mechanical strength of the catalytic composite, induce a defined physical texture, shape and activity, as well as generate a multifunctional catalyst by introducing additional active sites, expand the heat exchange volume of the catalytic composite, establish the metal oxide species in a different coordination state and valence from the unsupported oxide, and stabilize the metal species with very small particle sizes. Importantly, the supports can inherently avoid the agglomeration of metal nanoparticles induced by van der Waals forces, which can provide high catalytic efficiency and regeneration potential.39,41,54,127 However, synthetic and petroleum-based supports for metal-based catalysts inhibit their economic benefits and exhibit many environmental considerations. The shift to bio- and lignocellulose-based supports for metal catalysts has attracted tremendous interest in recent years due to the high conversion rate, good accessibility of activated sites, cost-effectiveness, biodegradability, abundance, lack of pollution, and emergence of green chemistry.41,44,57,131,140 Attractively, lignin is considered an ideal precursor to produce bio-active carbon and efficient bio-derived support for metal catalysts. It is the first natural origin of polyphenols, which provide a high content of aromatic compounds in the structure of the lignin-based carbon support. Lignin is biodegradable, amorphous, and thermally stable and has many functional groups (OH, COOH, OCH3, CO, etc.), which can provide anchoring reactive sites to immobilize noble and non-noble metals, resulting in highly active catalytic sites with improved porosity and recyclability in several catalytic transformations.39,51,53,54
In this view, lignin-based copper (Cu) catalysts were introduced as one of the most efficient materials in the metal catalysis field. Mohami et al. used a recyclable magnetic Cu catalyst coated with Kraft lignin (Fe3O4@LigA/Cu) via the Mannich reaction of 5-amino-1H-tetrazole and Kraft lignin for the catalytic reduction of three organic pollutants (4-nitrophenol (4-NP), methylene blue (MB) and Congo red (CR)).39 BET analysis of the prepared lignin-based Cu nano-catalyst demonstrated a specific surface area of 39.014 m2 g−1 and an average pore diameter of about 8.9293 nm, suggesting a porous structure of the catalyst. The catalyzed reduction of 4-NP gave a colorless 4-aminophenol (4-AP) compound with more than 99% conversion in 4 min. Similarly, the conversion of MB to leucomethylene blue and CR to biphenyl and sodium 4-aminonaphthalene-1-sulfonate reached 97% and 92%, respectively, in 3 min (Fig. 7a). Catalyst reuse tests showed that, for all investigated organic pollutants, the catalytic reduction was conducted for three consecutive cycles with a minor decrease in conversion rate, suggesting the high performance and eco-compatibility of the prepared lignin-based Cu nano-catalyst. In another work, Nasrollahzadeh et al.129 managed to prepare a magnetic lignosulfonate (MLS) copper complex catalyst through the immobilization of a Cu(II) complex on the magnetic lignosulfonate, and use it in a solvent-free system for formamide synthesis. The morphological properties of the catalyst examined by FESEM analysis revealed the successful immobilization of the copper complex on the lignosulfonate surface, and 25–38 nm copper nanoparticles were observed. The optimal catalytic activity of the catalyst was studied in a non-solvent N-formylation of amines (2-chlorophenylamine). The optimal conditions were found to be 1.0 mmol amine, 1.2 mmol formic acid, and 0.03 g catalyst at room temperature for 45 min without using the solvent, which gave 90% of 2-chlorophenylamine. In addition, the catalyzed N-formylation of benzylamine reached 94% when performed at room temperature for 55 min. These yields were comparable to or better than other reported catalyst systems used for the formylation of formamide, including natrolite zeolite (88%), Amberlite IR-120 (92%), and anhydrous ZnCl2 (90%). Interestingly, the reusability of the catalyst was verified in six consecutive cycles, and the yield of 2-chlorophenylamine showed a slight decrease from 90% to 86% in the last cycle, which demonstrates the high chemical stability and economic viability of the catalyst.
 Fig. 7  (a) The catalytic reduction of organic pollutants using Fe3O4@LigA/Cu catalyst (drawn by the author). (b) Dehydration of fructose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) over the magnetic lignin-based carbonaceous catalyst (drawn by the author). (c) SEM micrographs of lignin (1) before and (2) after Pd-NP loading (adapted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2016, Elsevier). (d) Illustration of the preparation method of a lignin-based single atom Co–N/C catalyst (reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2021, Elsevier). 
Lignin-based iron catalysts have emerged as bio-based and cost-effective materials through multiple catalytic transformations. These catalysts can be magnetically recovered from the reaction by an external magnet and subsequently reused, as mentioned by Hu et al.140 They reported a porous magnetic carbonaceous catalyst derived from functionalized enzymatic hydrolysis lignin (EHL) residues by FeCl3 impregnation, carbonization at 400 °C for 1 h under a N2 atmosphere, and sulfonation with H2SO4. The catalyst active sites (Fe3O4, COOH, phenolic/aliphatic OH) afforded high catalytic performance in the dehydration reaction of fructose to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) (Fig. 7b). The fructose conversion rate and HMF yield were determined using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on the basis of the external standard method. The catalyzed dehydration yielded 81.1% of HMF with 100% fructose conversion when carried out at 130 °C for 40 min in DMSO. The lignin-derived carbon catalyst was magnetically removed and recycled five subsequent times with a slight decrease in HMF yield (74.6%) on the last run, which was due to the adsorption of humins onto the catalyst. Another valuable catalytic use of such materials is the selective hydrogenation of aromatic aldehydes and nitroarenes, which can be well accomplished using a lignin-derived nanoscale iron catalyst.51 The reported catalyst (γ-Fe2O3/LRC-700) was synthesized using Fe(NO2)3·9H2O and urea with lignin residue, followed by pyrolysis at 700 °C under an inert environment for 2 h. The N2 adsorption–desorption analysis showed that the surface area of the catalyst was 160 m2 g−1 and the total pore volume was 0.013 cm3 g−1, with a size ranging from 2 to 3.5 nm. Moreover, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) showed that the catalyst is stable until 270 °C, and above this temperature, an obvious mass loss (22 wt% until 900 °C) was detected due to the degradation of the carbon support. The conversion and selectivity of the prepared catalyst were evaluated using a model hydrogenation reaction of 4-nitrochlorobenzene by varying the temperature (30–120 °C), time (6–18 h) and H2 pressure (5–35 bar). It was found that the increase of these parameters significantly enhances the performance of the catalyst. Ideally, both the conversion and selectivity reached 99% at 120 °C for 18 h when the hydrogen pressure attained 35 bar. Notably, the lignin-based iron nano-catalyst was reused five cycles with no major decrease in its performance.
The recovery and recycling of homogeneous metal catalysts are usually tedious. Particularly, although palladium (Pd) catalysts are of significant benefit and have been actively used as highly efficient metal catalysts in various reactions, the agglomeration of nanoparticles (NPs) due to their fine structure is a serious and undeniable challenge, causing a significant decrease in their catalytic abilities. To overcome this limitation, Pd NPs are usually stabilized and immobilized on solid polymeric or inorganic supports such as carbon polymers, zeolite, gum, iron oxide, metal oxides, natural phosphate, graphene and silica.40,220,221 In effect, the support has a vital role in the stability and catalytic behavior of Pd-based catalysts. Interestingly, polymeric matrices are beneficial supports for such implementation as they inhibit the aggregation of metal NPs.42,131,162 Lignin, a biologically derived polyphenol, is being actively considered as an alternative to synthetic polymer substrates for heterogeneous Pd-based catalysts. Marulasiddeshwara et al. used Pd-NPs immobilized on lignin (lignin@Pd-NPs) in the Mizoroki–Heck reaction in a solvent-free system.222 Pd(0) loaded onto lignin was 0.0467 mmol g−1 as determined by high-resolution inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectra (HRICP-AES) and 0.89% (w/w) found by energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). The C–C bond formation reactions between n-butyl propene-2-enoate and halobenzene derivatives were realized to evaluate the catalytic capabilities of the lignin@Pd-NPs catalyst. As a result of the availability of several reactive and functional sites in lignin, such as OH, COOH, SO3H, OCH3 and CO, high-stability Pd-NPs with a regulated size and shape were provided. Likewise, SEM micrographs of the synthesized lignin-Pd based nano-catalyst (Fig. 7c) showed that the Pd NPs are well dispersed on the lignin framework, exhibiting a spherical-like morphology with a size of 1–5 nm. The results showed that the catalyst was highly active and selective in the presence of n-Pr3N, whereas inorganic bases (KOH/NaOH and K2CO3/Na2CO3) gave lower rates. In addition, increasing the reaction temperature noticeably increased the yield. At 140 °C, the yield was 94% in a shorter time (5 min), without using any solvent. The lignin@Pd-NPs catalyst was recycled for five cycles, and the yield was 75% by the fifth cycle. These results suggest the high catalytic capacity and recoverability of the prepared lignin-based Pd catalyst.
Lignin was used as a carbon network for capturing atom-size metal particles, through the functionalization of a nitrogen-coordinated cobalt single-atom catalyst (SA Co–N/C).57 The lignin carbon successfully entrapped the metal atoms via a one-pot pyrolytic approach (Fig. 7d). The catalytic activity of the developed catalyst was evaluated by the degradation of naproxen (NPX), a widely used anti-inflammatory, activated by peroxymonosulfate (PMS). Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were used to investigate the distribution of the catalytic site in the lignin-supported catalyst. The charge accumulation in the conventional NP-based Co/C catalyst template was primarily confined around the Co–Co atoms (Fig. 8a and c), indicating poor interactions between the Co NPs and the lignin-based carbon network, and thus limited electron transfer from the Co NPs to the nearby C atoms. However, for the Co–N/C SA catalyst, there was more charge accumulation centered on the single Co sites (Fig. 8b and d), and the charge accumulations between Co and the coordinated N(C) were also higher. This improved charge re-distribution is thought to provide more electron-rich catalytic active sites around the single-atom Co sites, which can significantly minimize catalyst leaching and expedite electron transfer for NPX decomposition. Considerably, the SA Co–N/C catalyst (0.05 g L−1) enabled PMS (0.5 mM) for the degradation of the NPX pollutant (10 mg L−1) with significant catalytic efficiency of 0.241 min−1, which was higher than other catalyst systems (0.0012–0.052 min−1). Meanwhile, the turnover frequency of NPX reached 4.82 min−1. During the degradation process, monoatomic Co adsorbs PMS molecules to form a metastable PMS/carbon complex, which allows for faster electron transfer from the PMS to monoatomic Co, thereby enhancing the breakdown of NPX moieties via the electron transfer mechanism. After four cycles, Co leaching was found to be uncountable given the high dispersion of Co–N3 sites in the lignin-based carbon structure, and thus, no loss of catalytic performance of the lignin-based Co catalyst was noted, suggesting the high stability and good recyclability of the catalyst. Lignin-supported catalysts are designed by depositing active metal on the aromatic structure of lignin. The rationale for using lignin is to obtain an optimal spread of the catalytically active component and also to stabilize it from sintering. Lignin can serve as a thermal stabilizer, where it stabilizes the metal catalyst against agglomeration and coalescence, as well as a material that improves selectivity by resisting by-product generation, reduces catalyst density, resists fracture and minimizes pressure drop. Moreover, the abundance of O-containing functional groups and the carbonaceous character of lignin ensure beneficial water solubility, which minimizes the aggregation of metal NPs, as well as beneficial interactions between the lignin-based carbon and the metal catalyst species, resulting in high catalytic activity and stability over recycling.39,40,52,127
 Fig. 8  Top and side views of different charge densities of the optimized structure model of NPs Co/C (a and c) and SA Co–N/C catalysts (b and d) in DFT calculations (the green regions show charge depletion and the red regions show charge accumulation) (adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2021, Elsevier). (e) Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pd@LPR nano-catalysts and the reduction mechanism of Cr(VI) (reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2020, Elsevier). (f) Process illustration of Pt-NLCDs@CdS synthesis (reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2022, Elsevier). (g) Top and side views of the optimized Pt-NLCDs structure (adapted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2022, Elsevier). 
As the leading natural source of aromatics, lignin has proved to be a suitable alternative to phenol in the formulation of phenolic resins.23,70,71 In this manner, bamboo Kraft lignin was used by Chen et al.55 to replace up to 40% phenols in a lignin–phenol resin (LPR) nanosphere, which was used as a reducing agent and to immobilize Pd NPs. The nano-catalyst was formulated by a facile hydrothermal process for the synthesis of LPR nano-spheres and an in situ reduction procedure to immobilize the Pd NPs without adsorptive reducing agents. With the excellent reducing activity of lignin, Pd2+ was reduced to Pd NPs and dispersed densely on the surface of the LPR nano-spheres, which can promote outstanding cyclic efficiency of the nano-catalyst (Fig. 8e). The prepared lignin-based Pd nanocomposites were used as a catalyst in the reduction of toxic Cr(VI) to Cr(III) using K2Cr2O7, and of methyl orange (MO) and rhodamine B (RhB) organic dyes using NaBH4. The turnover frequency (TOF) of the lignin-based Pd catalyst in the reduction of Cr(VI) was 2.045 mol mol−1 min−1 with 10 recycling runs, while it was 1.406 mol mol−1 min−1 for the free lignin-based Pd nano-catalyst. On the other hand, MO was reduced by 79% within 20 min, and RhB was degraded by 72% within 9 min. Hence, the lignin-based catalyst showed a significant catalytic yield, which evidenced its relevance in wastewater processing. In fact, the incorporation of lignin-phenolic NPs enables facile distribution into the reactants and a substantial amount of metal loading, as well as a clear reduction in the size of the support, leading to a large number of catalytically activated sites. Recently, single-atom Pt supported on N-doped alkali lignin-based carbon dots (Pt-NLCDs) has emerged as a useful photocatalytic system for H2 evolution. In fact, the aggregation of Pt catalysts can be addressed by synthesizing single-atom Pt catalysts carried by lignin.56 The branched phenolic nature of the 3D lignin network was used as a suitable biological support for the Pt single atoms to prevent their aggregation or leaching. The heteroatoms and functional moieties of lignin facilitate the steady dispersion of metal atoms (Fig. 8f). To investigate the specifics of the interaction between the NLCDs and Pt, structural modeling of Pt-NLCDs was developed using C240 using DFT (Fig. 8g). The simulation output reveals that the Pt atoms can combine with the doped N atoms to form a stable Pt–N4 structure through Pt–N bonds. The different functional groups present on the surface of the N-doped LCDs can serve as active sites for the chemisorption of PtCl62− ions. Pt ions can interact with pyridine nitrogen to create Pt–N bonds and a Pt–N4 coordination structure when exposed to soft visible light. To achieve stable anchoring of isolated Pt atoms on the NLCDs’ surface, this coordinative scheme can tightly confine the Pt atoms, thus producing a highly stable lignin-based Pt catalyst. Interestingly, the prepared lignin-based photocatalytic system showed a catalytic capacity of 46.10 mmol h−1 g−1, which is 68.8 times greater than that of pristine CdS NRs (0.67 mmol h−1 g−1). This good catalytic activity of the lignin–Pt catalyst under visible light remained higher than 38 mmol h−1 g−1 even after 60 hours of continuous irradiation, suggesting considerable stability in photocatalytic water splitting.

Table 9 compiles the main catalytic implementations of the lignin-supported metal catalyst compared with other conventional catalytic systems. Carbon-based nanomaterials, functionalized zeolite, zirconia, hydrotalcites, graphite-supported metals, and other polymer-supported metals have shown high performance in different catalyzed reactions. As well, metal oxide-supported catalysts using different polymeric and inorganic supports, such as silica (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3), titania (TiO2), zirconia (ZrO2), chromium oxide (Cr2O3), Co@CoO, and MgO@CNT have been used as highly efficient catalysts.188,189,223–225 Markedly, given their well-defined structure, high surface area, large pore volumes and high stability, activated carbon-based catalysts and functionalized carbon nanostructures are also widely used as catalysts in various reactions such as hydrogenation, oxidation/reduction, condensation, catalytic degradation and photocatalysts.152,154,226,227 Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and nitrogen-doped bamboo-like carbon nanotubes (BCNTs) comprising Pd, Rh, Ru and Ir catalysts were used in the catalytic hydrogenation of 1-octadecene to octadecane, and the conversion reached 96.5%.155 Mesoporous carbon microspheres loaded with Ru NPs were used as heterogeneous catalysts for the hydrogenation of aromatic compounds.152 The conversion and selectivity of phenol hydrogenation into cyclohexanol reached 100%, given the hierarchically porous character of the catalyst that promotes effective mass transfer of the reactants. Carbon nanomaterials with strong physical and mechanical properties have also been used as highly effective catalysts for the removal and catalytic degradation of dyes, heavy metals and pharmaceutical contaminants from polluted effluents. This promotes high capabilities in various fields of water purification and environmental remediation.228,229 However, these carbon nanomaterials can have high production costs, difficulties in mass production and large-scale engineering synthesis, challenges in controlling the size and shape of the nanomaterials, and limited stability under certain reaction conditions. As well, the high surface area and small size of carbon nanomaterials can lead to rapid surface degradation and poor catalytic performance over time.230,231 Lignin, on the other hand, has the merits of being either used as a bio-source of activated carbon to prepare a natural support material for species with high catalytic activity or directly functionalized without prior treatments or energy-intensive processing, through the reduction of different types of metals given its aromatic nature and the presence of COOH, OH, CO etc., as well as through covalent bonding and electrostatic interactions with catalysts. The natural feature of lignin, its biocompatibility, availability and accessibility, as well as the ease of recovery and functionalization due to its bio-aromatic structure and functional groups, favor a high potential in various catalytic implementations. In effect, lignin-based catalysts have a desirable lifespan and can be recycled and re-utilized multiple times, minimizing the environmental footprint of industrial processes and increasing the sustainability of these processes. Lignin is relatively inexpensive compared with other catalysts, which makes it a profitable alternative for catalyzed industrial processes. Besides, the toxicity of metal catalysts can be outstandingly reduced by using lignin as a natural support or a functional bio-polyphenol to ensure the uptake of these highly catalytic molecules.50,54,57,126,127,129,232
Table 9 Overview of the properties and catalytic performances of lignin-based catalysts in comparison with other catalytic systems used in various applications




Catalytic transformations
Catalytic systems
Feedstocks
Products/yields
Reaction temperature (°C)/time (min)
No. of reuses
Ref.




Environmental remediation
Magnetic lignin-coated copper (Fe3O4@LigA/Cu)
Methylene blue
Leucomethylene blue (97%)
RT/3–4
3

39



Congo red
Biphenyl and sodium 4-aminonaphthalene-1-sulfonate (92%)


4-Nitrophenol
4-Aminophenol (99%)


Lignin-based carbon Co single-atom (SA Co–N/C)
Naproxen
NPX (TOF: 0.241 min−1)
20/—
4

57



N-doped carbon nanotube-encapsulated Co
Tetracycline
Peroxymonosulfate (94.5%)
25/—
—

229



Activated hydrotalcites (Mg/Al)
Congo red
Biphenyl and sodium 4-aminonaphthalene-1-sulfonate (91%)
—/60
—

235



CuS/Fe2O3/Mn2O3
Ciprofloxacin
CO2 + H2O (88%)
25/120
5

225



Pd supported on mesoporous natural phosphate
4-Nitrophenol
4-Aminophenol (99%)
RT/42
4

221



Zero-valent iron/graphene
Cr(VI)
Cr(III) (102.35 mg g−1)
25/—
8

236



TiO2/porphyrin
Methylene blue
Leucomethylene blue (97%)
25/180
10

237



Synthesis of formamides
Magnetic lignosulfonate (MLS–TA@Cu)
Phenyl-methanamine

N-Benzylformamide (94%)
RT/55
5

129



Natrolite zeolite
Phenyl-methanamine
Dibenzylamine (88%)
RT/30
5

238



TiO2

N-Methyl-morpholine
Thioformamides (90%)
15/80
—

239



Ethyl chloroformate


Sodium azide


Co@N-doped carbon
Phenyl-methanamine

N-Benzylformamide (98%)
—/720
—

240



Fe2O3@SiO2–SO3H
Aniline

N,N′-Diphenyl-formamidine (96%)
70/60
5

241



Hydrogenation
Lignin-supported Pd(0) (lignin@Pd-NPs)
Acetophenone
Phenyl ethanol (95%)
25/240
5

162



Lignin-derived carbon-supported magnetic iron (γ-Fe2O3/LRC-700)
Nitroarenes
Anilines (99%)
120/1080
5

51



Ru-supported mesoporous carbon microspheres
Phenol
Cyclohexanol (100%)
200/60
8

152



Ru-phosphated zirconia–alumina (Ru/ZP-A)
Furfuryl
Furfuryl alcohol (59.5%)
90/420
—

242



Metal-based multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)
1-Octadecene
Octadecane (%)
50/120
—

155



C–C bond formation
Lignin-supported Pd(0) nanoparticles (lignin@Pd-NPs)

n-Butyl propene-2-enoate and halobenzenes
Butyl (2E)-3-phenylprop-2-enoate (94%)
140/5
5

243



Lignin-stabilized Pd nanoparticles
Aryl halide and phenylboronic acid
Biphenyl (100%)
70/300
2

163



FeNPs/DETA–reduced graphene oxide
Aldehyde
2-Nitrovinyl-benzene (92.3)
50/180
4

180



Nitromethane


Pectin-modified Fe3O4–Pd NPs
Bromobenzene and phenylboronic acid
Biphenyl (96%)
100/45
11

244



Photocatalytic H2 evolution
Lignin-based carbon dot-supported Pt single atoms
DMF
H2 (95%)
—
—

56



Nafion


Na2SO4


Lactic acid


Black phosphorus (BP) and nickel oxide (NiO) nanosheets
H2O
H2 (46.10 mmol h−1 g−1)
—
—

245



Triethanolamine


Carbon dots in g-C3N
H2PtCl6
H2 (3.12 mmol h−1 g−1)
—
—

246



LaFeO3-reduced graphene oxide–NiO
H2O
H2 (465 μmol h−1 g−1)
—
—

247



Palladium–copper nanodots
Anhydrous ethanol
H2 (156.6 μmol h−1)
—
—

248



Nafion D-520


Co-decorated ultrathin Cd0.5Zn0.5S nanosheets
H2O
H2 (269.2 μmol h−1)
30/—
—

249



MeOH




Noteworthily, the introduction of functionalized lignin-based supports, exploiting its biopolymeric structure, can provide easy functionalization, chemical inertness, excellent recyclability, low sludge production as well as reduced secondary pollution generation. The use of lignin-based catalysts in various applications offers a desirable catalytic performance with a high yield, selectivity and conversion rate. Importantly, they are time-saving and have the exceptional ability to regenerate through simple recovery and repetitive use. In addition, lignin-supported metal catalysts are useful for many solvent-free transformations, promoting greener and safer processing conditions. In fact, lignin has been creatively used to trap atom-sized metal particles, which exhibit a high surface area, good chemical and thermal stability, a hollow and layered textural structure, multifunctionality, low ecological impacts and ease of processing, as well as simple recovery, high reproducibility and regeneration potential. In general, given the good biocompatibility, bio-polyphenolic nature and high thermo-stability of lignin, metal catalysts supported on lignin have enabled the prospective implementation of lignin as a native and beneficial support in large-scale catalyst production.54–56,233,234 Lignin supports, though, still show complexity and insufficient mechanical properties. Moreover, there is no reliable and prominent source for lignin extraction so far, to implement the large-scale production and valorization of lignin as a raw biopolymer, rather than its functionalization in catalysis. Therefore, it is interesting to address these aspects, as well as to study thoroughly the mechanisms of metal immobilization on the functional structure of lignin, to prevent the potential leaching of catalytic functions and to provide outstanding stability and activity of these lignin-based catalysts.

5. Challenges and functional prospects of lignin-based catalysis
While extensive research has been devoted to the valorization of lignin as one of the most abundant natural elements to open up ecological and economic opportunities in many sectors, less emphasis has been placed on the development of lignin-derived catalysts, even until now. Lignin provides excellent alternative support to silica, aluminum, zeolites and carbonaceous materials, as well as other biopolymers for valuable solid bio-based catalysts. Assessing the available literature on this topic undoubtedly reveals that these functionalized catalysts present a new option to valorize lignin. Indeed, lignin-supported catalysts are very efficient and can be considered natural alternatives to the existing conventional catalysts for a variety of catalytic applications, due to their sustainability, high catalytic activity, affordability and possibility of separation and reuse. In addition, it is a versatile methodology to recycle biomass waste and valorize its components, thus protecting the environment and implementing more eco-efficient industrial processes. As of now, even conventional lignin applications, including adhesives and composites, remain confined to the lab scale and require more focus on industrialization to integrate the market for high-value materials. This review presents an insightful analysis of the current key methodologies, as well as approaches developed to uncover the innovative and less discussed use of lignin in the catalysis sectors. With that in mind, the following issues and challenges are yet to be comprehensively addressed for the beneficial synthesis, characterization, and industrialization of lignin-based green catalysts to provide more societal, ecological and economic benefits:
• Most of the lignin produced today comes from paper and pulp processing, and there is no permanent source of lignin. It is, therefore, necessary to increasingly recycle industrial waste to recover lignin at a lower cost while protecting the environment and human health.
• Some works have revealed that, compared with conventional and commercial catalysts, lignin-based catalysts exhibit lower catalytic performance due to their instability at high temperatures, as well as their inability to remove undesired by-products. Therefore, these materials need further optimization and thorough investigation.
• Direct chemical functionalization of lignin, instead of hydrothermal treatments, to develop advanced lignin-derived green catalysts that can be reused in many catalytic reactions, is still extremely uncommon and deserves careful and thorough study, to reduce the cost and energy consumption of lignin-derived catalyst processing.
• Lignin is a heterogenous and complex polymer, rich in oxygen-containing functional groups (OH, COOH, OCH3, etc.), which can govern steric effects and minimize the ability to chemically alter these groups, thereby decreasing the efficiency of lignin-functionalized catalysts. It is worthwhile to consider these issues in catalyst synthesis.
• While lignin-derived solid acid catalysts are generally quite developed, lignin-derived bases and metal catalysts are somewhat less established and need more attention and focus to extend the valuable involvement of lignin in catalysis.
• Metal-based catalysts face many challenges that prevent their real industrial involvement, due to particle aggregation, high cost, and the possible leaching of active species. Metal-free lignin-based catalysts can offer high catalytic efficiency, low cost, and biodegradation, and prevent the harmful effects of heavy metal pollution and depletion.
• The exploration of low-cost bio-catalysts and the use of hybrid polymer catalysts, as well as bifunctional catalysts, are innovative approaches to upgrading the physicochemical properties and developing efficient biomass-based catalysts.
• Theoretical approaches and elaborated mechanisms to understand the catalytic pathways of lignin in different catalyzed reactions are still insufficiently addressed and need more work. Quantum chemical simulations are a valuable means to achieve these goals.
• The separation or recovery of solid catalysts from the reaction medium can be time-consuming and requires additional processing. Therefore, magnetic lignin-based catalysts are deemed a major solution in this regard to improve regeneration performances.
6. Conclusions
Although lignin valorization has been broadly studied and reported over the years in a variety of practical value-added materials, it is only in the last decade that lignin-catalyzed applications have attracted increased attention. In this review, we illustrate an insightful analysis of the potential for using lignin as a biomaterial to catalyze and accelerate many reactions and contrast it with previously reported commercial, toxic and expensive supports and catalysts. Regardless of the inhomogeneous and complex structure of lignin, its use in catalysis has shown high selectivity and affordability compared with many industrial catalysts used to date. Importantly, the developed lignin-derived catalysts could be applied to a wide range of reactions to improve the yields, reduce undesirable co-products, and achieve outputs previously unattainable with traditional catalysts or petroleum-derived materials. One of the most studied reactions using lignin-based solid acid catalysts is esterification, in which the yield was over 92% with high percentages of FFA conversion. Similarly, the green lignin-functionalized catalysts efficiently and selectively hydrolyzed carbohydrates into valuable chemicals (lactic acid, formic acid, glucose, and nano-cellulose fibers). On the other hand, up to 100% conversion was achieved in various chemical transformations including dehydration, hydration, condensation and oxidation. Regarding lignin-supported metal catalysts, they show unquestionable activity and reduced aggregation of nanoparticles (Pt, Pd, Co, Fe, Cu, etc.), resulting in an improved catalytic rate, as well as a great possibility of regeneration. In fact, by filtration, centrifugation, or magnetic recovery, some lignin-functionalized catalysts have shown a recyclability performance of up to 12 times, without significant loss of catalytic capacity or reaction yield.
Fairly modest research has been devoted to integrating lignin into catalysis; hence, we provide a summary of current research approaches and prospects for the implementation of lignin-based catalysts in green synthesis. As such, we initiate new directions in the valorization of one of the most abundant natural polymers and the main source of phenolics, in addition to drawing out the unresolved issues and less addressed questions in this regard for the future cost-effective industrialization of biopolymer-based materials and lignin-derived catalysts.
Abbreviations

UVUltraviolet
HBAHydrogen-bond acceptors
HBDHydrogen-bond donors
PFPhenol-formaldehyde
UFUrea-formaldehyde
MUFMelamine urea-formaldehyde
FEFormaldehyde emissions
PCEPolycarboxylate polyether
PSAPressure-sensitive adhesive
SEMScanning electron microscopy
AFMAtomic force microscopy
AAAcyclic acid
FAMEFatty acid methyl ester
HMFHydroxymethylfurfural
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
CNFsCellulose nanofibers
CNTCarbon nanotubes
NPXNaproxen
TEMPO(2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl
FFAFree fatty acids
BETBrunauer–Emmett–Teller
MCCMicrocrystalline cellulose
TRSTotal reducing sugars
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
MBMethylene blue
MWCNTsMulti-wall carbon nanotubes
CRCongo red
4-NP4-Nitrophenol
4-AP4-Aminophenol
EHLEnzymatic hydrolysis lignin
HPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatography
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
NPsNanoparticles
HRICP-AESHigh-resolution inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectra
EDXEnergy-dispersive X-ray
PMSPeroxymonosulfate
ILsIonic liquids
NDCN-doped carbon
FTIRFourier-transform infrared spectroscopy

1H-NMRProton nuclear magnetic resonance
2D-HSQC NMRHeteronuclear single quantum correlation nuclear magnetic resonance
DFTDensity functional theory

Author contributions
Mehdi Mennani: conceptualization, bibliographic analysis, formal analysis, writing – original draft; Meriem Kasbaji: bibliographic analysis, investigation, writing – original draft; Anass Ait Benhamou: conceptualization, formal analysis, review & editing; Abdelghani Boussetta: visualization, investigation, review & editing; Ayoub Abdelkader Mekkaoui: conceptualization, formal analysis, review & editing; Nabil Grimi: visualization, conceptualization, validation; Amine Moubarik: supervision, visualization, review & editing, validation. The definitive version of the manuscript has been approved by all authors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Minister of Higher Education, Scientific Research and Innovation, and the National Office of University, Social and Cultural Works of Morocco.
References
S. Sugiarto, Y. Leow, C. L. Tan, G. Wang and D. Kai, Bioact. Mater., 2022, 8, 71–94 CrossRef PubMed .
S. You, Y. Xie, X. Zhuang, H. Chen, Y. Qin, J. Cao and T. Lan, Biochem. Eng. J., 2022, 180, 108335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasbaji, M. Mennani, N. Grimi, F. J. Barba, M. Oubenali, M. J. Simirgiotis, M. Mbarki and A. Moubarik, Process Biochem., 2022, 120, 213–226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Harmen, Y. Chhiti, F. E. M'Hamdi Alaoui, F. Bentiss, M. El Khouakhi, C. Jama, S. Duquesne, M. Bensitel and L. Deshayes, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 33, 102025 CrossRef .
Y. Harmen, Y. Chhiti, F. E. M. Alaoui, F. Bentiss, C. Jama, S. Duquesne and M. Bensitel, Carbon Nanostruct., 2021, 29(9), 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mennani, A. Ait Benhamou, M. Kasbaji, A. Boussetta, E. Ablouh, N. Boussetta, Z. Kassab, M. El Achaby and A. Moubarik, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2022, 221, 149–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kassab, I. Kassem, H. Hannache, R. Bouhfid, A. E. K. Qaiss and M. El Achaby, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 4287–4303 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ait Benhamou, Z. Kassab, A. Boussetta, M. H. Salim, E. H. Ablouh, M. Nadifiyine, A. E. K. Qaiss, A. Moubarik and M. El Achaby, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2022, 203, 302–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Leng, Y. Guo, J. Chen, S. Liu, J. E and Y. Xue, Fuel, 2022, 309, 122102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasbaji, M. Mennani, A. Boussetta, N. Grimi, F. J. Barba, M. Mbarki and A. Moubarik, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2022, 15, 1–20 Search PubMed .
A. Moubarik, F. J. Barba and N. Grimi, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2015, 61, 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang and F. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–18 CAS .
A. Boussetta, A. A. Benhamou, A. Ihammi, E. Ablouh, F. J. Barba, N. Boussetta, N. Grimi and A. Moubarik, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 187, 115323 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ait Benhamou, A. Boussetta, Z. Kassab, M. Nadifiyine, H. Sehaqui, M. El Achaby and A. Moubarik, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 176, 114318 CrossRef CAS .
M. El Achaby, Z. Kassab, A. Aboulkas, C. Gaillard and A. Barakat, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 106, 681–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ait Benhamou, A. Boussetta, Z. Kassab and M. Nadifiyine, Constr. Build. Mater., 2022, 348, 128683 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liao, N. H. A. Latif, D. Trache, N. Brosse and M. H. Hussin, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 162, 985–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tribot, G. Amer, M. Abdou Alio, H. de Baynast, C. Delattre, A. Pons, J. D. Mathias, J. M. Callois, C. Vial, P. Michaud and C. G. Dussap, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 112, 228–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gillet, L. Petitjean, M. Aguedo, C. H. Lam, C. Blecker and P. T. Anastas, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 233, 216–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Song and J. Xu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 377, 102–107 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Szalaty, Ł. Klapiszewski and T. Jesionowski, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 301, 112417 CrossRef CAS .
I. Haq, P. Mazumder and A. S. Kalamdhad, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 312, 123636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Younesi-Kordkheili and A. Pizzi, Polymers, 2021, 13, 3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. de Baynast, A. Tribot, B. Niez, F. Audonnet, E. Badel, G. Cesar, C. G. Dussap, E. Gastaldi, L. Massacrier, P. Michaud and C. Delattre, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 177, 114421 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Xiong, B. Pang, S. J. Zhou, M. K. Li, S. Yang, Y. Y. Wang, Q. Shi, S. F. Wang, T. Q. Yuan and R. C. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5338–5346 CrossRef CAS .
L. Siddiqui, J. Bag, D. Seetha, D. Mittal, A. Leekha, H. Mishra, M. Mishra, A. K. Verma, P. K. Mishra, A. Ekielski, Z. Iqbal and S. Talegaonkar, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 152, 786–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liang, X. Zhu, P. Dai, X. Lu, H. Guo, H. Que, D. Wang, T. He, C. Xu, H. M. Robin, Z. Luo and X. Gu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 259, 124101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, B. Yu, X. Xu, S. Bourbigot, H. Wang and P. Song, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 2129–2161 RSC .
E. A. López-Maldonado, H. Hernández-García, M. A. M. Zamudio-Aguilar, M. T. Oropeza-Guzmán, A. Ochoa-Terán, L. M. López-Martínez, M. Martinez-Quiroz, R. Valdez and A. Olivas, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125384 CrossRef .
X. Han, R. Li, P. Miao, J. Gao, G. Hu, Y. Zhao and T. Chen, Materials, 2022, 15, 2310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Burkholder, F. B. Abdur Rahman, E. H. Chandler, J. R. Regalbuto, B. F. Gupton and J. M. M. Tengco, Carbon Trends, 2022, 9, 100196 CrossRef CAS .
M. Laayati, A. A. Mekkaoui, L. Fkhar, M. Ait Ali, H. Anane, L. Bahsis, L. El Firdoussi and S. El Houssame, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 11139–11154 RSC .
M. Wang, M. Liu, H. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6837–6843 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Singh and P. K. Tandon, J. Energy Chem. Eng., 2015, 2, 106–115 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, X. Xing, Z. Qu, Y. Sun, G. Sun, X. Wang and Y. Han, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 164, 1840–1846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kupila, K. Lappalainen, T. Hu, H. Romar and U. Lassi, Appl. Catal., A, 2021, 612, 118011 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, F. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Cao and Q. Han, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 342, 125977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aberkouks, A. A. Mekkaoui, B. Boualy, S. E. L. Houssame, M. Ait Ali and L. El Firdoussi, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 13, 453–457 CAS .
R. Mohami, A. Shakeri and M. Nasrollahzadeh, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 285, 120373 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Arnawtee, B. Jaleh, M. Nasrollahzadeh, R. Bakhshali-Dehkordi, A. Nasri and Y. Orooji, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 290, 120793 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, M. Ghasemzadeh, H. Gharoubi and Z. Nezafat, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 342, 117559 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mekkaoui, H. Orfi, K. Bejtka, M. Laayati, S. A. Labyad, L. El Firdoussi, C. F. Pirri, A. Chiodoni and S. El Houssame, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2022, 1–16 Search PubMed .
X. Xie, J. Shi, Y. Pu, Z. Wang, L. L. Zhang, J. X. Wang and D. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 571, 100–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Jacob, N. S. Vignesh and P. Varalakshmi, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 167, 807–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, X. Qi, L. Li and R. L. Smith, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 116, 355–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Hou, X. Zhong, J. Hu, F. Shi and H. Mi, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 208, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, J. Xu, Z. Cheng, Y. Kuang, Q. Wu, B. Wang, W. Gao, J. Zeng, J. Li and K. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118732 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Z. Zhang, B. Yuan, F. Yu and C. Xie, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2022, 111, 369–379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, L. Ye, X. Gu, P. Zhu and X. Lu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2019, 127, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mennani, M. Kasbaji, A. Ait and A. Boussetta, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2023, 230, 123242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sarki, R. Kumar, B. Singh, A. Ray, G. Naik, K. Natte and A. Narani, ACS Omega, 2022, 7, 19804–19815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Lv and D. Pan, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 569, 110–118 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kong and M. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1182–1188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Z. Li and J. Chen, Green Energy Environ., 2019, 4, 210–244 CrossRef .
S. Chen, G. Wang, W. Sui, A. M. Parvez, L. Dai and C. Si, Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 145, 112164 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhuang, S. Ren, B. Zhu, C. Han, Y. Y. Li, X. Zhang, H. Gao, M. Fan and Q. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 136873 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, J. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Cao, Y. Si, Z. Wu, M. Akram and X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 286, 119910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Li, J. Lu, M. Liu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1614–1620 CrossRef CAS .
A. Duval and M. Lawoko, React. Funct. Polym., 2014, 85, 78–96 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Collins, M. Nechifor, F. Tanasă, M. Zănoagă, A. McLoughlin, M. A. Stróżyk, M. Culebras and C. A. Teacă, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 131, 828–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Ang, Z. Ashaari, S. H. Lee, P. Md Tahir and R. Halis, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2019, 95, 102408 CrossRef .
M. Sun, X. Wang, S. Ni, L. Jiao, H. Bian and H. Dai, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 187, 115441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laurichesse and L. Avérous, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1266–1290 CrossRef CAS .
E. Eran Nagar, L. Berenshtein, I. Hanuka Katz, U. Lesmes, Z. Okun and A. Shpigelman, J. Food Eng., 2021, 289, 110304 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Gillani and D. Shahwar, J. Plant Biochem. Physiol., 2018, 05, 1–4 Search PubMed .
A. Moubarik, A. Pizzi, A. Allal, F. Charrier and B. Charrier, Ind. Crops Prod., 2009, 30, 188–193 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pizzi, Biomolecules, 2019, 9, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Zevallos Torres, A. Lorenci Woiciechowski, V. O. de Andrade Tanobe, S. G. Karp, L. C. Guimarães Lorenci, C. Faulds and C. R. Soccol, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 263, 121499 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Poveda-Giraldo, J. C. Solarte-Toro and C. A. Cardona Alzate, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 138, 110688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moubarik, N. Grimi, N. Boussetta and A. Pizzi, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 45, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boussetta, A. A. Benhamou, F. J. Barba, M. El Idrissi, N. Grimi and A. Moubarik, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2021, 104, 102737 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, Y. Meng, J. Lu, Y. Tao, Y. Cheng and H. Wang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2022, 223, 2100434 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mili, S. A. R. Hashmi, M. Ather, V. Hada, N. Markandeya, S. Kamble, M. Mohapatra, S. K. S. Rathore, A. K. Srivastava and S. Verma, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2022, 139, 1–24 CrossRef .
P. S. Chauhan, R. Agrawal, A. Satlewal, R. Kumar, R. P. Gupta and S. S. V. Ramakumar, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2022, 197, 179–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Kumar and S. Sharma, Bioresour. Bioprocess., 2017, 4, 1–19 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Al Arni, Ind. Crops Prod., 2018, 115, 330–339 CrossRef .
R. Sindhu, M. Kuttiraja, T. P. Prabisha, P. Binod, R. K. Sukumaran and A. Pandey, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 215, 110–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Djafari Petroudy, J. Ranjbar and E. Rasooly Garmaroody, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 197, 565–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ait Benhamou, A. Boussetta, Z. Kassab, M. Nadifiyine, M. Hamid Salim, N. Grimi, M. El Achaby and A. Moubarik, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2021, 110, 102940 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ajith, Int. J. Innovative Sci. Res. Technol., 2019, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
F. Roberto Paz Cedeno, B. Belon de Siqueira, E. Gabriel Solorzano Chavez, I. Ulises Miranda Roldán, L. Moreira Ropelato, J. Paul Martínez Galán and F. Masarin, Renewable Energy, 2022, 193, 807–820 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. de Souza, F. J. G. Borges, O. B. Edvá, C. L. Roberto Carlos, L. A. B. Ribas, F. A. Santos and L. J. Dalton, J. Appl. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2020, 7, 100–105 Search PubMed .
J. C. Carvajal, Á. Gómez and C. A. Cardona, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 214, 468–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. Zhao, A. Wang, G. W. Huber and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11559–11624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Labauze, N. Cachet and B. Benjelloun-Mlayah, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 187, 115328 CrossRef CAS .
R. Behling, S. Valange and G. Chatel, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1839–1854 RSC .
N. Mahmood, Z. Yuan, J. Schmidt and C. Xu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 317–329 CrossRef CAS .
F. Momayez, M. Hedenström, S. Stagge, L. J. Jönsson and C. Martín, Bioresour. Technol., 2022, 359, 127466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lange, S. Decina and C. Crestini, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1151–1173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Lu, B. Jiang, Y. Fan and Z. Wang, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2019, 6, 181757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Azadfar, A. H. Gao and S. Chen, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2015, 75, 58–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Moubarik, J. Adhes., 2014, 91, 347–355 CrossRef .
H. Sun, Z. Liu, K. Liu, M. E. Gibril, F. Kong and S. Wang, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 170, 113798 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Gouveia, G. E. S. Garcia, L. D. Antonino, L. B. Tavares and D. J. Dos Santos, Molecules, 2020, 25, 2513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Zhang, Z. Zhu and S. Fu, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 152, 775–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Ridho, E. A. Agustiany, M. R. Dn, E. W. Madyaratri, M. Ghozali, W. K. Restu, F. Falah, M. Adly, R. Lubis and F. A. Syamani, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2022, 2022, 1–34 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, V. Terrasson and E. Guénin, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Yi, M. E. Gibril, S. Wang and F. Kong, Coatings, 2021, 11, 1–12 Search PubMed .
H. A. Saffian, M. A. Talib, S. H. Lee, P. Md Tahir, L. Ching Hao, H. Ariffin and A. Ainun Zuriyati Mohamed, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sadeghifar, R. Venditti, J. Jur, R. E. Gorga and J. J. Pawlak, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 625–631 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rosova, N. Smirnova, E. Dresvyanina, V. Smirnova, E. Vlasova, E. Ivan'kova, M. Sokolova, T. Maslennikova, K. Malafeev, K. Kolbe, M. Kanerva and V. Yudin, Cosmetics, 2021, 8, 1–17 CrossRef .
H. M. Wang, T. Q. Yuan, G. Y. Song and R. C. Sun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3790–3817 RSC .
Y. Guo, D. Tian, F. Shen, G. Yang, L. Long, J. He, C. Song, J. Zhang, Y. Zhu, C. Huang and S. Deng, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. Gendron, I. Stambouli, C. Bruel, Y. Boumghar and D. Montplaisir, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 182, 114893 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, X. Zhao, P. Fatehi, X. Dong, K. Liu, S. Chen, S. Wang and F. Kong, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 168, 113585 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chang, B. Yu and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 1352–1357 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Ardila-Fierro and J. G. Hernández, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 2145–2162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hemalatha, G. Madhumitha, A. Kajbafvala, N. Anupama, R. Sompalle and S. Mohana Roopan, J. Nanomater., 2013, 2013, 1–23 CrossRef .
M. Bilal, T. Anh Nguyen and H. M. N. Iqbal, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 422, 213475 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Hong, M. Morimoto, E. A. Kapustin, N. Alzakhem, R. G. Bergman, K. N. Raymond and F. D. Toste, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6591–6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Mekkaoui, A. Aberkouks, L. Fkhar, M. Ait Ali, L. El Firdoussi and S. El Houssame, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2020, 34, 1–15 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, D. Rodriguez-Padron, K. S. Triantafyllidis, Y. Wang, R. Luque and C. Len, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3091–3102 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Argyle and C. H. Bartholomew, Catalysts, 2015, 5, 145–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. Zhang, S. Das and S. Kawi, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 250–272 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Wu, X. Lv, G. Sun, H. Zhang, T. Chen, G. Du, J. Li and L. Liu, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 332, 125071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Han, M. Hu, Y. Liu, J. Gao, L. Han, S. Lu, H. Cao, X. Wu and B. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 274, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maleki, A. A. Jafari and S. Yousefi, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 175, 409–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Barragán-Ocaña, P. Silva-Borjas, S. Olmos-Peña and M. Polanco-Olguín, Processes, 2020, 8, 1–11 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, M. Gao, J. Geng, Y. Cheng, X. Wang, C. Wu, Q. Wang, S. Liu and S. M. Cheung, Renewable Energy, 2021, 164, 824–832 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beaucamp, M. Muddasar, I. S. Amiinu, M. Moraes Leite, M. Culebras, K. Latha, M. C. Gutiérrez, D. Rodriguez-Padron, F. del Monte, T. Kennedy, K. M. Ryan, R. Luque, M. M. Titirici and M. N. Collins, Green Chem., 2022, 8193–8226 RSC .
M. Stanisz, L. Klapiszewski, M. N. Collins and T. Jesionowski, Mater. Today Chem., 2022, 26, 101198 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, Y. Liu, C. Wang, F. Chu, F. Xu and D. Zhang, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1–12 Search PubMed .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, N. Shafiei, Z. Nezafat and N. S. S. Bidgoli, Mol. Catal., 2020, 489, 110942 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Low, K. C. Teh, S. P. Siva, I. M. L. Chew, W. W. Mwangi, C. L. Chew, B. H. Goh, E. S. Chan and B. T. Tey, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manage., 2021, 15, 100398 CAS .
S. Hu, F. Jiang and Y. Lo Hsieh, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2566–2574 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, R. Dou, Y. Wu, R. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Gong, J. Chen and X. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16585–16594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Orooji, K. Pakzad and M. Nasrollahzadeh, Chemosphere, 2022, 305, 135180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hameed, B. Jaleh, M. Nasrollahzadeh, R. Bakhshali-Dehkordi, A. Nasri and Y. Orooji, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 290, 120793 CrossRef .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, N. Sadat, S. Bidgoli and M. Mahdi, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2021, 7, 3520–3526 Search PubMed .
J. N. Appaturi, R. Ratti, B. L. Phoon, S. M. Batagarawa, I. U. Din, M. Selvaraj and R. J. Ramalingam, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 4445–4469 RSC .
T. Baran and I. Sargin, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 155, 814–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sandouqa, Z. Al-Hamamre and J. Asfar, Renewable Energy, 2019, 132, 667–682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, R. Bai and Y. Gu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 549–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, L. Peng, X. Gao, L. He and K. Chen, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 15762–15772 RSC .
M. Li, Q. Zhang, B. Luo, C. Chen, S. Wang and D. Min, Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 145, 111920 CrossRef CAS .
J. She, Z. Wu, K. Zhou, X. Zhao, H. Min, X. Gu, X. Li, J. Yao, L. Li and H. Xiao, Catal. Lett., 2020, 151, 1376–1384 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, S. Zhang, B. Yan, Q. Cai and S. Zhang, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 178, 114523 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, J. Luo, Z. Fang and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 190, 103–114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Gan, B. Li and X. Yang, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2017, 34, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, X. Tang, Z. Wu, L. Lin, J. Xu, N. Xu and B. Dai, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 263, 299–308 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sangsiri, N. Laosiripojana and P. Daorattanachai, Renewable Energy, 2022, 193, 113–127 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liang, Y. Song, C. Huang, J. Zhang and B. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2013, 40, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitano, D. Yamaguchi, S. Suganuma, K. Nakajima, H. Kato, S. Hayashi and M. Hara, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5068–5075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yan, C. Dimaggio, S. Mohan, M. Kim, S. O. Salley and K. Y. S. Ng, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 721–736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, H. A. Dhahad, H. Esmaeili and M. Razavi, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2022, 161, 136–146 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dou, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, Z. Fang, H. Li and J. Fang, Ind. Crops Prod., 2022, 180, 114721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bedia, J. M. Rosas, J. Márquez, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Carbon, 2009, 47, 286–294 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vernersson, P. R. Bonelli, E. G. Cerrella and A. L. Cukierman, Bioresour. Technol., 2002, 83, 95–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, R. Gleisner, D. H. Mann, J. Xu, J. Jiang and J. Y. Zhu, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Namchot, N. Panyacharay, W. Jonglertjunya and C. Sakdaronnarong, Fuel, 2014, 116, 608–616 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bojarska, M. Mazurkiewicz-Pawlicka, B. Mierzwa, T. Plocinski and L. Makowski, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10(4), 108038 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tian, M. Li, X. Hao, Y. Hao, X. Zhang and H. Yang, Carbon, 2022, 201, 930–940 CrossRef .
M. Oubenali, G. Vanucci, B. MacHado, M. Kacimi, M. Ziyad, J. Faria, A. Raspolli-Galetti and P. Serp, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 950–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, T. Shen, T. Zhang, H. Qiu, X. Gu, Z. Ali and Y. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1–21 Search PubMed .
E. Sikora, K. Adrienn, H. G. Zsuzsa, P. Péter, K. Ferenc, S. Milán, R. Anita, V. Béla, F. Béla and V. László, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2019, 129, 95–106 CrossRef .
N. Suriyachai, V. Champreda, C. Sakdaronnarong, A. Shotipruk and N. Laosiripojana, Renewable Energy, 2017, 113, 1141–1148 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Fu, S. Tang, Y. Cheng, L. Zhu, L. Xing, J. Wang and L. Xue, Catal. Commun., 2014, 56, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Roy, A. Cheruvathoor Poulose, A. Bakandritsos, R. S. Varma and M. Otyepka, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 23, 101053 CrossRef .
W. H. Zhang, Y. C. Zhou, C. H. Du, M. Gao, S. S. Liu, P. Liu and Y. X. Li, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2019, 127, 715–726 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Narei, R. Ghasempour and O. Akhavan, Toxicity and Safety Issues of Carbon Nanotubes, Elsevier Inc.,  2017 Search PubMed .
R. Dong, Z. Yang, Y. Fu, Z. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Zhou and H. Qin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 580, 152205 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Marulasiddeshwara and M. B. Raghavendra, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 9, 295–305 Search PubMed .
F. Coccia, L. Tonucci, N. D'Alessandro, P. D'Ambrosio and M. Bressan, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2013, 399, 12–18 CrossRef CAS .
H. Belkhanchi, M. Rouan, M. Hammi, Y. Ziat and M. Chigr, Biointerface Res. Appl. Chem., 2021, 11, 12858–12868 CAS .
L. P. P. Sukma and E. W. Qian, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2017, 37, 850–860 CrossRef .
N. Karanwal, R. G. Kurniawan, J. Park, D. Verma, S. Oh, S. M. Kim, S. K. Kwak and J. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 314, 121466 CrossRef CAS .
J.-n. Gu, J. Liang, S. Hu, Y. Xue, X. Min, M. Guo, X. Hu, J. Jia and T. Sun, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 295, 121356 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Wang, J. Song, Q. Wang, L. Shi, X. Wang and M. Huo, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2022, 185, 106473 CrossRef CAS .
N. Boz, N. Degirmenbasi and D. M. Kalyon, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 723–730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Sharma and B. Singh, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 1267–1273 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, Y. Su, Y. Tao, W. Sun and W. Wang, Fuel, 2018, 226, 417–422 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shaikh, S. K. Singh, S. Khilari, M. Sahu and K. V. S. Ranganath, Catal. Commun., 2018, 106, 64–67 CrossRef CAS .
K. Narasimharao, M. Mokhtar and E. Al-Mutairi, Catal. Commun., 2022, 164, 106423 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ban, T. Endo, R. Matsui, N. Morita, Y. Hashimoto, K. Tanaka and O. Tamura, Tetrahedron Lett., 2020, 61, 152233 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mishra and Y. R. Lee, J. Catal., 2019, 376, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, W. Huang, P. Chen, C. Peng, H. Xie, Z. K. Zhao, M. Sohail and M. Bao, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1083–1089 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hernández-Soto, A. Erigoni, C. Segarra, F. Rey, U. Díaz, E. Gianotti, I. Miletto and M. Pera-Titus, Appl. Catal., A, 2022, 643(5), 118710 CrossRef .
D. Goyal, Priyanka, R. Hada, S. Katara, A. Bhatia and S. K. Malpani, Mater. Today: Proc., 2022, 49, 3717–3725 CAS .
K. Zheng, Q. Gao, C. Li, G. Zhang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Han and Y. Tan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137324 CrossRef CAS .
D. Patel, K. A. Trivedi, H. Srivastava, S. R. Kane and C. K. Modi, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2022, 136, 109175 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jun'ichi, K. Atsuo, M. Katsuhiko and W. A. Paul, Carbon, 2000, 38, 1873–1878 CrossRef .
J. M. Illingworth, B. Rand and P. T. Williams, Fuel Process. Technol., 2022, 235, 107348 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bergna, T. Varila, H. Romar and U. Lassi, Biomass Bioenergy, 2022, 159, 106387 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, Y. Zuo, Y. Zhang, Y. Fu and Q. X. Guo, Fuel, 2013, 113, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fierro and V. Torne, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 101, 419–431 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, X. Sheng, L. Ti, H. Jia, Q. Ping and N. Li, SSRN Electron. J., 2022, 369, 128379 Search PubMed .
R. Foroutan, S. J. Peighambardoust, R. Mohammadi, B. Ramavandi and D. C. Boffito, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2021, 21, 101250 CrossRef CAS .
N. Widiarti, Y. L. Ni'mah, H. Bahruji and D. Prasetyoko, J. Renewable Mater., 2019, 7, 915–939 CAS .
D. W. Lee and B. R. Yoo, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 3947–3959 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nabihah-Fauzi, N. Asikin-Mijan, M. L. Ibrahim, H. Hashim, S. Yusup, Y. H. Taufiq-Yap and M. S. Mastuli, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 29187–29201 RSC .
C. C. S. Macedo, F. R. Abreu, A. P. Tavares, M. B. Alves, L. F. Zara, J. C. Rubim and P. A. Z. Suarez, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2006, 17, 1291–1296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tamjidi, B. Kamyab Moghadas and H. Esmaeili, Fuel, 2022, 327, 125170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, M. Ma, M. Fan, K. Sun, W. Xu, K. Wang, B. Li and J. Jiang, Energy, 2022, 261, 125369 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aghel, A. Gouran, E. Parandi, B. H. Jumeh and H. R. Nodeh, Renewable Energy, 2022, 200, 294–302 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Chrobok and A. Szelwicka, in Nanomaterials for Biocatalysis, ed. G. R. Castro, A. K. Nadda, T. A. Nguyen, X. Qi and G. Yasin, Elsevier,  2021, pp. 339–376 Search PubMed .
L. Guo, Y. Xiong, R. Zhang, H. Zhan, D. Chang, L. Yi, J. Chen and X. Wu, J. CO2 Util., 2022, 56, 101863 CrossRef CAS .
A. Munyentwali, H. Li and Q. Yang, Appl. Catal., A, 2022, 633(5), 118525 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Xu, H. Yu, H. Yang and T. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
K. van Beurden, S. de Koning, D. Molendijk and J. van Schijndel, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2020, 13, 85–100 Search PubMed .
N. R. Conceiçao, B. P. Nobre, A. Karmakar, A. M. F. Palavra, K. T. Mahmudov, M. F. C. Guedes da Silva and A. J. L. Pombeiro, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2022, 538, 120981 CrossRef .
I. W. Zapelini and D. Cardoso, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 324, 111270 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kesic, I. Lukic, M. Zdujic, H. Liu and D. Skala, Procedia Eng., 2012, 42, 1169–1178 CrossRef .
A. Taketoshi, T. Ishida, T. Murayama, T. Honma and M. Haruta, Appl. Catal., A, 2019, 585, 117169 CrossRef .
Y. C. Wong, Y. P. Tan, Y. H. Taufiq-Yap, I. Ramli and H. S. Tee, Fuel, 2015, 162, 288–293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takase, I. M. Bryant, P. K. Essandoh, A. Ernest and K. Amankwa, Green Technol. Sustain., 2023, 1, 100004 CrossRef .
M. Helmi and A. Hemmati, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 248, 114807 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Nguyen, S. H. Liang, S. S. Chen, C. H. Su, J. H. Lin and C. C. Chien, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 158, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Efavi, D. Kanbogtah, V. Apalangya, E. Nyankson, E. K. Tiburu, D. Dodoo-Arhin, B. Onwona-Agyeman and A. Yaya, S. Afr. J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 25, 98–102 Search PubMed .
K. Tohdee, S. Semmad, A. Jotisankasa, P. Praserthdam and B. Jongsomjit, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2021, 16, 100855 CrossRef CAS .
J. van Schijndel, L. A. Canalle, D. Molendijk and J. Meuldijk, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2017, 10, 404–411 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Almeida and D. Cardoso, Catal. Today, 2013, 213, 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rana and S. B. Jonnalagadda, Catal. Commun., 2017, 92, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Delgado-Gómez, V. Calvino-Casilda, A. Cerpa-Naranjo and M. L. Rojas-Cervantes, Mol. Catal., 2017, 443, 101–109 CrossRef .
A. R. Liandi, A. H. Cahyana, R. T. Yunarti and T. P. Wendari, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 20266–20274 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ortiz-Bustos, P. Cruz, Y. Pérez and I. del Hierro, Mol. Catal., 2022, 524, 112328 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, P. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Yan, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. Cao and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 735–744 RSC .
Z. Huo, Y. Fang, D. Ren, S. Zhang, G. Yao, X. Zeng and F. Jin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2765–2771 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, N. Feng, J. Zheng, K. B. Yoon, D. Lee, M. Qu, X. Zhang and H. Zhang, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2016, 27, 1351–1354 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, S. Hong, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Xu, X. Wang, Z. Jiang, S. Chen and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117767 CrossRef .
S. Xu, J. Du, Q. Zhou, H. Li, C. Wang and J. Tang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 604, 876–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Mekkaoui, S. Jennane, A. Aberkouks, B. Boualy, A. Mehdi, M. Ait Ali, L. El Firdoussi and S. El Houssame, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 33, 1–12 CrossRef .
M. B. Marulasiddeshwara and P. R. Kumar, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 83, 326–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hayati, A. A. Isari, B. Anvaripour, M. Fattahi and B. Kakavandi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122636 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seth, P. Dubey, V. R. Chaudhari and B. L. V. Prasad, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 402–410 RSC .
Y. Huang, L.-c. Nengzi, X. Zhang, J. Gou, Y. Gao, G. Zhu, Q. Cheng and X. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124274 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dembinska and P. J. Kulesza, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4682–4687 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kazakova, A. G. Selyutin, A. V. Ishchenko, A. S. Lisitsyn, K. Yu and V. I. Sobolev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(38), 19420–19430 CrossRef CAS .
F. Besharat, F. Ahmadpoor and M. Nasrollahzadeh, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 334, 116123 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. K. Li, C. Huang, R. Chen, Y. Chen and C. Wang, React. Funct. Polym., 2023, 183, 105482 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, J. Jia and S. Zhai, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 13967–13992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Candelaria, Y. Shao, W. Zhou, X. Li, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Liu, J. Li and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 195–220 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ji, L. Chen, M. Schmitz, F. S. Bao and J. Zhu, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2515–2523 RSC .
F. J. García-Mateos, T. Cordero-Lanzac, R. Berenguer, E. Morallón, D. Cazorla-Amorós, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 18–30 CrossRef .
M. Ioffe, S. Kundu, N. Perez-lapid and A. Radian, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 134609 CrossRef CAS .
S. Argote-Fuentes, R. Feria-Reyes, E. Ramos-Ramírez, N. Gutiérrez-Ortega and G. Cruz-Jiménez, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 1–19 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, S. Luo, V. Romanovski, X. Huang, B. Czech, H. Sun and T. Li, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10(6), 109004 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Min, R. S. Kumar, J. H. Lee, K. S. Kim, S. G. Lee and Y. A. Son, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 160, 37–47 CrossRef CAS .
D. Habibi, M. Nasrollahzadeh and H. Sahebekhtiari, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 378, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uma, H. S. Lalithamba and B. C. Revanasiddappa, Chem. Data Collect., 2020, 30, 100591 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, D.-h. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Xue, Q. Xu, Y. Du, C. Li and J. Lu, Catal. Commun., 2020, 147, 106138 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ziyadi, M. Baghali and A. Heydari, Heliyon, 2021, 7, 07165 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Musci, M. Montaña, A. B. Merlo, E. Rodríguez-Aguado, J. A. Cecilia, E. Rodríguez-Castellón, I. D. Lick and M. L. Casella, Catal. Today, 2022, 394–396, 81–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Marulasiddeshwara and P. R. Kumar, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 83, 326–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, H. Veisi, R. Sharifi, D. Salamat, B. Karmakar, M. Hekmati, S. Hemmati, M. M. Zangeneh, Z. Zhang and Q. Su, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 160, 1252–1262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Yan, F. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Ren, H. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Ye, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 627, 969–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, X. Yang, H. Fu, X. Ran, C. Zhao and X. An, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 18032–18043 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vijayaraghavan, R. Althaf, P. Babu, K. M. Parida, S. Vadivel and A. M. Ashok, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104675 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, D. Gao, H. Yu, P. Wang, B. Zhu, L. Wang and J. Fan, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 215–225 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xue, J. Tian, X. Hu, J. Fan, T. Sun and E. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 443, 136427 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Mehdi Mennani	Mr Mehdi Mennani is a PhD candidate at the Polydisciplinary Faculty of Beni Mellal, Sultan Moulay Slimane University. His main research focuses on the valorization of municipal and agro-industrial lignocellulosic residues into high value-added lignin-based materials, most notably in the field of catalysis and adhesives. His research is focused on the design, synthesis and functionalization of new lignin-based catalytic systems by direct physicochemical processing, which could meet the ongoing demand for eco-compatible and cost-effective materials for catalyzed transformations.
Meriem Kasbaji	Mme Meriem Kasbaji is a PhD candidate at the Faculty of Science and Technology of Beni Mellal. Her current main research activities are related to the extraction and valorization of biopolysaccharides from lignocellulosic wastes (agricultural, food and marine sources) and their use in composite adsorption systems for environmental decontamination, bio-remediation and protection applications. She is also active in the valorization of lignin as an efficient and reliable natural polymer in bio-adsorption and bio-catalysis.
Anass Ait Benhamou	Dr Anass Ait Benhamou, is a young researcher affiliated with the Materials Science and Nanoengineering (MSN) Department, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University (UM6P). He recently defended his PhD thesis, in January 2023, at the Faculty of Sciences Semlalia at Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech, Morocco. Upon successful completion, he was awarded his doctorate degree in physico-chemistry and materials science. His research focuses on the extraction, characterization, and valorization of biopolymers, including cellulose, lignin, chitosan and chitin, from renewable source-derived materials; chemical modifications of these biopolymers; and the development of polymer and biopolymer-based bio-nanocomposites: processing, characterization and applications in food packaging, catalysis, and storage energy.
Abdelghani Boussetta	Abdelghani Boussetta obtained his PhD in Materials Chemistry at the laboratory of chemical processes and applied materials, Sultan Moulay Slimane University, Morocco. His research is focused on the valorization of biomasses, including those generated from industrial activities and agricultural waste, contributing to over 18 publications. His research interests encompass several areas, including bio-polymer extraction, polymer and materials engineering, bio-composites, and nanocomposites. Dr Boussetta's focus is on green chemistry for sustainable technology through innovation and all aspects of the extraction of bio-polymers. He is particularly interested in the potential industrial uses of different biopolymers and their utilization in the elaboration of high-value materials, as well as for catalysis applications.
Ayoub Abdelkader Mekkaoui	Prof. A. Mekkaoui is an Assistant Professor in Organic & Catalytic Chemistry at the Chemistry Department, Faculty of Sciences Semlalia Marrakech, Cadi Ayyad University. He is a former postdoctoral researcher in Organic & Green Chemistry at the CBS-GPE Department, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University. He is also a former MAECI alumnus at the Politecnico di Torino. He has obtained a PhD in Organic Chemistry & Catalysis at University Sultan Moulay Slimane. His research interest focuses on developing novel nanomaterials, especially heterogeneous nanocatalysts for catalytic eco-friendly processes, as well as the valorization of natural resources and waste materials in agreement with circular economy and green chemistry principles.
Nabil Grimi	Prof. Nabil Grimi, is a professor in the process engineering department and head of the agro-industrial technologies group at the University of Technology of Compiègne. He obtained his PhD (2009) and Habil. Dr (2020) in process engineering at the University of Technology of Compiègne. His research interests encompass the electric field effects in bio- and food materials (microalgae, lignocellulosic biomass, etc.). He has published 120 journal papers in peer-reviewed journals (h-index = 43, Google Scholar), and 5 review chapters in books. Nabil Grimi has delivered many international keynote lectures and taught many courses in food engineering. He was the co-supervisor of 13 PhD theses. Nabil Grimi is a member of the editorial boards of several journals (Foods, Molecules, etc.). He has participated as a member of the organizing committee for many international conferences and he has been involved as a leader or participant in several projects.
Amine Moubarik	Prof. Amine Moubarik (02/02/1983, Morocco) obtained his PhD degree in polymer chemistry and physics at the Université de Pau et des Pays de l'Adour (Pau, France) and Habil. Dr Science in Polymer and Composite Materials at the Faculté des Sciences et Techniques (Béni Mellal, Morocco). His research interests encompass polymer rheology, bio-adhesive formulation, polymer chemistry and composites. He has published 63 journal papers (51 Scopus) in peer-reviewed journals (h-index = 17, Scopus). Amine Moubarik is an associate editor of the Nutrition and Food Science Technology journal. He has participated as a member of the organizing committee for many international conferences (>20). He is a reviewer for different high-impact journals (more than 10 different journals).

 	Fig. 1  (a) Available published works on “lignin” and “lignin-based catalyst” as per a ScienceDirect database survey for 2010–2022 (search date: 01.02.2023). (b) The main structures of lignocellulosic biopolymers in the plant cell wall (drawn by the author).	 

Corn stover	19	38	26	
75

Sugarcane bagasse	18–25	44–55	16–26	
76

Rice straw	21.2	32.7	15.6	
77

Wheat straw	18	45.5	25.5	
78

Cactus seeds by-product	37.25	27.2	0.01	
79

Hardwood stems	18–25	40–55	24–40	
75

Softwood stems	25–35	45–50	25–35	
75

Waste papers from chemical pulps	5–10	60–70	10–20	
22

Coconut husk	29.8	39.3	16.1	
80

Eucalyptus by-product	27.2	43.9	14.1	
81


Lignosulfonate	Hydrolytic treatment with NaOH and Na2SO3 at 120–180 °C.	- Soluble lignin in water, polar organic solvents and amines.	- Non-selective for lignin recovery.	
1 and 82
- Applicable for wood biomass.	- Difficult to apply for biomedical purposes because of the high sulfur level.
Kraft	NaOH and Na2S treatment at 150–180 °C.	- Low ash content.	- Long-duration processing (1–2 h).	
69 and 83
- Lignin soluble in alkali solutions and polar solvents.	- Black liquor with elevated sugar concentration.
Klason	Acid hydrolysis with concentrated H2SO4.	- High lignin yield.	- Change in the structure of lignin.	
69 and 84
- Reduced levels of carbohydrates.	- Expensive acid treatment.
Organosolv	Hydrothermal treatment with solvent (25–75%), at a temperature of 90–120 °C.	- Sulfur-free lignin.	- Additional steps for solvent recovery.	
85 and 86
- Minor alteration in the structure of the lignin.	- Additional solvent cost.
- Alkali-soluble lignin.
Soda	Alkali treatment with NaOH/KOH (T = 90–150 °C).	- Sulfur-free lignin.	- Lignin structure change.	
70 and 74
- Low ash content.	- Low purity due to the presence of carbohydrates.
Hydrolysis	Acidic or enzymatic hydrolysis at 170–210 °C	- High-quality and sulfur-free lignin.	- Severe acidic conditions of the treatment.	
87 and 88
- Minor degradation.	- Expensive acid treatment.
Pyrolysis	Thermal treatment at high temperatures (>450 °C)	- Short vapor residence time (2 s).	- High carbohydrate consumption.	
68 and 89
- Sulfur-free lignin.	- Low average molecular weight.
Ionic liquids	Hydrothermal solvent fractionation at 70–100 °C.	- Low changes in the structure of the lignin.	- Expensive ionic liquids.	
69 and 74
- Sulfur-free lignin.	- Interference between the residual ionic liquid and the enzymatic and microbial activities.
Deep eutectic solvents	Mixtures of hydrogen-bond acceptors (HBA) or hydrogen-bond donors (HBD) at 120 °C for 6 h.	- Pure lignin with high yield.	- High cost.	
68 and 90
- No complicated synthesis is needed.	- Energy demand.
- Further optimizations and studies are required.

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of various structural modifications of lignin for enhancing the reactivity in different practical end-uses (drawn by the author).	 

Sugar cane bagasse lignin	Lignin–phenol-formaldehyde (PF) wood resin	- With 30 wt% of lignin:PF, the dry tensile strength and wood fracture increased from 1.2 MPa and 70% to 1.8 MPa and 75%, respectively, compared with pure PF resin. Also, the formaldehyde released from wood shows a drastic decrease of up to 30%.	
70

Kraft and organosolv lignin	Lignin–polycarboxylate polyether (PCE) adhesives	- Organosolv lignin with a molecular weight of 1270 g mol−1 and an OH content of 7.08 mmol g−1 gives competitive adhesive performance to commercial PSA.	
104

Kraft lignin	Injected-moulded biocomposites	- The bio-composite incorporating 12% of Kraft lignin and corn cob showed the maximum flexural strength (84 MPa).	
24

Alkali lignin	Lignin-based flame retardants	- When 20% lignin-based flame retardant was included, the carbon residue of the epoxy resin was raised by 15.3% and the oxygen index limit value was enhanced by 35.2%.	
27

Softwood Kraft lignin	Corrosion inhibitor	- SEM and AFM analysis revealed that the carbon steel surface is unaffected by the HCl solution containing lignin-AA.	
105

Kraft lignin	Drug carrier	- In vitro cell line analysis indicates that BLNPs are suitable for use in normal and lung cancer cells, including highly concentrated levels, and can therefore be safely used as drug vectors with excellent encapsulation performance.	
26

Bagasse lignin	Antioxidant	- The rich phenolic, syringyl (S) and guaiacyl (G) contents in DAKL (dilute acid–alkali-treated lignin) enhanced its antioxidant activity (IC50: 38.5 μg ml−1).	
2

- DAKL showed a superior antibacterial effect on Staphylococcus aureus (96.71%) and Escherichia coli (100%) as a result of its low molecular weight (756 g mol−1) plus the availability of multiple phenolic compounds.
Alkali lignin	Functionalized lignin–phenol-formaldehyde resin	- 50 wt% of phenol substituted with functionalized lignin in phenol-formaldehyde resins for particleboard bonding.	
23

- PF filled with maleic anhydride and ionic liquid lignin had low formaldehyde generation and high mechanical strength when used to glue wood panels.
Corn stalks lignin	Lithium-ion batteries	- The outstanding electrochemical performance can be ascribed to the high purity of the acetone-extracted lignin, the surface oxygen-containing functional groups and the relatively high graphitization rate of the reduction sample.	
106

Commercial lignin	Removal of Congo red	- 20 wt% lignin/chitosan beads revealed an adsorption capacity of 173 mg g−1, with a removal percentage of 86.5%.	
30


 	Fig. 3  Overview of the leading developed lignin-based catalysts and their catalytic implementations (drawn by the author).	 

Lignin-derived heterogeneous base catalyst	Organic synthesis	- The yield of a Michael addition/dehydration tandem reaction reached 91% using 1.2 mol% lignin-based catalyst, whereas it was 98% for the Knoevenagel and Glaser reactions using 1 mol% and 10 mol% lignin-derived catalyst, respectively.	3	
133

Lignin solid acid catalyst	Hydrolysis of cellulose into glucose and nanocellulose	- Lignin-based catalysis generated 64% glucose with a selectivity of 91.7, and also 8.1% cellulose nanofibrils by hydrolyzing 69.8% of the raw cellulose.	—	
125

Lignosulfonate-based acidic carbon catalyst	Synthesis of furan derivatives for biofuels	- The lignin-based catalysis, with an –SO3H density of 1.33 mmol g−1, exhibited good catalytic efficiency for the preparation of 5-ethoxymethylfurfural (EMF) in ethanol, yielding 86%, 57%, and 47% from 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), fructose, and inulin, respectively.	4	
134

Lignin heterogeneous acid catalyst	Biodiesel production	- 10 wt% acid catalyst derived from sulfonated olive cake lignin was used to esterify spent vegetable oil with a transformation rate of about 92%, as well as converting 57% waste vegetable oil to fatty acid methyl esters (FAME).	10	
132

Soda lignin catalyst	Cycloaddition of epoxides and CO2	- Soda lignin with rich dimeric hydrogen bonds and β-O-4′ aryl ethers displayed the greatest catalytic reactivity with five cycles. The yield of the cycloaddition reached 91% under the optimal conditions of 80 °C and 10 h with 0.1 KI as a co-catalyst.	5	
126

Lignin–Pt catalyst	Oxidative transformations	- A high number of the oxygen-containing groups on the surface of the new catalyst promotes good Pt deposition, exposing the surface to the reaction system, which improves the catalytic performance compared to commercial Pt and Ru-based catalysts.	—	
52

Lignin-based activated carbon catalyst	Transformation of fructose into 5-hydroxy-methylfurfural (HMF)	- With a high specific surface area of 1629.96 m2 g−1, the new catalyst effectively converts 75.7% of fructose to HMF using DMSO as a solvent.	5	
135

Lignin-based solid acid catalyst	Production of cellulose nanofibers and platform chemicals	- The lignin-based catalyst with 0.60 mmol g−1 sulfonic density and 4.62 mmol g−1 total acid density yielded 90.8% of CNFs with 82% crystallinity index over five reusability cycles, as well as 3.9% glucose and 2.1% formic acid.	6	
47

Lignin-derived polyacid catalyst	Catalyze the curing process of the UF wood resin	- By using 5% lignin catalysis in wood resins, the water resistance was significantly improved as compared with the commercial additive (NH4Cl), as well as good mechanical properties and decreased formaldehyde release.	—	
122

Lignin–chitosan magnetic beads	Preparation of aryl nitriles and biaryls	- PdNPs@Fe3O4/lignin/chitosan was formulated by dispersing nano-palladium on lignin/chitosan magnetic beads and used for aryl nitrile and biaryl preparation.	7	
131

- The conversion rates of aryl nitrile and biaryl reached 97% and 98%, respectively, which were higher than conventional Pd-based catalysts. Also, due to the magnetic nature of the catalyst, it was easily retrieved by a magnet for later usage.
Single cobalt atom lignin catalyst	Naproxen (NPX) pollutant degradation	- With extremely low Co loading (2.45 wt%), the single-atom Co sites functioned as the key active sites for NPX degradation via peroxy-monosulfate activation, resulting in an outstandingly high turnover frequency of NPX (4.82 min−1).	4	
57

Lignin sulfonated carbon catalyst	Benzylation	- The characterization revealed a porous nature and many active sulfonic, hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on the surface, resulting in a high catalytic performance (the conversion rate of BA reached 99% and remained consistently high after 12 recycling tests).	12	
48


 	Fig. 4  (a) H2SO4 and H3PO4 surface activation in lignin-derived catalysis. (b) The main catalytical implementations of solid acid catalysts derived from lignin (drawn by the author).	 



Alkaline lignin	200/5	105/10	FeS/—	21.61	Cellulose conversion to levulinic acid	7.5%	200/2	Levulinic acid	35.64	
49

Alkali lignin	900/0.5	150/24	H2SO4/0.56	475	Hydrolysis of cellulose	160 mg	150/24	Glucose	64	
125

CNF	8.1
Dealkaline lignin	180/1	150/10	H2SO4/1.41	391.7	Biodiesel production	5%	80/5	Biodiesel	95.5	
138

Masson pine alkali lignin	450/1.5	80/6	H3PO4/—	488.4	Micro-crystalline cellulose hydrolysis	0.1 g	180/3	Glucose	69.7	
139

180/12	H2SO4/0.88
Olive cake lignin	400/1	RT/1	H3PO4/—	10.73	Esterification and trans-esterification	10%	65/8	Biodiesel	94	
132

150/10	H2SO4/0.69
Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin	400/1	150/10	H2SO4/—	234.61	Dehydration of fructose	50 mg	130/0.6	5-Hydroxy-methyl-furfural	100	
140

Kraft lignin	200–500/1	120/6	H2SO4/1.11	5.4	Synthesis of furan derivatives	0.2 g	110/15	5-Ethoxy-methyl-furfural	86	
134

Commercial lignin	500/2	180/8	H2SO4/1.06	1193.8	Esterification	5%	80/6	Biodiesel	92.3	
35

Corn stalk lignin	400/2	150/10	H2SO4/0.60	1.88	Hydrolysis of cellulose	0.2–0.4 g	160/12	CNFs	90.8	
47

Glucose	3.9
Formic acid	2.1
Sugarcane bagasse lignin	240/6	150/14	CH4O3S/—	3.04	Esterification of stearic acid	5%	240/0.16	Methyl stearate	89.2	
141

Alkaline lignin	400/1	150/10	H2SO4/0.61	63	Benzylation of benzene ring compounds	0.05 g	150/2	Diphenyl-methane	100	
48


 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM images of lignin-based sulfonated catalyst (1 and 2) and cellulose nanofibers (3). AFM height images (4) and size distribution of cellulose nanofibers (5) (adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, Elsevier). (b) Recyclability of lignin-based acid catalyst in the esterification of oleic acid (reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2020, Elsevier). (c) Hydroxy-methylation of lignin (drawn by the author). (d) The bond line physicochemical interactions between the wood surface and lignin-UF resin (drawn by the author). (e) Immobilization and leaching of acidic catalytic species on lignin (drawn by the author).	 

Hydrolysis of poly-saccharides	Sulfonated lignin-based activated carbon	Rice straw	Glucose (64%)	150/24	—	
125


	CNF (8.1%)
Lignin-based sulfide acid (LC-SO3H)	Cellulose	Glucose (3.9%)	160/12	5	
47

Formic acid (2.1%)
CNF (90.8%)
Ru–Cu/zeolite-Y	Cellulose	γ-Valerolactone (49.8%)	250/5	6	
166

Hetero-polyacid graphitic carbon nitride	Cellulose	5-HMF (58.6%)	140/10	10	
168

Sulfonated magnetic carbon nanotube arrays	Corn stalk	Glucose (31%)	150/2	4	
157

Esterification and trans-esterification	Lignin-derived carbon-based solid acid	Oleic acid and methanol	Biodiesel (92.3%)	80/6	5	
35

Sodium lignosulfonate-based acid	Adipic acid and methanol	Dimethyl adipate (99%)	72.85/2	5	
146

Acidic ion-exchange resins (Amberlyst 15)	Waste cooking oil and methanol	Biodiesel (78%)	64.85/9	3	
169

Sulfuric acid (H2SO4)	Karanja/mahua and methanol	Biodiesel (98.6%)	55/1	—	
170

Silane-functionalized graphene oxide	Ethylene carbonate	Dimethyl carbonate (96.2%)	70/4	6	
159

Dehydration	Magnetic (Fe3O4) lignin-based carbonaceous	Fructose	5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (100%)	130/0.6	5	
140

Lignin-based carbon solid acid	Fructose	5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (99%)	180/4	5	
135

Silica-supported phosphotungstic acid	Glucose	5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (78.31%)	160/2.33	5	
171

Graphene oxide	Fructose	5-Hydroxy-methylfurfural (99%)	100/5	—	
172

Benzylation	Lignin-based sulfonated carbon	Benzene	Diphenylmethane (100%)	90/2	12	
48

Iron phosphate nanotubes (FeP-NT)	Benzyl alcohol	Diphenylmethane (100%)	80/1	5	
173

Cationic gold(I)	2-Benzyloxyethanol	1,2-Bis(benzyloxy)-ethane (82%)	80/25	—	
174

Reduced graphene oxide nanosheets	Quinoline	1-Benzyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline (97%)	100/5	—	
175

Benzaldehyde
Condensation	Lignosulfonic acid	Creosol	Lignin-derived bisphenol (52.7%)	100/6	4	
176

Hybrid organosiliceous with amine groups and Pd nanoparticles	Furfural and methyl isobutyl ketone	1-(Furan-2-yl)-5-methylhexan-3-one (99%)	100/12	1	
177

Silica-rich perlite base catalyst	Benzaldehyde and acetophenone	Benzylidene acetophenone (96%)	5/4	4	
178

Sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON)	Formaldehyde and acetic acid	Acrylic acid (50.2%)	360/2	30	
179

Methyl acrylate (9.40%)
FeNPs/diethylene-triamine@reduced graphene oxide	Aldehyde	2-Nitrovinyl-benzene (92.3)	50/3	4	
180

Nitromethane

 	Fig. 6  (a) Base surface activation of lignin-derived catalysts (drawn by the author). (b) Biodiesel production by lignin-derived solid-base catalytic transesterification (drawn by the author). (c) Flow chart of the proposed industrial implementation of lignin-derived base catalyst for biofuel production (adapted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2022, Elsevier); (d) Knoevenagel reaction catalyzed by a lignin-derived base catalyst (drawn by the author).	 


K2CO3/Kraft lignin	Soybean oil	Methanol	25	25 min	18:1	0.5 g	100	
186

MgO@CNT@K2CO3	Waste edible oil	Methanol	65	4 h	20:1	4%	98.25	
145

CaO·ZnO	Sunflower seed oil	Methanol	60	3 h	10:1	2%	99	
202

Au/ZnO	Octanal (1)	Ethanol	100	3 h	—	0.1 g	100	
203

CoFe2O4@graphene oxide	Waste edible oil	Methanol	64.75	55.75 min	16.05:1	5.22%	98.17	
192

CaO–CeO2	Palm oil	Methanol	65	4 h	12:1	5%	95	
204

KOH/ZrO2	Waste Adansonia digitata oil	Methanol	60	90 min	14:1	6%	96.7	
205

NaOH/chitosan–Fe3O4	Waste cooking oil (WCO)	Methanol	25	60 min	6:1	1%	92	
206

Activated carbon supported nano-CaO	Soybean oil	Methanol	65	3 h	9:1	2%	98.4	
193

KOH	Used frying oils (UFO)	Ethanol	18	60 min	6:1	1%	95.95	
164

Novozym 435	
Hermetia illucens oil	Methanol	39.5	12 h	14.64:1	17.58%	96.97	
207

NaOH	
Citrullus vulgaris seed oil	Methanol	60	120 min	5:1	0.13 g	70	
208

KOH	Used frying oils (UFO)	2-Propanol	18	60 min	6:1	1%	20.2	
164

Graphene oxide doped MgO	Waste cooking oil (WCO)	Methanol	63	174.2 s	2.67:1	3.9%	99.23	
194

KOH	Waste Adansonia digitata oil	Methanol	60	60 min	8:1	1%	95.1	
205

Diatomaceous earth (DE-AC)	Propanoic acid	Ethanol	80	3 h	1:1	40 g l−1	60.4	
209




	Ammonium lignin-based catalyst (LS-IL@NH2)	98	3	
133



	Ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3)	100	—	
210



	Zn(II) coordination polymer	100	3	
200



	Y zeolite type containing alkyl-ammonium	73	—	
211



	APTES graphene oxide	94	5	
212



	Alkaline-doped multiwall carbon nanotubes	89	3	
213



	Fe3O4@chitosan	92.3	5	
214



	Amine-grafted Na-LTA zeolite	64.2	4	
201



	Chol-MSN/Prol-MSN	99	10	
215


 	Fig. 7  (a) The catalytic reduction of organic pollutants using Fe3O4@LigA/Cu catalyst (drawn by the author). (b) Dehydration of fructose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) over the magnetic lignin-based carbonaceous catalyst (drawn by the author). (c) SEM micrographs of lignin (1) before and (2) after Pd-NP loading (adapted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2016, Elsevier). (d) Illustration of the preparation method of a lignin-based single atom Co–N/C catalyst (reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2021, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 8  Top and side views of different charge densities of the optimized structure model of NPs Co/C (a and c) and SA Co–N/C catalysts (b and d) in DFT calculations (the green regions show charge depletion and the red regions show charge accumulation) (adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2021, Elsevier). (e) Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pd@LPR nano-catalysts and the reduction mechanism of Cr(VI) (reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2020, Elsevier). (f) Process illustration of Pt-NLCDs@CdS synthesis (reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2022, Elsevier). (g) Top and side views of the optimized Pt-NLCDs structure (adapted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2022, Elsevier).	 

Environmental remediation	Magnetic lignin-coated copper (Fe3O4@LigA/Cu)	Methylene blue	Leucomethylene blue (97%)	RT/3–4	3	
39

Congo red	Biphenyl and sodium 4-aminonaphthalene-1-sulfonate (92%)
4-Nitrophenol	4-Aminophenol (99%)
Lignin-based carbon Co single-atom (SA Co–N/C)	Naproxen	NPX (TOF: 0.241 min−1)	20/—	4	
57

N-doped carbon nanotube-encapsulated Co	Tetracycline	Peroxymonosulfate (94.5%)	25/—	—	
229

Activated hydrotalcites (Mg/Al)	Congo red	Biphenyl and sodium 4-aminonaphthalene-1-sulfonate (91%)	—/60	—	
235

CuS/Fe2O3/Mn2O3	Ciprofloxacin	CO2 + H2O (88%)	25/120	5	
225

Pd supported on mesoporous natural phosphate	4-Nitrophenol	4-Aminophenol (99%)	RT/42	4	
221

Zero-valent iron/graphene	Cr(VI)	Cr(III) (102.35 mg g−1)	25/—	8	
236

TiO2/porphyrin	Methylene blue	Leucomethylene blue (97%)	25/180	10	
237

Synthesis of formamides	Magnetic lignosulfonate (MLS–TA@Cu)	Phenyl-methanamine	
N-Benzylformamide (94%)	RT/55	5	
129

Natrolite zeolite	Phenyl-methanamine	Dibenzylamine (88%)	RT/30	5	
238

TiO2	
N-Methyl-morpholine	Thioformamides (90%)	15/80	—	
239

Ethyl chloroformate
Sodium azide
Co@N-doped carbon	Phenyl-methanamine	
N-Benzylformamide (98%)	—/720	—	
240

Fe2O3@SiO2–SO3H	Aniline	
N,N′-Diphenyl-formamidine (96%)	70/60	5	
241

Hydrogenation	Lignin-supported Pd(0) (lignin@Pd-NPs)	Acetophenone	Phenyl ethanol (95%)	25/240	5	
162

Lignin-derived carbon-supported magnetic iron (γ-Fe2O3/LRC-700)	Nitroarenes	Anilines (99%)	120/1080	5	
51

Ru-supported mesoporous carbon microspheres	Phenol	Cyclohexanol (100%)	200/60	8	
152

Ru-phosphated zirconia–alumina (Ru/ZP-A)	Furfuryl	Furfuryl alcohol (59.5%)	90/420	—	
242

Metal-based multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)	1-Octadecene	Octadecane (%)	50/120	—	
155

C–C bond formation	Lignin-supported Pd(0) nanoparticles (lignin@Pd-NPs)	
n-Butyl propene-2-enoate and halobenzenes	Butyl (2E)-3-phenylprop-2-enoate (94%)	140/5	5	
243

Lignin-stabilized Pd nanoparticles	Aryl halide and phenylboronic acid	Biphenyl (100%)	70/300	2	
163

FeNPs/DETA–reduced graphene oxide	Aldehyde	2-Nitrovinyl-benzene (92.3)	50/180	4	
180

Nitromethane
Pectin-modified Fe3O4–Pd NPs	Bromobenzene and phenylboronic acid	Biphenyl (96%)	100/45	11	
244

Photocatalytic H2 evolution	Lignin-based carbon dot-supported Pt single atoms	DMF	H2 (95%)	—	—	
56

Nafion
Na2SO4
Lactic acid
Black phosphorus (BP) and nickel oxide (NiO) nanosheets	H2O	H2 (46.10 mmol h−1 g−1)	—	—	
245

Triethanolamine
Carbon dots in g-C3N	H2PtCl6	H2 (3.12 mmol h−1 g−1)	—	—	
246

LaFeO3-reduced graphene oxide–NiO	H2O	H2 (465 μmol h−1 g−1)	—	—	
247

Palladium–copper nanodots	Anhydrous ethanol	H2 (156.6 μmol h−1)	—	—	
248

Nafion D-520
Co-decorated ultrathin Cd0.5Zn0.5S nanosheets	H2O	H2 (269.2 μmol h−1)	30/—	—	
249

MeOH
UV	Ultraviolet
HBA	Hydrogen-bond acceptors
HBD	Hydrogen-bond donors
PF	Phenol-formaldehyde
UF	Urea-formaldehyde
MUF	Melamine urea-formaldehyde
FE	Formaldehyde emissions
PCE	Polycarboxylate polyether
PSA	Pressure-sensitive adhesive
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AA	Acyclic acid
FAME	Fatty acid methyl ester
HMF	Hydroxymethylfurfural
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
CNFs	Cellulose nanofibers
CNT	Carbon nanotubes
NPX	Naproxen
TEMPO	(2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl
FFA	Free fatty acids
BET	Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
MCC	Microcrystalline cellulose
TRS	Total reducing sugars
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
MB	Methylene blue
MWCNTs	Multi-wall carbon nanotubes
CR	Congo red
4-NP	4-Nitrophenol
4-AP	4-Aminophenol
EHL	Enzymatic hydrolysis lignin
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
NPs	Nanoparticles
HRICP-AES	High-resolution inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectra
EDX	Energy-dispersive X-ray
PMS	Peroxymonosulfate
ILs	Ionic liquids
NDC	N-doped carbon
FTIR	Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy

1H-NMR	Proton nuclear magnetic resonance
2D-HSQC NMR	Heteronuclear single quantum correlation nuclear magnetic resonance
DFT	Density functional theory

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
