Spontaneous open-circuit voltage gain of fully fabricated organic solar cells caused by elimination of interfacial energy disorder   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00825J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00825J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2518-2528Spontaneous open-circuit voltage gain of fully fabricated organic solar cells caused by elimination of interfacial energy disorder†

        
          
            Rui 
            Sun‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Deng‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mumin 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kui 
            Shi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Wang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Longjian 
            Xue
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhixiang 
            Wei
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jie 
            Min
          
        
      *a
aThe Institute for Advanced Studies, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: min.jie@whu.edu.cn
bCAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: weizx@nanoctr.cn
cThe Institute of Technological Science and School of Power and Mechanical Engineering, Wuhan University, South Donghu Road 8, Wuhan 430072, China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China
Received 
      13th March 2019
    , Accepted 17th June 2019First published on 18th June 2019AbstractThe realization of high open-circuit voltage (Voc) in organic solar cells (OSCs) mainly depends on the delicate donor (D) and acceptor (A) structures, meticulously optimized bulk heterojunction (BHJ) microstructure and functionalized interfacial materials. In this work, we demonstrate a spontaneous Voc gain in efficient OSCs without sacrificing the short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). Using a combination of device studies and morphological analysis, we point out that the spontaneous phenomenon occurred at the bottom of the BHJ layer, which is caused by [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) acceptors spontaneously migrating to the BHJ/ZnO interface under ambient conditions. Furthermore, physical characterization determines the relation between morphology evolution and spontaneous Voc enhancement, which mainly results from the eliminated energetic disorder at the BHJ/ZnO interface. The investigation of surface energy parameters among selected components highlights the wetting coefficient as a dominant dynamic for this spontaneous phenomenon. Besides, a wide range of photovoltaic systems introduced for enabling parallel verification also confirm the effect of the interfacial surface energy on Voc spontaneous enhancement in inverted solar cells. These findings exemplify the importance of surface energy modification as a tool for improved interfaces of layered morphology, and open new routes to device interfacial optimization using novel design strategies of photoactive materials and interfacial materials. Such a spontaneous phenomenon may open a novel field for making materials work in an intelligent way in organic electronics.

Broader context
In the past two decades of organic solar cell (OSC) research, various factors such as the density of states or energetic disorder, charge transfer states, donor–acceptor interface, carrier density, recombination, third component ratio, interfacial molecular orientation, defect states, temperature and light intensity, etc. that affect the open circuit voltage (Voc) have been widely discussed. However, there are hardly any studies on the influence of the interfacial surface energy of each component on the energy order at the bulk heterojunction (BHJ)/contacts. In this work, we fabricated efficient inverted solar cells based on BTID-2F:PC71BM as a photoactive layer and zinc oxide (ZnO) as an electron transport layer, and found a spontaneous gain of Voc from 0.807 to 0.950 V without sacrificing the device short-circuit current and fill factor. Analysis of the surface energy of each component and the corresponding wetting coefficient at the BHJ/ZnO interface, as well as similar investigations of another fifteen photovoltaic systems, sheds light on the origin of spontaneous Voc gain in OSCs. We not only offer a useful concept for material development by carefully adjusting the surface energy of each component in OSCs, but also probably allow deriving more general design rules for freezing the morphology of the active layer.

1. Introduction
Solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have received significant attention in recent years due to their unique advantages of low cost, light weight, and capability to be fabricated into large area flexible and semi-transparent solar cells.1–4 Significant improvement in the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OSCs generally is achieved by developing new photoactive materials,5–7 optimizing the nanoscale morphology via diversified strategies (e.g. additives and annealing treatments),3,8,9 and using interfacial materials,10,11 inverted architectures,12etc. Benefiting from these effective strategies, the PCEs of OSCs have been greatly improved from a certified 6.77%13 to a certified 14.90%14 in less than ten years of development. One origin of the high photovoltaic performance is the relatively small open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss or energy loss (Eloss) defined by Eloss = Eg − qVoc, where Eg is the optical bandgap and q is the elementary charge.15 However, the energy loss of OSCs with a normal value of about 0.60 eV is considerably higher than those of perovskite, amorphous silicon and gallium arsenide thin film solar cells with comparable bandgaps.16,17 Thus, it is clear that one of the main challenges in OSCs is to improve the open-circuit voltage while keeping or broadening the optical absorption spectrum.18 Given that the most striking feature of non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) based solar cells compared with fullerene (e.g. [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM)) based devices is efficient charge generation upon small (<0.1 eV, even negligible) driving energies,19–21 there is still considerable scope to further increase the device efficiency by boosting Voc.19
In general, Voc originates due to the splitting of electron and hole quasi-Fermi energy levels actuated by light illumination:18,22 Voc = (1/q)(EFn − EFp)(1)where EFn and EFp are the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels, respectively. Since organic materials generally possess disorder induced gap tail states, the distribution of photogenerated carriers in such gap tail states upshifts the hole quasi-Fermi level and downshifts the electron quasi-Fermi level, thereby reducing the Voc in organic solar cells. In the past two decades of OSC research, various factors such as the density of states or energetic disorder, charge transfer states, donor–acceptor interface, carrier density, recombination, third component ratio, interfacial molecular orientation, defect states, temperature and light intensity, etc. that affect the Voc have been widely discussed.18,23–27 More efforts regarding the effective reduction of Voc loss focused on modifying the energy levels of donor/acceptor materials,20,28 optimizing the BHJ microstructure18,29–31 and introducing novel buffer layers.14,32–34 However, relatively little attention has been paid to the organic/contact interfaces,25,35 which inevitably introduce energy disorder into organic solar cells.
In order to eliminate the energy disorder at the BHJ/contacts, various processing strategies, including modification of active layers (e.g. solvent vapor annealing (SVA), the layer-by-layer (LbL) approach and controlled ternary structure),36–39 selection of interfacial layers10,40 and device architecture design,38etc. are applied to generate a high Voc in relevant OSCs. Apart from these approaches, the effects of the surface energy of carrier collecting interfaces on efficient control of voltage losses are examined in detail.41–44 Nevertheless, there are hardly any studies on the influence of the interfacial surface energy of each component on the energy order at the BHJ/contacts. To more accurately design and evaluate active layer materials and to find efficient strategies to mitigate the energetic disorder in organic solar cells, it would be desirable to have a full understanding of the correlation of the wetting coefficient among the components and the morphology characteristics they formed.
In this paper, we fabricated efficient inverted solar cells based on BTID-2F:PC71BM45 as a photoactive layer and zinc oxide (ZnO) as an electron transport layer. We were surprised to find a spontaneous gain of Voc from 0.807 to 0.950 V without sacrificing the device short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). This spontaneous phenomenon occurs at room temperature and is independent of storage conditions without artificial operations. This phenomenon is found to be associated with the morphology evolution at the BHJ/ZnO interface other than at the active layer/anode interface and/or in the microscopic bulk morphology. Furthermore, we systematically probe the BHJ microstructures, and discuss the charge carrier kinetics in devices using optical and electronic techniques to determine the spontaneous Voc enhancement caused by the elimination of energy disorder at the BHJ/ZnO interface. Analysis of the surface energy of each component and the corresponding wetting coefficient at the BHJ/ZnO interface, as well as similar investigations of another fifteen photovoltaic systems, further sheds light on the origin of spontaneous open-circuit voltage gain in organic solar cells.
2. Results and discussion
Spontaneous improvement of the open-circuit voltage
The chemical structures of BTID-2F and PC71BM are depicted in Fig. 1a. The inverted solar cells in this study were structured as ITO/ZnO/BTID-2F:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag, as shown in Fig. 1b. Fig. 1c shows the evolution of the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the optimized BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells measured under AM 1.5 solar illumination. The photovoltaic parameters, including Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE, are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). The fresh devices were evaluated directly after thermal evaporation of the top electrode, and exhibited a PCE of 8.45%. Then the devices were stored in a nitrogen glovebox at room temperature, and evaluated again under the same conditions within multiple time periods. Strikingly, as the stored time increases from 0 to 40 h, a Voc improvement of ∼20% (from 0.807 to 0.950 V) and a PCE enhancement of ∼25% (from 8.45% to 10.63%) were observed without artificial operations, while their Jsc and FF values almost remained at the same level. Further extending the storage time, the photovoltaic performance is very stable (Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI†). Importantly, this spontaneous phenomenon regarding the spontaneous open-circuit voltage improvement has not been reported to date in state-of-the-art OSCs.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures, device architecture and current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs. (a) The chemical structures of BTID-2F and PC71BM and (b) inverted device architecture of OSCs based on ZnO as an electron transport layer. (c) The time evolution of the J–V characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs measured under one sun illumination; the investigated solar cells were stored in a nitrogen glovebox at room temperature without illumination and their photovoltaic parameters were observed in different time periods. 
In order to find the primary cause of the Voc gain, we firstly fabricated solar cells with a conventional structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BTID-2F:PC71BM/Ca/Al. Interesting, a more stable open-circuit voltage was observed for the conventional devices, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). Since the spontaneous Voc enhancement was only found in the inverted OSCs, we conclude that relevant gain indeed results from the organic/contact interfaces rather than from the BHJ microstructure. The evolution of the normalized photovoltaic parameters of inverted OSCs with a structure of ITO/ZnO/BTID-2F:PC71BM/Ag, which were processed without a thermally evaporated MoOx layer, is depicted in Fig. S4 (ESI†). Furthermore, Fig. S5 (ESI†) shows the normalized photovoltaic parameters of fresh devices. But their active layers coated on the top of ZnO substrates were stored within multiple time periods before the MoO3/Ag anode deposition. A similar Voc improvement was observed for both types of solar cells fabricated by different approaches. These results indicate that the spontaneous Voc gain was found to be more independent of the top electrode, but mainly associated with the BHJ/ZnO interface.
The charge traps of the ZnO layer and the morphological and photochemical behavior of the active layer, as well as the work function of the ZnO/ITO cathode, can be modified by UV-visible light,46–49 which is often referred to as the “light-soaking” issue. Thus, we further investigated the UV light soaking effects in the related OSCs. Over six devices were investigated with different UV illumination time periods. It was found that the Voc values gradually decreased with the extension of the illumination time (Fig. S6, ESI†). Moreover, under sustained one sun illumination for 4 hours, all of the photovoltaic parameters showed continuous losses (Fig. S7, ESI†). These results indirectly illustrate that the effects of short time illumination when testing BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells on spontaneous Voc improvement are irrelevant. Note that the discussion on photo-stability mechanisms in OSCs is beyond the scope of the present work, which is focused mainly on the origin of open-circuit voltage gain in BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs.
Apart from the light-soaking issue, the storage temperature of the investigated OSCs should also be carefully considered. Fig. 2 summarizes the Voc evolution of OSCs under different storage conditions. The above-mentioned OSCs were measured and stored in a nitrogen atmosphere and the temperature was determined to be ∼300 K. As shown in Fig. 2, the Voc evolution for 300 K was taken from Fig. 1c. However, the Voc evolution trends of OSCs under different storage temperatures are inconsistent. OSCs stored at 250 K and 200 K, respectively, still exhibited Voc gains, while the spontaneous trends are less obvious than that of solar cells stored at room temperature (∼300 K). In contrast, the Voc of OSCs stored at 350 K in a vacuum (10−6 mbar) decreased by ∼43% in 10 h, mainly resulting from the BHJ microstructural changes. The results further indicate that the spontaneous Voc gain in the optimized solar cells is induced by the elimination of energetic disorder of the BHJ/ZnO interface, which can occur even at very low temperatures. Also, we found that the spontaneous Voc gain phenomenon of the storage devices could occur in ambient air (Fig. S8, ESI†). Overall, our recent work suggests that an increase in Voc during the storage period without losing high Jsc and FF values is mainly related to the reduction of energy loss at the BHJ/ZnO interface. The morphological analysis and fundamental investigation will be discussed in detail in the following two sections. In addition, we provide the correlations between the Voc gains and BHJ thicknesses during the storage time in Fig. S9 (ESI†). We found that the phenomenon of voltage increase with the incubation time could occur in the devices with BHJ thicknesses from 70 nm to 170 nm. The increase of the voltage will decrease when the films get thicker.
 Fig. 2  Evolution test of the Voc values of BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs. Evolution of the Voc values of optimized BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells stored at different temperatures. 
Morphology investigation
To directly verify this spontaneous phenomenon resulting from the BHJ/ZnO interface, we perform atomic force microscopy (AFM), grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), optical spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. The AFM topography images of BTID-2F:PC71BM BHJ films coated on glass and ZnO/glass, respectively, are almost unchanged during the storage periods (Fig. S10, ESI†). Furthermore, we can know from Fig. S11 (ESI†) that the changes of RMS data in both layers are not dramatic, resulting from the special morphology evolution occurring at the bottom of the active layer with a thickness of 90 nm. Moreover, Fig. S12 (ESI†) shows the two-dimensional GIWAXS patterns and the corresponding azimuth information. The GIWAXS profiles collected from out-of-plane cuts at Qy = 0 and in-plane cuts at Qz = 0 are depicted in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. The morphology of the blends before and after the storage time is rather similar, indicating that the morphology changes in the BHJ microstructures at room temperature are negligible. In addition, the fresh and aged blend films show similar edge-on orientation with the crystal coherence length (CCL) of the small molecule π–π stacking calculated to be 9.60 Å for the 0 h aged film, 16.43 Å for the 24 h aged film, and 18.44 Å for the 48 h aged film, respectively. The slightly increased π–π stacking CCL agrees with the slightly enhanced vertical phase segregation at the bottom of the active layer. The absorption spectra of active layers deposited on a glass substrate and ZnO/glass substrate under the same storage conditions are provided in Fig. S13a and c (ESI†). The normalized data measured at the absorption peaks in both films partially support the stable blend morphology in the whole layer (Fig. 3c). These results suggest that the spontaneous Voc improvement is not attributed to the nearly unchanged morphology in the BTID-2F:PC71BM BHJ film.23,50,51
 Fig. 3  Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) data, optical spectra and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of BTID-2F:PC71BM films. The GIWAXS profiles of BTID-2F:PC71BM films for different storage time periods collected from (a) out-of-plane cuts at Qy = 0 and (b) in-plane cuts at Qz = 0. (c) The time evolution of normalized absorption spectra at 607 nm and normalized PL spectra at 747 nm for BTID-2F:PC71BM layers coated on glass and ZnO/glass, respectively; the detailed absorption spectra and PL spectra of relevant films are shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†). (d) XPS spectra of BTID-2F:PC71BM layers coated on the top of ZnO-modified Si wafers measured at different time periods, including 0 h, 10 h and 40 h, respectively. 
Since the evolution of the donor and acceptor phases generally occurs only in the microscopic range, we examined the photoluminescence (PL) of active layers with and without a ZnO layer under the same storage conditions (Fig. S13b and d, ESI†). The PL signal generally provides direct evidence for exciton dissociation and interfacial change transfer (CT) states as well as low energy recombination transitions at the D/A interface.52 As shown in Fig. 3c, the BHJ layer coated on glass exhibited the same PL intensity during the storage time; in contrast a continuous drop was observed in the PL signal for the BHJ/ZnO film. The PL intensity of the BHJ/ZnO film is significantly quenched by 21% after 40 h storage time, indicating a more efficient photoinduced charge shift from the active layer to the ZnO layer for effective charge extraction. Thus, the relevant Voc gain is clearly attributed to the elimination of energy disorder at the BHJ/ZnO interface. We also conducted XPS measurements of very thin BTID-2F:PC71BM films (∼5 nm, the thickness was determined using a profilometer (Ambios Tech. XP-2)53) on the top of ZnO-modified Si wafers measured at different time periods, including 0 h, 10 h and 40 h. As shown in Fig. 3d, we observed the intensity of the sulfur and fluorine signals of the thin BHJ/ZnO film. Here sulfur and fluorine were used to track the BTID-2F donor molecule. The gradually improved sulfur and fluorine peaks at 163 eV and 687 eV appearing in the XPS spectrum suggested that the mass ratio of BTID-2F in the thin film changed significantly. In other words, more PC70BM acceptors spontaneously migrate to the bottom of the thin BHJ layer and/or the BHJ/ZnO interface during the storage time. Also, we explored this XPS behavior with layers of varying thickness; we discovered that when the thickness of BTID-2F:PC71BM is about 8nm, the intensity of the sulfur and fluorine signals has a clear improvement. When the thickness is 17 nm, the growth is weaken, and the phenomenon disappears at 25 nm (Fig. S14a–c, ESI†). In previous work,22 the notion has been demonstrated that reducing material structural disorder is a benefit for mitigating the energy disorder. Overall, the whole morphological investigation proves that the elimination of energy disorder at the BHJ/ZnO interface should be associated with the Voc improvement in BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells.
Physical characterization
In order to directly explore the evolution of the surface electronic states of the BHJ/ZnO interface, we firstly performed capacitance (C)–voltage (V) measurements and AC impedance measurements.54,55 The upper-limit of the doping density (N) can be determined by the slope of the Mott–Schottky plot using the following equation:56 (2)where ε0 is the dielectric constant of a vacuum, εr is the relative dielectric constant, and A corresponds to the device active area.57Fig. 4a shows the C–V characteristics attained by applying a low AC perturbation signal with a fixed frequency and sweeping the DC bias. It is found that the built-in voltage (Vbi) was gradually increased. Fresh solar cells showed a Vbi of approximately 0.663 ± 0.01 V and a maximum dopant density of around 0.85 × 1016 cm−3. After 40 h storage, Vbi increased to 0.822 ± 0.01 V and the maximum value of N increases as well to approximately 2.36 × 1016 cm−3. This 150 ± 10 mV increase of Vbi matches the Voc gain in the stored solar cells, while the increase of N after 40 h storage may lead to an increase of the surface charge density and an enhanced electrical field.54,58Fig. 4b shows Nyquist plots of impedance measurements of the stored devices for frequencies from 1 Hz to 1000 kHz. The data were fitted by using equivalent circuit modeling (ECM) with detailed circuits depicted in the inserts. The extra RC component (Ctrap) attributed to surface traps has been previously applied in other photovoltaic systems.54,56 We suspect there are surface traps also existing at the BHJ/ZnO interface in the fresh device and thus add extra RC in series connected in parallel with the depletion capacitance to improve the data modeling. As a result, the ECM yields a satisfactory agreement with the measurements. These observations indicate that surface traps may become less significant in the stored devices. Besides, the series resistance (Rs) can be obtained from the intercept on the ReZ axis at high frequencies (left part) in the Nyquist plots.59 After 40 h storage, Rs is reduced from 2.20 Ω cm2 to 1.64 Ω cm2 in BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells. The reduced Rs in devices is conductive to charge carrier transport. This correlation is confirmed not only by the above-mentioned PL data, but also by the measured charge transport properties in BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells. Details of the measurement techniques in the space-charge limited current (SCLC) and photo-induced charge carrier extraction by linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) methods are given in Supplementary Notes 1 and 2 (ESI†), respectively. As a result, the higher electron only mobility calculated by the SCLC model and the greater charge carrier extraction measured by the photo-CELIV technique further demonstrate the microstructure change at the BHJ/ZnO interface.
 Fig. 4  Impedance spectra, transient photocurrent (TPC), charge extraction (CE) and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements as well as the temperature dependent Voc test. (a) (C/A)−2versus applied bias voltage in BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells measured at different time periods, including 0 h, 10 h and 40 h, the solid lines correspond to the Mott–Schottky plot. Impedance spectra analysis for the effect of spontaneous morphological evolution on BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells. (b) Nyquist plots for BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells measured at different storage periods. The data are fitted by the inserted equivalent circuit model. (c) Normalized TPC data for the BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells tested at different time periods. The illumination pulse intensity was 150 mW cm−2 (a light pulse of 50 μs). (d) Charge carrier lifetime τ, obtained from TPV, as a function of charge density n, calculated from CE measurements under Voc conditions (from 0.15 to 2.5 suns). (e) Charge extraction measurements of a fresh and a stored BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cell show a shift in the voltage-dependent carrier density, consistent with a corresponding shift in the density of states. Storing lowers Voc (vertical lines) while the charge carrier density in the device under one sun illumination is unchanged. (f) Temperature dependent Voc of the fresh and stored BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells. 
In order to further figure out the extraction and recombination of charge carriers, we conduct the transient photocurrent (TPC) technique, which is characterized by an initial, voltage-dependent sweep-out of mobile carriers, followed by a long, bias-insensitive photocurrent tail. Details of the measurement technique and discussions of the TPC measurements are given in Supplementary Note 3 (ESI†). Fig. 4c shows the charge extraction of a BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cell at the Jsc condition where the internal field equals Vbi. As compared to the fresh solar cell, the faster decay kinetics in the observed device upon storage indicates a faster charge extraction property, indicating that the enhanced Vbi results in improved sweep-out of mobile carriers. Combined with the previous impedance analysis and the discussions of light intensity dependent J–V characteristics (Supplementary Note 4, ESI†), we attribute this spontaneous effect to the passivation of surface traps in the stored solar cells rather than suppression of bulk recombination.
Since the absorption spectra in the BHJ film (Fig. S13c, ESI†) and the short-circuit current in the device (Fig. 1c) are almost unchanged, two possible mechanisms generally can be used to explain a spontaneous Voc gain. One mechanism is that the carrier density could be increased by a reduction in the recombination rate while the density of states in the stored device is almost identical to its initial value in the fresh device. Another mechanism is that the density of states could be narrowed while the carrier density is unchanged. Thus, we further applied the transient photovoltage (TPV) technique to measure the charge carrier lifetimes of relevant devices upon small perturbations in the carrier density. As shown in Fig. S21 (ESI†), the carrier lifetimes for the stored devices are almost identical to those obtained for the fresh solar cell. No evidence of a change in the recombination lifetime was found in the TPV measurements. Furthermore, we observed the charge carrier density achieved by charge extraction (CE) measurements dependence of the charge carrier lifetime at open circuit (Fig. 4d). Details of the measurement techniques in the TPV and CE methods are given in Supplementary Notes 5 and 6 (ESI†). Our measurements of a fresh device and the same device stored for different time periods further show no evidence of an obvious change in the carrier recombination dynamics. These results strongly demonstrate that the Voc gain is not related to changes in the recombination rates. Note that the carrier densities in the same device stored for different time periods are not completely identical, although it appears that the Voc gain upon storage is not mainly caused by an improved carrier density.60 Using a common analytical model,61,62 and assuming n = p, we can write the Voc gain caused by a given change in carrier density as , where x = n2/n1 (describing the relative change in carrier density n, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature). It is perhaps no surprise that the voltage shift (ΔVoc = 3.0 mV, assuming an ideality factor of 2) expected from the observed change in charge density or recombination (especially for surface recombination) in the same device is significantly small compared to the larger Voc shift (153 mV) in energetics.
Since the above-mentioned bimolecular recombination dynamics after storage is almost unchanged, we can suppose that a narrowing in the DOS causes the observed Voc gain. This hypothesis was further investigated by the CE technique (Supplementary Note 6, ESI†), which can quantify the amount of extractable charge present in the solar cell at a given voltage. By varying the light intensity over a wide range (Fig. S22, ESI†), a range of open-circuit voltages can be obtained. Fig. 4e shows the charge carrier density against the voltage of the solar cell. It is found that a similar generated charge density of ∼2 × 1016 cm−3 is observed at the Voc of the fresh device (given by the vertical lavender line, 0.791 V), the same device after 10 h storage (given by the vertical purple line, 0.885 V) and the same device after 40 h storage (given by the vertical deep purple line, 0.939 V). Thus, the observed Voc gain appears to mainly result from mitigated energetic disorder, which causes a change in the relevant low-energy portion of the DOS such that for a similar charge carrier density a higher quasi-Fermi level splitting is obtained. Furthermore, we measured the open-circuit voltage of the fresh and the stored device in the temperature range from 100 to 300 K (Fig. 4f), and found that the temperature dependent Voc improvement can be described with the analytical model for order-induced Voc enhancement.60 It is clearly visible that at lower temperatures the difference between the fresh and the stored device is larger than at room temperature (Fig. S23a, ESI†), almost consistent with the 1/T dependence. Besides, the open-circuit voltage before and after 40 h storage from 0.15 suns up to 1 sun is shown in Fig. S23b (ESI†) for 100 and 300 K. The change in Voc at each temperature is constant for all light intensities measured. This allows us to match the fresh and stored curve for all light intensities by simply shifting the voltage. Overall, all the physical investigations are consistent with our scenario that a similar charge generation density (or light intensity) could generate higher Voc values due to the mitigated energy disorder in the stored solar cell.
Possible origin of spontaneous molecule migration
Since the solar cell is the same, we assign this shift in voltage to a result of a morphology change at the BHJ/ZnO interface, which has been demonstrated by the investigations of the morphological characteristics. Furthermore, our fundamental physics observation is consistent with the model for the narrowing density of states upon storage. Thus, this spontaneous phenomenon is likely caused by the changes in the microstructure evolution and fundamental physical processes as depicted in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Schematics of the morphological characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM films as well as their relevant fundamental mechanisms. Schematics of the morphological characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM films coated on the top of ZnO layers are shown in (a) for the fresh device (0 h) and (b) for the stored device (40 h). (c) General mechanism of a device using a ZnO layer as an electron transport layer before and after 40 h storage time. CBM, conduction band minimum; VBM, valence band maximum; LUMO, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital; HOMO, highest occupied molecular orbital; EFn, electron quasi-Fermi-level; EFp, hole quasi-Fermi-level; q, charge. The Gaussian curves in (c) are the band tail states caused by structural disorder at the BHJ/ZnO interface. 
Surprisingly, on one hand, the improvement of open-circuit voltage occurs after device fabrication rather than during the fabrication process with artificial operations (e.g. a methanol treatment approach and a two-step off-center spinning method).40,54,58,63 On the other hand, the open-circuit voltage loss rather than gain, which is caused by the redistribution of changes in the broader density state in devices, is observed in many photovoltaic materials.15,60 These two queries drive us to further shed light on the origin of the spontaneous open-circuit voltage gain in the solar cells upon storage. As mentioned in the introduction, the surface energy has been shown to play a decisive role in the segregation of components. In addition, the difference in surface energy between the donor and acceptor, as well as the interfacial free energy of the substrates, has also been reported to be one of the driving forces for the vertical phase-separation in BHJ binary and ternary films.64–67 In general, narrowing the surface energy offset between the interfaces and the active material is expected to be beneficial in obtaining a more evenly distributed interface composition.40
The surface energy can be quantified using surface-energy analysis, as extrapolated from contact-angle measurements. Thus we examined the surface energy of the components and introduced a model to understand the origin of spontaneous molecule migration in the fabricated devices. Fig. 6a depicts the photographs of water and ethylene glycol droplets on different composition surfaces. The surface energy of each material employed in this study is shown in Table S3 (ESI†) and summarized in Fig. 6b. Here we only focus on the surface energy of materials as another driving force of the acceptor's spontaneous migration in the BHJ/ZnO interface. The surface energy of material A (γA) was estimated from the contact angles of ultrapure water and ethylene glycol on spin-coated films of material A. The surface energy values of ZnO (γZnO) and PC71BM (γPC71BM) are 36.85 mJ m−2 and 29.22 mJ m−2, respectively, which are consistent with previous reports.64,65,68,69 The surface energy of BTID-2F is γBTID-2F = 43.17 mJ m−2, which is slightly higher than those of ZnO and PC71BM, but is significantly lower than that of PEDOT:PSS (γPEDOT:PSS = 122.77 mJ m−2). Furthermore, we estimated the wetting coefficient for the BHJ/ZnO interface to predict the migration of PC71BM acceptors at the BHJ/ZnO interface. This method has been applied to binary blends doped with various materials such as conductive carbon black particles,70 carbon nanotubes,71 polymers,72 small molecules,44 and dyes.65 The wetting coefficient of a guest material C (ωC) in blends of host materials A and B can be calculated by Young's equation as follows: ωC = (γC–B − γC–A)/γA–B, where γX–Y is the interfacial surface energy between X and Y. The interfacial surface energy can be calculated by Neumann's equation as follows: γX–Y = γX + γY − 2(γXγY)0.5exp[−β(γX − γY)2], where β = 0.000115 m4 mJ−2.65 If the wetting coefficient is larger than unity (ωC > 1), material C will be located in domain A. As shown in Fig. 6b, the wetting coefficient of PC71BM in BHJ/ZnO interfaces was calculated to be 3.36 on the basis of the above equation, suggesting that PC71BM acceptors tend to migrate to the ZnO layer. Moreover, we monitor the changes of contact angle of ITO/ZnO/BHJ with a BHJ of varying thickness over time. The contact angle of ITO/ZnO/BHJ with a thicker BHJ (70 nm to 160 nm) using two solvents (water and ethylene glycol) can be ignored (Fig. S24a, ESI†). In contrast, we found the contact angles of ITO/ZnO/BHJ with thin BHJ films (8 nm and 17 nm, Fig. S24b, ESI†) gradually increased during the storage time. However, the contact angle of a BHJ film with a thickness of 25 nm did not obviously tend to approach the contact angle of the BTID-2F donor. Originally, using wetting coefficient factor for evaluating morphology evolution was considered for the addition of particle components (e.g. carbon black particles and carbon nanotubes) into relevant blends. It is not clear whether wetting coefficient can be also applied to BTID-2F:PC71BM system, although the above-mentioned analysis is identical to the trends of the inverted and conventional solar cells.
 Fig. 6  Surface energy measurement and wetting coefficient calculation as well as the correlation of the wetting coefficient and Voc gain. (a) Photographs of water and ethylene glycol droplets on the top surfaces of PEDOT:PSS, ZnO, BT1D-2F and PC71BM, and the respective contact angle values. The contact angle measurement is conducted at the center of the substrates, avoiding the edges, reflecting the properties of the effective working area in the devices. (b) Investigations of the wetting coefficients of PC71BM in BHJ/ZnO and BHJ/PEDOT:PSS interfaces. (c) Wetting coefficients of fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors in BHJ/ZnO interfaces, and the corresponding variation of the normalized average Voc gains over the storage time for the devices based on fourteen photoactive layer systems. 
Accordingly, various donor materials, including H11, J71, J52-2F, Si-PCPDTBT, P3HT, PDTSTPD, PBDB-T, PTB7, PTB7-Th, P3TDPP, PDCTBT and PCE11, and acceptor materials like PC71BM, IDIC and ITIC, have been introduced to further demonstrate the validity of this analysis and conclusions as mentioned above. The molecular structures of the investigated materials in this study are shown in Fig. S25 (ESI†). Moreover, Fig. S26a–S38a (ESI†) show the respective contact angle values of pristine donor and acceptor films, and the normalized values of the photovoltaic parameters of BHJ/ZnO interface based solar cells over time measured under one sun illumination. The relevant Young's factors and wetting coefficients of acceptors at the BHJ/ZnO interfaces are shown in Table S4 (ESI†). Strikingly, the relevant blend films are studied as a model of ωC > 1 where fullerene acceptors (PC71BM) and non-fullerene acceptors (IDIC) are considered to slowly migrate to the ZnO surface. This theoretical calculation is in great agreement with the experimental results of device performance (Fig. S26b–S38b, ESI†). All of these BHJ solar cells exhibited a remarkable Voc gain after 40 h storage, as plotted in Fig. 6c. In contrast, the calculated wetting coefficients of below 1 for PC71BM or ITIC in the other six systems suggest that acceptor materials are most likely to interact with the domains of the donor materials. As a result, the Voc changes of the investigated six systems are negligible. Besides, a recent publication by Christoph et al.73 confirmed that when the optimized PCE11:PCBM solar cells with the BHJ/ZnO interface were stored in the dark under ambient conditions for 5 days, they showed a spontaneous strong photocurrent burn-in loss but a much more stable Voc value. Although demixing of the donor and acceptor phases results in short-circuit current losses, the same Voc value of the observed device upon storage agreed well with our theoretical prediction (Fig. S39 and Table S7, ESI†). Overall, these findings indicate the importance of the interfacial surface energy as a driving force controlling the migration of acceptor materials at the BHJ/ZnO interface, and are powerful to explain the origin of the open-circuit voltage gain in the stored solar cells at room temperature. Because of the different factors affecting a morphology change, this surface energy range cannot be defined with accuracy, but we suggest a surface treatment to obtain an intermediate surface energy above the neutral range as a first attempt to achieve an optimized morphology. However, the question of how to correctly regulate the interfacial properties at the electrodes to induce optimal vertical stratification and photoelectric performance remains unanswered.
3. Conclusion
To summarize, we presented a spontaneous open-circuit voltage gain in efficient BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs of ∼20% after 40 h storage in the dark under ambient conditions. A stable BHJ micromorphology in the blends was confirmed by AFM, GIWAXS and absorption data, which is in great accordance with the stable Jsc and FF values for the stored OSCs. Meanwhile PL and XPS data proved that the morphology evolution at the BHJ/ZnO interface is not negligible, which results in the Voc improvement in the stored device. Using a combination of device studies, impedance spectra, photo-CELIV, CE, TPV and TPC techniques and temperature dependent Voc analysis, we establish that the spontaneous Voc gain mainly originates from the elimination of energy disorder of the BHJ/ZnO interface, rather than the suppression of trap-assisted recombination at the BHJ/ZnO interface. Again the storage of a relevant device leads to the gradual enhancement of the electron extraction properties, narrowing of the DOS, and an up-shift in the Fermi-level, thereby giving electron-selective ohmic contacts towards the active layer in OSCs. Although the miscibility between the donor and acceptor as well as their thermodynamic behaviors in some cases can result in phase separation in BHJ blend films, the obvious Voc gains and stable Jsc and FF values in these investigated systems suggest that the interfacial surface energy does play a crucial role in determining the morphology evolution at BHJ/ZnO interfaces. Furthermore, wetting coefficient calculations in combination with comparative analysis of other fullerene- and non-fullerene systems allowed us to pin down the responsible mechanism.
It is notable that the significance of these findings goes well beyond the material couple BTID-2F:PC70BM. Our findings not only highlight that surface energy plays an important role in vertical phase separation in blends during film drying processes, but also suggest that extended wetting coefficient calculations allow one to properly predict the stability of BHJ microstructures as well as the potential device performance. We are certainly aware that design of material structures, modification and doping functionalization of the interfacial layer and different molecular weight distributions of the same system may strengthen or weaken the driving forces for spontaneous morphology evolution at the interfaces. Nevertheless, narrowing the surface energy offset between the interfaces and the active material would be one of the most elegant ways to overcome this spontaneous phenomenon. Overall, we not only offer a useful concept for material development by carefully adjusting the surface energy of each component in solar cells, but also probably allow deriving more general design rules for freezing the morphology of the active layer.
Author contributions
Device fabrication and fundamental studies were carried out by R. S., J. G., Q. W., and J. G. BTID-2F was synthesized by D. D. Contact angle measurements were supported by K. S. In addition, J. M. had the idea, led the project and prepared the manuscript. All authors contributed to the manuscript preparation.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant No. 21702154 and 51773157), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (Grant No. 2017CFB118) and supported by “the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2042017kf0269). Dan Deng and Longjian Xue also acknowledge the support from the NSFC (Grant No. 51603051 and 51503156), respectively.
References
W. Huang, P. Cheng, Y. M. Yang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705706 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Han, Y. Yi and Z. Shuai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702743 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, C. Wang and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703147 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 113–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xue, J. Zhang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Small, 2018, 14, e1801793 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Nielsen, S. Holliday, H. Y. Chen, S. J. Cryer and I. McCulloch, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2803–2812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. F. Manley, J. Strzalka, T. J. Fauvell, T. J. Marks and L. X. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800611 CrossRef .
S. Kwon, H. Kang, J.-H. Lee, J. Lee, S. Hong, H. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601496 CrossRef .
B. Xu and J. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800022 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Zhang, K. Usman and J. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702730 CrossRef .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Min, Y. N. Luponosov, C. Cui, B. Kan, H. Chen, X. Wan, Y. Chen, S. A. Ponomarenko, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700465 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, Y. Hishikawa, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2018, 26, 3–12 CrossRef .
J. Yao, T. Kirchartz, M. S. Vezie, M. A. Faist, W. Gong, Z. He, H. Wu, J. Troughton, T. Watson, D. Bryant and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 014020 CrossRef .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391–410 RSC .
J. Hou, O. Inganas, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qian, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, W. Tress, T. R. Hopper, S. Chen, S. Li, J. Liu, S. Chen, J. Zhang, X. K. Liu, B. Gao, L. Ouyang, Y. Jin, G. Pozina, I. A. Buyanova, W. M. Chen, O. Inganas, V. Coropceanu, J. L. Bredas, H. Yan, J. Hou, F. Zhang, A. A. Bakulin and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 703–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Nikolis, J. Benduhn, F. Holzmueller, F. Piersimoni, M. Lau, O. Zeika, D. Neher, C. Koerner, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700855 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15001 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, J. Wang, A. Melianas, Y. Wu, R. Kroon, W. Li, W. Ma, M. R. Andersson, Z. Ma, W. Cai, W. Tress and O. Inganäs, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12574–12581 RSC .
N. A. Ran, S. Roland, J. A. Love, V. Savikhin, C. J. Takacs, Y. T. Fu, H. Li, V. Coropceanu, X. Liu, J. L. Bredas, G. C. Bazan, M. F. Toney, D. Neher and T. Q. Nguyen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 79 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Spies, M. List, T. Sarkar and U. Würfel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601750 CrossRef .
B. Kitchen, O. Awartani, R. J. Kline, T. McAfee, H. Ade and B. T. O'Connor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13208–13216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Mollinger, K. Vandewal and A. Salleo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501335 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, L. Ye and J. Hou, Polym. Int., 2015, 64, 957–962 CrossRef CAS .
C. Poelking, M. Tietze, C. Elschner, S. Olthof, D. Hertel, B. Baumeier, F. Wurthner, K. Meerholz, K. Leo and D. Andrienko, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 434–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Collins, C. M. Proctor, N. A. Ran and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501721 CrossRef .
Y. L. Lin, M. A. Fusella and B. P. Rand, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702816 CrossRef .
J. Wei, G. Ji, C. Zhang, L. Yan, Q. Luo, C. Wang, Q. Chen, J. Yang, L. Chen and C. Q. Ma, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5518–5529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. a. Tan and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1059–1091 RSC .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Z. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1160–1189 RSC .
S. Wheeler, F. Deledalle, N. Tokmoldin, T. Kirchartz, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 024020 CrossRef .
P. Cheng, R. Wang, J. Zhu, W. Huang, S. Y. Chang, L. Meng, P. Sun, H. W. Cheng, M. Qin, C. Zhu, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705243 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nakano and K. Tajima, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603269 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, X. Liu and T. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601674 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sun, J. Guo, C. Sun, T. Wang, Z. Luo, Z. Zhang, X. Jiao, W. Tang, C. Yang, Y. Li and J. Min, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 384–395 RSC .
L. Huang, G. Wang, W. Zhou, B. Fu, X. Cheng, L. Zhang, Z. Yuan, S. Xiong, L. Zhang, Y. Xie, A. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Ma, W. Li, Y. Zhou, E. Reichmanis and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4440–4452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Min, Y. N. Luponosov, Z.-G. Zhang, S. A. Ponomarenko, T. Ameri, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400816 CrossRef .
E. L. Ratcliff, A. Garcia, S. A. Paniagua, S. R. Cowan, A. J. Giordano, D. S. Ginley, S. R. Marder, J. J. Berry and D. C. Olson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 647–656 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. O'Malley, C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 82–86 CrossRef .
D. Galli, N. Gasparini, M. Forster, A. Eckert, C. Wilding, M. S. Killian, A. Avgeropoulos, V. G. Gregoriou, U. Scherf, C. L. Chochos, C. J. Brabec and T. Ameri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28803–28811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Zhu, J. Fang, B. Xia, Z. Wang, K. Lu, W. Ma and Z. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Trost, A. Behrendt, T. Becker, A. Polywka, P. Görrn and T. Riedl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500277 CrossRef .
A. Sundqvist, O. J. Sandberg, M. Nyman, J.-H. Smått and R. Österbacka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502265 CrossRef .
W. Xu, R. Xia, T. Ye, L. Zhao, Z. Kan, Y. Mei, C. Yan, X. W. Zhang, W. Y. Lai, P. E. Keivanidis and W. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500245 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, C. Jiang, C. Zhu and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 713–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gasparini, A. Wadsworth, M. Moser, D. Baran, I. McCulloch and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703298 CrossRef .
J. Benduhn, K. Tvingstedt, F. Piersimoni, S. Ulbrich, Y. Fan, M. Tropiano, K. A. McGarry, O. Zeika, M. K. Riede, C. J. Douglas, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, D. Neher, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17053 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baran, N. Li, A. C. Breton, A. Osvet, T. Ameri, M. Leclerc and C. J. Brabec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10949–10955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-G. Zhang, B. Qi, Z. Jin, D. Chi, Z. Qi, Y. Li and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1966 RSC .
H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Seifter, S. D. Collins, C. Luo, G. C. Bazan, T. Q. Nguyen and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1646–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Brus, C. M. Proctor, N. A. Ran and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502250 CrossRef .
W. L. Leong, S. R. Cowan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 517–522 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, T. Stubhan, N. Li, M. Turbiez, G. J. Matt, T. Ameri and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18917–18923 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, B. Yang, J. VanDerslice, J. Chen, O. Dyck, G. Duscher and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3068–3075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X.-D. Dang, C. Kim and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 610–617 CrossRef CAS .
T. Heumueller, T. M. Burke, W. R. Mateker, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, K. Vandewal, C. J. Brabec and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500111 CrossRef .
D. Cheyns, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165332 CrossRef .
D. Rauh, A. Wagenpfahl, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 133301 CrossRef .
J. Huang, J. H. Carpenter, C. Z. Li, J. S. Yu, H. Ade and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 967–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bulliard, S.-G. Ihn, S. Yun, Y. Kim, D. Choi, J.-Y. Choi, M. Kim, M. Sim, J.-H. Park, W. Choi and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4381–4387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Honda, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 588–598 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Trino, L. F. G. Dias, L. G. S. Albano, E. S. Bronze-Uhle, E. C. Rangel, C. F. O. Graeff and P. N. Lisboa-Filho, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 4000–4008 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ameri, P. Khoram, T. Heumüller, D. Baran, F. Machui, A. Troeger, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi, M. Halik, S. Rathgeber, U. Scherf and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19461–19472 RSC .
J. L. Wu, Y. C. Chen, H. Y. Lin, S. Y. Chu, C. C. Chang, C. J. Wu and Y. D. Juang, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2013, 60, 2324–2330 CAS .
I. Lee, J. Noh, J. Y. Lee and T. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37395–37401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sumita, K. Sakata, S. Asai, K. Miyasaka and H. Nakagawa, Polym. Bull., 1991, 25, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
A. Golden, G. Kasaliwal and P. Potschke, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 423–429 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Cheng, H. Keskkula and D. R. Paul, Polymer, 1992, 33, 1606 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, J. D. Perea, T. Kassar, M. Richter, T. Heumueller, G. J. Matt, Y. Hou, N. S. Guldal, H. Chen, S. Chen, S. Langner, M. Berlinghof, T. Unruh and C. J. Brabec, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00825j‡ The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
In the past two decades of organic solar cell (OSC) research, various factors such as the density of states or energetic disorder, charge transfer states, donor–acceptor interface, carrier density, recombination, third component ratio, interfacial molecular orientation, defect states, temperature and light intensity, etc. that affect the open circuit voltage (Voc) have been widely discussed. However, there are hardly any studies on the influence of the interfacial surface energy of each component on the energy order at the bulk heterojunction (BHJ)/contacts. In this work, we fabricated efficient inverted solar cells based on BTID-2F:PC71BM as a photoactive layer and zinc oxide (ZnO) as an electron transport layer, and found a spontaneous gain of Voc from 0.807 to 0.950 V without sacrificing the device short-circuit current and fill factor. Analysis of the surface energy of each component and the corresponding wetting coefficient at the BHJ/ZnO interface, as well as similar investigations of another fifteen photovoltaic systems, sheds light on the origin of spontaneous Voc gain in OSCs. We not only offer a useful concept for material development by carefully adjusting the surface energy of each component in OSCs, but also probably allow deriving more general design rules for freezing the morphology of the active layer.

Voc = (1/q)(EFn − EFp)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures, device architecture and current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs. (a) The chemical structures of BTID-2F and PC71BM and (b) inverted device architecture of OSCs based on ZnO as an electron transport layer. (c) The time evolution of the J–V characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs measured under one sun illumination; the investigated solar cells were stored in a nitrogen glovebox at room temperature without illumination and their photovoltaic parameters were observed in different time periods.	 

 	Fig. 2  Evolution test of the Voc values of BTID-2F:PC71BM OSCs. Evolution of the Voc values of optimized BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells stored at different temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 3  Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) data, optical spectra and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of BTID-2F:PC71BM films. The GIWAXS profiles of BTID-2F:PC71BM films for different storage time periods collected from (a) out-of-plane cuts at Qy = 0 and (b) in-plane cuts at Qz = 0. (c) The time evolution of normalized absorption spectra at 607 nm and normalized PL spectra at 747 nm for BTID-2F:PC71BM layers coated on glass and ZnO/glass, respectively; the detailed absorption spectra and PL spectra of relevant films are shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†). (d) XPS spectra of BTID-2F:PC71BM layers coated on the top of ZnO-modified Si wafers measured at different time periods, including 0 h, 10 h and 40 h, respectively.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Impedance spectra, transient photocurrent (TPC), charge extraction (CE) and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements as well as the temperature dependent Voc test. (a) (C/A)−2versus applied bias voltage in BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells measured at different time periods, including 0 h, 10 h and 40 h, the solid lines correspond to the Mott–Schottky plot. Impedance spectra analysis for the effect of spontaneous morphological evolution on BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells. (b) Nyquist plots for BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells measured at different storage periods. The data are fitted by the inserted equivalent circuit model. (c) Normalized TPC data for the BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells tested at different time periods. The illumination pulse intensity was 150 mW cm−2 (a light pulse of 50 μs). (d) Charge carrier lifetime τ, obtained from TPV, as a function of charge density n, calculated from CE measurements under Voc conditions (from 0.15 to 2.5 suns). (e) Charge extraction measurements of a fresh and a stored BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cell show a shift in the voltage-dependent carrier density, consistent with a corresponding shift in the density of states. Storing lowers Voc (vertical lines) while the charge carrier density in the device under one sun illumination is unchanged. (f) Temperature dependent Voc of the fresh and stored BTID-2F:PC71BM solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematics of the morphological characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM films as well as their relevant fundamental mechanisms. Schematics of the morphological characteristics of BTID-2F:PC71BM films coated on the top of ZnO layers are shown in (a) for the fresh device (0 h) and (b) for the stored device (40 h). (c) General mechanism of a device using a ZnO layer as an electron transport layer before and after 40 h storage time. CBM, conduction band minimum; VBM, valence band maximum; LUMO, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital; HOMO, highest occupied molecular orbital; EFn, electron quasi-Fermi-level; EFp, hole quasi-Fermi-level; q, charge. The Gaussian curves in (c) are the band tail states caused by structural disorder at the BHJ/ZnO interface.	 

 	Fig. 6  Surface energy measurement and wetting coefficient calculation as well as the correlation of the wetting coefficient and Voc gain. (a) Photographs of water and ethylene glycol droplets on the top surfaces of PEDOT:PSS, ZnO, BT1D-2F and PC71BM, and the respective contact angle values. The contact angle measurement is conducted at the center of the substrates, avoiding the edges, reflecting the properties of the effective working area in the devices. (b) Investigations of the wetting coefficients of PC71BM in BHJ/ZnO and BHJ/PEDOT:PSS interfaces. (c) Wetting coefficients of fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors in BHJ/ZnO interfaces, and the corresponding variation of the normalized average Voc gains over the storage time for the devices based on fourteen photoactive layer systems.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00825j
‡ The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
