A refractory metamaterial absorber for ultra-broadband, omnidirectional and polarization-independent absorption in the UV-NIR spectrum   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR01728J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR01728J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8298-8303A refractory metamaterial absorber for ultra-broadband, omnidirectional and polarization-independent absorption in the UV-NIR spectrum†

        
          
            Yijia 
            Huang‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Liu‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Mingbo 
            Pu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiong 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoliang 
            Ma
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xiangang 
            Luo
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Optical Technologies on Nano-Fabrication and Micro-Engineering, Institute of Optics and Electronics, Chinese Academy of Science, P.O. Box 350, Chengdu 610209, China. E-mail: lxg@ioe.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      1st March 2018
    , Accepted 2nd April 2018First published on 2nd April 2018AbstractIn this paper, efficient ultra-broadband absorption from ultraviolet (UV) to near infrared (NIR) is achieved using a metamaterial perfect absorber (MPA) with refractory constituents. Both simulated and experimental results indicate that this proposed MPA exhibits an average absorption over 95% at wavelengths ranging from 200 nm to 900 nm. Besides, owing to the ultrathin thickness and symmetrical topology of this device, it exhibits great angular tolerance up to 60° independent of the incident polarizations. Excellent thermal stability is also demonstrated at high operation temperatures. The physical origin of the ultra-broadband characteristics is mainly based on diffraction/interference engineering at short wavelengths and the anti-reflection effect at long wavelengths. We believe that such a device may find potential applications ranging from photodetection and photothermal energy conversion to ultraviolet protection and thermophotovoltaics.
Introduction
Broadband perfect absorbers,1 as an important branch of optical devices, are vital for a variety of applications, such as imaging devices,2 thermal emitters3,4 and bolometers.5 Traditionally, broadband perfect absorption is achieved by planar film stacks consisting of alternating layers of metal/dielectric films with overall thicknesses much higher than the working wavelengths.6,7 These bulky designs apparently violate the ongoing trend of scaling down the photonic and optical devices for further scientific and industrial integrations. Recently, metamaterials, as a kind of artificial structure with permittivity or/and permeability unattainable in nature, have drawn much attention due to their unique electromagnetic response.8–10 With suitable designs, many exotic phenomena have been achieved, such as invisible cloaking,11 superlenses,12 miniature antennas13 and radiative cooling coatings,14 among others.15–17 Moreover, since it was demonstrated that metamaterials can be employed for efficient electromagnetic absorption,18 a new research field about MPA has been stimulated and investigated. This kind of absorber exhibits tremendous merits over its traditional counterparts owing to its decreasing dimensions and increasing functionalities. So far, many efforts have been made to develop MPAs at different frequencies.19–29 Among the whole spectrum, optical frequencies have attracted enormous interest as the solar spectrum is mainly located in this region. Broadband absorption across most of the solar spectrum is vital to make full use of solar energy, which is one of the most important environmentally friendly energies on Earth.
To date, metamaterial-based broadband absorption in visible (VIS) and NIR regions has been widely investigated with different physical mechanisms. A typical design principle for such MPAs consists of sandwiched metal–dielectric–metal layers with the top surface patterned or not.25,30–33 This kind of structure can achieve extreme absorption by localized electromagnetic field enhancement. However, this absorption mechanism is accompanied by a relatively narrow bandwidth. One way to extend the bandwidth is to combine various resonators with different resonant peaks to form a supercell.32,34,35 Nevertheless, as the number of resonators increases, the effective number density (defined as the ratio of a certain sub-cell to the amount of sub-cells in a supercell) of each resonator decreases, which will unavoidably deteriorate the overall performance. Another strategy is to combine magnetic resonances with other resonances with broadband behaviors. For example, by employing Mie resonance induced by nanoparticles with varying diameters, nearly perfect broadband absorption is achieved with a tri-layered MPA.30 Recently, a novel method was proposed and nearly perfect absorption was realized over a one-octave bandwidth by engineering the dispersion of the metamaterial to mimic an ideal absorbing sheet.4 These methods above show advances to ideal absorbers with broadband efficient absorption as well as a compact profile. However, they still suffer from problems such as sensitivity to the incident polarization, low tolerance to the incident angle, requiring a complex fabrication process or being unsuitable for high temperature applications.
Here, based on our previous research on diffraction/interference engineering,9,33 we propose that an MPA shows absorption over 95% spanning a broad range of frequencies from UV (200 nm) to NIR (900 nm) even at high operation temperatures. Different from the typical metal–dielectric–metal profile, our MPA is formed by dielectric–semiconductor–metal tri-layers with a period smaller than the working wavelengths. Owing to the ingenious alignment of layers that possess a wideband anti-reflection property and the high ε′′ of the employed metal, the absorption induced by diffraction effects is further enhanced and broadened with minimal degradation for different polarizations at oblique incidence. Besides, as interference lithography is used to produce the nanostructure configuration, the fabrication process of our MPA is comparatively simple, cost-effective and more suitable for large-scale fabrication. We believe that the proposed device can open up new possibilities for various applications. For example, as our device can convert incident light to heat efficiently, it can be used in the solar-thermal harvesting industry and solar thermophotovoltaic applications. Besides, this broadband absorber can be employed for photodetection, spectroscopy and imaging to increase their contrast and sensitivity.
Results and discussion
Design and characterization of the proposed MPA

Fig. 1(a) depicts the schematic diagram of our MPA and its simulated performance in the designed wavelength region. The inset in the bottom left shows the cross-section configuration of a unit cell and the labeled parameters are given in the figure caption. The proposed MPA consists of a periodic array of tungsten (W) cylinders covered by a 40 nm thick silicon carbide (SiC) layer and a 40 nm silicon dioxide (SiO2) layer. The diameters of the SiO2, SiC and W cylinders in the simulation are 240 nm, 180 nm and 120 nm, respectively. As a proof of concept, a sample is fabricated and demonstrated. The SEM images and measured absorption are depicted in Fig. 1(b). Apparently, the measurement results agree quite well with the simulation both in the structure profile and the absorption performance. It should be noted that the incident angle for both Fig. 1(a) and (b) is 20° due to the limitation of the ellipsometer. As the W layer is thick enough to attenuate the incident light, the experiment absorption is obtained from A = 1 − R, where R is the reflectivity of the device. The total absorption for the simulated results is calculated from A = (ATE + ATM)/2, where ATE and ATM correspond to the absorption for the transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) polarizations, respectively (the definition of TE and TM polarizations is given in the bottom right of Fig. 1(a)).
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic image of the proposed MPA and its simulated absorption in the designed region. The inset in the bottom left is the cross-section of a unit cell with h = 80 nm and p = 300 nm. The inset in the bottom right is the definition of TM and TE polarizations in this paper. (b) The SEM of the fabricated MPA and the measured absorption. The inset in the bottom right shows the cross-section of the sample where three different materials can be easily identified. 
Then, we plot Fig. 2 to further illustrate the absorption performance of the proposed MPA at various oblique incident angles for TM and TE waves. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the simulated and measured results for the TE wave, while Fig. 2(c) and (d) correspond to their TM counterparts. The simulated results are calculated by the commercial software CST Microwave Studio. In the simulation, the refractive indexes for SiO2 and W are retrieved from Palik and the parameters for SiC are obtained by measurements (details are given in the ESI†).36 Obviously, our MPA presents high angular tolerance up to 60° for both polarizations with little variations in absorption. To have a closer look at this issue, the simulated and measured angle dependence of average absorption is plotted in the inset of Fig. 2(c) and (d), respectively. The average absorption is calculated from the mean value at the respective wavelengths for both polarizations. It is clear that the average absorption of our MPA varies very little up to 50° and it remains above 95% at 60° both in the simulation and experiment. Moreover, the average absorption can reach nearly 90% even at 70°, which is far beyond its reported counterparts.19,37 The slight difference between the simulated and measured results can be mainly ascribed to two reasons. (i) The imperfection in fabrication, especially that the side wall thickness of the structure cannot be controlled precisely by magnetron sputtering, will unavoidably lead to some discrepancies. (ii) The refractive index of the materials in the simulation may have certain deviations from that in the experiment, which will also have some impacts on the simulated results.
 Fig. 2  (a), (b) The simulated and measured absorption at oblique incidence for TE waves. (c), (d) The simulated and measured absorption at oblique incidence for TM waves. The insets in (c) and (d) are the simulated and measured angle dependence of average absorption. The dotted line in the right inset is fitted because the ellipsometer cannot measure those angles. 
The physical mechanism behind this absorber
To shed light on the physical origin of our device, we measured absorptions for different structures and depicted the results in Fig. 3(a). Obviously, a planar W film cannot absorb the incident wave efficiently. This is mainly because the impedance between the W film and the environment is mismatched which will lead to high reflectance.28,29 This low absorbing performance is enhanced when sub-wavelength nanostructures are etched on the film. However, the absorption of the W cylinder array is still far from perfect in a broadband spectrum as the resonances induced by the nanostructures are comparatively narrow-banded. Interestingly, after being coated with two optically transparent materials with nanometer thicknesses, the device becomes totally black with little reflectance. In fact, we attribute this ultra-broadband impedance matching behavior of our device to three effects and we will illustrate each of them in detail below. The first is the diffraction effect induced by the resonances in the nanostructures at around 300 nm. As the period of the structure is larger than the wavelength in the substrate, but still smaller than that in free space, the first order diffraction will occur in the MPA. This diffraction effect would undoubtedly decrease the reflection of the structure and thus enhance the absorption. This absorbing mechanism is illustrated in our previous work in detail33 and can explain the absorption peak for the W cylinder array as well. The second mechanism for the ultra-broadband absorption is the graded refractive index of the coating materials (SiO2 and SiC) that forms a wideband anti-reflection layer. This layer will dramatically decrease the reflection at the structure surface and therefore increase the absorption. Such high absorption behavior can be well explained by the effective medium theory.38 In that case, the structure can be regarded as multilayered films and the effective permittivity of each layer εi can be calculated by the Maxwell–Garnett theory: (1)where f = Venv/V0 is the filling factor of the environmental media with V0 = Venv + Vnano. εenv and εnano are the permittivity of the environmental media and nanostructure material, respectively. Then, the absorption of such an effective medium can be easily obtained by employing the transform matrix method. The comparison between the retrieved and simulated absorption is plotted in Fig. 3(b). The curves are well overlapped from 450 nm to 900 nm and separated at short wavelengths. The discrepancy can be addressed by the closer dimension of the period of the structure and the incident wavelength. As is observed, our structure can be regarded as a five-layered film stack with the incremental permittivity of each layer at long wavelengths, which is a typical profile for antireflection. To illustrate these two absorbing mechanisms further, we plot Fig. 3(c) and (d) to map the electric field distribution of our device at 300 nm and 900 nm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3(c), typical diffraction patterns are observed that validate the existence of the diffraction effect at this wavelength. The incident wave in Fig. 3(d) uniformly passes through the dielectric layers and reaches the W structure with little reflection, which indicates the anti-reflection effect in this region. The third absorbing mechanism is the high ε′′ of the absorbing material that can enhance the field dissipation in the structure. It is well known that the heat power density q is related to the absorption in the structure and it can be described by (2)where ε0, ω and  are the vacuum permittivity, angular frequency of light and electric field vector, respectively.31 Thus, in order to increase the absorption at these non-resonant wavelengths, the dominating factor is to employ metals with high ε′′ to enhance the field dissipation. Because the ε′′ of W is much greater than that of metals like Au or Ag, we choose W as the lossy metal in our device. The absorption comparison between W and other noble metals with the same structure is plotted in Fig. S2.† After the analyses above, we can understand the performance of our device in a more intrinsic way.
 Fig. 3  (a) The absorption performance for various structures. By employing our design principle, the bandwidth and absorbing efficiency of our device are remarkably improved compared with the planar W film. (b) The absorption retrieved from the effective medium theory and numerical simulation. The nanostructure can be regarded as a multilayered film stack at long wavelengths. (c), (d) The electric field distribution for the proposed MPA at 300 nm and 900 nm. The black lines indicate the contours of each layer. 
Fabrication process of the proposed absorber
It is noted that the diameter of the W cylinders in our device is only 120 nm, and such a configuration is often fabricated by complex procedures (such as e-beam lithography or ion-beam lithography). Here, we propose a fabrication procedure that makes our device suitable for cost-effective and large-scale fabrication. A schematic of the procedures involved in the fabrication of the proposed MPA is presented in Fig. 4. Firstly, a 200 nm W layer was sputtered on the Si substrate with 10 nm chrome as an adhesive layer and with an Ar gas flow of 35 sccm in the chamber. As the flatness of the W layer plays a key role in the subsequent fabrication, the process parameters are optimized based on our measured surface roughness under different conditions (details are given in the ESI Fig. S3†). Then, three layers of a photoresist, SiO2 and photoresist are deposited on the W film with thicknesses of 180 nm, 20 nm and 120 nm from bottom to top. After that, interference lithography was used to expose the top photoresist. In order to transfer the nanostructure configuration from the top photoresist layer to the W layer, reactive ion etching (RIE) and ion beam etching (IBE) were employed consequently to etch the SiO2 layer, the bottom photoresist and the 80 nm W layer. It should be noted that we used three layers (photoresist–SiO2–photoresist) to form the mask instead of one photoresist layer because the high reflectance of the W layer can lead to the standing wave effect in the photoresist, which will unavoidably decrease the overall performance. With the help of the three alternating layers, the reflectance of the structure can be suppressed and therefore the configuration will be better transferred. After the W cylinder array was obtained (the AFM of the W cylinder array is plotted in the ESI Fig. S4†), the SiC layer and SiO2 layer were then deposited with their respective thicknesses (the SEM images for W, W-SiC and W-SiC-SiO2 nanostructures are shown in Fig. S5†). It should be mentioned that the use of the Si substrate is not essential and it can be replaced by other organic substrates like PDMS. We believe such stretchable MPA may find more applications such as transformable absorbing coatings or mechanically tunable absorbers.
 Fig. 4  The schematic diagram of the fabrication procedures for our MPA. As complex processes are not involved, the fabrication method we proposed in this paper is typically suitable for large-scale devices with nanoscale configurations. 
Outlook of potential applications of our device
Compared with traditional absorbers and MPAs reported previously, the device proposed in this paper presents several advantages: (i) the structure is of sub-wavelength dimensions and can be easily employed for further integrations to photonic or optical instruments. (ii) It is well known that W is a typical refractory metal that has found many applications at high temperatures. In addition, the refractive parameters for SiO2 and SiC are both stable at various temperatures (see the ESI† for details). As a consequence, the proposed MPA can work efficiently even at high operation temperatures. To demonstrate this issue, the MPA is baked to different temperatures for an hour and annealed naturally for several hours. The temperature was ramped at a rate of 20 °C min−1. It is worth noting that different from many similar experiments that were conducted in a vacuum or surrounded by inert gas to avoid sample oxidation,39,40 our experiment was performed in air directly because the surface SiO2 layer can separate the whole structure from air. The measured absorption and the SEM image after annealing at 600 °C are shown in Fig. 5 with their room temperature counterpart for comparison. It can be inferred that the absorption performance as well as the nanostructure configurations are nearly unchanged which manifests the stability of our device. In fact, the nanostructures are even stable at higher temperatures (800 °C) but the thermal expansion mismatch will lead to the shrinkage of the films (details are given in the ESI†). This high temperature tolerance absorber is crucial for many applications such as thermophotovoltaic energy harvesters41 and artificial thermal emitters.42 As we all know, solar thermophotovoltaic systems have been under extensive investigation due to their high theoretical efficiencies.41 However, the very high operational temperatures required for efficient energy conversion have hindered their development due to material limitations. As our device can fulfill the requirement of perfect absorption and high temperature tolerance simultaneously, it is a promising candidate for this application. (iii) Unlike the MPAs reported by other groups that only cover VIS or NIR regions, the efficient absorption spectrum of our device ranges from UV to NIR. The near unity absorption for UV light can be utilized to protect chemical materials or antiques from UV radiation. (iv) The fabrication process we proposed in this paper enables cost-effective and large-scale fabrication for the device because the nanostructures can be easily obtained by interference lithography. Such a technique is more suitable for industrial applications.
 Fig. 5  The absorption and SEM image of our device at room temperature and after annealing at 600 °C. The absorption performance as well as the nanostructured configurations are nearly unchanged which demonstrates the high temperature tolerance of the MPA. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have designed, fabricated and demonstrated an ultra-broadband MPA across UV to NIR with perfect thermal stability. Absorptivity over 95% from 200 nm to 900 nm is achieved both in the simulation and experiment. Besides, our device also exhibits a large angle tolerance independent of incident polarizations. By employing the anti-reflection effect and high ε′′ metal, the comparatively narrowband absorption induced by the diffraction effect of nanostructures is enhanced and extended remarkably that leads to near-unity absorption in a wide bandwidth. Such a design principle is universal and can be applied to MPAs at other frequencies. Moreover, the proposed MPA can be obtained with the fabrication procedures mentioned in this paper, and can be easily integrated into other optoelectronic devices. We believe that the demonstrated MPA can find many exciting applications, such as energy harvesting, spectroscopy, and emissivity control.
Experimental
Absorption measurements were conducted using an ellipsometer (SE 850 DUV, SENTECH). The reference spectrum is obtained by a built-in calibration process in the ellipsometer with an accompanied standard reference film. Owing to the architecture of this device, a reflection angle less than 20° cannot be measured. The heating experiments were performed with a home-made heating system. The temperature in the baker can be precisely controlled with a computer and the real time temperature of the sample can be measured automatically.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research (973) Program of China under Grant No. 2013CBA01700 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61575201 and 61622508.
Notes and references
C. M. Watts, X. Liu and W. J. Padilla, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP98 CAS .
X. Liu, T. Tyler, T. Starr, A. F. Starr, N. M. Jokerst and W. J. Padilla, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 045901–045901 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Du, Q. Li, Y. Lyu, J. Ding, Y. Lu, Z. Cheng and M. Qiu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6(1), e16194 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, M. Pu, C. Hu and X. Luo, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 2133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maier and H. Brueckl, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 3766–3768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Corrigan, D. H. Park, H. D. Drew, S. H. Guo, P. W. Kolb, W. N. Herman and R. J. Phaneuf, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51, 1109–1114 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. K. Zhong, Y. C. Lai, M. H. Tu, B. R. Chen, S. M. Fu, P. Yu and A. Lin, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pu, X. Ma, X. Li, Y. Guo and X. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4361–4378 RSC .
X. G. Luo, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2015, 58, 594201 CrossRef .
X. Luo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 1701201 CrossRef .
J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 312, 1780–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. Durant, H. Lee, Y. Pikus, N. Fang, Y. Xiong, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lier, D. H. Werner, C. P. Scarborough, Q. Wu and J. A. Bossard, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Raman, M. A. Anoma, L. Zhu, E. Rephaeli and S. Fan, Nature, 2014, 515, 540–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, X. Li, M. Pu, X. Ma, K. Liu, Y. Guo and X. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1706673 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, M. Pu, X. Li, P. Gao, X. Ma, J. Luo, H. Yu and X. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704295 CrossRef .
M. Pu, X. Li, X. Ma, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, C. Hu, P. Gao, C. Huang and H. Ren, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500396 Search PubMed .
N. I. Landy, S. Sajuyigbe, J. J. Mock, D. R. Smith and W. J. Padilla, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 207402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, T. Wang, Z. Lu, Q. Sun, Y. Fu and W. Yu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 43–49 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, M. Pu, P. Gao, Z. Zhao, X. Li, X. Ma and X. Luo, Appl. Phys. Express, 2017, 10, 112601 CrossRef .
C. Yang, C. Ji, W. Shen, K. T. Lee, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and L. J. Guo, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 590–596 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Mason, S. Smith and D. Wasserman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 1130–1136 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, K. H. Fung, J. Xu, H. Ma, Y. Jin, S. He and N. X. Fang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1443–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aydin, V. E. Ferry, R. M. Briggs and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 517 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Liu, M. Mesch, T. Weiss, M. Hentschel and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, A. F. Kaplan, L. Chen and L. J. Guo, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 618–624 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pu, Q. Feng, M. Wang, C. Hu, C. Huang, X. Ma, Z. Zhao, C. Wang and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 2246–2254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Liang, P. Huo, D. Wang, J. Tan and T. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 251102 CrossRef .
E. Rephaeli and S. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 211107 CrossRef .
M. K. Hedayati, M. Javaherirahim, B. Mozooni, R. Abdelaziz, A. Tavassolizadeh, V. S. K. Chakravadhanula, V. Zaporojtchenko, T. Strunkus, F. Faupel and M. Elbahri, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5410–5414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Qu, K. Du, S. Bai, J. Tian, M. Pan, H. Ye, M. Qiu and Q. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 101101 CrossRef .
W. Guo, Y. Liu and T. Han, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 20586–20592 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pu, M. Wang, C. Hu, C. Huang, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 25513–25519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Ma, W. Sun, F. Ding, Q. He, L. Zhou and Y. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 4773–4779 Search PubMed .
Y. Cui, J. Xu, K. H. Fung, Y. Jin, A. Kumar, S. He and N. X. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 193 Search PubMed .

          E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA,  1997 Search PubMed .
H. Deng, Z. Li, L. Stan, D. Rosenmann, D. Czaplewski, J. Gao and X. Yang, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40, 2592–2595 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, C. Hu, M. Pu, C. Huang, Z. Zhao, Q. Feng and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 20642–20649 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Roberts, D. Wang, F. Ding, K. Pedersen, M. Chirumamilla, P. K. Kristensen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 2704–2714 CrossRef .
H. Sai, Y. Kanamori and H. Yugami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1685–1687 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, U. Guler, N. Kinsey, G. V. Naik, A. Boltasseva, J. Guan, V. M. Shalaev and A. V. Kildishev, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7921–7921 CrossRef .
A. Narayanaswamy and G. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3544–3546 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The measured permittivity of SiC at different temperatures; the absorption comparison of the proposed structure profile with different materials as the lossy metal; the Root Mean Square (RMS) of the surface roughness of the W film under different conditions; the AFM of the W cylinder array and the measured contours of its cross-section. The SEM images for W, W-SiC and W-SiC-SiO2 nanostructures. The SEM image of the MPA after annealing at 800 °C in air. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr01728j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic image of the proposed MPA and its simulated absorption in the designed region. The inset in the bottom left is the cross-section of a unit cell with h = 80 nm and p = 300 nm. The inset in the bottom right is the definition of TM and TE polarizations in this paper. (b) The SEM of the fabricated MPA and the measured absorption. The inset in the bottom right shows the cross-section of the sample where three different materials can be easily identified.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a), (b) The simulated and measured absorption at oblique incidence for TE waves. (c), (d) The simulated and measured absorption at oblique incidence for TM waves. The insets in (c) and (d) are the simulated and measured angle dependence of average absorption. The dotted line in the right inset is fitted because the ellipsometer cannot measure those angles.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) The absorption performance for various structures. By employing our design principle, the bandwidth and absorbing efficiency of our device are remarkably improved compared with the planar W film. (b) The absorption retrieved from the effective medium theory and numerical simulation. The nanostructure can be regarded as a multilayered film stack at long wavelengths. (c), (d) The electric field distribution for the proposed MPA at 300 nm and 900 nm. The black lines indicate the contours of each layer.	 

 	Fig. 4  The schematic diagram of the fabrication procedures for our MPA. As complex processes are not involved, the fabrication method we proposed in this paper is typically suitable for large-scale devices with nanoscale configurations.	 

 	Fig. 5  The absorption and SEM image of our device at room temperature and after annealing at 600 °C. The absorption performance as well as the nanostructured configurations are nearly unchanged which demonstrates the high temperature tolerance of the MPA.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The measured permittivity of SiC at different temperatures; the absorption comparison of the proposed structure profile with different materials as the lossy metal; the Root Mean Square (RMS) of the surface roughness of the W film under different conditions; the AFM of the W cylinder array and the measured contours of its cross-section. The SEM images for W, W-SiC and W-SiC-SiO2 nanostructures. The SEM image of the MPA after annealing at 800 °C in air. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr01728j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
