Hierarchical assembly of anatase nanowhiskers and evaluation of their photocatalytic efficiency in comparison to various one-dimensional TiO 2  nanost ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM11088H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM11088H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11844-11853Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHierarchical assembly of anatase nanowhiskers and evaluation of their photocatalytic efficiency in comparison to various one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures

        
          
            Jiawei 
            Ng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jia Hong 
            Pan
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Darren Delai 
            Sun
          
        
      *
      School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798. E-mail: jhpan@ntu.edu.sg; ddsun@ntu.edu.sg;  Fax: +65 6791-0676;   Tel: +65 6790-6273
Received 
      13th March 2011
    , Accepted 27th May 2011First published on 14th July 2011AbstractWell-crystallized anatase nanowhiskers were successfully grown from a Ti substrate via an anodization process followed by hydrothermal treatment. Progressive morphological and crystallographic evolution of anodic nanotubes to nanowhisker arrays was clearly elucidated. The morphology, crystallinity and optical properties of the final nanowhiskers were extensively investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), UV-Vis spectroscopy and photoluminescence (PL) techniques. The synthesized TiO2 photocatalyst exhibited excellent photodegradation of Acid Orange 7 (AO7), a common dye used in textile industries, under UV-A irradiation. Photocatalytic performance was evaluated against other TiO2 films of various 1D (one-dimensional) nanostructures, and benchmarked against a Degussa P25 TiO2 coated film. Owing to its unique morphology and monocrystalline defect-free lattice structure, the nanowhisker sample exhibited the highest photocatalytic efficiency. In view of presented experimental results, the 1D hierarchical nanowhisker architecture may find a variety of potential applications in solar cells, endoscopy and photonic devices, etc.
Introduction
Since the discovery of photoelectrochemical decomposition of water under an irradiated titanium dioxide (TiO2) photoelectrode by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,1TiO2 photocatalysis has spawned a tremendous amount of research work on the development of photocatalysts for technological applications. The unique optical, electronic and chemical properties of TiO2 render it a remarkable yet uncostly material for a wide spectrum of practical applications. By virtue of their intrinsic characteristics, such as large surface areas and rapid surface reactions, nanophase TiO2 has been vastly employed in dye-sensitized solar cells,2 photovoltaics,3 biomedical implants4 and wide band gap semiconductor photocatalysts for renewable clean energy applications and environmental remediation.5,6
It is known that the performance of TiO2 relies primarily on its crystalline phase, morphology and dimensionality. High crystallinity and specific surface area have been reported to contribute positively towards surface-based processes such as heterogeneous photocatalysis, in achieving high photocatalytic activity and adsorption efficiencies by virtue of their induced shape- and size-dependent properties. Much research attention has been focused on 1D nanostructures such as wires, tubes, rods and belts, owing to their important roles in the fabrication of various electronic devices in nanoscale dimensions.5–8 1D structures provide large interfacial areas and channels for excited electrons to effectively separate, thus preventing recombination with the photogenerated holes under excitation.9 The effective transport and movement of charge carriers are facilitated throughout the crystal length, unique to a 1D crystal, leading to improved delocalization and enhancing photocatalytic reaction efficiencies.10
From diffusion-model studies of micro- and mesoporous bulk particles, solute-diffusivities and intraparticle mass transfer rates have been reported to be substantially retarded, suggesting strong hindrance effects caused by tortuosities and narrow pore constrictions.11 In addition, the use of a powdered suspension in aqueous-based systems limits practical applications, particularly in wastewaters, due to constraints in separation, recycling and reuse of the spent catalyst.12 Thus, micrometric sized photocatalysts introduced into the system could potentially evoke a cause of concern for secondary contamination. In view of the practical limitations of powdered-suspension systems, many techniques such as dip-coating,13 solvothermal,14 sol–gel method,15spin-coating,16 have been proposed to immobilize nanoparticulate TiO2 on solid substrates. However, these methods generally involve a tedious procedure and have poor adhesion to the Ti substrate, rendering them unsuitable for scaled-up engineering operations. In consideration of the above shortcomings, thin films of ordered nanostructures on various substrates has been attracting research attention, particularly in applications of concurrent photocatalysis and filtration.12,17–19
Contrary to top-down nanolithography techniques, bottom-up self-assembly of 1D nanowires have inherent advantages of being single-crystalline and possessing atomically smooth surfaces with nearly defect-free lattice characteristics. Henceforth, chemically-grown nanowires are increasingly becoming a viable option as they offer choices of tailored design customizations to complement construction of multifunctional peripherals assembled on a common substrate.
Herein for the first time, we report the synthesis of a hierarchically-structured anatase film made up of radially-aligned, ultra-long nanowhiskers. Photocatalytic activity of as-synthesized TiO2 nanowhiskers was evaluated using AO7 as the model compound. For comparison, photocatalytic experiments with other TiO2 films of various 1D nanostructures and a Degussa P25 TiO2 coated film were performed under the same conditions.
Results and discussion
Morphological evolution of trititanate nanowhisker arrays

Fig. 1 provides a schematic illustration of the hydrothermal coarsening process in converting hollow nanotubes to solid nanowhiskers. Highly-ordered TiO2 nanotubes are obtained after electropolishing and a 6 h anodization process. This procedure yields vertically-aligned and closely-packed TiO2 nanotube arrays, as shown in Fig. 1. It was observed that each anodic tube has an inner diameter of 50 nm, tubular wall width of 20 nm and height of c.a. 30 μm. Owing to its ordered tubular morphology, titania nanotubes possess high surface-to-volume ratios, and thus high surface free energy. It is noteworthy that coarsening of hollow nanotubes to solid nanowhiskers greatly reduces surface-to-bulk ratios and achieves free enthalpy gain in the process,20 hence they are thermodynamically favoured over hollow nanotubes once systems enter the thermodynamic control regime.6
 Fig. 1  Left: FESEM image of the starting anodized TiO2 nanotubes. Middle (top): Illustration of the hydrothermal coarsening process in converting hollow nanotubes to solid nanowhiskers, as induced by concurrent processes of oriented attachment and Ostwald ripening. Oriented attachment is responsible for the rapid coarsening of parallel nanotubesvia a “bunching” and recrystallization mechanism. Middle (bottom): Illustration of the gradual filling of nanotubes hollow channels by deposition of smaller nanocrystallites via the Ostwald ripening process. Right: Cross-sectional and overview FESEM images of the radially-aligned Na2Ti3O7 nanowhiskers. 

Fig. 2 and 3 show the respective FESEM and TEM images of samples obtained by treating the amorphous TiO2 nanotubes with concentrated NaOH at 180 °C for a series of durations. At the beginning (2 h), there is a clear indication of warping and convergence at the top section of the nanotubes as evidenced in Fig. 2A and 2B. The dissolution of TiO2 in concentrated NaOH starts from the open tubular end, which is the most vulnerable part of a nanotube.20 It is also observed that the nanotubes were broken up into random clusters of relatively similar sizes. During the hydrothermal reaction, localized cracks due to shear forces were observed at the foot of the nanotubes where intrinsic surface-induced stress acts—a location of highest surface free energy. Bavykin et al. detected a gain in free surface energy against a reduction of elastic energy during the curving of multilayered conjoined TiO2 nanosheets.21 Similarly, we believe that the mechanical tension arising from the warping and upward flexure of nanotubes is being compensated by an increase in surface energy. Based on density function theory of H2Ti3O7 and TiO2 nanostructures, Zhang et al. postulated that an asymmetrical chemical environment could give rise to excess surface energy due to hydrogen deficiencies, thus resulting in a wrapping phenomenon.22
 Fig. 2  Low and high magnifications of FESEM images depicting progressive morphological evolution of nanotube to nanowhisker under different hydrothermal durations: (A–B) 2 h, (C–D) 4 h, (E–F) 8 h, (G–H) 10 h, (I–J) 15 h. 
 Fig. 3  
TEM and their respective HRTEM and SAED (inset) micrographs depicting progressive crystallographic transformation of nanotube to nanowhisker under different hydrothermal durations: (A–B) 2 h, (C–D) 4 h, (E–F) 8 h, (G–H) 10 h, (I–J) 15 h. 
The coalesence and bunching of the vertically-ordered anodic TiO2 nanotubes is a clear testament of the oriented attachment mechanism. Fig. 3A and 3B show solute phase transport with subsequent precipitation and recrystallization of Ti(IV) within inner hollow channels and interspace pore boundaries of the nanotube walls after 2 h to yield solid nanorods. This is consonant to the claim that hollow channels of nanotubes are fused together by precipitation of Ti(IV), resulting from dissolution of TiO2 in NaOH.23 Such an observation displays the particular characteristic of Ostwald ripening—a phenomenon in which small crystals formed initially gradually dissolve and coalesce to form bigger crystals before re-depositing on the surfaces of other larger crystals; thereby reducing the surface-to-volume ratio and surface free energy of the system.24 In contrast to the oriented attachment mechanism which results in rapid coarsening of crystals, the Ostwald ripening process is a gradual phenomenon contributing to the enlargement of crystalite size. In other words, the filling of inner hollow channels of the nanotubes is driven by the Ostwald ripening process while the tube bunching trend is advocated by the oriented attachment mechanism.
After 4 h of hydrothermal treatment, the warped up clusters of nanotubes clearly self-assembled into hierarchical bundles of secondary structures each culminating at pronounced vertices of ca. 200 nm (Fig. 2C). The geometric height of each structure was elevated slightly to ca. 50 μm, partially motivated by compressive surface-induced stress, i.e. intrinsic to such a structure.25 The high-magnification FESEM image from Fig. 2D shows the bunching and attachment of adjacent parallel nanotubes to form larger bundles, suggesting the preponderant mechanism to be oriented attachment. Penn and Banfield have reported that oriented attachment is an important growth mechanism during the hydrothermal coarsening of titania particles. When the structurally-similar adjacent nanotubes approach one another, atoms of opposing surfaces may form chemical bonds between them to achieve full coordination of crystallographic orientations, resulting in the observed densification of bundled titanate nanowires that fuse along identical crystal faces.26 Henceforth, the energy levels of the overall system are reduced as a result of eliminating the solid-liquid interface. The tailing of diffraction spots shown in the inset of Fig. 3D demonstrates a typical case of short-range disorder within long-range order in the crystal lattice, as a result of the large amount of defects generated from the tube bunching process.
After 8 h, it is apparent that the nanowhisker structure has been generally constructed, however with the presence of large amounts of incorporated defects (Fig. 2E), believed to be inherited from misorientations and dislocations at interfaces of adjacent crystal lattices during the oriented attachment of crystal planes. Close-up inspection of the surface defects reveal a spiral network matrix of densely-assembled nanofibres in between two regions of radially-ordered nanowhiskers—a tell-tale sign of crystal lattice dislocations, forming critical sites of nucleation and phase transformations.26Growth of such nanofibres takes place spirally around crystal dislocation sites prior to a surface nucleation process, which explains the precipitation of titanate nanoparticles on the exterior of nanofibres shown in Fig. 3E.
By t = 10 h, we notice the disappearance of the intermittent nanofibre networks and the nanowhisker arrays become more prominent. Fig. 2H shows a close up image of the surface of a nanowhisker which appears to be corrugated and having a layered appearance of several nanofibres stacking atop one another. A high concentration of surface defects imparted by twins and stacking faults is apparent on each of the nanowhisker strand. The large amount of defects inherent from the coarsening process is further evidenced through SAED images (insets of Fig. 3D, 3F and 3H), which exhibited tailing of diffraction spots.
With extension of hydrothermal duration to 15 h, we successfully remove these generated defects to achieve smooth-surfaced, solid nanowhiskers, as evidenced from the respective low and high magnifications of the FESEM micrographs in Fig. 2I and 2J, as well as the TEM image in Fig. 3I. It is also notable from the SAED patterns that with elongation of the hydrothermal treatment time, tailing of diffraction spots became shorter—consistent with TEM images showing smoother nanocrystals. The corresponding clear spot SAED pattern (inset of Fig. 3J) of the final nanowhisker product further exemplifies its high purity and crystal defect-free characteristics. Cross-sectional and overview FESEM images of the final nanowhisker film presented in Fig. 1 confirm that the ultra-long nanowhiskers are highly uniformed and densely packed with aspect ratios as high as 300. The HRTEM image of Fig. 3J denotes single-crystallinity of the final trititanate nanowhiskers with almost defect-free lattice characteristics—continuous, uniform lattice fringes with clear spot diffraction patterns.
From the XRD spectra in Fig. 4, diffraction peaks of products obtained after 8 h can be well indexed to monoclinic Na2Ti3O7 (JCPDS no 72-0148). It is apparent that with longer hydrothermal durations, intensities of diffraction peaks at 2θ = 10.5°, 15.8°, 25.7° and 28.4°, increase with narrowing of widths, suggesting enhancement of crystallinity by the removal of crystal defects. At 0 h, only Ti peaks, ascribed to the Ti substrate, were present since the highly-organized TiO2 nanotubes prepared viaanodization is amorphous in nature. It is obvious that with longer hydrothermal durations, the typical XRD patterns of titanate became more prominent, without any trace of TiO2 peaks. Based on calculations using the Scherrer equation,27 the crystallite size of sodium titanate increased by more than 2 folds over the progression of 15 h. Fig. 4 exhibits evidence of sodium titanate formation as early as 2 h, with a calculated crystallite size of 3.95 nm and growing to a final crystallite size of 10.53 nm after 15 h. The growth of titanate crystals seemed to be linear across the reaction, which was consonant to FESEM and TEM images from Fig. 2 and 3, exhibiting gradual coarsening of crystals. The XRD patterns of the titanate peaks are similar to those of powdered titanate obtained under similar hydrothermal conditions, albeit using anatase TiO2 nanopowder as starting materials.21,23 It is worthy to note that the consequent XRD patterns of titanate products obtained by prolonging hydrothermal treatment up to 24 h, did not exhibit any apparent discrepancies from that of 15 h. The same can be mentioned about the morphology of products obtained beyond 15 h; no further morphological evolution could be observed by extending the hydrothermal duration, indicating that the nanowhiskers have reached their critical equilibrium state and likewise, there was no further increment in subsequent crystallite size.
 Fig. 4  
            XRD patterns of the various products obtained after hydrothermal treatment of amorphous TiO2 nanotubes with concentrated NaOH at different durations. From labels of the respective XRD peaks, ST refers to sodium titanate and Ti is titanium. 
Development of different morphologies of anatase TiO2
The trititanate nanowhiskers were recrystallized into pure anatase polymorph of TiO2viacalcination in air at 500 °C, while retaining its 1D morphology. Omitting either the anodization or hydrothermal step would not yield the final nanowhisker structure, but instead lead to formation of nanowires and nanotubes respectively. Fig. 5 shows the respective synthetic routes taken in obtaining different morphologies of anatase TiO2. The FESEM images of the nanotube, nanowire, P25 coating samples and the final calcined nanowhisker sample are shown in Fig. 6 and 7 respectively. As observed from Fig. 6B, some of the anodic tubes were noted to fracture after calcination, exposing hollow inner channels that suggest that the tube walls are thin, porous and relatively fragile. On the other hand, the nanowire sample was made up of a network of overlapping TiO2 nanowires that enmesh and interweave into a layer of fibrous film (Fig. 6C and 6D). No morphological change was noted upon calcination. The P25 dip-coated film on Ti foil resulted in the agglomeration of aggregated nanoparticles with varying dimensions and shapes, enveloping both faces of the Ti foil. The aggregation of P25 nanoparticulates after the dip-coating and heat treatment process is a testimony of van der Waals forces acting on the particles leading to formation of primary particulate clusters as observed in Fig. 6F.
 Fig. 5  Various synthetic routes in obtaining different morphologies of anatase TiO2. 
 Fig. 6  
            FESEM images of the as-prepared (A–B) nanotube sample, (C–D) nanowire sample, (E–F) P25 coating sample. The left column shows low magnification overviews while the right column shows high magnification close-up images of the respective 1D nanostructured samples. 
 Fig. 7  
            FESEM images of calcined TiO2 Nanowhisker sample taken at different magnifications. 
As explained in the preceding section, anodic nanotubes are a necessary starting material in obtaining the final nanowhisker structure. The “bottom-up” construction of the final nanowhiskers involves evolution of intrinsically anisotropic ordered nanotubes in initiating 1D growth of longer nanowhiskers. As shown from the high and low magnifications of top-surface FESEM micrographs in Fig. 7, the ultra-long nanowhiskers are highly uniform and densely packed with a characteristic flat rhombohedral cross-sectional plane. Fig. 7B reveals the longest lateral dimension of a nanowhisker to be c.a. 100 μm, measured from a divergent point of radial nanowhisker growth. It is noteworthy that the high temperature calcination process did not alter overall morphology of Na2Ti3O7, obtained after alkaline hydrothermal of anodic nanotubes.
Crystallographic phases and states of 1D TiO2

Fig. 8 compares the typical XRD patterns of the synthesized TiO2 nanowhiskers, nanotubes, nanowires and P25 film coated sample. Ti (JCPDS no. 89-5009) peaks can be indexed to all spectra since every film is embedded on a Ti substrate. Barring the Ti peaks, the spectra of nanowhisker, nanowire and nanotube exhibit the evident presence of only the tetragonal anatase phase (JCPDS no. 21-1272), indicating that protonated titanate after the ion-exchange process has been completely transformed via a calcination step. In addition to the anatase phase, the P25 coating on Ti substrate reveals presence of rutile polymorph with a pronounced peak at 2θ = 27.4°, since commercial P25 consists of a mixed phase of anatase and rutile in the ratio of c.a. 4:1.28XRD profiles of all the samples clearly exhibit an enhanced peak for the <101> reflection centred at 2θ = 25.3°, thereby affirming a preferential crystal growth of the 1D nanostructures along the thermodynamically-stable <101> plane of the body-centred tetragonal phase. It has been widely reported that the <101> plane has the lowest surface energy and is thus most energetically-stable.29 The strong diffraction peaks of the nanowhisker sample are substantially higher and sharper than the rest of the spectra, suggesting it to be highly crystallized, therefore also yielding the highest photocatalytic activity as seen from Table 1. It is also observed that XRD spectra of the nanowhisker sample consist of weaker anatase diffraction peaks that are absent in the other photocatalysts (namely, 2θ = 37.8°, 53.9°, 55.1°), exemplifying its single crystallinity, high purity and crystal defect-free characteristics. The crystallite sizes of each sample are estimated by measuring the full width at half maximum (FWHM) values from respective peaks and applying the Scherrer Equation.27 The calculated P25 crystallite size of c.a. 20 nm coincides with previously reported figures.30
 Fig. 8  
XRD spectra of the as-prepared photocatalysts. 
Table 1 Film weight, physicochemical properties and photoactivity of the synthesized TiO2 thin film photocatalysts




Photocatalyst
FWHM (deg)

                    Anatase sizea (nm)
Indirect band gap (eV)
Film weight ± 0.05 (mg cm−2)

k (h−1)
TOC removal (%)

η
app,in






a Calculated based on the (101) peak for anatase, according to the Scherrer Equation.





Nanowhisker
0.76
10.6
3.03
1.311
1.595
41.9
10.8 × 10−4



Nanotube

0.497
16.22
3.07
1.231
1.339
25.2
9.05× 10−4



Nanowire

1.03
7.85
3.14
1.118
0.862
14.3
5.83× 10−4



                    P25 coating
0.38
21.21
3.11
1.193
1.039
17.1
7.03× 10−4




From Fig. 9A, the ends of the TiO2 nanowhiskers are generally shaped in a rhombus—as delineated in red, while the edges of some whiskers were chipped off. The lateral dimension of each rhombus side is c.a. 200 nm and the length of the longer diagonal across its centre axis is up to 400 nm. The clear spot diffraction pattern from its SAED pattern (Fig. 9E) suggests that the anatase nanowhiskers obtained after calcination are monocrystalline. Fig. 9C and 9D are the corresponding HRTEM images which exhibit almost defect-free lattice characteristics—continuous, uniform crystal lattices that are unbroken to the edge of the sample and without presence of grain boundaries, thereby reaffirming its single-crystalline structure after calcination. An interplanar spacing of 0.352 nm between the planes of the atomic lattices, parallel to the <101> planes, can be readily measured from the micrographs. This is further evidence that the single crystalline anatase nanowhiskers grow along the <101> crystal plane with a preferred orientation in the <010> direction, thus resulting in a pronounced XRD peak for the <101> reflection as centred at 2θ = 25.3° where d = 0.352 nm based on Bragg's Law.31
 Fig. 9  (A) High magnification FESEM image of the nanowhiskers, (B) Typical TEM micrograph of a single TiO2 nanowhisker, (C–D) HRTEM showing crystal lattice orientation and interplanar distance, (E) Corresponding SAED patern of the single crystalline nanowhisker. 
Optical properties: UV-Vis and photoluminescence study
The UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of the respective nanostructured photocatalysts are shown in Fig. 10. The inset of Fig. 10 is plotted by application of the transformed Kubelka-Munk theorem, of (αhν)1/2 against hν, and the vertical segment of the spectra is extended to intersect the hν axis (x-axis) in obtaining the indirect optical band gap (Eg) value of the TiO2 samples. As recorded in Table 1, the measured optical band gaps of synthesized anatase-TiO2 samples (nanowhisker, nanotube and nanowire) were in the range of 3.03–3.14 eV, consonant to reported band gap values of bulk anatase TiO2.32 It can be observed that the TiO2 nanowhiskers exhibited higher adsorption of light from 250 to 400 nm, as compared to the other samples. This can be ascribed to the enhanced light harvesting abilities and optimized UV penetration due to the presence of voids between the individual nanowhiskers; therefore nearly the entire length of each nanowhisker can be exposed to the UV light. It can be suggested that the nanowhisker sample is thus able to utilize more UV photons from the irradiation source in its excitation to initiate the photocatalytic process; which explains a higher photoactivity.33 As motivated by its unique macrostructure, a slight red-shift was observed in the action spectrum and the onset of optical absorption was lowered to c.a. 400 nm. Despite having the same anatase crystalline phase, it is evident that the morphology of the samples had a certain extent of influence on their band gap values.
 Fig. 10  
UV-Vis
diffuse reflectance spectra of the as-prepared photocatalysts. 
The PL emission analysis is commonly used to evaluate the extent of transfer and separation, as well as trapping of charge carriers within an activated semiconductor photocatalyst. The transfer behaviour of photoinduced electron and hole pairs can also be interpreted from the spectra since recombination of these free charges contribute significantly to emission signals. Fig. 11 depicts the PL spectra of the as-prepared four photocatalysts and it is apparent that all four spectra are comprised of broad and structureless luminescence bands. The observed emissions can be assigned to the radiative recombination of self-trapped exciton luminescence due to their characteristic bands. It has been reported that the surface states of the photocatalyst, such as defect sites (or recombination centres) and oxygen vacancies that promote combination of photogenerated electrons and holes, are responsible for the observed luminescence.34 The longer and surface defect-free nanowhiskers facilitate migration of charge carriers more efficiently than the other nanostructures, therefore reducing the phenomenon of charge recombination as hypothesized from its weaker PL signal. Since defect sites and oxygen vacancies constitute recombination centres for photogenerated electrons and holes, we postulate that the nanowhiskers possess a more defect-free crystal structure as compared to the other nanostructures. With a greater suppression of charge recombination, reaction lifetimes and quantities of these electron and hole pairs are prolonged and increased substantially, which directly correlates to a higher concentration of active oxidative species being produced,35–37 and resulting in greater photocatalytic efficiencies.
 Fig. 11  
Photoluminescence spectra of the as-prepared photocatalysts. The adventitious peak centred around 375 nm is attributed to the double-sided tape adhered on the film sample during PL analysis. 
Photocatalytic and quantum efficiencies
In order to establish a rational comparison of photocatalytic activity among the 4 prepared photocatalysts, each specific Ti foil was weighed prior to and after synthesis to determine the respective mass of film developed on the Ti foil. A maximum film weight variance of 15% between the samples is allowed, before evaluating their photoactivities.
The photocatalytic activity of the synthesized nanostructured TiO2 films was evaluated based on the degradation of aqueous AO7 under UV-A irradiation (365 nm). AO7 is a type of widely used water-soluble dye employed mostly in the form of sodium salts of sulfonic or carboxylic acids. They are extensively used in textile industries since they are anionic in nature and therefore attach strongly to the cationic groups of natural fibres such as wool, cotton, as well as synthetics such as polyesters and acrylic. AO7 are also commonly used in paints, inks, leather, and colouring of food and drugs. They are considered to be pervasive pollutants and potential co-contaminants for nitrates in wastewater engineering.
The Langmuir-Hinshelwood kinetics was used to model the photocatalytic process,38 in which the reaction rate (r) is a function of the degree of substrate coverage (θ): (1) where C is the concentration of AO7, ki is the intrinsic reaction rate constant, and K is the Langmuir adsorption equilibrium constant. In this study, the low AO7 concentration (initial concentration of 20 ppm) and negligible adsorption of AO7 on the film sample (dark adsorption did not result in any appreciable decrease in AO7 concentration), suggest that KC ≪ 1. Hence, the Langmuir-Hinshelwood kinetics can be simplified to: (2) where k (as tabulated in Table 1) refers to the corresponding reaction rate kinetic constant. Thus, the pseudo first-order reaction rate can be applied: (3) where C is the AO7 concentration at the stated time t, Co is the initial AO7 concentration measured after 1 h of dark adsorption and t is the reaction time.

Fig. 12 presents a degradation trend of AO7 as logarithms of normalized dye concentration against irradiation time, and the corresponding k constants represent a good measure of the overall photodegradation rates since it is apparent from the linear shape of the curves that the degradation trend follow pseudo first-order kinetics. The nanowhisker sample clearly exhibited the highest photocatalytic efficiency and the highly-ordered nanotubes were second best—a trend which supports the better quantum efficiencies and anti-charge recombination properties of ordered 1D nanostructures. In comparison to nanowires and P25 nanoparticulates, the higher efficiency of the nanowhiskers and tubes can be attributed to a more optimized geometry; hence electron-hole pairs travel shorter carrier-diffusion paths as opposed to migrating between single nanoparticles.39,40 The highly-organized 1D geometry within the nanowhisker architecture offers a straightforward, hence shorter diffusion path across the liquid-solid interface for AO7 molecules to reach the active surface sites of the photocatalyst. This is in contrast with the convoluted structure of the nanowire and nanoparticulate structures which contain a highly varied spectrum of longer mass transfer paths. For the nanowhisker sample, 99% of the AO7 was removed after 2.5 h of irradiation and the corresponding removal of total organic carbon (TOC) was also highest at 41.9%. The photocatalytic activities follow the order of nanowhisker > nanotube > P25 coating > nanowire. The apparent photocatalytic degradation of AO7 by nanowhiskers is 1.2 times higher than the nanotubes, more than 1.5 times better than commercial P25 nanoparticles, and almost 2 times more superior over the nanowire sample. The photolysis results revealed negligible degradation of AO7 at 1.6%, largely due to the photostability of AO7 under UV-A exposure.41
 Fig. 12  Pseudo first-order photocatalytic degradation of AO7 over the as-prepared photocatalysts. 
The apparent quantum efficiencies of the respective photocatalysts were calculated and tabulated in Table 1. Proper evaluation of quantum efficiency requires careful assessment of absorbed photons by the photocatalyst; those which successfully generate electron-hole pairs, where charges are separated and collected at a junction. Due to simultaneous existence of light absorption, reflection, scattering and transmission in heterogeneous photocatalytic systems, the exact rate of absorbed photons becomes very complex to determine. The apparent quantum efficiency, ηapp,in, is therefore employed to evaluate light utilization in this photocatalytic reaction. ηapp,in is calculated from eqn (4), (4) with P representing the rate of photons entering the reactor, and (dN/dt)in is the rate of photoconversion of reactant molecules under initial conditions. (dN/dt)in and P can be derived from eqn (5) and eqn (6) respectively. (5) where k is the respective reaction rate constant of AO7 degradation in min−1, Co is the initial AO7 concentration in mol L−1 (20 ppm), NL is the Avogadro number (6.02 × 1023 mol−1), and V is the volume of aqueous pollutant (15 mL). (6) where I is the supplied light intensity in W m−2 (1150 mW cm−2), S is the irradiated catalyst area in m2 (20 mm × 30 mm), h is Planck's constant (6.62 × 10−34 J.s), c is the speed of light in a vacuum (3 × 108 m s−1), and λ is the wavelength of emitted light (365 nm). As noted from Table 1, the apparent quantum efficiency of the nanowhisker sample was substantially greater than that of the nanowire and P25 samples, establishing a correlation that weaker PL intensities engender higher quantum efficiencies and henceforth give rise to higher photocatalytic activities.42 Low quantum yields are possibly caused by accentuated recombination of photogenerated positive holes and electrons within the semiconductor particles, likely to be induced by morphological effects. In general, it can be observed that the highly ordered, vertically-aligned nanowhisker and nanotube samples exhibit higher quantum efficiencies as compared to the random matrix of intertwined nanowires and agglomerated nanoparticles of the P25 coating. This further demonstrates the intrinsic properties of 1D ordered structures in suppressing charge carrier recombination under excitation via an effective delocalization of electrons across the channels.
Experimental
Synthesis
A Ti foil measuring 20 mm by 30 mm (99.7%, 0.25 mm thick, Goodfellow Cambridge Ltd, Cambridge, England) was first degreased by ultrasonication in acetone for 30 min to remove organic grime, followed by repeated rinsing with large amounts of DI water, and finally dried in a N2 gas stream. To smoothen out surface corrugation and ensure uniform electric field distribution on its surface, the Ti foil was electropolished at 20 V for 5 min in an organic electrolyte of perchloric acid and ethanol. The foil was then immediately washed with DI water and acetone to remove residual Ti fragments.
A 6 h electrochemical anodization procedure was subsequently performed in a one compartment, two-electrode electrochemical cell at 30 V, supplied by a DC power source (Agilent E3612A, Agilent Technologies, California, USA). The as-polished Ti foil served as the working electrode and a Pt foil (99.99%, 1 mm thick, Goodfellow Cambridge Ltd, Cambridge, England) was employed as the counter electrode. The electrolyte used was comprised of ethylene glycol solution containing 0.4 wt % NH4F and 2 wt % H2O. The anodized Ti samples were then rinsed with DI water and acetone, before being dried in an N2 gas stream.
The resulting anodized TiO2 film is amorphous and firmly attached to the Ti substrate. It was then subjected to a wet corrosion alkali treatment in a 45 ml Teflon-lined autoclave (Parr Instrument, Illinois, USA), 80% filled with 10 M NaOH at 180 °C for 15 h. Thereafter, a white-coloured, sodium titanate film was developed on the Ti surface and the foil was then immersed in 0.1 M HCl for 5 h, in an ion-exchange process to obtain protonated titanate. The sample was then calcined in ambient air at 500 °C for 2 h with a heating/cooling rate of 2 °C min−1, transforming the protonated titanate structure to the final anatase “Nanowhisker” photocatalyst.
For preparation of the reference “Nanotube” photocatalyst, the degreased, electropolished and anodized TiO2 film was calcined under identical conditions to convert its amorphous phase to anatase; the overall synthesis method was identical to that of the “Nanowhisker” photocatalyst, except that hydrothermal and ion-exchange procedures were excluded. On the other hand, the reference “Nanowire” photocatalyst was prepared by subjecting the starting degreased Ti foil to the same alkaline hydrothermal reaction, ion-exchange treatment and calcination process. Contrary to the “Nanotube” photocatalyst, overall synthesis method was identical to that of “Nanowhisker” photocatalyst, except that electropolishing and anodization procedures were omitted. Additionally, a Ti foil was repetitively dip-coated in a Degussa P25 suspension to deposit a layer of homogeneous P25 nanoparticulate film on its surface. The suspension was prepared by dispersing 1.0 g of Degussa P25 TiO2 powder in 20 ml of DI water, and then centrifuged to remove coarse and aggregated particles from the supernatant prior to the dip-coating process. The dip-coated foil was then air-dried at 120 °C for 30 min and the cycle was repeated continuously until an identical film weight across the four photocatalysts was achieved. The resulting sample is termed as “P25 coating” in this manuscript.
Characterization

XRD analysis was performed using the Bruker Axs D8 Advance XRD (Bruker AXS GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) with monochromated high-intensity Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) across a 2θ range of 5–80°, step size of 0.0040° and step time of 2 s. FESEM images were obtained using the JEOL 6340F FESEM (JEOL Ltd, Tokyo, Japan). High resolution TEM (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) micrographs were taken using the Jeol 2010F FETEM (JEOL Ltd, Tokyo, Japan), with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Prior to TEM analysis, a methanol suspension of the sample particles was spread on an amorphous carbon-coated copper grid. UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra were obtained using a Thermo Scientific Evolution 300 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with an integrating sphere assembly and a Xenon lamp source. BaSO4 was used as the reflectance standard and the spectra were converted from reflectance to absorbance. Photoluminescence analysis was conducted using a Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer, equipped with a Nd:YAG laser system of excitation wavelength at 325 nm (Horiba Scientific, New Jersey, USA). The interfacial strength and adhesion of the film to the Ti substrate was qualitatively evaluated by immersing the film in water and subjecting it to ultrasonic agitation for 5 min. The mechanical stability of the films did not compromise as no broken fragments from the films were observed in water after ultrasonic vibrations.
Photocatalytic evaluation
Photocatalytic experiments were carried out in a quartz petri dish secured on an orbital shaker set at 120 rpm to induce homogenization throughout the experiments. Prior to UV irradiation under a low-pressure UVP Pen-Ray mercury lamp (model no. 11SC-1L, UVP, LLC, California, USA), the catalyst sample (20 mm by 30 mm) was immersed in 15 ml of 20 ppm Acid Orange 7 (C16H11N2O4SNa, Acros Organics, Belgium) for 1 h in the dark to establish dye adsorption/desorption equilibrium. The initial concentration of AO7 was taken after 1 h of dark adsorption. The primary emission energy of the lamp was centred at 365 nm and the typical light intensity of the lamp was 1150 mW cm−2. The entire setup was placed in an aluminium enclosure with reflective surfaces to maximize UV exposure onto the sample. The UV lamp was placed at a fixed proximity from the petri dishes, with the nanostructures facing the UV lamp; to ensure all photocatalysts receive the equal amount of UV irradiation during the photocatalytic experiments. Photolysis experiments (without catalyst dosage) were carried out under identical experimental conditions over a blank Ti foil, also measuring 20 mm by 30 mm, to normalize the effect of dye molecule adsorption on Ti substrates. Decomposition rates of the dye were obtained by periodically measuring absorbance of the test solutions using a UV/Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) at wavelength, λ = 484 nm. TOC of the solution was measured using a Shimadzu ASI-V TOC analyzer (Shimadzu Corporation, Kanagawa, Japan).
Conclusion
In summary, a template-free technique was developed to grow 1D anatase nanowhisker arrays from a Ti substrate. By means of FESEM and TEM techniques, the hierarchical evolution of highly-ordered nanotubes to radially-aligned nanowhisker arrays was presented. An extended hydrothermal reaction successfully removed the inherent crystal defects of the titanate nanowhiskers, and calcination in air at 500 °C recrystallized the hydrothermally-prepared titanate into an anatase polymorph, while retaining its 1D morphology. The nanowhisker architecture demonstrates high thermal stability, without experiencing morphological change under prolonged hydrothermal duration (24 h) and calcination (500 °C). The TiO2 nanowhisker film exhibits a single crystalline structure with almost defect-free lattice characteristics as evidenced from HRTEM and SAED results, and possesses excellent photocatalytic properties in comparison to other TiO2 photocatalysts. The high quantum efficiency reiterates strong ability to suppress recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, by virtue of its 1D morphology in promoting efficient migration of charge carriers. Removal of AO7 and TOC over the nanowhisker product yielded the highest photoactivity amongst other TiO2 thin film photocatalysts, including a Degussa P25 coated film of nanoparticulates.
The immobilized nanowhisker film, directly grown on a Ti substrate, will address the common shortcomings of conventional nanopowdered TiO2 photocatalysts, by 1) enabling ease of catalyst recovery in scale-up engineering processes; 2) overcoming mass-transfer limitations present in micro- or mesoporous bulk particles; 3) promoting high performance photocatalysis by virtue of its high quantum efficiency, unique 1D morphology and surface defect-free crystal structure. This radially-aligned, ultra-long TiO2 nanowhisker array film is the first of its kind to be reported hitherto, and an integral member to a rapidly-expanding family of 1D nanostructures which includes ZnO nanorods,43V2O5 nanowires,44In2O3 nanocrystal chains,45 and carbon nanotubes.46
In view of the wide spectrum of engineering applications which semiconductor nanowires can potentially excel in, the synthesis procedures reported herein could herald an emerging generation of immobilized single-crystal nanowire assembly for other metal oxides, particularly in nanophotonics, single cell endoscopy and solar-to-fuel conversion devices. The exciting possibilities of assembling these nanoarrays on different flexible and transparent substrates are added impetuses in developing the future of nanowire technology.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support received from the Prime Minister's Office of Singapore via an initiative called The Enterprise Challenge under award number P00579/1273, Singapore Environment & Water Industry (EWI) Development Council under award number MEWR 651/06/166 and the Public Utilities Board of Singapore. We would like to acknowledge National Research Foundation (Environmental and Water Technologies) for awarding the NRF (EWT) PhD Scholarship for Mr. Jiawei Ng. We would also like to especially extend our heartfelt thanks to Dr Xiwang Zhang and Ms. Xiaoping Wang for their invaluable technical advice and assistance.
Notes and references
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Akin, H. Zreiqat, S. Jordan, M. B. J. Wijesundara and L. Hanley, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2001, 57, 588–596 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Yang, R. X. Yan and M. Fardy, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1529–1536 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and Y. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. F. Duan, Q. Q. Wei and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 630–633 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16–24 RSC .
S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichthorl, A. J. Nozik, M. Gratzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5259–5275 CAS .
C. Papelis, P. V. Roberts and J. O. Leckie, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 1099–1108 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Peng and A. C. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1355–1362 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi and Y. Matsuoka, J. Mater. Sci., 1988, 23, 2259–2266 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, M. S. Kang, S. M. Cho, G. Y. Han, B. W. Kim, K. J. Yoon and C. H. Chung, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 146, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, X. J. Zhao and Q. N. Zhao, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 379, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
T. Noguchi and A. Fujishima, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 3831–3833 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Ng and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3731–3736 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pan, X. W. Zhang, A. J. Du, D. D. Sun and J. O. Leckie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11256–11257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. McKenzie and H. F. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12384–12385 CrossRef CAS .
E. Horvath, A. Kukovecz, Z. Konya and I. Kiricsi, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 927–931 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, V. N. Parmon, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3370–3377 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. M. Peng, Q. Chen, G. H. Du, G. Dawson and W. Z. Zhou, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 256103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Huang, Y. G. Cao, Q. F. Huang, H. He, Y. Liu, W. Guo and M. C. Hong, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3632–3637 CAS .
A. Kabalnov, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su and J. N. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 162905 CrossRef .
R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Science, 1998, 281, 969–971 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Patterson, Phys. Rev., 1939, 56, 978–982 CrossRef CAS .
K. Komaguchi, H. Nakano, A. Araki and Y. Harima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 338–342 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bakardjieva, J. Subrt, V. Stengl, M. J. Dianez and M. J. Sayagues, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 58, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Ewald, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1969, 25, 103–108 CrossRef .
K. A. Michalow, D. Logvinovich, A. Weidenkaff, M. Amberg, G. Fortunato, A. Heel, T. Graule and M. Rekas, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Zhang, M. S. Zhang, Z. Yin and Q. Chen, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2000, 70, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa and Y. Nosaka, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Chen, S. Y. Yang, K. Wang and L. P. Lou, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2005, 172, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishibashi, A. Fujishima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 134, 139–142 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Wang and T. T. Lim, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 355–364 CrossRef CAS .
J. Krysa, G. Waldner, H. Mest'ankova, J. Jirkovsky and G. Grabner, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 64, 290–301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Chu, S. Inoue, K. Wada, S. Hishita and K. Kumshima, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1343–1349 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, M. Zlamal, J. Krysa and P. Schmuki, Small, 2007, 3, 300–304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ng, S. Xu, X. Zhang, H. Y. Yang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4287–4294 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Choi, D. Choi, M. J. Jin, I. Kim, S. H. Kim, J. Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2185–2189 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Velazquez and S. Banerjee, Small, 2009, 5, 1025–1029 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lao, J. Y. Huang, D. Z. Wang and Z. F. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Li, S. S. Xie, L. X. Qian, B. H. Chang, B. S. Zou, W. Y. Zhou, R. A. Zhao and G. Wang, Science, 1996, 274, 1701–1703 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Left: FESEM image of the starting anodized TiO2 nanotubes. Middle (top): Illustration of the hydrothermal coarsening process in converting hollow nanotubes to solid nanowhiskers, as induced by concurrent processes of oriented attachment and Ostwald ripening. Oriented attachment is responsible for the rapid coarsening of parallel nanotubesvia a “bunching” and recrystallization mechanism. Middle (bottom): Illustration of the gradual filling of nanotubes hollow channels by deposition of smaller nanocrystallites via the Ostwald ripening process. Right: Cross-sectional and overview FESEM images of the radially-aligned Na2Ti3O7 nanowhiskers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Low and high magnifications of FESEM images depicting progressive morphological evolution of nanotube to nanowhisker under different hydrothermal durations: (A–B) 2 h, (C–D) 4 h, (E–F) 8 h, (G–H) 10 h, (I–J) 15 h.	 

 	Fig. 3  
TEM and their respective HRTEM and SAED (inset) micrographs depicting progressive crystallographic transformation of nanotube to nanowhisker under different hydrothermal durations: (A–B) 2 h, (C–D) 4 h, (E–F) 8 h, (G–H) 10 h, (I–J) 15 h.	 

 	Fig. 4  
            XRD patterns of the various products obtained after hydrothermal treatment of amorphous TiO2 nanotubes with concentrated NaOH at different durations. From labels of the respective XRD peaks, ST refers to sodium titanate and Ti is titanium.	 

 	Fig. 5  Various synthetic routes in obtaining different morphologies of anatase TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 6  
            FESEM images of the as-prepared (A–B) nanotube sample, (C–D) nanowire sample, (E–F) P25 coating sample. The left column shows low magnification overviews while the right column shows high magnification close-up images of the respective 1D nanostructured samples.	 

 	Fig. 7  
            FESEM images of calcined TiO2 Nanowhisker sample taken at different magnifications.	 

 	Fig. 8  
XRD spectra of the as-prepared photocatalysts.	 


Nanowhisker	0.76	10.6	3.03	1.311	1.595	41.9	10.8 × 10−4

Nanotube
	0.497	16.22	3.07	1.231	1.339	25.2	9.05× 10−4

Nanowire
	1.03	7.85	3.14	1.118	0.862	14.3	5.83× 10−4

                    P25 coating	0.38	21.21	3.11	1.193	1.039	17.1	7.03× 10−4

 	Fig. 9  (A) High magnification FESEM image of the nanowhiskers, (B) Typical TEM micrograph of a single TiO2 nanowhisker, (C–D) HRTEM showing crystal lattice orientation and interplanar distance, (E) Corresponding SAED patern of the single crystalline nanowhisker.	 

 	Fig. 10  
UV-Vis
diffuse reflectance spectra of the as-prepared photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 11  
Photoluminescence spectra of the as-prepared photocatalysts. The adventitious peak centred around 375 nm is attributed to the double-sided tape adhered on the film sample during PL analysis.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 12  Pseudo first-order photocatalytic degradation of AO7 over the as-prepared photocatalysts.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
