Revealing the semiconductor–catalyst interface in buried platinum black silicon photocathodes   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA02505F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA02505F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8123-8129Revealing the semiconductor–catalyst interface in buried platinum black silicon photocathodes†

        
          
            Jeffery A. 
            Aguiar‡
, 
      
        
          
            Nicholas C. 
            Anderson‡
 and 

        
          
            Nathan R. 
            Neale
          
        
      *
      National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: Nathan.Neale@nrel.gov
Received 
      25th March 2016
    , Accepted 25th April 2016First published on 26th April 2016AbstractNanoporous “black” silicon semiconductors interfaced with buried platinum nanoparticle catalysts have exhibited stable activity for photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution even after months of exposure to ambient conditions. The mechanism behind this stability has not been explained in detail, but is thought to involve a Pt/Si interface free from SiOx layer that would adversely affect interfacial charge transfer kinetics. In this paper, we resolve the chemical composition and structure of buried Pt/Si interfaces in black silicon photocathodes from a micron to sub-nanometer level using aberration corrected analytical scanning transmission electron microscopy. Through a controlled electrodeposition of copper on samples aged for one month in ambient conditions, we demonstrate that the main active catalytic sites are the buried Pt nanoparticles located below the 400–800 nm thick nanoporous SiOx layer. Though hydrogen production performance degrades over 100 h under photoelectrochemical operating conditions, this burying strategy preserves an atomically clean catalyst/Si interface free of oxide or other phases under air exposure and provides an example of a potential method for stabilizing silicon photoelectrodes from oxidative degradation in photoelectrochemical applications.
Introduction
Direct solar-to-hydrogen (H2) production through photoelectrochemical (PEC) conversion is a promising avenue for storing renewable energy and a necessary step towards an energy economy independent of fossil fuels.1 Silicon (Si) is an attractive target for the light absorbing semiconductor photoelectrode for PEC water splitting devices because Si is an earth-abundant material with existing low-cost supply chains for mature technologies.2 Though polished Si wafers exhibit high reflectivity and a low extinction coefficient,3,4 photon management based on nanostructuring can significantly decrease reflectivity as well as enhance light scattering, both of which lead to increased light absorption.5–7 An added benefit of nanostructuring important to PEC solar fuels applications is a high surface area that improves the charge collection efficiency,8 reduces catalyst overpotential,9 and gives rise to facile hydrogen gas desorption10,11 compared to planar Si.12
Another major hurdle in realizing solar fuels technology using a Si photoelectrode is overcoming the inevitable formation of an insulating surface oxide layer, SiOx, resulting in a large kinetic barrier to charge extraction.13,14 Oxidation of n-type Si occurs during photoexcitation, whereas p-type Si is oxidized in the dark under anodic potentials. Methods for mitigating the impacts of oxidation have ranged from depositing protective coatings to implementing heterogeneous catalysts to improving proton reduction kinetics, thus suppressing undesired surface oxidation.15,16
Nanostructuring Si photoelectrodes with chemical processing can also mitigate the adverse effects of surface oxidation on interfacial charge transfer. For instance, Boettcher et al. introduced a buried n+p junction into a Si nanowire array with Pt nanoparticle (NP) catalysts that achieved an overall solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency near 6%, though evidence of incomplete protection by the n+ layer resulting in the formation of a thin surface oxide layer and a consequential decreased PEC hydrogen evolution performance was noted after 24 h.17 Seger et al. reported that a planar n+p Si junction could be protected from degradation for over 72 h with a sputtered titania coating between Si and a Pt catalyst.18 Recently, atomic layer deposition (ALD) has also been used to deposit protective titania coatings on both n-type Si photoanodes and p-type Si photocathodes.19
We recently reported20 an alternative strategy for mitigating the adverse effects of surface SiOx formation on a Si photocathode. In that work, nanoporous “black” Si (b-Si) photoelectrodes were prepared via silver-assisted chemical etching of a p-type Si wafer followed by electroless deposition of Pt nanoparticle (NP) catalysts.21 As with many Si photoelectrodes, the hydrogen evolution activity of this p-type photocathode (termed Pt/b-Si) was found to degrade over days owing to the formation of surface oxide SiOx. However, subjecting a Pt/b-Si photocathode to a secondary metal-assisted chemical etch buried the Pt NPs within the nanoporous layer. These “buried” Pt NP-black Si (B-Pt/b-Si) photocathodes exhibited stable PEC hydrogen evolution activity even after ambient air storage for over two months.
We hypothesized that the surprising oxidative stability of B-Pt/b-Si photocathodes under ambient conditions is related to an ultra-stable interface between the buried Pt NP catalysts and the Si semiconductor. Cross-sectional SEM and TEM images of a 1 month air-aged B-Pt/b-Si sample established that Pt NPs were located both within the nanoporous layer (comprised mainly of amorphous silica, a-SiO2, resulting from oxidation) as well as at the bottom of the pores near the non-porous (un-etched) crystalline silicon (c-Si) wafer below.20
Here, we use microscopy and chemical analysis to resolve the key question of whether the oxidative stability of B-Pt/b-Si photocathodes is due to a durable catalyst/semiconductor interface or some other phenomenon. To address this question, we use scanning tunneling electron microscopy (STEM) experiments to investigate the chemical composition and structure of the Pt/Si interface. We also selectively identify the active sites within B-Pt/b-Si photocathodes by photoelectrodepositing Cu from a Cu2+ solution that mimics the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).
These experiments uncover the key features of this unique B-Pt/b-Si system and more generally demonstrate that resolving material structure, composition and catalytic activity from a micron to sub-nanometer level using analytical STEM can provide an understanding of the interface between photoabsorber and catalyst, an essential component for any PEC platform.22
Results and discussion
Imaging the chemistry at the B-Pt/b-Si interface
We sought to rationalize the extended stability of B-Pt/b-Si under ambient conditions by investigating the chemical nature of the Pt/Si interface. Platinum is known to form both ohmic and Schottky junctions with Si,23,24 the former enhanced by platinum silicide phases (PtxSi) that can form at temperatures as low as 200 °C, and whether the junction displays rectifying behavior or not is highly dependent on the doping density.25 Even with PtxSi phases present, Si/PtxSi/Pt junctions are rectifying after annealing to 600 °C as long as the Si substrate has a low doping density of ≤1016 (cf. 3–5 × 1015 for the Si wafers used here).25 These studies suggest that the chemical and electrical properties must be evaluated independently to fully understand the nature of the Pt/Si junction.
To probe the chemical nature of the Pt/Si interface, we conducted high-angle annular dark (HAADF) and bright (ABF) field imaging while simultaneously performing point-by-point chemical imaging using either electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and/or energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), depending on the magnification (see Experimental). Thin lamellae (<100 nm thick) were prepared using the conventional focus-ion beam (FIB) method. To protect the photoelectrode surface we followed the FIB with a thick deposition of Pt (>2.5 μm) prior to Ga-ion milling using both the electron and ion beam (see Experimental section for full details).

Fig. 1 shows a STEM/HAADF cross-sectional image of B-Pt/b-Si. At the surface of the sample, the nanoporous layer consists of both c-Si and a-SiO2, consistent with our previous report.20 The narrow linear tracks in this layer are formed by the initial Ag NP etch. In addition to this nanoporous a-SiO2/c-Si layer, the B-Pt/b-Si sample exhibits some Pt NPs that have been buried below the nanoporous layer and within the c-Si wafer. In contrast to the vertical pores formed by the Ag-assisted etching process, the tracks formed by these deeply buried Pt NPs are not oriented perpendicular to the substrate. Instead, Pt NPs follow more random paths as they etch into the c-Si. The pathway followed by Pt NPs is a function of the HF/H2O2 ratio, as well as the Si wafer doping type and density, and can result in tracks with conical shapes and helices as well as the random geometry observed here.26,27
 Fig. 1  STEM HAADF image of 1 month air-aged black silicon with buried Pt NP catalysts (B-Pt/b-Si). The nanoporous surface layer comprised of a-SiO2/c-Si is seen at the top of the sample, with the Pt surface layer deposited to protect the sample during ion milling. Pt NPs are evident as bright spots both within and below the nanoporous layer, the latter of which are buried within the c-Si wafer. The burying process leaves random pores (“tracks”) etched into the c-Si that terminate with Pt NPs at the bottom of the tracks. 
These images provide a general picture of the overall structure of B-Pt/b-Si photocathodes as having a thick nanoporous surface layer (400–800 nm depending on sample) composed of a-SiO2/c-Si on top of a c-Si wafer embedded with a low density of Pt NPs. We hypothesized that these deeply buried Pt NPs are responsible for the long-term stability of B-Pt/b-Si and probed these buried particles further using a suite of imaging and chemical analysis techniques. We first used STEM-based EDS to provide quantitative elemental maps of the region below the nanoporous a-SiOx/c-Si layer. Fig. 2 shows the STEM HAADF images as well as EDS maps for Pt, oxygen (O), and Si of the area near buried Pt NPs within an aged B-Pt/b-Si sample. The micrograph shows areas where tracks (nanopores) terminate at Pt NPs. Point-resolved EDS mapping of this region clearly identifies the bright contrast areas in the STEM images as the Pt NPs at the bottom of each track (Fig. 2c). The O and Si chemical maps (Fig. 2e and g), show that the tracks are lined with a-SiO2, consistent with the mechanism of the metal-assisted chemical etching of the Si wafer in which the strongly oxidizing environment results not only in nanopore formation, but also in a Si chemical structure that is prone to accelerated oxidation within the nanopore walls.20 This also accounts for the oxidation of the nanoporous region formed by Ag-assisted etching in b-Si samples, where primarily a-SiO2 and only a minimal amount of c-Si were observed via electron diffraction.20 A higher resolution image of the same Pt NP (Fig. 2b) shows that Pt NPs appear to consist of several smaller Pt pieces (this morphology may result from the secondary etch). The anisotropic structure of the Pt NPs may additionally help explain the circuitous pathway of the Pt NPs carved during the etching process. Another observation from these higher resolution chemical maps (Fig. 2d, f and h) is that the a-SiO2-lined track is localized toward one edge of the Pt NP, suggesting that there may be no oxide interlayer between the buried Pt NP and the c-Si semiconductor.
 Fig. 2  STEM HAADF images of a 1 month air-aged B-Pt/b-Si sample collected over (a) a sub-nanoporous region containing two Pt NPs embedded in the c-Si wafer and (b) a higher magnification image of one of the Pt NP aggregates. Elemental distribution maps of (c and d) platinum, (e and f) oxygen, and (g and h) silicon collected via EDS with the atomic percentage scale bar noted at the right of each map (red = 100%, dark blue = 0%). 
We probed the interface around this buried Pt NP in greater detail using STEM HAADF and atomic contrast imaging, which shows strong lattice fringes associated with Si and weaker fringes from Pt – identified as bright horizontal features in the box in Fig. 3a – consistent with edge on imaging of the faceted buried Pt NP. The individual diffraction spots in the Fast-Fourier Transform (FFT) of the atomic contrast image (Fig. 3b) conclusively confirms that the individual Pt NP is randomly oriented and does not share an epitaxial orientation relationship with the surrounding c-Si. Based on this information and the lack of extra lattice spots or image contrast that would suggest the presence of an oxide or platinum silicide layer at the interface between Pt/Si, we determine that the Pt NPs are simply buried into the c-Si during the etching process. This intimate contact between buried Pt NP catalysts and the c-Si revealed by these images and chemical mapping profiles likely explains the low resistance and high catalytic activity of B-Pt/b-Si photoelectrodes even after storage under ambient conditions. We speculate that the buried Pt NPs form a “cork” at the bottom of the nanopore tracks, blocking diffusion of oxygen to some of the interface between the semiconductor and catalyst, just as a cork in a bottle protects wine from oxidation.
 Fig. 3  (a) STEM HAADF imaging of a portion of a buried Pt NP aggregate. Individual Pt NPs do not share an epitaxial orientation relationship with the surrounding darker contrast c-Si resolved by a combination of (b) high-resolution atomic imaging with the atomic model of Si for the 〈100〉 zone axis (where blue dots are the silicon atomic columns) overlaid on the high resolution STEM HAADF image; and (c) complementary higher resolution Fast-Fourier Transform (FFT) images. The FFT image verifies the crystallographic orientation for Si. The observed crystal lattice on top of the bright Pt NP is due to c-Si overlapping with a coherent scattering portion of the buried Pt NP. The lattice fringes are consistent with edge on imaging of the faceted buried Pt NP, where some facets of the NP are close to the same STEM imaging conditions. 
Given the clean Pt/Si interface resulting from burying Pt NPs into b-Si, we hypothesized that these deeply buried NPs are the primary catalytically active sites in aged B-Pt/b-Si samples. To probe this possibility, we photoelectrochemically deposited copper from a CuSO4 solution under conditions mimicking the standard PEC operating conditions for proton reduction. We chose a deposition bias of −0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl that is close to the onset potential for proton reduction (Fig. S1†). Consequently, any Cu deposition should occur only at the most active sites for electron transfer from substrate or catalyst to solution, since less catalytically active sites would require greater overpotential and thus should only be active at more negative potentials than −0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
STEM of the 1 month aged B-Pt/b-Si sample following Cu deposition was conducted on two areas of the sample: a Pt NP buried within the c-Si substrate (Fig. 4a) as well as a Pt NP within the a-SiO2/c-Si nanoporous layer (Fig. 4b). To track Cu, STEM EELS was conducted analytical probe measuring 1.2 Å and beam current of 96 pA to map the Cu-L edge at 931 eV as a 2-dimensional spectral image. Using these conditions, we observed a defined cluster of Cu hot spots above the background levels localized on the buried Pt NP (Fig. 4g). In contrast, a similar analysis of a Pt NP within the a-SiO2/c-Si nanoporous region only shows background levels of Cu (Fig. 4h). These data demonstrate that the Pt NPs in intimate contact with c-Si buried deeply within the substrate are indeed the most catalytically active sites and are responsible for the air stability of this photocathode.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) STEM chemical imaging was performed on a 1 month air-aged B-Pt/b-Si sample electrodeposited with Cu (scale bars = 20 nm). Image (a) and corresponding chemical maps (c, e and g) are of a Pt NP buried within the c-Si layer, and image (b) and corresponding chemical maps (d, f and h) is of a Pt NP within the a-SiOx/c-Si nanoporous layer. EELS-based chemical images for (c/d) Pt and (e/f) O are shown for each sample. Imaging with STEM EELS of the Cu-L edge at 931 eV as a 2-dimensional spectral image from the two sample areas (g and h). For the buried Pt NP (g), Cu is observed to cluster in a low concentration (<3 atomic%) on the buried Pt particle, whereas for the Pt NP within the a-SiOx/c-Si nanoporous layer (h), no Cu above background levels was detected. The vertical line scans to the right of the Cu maps in (g) and (h) help visualize the Cu atomic% relative to background. 
Operating durability of black silicon
We previously reported that B-Pt/b-Si is oxidatively stable for months when stored under ambient conditions.20 To explore the durability of B-Pt/b-Si under operating conditions, we performed a potentiostatic measurement near the onset potential for proton reduction (−0.05 V vs. RHE) under simulated diurnal cycles. Fig. 5a shows that the photocurrent density decreases considerably during this 100 h experiment. In addition, J–V measurements before and after the 100 h test display a negative shift in onset potential for proton reduction (Fig. 5b), suggesting that the photoelectrode is unstable during operation, at least within the first 48 h. After 48 h, the total photocurrent density does not change with the exception of the initial spikes caused as the equilibrium between protons and hydrogen dissolved in the electrolyte is established.
 Fig. 5  (A) 100 h potentiostatic measurement of B-Pt/b-Si at −0.05 V vs. RHE in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a Pt counter electrode and Hg/Hg2SO4 reference electrode under diurnal simulated 1 sun illumination. (B) J–V curves before (red) and after (blue) the 100 h test, where the dashed black line indicates the potentiostatic measurement potential. 
A number of factors may contribute to the photocurrent decay over extended proton reduction. The Pt NPs may be disrupted or damaged in some way during proton reduction to H2, perhaps via agitation from desorbing H2 bubbles, thus “uncorking the bottle” and allowing oxidation of the Pt/Si interface. We previously demonstrated that the initial Ag NP etch is essential for long-term stability in ambient conditions. It is also possible that extended proton reduction alters the thick a-SiO2/c-Si layer formed by the initial Ag NP etch thus compromising long-term PEC performance. Oxidation of the c-Si surrounding the blackened active layer or the back-side of the photocathode may also contribute to the photodegradation, and may explain the anodic onset potential shift observed here compared to our previous report of air-aged B-Pt/b-Si. The electrode design used for the long-term PEC measurements makes the TEM methods described above challenging, and in situ TEM may be required to understand the degradation of B-Pt/b-Si under operating conditions.
Conclusions
We use both conventional and aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy to reveal the chemical composition and structure of B-Pt/b-Si photocathodes. We find that the secondary metal-assisted etching processes applied to Pt NPs electrolessly deposited onto b-Si substrates results in some Pt NPs becoming buried within the c-Si wafer below the nanoporous a-SiO2/c-Si layer. The stable hydrogen evolution activity of B-Pt/b-Si photocathodes after months of air aging can be attributed directly to the stability of the Pt/Si interface, which remains free from oxide growth under these conditions. The Pt NPs are proposed to act as a cork at the bottom of the nanopores and prevent oxygen diffusion to parts of the Pt/Si interface. We also demonstrate that these buried Pt NPs are the primary catalytically active site by photoelectrically depositing Cu under conditions similar to proton reduction. While B-Pt/b-Si degradation does occur under prolonged operation, this analysis provides a detailed understanding of the stability previously observed for B-Pt/b-Si under ambient conditions and highlights another possible method for stabilizing silicon photoelectrodes from oxidative degradation in PEC applications.
Experimental
Black silicon electrodes
Electrodes were prepared from 300 μm thick B-doped p-type (100) float-zone wafers (3–5 Ω cm) by Ag metal-assisted chemical etching as described previously with some modifications.20 Instead of using epoxy-sealed photocathodes, two alternative electrode designs were utilized. For the Cu deposition study, 5 cm × 1 cm substrates of Si were used and the backside was blocked from chemical treatment with polyimide tape. The bottom 4 cm (length) was dipped into the various etchant solutions, and the remaining 1 cm (top) was contacted with Ag paint after etching in 5 wt% HF to remove the native oxide. For the long-term stability study, the front side of a 2 cm × 2 cm substrate was masked with polyimide tape, leaving a 0.1 cm diameter circle exposed at the center of the substrate. Nanoporous b-Si was formed by dipping freshly HF (5 wt%) etched silicon photocathodes into 1 mM AgNO3 and 1 wt% HF solution for 30 s, followed by a distilled H2O rinse and drying under a N2 stream. Ag NPs were then etched into the substrate by dipping the photocathode into a 50 wt% HF, 30 wt% H2O2, and distilled H2O solution with a volume ratio of 25:4:370 for 6 min. This differs from our previously reported etching solution. We found that using fresh H2O2 at ratios in our prior report gave a somewhat different morphology (thinner nanoporous layer) of b-Si as observed by TEM than previously reported, though this did not correspond to a change in the J–V characteristics during PEC hydrogen production. Reducing the concentration of H2O2 in the etching solution achieved a morphology similar to our previous report. Ag NP were then removed by exposing the photocathode to 35 wt% HNO3 for 6 min, followed again by rinsing with H2O and drying under N2. The photocathodes were then dipped in 0.5 wt% tetramethylammonium hydroxide solution for 2 s to decrease the roughness of the nanostructured features as previously reported. Pt NPs were deposited onto b-Si electrodes by electroless deposition from 5 mM H2PtCl6 in 1% HF solution (Pt/b-Si). Pt NPs were buried by exposing Pt/b-Si to a 50 wt% HF, 30 wt% H2O2, and distilled H2O solution with a volume ratio of 25:4:370 (same new ratios as above) to form fresh B-Pt/b-Si. We note that the previously reported 30 min 1 wt% H2O2 step was unnecessary when fresh H2O2 was used. Aged Pt/b-Si and B-Pt/b-Si samples were prepared by storage of fresh photocathodes in the dark under air ambient for 1 month.
Cu photoelectrodeposition
Copper was photoelectrodeposited onto aged B-Pt/b-Si under conditions similar to PEC measurements reported previously. Freshly etched B-Pt/b-Si was prepared as described above. Using a three-electrode set up, where the B-Pt/b-Si served as the working electrode, Pt wire as the counter electrode, and 3 M Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, Cu was deposited from a 5 mM CuSO4 and 50 mM H2SO4 solution at −0.3 V versus Ag/AgCl under illumination from a white LED. The deposition was run for 45 s, before the photocathode was removed and washed with distilled H2O. Running for longer or at more negative potential resulted in visible Cu deposition on the B-Pt/b-Si photocathode.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
PEC measurements for aged B-Pt/b-Si were conducted using a pressure cell reported in detail previously.28 A GaIn eutectic was painted on the backside of a freshly HF-etched electrode followed by Ag paint and contacted by a spring-loaded copper plunger that also served to press the working electrode against a Teflon gasket so that only the active area contacted the electrolyte. A three-electrode set-up with Pt counter-electrode and Hg2SO4 reference electrode was used with 0.5 M H2SO4 under 1.5 AMU illumination. J–V measurements were taken before and after running a potentiostatic (−0.05 V versus RHE) measurement of current over 100 hours.
Transmission electron microscopy
Electron transparent FIB lamellae were prepared using a FEI Nova 200 Nanolab Dual Beam focus ion beam (FIB) instrument located at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. A final clean was performed using a 5 kV gallium beam and a beam current of 12 pA to remove material deposited during FIB preparation and reduce the damage from the initial milling, followed by low energy argon cleaning at 600 eV, for ±10°, in a Fischione nanomill instrument. Care was taken to minimize the ion beam interaction with the exposed surface throughout the TEM sample preparation. This was done by first depositing a thin layer of electron beam deposited platinum, followed by a gradient of fine to coarse-grained ion beam platinum.
The bulk of the analytical transmission electron microscopy was performed on a FEI Tecnai operated 200 kV in S/TEM mode. The STEM probe diameter was tuned to 1.8 Å with 16 mrad semi-convergence angle. Each sample was then tilted to approximately 13° on the perpendicular axis shared by the energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer using a double-tilt low-background sample holder. The Si-K, O-K, Cu-K, and Pt-M X-ray emission lines were then captured with the EDS spectrometer with a 10 eV per channel, 10 μs time constant, and operated in S/TEM mode with a 4 s per pixel dwell time. Two-dimensional quantified EDS maps were then generated, after subtracting the background and quantifying each of the elements based on known k-factors. The analytical certainty associated with the EDS profiling for this sample was 1–2 atomic%.
Scanning transmission electron microscopy was performed on both the probe-corrected JEOL ARM 200F operated at 200 kV and FEI Titan G2 microscope operated at 300 kV located at the LeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State Science at Arizona State University and Oak Ridge National Laboratory, respectively. On both probe corrected instruments, a Gatan electron energy loss image filter (GIF) and high solid angle X-ray detectors (JEOL ARM: 50 mm2 and FEI Titan: 60 mm2) were used to track the point resolved chemistry of the samples. Electron dispersive X-ray spectral (EDS) chemical imaging was utilized to acquire the Si-K, O-K, and Pt-M edges with the best achievable spatial and energy resolution for the microscope. Dual electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS)29 was simultaneously performed over the same areas to capture the O-K near edge fine structure and lower loss valence spectra (<30 eV) with beyond 20 mrad collection half angles providing an energy resolution defined by the full-width half-maximum (FWHM) of the zero-loss peak (ZLP) of 0.98 eV. The acquisition time to resolve both EDS and EELS near edge fine structures was performed over a series of consecutive sub-second exposures. All the EELS spectra were aligned based on their first peak maximum, individually dark count subtracted, and summed to produce the results shown here. The core loss EELS spectra were then processed using a power law background subtraction and plural scattering events were reduced using Fourier-log deconvolution.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Howard M. Branz for helpful discussions. This material is solely based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Solar Photochemistry Program under contract number DE-AC36-08GO28308 to NREL. Parts of the electron microscopy were conducted as part of a user proposal at ORNL's Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
References
J. Turner, G. Sverdrup, M. K. Mann, P.-C. Maness, B. Kroposki, M. Ghirardi, R. J. Evans and D. Blake, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 379–407 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, S. Shen, Y. Liang, P. E. Burrows, S. S. Mao and D. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8662–8719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Iyer and Y. H. Xie, Science, 1993, 260, 40–46 CAS .
D. Liang and J. E. Bowers, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 511–517 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Q. Peng, Y.-J. Yan, S.-P. Gao and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1164–1167 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Raut, V. A. Ganesh, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3779–3804 CAS .
F. Priolo, T. Gregorkiewicz, M. Galli and T. F. Krauss, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 19–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, J. M. Spurgeon, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, J. R. Maiolo, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2010, 327, 185–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Oh, J. Kye and S. Hwang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Wang, P.-I. Wang, Y. Peles, N. Koratkar and G. P. Peterson, Small, 2008, 4, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690–1694 CAS .
N. P. Dasgupta, C. Liu, S. Andrews, F. B. Prinz and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12932–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Bolts, A. B. Bocarsly, M. C. Palazzotto, E. G. Walton, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 1378–1385 CrossRef CAS .
F.-R. F. Fan, G. A. Hope and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1647–1649 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Kohl, S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 225–229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakato and H. Tsubomura, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 897–907 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, P. Zhang, X. Song and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18560–18565 CAS .
Y. Zhao, N. C. Anderson, K. Zhu, J. A. Aguiar, J. A. Seabold, J. v. d. Lagemaat, H. M. Branz, N. R. Neale and J. Oh, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2517–2525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. de Boor and U. Gosele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Brydson, Aberration-Corrected Analytical Transmission Electron Microscopy, Wiley,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. S. Cohen, P. A. Piacente, G. Gildenblat and D. M. Brown, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 8856–8862 CrossRef CAS .

          B. El-Kareh and L. Hutter, in Silicon Analog Components, Springer, New York,  2015, ch. 4, pp. 111–146,  DOI:10.1007/978-1-4939-2751-7_4 .
H. Muta and D. Shinoda, J. Appl. Phys., 1972, 43, 2913–2915 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsujino and M. Matsumura, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, C193–C195 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Xiao, C. Yan, K. Zhou, S. L. Schweizer, A. Sprafke, J.-H. Lee and R. B. Wehrspohn, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, P22–P24 CrossRef CAS .
H. Doscher, J. L. Young, J. F. Geisz, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 74–80 CAS .

          R. Egerton, Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope, Springer,  2011, 3rd edn Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta02505f‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  STEM HAADF image of 1 month air-aged black silicon with buried Pt NP catalysts (B-Pt/b-Si). The nanoporous surface layer comprised of a-SiO2/c-Si is seen at the top of the sample, with the Pt surface layer deposited to protect the sample during ion milling. Pt NPs are evident as bright spots both within and below the nanoporous layer, the latter of which are buried within the c-Si wafer. The burying process leaves random pores (“tracks”) etched into the c-Si that terminate with Pt NPs at the bottom of the tracks.	 

 	Fig. 2  STEM HAADF images of a 1 month air-aged B-Pt/b-Si sample collected over (a) a sub-nanoporous region containing two Pt NPs embedded in the c-Si wafer and (b) a higher magnification image of one of the Pt NP aggregates. Elemental distribution maps of (c and d) platinum, (e and f) oxygen, and (g and h) silicon collected via EDS with the atomic percentage scale bar noted at the right of each map (red = 100%, dark blue = 0%).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) STEM HAADF imaging of a portion of a buried Pt NP aggregate. Individual Pt NPs do not share an epitaxial orientation relationship with the surrounding darker contrast c-Si resolved by a combination of (b) high-resolution atomic imaging with the atomic model of Si for the 〈100〉 zone axis (where blue dots are the silicon atomic columns) overlaid on the high resolution STEM HAADF image; and (c) complementary higher resolution Fast-Fourier Transform (FFT) images. The FFT image verifies the crystallographic orientation for Si. The observed crystal lattice on top of the bright Pt NP is due to c-Si overlapping with a coherent scattering portion of the buried Pt NP. The lattice fringes are consistent with edge on imaging of the faceted buried Pt NP, where some facets of the NP are close to the same STEM imaging conditions.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) STEM chemical imaging was performed on a 1 month air-aged B-Pt/b-Si sample electrodeposited with Cu (scale bars = 20 nm). Image (a) and corresponding chemical maps (c, e and g) are of a Pt NP buried within the c-Si layer, and image (b) and corresponding chemical maps (d, f and h) is of a Pt NP within the a-SiOx/c-Si nanoporous layer. EELS-based chemical images for (c/d) Pt and (e/f) O are shown for each sample. Imaging with STEM EELS of the Cu-L edge at 931 eV as a 2-dimensional spectral image from the two sample areas (g and h). For the buried Pt NP (g), Cu is observed to cluster in a low concentration (<3 atomic%) on the buried Pt particle, whereas for the Pt NP within the a-SiOx/c-Si nanoporous layer (h), no Cu above background levels was detected. The vertical line scans to the right of the Cu maps in (g) and (h) help visualize the Cu atomic% relative to background.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) 100 h potentiostatic measurement of B-Pt/b-Si at −0.05 V vs. RHE in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a Pt counter electrode and Hg/Hg2SO4 reference electrode under diurnal simulated 1 sun illumination. (B) J–V curves before (red) and after (blue) the 100 h test, where the dashed black line indicates the potentiostatic measurement potential.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta02505f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
