Electronic coupling assembly of semiconductor nanocrystals : self-narrowed band gap to promise solar energy utilization   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00807A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00807A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1684-1689Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectronic coupling assembly of semiconductor nanocrystals: self-narrowed band gap to promise solar energy utilization†

        
          
            Hua 
            Tong
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Naoto 
            Umezawa
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jinhua 
            Ye
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Takahisa 
            Ohno
          
        
      c
aInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS),1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan. E-mail: Jinhua.YE@nims.go.jp;  Fax: +81-29-859-2301;   Tel: +81-29-859-2646
bPhotocatalytic Materials Center (PMC), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS);, 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan
cComputational Materials Science Center (CMSC), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan
Received 
      22nd December 2010
    , Accepted 8th March 2011First published on 11th April 2011AbstractTo promote solar energy conversion into clean energy, hydrogen fuel and electrical power, photoactive nanostructures, e.g.cadmium sulfide nanotubes and nanocages, have been developed from electronic coupling assembly of nanocrystals. The inter-particle electronic coupling provides the nanostructures with self-narrowed band gap even less than that of bulk material. Consequently, the nanostructures achieve superior aptitude for solar energy utilization.

Broader context
Band gap engineering is a crucial technique for semiconductor applications in solar energy conversion. Nanosized semiconductors have a prosperous future in the field of optoelectronics due to their easily adjustable band gap. However, constant broadening of the band gap is still a bottleneck, preventing semiconductor nanocrystals from efficiently utilizing solar energy. In current study, a novel collective effect attributed to electronic coupling in assembly of semiconductor nanocrystals has been found to result in band gap narrowing in such nanocrystal assembled materials. The photocatalytic and photovoltaic studies indicate that this band gap narrowing can make a success of enhancing solar energy conversion efficiency substantially. In principle, electronic coupling assembly of nanocrystals may be spread over all of the inorganic semiconductors in any anticipated structures. Up to now, band gap narrowing has been achieved in CdS, TiO2, CdSe, CdTe and WO3. The real behavior of nanocrystal assembly system is very complicated, which involves many other scientific concerns, such as electronic and energy transfers. This suggests that the resultant band gap can be modulated by controlling nanocrystal size, inter-particle spacing and surface characteristics. Current study is anticipated to shed light on a new aspect of nanotechnology and show its importance in the band gap engineering of semiconductors.

How to efficiently utilize solar energy within semiconductors to achieve clean energy, hydrogen fuel and electrical power, is of great interest and challenge to the scientists in a broad range of disciplines.1–7 Progress in this subject is closely interrelated with advances in materials science and engineering. Under sunlight irradiation, photo-electronic conversion in semiconductors strongly relies on the nature of energy bands and band gap.8,9 A number of promising semiconductors with wide band gap, e.g. CdS (2.42 eV) and TiO2 (3.2 eV), are of limited use because their photoactive region is in a small portion of solar spectrum. To break through the limitation, impurity doping strategy has been extensively adopted to introduce an intraband gap, which can admit valence electrons to be excited by the photons with low energy unable to overcome the band gap.1,2,10–13 Although this strategy has greatly expanded semiconductor utility, introduction of impurity states incurs the risk of suppressing photo-electronic conversion efficiency due to increased non-radiative recombination of photo-generated carriers.11 In addition, doping operation usually requires rigorous conditions, complex processes, and special apparatus. Actually, practical performance of materials still shows strong dependence on their external characteristics, including morphology, structure and dimension.14–18 For materials, appropriately small size and large active surface are favored to benefit interfacial behavior, and uniform shape is also preferred for easily modelling into devices. Therefore, integrative optimization should be used in the design and fabrication of materials.
Semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs), displaying interesting electronic and optical properties attributed to discrete electronic structure and large specific surface area, are expected to be useful for photo-electronic applications.3,19–21 Although the band gap of semiconductor NCs can be modulated by tailoring the size,20,21 the band gap broadening remains a bottleneck preventing efficient solar energy utilization. A promising blueprint is to assemble NCs into hierarchical nanostructures,22–24 which can not only provide desirable external characteristics, but also present novel and useful collective properties in electronics,3,25–27 magnetics,28 optics,29–33 catalysis,34 and so on. These collective properties are derived from interfacial electronic coupling between adjacent NCs, thus they are not present in either isolated NCs or intrinsic bulk crystals.20,35,36 For an isolated NC, the wave functions of delocalized electrons are spread over the entire NC area.37 As experimentally proven in electronically coupled NCs, there is presence of bonding and anti-bonding levels,38 and an electronic band structure.39 These findings suggest that one can fine-tune the electronic structure and band gap for NC assembled materials through inter-particle electronic coupling rather than incorporating foreign atoms.
In current study, the electronic coupling of interfacial cadmium cation-cation pairs brings about self-narrowed band gap to the assembly of CdS NCs compared to individual CdS NCs as well as bulk CdS material. With the use of precursor templates, the assembly of CdS NCs gives rise to uniform nanostructures, such as nanotubes (NTs) and nanocages. To demonstrate the potential of these CdS nanostructures in solar energy utilization, CdS NTs were used as photocatalyst for catalyticwater reduction into hydrogen, and CdS nanocages were engineered into photo-electrode for photovoltaic cell.
First demonstration is about CdS NTs, which were grown from chemical combination of free S2− anions and localized Cd2+ cations in KCdCl3 nanowire templates (Electronic Supporting Information, ESI†). The resultant NT characteristics can be identified by dark field transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Fig. 1(a)); and the high-resolution (HR) TEM image (Fig. 1(b)) shows clearly that the tube wall was composed of ∼4 nm NCs. As shown in ultraviolet and visible (UV-vis) absorption spectrum (Fig. 1(c)), the absorption edge of CdS NTs is located at around 580 nm, which was red-shifted as much as about 70 nm with respect to that of bulk CdS (512 nm). Correspondingly, the estimated band gap was narrowed by 0.24 eV in CdS NTs (2.18 eV) relative to that of the bulk CdS (2.42 eV). In remarkable contrast, individual ∼4nm CdS NCs (see ESI†, Figure S3), which were synthesized by chemical combination of free S2− anions and Cd2+ cations, exhibited a blue-shifted absorption edge at 460 nm (Fig. 1(c)) and broadened band gap of 2.69 eV due to quantum confinement effect. It should be noted that two sets of absorption spectra for each sample had been tested: one was done by diffusive reflectance mode on compact powder sample as shown in Fig. 1(c); and another one was carried out by transmission mode on sample dispersed in water (Figure S4a†). The transmission spectrum, especially for NTs, exhibited a scattering tail in its red region. The diffusive reflectance spectrum showed a broad maximum and slowly declined in its blue region. Although with above differences in curve configuration, the two sets of spectra gave rise to consistent absorption onset and maximum for same sample; it is reasonable to confirm band gap narrowing for the NTs compared to the individual NCs. Additionally, immediate evidence is apparently visible in material colour (Fig. 1(c)): NTs appear red, but individual NCs look green-yellow.
 Fig. 1  (a) Dark fild TEM image of CdS NTs. (b) HRTEM image of a tube wall. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs (diffusive reflectance mode on compact powder sample); inset displays a digital image of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs dispersed in water. (d) EDS spectra of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs. (e) HRTEM image of an interface between two adjacent NCs on a CdS NT. (f) EELS spectra collected from the two adjacent NCs and their interface on a CdS NT. (g) XPS spectra of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs. (h) Illustration of energy band construction in two adjacent CdS NCs, which are combined with electronic coupling of an interfacial cadmium cation-cation pair. 
By comparison, these two CdS materials were all categorized to same zinc-blende phase by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Figure S4b†); and they consisted of similar composition: cadmium of 54% and sulfur of 46%, according to the results of energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Fig. 1(d)). The nearly 20% excess of cadmium component beyond stoichiometry implies the situation of Cd2+ cation bias or sulfur vacancies on the CdS NC surface. Fig. 1(e) presents HRTEM image of an interface between two adjacent NCs on CdS NT wall. The HRTEM shows that the interface was parallel to the (100) plane at one NC side and contained an included angle of 19.4° against the (100) plane at another NC side. Slight dislocation was observed at the interface, showing coherent lattice combination between the two NCs. The analysis of electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS, Fig. 1(f)) indicates that the interface accommodated large cadmium cation bias, implying that the two NCs were most likely combined with interfacial cadmium cation-cation pairs. This electronic coupling had been further detected by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Fig. 1(g)). Compared with the individual CdS NCs, the CdS NTs showed wider Cd3d peaks with positive chemical-shift (ΔEb). By Gaussian fitting (inset in Fig. 1(g)), both Cd3d3/2 and Cd3d5/2 peaks of the CdS NTs were clearly comprised of doublets: one peak was assigned to the cadmium cations inside NCs; and another one with positive ΔEb of around 1.5 eV was assigned to the interfacial cadmium cation-cation pairs, which may be viewed as interfacial Cd–Cd bonds as illustrated in Fig. 1(h). Because Cd–Cd bonds draw Cd 5s electrons far away from Cd cores, the binding energy of Cd core electrons increases exhibiting a positive ΔEb. It should be stressed that the interfacial Cd–Cd bonds in this case are different to the bonds in Cd metal, because (i) an interfacial Cd–Cd bond links two Cd cations, which are still simultaneously bonded with sulfur anions; (ii) the interfacial Cd–Cd bonding is actually the electronic coupling of interfacial Cd 5s electrons, which are provided due to surface sulfur vacancies; (iii) according to electronic structure calculations, this Cd–Cd bonding state results from hybridization of surface defect (sulfur vacancies) states.
In order to understand the mechanism of band gap self-narrowing phenomenon as a result of interfacial Cd–Cd bonds in CdS NC assemblies, we have performed electronic structure calculations for several surface and interface structures shown in Fig. 2(a)–(d). The total and local density of states (DOS) associated with these structures are also shown in Fig. 2(e)–(h), respectively. The ideal (110) surface of zincblende CdS (Fig. 2(a)) gives slightly narrowed band gap compared to bulk CdS due to the formation of surface states (Fig. 2(e)). Removal of half the sulfur atoms on the surface (Fig. 2(b)) introduces extra intra-band states (Fig. 2(f)). The DOS projected on all of surface cadmium atoms shows that the intra-band states mainly consist of Cd 5s and Cd 5p (Fig. 2(f)). Fig. 2(c) shows a contact of two ideal surfaces with mirror symmetry, which exhibits slightly different DOS (Fig. 2(g)) from the isolated surface (Fig. 2(e)), possibly due to weak hybridizations between the surface states. Here, the distance between the two surfaces is set to the length elongated by 20% of the layer-by-layer distance in the bulk. Introduction of sulfur vacancies at the interface results in the formation of Cd–Cd bonds (Fig. 2(d)), leading to a dramatic reduction of the band gap due to the upward shift of the valence band maximum (Fig. 2(h)). According to the bond counting concept on CdS terminating facets, the removal of one sulfur leaves two electrons behind at dangling bonds consisting of sp2 hybrid orbital of cadmium atoms. A surface of covalent material is usually stabilized by terminating dangling bonds, and thereby the two electrons are naturally used for the formation of a Cd–Cd bond. The bond length of the Cd–Cd bond (2.7 Å) is comparable to that in bulk cadmium of hexagonal phase estimated in our calculation (3.0 Å). The DOS projected on all of the cadmium atoms at interface reveals that the gap states originate form the Cd atoms located at the interface and they possess Cd 5s and Cd 5p characters (Fig. 2(h)). An electronic charge density corresponding to one of these gap states is depicted in Fig. 2(h). Apparently, the new band above the valence band is associated with the formation of Cd–Cd bonds. According to our analysis of the relative stability of the reduced layers in Model B and D, the formation of such a Cd-rich layer is more promoted at the interface than on surface (Supporting Information†), and thereby the surface contact is advantageous for the formation of Cd–Cd bonds.
 Fig. 2  (a–d) Relaxed geometry of model structures used for electronic structure calculations. (a) ideal (110) surface of zincblende CdS (Model A). (b) half the sulfur atoms are removed from the surface (Model B). (c) a contact of two (110) surfaces with mirror symmetry where the distance is set to 120% of layer-by-layer thickness in the bulk (Model C). (d) half the sulfur atoms were removed from the interface (model D). (e–h) Calculated total and local density of states (DOS) for Model A–D, respectively. (f) and (h) also show DOS projected on the cadmium atoms at the surface or interface. The vertical broken line denotes the highest occupied state in each system. 
This scenario is also supported by the fact that surfaces of CdS NCs are relatively abundant in sulfur vacancies and the formation of Cd–Cd bonds is expected viaassembly of CdS NCs. As idealistically illustrated in Fig. 1(h), when a Cd–Cd bond is formed between two CdS NCs, the Cd 5s electronic orbital splits into two-electron-occupied Cd 5s(σ) bonding orbital and unoccupied Cd 5s(σ*) anti-bonding orbital. These newly created bonding and anti-bonding orbitals hybridize with the energy bands of the host NCs. As a result, the reconstructed valence band top is lifted due to the emergence of Cd 5s(σ) bonding electronic orbital that is higher than the original S 3p orbital. The reconstructed conduction band bottom is suggested to change little, because the original one is mainly composed of Cd 5s(σ*) anti-bonding electronic orbital too. Extending this mechanism to the whole CdS NC assembly system gives rise to self-narrowed band gap, irrespective of morphology, size, or contact orientation of the NCs.
According to the theoretical calculations, the interfacial Cd–Cd bonding state results from hybridization of surface defect (sulfur vacancies) states. The photo-absorption from surface defects is much weaker than that from intrinsic states and negligible in most cases. Thus, the absorption edge indicates the transition through band gap. In fact, the surface defect and interfacial states do exist and can be observed by photoluminescence (PL) spectra as shown in Fig. 3. The individual surfacant-free CdS NCs (Figure S3†) displayed two emission bands (Fig. 3(a)): one at the intrinsic band edge and another at lower energy resulting from the defect states. When the CdS NCs were modified with surfactant ligands, e.g.dodecylamine (Figure S8†), the defect state emission was suppressed and there was only band-edge emission (Fig. 3(b)). Fig. 3(c) shows that the CdS NC assembled NTs displayed only one broad and red-shifted emission band, which is assigned to interfacial Cd–Cd bonding states. It is apparent evidence for the newly created energy gap. The absence of band-edge emission of individual NCs can support this claim. Consistently, the CdS NC assembled nanocages (Fig. 3(d)) exhibited single red-shifted emission band.
 Fig. 3  
Photoluminescence spectra (Excitation λ = 360 nm). (a) Individual surfactant-free CdS NCs. (b) Dodecylamine modified CdS NCs. (c) CdS NC assembled NTs. (d) CdS NC assembled nanocages. 
With the question whether the self-narrowed band gap is favourable for solar energy utilization, CdS NTs were used as photocatalyst for hydrogen production from catalyticwater reduction under simulated sunlight irradiation (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). In current photocatalytic system, Na2S/Na2SO3 were used as sacrificial reagents for consuming photo-generated holes. The time coursed evolution shows an average hydrogen release rate of 20.04 μmol h−1 cm−2 (Fig. 4(a)), with which solar energy conversion efficiency (SECE) was estimated to be 1.32% for CdS NTs. In contrast, the yield in individual CdS NCs was less than half of that in CdS NTs (Fig. 4(a)), although individual NCs possessed larger BET surface area (152 m2 g) than NTs (98 m2 g). In order to assess the band gap dependence of photocatalytic activity on materials, quantum yields (QY) at wavelengths (λ) of incident photons were investigated with monochromatic filters added to the simulated sunlight apparatus (Fig. 4(b),(c)). As shown in Fig. 4(c), QY(λ) spectra coincide with optical absorption characteristics of photocatalysts; for NTs, the onset of hydrogen production was at about λ = 600 nm and the maximum QY was nearly 18.6% at λ = 480 nm, both of which were red-shifted with respect to that for individual NCs. According to photocatalytic principle that conduction band electrons dominate water reduction,7 higher activity in NTs means stronger ability for photo-electronic conversion.
 Fig. 4  (a) Time course of hydrogen evolution under simulated sunlight irradiation (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). (b) Hydrogen evolution with monochromatic filters equipped to the simulated sunlight apparatus. (c) Calculated quantum yields according to the results of (d). 
Another demonstration in photovoltaics is presented with CdS nanocages, which was combined with FTO (Fluorine doped SnO2 glass) substrate into photo-electrode (PE-1, Fig. 5(a)) working in a photo-electrochemical (PEC) cell {CdS∣Na2S, Na2SO3∣Pt (Hg/Hg2Cl2)}. The electrolytes Na2S/Na2SO3 also played role of hole scavenger to prevent the CdS elelctrode from photoelectrochemical corrosion. In PE-1 fabrication, Cd(OH)2 nanosheet templates (Figure S5†) were first prepared and deposited on FTO substrate by spin coating method, and then the FTO substrate was immersed in Na2S aqueous solution to create a 900 nm thickness film composed of CdS nanocages (Fig. 5(a),(b)). The HRTEM image (Fig. 5(c)) shows that the CdS nanocages were assembled from ∼4 nm NCs. In UV-vis absorption spectrum (Fig. 5(d)), PE-1 exhibited a red-shifted absorption edge up to 560 nm; the calculated band gap (2.25 eV) was narrowed by 0.17 eV relative to that of bulk CdS (2.42 eV). As well as the CdS NTs, the building block CdS NCs in CdS nanocages possessed large Cd2+ cation bias or sulfur vacancies on the surface according to EDS results (Figure S6†); and obvious broadening and positive ΔEb were observed in the Cd3d XPS peaks of CdS nanocages (Figure S7†). Accordingly, the band gap narrowing in CdS nanocages is attributed to the electronic coupling of interfacial cadmium cation-cation pairs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Cross-section SEM image of CdS photoelectrode (PE-1). (b) TEM image of CdS nanocages scraped from PE-1. (c) HRTEM image of a nanocage. (d) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdS materials in PE-1 (nanocages), PE-2 (surfactant-free NCs) and PE-3 (DDA modified NCs). (e) I–V characteristics of the PEC cells under simulated solar irradiation (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). (f) Current density at 0 V bias voltage as monochromatic filters were equipped to the simulated sunlight apparatus. (g) Calculated ICPE according to the results of (f). 
For comparison, two materials of individual ∼4 nm CdS NCs, one of which was surfactant-free (Figure S3†) and another of which was dodecylamine (DDA) modified (Figure S8†), were prepared and deposited on FTO substrates into photo-electrodes PE-2 and PE-3, respectively. The thickness of CdS films in PE-2 and PE-3 was adjusted to about 900 nm (Figure S9†) similar to that in PE-1. The three photo-electrodes differed in the band gap of CdS materials (Fig. 5(d)); it was 2.70 eV in PE-2 and 2.75 eV in PE-3. Fig. 4(e) presents the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of PEC cells as CdS photo-electrodes were exposed to simulated solar irradiation (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Among the three photo-electrodes, PE-1 exhibited best photovoltaic performance with a short-circuit current of 2.6 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage of 1.2 V and fill factor of 0.42, and SECE of 1.26% which was 3.5 times of PE-2 or 8.4 times of PE-3. The monochromatic photocurrent of PEC cells at 0 V bias voltage (Fig. 5(f)) reflected optical absorption feature of the CdS materials in photo-electrodes. For PE-1, the incident photon wavelengths to start response and produce maximum current were 600 and 520 nm, respectively, which had 80–100 nm red-shift to that of PE-2 and PE-3. This is just equal to the difference in the band gap between photo-electrodes. The resultant incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. 5(g)) showed that PE-1 held high activity (IPCE>10%) in a broad spectrum region (λ = 400–560 nm) and with maximum IPCE of 34% as λ = 500 nm. In contrast, PE-2 and PE-3 were merely active to λ<500 nm incident illumination and showed slightly higher efficiency than PE-1 as λ<460 nm. The inferior performance of PE-3 to PE-2 can be easily understood as difficulty in carrier transfer owing to the blocking of surfactant DDA molecules on NC surface. As to PE-1, the interfacial electronic coupling between NCs would facilitate carrier transfer.
Apparently, the above demonstrations present affirmative evidence that the hierarchical CdS nanostructures can take advantage of longer wavelength light in sun spectrum for photo-electronic conversion, thus they achieve superior aptitude for solar energy utilization to the individual building blocks. This significant promotion is attributed to the electronic coupling assembly of the nanocrystalline building blocks, which contributes self-narrowed band gap to the resultant CdS nanostructures. In principle, electronic coupling assembly of NCs may be spread over all of inorganic semiconductors in any anticipated structures. In addition to CdS, we have found such band gap self-narrowing phenomenon also occurs for the electronic coupling assembly of TiO2,40CdSe and WO3 NCs. We note that the real behavior of the NC assembly system is very complicated, which involves other many scientific concerns, such as electronic and energy transfers.
This work was in part supported by the World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI Initiative) on Materials Nanoarchitectonics, and the Mext Program for Development of Environmental Technology using Nanotechnology. N. Umezawa thanks P. Weakliem for technical advice on using the computer facilities at the California Nanosystems Insititute (CNSI) at University of California Santa Barbara. All the calculations were performed on Hewlett-Packard Cluster at CNSI. This work was partly supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science KAKENHI (21760030).
References
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Feng, K. Shankar, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8095 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1042 RSC .
C. Ampelli, G. Centi, R. Passalacqua and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 292 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Scaife, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25, 41 CrossRef CAS .
E. O. Kane, Phys. Rev., 1962, 127, 131 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Spokoyny, T. C. Li, O. K. Farha, C. W. Machan, C. X. She, C. L. Stern, T. J. Marks, J. T. Hupp and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Luque and A. Marti, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 160 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mitoraj and H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9975 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. N. Zhao, C. H. Sun, F. Li, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4516 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bauerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2003 RSC .
S. Stankic, M. Muller, O. Diwald, M. Sterrer, E. Knozinger and J. Bernardi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4917 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Huda and J. A. Turner, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107 .
S. X. Ouyang, D. Chen, D. F. Wang, Z. S. Li, J. H. Ye and Z. G. Zou, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2921 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Li, X. D. He, Z. H. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. L. Liu, S. Y. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. B. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 2555 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shavel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmuller, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 3613 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J. S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 1995, 270, 1335 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Artemyev, A. I. Bibik, L. I. Gurinovich, S. V. Gaponenko and U. Woggon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 60, 1504 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Gaponenko, A. M. Kapitonov, V. N. Bogomolov, A.
V. Prokofiev, A. Eychmuller and A. L. Rogach, JETP Lett., 1998, 68, 142 CrossRef .
T. S. Mentzel, V. J. Porter, S. Geyer, K. MacLean, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Kastner, Phys. Rev. B, 2008, 77, 075316 CrossRef .
H. Zeng, J. Li, J. P. Liu, Z. L. Wang and S. H. Sun, Nature, 2002, 420, 395 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chen, C. P. Yet, H. N. Wang and C. Y. Chao, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 6845 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Chen, V. Lesnyak, N. C. Bigall, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmuller, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2309 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Artemyev, A. I. Bibik, L. I. Gurinovich, S. V. Gaponenko, H. Jaschinski and U. Woggon, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2001, 224, 393 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kulakovich, N. Strekal, A. Yaroshevich, S. Maskevich, S. Gaponenko, I. Nabiev, U. Woggon and M. Artemyev, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1449 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wojnar, J. Suffczynski, A. Golnik, A. Ebbens, U. Woggon, G. Karczewski and J. Kossut, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 195321 CrossRef .
V. Polshettiwar, B. Baruwati and R. S. Varma, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 728 CrossRef CAS .
P. Borri, W. Langbein, U. Woggon, M. Schwab, M. Bayer, S. Fafard, Z. Wasilewski and P. Hawrylak, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 267401 CrossRef CAS .
R. Osovsky, A. Shavel, N. Gaponik, L. Amirav, A. Eychmuller, H. Weller and E. Lifshitz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20244 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Zhitenev, M. Brodsky, R. C. Ashoori, L. N. Pfeiffer and K. W. West, Science, 1999, 285, 715 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schedelbeck, W. Wegscheider, M. Bichler and G. Abstreiter, Science, 1997, 278, 1792 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobo-Checa, M. Matena, K. Muller, J. H. Dil, F. Meier, L. H. Gade, T. A. Jung and M. Stohr, Science, 2009, 325, 300 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tong, N. Uwezawa and J. H. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4219 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, facilities information, supplemented data, and details of theoretical calculations. See DOI: 10.1039/c0ee00807aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Band gap engineering is a crucial technique for semiconductor applications in solar energy conversion. Nanosized semiconductors have a prosperous future in the field of optoelectronics due to their easily adjustable band gap. However, constant broadening of the band gap is still a bottleneck, preventing semiconductor nanocrystals from efficiently utilizing solar energy. In current study, a novel collective effect attributed to electronic coupling in assembly of semiconductor nanocrystals has been found to result in band gap narrowing in such nanocrystal assembled materials. The photocatalytic and photovoltaic studies indicate that this band gap narrowing can make a success of enhancing solar energy conversion efficiency substantially. In principle, electronic coupling assembly of nanocrystals may be spread over all of the inorganic semiconductors in any anticipated structures. Up to now, band gap narrowing has been achieved in CdS, TiO2, CdSe, CdTe and WO3. The real behavior of nanocrystal assembly system is very complicated, which involves many other scientific concerns, such as electronic and energy transfers. This suggests that the resultant band gap can be modulated by controlling nanocrystal size, inter-particle spacing and surface characteristics. Current study is anticipated to shed light on a new aspect of nanotechnology and show its importance in the band gap engineering of semiconductors.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Dark fild TEM image of CdS NTs. (b) HRTEM image of a tube wall. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs (diffusive reflectance mode on compact powder sample); inset displays a digital image of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs dispersed in water. (d) EDS spectra of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs. (e) HRTEM image of an interface between two adjacent NCs on a CdS NT. (f) EELS spectra collected from the two adjacent NCs and their interface on a CdS NT. (g) XPS spectra of CdS NTs and individual CdS NCs. (h) Illustration of energy band construction in two adjacent CdS NCs, which are combined with electronic coupling of an interfacial cadmium cation-cation pair.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–d) Relaxed geometry of model structures used for electronic structure calculations. (a) ideal (110) surface of zincblende CdS (Model A). (b) half the sulfur atoms are removed from the surface (Model B). (c) a contact of two (110) surfaces with mirror symmetry where the distance is set to 120% of layer-by-layer thickness in the bulk (Model C). (d) half the sulfur atoms were removed from the interface (model D). (e–h) Calculated total and local density of states (DOS) for Model A–D, respectively. (f) and (h) also show DOS projected on the cadmium atoms at the surface or interface. The vertical broken line denotes the highest occupied state in each system.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Photoluminescence spectra (Excitation λ = 360 nm). (a) Individual surfactant-free CdS NCs. (b) Dodecylamine modified CdS NCs. (c) CdS NC assembled NTs. (d) CdS NC assembled nanocages.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Time course of hydrogen evolution under simulated sunlight irradiation (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). (b) Hydrogen evolution with monochromatic filters equipped to the simulated sunlight apparatus. (c) Calculated quantum yields according to the results of (d).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Cross-section SEM image of CdS photoelectrode (PE-1). (b) TEM image of CdS nanocages scraped from PE-1. (c) HRTEM image of a nanocage. (d) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdS materials in PE-1 (nanocages), PE-2 (surfactant-free NCs) and PE-3 (DDA modified NCs). (e) I–V characteristics of the PEC cells under simulated solar irradiation (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). (f) Current density at 0 V bias voltage as monochromatic filters were equipped to the simulated sunlight apparatus. (g) Calculated ICPE according to the results of (f).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, facilities information, supplemented data, and details of theoretical calculations. See DOI: 10.1039/c0ee00807a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
