Lignocellulose-derived hydrogel/aerogel-based flexible quasi-solid-state supercapacitors with high-performance: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02281D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02281D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14233-14264Lignocellulose-derived hydrogel/aerogel-based flexible quasi-solid-state supercapacitors with high-performance: a review

        
          
            Peng 
            Gu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Liu†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Qingxi 
            Hou
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yonghao 
            Ni
          
        
      *b
aTianjin University of Science & Technology, Tianjin 300457, China. E-mail: wei.liu2009@hotmail.com
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, New Brunswick E3B 5A3, Canada. E-mail: yonghao@unb.ca
Received 
      18th March 2021
    , Accepted 19th May 2021First published on 24th May 2021AbstractThe proliferation of electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices demands more advanced power/energy storage technologies. Flexible quasi-solid-state supercapacitors (FSSCs) have been attracting rapid and considerable attention as they exhibit unique and promising advantages, such as a long cycle life, light weight, high power density, and environment friendliness. Hydrogels, commonly synthesized by chemical and/or physical cross-linking of monomers and/or polymers, have already become an emerging platform for the rapid development of FSSCs. Lignocellulose materials are green/sustainable, abundant, and low-cost; due to the synergy of lignocellulose and hydrogels, the development of lignocellulose-based hydrogels/aerogels with distinguished physicochemical properties (e.g., high flexibility, good mechanical strength, and rapid charge transport) offers emerging opportunities for FSSCs. This review highlights the fundamental understanding and recent developments of lignocellulose and supercapacitors, with focus on the latest concepts/technologies in developing hydro- and aerogels based on lignocellulose as major components in FSSCs, structural design, and improvement of the performance of lignocellulose-based electrodes and electrolytes. Furthermore, the challenges and opportunities during the development of lignocellulose-based hydrogels/aerogels in FSSCs are discussed.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices have played an increasingly crucial role in the modern industrialization era. It is unquestionable that supercapacitors (SCs) have successfully attracted more and more attention in different EES systems.1,2 EES devices, such as batteries and SCs, are becoming lighter and lighter, with other attributes, such as low volumes, high energy density, and high flexibility for flexible electronic products.3–5 Compared with traditional SCs, flexible solid-state supercapacitors (FSSCs) show numerous advantages such as light weight, bendability and flexibility, small sizes, and good safety, as well as good convenience to integrate into electronic equipment. These advantages make FSSCs a good and promising alternative for these flexible electronic products to store energy in the future, for example, implantable/wearable healthcare devices, communication equipment, and so on. Therefore, FSSCs have become a hot topic.6,7
In the past few decades, extensive commercialization of flexible electronic devices has brought new opportunities and challenges for FSSCs.8 Meanwhile, due to the limitation of traditional capacitor materials in the development of FSSCs, hydrogels have been successfully and increasingly introduced into the FSSC field. Hydrogels have obvious advantages such as satisfactory stretchability, good processability, and high ionic conductivity.9,10 However, most of the major components of hydrogels that have been previously reported are derived from polymers that are based on petrochemical-derived materials,11 which is not in harmony with the sustainable development of electronic products. Instead of petrochemical-based polymers, natural biological polymers from abundant, renewable, biodegradable, and cheap lignocellulose fit well with the requirement of green, economical, and metal-free FSSCs.12–14 Cellulose, lignin, and hemicelluloses are the main constituents of lignocellulose. The annual production of lignocellulose is approximately estimated to be 150 to 200 billion metric tons.15,16 Lignocellulose is presently well utilized; in fact, many industries, for example, the wood product industry and the pulp and paper industry, are using lignocellulose as their raw materials. Lignocellulose is used as an essential ingredient in traditional polymer products,17,18 or as a precursor to be modified via chemical or mechanical methods. The green feature of lignocellulose promotes its utilization, such as lignocellulose-based hydrogels, in the construction of FSSCs. Therefore, lignocellulose-derived hydrogels are regarded as a potential alternative for the next-generation of FSSCs.19
Particularly, in the last few years, there has been a large body of publications related to lignocellulose-derived hydrogels in the applications of FSSCs. Therefore, a systematical review on the latest progress and innovations in lignocellulose-derived hydrogels based FSSCs, including the fundamental understanding and novel design of key component of FSSCs, is necessary and highly required. Herein, this review summarizes the latest advances in FSSCs derived from lignocellulose-derived hydrogels/aerogels, as shown in the following three sections: (1) the main characteristics of lignocellulose and its derivatives (mainly nanocellulose and lignin), and their effects on FSSCs; (2) the recent development of flexible electrolytes and electrodes for FSSCs, and the hydro- and aerogels derived from lignocellulose as major components in FSSCs; (3) the future research trends of lignocellulose-based FSSCs to promote their sustainable and green development.
2. Overview of the main components and properties of lignocellulose
Biomass provided essential support for the mankind for thousands of years until fossil resources sprung up about two centuries ago.20 However, with the diminishing of fossil resources and the ever-increasing concern about environmental issues, one of the foremost challenges in the 21st century is to promote green and sustainable development for achieving biomass-based circular economy. Broadly defined, biomass includes all plants, and microorganisms, as well as animals and their production waste (Fig. 1).21,22 Lignocellulose refers to the resources fixed in organics due to the photosynthesis of plants, representing more than 90% of whole plants.23 Lignocellulose has three main components, i.e., cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin, with weight percentages of 40–60%, 10–40%, and 15–30%, respectively (Fig. 1);24,25 cellulose is the core of the lignocellulosic matrix, and hemicelluloses and lignin function as fillers and binders that wrap cellulose molecules in the form of fibrils or fiber bundles, all of which are connected with each other through both physical interactions and chemical bonding.26 Lignocellulose shows great potential to replace fossil resources in the production of clean energy and high-value chemicals, especially organic oxygenates.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the main types of biomass and chemical structures of major components of lignocellulose.25 Copyright © 2018 Royal Society Chemistry. 
2.1 Cellulose
Cellulose consists of several hundreds to many thousands of D-glucose monomeric units that are linearly connected by β-1,4-glycosidic bonds, known as (C6H10O5)n, with a degree of polymerization of 800–10000.27 Abundant hydroxyl groups on a single glucose chain can form hydrogen bonding networks (Fig. 1). The networks can hold carbon chains tightly together side-by-side to form microfibers, and the intra-chain and inter-chain hydrogen bonding networks endow it with high mechanical strength.28 Due to inherent hydrophilicity and 3D hierarchical structures, cellulose can be processed into various stable structures in the range of films to hydrogels.29 It is expected that these comprehensive properties ensure the use of cellulose as an ideal basic material for different functional materials, and an important supplement in different applications.
Cellulose-based nanomaterials, e.g., cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) and cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), have been rapidly developed, which can be manufactured in a top-down manner by a bio-chemical method (acidolysis, enzymolysis, oxidation, etc.) or mechanical method (grinding, high-pressure homogenization, etc.) from cellulose fiber.30–32 In this section, CNFs and CNCs are chosen and briefly described as follows: (1) CNFs are flexible fiber-like structures with a low diameter (<100 nm) and long length (>500 nm), and are made up of both amorphous and crystalline domains (Fig. 2a).33 Thanks to the longer longitudinal dimension (approximately several micrometers) and the retention of crystalline regions and part of the amorphous regions,34 CNFs exhibit good transmittance, excellent flexibility, and impact resistance.35 On the one hand, CNFs are excellent candidates to partially replace glass and metal substrates in the traditional electronic industry. In addition to mechanical support, they can also provide flexibility and scalability for devices, displaying a significant impact on designing FSSC structures especially when they are used for wearable electronic devices. On the other hand, by introducing capacitive nanomaterials including carbon materials, electronic conducting polymers, and metal oxides into the interconnected CNF network, the electrode materials with a sustainable and high power amplifier can be obtained, which is the most attractive feature of CNFs for FSSCs.36 CNF-based electrode materials have excellent porosity and accessibility of different ionic species to electrode surfaces, resulting in a remarkable charging/discharging rate capability of electrodes.37 Furthermore, because the size of CNFs is smaller than the visible light wavelength, their derived materials have high transparency and significant scattering ability in the light transmission direction (Fig. 2b).38,39 (2) CNCs are rigid rod-like particles with a diameter of 3–35 nm, a length of about several hundred nanometers, and higher crystallinity and rigidity than CNFs (Fig. 2a).40 During the preparation process, the disordered or sub-crystalline region of the cellulose is preferentially hydrolyzed, while the crystalline region remains intact (Fig. 2c).41 Thus, CNCs have higher crystallinity and better mechanical strength, both of which are particularly suited for strength and stiffness reinforcement.42 High aspect ratio CNCs are conducive to combining with active materials or transforming into carbon based materials to fabricate electrodes with developed specific surface areas. Besides, the chiral nematic structure of CNCs is unique to produce energy storage electrodes with high-performance.43 Surprisingly, as a dielectric material, the positive charges on CNCs can form an extra electric field that promotes the creation of added induced charges, which markedly improves the electrochemical performance of FSSCs (Fig. 2d).44
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of CNF and CNC production from cellulose fiber.33 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD,41 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) Schematic illustration of the CNF/PAR hybrid substrate.37 Copyright © 2015 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Schematics of idealized cellulose nanocrystals after sulfuric acid hydrolysis of disordered regions.41 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (d) CNCs as an effective dielectric improve the performance of generators (lighting up to 100 multicolor commercials led lights).42 Copyright © 2017 Royal Society Chemistry. 
There has been research on cellulose and its nanomaterials in the energy storage field because of many unique structures and properties. So far, CNFs or CNCs as building blocks can be synergistically processed with other materials (e.g., carbon based materials, metal oxide composites, and conducting polymers) to fabricate electrodes and electrolyte. Due to the abovementioned characteristics, they can be potentially assembled into various nanoscale configurations to satisfy the requirements of novel design and optimization of FSSCs (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the importance and functionality of cellulose nanomaterials in SCs. 
2.2 Lignin
Lignin, the second largest biopolymer and the most abundant natural phenolic polymer in the world, functions as an adhesive in plant fiber cell walls, thus improving plant cell wall rigidity and fiber physical strength.45 Lignin has huge abundance, renewability, degradability, and low cost.46 Dependent on its sources, lignin can be classified as native lignin and technical lignin. Native lignin refers to the original lignin structure in lignocellulose without any modification.47 Technical lignin is defined as a form of lignin isolated from lignocellulose or recovered from industrial wastes or byproducts. Common technical lignin materials include Kraft lignin,48 enzymatic lignin,49 organosolv lignin,50 hydrolysis lignin,51 pyrolytic lignin,52etc. At present, most technical lignin are obtained from chemical pulping processes via breaking the chemical bonds between lignin and carbohydrates at high temperature and pressure.
Lignin is a complex amorphous long-chain heterogeneous polymer of phenyl-propane connected by ether bonds.53 Lignin molecules are mainly composed of three major aromatic alcohol precursors including p-coumaryl, coniferyl, and sinapyl alcohol with different percentages for the lignin from different plants (Fig. 4a). Aromatic alcohol precursors are conjugated via different bonds to form monolignols,54,55 (Fig. 4b), and these monolignols are randomly connected at different positions by ether or carbon–carbon bonds during the lignification process, resulting in a variety of interunit linkages in different lignin sub-structures.56a The presence of various functional groups, especially hydroxyl, carboxyl, and methoxy groups, endows lignin with a highly chemical modification ability such as grafting or polymerization to obtain lignin and lignin-derived functional materials. Moreover, the lignin structure changes due to de- and re-polymerization in post-processing steps. The functional groups in lignin and lignin-derived materials have many active reaction sites that can promote the storage and transport of ions for SCs. Fig. 4c shows some lignin-based functional materials for flexible electronics.57–60
 Fig. 4  (a) The aromatic alcohol precursors and monolignols in the lignin molecule. (b) Type of inter-lignin bond ((I) β-O-4′ sub-structure; (II) β-O-4′, α-O-4′ and 5–5′ linkage in the dibenzodioxocin sub-structure; (III) β-5′ linkage in the phenylcoumaran sub-structure; (IV) β-β′ in the resinol sub-structure; and (V) β-1′ linkage in the spirodienone sub-structure).56a Copyright © 2000 Elsevier. (c) Some lignin-based functional materials for use in flexible electronics.56b Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Science BV.56c Copyright © 2018 Nature Publishing Group.56d Copyright © 2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GMBH.56e Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Science SA.56f Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GMBH.56g Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Science BV.56h Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GMBH. 
2.3 Hemicelluloses
Hemicelluloses include xylans, xyloglucans, glucomannans, mannans, and β-(1→3,1→4)-glucans. One of the characteristics of hemicelluloses is their great diversity, for example, in terms of molecular weight, side group type, site, degree, and frequency of branching, even within the same plant source and hemicellulose category.61 The high diversity of hemicelluloses is both an opportunity and a challenge, i.e., it can “customize” the application specification. The physical properties of hemicelluloses are different from those of cellulose and lignin.62 Compared with the rigid and crystalline structure of cellulose, hemicelluloses are amorphous, and generally more chemically reactive.63 In plant cell walls, hemicelluloses can bind large amounts of water due to their amorphous, hydrophilic, and highly charged properties, providing inspiration in the design of functional materials.64
Compared with cellulose and lignin, hemicelluloses as a carbon source have the following advantages: (1) the extraction process of hemicelluloses is easy and simple; (2) hemicelluloses can function as “soft” tissue in the formation of carbon with a special structure;65 (3) hemicelluloses as a by-product in the bioethanol production of lignocellulose (mainly cellulose) can be used as a carbon source to achieve high value-added utilization of lignocellulose.66 Due to high carbon content, reproducibility, environmental sustainability, and special structure, hemicelluloses can be used as a potential carbon material. For example, hemicelluloses-derived aqueous hydrolyzed products have been used as carbon precursors for SCs via hydrothermal carbonization processes.67
3. Flexible solid-state supercapacitors
The basic supercapacitor (SC) structural unit consists of two electrodes, electrolyte, a diaphragm, and the outer casing (Fig. 5a). According to the charge storage mechanism, SCs can be divided into (1) electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC), and (2) pseudo-capacitors (PC) (Fig. 5b and c). In EDLCs, the electrical charge is stored by the adsorption and desorption of ions on the surface of electrodes, a physical process that occurs without any faradaic reactions, and the capacitance is strongly dependent on the surface characteristics of electrodes. Different from EDLC, for PC, the charge is stored through surface or near-surface charge transfer reactions, and the charge/discharge behavior is similar to that of a capacitor, rather than an ordinary battery.68 In terms of construction of materials, SCs can be divided into three types, i.e., EDLC, PC, and hybrid capacitors (HCs) (Fig. 5d). HCs usually use an EDLC material on one electrode, and a PC material or battery material on the other. The properties of materials determine the electrochemical properties of different kinds of SCs. As shown in Fig. 5e, the operating potential window, V, can be expanded by using negative and positive electrodes made of different materials, as in a battery.2Fig. 5f and g depict the difference in charge storage mechanisms between EDLC and HC. The HC concept design takes advantage of different materials, thereby improving the performance of SCs as a whole.71
 Fig. 5  (a) Components of typical SCs.69 Copyright © 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC). (c) Pseudocapacitors (PC). (d) Hybrid capacitors (HC).70 Copyright © 2016 Royal Society Chemistry. (e) Schematic plot of the electrode potentials (V+ and V−) and cell potential (V) versus specific capacity for symmetric (blue lines) and hybrid (red lines) configurations. (f) Typical symmetric configuration featuring activated carbon (AC) as both positive and negative electrodes. (g) Example of a hybrid device consisting of an insertion metal oxide negative electrode (anode) combined with a high surface area carbon positive electrode (cathode).71 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The evaluation of FSSCs mainly refers to the structure, electrochemical properties, flexibility, mechanical strength, processibility, and so on. (1) Structurally, unlike traditional SCs, FSSC electrodes are flexible or freestanding flexible electrodes without additional conducting additives, binders, or current collectors. Flexible electrode materials with excellent conductivity can serve as both current collectors and active materials, thus simplifying the design and structure of devices. FSSCs can combine two electrodes and electrolytes, thereby altering the overall performance of the device.72 (2) Flexible features (e.g., stretchable, twistable, compressible, foldable, bendable, and mechanically flexibile) of FSSCs are essential for practical applications such as wearable/implantable devices. FSSCs are particularly suited for wearable and implantable devices in the future. (3) FSSCs should have no significant performance degradation under tension or compression, and even have the function of self-healing in the case of rupture.73 (4) In addition, with the emergence and development of wearable/implantable devices, new requirements have been put forward for SCs as energy storage components, which is expected to be portability, excellent mechanical properties (e.g., toughness), and integrated design.74
3.1 Current advances of the main components in FSSCs

3.1.1 Substrate-supported flexible electrodes. 
A substrate-supported flexible electrode with good physical strength and high energy capacitance is essential and vital for FSSCs. On the one hand, one or more conducting polymers with high specific capacitance, mechanical flexibility and good processability can be chosen as the active electrode materials; on the other hand, flexible substrates should have very low resistance and excellent mechanical strength. In addition, good compatibility of the substrates with the active electrode material is very necessary.75 Active electrode materials can be loaded on substrates by means of inkjet printing, deposition, dipping–drying, and hydrothermal methods. So far, most research on flexible electrodes has been focused on flexible substrates. The common flexible substrates include:
(1) Flexible metal substrates, such as titanium, copper, nickel, and stainless steel, have been widely used as substrates for flexible electrodes because of their good conductivity and mechanical properties. The electroactive materials can be directly synthesized on metal surfaces without additional adhesives or binders. Moreover, the active materials in contact with the metal substrate can be evenly distributed on the substrate (Fig. 6a and b).76,77 In order to overcome the shortcomings (i.e., low load in electrode materials, and high difficulty of charge transfer to the substrate surface), many studies have found that 3D conductive structures (e.g., porous metal substrates, networks or foams as substrates) facilitate the increase of electrode loads (Fig. 6c and d).78,79
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of a metal substrate-based electrode. (b) SEM images of the active materials uniformly distributed on the substrate surface.76 Copyright © 2017 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) SEM image for the stainless steel mesh substrate. (d) The formation process of RuCo2O4 over the stainless-steel mesh by electrodeposition.77 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH. (e) SEM image of carbon paper.82 Copyright © 2014 Royal Society Chemistry. (f) Schematic diagram of the implantation of composites into carbon paper.83 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier. 
(2) Carbon-based supporting substrates (e.g., carbon cloth, carbon paper, carbon microfiber, and carbon nanofoam) are much more suitable for FSSCs because of their high conductivity and low corrosion resistance.80 FSSCs assembled with such materials not only show high flexibility, but also have decreased device weight, thus improving energy density.81 The regularly arranged carbon nanofibers can provide a large surface area for active electrode materials because of the presence of enormous nanoscale pores (Fig. 6e).82 It is found that, by implanting the composite within the void space of carbon paper, free-standing integrated cathodes with the architecture of a continuous conductive 3D network are constructed (Fig. 6f).83
(3) Yarn (fiber)-like substrates have small size and light-weight 1D lines with the diameters in the range of micrometers to millimeters (Fig. 7a).84 Among the various FSSCs, yarn fiber-based FSSCs have demonstrated high design versatility (i.e., ability to be fabricated into intelligent wearable textiles), excellent flexibility (i.e., ability to be made into various desired shapes that are suitable for different positions),85–87 and superior compatibility to other devices to form an integrated multifunctional system.88 Yarn (fiber)-like FSSCs inherit yarn/fiber features, including twisting, weaving and knitting (Fig. 7b).89 Yarn fibers with a low diameter improve electrochemical performance by shortening ion transport paths, but also reduce structural rigidity and bonding ability; the limited available connections between fibers make them vulnerable especially under dynamic conditions.90
 Fig. 7  (a) Preparation scheme to produce yarn and rope from fiber, and their SEM images.84 Copyright © 2019 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of coaxial fiber.88 Copyright © 2014 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of textile based SCs for wearable electronics.93 Copyright © 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (d) SEM images of commercial textile and active material-coated textiles.92 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (e) UV-vis transmittance spectra of a piece of commercial PET film.99 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration for the photothermal SCs packaged with the PET film under solar irradiation.100 Copyright © 2020 Royal Society Chemistry. 
(4) Textile-based substrates exhibit excellent flexibility and a stretchable nature, both of which are desirable for flexible electronics. In addition, porous textiles provide sufficient loading sites for active materials, facilitating the adsorption of electroactive materials into the structure. this leads to increased active material area mass loading, and thus high area power and energy density,91,92 which is a favorable attribute for the next generation of electronic textiles (Fig. 7c).93Fig. 7d shows a typical microstructure of the pre-synthesized coated textiles, in which active materials are uniformly distributed on commercial textiles with a high loading. Therefore, textile-based FSSCs show very promising application prospects in integrated systems for wearable electronic devices.
(5) Nonconducting polymer composites, including polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),94,95 polyurethane (PU),96 and ethylene/vinyl acetate copolymer composites97 have been studied as flexible substrates for FSSCs due to their convenient availability, good water-proof and wet-proof properties and transparency.98 For example, the transparency of PET thin films is 91.3% at 550 nm (Fig. 7e).99 Additionally, packaging photothermal SCs via transparent PET substrate reserves enhanced photothermal capacitance (Fig. 7f). This work provides innovative strategies for flexible SCs, and a new concept for these optical/temperature sensor components.100


3.1.2 Freestanding flexible electrodes. 
Although the substrate-supported flexible electrodes containing active materials exhibit excellent properties and structure, the substrate itself is inactive and makes up a large portion of the electrode volume, severely reducing specific capacitance and restricting the electrochemical performance of SCs. In order to overcome this deficiency, freestanding flexible electrodes are designed, showing a certain flexibility and electrochemical activity.101–103 The emerging approach can avoid the utilization of additional conductive additives or binders, or current collectors, thus considerably reducing the the total weight of the whole device. The freestanding flexible electrodes mainly use graphene and its derivatives. Graphene sheets (GSs) have large effective areas, high conductivity, and 3D paths for the transport of ions and electrons. But, GSs generally have poor electrochemical performance mainly due to the van der Waals forces and interplanar π–π interactions between GSs, leading to aggregation and re-stacking of GSs during the production. The agglomeration reduces the surface area of graphene films, and hinders the diffusion of electrolyte ions, thereby affecting specific capacity. To improve the specific capacitance of GSs, various approaches have been studied such as addition of spacers,104 and crumpling of graphene sheets.105 Due to the unique 2D structures, abundant functional groups, and distinguished physical strength of graphene oxide (GO), it has already become an ideal candidate for electrode materials.106 The mechanical properties of macroscopic GO flakes are significantly inferior to those of monolayer GO flakes because of relatively weak interactions between interlayers of GO sheets. Adding a small amount of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and metal ions into pure GO paper can improve the interlayer interaction between adjacent GO papers because they can act as a mechanical reinforcing and cross-linking agent.107Fig. 8 illustrates the mechanisms on stress transfer and fracturing behaviors in pure GO and Cu–CNTs/GO nanocomposite paper. As the load is applied, the relative interlayer slipping between GO flakes can be replaced by the deformation of the C–C bonds of GO flakes before the rupture of Cu–CNT/GO paper, thus enhancing the mechanical properties of GO sheets.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of different stress transfer mechanisms and fracture behaviors of pure GO (a–c) and Cu–CNT/GO (a′–c′) nanocomposite papers.107 Copyright © 2019 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. 


3.1.3 Flexible all-solid-state electrolytes. 
Flexible all-solid-state electrolytes mainly include inorganic solid electrolytes and polymer electrolytes. The former are not suitable for FSSCs because they usually need to be dried into powder before use.108 The latter usually can be subdivided into solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) and gel polymer electrolyte (GPE).109 SPE has relatively low conductivity and poor connection with electrodes, which greatly limits the application of such materials in SCs.110 Compared with other flexible electrolytes, GPE has high conductivity, and can meet the requirement for flexibility as the main part of flexible SCs, which has been used more and more in FSSCs. This is mainly attributed to the fact that the micro-structural network in GPE provides sufficient channels for ionic conduction and is the main factor that enhances the electrochemical energy storage.111
GPE is usually composed of a polymer matrix and a liquid electrolyte, but traditional gel-type organic electrolytes are mostly achieved by adsorbing strong acid or alkali solution as liquid electrolyte through gels.112 Both strong acids and alkalis are corrosive and have potential safety hazards when they are used in wearable devices. As one of the most principal natural polymers, lignocellulose has been widely used as a sustainable reinforcing additive in various composites. From the environmental perspective, constructing gel electrolytes using renewable materials is highly desirable but challenging. Therefore, it is promising to use lignocellulose-based hydrogels in flexible FSSC materials with high-performance.


3.1.4 Practical applications of FSSCs. 
The structure of flexible supercapacitors can be mainly divided into three types: 1D linear structure, 2D interdigital structure, and 3D sandwich structure (Fig. 9).113–115 These types of flexible supercapacitors have their own characteristics, but there is no essential difference in working mechanisms. In this section, we briefly review the practical application and the latest progress of FSSCs.
 Fig. 9  Main types of FSSCs. (a) 1D linear structure.113 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH. (b) 2D interdigital structure.114 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH. (c) 3D sandwich structure.115 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier. 
(1) Piezoelectric supercapacitors. 
Piezoelectric materials have the ability to convert ubiquitously irregular and low-frequency mechanical vibrations (e.g., heartbeat, breathing) into electricity, which have been extensively studied in piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs).116,117 FSSCs can be easily merged into electronic chips, which is suitable for implantable electronic devices. Consequently, energy conversion and/or storage processes can be integrated into a unit via introducing piezoelectric supercapacitors to replace traditional ones.118 Briefly, the dipole moment and bond charge density on electrodes surfaces can be varied by external strain, the resulting potential drop drives the migration of ions between positive and negative electrodes, and creates an electric double-layer at the interface; when external stress is released a self-discharging process happens, i.e., some ions are released from electrodes and flow back to the original position.119
(2) Photo-supercapacitors. 
Solar energy as the most abundant and available energy source can meet the future global energy demand of mankind.120 Currently, due to low energy density and the intermittent nature of solar irradiation, there are techno-economic challenges in the large-scale utilization of solar energy, such as solar photovoltaic power generation devices.121 Developing small-scale portable and wearable electronic devices entirely driven by solar energy is a unique opportunity to make use of solar energy. Photo-supercapacitors (PSCs) can collect fluctuating electricity, convert it to an electric current, and store the electric current in the form of charges, which is an important prerequisite for developing solar-powered wearable electronic devices. The fiber PSCs can be manufactured by integrating a fiber-shaped micro-supercapacitor and a fiber-shaped dye-sensitized solar cell into one device (Fig. 10a).122 The device usually exhibits a low mechanical stability because the fiber electrodes would be peeled off from each other when they are bent due to the use of liquid electrolyte. A coaxial, all solid-state “energy fiber” was investigated for its integrated functions of photovoltaic conversion and energy storage (Fig. 10b).123 As for photovoltaic conversion, the generated charge can be quickly separated and transferred to produce a high photocurrent because the coaxial structure brings a highly effective contact area, facilitating rapid charge transfer. In addition, various structures can be easily woven because of high flexibility (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the integrated wire-shaped device for photoelectric conversion and energy storage.122 Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) Schematic illustration of the structures of all solid-state, coaxial and integrated fiber devices. (c) Flexibility and weave ability of “energy fibers”.123 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (d) Design and manufacturing process flow of a nickel-pedicle SMA wire. (e) Schematic demonstration of a SMA supercapacitor woven with traditional fabric and fabrication of a shape-recoverable smart textile.128 Copyright © 2016 Royal Society Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of fiber-shaped supercapacitor and the resulting textile that are reversibly transformed into flexural or elongated states and recovered to the original shape.129 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 
(3) Shape-memory supercapacitors. 
Many electronic products that use FSSCs unavoidably undergo many kinds of irreversible deformations. So, it is necessary to incorporate shape-memory materials into FSSCs since they can help the devices recover to their initial shape and/or size after deformations.124 Shape-memory alloys (SMAs) and polymers (SMPs) are mainly used. They can be deformed at an increased transition temperature under the stimuli of external forces, and then the deformed shape is hardened upon cooling. The fixed shape can remain stable for a long period until it is heated to a higher temperature than the transition temperature.125,126 In comparison with SMAs, SMPs are soft, lightweight, and cheap, and have excellent extension (to several hundred percent), but the recovery speed is much lower than that of SMAs, and the deform stress is 100 times lower than that of SMAs. In addition to bending, SMPs also cause a reversible deformation of stretching/elongation127 in FSSCs. Structurally, in comparison with bandlike-shaped FSSCs, wire-shaped memory FSSCs are much more readily woven into a shape memory energy storage textile with traditional fabrics, Fig. 10d and e.128Fig. 10f shows a fiber-shaped supercapacitor with shape memory; it is fabricated by winding neatly arranged CNT sheets on a PU substrate, whose electrochemical performances are maintained during the deformation process.129
(4) Microbial supercapacitors. 
A microbial electrochemical technique is emerging technology that can degrade organic matter through microorganisms, while simultaneously producing electrical energy.130 With the recent rapid development of bio-inspired materials, biological pseudocapacitance materials including redox cofactors inside biological entities have the potential for replacing the traditional redox-based pseudo-capacitor.131 The electrons between biological entities and the electrodes of the biological pseudo-capacitor cannot be generally transferred because the outer membrane of the cell prevents electron exchange between redox cofactors within the cell and between the electrodes. One special case is that of the electrons taken from “exoelectrogens” through their extracellular electron transport.132,133Fig. 11a shows the schematic illustration of the working mechanism of microbial SCs, i.e., when a high-speed switch turns off, the electrons are stored in the biofilm on graphene anode, while the electrons are quickly discharged when it is on, resulting in an very high power density and current. The concept has been applied in various microbial electrochemical technologies, for example, microbial fuel cells, and microbial electrolysis cells.134
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of microbial SCs.134 Copyright © 2015 Elsevier. (b) Full-device fabrication electrochromic supercapacitors with fantastic patterns.142 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the autonomic electricity-triggered damage reporting and self-healing concept.145 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH. (d) Design and manufacturing process flow of a flexible, electrically, and mechanically self-healing supercapacitor. (e) Schematic representation of the self-healing capabilities of the electrical conductivity of SWCNT films spread on self-healing substrates.146 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (f) Design and manufacturing process flow of a magnetic-assisted self-healable yarn-based supercapacitor.147 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of components of self-healing polyelectrolyte. (h) Schematic illustration of self-healing electrolyte (3 mm thickness and 10 mm wide) to ultimately support a 100 g mass, before healing (left) and after the third breaking/healing cycle (right); red rectangles indicate the wound/healing position.148 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Science SA. 
(5) Electrochromic supercapacitors. 
During electrochemical reduction/oxidation processes, some electrode materials undergo reversible color changes induced by the applied external voltage, i.e., electrochromism.135 This phenomenon can be clearly seen on these transparent current collectors. Electrochromic materials can store/release ions and electrons during the process of charging/discharging, which can help to develop an integrated energy storage and electrochromic device.136,137 For example, electrochromic supercapacitors that can change their appearance according to the charging status have been developed (Fig. 11b). So far, transition-metal oxides, nickel oxide, Prussian blue, and conducting polymers as individual electrodes have been studied in electrochromic supercapacitors. The current collector is another key component of electrochromic supercapacitors, which ensures excellent performance of the active materials after many cycles. Various wrapping layers have been used as flexible and stretchable current collectors, which effectively solve the deterioration of electrochromic supercapacitors caused by the delamination of active materials as a result of mechanical deformation.138–140 At the same time, a high degree of transparency is needed.141 The development of electrochromic supercapacitors with unique functionalities requires not only energy storage, but also aesthetic features.142
(6) Self-healing supercapacitors. 
FSSCs as a power source will inevitably suffer from local stresses under deformations, causing permanent mechanical failure. The failure severely limits the reliability and life expectancy of FSSCs, leading to a series of problems (e.g., electronic equipment collapse, electronic waste, inconvenience, and potential safety hazard).143,144 Therefore, it is vital to develop FSSCs that can recover their structure and electrical properties after damage. Self-healing materials can respond to these external stimulus (e.g., pH, heat, light, and electricity), and autonomically heal, and repair damages by applying an appropriate voltage. Fig. 11c shows the autonomic electricity-triggered damage and self-healing concept.145 As shown in Fig. 11d, a self-healing supercapacitor was designed by diffusing a single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) film on a self-healable substrate composed of a supramolecular network and a layered rutile flower-like TiO2 nanostructure. Upon being subjected to mechanical damage, the separation area of the SWCNT layer was reconnected through the transverse motion of the self-healing composite layer, restoring the adhesion and electrical conductivity of the device (Fig. 11e).146 Compared with traditional supercapacitors, the use of fiber micro-supercapacitors is severely limited by accidental damage since it is difficult to reconnect the broken fiber electrodes made of multiple tiny fibers with a diameter of <20 mm. Fortunately, a self-healing fiber supercapacitor has been successfully produced by wrapping a wire-like electrode around a polymer shell with self-healing ability (Fig. 11f).147 In addition to restoring mechanical and structural performance, self-healing materials with multiple functionalities have also become a focus. Among them, non-covalent interaction hydrogels involving hydrogen bonds, host–guest interactions, and electrostatic interactions stand out because of their excellent electrochemical and stretchable properties, and high healing efficiency (Fig. 11g and h).148

3.2 Lignocellulose-based hydrogels as electrodes/electrolytes in FSSCs
The key features/quality parameters of SCs include mechanical strength, flexibility, conductivity, electrochemical properties, and self-healing ability, as well as elastic ability, and so on. Lignocellulose, with unique structures, biocompatibility, surface chemistry, rich functional groups, good processibility, etc., is an excellent material for use as an integral part of hydrogels. The use of lignocellulosic materials can enhance the performance of hydrogels, particularly those related to SC applications.149 Their intrinsic advantages can be summarized as follows: (1) lignocellulose nanomaterials, such as cellulose nanofibrils and nanocrystals, can provide high strength, such as Young’s modulus, and tensile strength; the high Young's modulus, for example, from cellulose nanocrystals, make it possible to overcome the inferior mechanical strength of polymer hydrogels; (2) intrinsic entangled web-like structures are suited to generate strong film/hydrogel/aerogel substrates for these flexible energy storage devices; (3) high carbon content makes lignocellulose nanomaterials a potential precursor for manufacturing porous or hybrid carbon-based materials with high conductivity; lignocellulose nanomaterials with a high specific surface area can promote ionic transportation in the porous electrodes/separator; in addition, lignocellulose contains desirable elements such as nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus, which can enhance the electro-chemical properties of biomass derived carbon materials; (4) highly active groups, e.g., abundant hydroxyl groups on cellulose, can be easily modified and combined with other active materials.
Hydrogels are defined as hydrophilic gels made of three dimensional network structures, which are primarily composed of water along with the solvated molecules/polymers/inorganic particles, and so on. Hydrogels have emerged as an attractive material platform for energy-related applications such as EES owing to their tailorable physiochemical and biological properties.150,151 With the rapid development of FSSCs, the hydrogels with outstanding physicochemical properties (e.g., mechanical strength, flexibility, and the electron transport rate) offer emerging opportunities for the next generation of FSSCs.152,153 Owing to cross-linked polymer networks, hydrogels exhibit elastic solid properties such as deformability and softness.154 Hydrogels are cross-linked polymer networks based on chemical and/or physical interactions, such as electrostatic interactions, physical entanglement, metal coordination, and covalent cross-linking.155,156 Due to significant tunability of key elements, e.g., polymers/monomers, the crosslinking type and conditions, polymer interactions, added functional groups/materials, and aqueous electrolytes, hydrogels provide excellent electronic conductivity, structural elasticity,157 a 3D interconnected framework,158 and a molecular transport rate,159 leading to high performance of energy storage devices (Fig. 12). The required attributes of electrodes and electrolytes in EES devices can be met by the rational design of hydrogels via customization of building blocks, topological structure adjustment,160 and functional additive integration.161
 Fig. 12  Tunable elements in hydrogels that are beneficial to energy storage devices. 

3.2.1 Lignocellulose-based hydrogels as electrodes in FSSCs. 
Some other methods have been proposed to produce lignocellulose-based hydrogels as electrodes, for example, electro-precipitation. Kim et al. electrodeposited pH-responsive TOCN hydrogels on the surface of conductive materials.162 As shown in Fig. 13a, pH reduction neutralizes the surface charge and triggers a sol–gel conversion to form hydrogels, which deposit on the anode. The galvanostatic charging and discharging cyclic stability test showed specific capacities of 260 mA h g−1 and 162 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles. It is an attractive and environmentally friendly approach to fabricate electrodes for different types of FSSCs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Fabrication of multilayer hydrogel composite materials on conductive substrates by electrochemical precipitation.162 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the PC–CNF–GG–glycerol hydrogel-based injectable electrode.163 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of fabricating a biocompatible SC and self-healing internal mechanism.164 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Inspired by mussel adhesion chemistry, Pan et al. prepared a PC–CNF–GG–glycerol hydrogel by dispersing proanthocyanins (PC)-coated CNF nanocomposites in guar gum (GG) and glycerol solution.163 Borax solution was used to crosslink the hydrogel and give hydrogel conductivity. The as-prepared hydrogel-based strain sensor needs low-weight samples (200 mg) and an ultrafast response speed (33 ms), Fig. 13b. The resultant PC–CNF–GG–glycerol hydrogel showed good adhesive, conductive, and injectable features, which can be used for these wearable, portable, and editable electrodes. Hsu et al. used a hybrid mixture containing gelatin methacrylate (GelMA), CNC and tannic acid to produce mussel-inspired and self-healing SCs.164 Gelatin was grafted with methacryloyl moieties to produce GelMA, thereby improving the compression and elastic moduli of the gelatin hydrogel; CNC was incorporated into the hydrogel to increase physical strength of the GelMA hydrogel; tannic acid imparted the GelMA–CNC hydrogel with self-healing ability. Fig. 13c depicts the fabricating process of the SCs and the corresponding self-healing mechanism. The SCs showed high conductivity and low resistance, i.e., the specific capacitance, energy density, and power density reached 1861.21 mF cm−3, 20.65 mW h cm−3, and 595.59 mW cm−3, respectively; meanwhile, these three retained 84%, 69%, and 82% of their pristine values after five cut and healing cycles.
Although functionalization with transition-metal compounds is a universal strategy to boost the pseudocapacitance of electrode materials,165,166 their high production cost, low availability and hazards hinder large-scale utilization. Organic grafting molecules have been used to achieve high capacitance due to their excellent redox activity in aqueous media,167 but the resulting energy density is limited. Compared with organic grafting molecules, the biomass derived redox-active biomolecules can highly satisfy the needs of the new generation of SCs. Instead of traditional pseudocapacitor additives, the use of renewable biomass can improve the safety, non-toxicity, and sustainability of electrode materials. Li et al. produced metal-free and flexible SCs from lignosulfonate functionalized graphene hydrogel (LS-GH).168 By employing a freestanding LS-GH electrode, the as-prepared symmetrical SCs showed a high specific capacitance of 408 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, a good retention of rate capability (75.4% at 20 A g−1), cycling stability (84.4% after 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1), and excellent flexibility. This metal-free and flexible SCs had comparable to or even better performance than the reported transition metal-derived pseudocapacitive SCs, resulting from the reversible redox charge transfer of quinone groups in lignin.


3.2.2 Lignocellulose-based hydrogels as electrolytes in FSSCs. 
Hydrogels can serve as electrolyte materials for EES devices, avoiding liquid electrolyte leaking, while providing improved conductivity compared to these traditional solid-state electrolytes.169,170 Although some hydrogel electrolytes have been developed to build EES devices that exhibit excellent electrochemical properties,171,172 the key components of these hydrogel electrolytes are obtained from fossil resources. Considering the inherent advantages of being green and renewable, biopolymer-based hydrogels have been considered as potential replacement for the next-generation of EES devices.
Wang et al. prepared cellulose-based hydrogel electrolytes to construct all solid-state hydrogel SCs via an in situ cross-linking at low temperature,173 in which both electrolytes and electrodes were hydrogels. As shown in Fig. 14a, the precursor solution containing 4.0 wt% cellulose was prepared in NaOH/urea through a freeze-thawing approach; two hydrogel electrodes were soaked in the precursor solution, followed by cross-linking with epichlorohydrin in an ice-water bath, making sure that the electrodes were wrapped with cellulose hydrogels. The optimal symmetric SCs with 3.0 mL of epichlorohydrin exhibited a high specific capacitance of 98.8 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, a good retention of capacitance (89.5% at 16 A g−1), and a maximum energy density of 13.5 W h kg−1 at a power density of 496.4 W kg−1. This device can be bent in the range of 0° to 180° without significant capacitance attenuation, indicating superb flexibility and mechanical stability. Zhang et al. designed a hollow PPy/cellulose hybrid hydrogel, in which a hollow and continuous PPy conducting network was implanted into cellulose hydrogels.174 As shown in Fig. 14b, the outer cellulose hydrogel served as a “protective jacket” for hollow PPy to give flexibility and strength, and acted as interior tank hold ions; the biphase porous network provided a path for ions; meanwhile, the hollow PPy network was conducive to the electrochemical performance. The hydrogels demonstrated enhanced capacitive performance and electrochemical stability with almost no capacitance attenuation under severe deformations. Chen et al. developed a robust, self-healable and conductive hydrogel electrolyte comprising Zn salt and borax-crosslinked PVA/nanocellulose.175 Due to hydrophilic skeletons and electrostatic repulsion among the charged functional groups, CNFs can automatically form a uniform colloid in water, and entangle with PVA chains through hydrogen bondings to generate a web-like network. The addition of borax led to the dynamic association between PVA and CNFs (Fig. 14c). Thanks to the excellent properties of nanocellulose, the B–PVA/CNFs hydrogel as electrolyte showed excellent mechanical, self-healing, and conductive abilities. A flexible quasi-solid-state Zn-ion hybrid supercapacitor was made using the hydrogel as electrolyte, cellulose paper as the cathode, and zinc metal as the anode, respectively, taking the advantages of Zn-ion batteries and SCs. The device showed a high capacity, great rate capability, and long cyclability.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ low temperature cross-linking method for the fabrication of an all solid-state hydrogel supercapacitor.173 Copyright © 2019 Royal Society Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the hollow polypyrrole/cellulose hybrid hydrogel.174 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier. (c) Illustration of the fabrication process of the B–PVA/NFC hydrogel.175 Copyright © 2019 Royal Society Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the cellulose hydrogel containing high concentrated ZnCl2 and the use for ZHS.176 (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of organohydrogel electrolyte from the HPC/PVA hydrogel.177 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. Copyright © 2020 Royal Society Chemistry. (f) Equilibrium structures comprising the PAM/CNFs/LiCl hydrogel and interactions of each component with water molecules.181 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Science SA. (g) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of flexible water-deactivated polyelectrolyte hydrogel electrolyte via UV photo-induced radical polymerization and (h) internal mechanism within water-deactivated polyelectrolyte hydrogel electrolyte.183 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (i) Schematic illustration of hydrogen bonding in polymer chains and the structure of a Zr(IV) cluster and (j) coordinate bonds of Zr(IV) clusters with carboxylates and/or hydroxyls.184 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the renewable double-crosslinked lignin hydrogel.185 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier. 
Hydrogel electrolytes with a water-rich structure inevitably cause freezing at sub-zero temperature, which seriously limits the application of FSSCs especially in some extreme environments, e.g., seasonal low temperatures or high altitudes. Much research effort has been made to solve this issue. For example, Yang et al. fabricated a flexible Zn-ion hybrid supercapacitor (ZHS) using a cellulose hydrogel as solid-state electrolyte with the presence of ZnCl2.176 The cotton cellulose was dissolved into a highly concentrated ZnCl2 solution; after adding a small amount of Ca2+, both Zn2+ and Ca2+ can be locked in the hydrogel (Fig. 14d); then, the ZHS was fabricated by using cellulose hydrogel as electrolyte. The ZHS showed a high energy density, stable cyclability, and 94.7% capacity retention after 5000 cycles, as well as the ability to withstand −20 °C. Lu et al. fabricated an antifreezing organohydrogel electrolyte by introducing a LiClO4 water/glycerol mixture into hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC)/PVA hydrogel, Fig. 14e.177 HPC can form abundant hydrogen bonds with the PVA chain and induce PVA crystallization,178 thus, improving the mechanical strength, as well as supporting and keeping the appearance of organohydrogel electrolyte. The as-prepared organohydrogel electrolyte had high conductivity and can maintain its mechanical strength even at −40 °C. The FSSCs comprising the electrolyte provided a specific capacitance of 194.7 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 at 20 °C. Even at −40 °C, the FSSCs can also provide a high specific capacitance of 143.6 F g−1 at 2 A g−1, accounting for 74% of that at 20 °C, and the capacitance retention rate of the FSSCs was 71.05% after 5000 cycles at 2 A g−1 at −40 °C. This work demonstrates the practical application of flexible SCs in extremely cold environments.
Organohydrogels usually have strict requirement for well-designed polymerization, and are limited by their conductivity at low temperature. To tackle these problems, addition of high concentrations of electrolyte such as salts has become an alternative strategy.179 Unfortunately, due to the salting-out effect, excessive inorganic ions may destroy 3D networks of the hydrogel, thereby sacrificing its mechanical properties.180 Ge et al. synthesized double network hydrogels via a one-step acrylamide (AM) polymerization in the company of CNFs and LiCl.181 In this system, the presence of Li+ and Cl− ions can effectively strengthen the interactions between water molecules within hydrogels, thereby ensuring the water holding capacity, and endowing the hydrogel with resistance to freezing in the range of −80 to 25 °C. The addition of CNFs can improve mechanical strength and dissipate energy. Owing to the joint action of CNFs and LiCl, the PAM/CNFs/LiCl hydrogels had attractive freezing and dehydration tolerance (Fig. 14f). The supercapacitor assembled with the PAM/CNF/LiCl 50% hydrogel as electrolyte displayed a stable electrochemical performance and high flexibility under the conditions of low temperature.
To improve the conductivity of the hydrogel, some ionizable functional groups are usually grafted into the polymeric network, such as polyelectrolytes. Polyelectrolytes are a class of charged polymers with abundant positive or negative groups,182 which can form special ion migration channels under the action of an applied electric field, accelerating ion migration and improving ion conductivity. Wei et al. prepared a water-deactivated polyelectrolyte hydrogel as electrolyte using an anionic CMC and a cationic monomer methacrylamido propyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (Fig. 14g).183Fig. 14h depicts the internal mechanism of water-deactivated polyelectrolyte hydrogel electrolyte, i.e., the electrolyte showed high physical strength and ion conductivity; the flexible supercapacitors equipped with this electrolyte showed highlighted performance, especially in terms of excellent rate performance; the high operating voltage of 2.1 V and energy density of 26.5 W h kg−1 were attributed to the hydrogen bonding and hydrophilic interaction between the charged groups and water molecules in hydrogel.
Dai et al. constructed a colorless Zr(IV)-crosslinked PAM/polyanionic cellulose (PAM/PAC) composite hydrogel by polymerization of acrylamide in PAC solution, followed by a treatment in ZrOCl2 solution.184 PAM acted as a major ingredient of the gel body; hydrogen bonding can be formed between PAC and PAM; meanwhile PAC can serve as a ligand to coordinate Zr(IV) clusters (Fig. 14i), which was responsible for the improvement of mechanical strength and good energy dissipation capacity (Fig. 14j). Simultaneously, the dynamic noncovalent bonds acted as a sacrificial bond to absorb energy, thereby giving the gel high toughness, good self-healing properties, and excellent fatigue durability.
For the practical application, toughness is of critical importance for wearable/implantable devices. Lignocellulose can effectively improve the mechanical properties of conductive polymer hydrogels, including their toughness, based on catechol–metal ion chemistry.185 Liu et al. found that the double crosslinking network strategy is an effective approach to improve the mechanical properties of hydrogels, which did not affect the ion transport capacity of the hydrogel; its high ionic conductivity remained almost constant even when the hydrogel was compressed and stretched.186 Inspired by a difference of lignin solubility in alkaline and acidic environments, Liu et al. fabricated a hybrid dual-crosslinked compressible lignin hydrogel as electrolyte (Fig. 14k).187 The resultant dual-crosslinked lignin hydrogel exhibited obvious improvement in mechanical strength, shape recovery, and conductivity. FSSCs constructed using the dual-crosslinked lignin hydrogel as the electrolyte showed high specific capacitance and excellent energy density. The supercapacitor a high specific capacitance after 500180 bending cycles or 500% compression strain. The double-crosslinked strategy is effective in improving the mechanical properties of hydrogels.188,189

Table 1 summarizes some examples of lignocellulose-derived hydrogel electrolytes used in energy-storage electronics, which are classified by application category.
Table 1 Examples of lignocellulose-derived hydrogel electrolyte in energy-storage electronics




Materials
Preparation method
Electrode
Specific capacitance
Energy density/power density
Ref.




Cellulose/NaOH hydrogel

In situ low temperature cross-linking method
N-doped graphene (NG) hydrogel or cobalt(II) carbonate hydroxide/NG hydrogel
98.8 F g−1/1 A g−1
13.5 W h kg−1/496.4 W kg−1

173



Hollow PPy/cellulose hybrid hydrogel

In situ implanting
Hollow PPy/cellulose hybrid hydrogel electrode
255 F g−1/0.25 A g−1
20.4 W h kg−1/—

174



PVA/nanocellulose hydrogel
Zinc-salt-containing borax-crosslinking
Zinc metal anode/cellulose paper
56.1 mA h g−1/0.5 mA cm−2
6.22 mW h cm−3/13.9 mW cm−3

175



Zinc ion trapping in cellulose hydrogel
—
Zinc foil/activated carbon
193 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
192 W h kg−1/499 W kg−1

176



HPC/PVA hydrogel
LiClO4 water/glycerol mixture solution displacement strategy
Activated carbon electrodes
213.8 F g−1/0.2 A g−1
—

177



PAM/CNF/LiCl hydrogel
—
CNT papers
110.2 mF cm−2/1 mA cm−2
—

181



Lignin-derived hydrogel
Hybrid double-crosslinking method
PANI deposited carbon cloth
190 F g−1/0.25 A g−1
15.24 W h kg−1/—

185






3.3 Lignocellulose-based aerogels as electrodes in FSSCs
Aerogels, typically referred to as hydrogel derivatives, are also excellent precursors to other useful functional materials.190,191 Aerogels are the nano-scale porous solid-state materials composed of interconnected 3D networks and a large number of air-filled pores that form by replacing the liquid phase in the hydrogel with gas in the subsequent drying process.192 Conductive aerogels as electrodes are typically constructed by integrating electronic active substrates that impart conductivity to the aerogel, such as carbon-based materials, conducting polymers, and metal nanoparticles. In FSSCs, the conductivity of the aerogels is imparted by carbon materials or conductive polymers.
In this section, we pay close attention to the lignocellulose-based aerogels with one and/or more of other conducting materials including carbon, metal oxides, and conducting polymers. Traditional carbon materials usually have a high specific surface area; however, they are inherently hydrophobic, limiting the accessible surface area.193 Lignocellulose-derived carbon aerogels (CAs) have many unique properties such as ultralight weight, developed surface areas, and high conductivity. The fabrication of hierarchical porous CAs from lignocellulose is low-cost, simple, and amphiphilic, which shows great potential and promising application prospects in FSSC electrodes.

3.3.1 Lignocellulose-based carbon aerogels. 
The unique properties (three dimensional structures, high flexibility, high Young's modulus/strength, rich functional groups, a high carbon content, etc.) associated with lignocellulose materials, make them a logical choice as an essential building block in hydrogels so that enhanced performance of hydrogel-based SCs can be achieved.194,195 However, these materials cannot be directly used for SCs because they have no electroactivity,196 but can be converted to carbon materials that can be used for SCs. Yang et al. obtained a unique activated carbon fiber aerogel by dissolving cellulose fibers from bamboo, followed by freeze-drying and pyrolysis.197 They found that the texture showed a crosslinked fiber skeleton wrapped by porous nanosheets; the activated carbon fiber aerogel exhibited a large microsurface area (910 m2 g−1), a good flexibility (86%) under a compressive stress of 23 kPa, a large specific capacitance (381 F g−1), and an inspiring retention rate (90% at 200 mV s−1). The carbon fiber aerogels are promising for FSSCs because of their ultra-light porous structure and high stability. The production of porous carbon fiber aerogels provides an economical and sustainable approach to explore high value-added utilization of biomass. Inspired by natural materials, Sun et al. proposed a dual-activation strategy for preparing compressible and mesoporous CAs, mimicking wood structures.198Fig. 15a shows a xylem-like structure that is prepared by a direct freeze casting method. Upon the ice formation and directional growth during process of freeze casting, the vertical channels were created, with a high strength-to-weight ratio, ensuring the material super-compressibility (∼90% strain) and a low density of 3.8 mg cm−3. NH4H2PO4 can decompose into NH3 and H3PO4 serves as sources of N and P, respectively, and also acts as an activator to create abundant mesopores in these vertical channels. The optimized CAs had a large specific surface area (∼1553 m2 g−1), ultrahigh mesoporous ratio of 70.37%, and high N,P-co-doping dosage, as well as a high specific capacitance of 367 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, indicating a good utilization in SCs and elastomeric conductors.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthetic route to xylem-like CA and dual activation.198 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of fabrication of wood-derived CNF aerogels.200 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (c) Schematic diagram of the microstructure and (d) 3D microstructure of CAs synthesized at different temperatures.201 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic view of the spherical particle production process.203 Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Science BV. (f) Preparation process of MF-CA.204 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of the shape independent ultra-thick cubic electrode.206 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (h) Schematic illustration of the preparation of hierarchical porous lignin-based CAs.207 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier. (i) Synthesis diagram of CAs and (j) SEM images and the corresponding photographs of CAs with different mass ratios of cellulose to lignin.208 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 
Nanocellulose, such as CNFs and CNCs, has also been studied to prepare aerogels. CNFs were used as one kind of sustainable reinforcement additive for composites, and the hydrophilic skeleton and 3D structural skeleton with large space provide transport channels for chargers.199 For example, Li et al. prepared an ultrathin CNF aerogel via a catalytic pyrolysis process (Fig. 15b).200 In their work, the CNF was successively treated with HCl, solvent exchange, freeze-drying and pyrolysis, maintaining the nanofibrous morphology of the resultant carbon material. The as-prepared CNF aerogels exhibited excellent conductivity, a large surface area, and good potential as a self-supporting electrode for FSSCs. Zhang et al. produced CAs from CNFs by freeze-drying and high-temperature carbonization.201 The results showed that, as the temperature increased from 400 to 1000 °C, the volume of CAs shrunk and the number of independent nanofibers increased, but the nanoplate structure decreased, Fig. 15c and d. The as-prepared CAs at 800 °C had the highest specific surface area and total pore volume, showing excellent electrochemical stability and a good specific capacitance up to 172.7 F g−1. The symmetrical supercapacitor as-assembled by CAs-800 showed an ideal energy density of 4.5 W h kg−1. Zu et al. prepared high-surface-area nanocellulose aerogels by dissolving CNCs in NaOH solution followed by gelation, regeneration, and drying; the aerogels were subjected to CO2 activation; then, the obtained carbon aerogels showed good potential as supercapacitor electrode materials with the advantages of cost-effectiveness and environmental friendly nature.202 The shape and size distribution of macroscopic aerogels are adjusted to break the limits of inherent friability of aerogels. Erlandsson et al. fabricated chemically cross-linked, wet-stable CNF aerogel beads with a millimeter-size, spherical and highly porous structure and low density (Fig. 15e).203 The functionalized conductive CNF aerogel beads carried a charge of up to 2 kA cm−2, and can be used as an electrode in SCs, displaying a stable capacity of charge storage (9.8 F g−1 after 50 charge–discharge cycles). Wang et al. reported a facile method to prepare compressible, anti-fatigue, conductive, and pressure-sensitive CAs by pyrolysis of CNF aerogels using melamine foams (MF) as the rigid skeleton to prevent sharp shrinkage during the drying process (Fig. 15f); in addition, the hydrogel with any shape can be massively obtained by adjusting the shape of MF templates.204 The results showed that the compressibility, sensitivity, and conductivity of the resultant CAs achieved a high performance, i.e., 60%, 1.541 kPa−1, and 0.378 S cm−1, respectively, while the density was low (11.23 mg cm−3); meanwhile, the specific capacitance and surface capacitance were determined to be 92.2 F g−1 and 461 mF cm−2, respectively, indicating an excellent electrochemical performance.
Lignin has also been investigated to produce carbon aerogels. Zhang et al. adopted a novel method to prepare lignin-derived CAs with hierarchically porous morphologies, in which the droplets of lignin/KOH solutions were subjected to ultrafast freezing with liquid nitrogen, freeze-drying, and in situ activation during carbonization.205 The resultant carbon had a large number of oxidized functional groups, mesopores, and a large SSA (1681.6 m2 g−1); the as-prepared electrode showed high specific capacitance (189 F g−1) at 1 A g−1 current density. It can be seen that the lignin-derived CAs as a promising high performance electrode material for SCs and other EES devices can be achieved via this method. Guo et al. fabricated an ultra-thick cubic electrode from lignin-derived CAs/nickel (LCAN) (Fig. 15g).206 They prepared a cubic electrode with a thickness of 4.2 mm via precisely adjusting the ratio of ZnCl2/lignin and the integrating LCAN binary network, showing an extremely high area capacitance of 26.6 F cm−2 (63% retention in 1–200 mA cm−2) even in the case of a high mass load (∼147 mg cm−2) and various shapes, and good cycle stability. The electrochemical properties of porous carbon as SC electrodes are closely related to the electrode thickness. Thus, it is crucial to fabricate a thick electrode for energy storage devices. Xu et al. prepared an enzymatic hydrolysis lignin-derived CA for SC electrodes.207 As shown in Fig. 15h, after carbonization and KOH activation, the lignin based CAs as electrodes in SCs showed an excellent electrochemical performance, due to the interconnected network, hierarchical and porous structure.
The mixture of cellulose and lignin has also been used to produce CAs. For example, Cai et al. dissolved a mixture of cellulose and lignin in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (BMIMCL) followed by regeneration in deionized water, freeze-drying, and carbonization; then obtained a well-designed CA with a 3D hierarchical network structure (Fig. 15i).208 In this work, cellulose can improve the graphitization degree and promote the specific surface area. Fig. 15j shows that, by increasing the mass ratio of cellulose to lignin in the mixture, the obtained carbon has a favorable morphological feature so that it can offer abundant storage locations and transport channels for electrolyte ions, achieving rapid charge transfer. Thus, the as-prepared CA-based SCs exhibited good specific capacitance, a long cycle life, and low impedance.


3.3.2 Lignocellulose–carbon binary composite aerogels. 
Carbon materials including activated carbon (AC), graphene, and graphene oxide (GO)/reduced graphene oxide (RGO), as well as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been studied and used as electrode materials for SCs due to their physical, electrochemical and environmental advantages.209,210 Several methods such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), high-temperature carbonization of carbon-rich precursors, and freeze-drying/supercritical drying have been investigated.211,212 The composites of lignocellulose–CAs can utilize both the advantages of lignocellulose and carbon nanomaterials. Zheng et al. fabricated FSSCs using CNFs/RGO/CNT hybrid aerogels as electrodes, Fig. 16a,213 exhibiting good specific capacitance, energy density, and power density (i.e., 252 F g−1, 8.1 mW h g−1, and 2.7 W g−1, respectively); the FSSCs retained above 99.5% of specific capacitance after 1000 charge–discharge cycles. Yang et al. fabricated 3D carbon-based aerogels using a mixture of 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO)-medicated oxidized cellulose nanofibrils (TOCN) and GO as precursors; the obtained TOCN/GO aerogels were further carbonized in an Ar atmosphere to prepare carbon nanofibrils meanwhile the GO was converted to RGO.214 The results found that the carbonized TOCN/RGO aerogels had a high specific capacitance of 398.47 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, and outstanding cycle stability, i.e., the initial capacity remained 99.8% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. However, the high toxicity of GO chemical reductants has been a negative issue for clean production. Jiang et al. used lignin as a green reducing agent for GO in hydrothermal treatment, and proposed the possible mechanism (Fig. 16b).215 Then, the well-dispersed lignin-reduced GO composites (LRGOs) were self-assembled into a flexible free-standing film; the LRGOs as an electrode delivered a high pseudocapacitance of 213.8 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, indicating multiple possibilities in electronics, the energy area, and environmental protection.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a CNF/RGO/CNT electrode.213 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration for the reduction mechanism of GO by lignin and aggregation–dispersion behavior of LRGOs.215 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (c) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of NCGA.218 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Science BV. (d) Schematic fabrication process of NSHPA.219 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of BN-MC/MnO2 formation.223 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Science BV. 
Moreover, doping some atoms (e.g., N, P, S, and B) into carbon nanomaterials would certainly improve electrochemical properties.216 N, as the most attractive and widely used dopant heteroatom, and an electron donor, can increase the surface polarity, wettability, and conductivity of resultant carbon.217 Zhang et al. prepared a N-doped carbon nanofibers/graphene aerogel (NCGA) through a serious of operations including hydrothermal pretreatment, freeze-drying, and carbonization (Fig. 16c),218 in which GO, CNFs, and ethylenediamine were used as C and N sources, respectively. The as-prepared NCGA as an electrode showed a high specific capacitance of 289 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1, and superb cycling stability (i.e., the specific capacitance of NCGA decreased only 9.5% after 5000 cycles). Dang et al. fabricated N,S co-doped hierarchical and porous CAs (NSHPAs).219 In their work, cotton cellulose was dissolved into NaOH/urea/α-lipoic acid (LA) solution, pre-cooled, and gelationed, and a hydrogel was obtained; then, pyrolysis was conducted. NaOH was used as an activator and porogen, aiming to develop multiscale pores; LA was a biocompatible biological molecule rich in dynamic disulfide bonds and carboxyl groups, forming more hydrogen bonds with cellulose chains. Impressively, when the as-prepared NSHPAs were used as an electrode in SCs, they showed high capacitance, good energy density, and electrochemical stability (Fig. 16d).


3.3.3 Lignocellulose–metal oxide binary composite aerogels. 
Introducing metal oxides as pseudocapacitive materials into electrodes can ensure rapid and reversible oxidation–reduction reactions on electrode surfaces, leading to much higher capacitance than carbon materials.220
MnO2 as a typical pseudocapacitance material shows broad competitiveness due to its rapid electrokinetics, large number of active sites, and continuous redox reactions.221 However, it is limited by some properties such as low electrical conductivity and agglomeration.222 Carbon-based materials from lignocellulose are good supports for MnO2, which would improve its conductivity and specific surface area, and would address these above issues. For example, Jia et al. prepared a novel B,N-dual doped methyl cellulose (MC)/MnO2 composite (Fig. 16e).223 The rich hydroxyl groups in MC can trigger the supramolecular assembly process, forming a self-crosslinking hydrogel; then, the resultant hierarchical aerogel BN-MC/α-MnO2 exhibited an excellent electrochemical performance by mitigating agglomeration and maximizing the efficient contact area. The SCs made from BN-MC/MnO2 as positive electrode and BN-MC as a negative electrode showed a high energy density (27.75 W h kg−1) at 1.35 kW kg−1 power density.
Similarly, nickel-based materials are suitable for preparing high-performance pseudocapacitors. Jha et al. assembled a novel SC, in which Al/lignin–NiWO4, Al/activated carbon, and PVA/H3PO4 gel, were used as the anode, cathode, and electrolyte, respectively, displaying a maximum specific capacitance of 17.01 mF cm−2at 0.13 A g−1; even after 2000 cycles of charging and discharging, the electrochemical performance was superior.224


3.3.4 Lignocellulose–conducting polymer binary composite aerogels. 
The low theoretical capacitance of carbon-based gel electrodes limits the specific capacitance of SCs.225 Conducting polymers, such as polypyrrole (PPy), polyacrylamide (PAAm), and polyaniline (PANI), possess a higher theoretical specific capacitance.226,227 They are conjugated molecules with a backbone consisting of alternating single and double bonds.228 The synergistic effects of CAs and conducting polymers facilitate the entry and exit of electrolyte ions.229,230 However, the low water-solubility of conductive polymers restricts their application in FSSCs. Lignocellulose and its derivatives have an amphiphilic structure, which can disperse hydrophobic substances. For example, hierarchical porous CAs with cellulose as a carbon precursor to support conducting polymers not only enable conducting polymers to effectively permeate and uniformly distribute throughout the carbon network, but also ensure rapid electrolyte transfer and high accessibility to conducting polymers (Fig. 17a).231 Yu et al. prepared a biomass-derived 3D carbon fiber aerogel by loading PPy particles.232 Cattail microfibers were treated with NaClO2, and pyrolysed, and then the PPy-anchored interconnected carbon fiber aerogels were prepared by in situ oxidation polymerization. The SCs containing PPy-anchored aerogel electrodes possess a maximum surface capacitance (419 mF cm−2) at 1 mA cm−2 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. The capacitance of this electrode remained 86.4% after 3000 charge–discharge cycles. Ding et al. used a viscoelastic PVA–borax (PB) gel matrix and CNFs–PPy complexes to prepare a multifunctional hybrid conducting polymer hydrogels, in which CNFs acted as a bio-template to guide conductive PPy to grow into a compact CNFs–PPy complex with good dispersibility; meanwhile PB served as a dynamic crosslinking agent between PVA chains and CNFs–PPy complexes.233 The CNFs–PPy complexes not only gave CNFs–PPy/PB hydrogels a high conductivity but also enhanced networks (Fig. 17b). The resultant hydrogels showed a robust physical strength, appropriate viscoelasticity (∼0.1 MPa of ), and outstanding conductivity (∼4.74 S m−1), and were capable of fast (∼20 s), efficient, and repeatable recovery (Fig. 17c). The CNFs–PPy/PB hydrogel as an electrode had a high specific capacitance of 236.9 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, and maintained 86% of capacitance after 1500 cycles.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the 3D hierarchical porous CA/PPy composite for a supercapacitor.231 Copyright © 2019 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (b) Preparation and synthesis process of CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels, and (c) luminance variation of an LED during cutting and self-healing processes.233 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic synthesis of thye supramolecular assembly process and their 2D structural arrangement to form 3D aerogels.235 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, polyaniline (PANI) is also integrated into the lignocellulose matrix to form composite aerogels. PANI has special electrical and optical properties and can show good conductivity and electrochemical properties after doping. Liu et al. prepared cross-linked PANI/TOCN hydrogels by using Fe3+, in which Fe3+ formed cross-linking between TOCN and PANI, and initiated polymerization of aniline.234 The as-prepared 3D conductive PANI/TOCN hydrogel as an SC electrode showed a good areal capacitance (3060 mF cm−2) and energy density (106 μW h cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2); meanwhile, the resultant FSSCs had a high areal capacitance and outstanding flexibility. Wang et al. used ginger-derived carboxylated cellulose nanofibers and PANI to produce a 3D nanocellulose aerogel via a self-assembling reaction.235Fig. 17d shows the schematic synthesis of the supramolecular assembling process, and their 2D structural arrangement to form 3D aerogels, in which PANI covered the overall structure of the supramolecular aerogels, connecting to supramolecular fibers via hydrogen bonds, instead of simply being loaded in the cellulose aerogel. Combining this supramolecular aerogel as electrolyte with low-cost non-woven polypropylene and PVA/H2SO4 without adhesives, a highly standardized capacitor of 291.01 F g−1 was obtained. Furthermore, other methods have been reported to improve the capacitive performance of the cellulose/PANI conductive hydrogel. For example, Tian et al. deposited silver nanoparticles uniformly on the cellulose/PANI hydrogel matrix.236 Thus, the conductivity of the cellulose/PANI/Ag aerogels increased to 94 × 10−2 S C m−1, much higher than that of the cellulose/PANI composite (3.45 × 10−2 S C m−1). As flexible electrodes for SCs, the specific capacitance of the cellulose/PANI/Ag aerogels can be up to 217 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1, which was nearly 1.5 times higher than that of the cellulose/PANI composite (145 F g−1), and the capacitance remained 83% after 1000 cycles.


3.3.5 Lignocellulose–carbon–metal oxide ternary composite aerogels. 
Due to the complementary functions of various materials, the lignocellulose–carbon–metal oxide ternary composite aerogels have been explored to further improve the electrochemical performance and other properties.
MoO3 has been considered to be one promising electrode material because of its anisotropic-layered structure, high theoretical specific capacity and energy density. However, the low electrical conductivity and poor chemical stability seriously hinder its application in high-performance EES systems.237 In pursuit of much higher capacitance and cycling stability, Zheng et al. developed a novel strategy of conducting N-doping at a moderate temperature; briefly, CNF/GO/MoO3 aqueous dispersion was subjected to freeze-drying and in situ hydrazine reduction, and then a CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel film was obtained (Fig. 18a); due to the presence of CNF, the aerogel was free-standing, lightweight, highly porous, and highly flexible.238 The SCs with the CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel film as the electrode exhibited remarkable specific capacitances and energy densities in different electrolytes, and high power density and cycling stability. It showed a good energy density of 114 W h kg−1 when the aerogel film-based FSSCs used ionogel as electrolyte, showing a similar energy density to lithium-ion batteries. Xia et al. prepared CF–CNF/MWCNT-Has; this carbon fiber-reinforced 3D network with porous structures significantly improved the electrochemical properties.239 Then, they fabricated CF–CNF/MWCNT/MnO2-HAs and CF–CNF/MWCNT/AC-HAs as the positive and negative electrodes for SCs, respectively (Fig. 18b). The positive and negative electrodes achieved high capacitances of 1745 mF cm−2 (661 F g−1) and 1273 mF cm−2 (212.1 F g−1), respectively, at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. A 1.8 V-SCs device fabricated by the as-prepared electrodes showed a maximum energy density of 8.93 mW h cm−3 (103.5 W h kg−1), outstanding flexibility, and a good retention of capacitance (96.7%) after 3000 cycles.
 Fig. 18  (a) Preparation process of a porous CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel electrode.238 Copyright © 2017 Royal Society Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the design of CF–CNF/MWCNT/MnO2 and CF–CNF/MWCNT/AC flexible electrodes, and the construction of FSSCs.239 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Science SA. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of CNF/MWCNT/RGO/Fe3O4 electrodes, and construction of FSSCs. (d) Digital photographs of electrode materials and their SEM images.245 Copyright © 2018 Royal Society Chemistry. 
Due to multiphase changes from Fe3O4 to FeOOH or Fe2O3 and poor electrochemical stability at high current density, the actual capacity of Fe3O4 is much lower than the theoretical value; although it possesses a high theoretical specific capacity (∼2299 F g−1), wide potential interval (−1.6 to 0), and good conductivity (2 × 104 s m−1).240–243 The nanostructured Fe3O4 exhibits a high surface area and capacitance, which improves electrochemical performance.244 Xia et al. prepared a flexible CNF/MWCNT/RGO/Fe3O4 negative electrode via the following steps: (1) dispersant preparation; (2) preparation of the CNF/MWCNT/RGO-HA substrate via freeze-drying and vapor reduction; and (3) in situ embedding of Fe3O4 nanoparticles through a solvothermal reaction (Fig. 18c).245 There were no changes in the substrate size and morphology during the vapor reduction and solvothermal reaction, suggesting good structural stability, Fig. 18d. The electrode exhibited a capacitance of 1193 mF cm−2 at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. CNF/MWCNT/RGO/Fe3O4 and CF–CNF/MWCNT/MnO2 were used as a negative and positive electrode for FSSCs, respectively; the assembled FSSCs had a volumetric energy density of 2.35 mW h cm−3, and capacitance retention of 94.7% after 5000 cycles.


3.3.6 Lignocellulose–carbon–conducting polymer ternary composite aerogels. 
Zhang et al. prepared strong N-doped CAs via direct pyrolysis of bamboo CNFs/melamine/GO ternary hybrid aerogel without the use of a catalyst with advantages of high cost-effectiveness and small environmental footprint.246 The resultant monolithic CAs were established by integrating carbon nanofibers with graphene nanosheets, forming a layered carbon–graphene structures with excellent mechanical strength and microstructure-derived resilience; the device exhibited high specific capacitance, and energy and power density when it was used as an electrode for SCs. In another study, Zhang et al. assembled FSSCs based on the CNFs/RGO/PPy aerogel as an electrode, showing a maximum areal capacitance of 720 mF cm−2 (405 F g−1) at 0.25 mA cm−2, good cycle stability (i.e., 95% of capacitance retention after 2000 cycles), and a high energy density of 60.4 μW h cm−2; meanwhile, the FSSCs were flexible and bendable without obvious capacitance loss.247 Shi et al. made lightweight SC devices by using CNCs aerogels as electrode supports.248 In their work, the cellulose conductive aerogels were manufactured by covalently cross-linking two orthogonal surface-modified CNCs and trapping MWCNTs into the aerogel structure; an excellent dispersion of MWCNTs was achieved because of the unique structure and adopting bile acid as a dispersant; the active material and PPy were in situ polymerized in CNCs/MWCNT aerogels. The resulting CNCs/MWCNTs–PPy electrode showed a high capacitance (∼2.1 F cm−2), and good cycle and capacitance stability during compression and bending. Yang et al. prepared an aerogel with a 3D porous network as an electrode of SCs, in which a strong interaction between CNFs, MWCNTs and PANI was formed because PANI was conducive to in situ polymerization of CNF and MWCNTs.249 The loose structure of the CNFs/MWCNTs/PANI aerogel as the electrode contributed to an outstanding absorption of electrolytes and low resistance of charge-transfer. A high specific capacitance of 791.13 F g−1 was obtained at 0.2 A g−1, and the capacitance remained over 82.1% at 4 A g−1 after 3000 cycles.
Making full use of the faradaic reaction of quinone groups in lignin, Tanguy et al. prepared novel thin film electrodes by depositing PANI on the flexible films that was made of lignin-containing cellulose nanofibrils (LCNF) and RGO nanosheets, in which LCNF functioned as an electrochemically active multi-functional component, giving the electrode good mechanical strength and flexibility, and improving the whole energy storage performance.250 The resultant LCNF/RGO/PANI electrode prepared with 20 wt% RGO nanosheets had a good specific capacitance (475 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1, 733 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1) and cycle life (87% after 5000 cycles), representing a 68% improvement as compared to the similar lignin-free electrode. This work revealed prominent potential of LCNF as a multi-functional electrochemical substrate for manufacturing high-grade flexible electrodes with high-performance, cost-effectiveness, and green features.

Table 2 summarizes some lignocellulose-derived electrodes with some key information such as the structural composition, carbonization methods, and electrochemical properties.
Table 2 Examples of lignocellulose-derived electrodes in supercapacitors




Materials
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Carbonization process
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance
Energy density/power density
Retainment of capacitance/cycle number
Ref.




Wood–CNF aerogel
553–689
700–1000 °C/inert gas/—
2 M H2SO4
140 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
—/48.6 W kg−1
—

200



Lignin-based CAs
779
1050 °C/N2/KOH
6 M KOH
142.8 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
—
96%/2000

206



Lignin/cellulose CAs
604.44
800 °C/—/—
6 M KOH
136 F g−1/5 A g−1
102 W h kg−1/175 W kg−1
98.6%/1000

207



CNF/RGO/CNT hybrid aerogels
—
—
H2SO4/PVA-gel
252 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
8.1 mW h g−1/2.7 W g−1
99.5%/1000

213



LRGOs hydrogels
—
—
1 M H2SO4
213.8 F g−1/1 A g−1
—
—

215



B,N-dual doped MC/MnO2 composite
989.8
—
1 M Na2SO4
338 F g−1/1 A g−1
27.75 W h kg−1/1350 W kg−1
95.6%/2000

223



Al/lig–NiWO4
—
—
PVA/H3PO4 gel
17.01 mF cm−2/0.13 A g−1
8.49 W h kg−1/509.48 W kg−1
97%/1000

224



Cellulose CA/PPy
139.8
200 °C/N2/—
1 M H2SO4
387.6 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
—
92.6%/10000

231



CNF–PPy/PB hydrogel
—
—
6 M KOH
236.9 F g−1/0.13 A g−1
—
86%/1500

233



PANI/TOCN hydrogel
327
—
1 M H2SO4
3.06 F cm−2/0.25 mA cm−2
106 μW h cm−2/487 μW cm−2
85%/1000

234



Cellulose/PANI/Ag aerogel
—
—
6 M KOH
217 F g−1/0.1 A g−1
—
83%/1000

236



CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel
—
—
Ionogel
518 F g−1/1 A g−1
114 W h kg−1/442 W kg−1
98%/2000

238



CF–CNF/MWCNT-HAs
—
—
1 M Na2SO4
661 F g−1/1 A g−1
103.45 W h kg−1/846.61 W kg−1
96.7%/3000

239



CNF/MWCNT/RGO/Fe3O4/CF–CNF/MWCNT/MnO2
1193
—
5 M LiCl
1193 F cm−2/1 mA cm−2
2.35 mW h cm−3/—
94.7%/5000

245



Bamboo CNFs-derived carbon fiber aerogel
910
900 °C/Ar/KOH
6 M KOH
220 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
31.25 W h kg−1/12.9 W kg−1
—

246



CNFs/MWCNTs/PANI aerogel
—
—
1 M H2SO4
791.13 F g−1/0.2 A g−1
—
82.14%/3000

249






3.4 FSSCs composed of a lignocellulose-based electrode and electrolyte
Chen et al. fabricated wood-derived CAs with a tracheid-like texture, which can be assembled into free-standing and all solid-state symmetric supercapacitors with satisfactory electrochemical performance and mechanical flexibility.251 In this strategy, flexible CNFs and alkaline lignin (AL) were incorporated into interconnected frameworks, in which AL as an additive can prevent severe structural deformations during the annealing process because of its high stiffness, thermal stability, and water resistance. As shown in Fig. 19a, a “bottom-up” route was adopted to fabricate lightweight and elastic CAs, i.e., mixing AL and CNFs in water, directional freeze casting, vacuum freeze drying, and carbonization. When it is used as an electrode for FSSCs, the SCs exhibited impressive electrochemical performance including high capacitance and energy density, high cycling stability, and good flexibility. Moreover, the CAs showed a high sensitivity over a wide working range when being used as a sensor, ensuring their application in wearable devices to monitor human bio-signals.
 Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of fabricating wood-derived CA.251 Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) Experimental scheme of the fabrication of an FSSC.252 Copyright © 2019 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustrations of the preparation of wearable SCs.253 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the preparation process for HSCCA and its micro-structure.257 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (e) Schematic of the fabrication process of SCs based on the PANI/β-CD conductive hydrogel polymer hydrogel.259 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. 
Taking advantage of the rich chemical functional groups of lignin, Park et al. prepared an all-lignin-based FSSC, in which a chemically cross-linked lignin hydrogel was used electrolyte, while the electro-spun lignin/polyacrylonitrile nanofiber was used as the electrode, Fig. 19b.252 In this work, the lignin hydrogel electrolyte was synthesized through ring-opening polymerization and cross-linking and showed a high conductivity (10.35 mS cm−1) and mechanical integrity (523% of swelling ratio); the freestanding flexible nanofiber for use as an electrode was obtained by electrospinning and self-activation. The as-prepared devices demonstrated a good capacitance of 129.23 F g−1, and 95% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles, as well as good flexibility and durability at various bending angles; moreover, the maximum energy and power density of the FSSCs were 4.49 W h kg−1 and 2.63 kW kg−1, respectively. Wood has excellent mechanical properties because of the strong connections between cellulose, lignin and other components. Inspired by the wood structure, Peng et al. constructed wearable SCs, using the lignosulfonate/SWCNT/holey RGO (Lig/SWCNT/HRGO) composite film as an integrated electrode and self-enhancing cellulose/H2SO4 hydrogel as electrolyte.253
Lignosulfonate is an important lignin-derived material and has been commonly found in lignocellulose based-FSSCs. The resulting SCs had low contact resistance and less delamination of electrodes and electrolytes. Fig. 19c shows the preparation of wearable SCs; HGO with a large specific surface area was dispersed in the SWCNT network to form a multilayer interconnection structure, in which HGO was reduced to HRGO that can tightly combine with Lig and the SWCNT, forming a tight multilayer structure. The obtained wearable SCs exhibited excellent tensile strength, areal capacitance and energy density. More importantly, the areal capacitance increased almost linearly with the increase of the mass of the film electrode, and as a wearable supercapacitor, it can withstand multiple arbitrary deformations. Besides that, Peng et al. designed a flexible SC assembled using lignosulfonate/SWCNTHNO3 (Lig/SWCNTHNO3) pressure-sensitive hydrogel as an electrode and cellulose hydrogel as electrolyte, respectively.254 The Lig/SWCNTHNO3 hydrogel was obtained by using a simple hydrothermal treatment, and the cellulose hydrogel was prepared by means of the phase-inversion method. The assembled lignocellulose-based FSSCs showed high specific capacitance and rate capability, and a good energy density of 17.1 W h kg−1 at a power density of 324 W kg−1. The FSSCs maintained electrochemical stability even after 1000 bending cycles.
Stretchable hydrogel SCs have been reported. Usually, hydrogels are not capable of completely returning to their original states upon removal of stress, that is, the deformation could not be fully recovered. For this reason, the development of elastic/stretchable SCs is usually challenging due to the inevitable strain residue of the hydrogel.255 Wang et al. fabricated an elastic stretchable SC using a double network hydrogel that was used as the electrolyte and conductive polypyrrole as electrodes.256 In this case, the as-fabricated SCs can fully recover from stretching, with almost no residual deformation. In addition, lignocellulose, in combination with biomass from different animal sources, can lead to the production of some novel materials with superior electrochemical performance for SCs. For example, Wang et al. applied skin secretion of Andrias davidianus (SSAD) to dope nanocellulose based-CAs aiming to generate highly compressible and elastic supercapacitors without any binders.257 SSAD as a green and renewable source of bio-nitrogen, and CNC were effective in addressing the dispersion of SSAD in water. Through the synergy effects between the two elements, CAs with a honeycomb structure were obtained by freeze-drying mixtures of SSAD/CNC/CNF, and then carbonization at high temperature, Fig. 19d. Unlike those fragile CAs in many other studies, the SSAD/CNC/CNF carbon aerogel (HSCCA) exhibited excellent elasticity in repeated compression and release tests. The HSCCA was used as positive and negative electrodes of a symmetrical supercapacitor; it showed a specific capacitance of 148.6 F g−1 at a current density of 0.25 A g−1. Even at a high current density of 10 A g−1, it still retained 66.7% of specific capacitance.
Li et al. designed a double cross-linked cellulose-based hydrogel and aerogel membrane for FSSCs, in which polydopamine (PDA) was used as a linking agent to connect the rigid cellulose skeleton with the flexible PAM network.258 The conductivity and tension sensitivity were further improved by loading Fe3+ into the C4-DM-40 hydrogel. Then, the cellulose–PDA–PAM hydrogel was carbonized to an aerogel. When the KOH-saturated C4-DM-40 aerogel membrane was used as electrolyte, the supercapacitor showed a high capacitance of 172 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 and long cycling life of 10000 cycles with 84.7% capacitance retention. By directly depositing an activated carbon material on the C4-DM-40 hydrogel, an integrated miniature supercapacitor was fabricated, showing an areal capacitance of 275.8 mF cm−2 and a volume capacitance of 394.1 F cm−3 at 10 mV s−1. Gong et al. developed a series of conducting polymer hydrogels from β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) grafted cellulose hydrogels, displaying good adhesive and mechanical properties of the hybrid hydrogels, which provided an easy fabrication of FSSCs.259 For the preparation, epichlorohydrin (ECH) was used as a coupling agent to decorate cellulose fibers with β-CD; then, the β-CD grafted cellulose hydrogel was soaked in aniline monomer solution to conduct the in situ polymerization of PANI, thereby preparing CAs. The grafted β-CD was introduced to achieve a targeted “micro-heterogeneous environment” in the cellulose 3D network, where the hydrophobic cavity can effectively absorb oily aniline monomers. The CAs can be directly sandwiched between carbon cloth to fabricate all-in-one SCs without secondary packaging, Fig. 19e.
Some examples of the lignocellulose-derived hydro- and aerogels applied to FSSCs are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Examples of lignocellulose derived hydro- and aerogels applied to FSSCs




Biomass composition
Electrode
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance
Energy density/power density
Retainment of capacitance/cycle number
Ref.




Alkaline lignin/CNFs
C-AL/CNF carbon aerogel
PVA–H2SO4 gel
62.4 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
8.6 W h kg−1/250 kW kg−1
88.5%/5000

250



Lignin
Electrospun lignin/polyacrylonitrile nanofiber
Chemically cross-linked lignin hydrogel
129.23 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
4.49 W h kg−1/2.63 kW kg−1
95%/10000

252



Lignosulfonate/cellulose
Lig/SWCNT/HRGO composite film
Cellulose/H2SO4 hydrogel
1121 mF cm−2/5 mA cm−2
77.8 μW h cm−2/2500 μW cm−2
—

253



Lignosulfonate/cellulose
Lignosulfonate/SWCNT hydrogel
Cellulose hydrogel
292 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
17.1 W h kg−1/324 kW kg−1
—

254



Cellulose
PANI/β-CD hydrogel
Carbon cloths
5.01 F cm−3/1.0 mA cm−2
89 μW h cm−2/800 μW cm−2
90%/2000

259





4. Conclusions and prospects
Many accomplishments and significant progress have been made by using the abovementioned flexible energy-storage devices, but there are still many challenges that need to be resolved to improve their performances. For supercapacitors, organic liquid-type electrolytes bring a number of safety issues due to thermal stability, whereas solid state electrolytes suffer from low ionic conductivity. In addition, the attenuation of electrochemical performance usually decreases for conventional flexible electrodes under severe bending deformation. To this end, flexible quasi-solid-state electrodes can fill in the void. Functional hydrogels, as an emerging kind of material, have many unique advantages compared with traditional materials. Recently, many studies have been conducted to use lignocellulose materials as an integral part of the hydrogel network to take advantage of their unique functions/properties, particularly for the purpose of improving the performance of hydrogel-based FSSCs. In this review, we focus on the recent development of lignocellulose based hydrogels/aerogels, and their applications in EES devices, especially FSSCs. Various conductive materials (i.e., carbon, metal oxides, and conducting polymers) can be integrated into lignocellulose-based hydrogels/aerogels, which are then used for FSSC applications. The synergy between lignocellulose and other elements in the hydrogel/aerogel network is discussed, in terms of favorable characteristics including enhanced mechanical and electrochemical performance, and biocompatibility. However, lignocellulose-based hydrogels/aerogels in FSSCs are still in the infancy stage, and further research and development is needed.
(1) There is a lack of theoretical and modeling studies concerning fundamental issues. The fundamental issues, such as charge transport between lignocellulose and other components in the hydrogel/aerogel system, surface-chemistry effects on charge transport at the hybrid interface of polymers, electrolyte, and inorganic materials, and electrochemical kinetics/thermodynamics of the SC assembling process, remain interesting topics. This information will have a huge impact on the rational design of lignocellulose based hydrogels/aerogels, and their application in FSSCs.
(2) As a reliable and abundant source of carbon and a precursor for the carbon material, lignocellulose, should be rationally designed, and the subsequent carbonization/activation should be optimized to obtain lignocellulose-derived carbons with effective micro–meso-structures for SC applications. The porous structures of the carbon profoundly affect the electrochemical properties and performance of SC composites. Thus, further optimizations of porous structures and carbonization processes are desired. In addition, the scale-up of cost-effective preparation of superior hydrogels/aerogels is yet to be addressed.
(3) Currently, there are some approaches to evaluate the flexibility of flexible energy storage devices, including FSSCs, for example, to test the specific capacitance after bending to different angles, or deformations at different pressures; however, the accuracy/repeatability is not satisfactory, partly because the definition of flexibility is vague, and the recovery from residual strain after deformation is incomplete.260 Thereby, a standardized method for evaluating the performance of FSSCs with mechanical flexibility needs to be developed.
(4) More attention should be paid to FSSCs with novel structural designs to meet the different demands. From the perspective of structural design, nature-inspired structures can serve as models/guidance for constructing FSSCs. For example, in nature, nacre has excellent strength properties, thanks to its brick-and-mortar structure. In this case, the “brick” may be bio-derived two-dimensional graphite or RGO, while organic “mortar” (polymers) will bind the carbon materials based on physical interactions, such as electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, and complexing; the “mortar” polymers may also be coiled so that the long molecular chain can be stretched, yielding desirable flexibility. The brick-and-mortar concept has been incorporated into the design of stretchable strain sensors. Certainly, one would expect that similar bio-inspired concepts will be appliable to lignocellulose-based flexible quasi-solid-state supercapacitors.261
(5) The design of a lignocellulose-derived hydrogel/aerogel rarely takes into account the application of biomimetic techniques. For example, many methods have been proposed to resolve the challenge of freezing the hydrogel electrolyte at sub-zero temperatures, but the results are still unsatisfactory. Inspired by epidermal tissue of mammalian skin, Wang et al. proposed a biomimetic organohydrogel electrolyte with extreme temperature tolerance and long-term moisture lock-in properties.262 We may boldly assert that, inspired by bionics, biomimetic gels may have great potential in this field.
(6) Green and sustainable development is an important element of a circular economy, and self-powered devices, such as implantable/wearable electronic devices, are in harmony with the circular economy concept. With the fast development of sensors for various novel implantable/wearable electronic devices, their applications have received much interest from health monitoring to more and more accurate analytical application, enriching modern lifestyle with convenience and efficiency. Usually, traditional sensing systems need to be externally connected to a power source, which may result in bulky devices and hinder their applications in wearable electronics. Meanwhile, the ever increasing energy consumption of wearable electronic devices needs a trade off in terms of battery capacity, weight/volume, service life, multifunctionality, etc. Despite recent advances in technology leading to low power consumption, and possibility of high performance, power supply units remain a bottleneck for wearable electronics. Therefore, integrated FSSC-sensors with a self-sustainable power supplying concept have received more and more attention for implantable healthcare/portable devices, and other portable/printable electronic products. The self-sustainable energy storage devices that can capture/store body energy and power smart electronics exhibit great potential in the next generation of implantable/wearable electronics devices, and other portable electronic products. It is believed that flexible power sources, combined with design innovations, will emerge as a subversive technology that could accelerate the advent of a new area of smart and omnipresent energy sources.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest to this work.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to express their gratitude for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31770634 and 32071715), Canada Research Chairs Program of the Government of Canada, National Science Foundation for Post-doctoral Scientists of China (2019M651050), and Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin City (17JCYBJC20600).
References
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 12, 7–15 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 RSC .
H. X. He, Y. M. Fu, T. M. Zhao, X. C. Guo, L. L. Xing, Y. Zhang and X. Y. Xue, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 590–600 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gaikwad, G. L. Whiting, D. A. Steingart and A. C. Arias, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3251–3255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307 RSC .
F. X. Wang, X. W. Wu, X. H. Yuan, Z. C. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. J. Fu, Y. S. Zhu, Q. M. Zhou, Y. P. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
L. Li, C. W. Fu, Z. Lou, S. Chen, W. Han, K. Jiang, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Qu, J. L. Cheng, X. D. Li, D. M. Yuan, P. N. Chen, X. L. Chen, B. Wang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Rana, J. H. Park, E. Ducrot, H. Park, M. Kota, T. H. Han, J. Y. Lee, J. Kim, J. H. Kim, P. Howlett, M. Forsyth, D. MacFarlane and H. S. Park, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 19, 197–205 CrossRef .
H. Y. Liao, F. L. Zhou, Z. Z. Zhang and J. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pal, A. Yasin, R. Kunwar, S. Y. Yang, M. M. Yusoff and R. Jose, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 58, 654–664 CrossRef .
G. Milczarek and O. Inganas, Science, 2012, 335, 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek and T. Tschaplinski, Science, 2006, 311, 484–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Hoffert, K. Caldeira, G. Benford, D. R. Criswell, C. Green, H. Herzog, A. K. Jain, H. S. Kheshgi, K. S. Lackner and J. S. Lewis, Science, 2002, 298, 981–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Klemm, B. Heublein, H. P. Fink and A. Bohn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3358–3393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Balat and G. Ayar, Energy Sources, 2005, 27, 931–940 CrossRef .
H. Bian, L. Wei, C. Lin, Q. Ma, H. Dai and J. Y. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4821–4828 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jin, W. Song, T. Liu, J. Xin, W. C. Hiscox, J. Zhang, G. Liu and Z. Kong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 6, 1763–1771 CrossRef .
M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, F. Estrany, E. Armelin, D. D. Díaz and C. Alemán, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1792–1805 RSC .
A. Deneyer, T. Ennaert and B. F. Sels, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2018, 10, 11–20 CrossRef .
P. Sudarsanam, R. Y. Zhong, S. V. Bosch, S. M. Coman, V. I. Parvulescu and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8349–8402 RSC .
C. H. Zhou, X. Xia, C. X. Lin, D. S. Tong and J. Beltramini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5588–5617 RSC .
P. Gallezot, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1538–1558 RSC .
M. E. Himmel, S. Y. Ding, D. K. Johnson, W. S. Adney, M. R. Nimlos, J. W. Brady and T. D. Foust, Science, 2007, 315, 804–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Schutyser, T. Renders, S. Van den Bosch, S. F. Koelewijn, G. T. Beckham and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 42, 852–908 RSC .
X. J. Wu, N. C. Luo, S. J. Xie, H. K. Zhang, Q. H. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6198–6223 RSC .
C. Wan, Y. Jiao, S. Wei, L. Zhang and J. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 459–475 CrossRef CAS .
B. Medronho and B. Lindman, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 222, 502–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zhang, S. X. Nie, C. R. Qin, K. Zhang and S. F. Wang, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 2037–2049 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Lin, D. F. Chen, Q. Yong, C. X. Huang and S. L. Huang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 293, 122055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Fu, L. Fu, X. M. Zhao, Q. Zhang, H. B. Wang and W. D. Gao, Eng. Life Sci., 2015, 15, 605–611 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Xiong, W. H. Dang, S. X. Nie, C. R. Qin, D. P. Li, L. Dai, M. X. Shen, Y. J. Xu and Y. H. Ni, Cellulose, 2021, 28, 1455–1468 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Victor and Y. Ta, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 132, 109924 CrossRef .
S. Saini, C. Y. Falco, M. N. Belgacem and J. Bras, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 135, 239–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Bian, L. H. Chen, H. Q. Dai and J. Y. Zhu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 167, 167–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lindström, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 29, 68–75 CrossRef .
Z. H. Wang, P. Tammela, M. Strømme and L. Nyholm, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3418–3423 RSC .
Z. H. Wang, D. O. Carlsson, P. Tammela, K. Hua, P. Zhang, L. Nyholm and M. Strømme, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7563–7571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Tao, R. P. Wang, H. Yu, L. L. Chen, D. J. Fang, Y. Tian, J. Y. Xie, D. M. Jia, H. Liu, J. S. Wang, F. C. Tang, L. Song and H. B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9701–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hu, G. Y. Zheng, J. Yao, N. Liu, B. Weil, M. Eskilsson, E. Karabulut, Z. C. Ruan, S. H. Fan, J. T. Bloking, M. D. McGehee, L. Wagberg and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 513–518 RSC .
E. Kontturi, A. Meriluoto, P. A. Penttilä, N. Baccile, J. M. Malho, A. Potthast, T. Rosenau, J. Ruokolainen, R. Serimaa, J. Laine and H. Sixta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14455–14458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, H. L. Zhang, Q. F. Zheng, C. M. Clemons, R. C. Sabo, S. Q. Gong, Z. Q. Mac and L. S. Turng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1428–1433 RSC .
R. M. A. Domingues, M. E. Gomes and R. L. Reis, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 2327–2346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang and C. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25621–25630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Campbell and R. R. Sederoff, Plant Physiol., 1996, 110, 3–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Constant, H. L. J. Wienk, A. E. Frissen, P. de Peinder, R. Boelens, D. S. van Es, R. J. H. Grisel, B. M. Weckhuysen, W. J. J. Huijgen, R. J. A. Gosselink and P. C. A. Bruijnincx, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2651–2665 RSC .
Y. Y. Cao, L. Lewis, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808186 CrossRef PubMed .
W. T. Cao, H. Ouyang, W. Xin, S. Y. Chao, C. Ma, Z. Li, F. Chen and M. G. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004181 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lora and W. G. Glasser, J. Polym. Environ., 2002, 10, 39–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ke, D. Singh, X. W. Yang and S. L. Chen, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 3617–3626 CrossRef CAS .
P. Asawaworarit, P. Daorattanachai, W. Laosiripojana, C. Sakdaronnarong, A. Shotipruk and N. Laosiripojana, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 356, 461–471 CrossRef .
J. R. Banu, S. Kavitha, R. Y. Kannah, T. P. Devi, M. Gunasekaran, S. H. Kim and G. Kumar, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 290, 121790 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dessbesell, M. Paleologou, M. Leitch, R. Pulkki and C. Xu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 123, 109768 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Anwar, M. Gulfraz and M. Irshad, J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci., 2014, 7, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen and C. Wan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 73, 610–621 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Dorrestijn, L. J. J. Laarhoven, I. W. C. E. Arends and P. Mulder, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2000, 54, 153–192 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Wu, S. T. Han, S. Venkatesh, Q. J. Sun, H. Y. Peng, Y. Zhou, C. Yeung, R. K. Y. Li and V. A. L. Roy, Org. Electron., 2018, 59, 382–388 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. Guo, Y. Q. Jiang, Z. Xu, Y. H. Xiao, B. Fang, Y. J. Liu, W. W. Gao, P. Zhao, H. T. Wang and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 881 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) N. R. Tanguy, H. R. Wu, S. S. Nair, K. Lian and N. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 1057–1067 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) S. S. Gao, Z. H. Cheng, X. Zhou, Y. P. Liu, J. F. Wang, C. P. Wang, F. X. Chu, F. Xu and D. H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124896 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) W. Li, Z. J. Chen, H. P. Yu, J. Li and S. X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000596 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (g) M. W. Zhu, T. Li, C. S. Davis, Y. G. Yao, J. Q. Dai, Y. B. Wang, F. AlQatari, J. W. Gilman and L. B. Hu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 332–339 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) W. T. Cao, H. Ouyang, W. Xin, S. Y. Chao, C. Ma, Z. Li, F. Chen and M. G. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004181 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, Y. Q. Pu, A. Ragauskas and B. Yang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 271, 449–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cho, M. Karaaslan, H. Wang and S. Renneckar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20973–20981 RSC .
M. W. Zhu, T. Li, C. S. Davis, Y. G. Yao, J. Q. Dai, Y. B. Wang, F. AlQatari, J. W. Gilman and L. B. Hu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 332–339 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. J. Chen, H. P. Yu, J. Li and S. X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000596 CrossRef PubMed .
W. D. Qu, Y. Xue, Y. W. Gao, M. Rover and X. L. Bai, Biomass Bioenergy, 2016, 95, 19–26 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Yaich, U. Edlund and A. C. Albertsson, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 8177–8207 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yi and V. M. Puri, Am. J. Bot., 2014, 101, 244–254 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Zhu, W. Luo, P. N. Ciesielski, Z. Q. Fang, J. Y. Zhu, G. Henriksson, M. E. Himmel and L. B. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhu, W. Luo, P. N. Ciesielski, Z. Q. Fang, J. Y. Zhu, G. Henriksson, M. E. Himmel and L. B. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9305–9374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Palkovits, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4336–4338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Falco, J. M. Sieben, N. Brun, M. Sevilla, T. van der Mauelen, E. Morallón, D. C. Amorós and M. M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 374–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Patrice and B. Gogotsi, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef .
C. Zhong, Y. D. Deng, W. B. Hu, J. L. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075–1803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, S. W. Zhang, X. H. Zhou and G. Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1499–1502 RSC .
P. Yang and W. Mai, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 274–290 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Lu, M. H. Yu, G. M. Wang, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160–2181 RSC .
J. Cao, T. Huang, R. L. Liu, X. Xi and D. Q. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Das, R. Bera, A. Maitra, S. K. Karan, S. Paria, L. Halder, S. K. Si, A. Bera and B. B. Khatua, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 10, 1039 Search PubMed .
N. R. Chodankar, D. P. Dubal, S. H. Ji and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800283 CrossRef .
L. Y. Lin, S. Tang, S. Q. Zhao, X. H. Peng and N. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, Y. Liu, H. Y. Bai, C. X. Li, B. D. Mao, L. Sun and W. D. Shi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 531, 64–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Liu, C. X. Lu, H. L. Li, R. Y. Tay, L. M. Sun, X. H. Wang, W. L. Chow, X. L. Wang, B. K. Tay, Z. W. Chen, J. Yan, K. Feng, G. Lui, R. Tjandra, L. Rasenthiram, G. Chiu and A. P. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3754–3764 RSC .
C. Y. Xiong, M. R. Li, W. Zhao, C. Duan, L. Dai, M. X. Shen, Y. J. Xu and Y. H. Ni, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125318 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Fan, J. Zhong, J. H. Wu, J. M. Lin and Y. F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9011–9014 RSC .
H. Li, D. Liu, X. X. Zhu, D. Y. Qu, Z. Z. Xie, J. S. Li, H. L. Tang, D. Zheng and D. Y. Qu, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104763 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Nie, W. Weng, L. M. Liu, S. Zhang, X. D. Yang, J. Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, Q. Li and X. Ding, Carbon, 2019, 149, 329–336 CrossRef .
K. H. Choi, J. T. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 RSC .
M. Liao, H. Sun, J. Zhang, J. X. Wu, S. L. Xie, X. M. Fu, X. M Sun, B. J. Wang and H. S. Peng, Small, 2017, 14, 1702052 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Guo, X. F. Wang, L. T. Hu, T. Y. Zhai, H. Q. Li and N. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19820–19827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, X. T. Ding, Y. Liang, Y. Zhao, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12113–12117 RSC .
W. Weng, Q. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. J. Lin, J. Ren, X. Lu, M. Wang and H. S. Peng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Shen, Y. X. Xie, M. Sanghadasa, Y. Tang, L. S. Lu and L. W. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39391–39398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Su, J. Y. Xiang, F. S. Wen, L. Z. Song, C. P. Mu, D. Y. Xu, C. X. Hao and Z. Y. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 212, 941–949 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Qu, J. L. Cheng, X. D. Li, D. M. Yuan, P. N. Chen, X. L. Chen, B. Wang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3605 CrossRef .
L. B. Dong, C. J. Xu, Y. Li, Z. Z. Pan, G. M. Liang, E. L. Zhou, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9313–9319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Y. Su, L. J. Cai, B. C. Qiu, N. Wang, J. Xiong, C. Yang, X. M. Tao and Y. Chai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900037 CrossRef .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D. H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kai, W. Suda, Y. Ogawa, K. Nagamine and M. Nishizawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19513–19518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bellani, E. Petroni, A. E. D. R. Castillo, N. Curreli, B. M. García, R. O. Nuñez, M. Prato and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807659 CrossRef .
M. Barakzehi, M. Montazer, F. Sharif, T. Norby and A. Chatzitakis, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 305, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiao, C. G. Zhang and Z. H. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41299–41311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Zhao, Y. L. Li, F. Lin, Y. S. Xu, L. L. Chen, W. C. Jiang, T. Jiang, S. G. Yang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16570 RSC .
Y. H. Yang, B. Wang, J. Y. Zhu, J. Zhou, Z. Xu, L. Fan, J. Zhu, R. Podila, A. M. Rao and B. G. Lu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5516–5524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Chao, K. Z. Wang, R. Jalili, A. Morlando, C. Y. Qin, A. Vijayakumar, C. Y. Wang and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46746–46755 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Li, Y. H. Zhao, Z. W. Liu, L. T. Yang, J. Zhang, M. Wang and R. C. Che, Small, 2018, 14, 1801007 CrossRef .
C. Y. Xiong, Q. Yang, W. H. Dang, M. R. Li, B. B. Li, J. Su, Y. Liu, W. Zhao, C. Duan, L. Dai, Y. J. Xu and Y. H. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2020, 447, 227387 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Liu, J. S. Xu, J. X. Zhu, Y. Q. Chang, H. G. Wang, Z. C. Liu, Y. Xu, C. Zhang and T. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10331 RSC .
W. Gao, L. B. Alemany, L. J. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Mei, F. Huang, X. Yang, Y. Li, J. Y. Li, F. B. Meng and Z. W. Zhou, Carbon, 2019, 147, 490–500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, C. Eames, B. Fleutot, R. David, J. N. Chotard, E. Suard, C. Masquelier and M. S. Islam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7050–7058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Łatoszyńska, G. Z. Żukowska, I. A. Rutkowska, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, P. J. Kulesza and W. Wieczorek, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1147–1154 CrossRef .
X. Y. He, Q. Liu, J. Y. Liu, R. M. Li, H. S. Zhang, R. R. Chen and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 134–143 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aytug, M. S. Rager, W. Higgins, F. G. Brown, G. M. Veith, C. M. Rouleau, H. Wang, Z. D. Hood, S. M. Mahurin, R. T. Mayes, P. C. Joshi and T. Kuruganti, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11008–11017 CrossRef CAS .
Y. E. Xie, Z. K. Ma, H. H. Song, H. Y. Wang and P. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 348, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Liu and Y. H. Gao, Small, 2017, 13, 1701989 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Wang, Z. J. Zheng, Y. Q. Feng, H. Ye, F. F. Cao and Z. P. Guo, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104817 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yu, Y. J. Gong, R. Y. Chen, M. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Zhou, J. N. An, F. Lv, S. J. Guo and G. Z. Sun, Small, 2018, 14, 1801203 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, T. Jiang and L. Xu, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, H. F. Li, Z. F. Wang, Z. X. Pei, Q. Xue, H. Y. Geng and C. Y. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605137 CrossRef .
J. D. Zou, M. Zhang, J. R. Huang, J. Bian, Y. Jie, M. Willander, X. Cao, N. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702671 CrossRef .
D. Y. Park, D. J. Joe, D. H. Kim, H. Park, J. H. Han, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, J. G. Park, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702308 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Roy, P. Majumdar, P. Sengupta, S. Kundu, S. Shinde, A. Jha, K. Pramanik and H. Saha, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 329, 135170 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Yang, Z. B. Cai, J. Ren, H. P. Li, H. J. Lin, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Zhang, X. L. Chen, P. N. Chen, G. Z. Guan, L. B. Qiu, H. J. Lin, Z. B. Yang, W. Y. Bai, Y. F. Luo and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Q. Y. Chan, Z. W. K. Low, S. J. W. Heng, S. Y. Chan, C. Owh and X. J. Loh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10070–10087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, W. M. Huang, Z. Ding, Y. Zhao, C. C. Wang, H. Purnawali and C. Tang, Mater. Des., 2012, 33, 577–640 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xie, Nature, 2010, 464, 267–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Guo, N. Yu, Z. Q. Hou, L. T. Hu, Y. Ma, H. Q. Li and T. Y. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16–30 RSC .
Y. Huang, M. S. Zhu, Z. X. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang and C. Y. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1290–1297 RSC .
J. Deng, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, P. N. Chen, X. L. Cheng and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 15639–15643 CrossRef .
B. R. Sreelekshmy, R. Basheer, S. Sivaraman, V. Vasudevan, L. Elias and S. M. A. Shibli, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6041–6056 RSC .
U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 23–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, G. Chata, Y. D. Zhang, Y. Peng, J. E. Lu, N. Wang, R. Mercado, J. Li and S. W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 811–819 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, F. X. Ma, C. Y. Xu, J. Yu, D. Li, Y. J. Feng and L. Zhen, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 533–539 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, H. Tian, H. S. Lee, T. Park, F. C. Leung, T. L. Ren and J. Chae, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 697–708 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Wang, S. Cong, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 140, 100524 CrossRef .
L. Liu, K. Du, Z. B. He, T. Wang, X. L. Zhong, T. Ma, J. M. Yang, Y. C. He, G. B. Dong, S. H. Wang and X. G. Diao, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Q.
Q. Zhang, K. Du, Z. B. He, T. Wang, Y. Yi, M. Y. Wang, X. L. Zhong, G. B. Dong and X. G. Diao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23028–23037 RSC .
P. Y. Wang, J. Tian, J. L. Hu, X. J. Zhou and C. L. Li, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7390–7400 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, X. P. Bai, H. Y. Wang, H. L. Wang, J. N. Song, K. Huang, C. Wang, N. Wang, B. Li, M. Lei and H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703238 CrossRef .
L. L. Zhu, W. L. Ong, X. Lu, K. Y. Zeng, H. J. Fan and G. W. Ho, Small, 2017, 13, 1700084 CrossRef PubMed .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D. H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Z. Wang, Z. G. Chen, S. Cong and Z. G. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1915–1922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Cadek, M. Wachtler and F. Béguin, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 943–949 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, Y. K. Hsu, Y. G. Lin, Y. K. Lin, Y. Y. Horng, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7124–7130 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Pu, D. H. Fu, Z. H. Wang, X. P. Gan, X. L. Lu, L. Yang and H. S. Xia, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800101 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, B. Zhu, W. Jiang, Y. Yang, R. L. Wan, H. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. S. Zhu, W. J. Meng, Z. X. Pei, C. Liu, H. Hu and C. Y. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6242–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Lin, H. Y. Zhang, H. Y. Liao, Y. Zhao and K. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 367, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .
F. Q. Wang, D. H. Ouyang, Z. Y. Zhou, S. J. Page, D. H. Liu and X. B. Zhao, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 57, 247–280 CrossRef .
Y. H. Guo, J. Bae, Z. W. Fang, P. P. Li, F. Zhao and G. H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642–7707 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, J. K. El-Demellawi, Q. Jiang, G. Ge, H. F. Liang, K. Lee, X. C. Dong and K. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7229–7251 RSC .
K. Liu, X. F. Pan, L. H. Chen, L. L. Huang, Y. H. Ni, J. Liu, S. L. Cao and H. P. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6395–6403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, L. H. Chen, L. L. Huang, Y. H. Ni, Z. W. Xu, S. Lin and H. P. Wang, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 4565–4575 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, X. H. Zhao, J. X. Zhou and Z. G. Suo, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2008, 56, 1779–1793 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhang and A. Khademhosseini, Science, 2017, 356, 627 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Guo, J. Bae, Z. W. Fang, P. P. Li, F. Zhao and G. H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Shi, L. J. Pan and G. H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1734–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, X. Y. Zhou and G. H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2642–2652 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, J. Bae, X. Y. Zhou, Y. H. Guo and G. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801796 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kong, Y. Chen, R. Liu, X. Liu, C. Y. Liu, Z. W. Shao, L. M. Xiong, X. N. Liu, W. Sun and S. L. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Guo, J. Bae, F. Zhao and G. H. Yu, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 335–348 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, B. Endrődi, G. S. Alvarez and A. Cornell, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19415–19425 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Pan, Q. H. Wang, P. He, K. Liu, Y. H. Ni, X. H. Ouyang, L. H. Chen, L. L. Huang, H. P. Wang and Y. Tan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7918–7925 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Hsu, Y. Q. Liu, Y. Wang, B. Y. Li, G. X. Luo, M. Xing and W. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6935–6948 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zhang, F. Xiao, L. H. Qian, J. W. Xiao, S. Wang and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400064 CrossRef .
D. Ghosh and C. K. Das, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1122–1131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Madec, A. Bouvrée, P. Blanchard, C. Cougnon, T. Brousse, B. Lestriez, D. Guyomard and J. Gaubicher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5379–5386 RSC .
F. F. Li, X. L. Wang and R. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20643–20650 RSC .
F. F. Li, X. L. Wang and R. C. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 732–742 CrossRef .
H. H. Rana, J. H. Park, E. Ducrot, H. Park, M. Kota, T. H. Han, J. Y. Lee, J. Kim, J. H. Kim, P. Howlett, M. Forsyth, D. MacFarlane and H. S. Park, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 19, 197–205 CrossRef .
W. W. Li, F. X. Gao, X. Q. Wang, N. Zhang and M. M. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 9342–9347 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, F. K. Shi, X. Y. Liu, Z. J. Tang, Y. K. Wang, Y. Huang, H. Q. Hou, X. M. Xie and C. Y. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9141–9145 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Wang, J. Wu, J. Qiu, K. F. Zhang, J. W. Shao and L. F. Yan, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3109–3115 RSC .
X. F. Zhang, J. Q. Zhao, T. Xia, Q. Y. Li, C. H. Ao, Q. H. Wang, W. Zhang, C. H. Lu and Y. L. Deng, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 31, 135–145 CrossRef .
M. F. Chen, J. Z. Chen, W. J. Zhou, J. L. Xu and C. P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26524–26532 RSC .
L. Y. Yang, L. Song, Y. Feng, M. J. Cao, P. C. Zhang, X. F. Zhang and J. F. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12314–12318 RSC .
N. Lu, R. Q. Na, L. B. Li, C. Y. Zhang, Z. Q. Chen, S. L. Zhang, J. S. Luan and G. B. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1944–1951 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Yue, F. Wen, S. J. Gao, M. Y. Ang, P. K. Pallathadka, L. H. Liu and H. Yu, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 8141–8152 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Sui, H. S. Guo, P. G. Chen, Y. N. Zhu, C. Y. Wen, Y. H. Gao, J. Yang, X. Y. Zhang and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907986 CrossRef .
F. Tao, L. M. Qin, Z. K. Wang and Q. M. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15541–15548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ge, S. Cao, Y. Yang, O. J. Rojas and X. H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 12, 127306 Search PubMed .
C. K. Roy, H. L. Guo, T. L. Sun, A. B. Ihsan, T. Kurokawa, M. Takahata, T. Nonoyama, T. Nakajima and J. P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 27, 7344–7348 CrossRef .
J. J. Wei, J. Zhou, S. S. Su, J. H. Jiang, J. Feng and Q. G. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3410–3415 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Dai, J. Q. Wang, F. Teng, Z. Q. Shao and X. N. Huang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2019, 57, 981–991 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Gan, W. S. Xing, L. L. Jiang, J. Fang, C. C. Zhao, F. Z. Ren, L. M. Fang, K. F. Wang and X. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1487 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. X. Liu, G. J. Liang, Y. X. Zhan, H. F. Li, Z. F. Wang, L. T. Ma, Y. K. Wang, X. R. Niu and C. Y. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 732–742 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, X. L. Ren, J. M. Zhang, J. Liu, R. X. Ou, C. G. Guo, X. Y. Yu, Q. W. Wang and Z. Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 449, 227532 CrossRef .
H. R. Chen, P. J. Shi, F. J. Fan, H. Chen, C. Wu, X. B. Xu, Z. Y. Wang and M. Du, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705069 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Yang, X. Wang, F. Yang, H. Shen and D. C. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7178–7184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhang, R. J. Lv, A. Wang, W. Q. Guo, X. J. Liu and J. Y. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15028–15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, H. B. Zhang, J. Q. Luo, Q. W. Wang, B. Xu, S. Hong and Z. Z. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11193–11202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Li, Y. Y. Zheng, Y. M. Xu, Z. K. Zheng, X. D. Chen and W. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, 190826 Search PubMed .
Q. D. Deng, S. C. Abbas, Z. L. Li, J. Q. Lv, X. J. Ma, S. L. Cao, Y. H. Ni and W. G. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 574, 33–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Chang and L. N. Zhang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 84, 40–53 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wang, P. Tammela, M. Strømme and L. Nyholm, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700130 CrossRef .
R. Shinoda, T. Saito, Y. Okita and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 842–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, B. H. Fei, J. F. Ma, X. G. Liu, S. M. Yang, G. L. Tian and Z. H. Jiang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 180, 385–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Sun, J. Huang, L. E, C. H. Ma, Z. W. Wu, Z. Xu, S. Luo, W. Li and S. X. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11114–11122 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, H. F. Li, Z. X. Liu, Z. J. Tang, G. J. Liang, F. N. Mo, Q. Yang, L. T. Ma and C. Y. Zhi, Small, 2018, 14, 1803978 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Li, B. C. Hu, Y. W. Ding, H. W. Liang, C. Li, Z. Y. Yu, Z. Y. Wu, W. S. Chen and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 11, 7085–7090 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Qing, X. H. Lu, Y. Q. Wu, N. Yan and W. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 23374–23381 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Zu, J. Shen, L. P. Zou, F. Wang, X. D. Wang, Y. W. Zhang and X. D. Yao, Carbon, 2016, 99, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Erlandsson, V. L. Durán, H. Granberg, M. Sandberg, P. A. Larsson and L. Wågberg, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 246–254 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Y. L. Chen, Y. L. Qin, T. J. Wang, J. Yang and F. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12726–12733 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhang, C. Y. Zhao, W. K. Ong and X. H. Lu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Guo, H. C. Li, X. Zhang, H. Nawaz, S. Chen, X. M. Zhang and F. Xu, Carbon, 2021, 174, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X. Y. Zhou, M. Z. Chen, S. K. Shi and Y. Z. Cao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 265, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Cai, L. W. Kuang, C. Wang, C. D. Jin, Z. Wang and Q. F. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2586–2594 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983–5992 RSC .
S. J. Chae, F. Güneş, K. K. Kim, E. S. Kim, G. H. Han, S. M. Kim, H. J. Shin, S. M. Yoon, J. Y. Choi, M. H. Park, C. W. Yang, D. Pribat and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2328–2333 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng and Q. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1615–1619 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zheng, Z. Y. Cai, Z. Q. Ma and S. Q. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3263–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Yang, J. W. Yang, Z. D. F. Gao, B. Li and C. X. Xiong, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 3, 1145–1151 CrossRef .
C. Jiang, D. An, Z. H. Wang, S. M. Zhang, X. P. An, J. Y. Bo, G. P. Yan, K. S. Moon and C. P. Wong, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 268, 122019 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shang, X. Y. An, H. Zhang, M. X. Shen, F. Baker, Y. X. Liu, L. Q. Liu, J. Yang, H. B. Cao, Q. L. Xu, H. B. Liu and Y. H. Ni, Carbon, 2020, 161, 62–70 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Liu, H. H. Song, X. H. Chen, S. Zhang, J. S. Zhou and Z. K. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 303–309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Zhu, L. C. Zhou, X. L. Zheng, X. H. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, D. D. Zhang and D. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 426, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dang, Z. Y. Huang, Y. Chen, S. H. Zhou, X. Feng, G. X. Chen, F. L. Dai and H. S. Qi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21528–21538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Wang, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
C. Xiong, X. Lin, H. Liu, M. Li, B. Li, S. Jiao, W. Zhao, C. Duan, L. Dai and Y. Ni, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, 3965–3971 CrossRef .
L. H. Tseng, C. H. Hsiao, D. D. Nguyen, P. Y. Hsieh, C. Y. Lee and N. H. Tai, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 266, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Jia, Y. H. Shi, Q. Zhang and X. H. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 462, 923–931 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jha, S. Mehta, Y. Chen, P. Renner, S. S. Sankar, D. Parkinson, S. Kundu and H. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 3418–3430 RSC .
L. Lim, Y. S. Liu, W. W. Liu, R. Tjandra, L. Rasenthiram, Z. W. Chen and A. P. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6448 RSC .
M. Y. Li, M. Zu, J. S. Yu, H. F. Cheng and Q. W. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1602994 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, K. Q. Zheng and P. B. Wan, Small, 2018, 14, 1704497 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, P. Feng, J. Chen, Z. M. Sun and B. X. Zhao, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 88, 220–240 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Xiong, M. R. Li, S. X. Nie, W. H. Dang, W. Zhao, L. Dai and Y. H. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2020, 471, 228448 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Li, X. J. Chen, Z. Y. Jin, P. P. Li and D. Xiao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1140 RSC .
H. Zhuo, Y. J. Hu, Z. H. Chen and L. X. Zhong, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 215, 322–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Y. Han, Y. Li, J. Li and L. J. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 199, 555–562 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Ding, X. W. Xu, Y. Y. Yue, C. T. Mei, C. B. Huang, S. H. Jiang, Q. L. Wu and J. Q. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27987–28002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Liu, J. S. Chen, Y. Zhan, B. Liu, C. X. Xiong, Q. L. Yang and G. H. Hu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17652–17660 Search PubMed .
D. C. Wang, H. Y. Yu, D. M. Qi, M. Ramasamy, J. M. Yao, F. Tang, K. C. Tam and Q. Q. Ni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24435–24446 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, D. F. Peng, X. Wu, W. Li, H. B. Deng and S. L. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 156, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, R. Nesper, C. Villevieille and P. Novák, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 606–614 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zheng, A. Kvit, Z. Y. Cai, Z. Q. Ma and S. Q. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12528 RSC .
L. Y. Xia, X. L. Li, Y. Q. Wu, S. H. Hu, Y. Liao, L. Huang, Y. Qing and X. H. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122325 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Sun, Y. Huang, C. X. Fu, Y. Huang, M. S. Zhu, X. M. Tao, C. Y. Zhi and H. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14877–14883 RSC .
Y. X. Zeng, M. H. Yu, Y. Meng, P. P. Fang, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601053 CrossRef .
J. H. Lin, H. Y. Liang, H. N. Jia, S. L. Chen, J. L. Guo, J. L. Qi, C. Q. Qu, J. Cao, W. D. Fei and J. C. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24594–24601 RSC .
V. D. Nithya and N. S. Arul, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10767–10778 RSC .
F. Li, H. Chen, X. Y. Liu, S. J. Zhu, J. Q. Jia, C. H. Xu, F. Dong, Z. Q. Wen and Y. X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 4, 2096–2104 RSC .
L. Y. Xia, X. L. Li, X. Wu, L. Huang, Y. Liao, Y. Qing, Y. Q. Wu and X. H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17378–17388 RSC .
X. F. Zhang, J. Q. Zhao, X. He, Q. Y. Li, C. H. Ao, T. Xia, W. Zhang, C. H. Lu and Y. L. Deng, Carbon, 2018, 127, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhang, Z. Shang, M. X. Shen, S. P. Chowdhury, A. Ignaszak, S. H. Sun and Y. H. Ni, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11175–11185 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Shi, X. Yang, E. D. Cranston and I. Zhitomirsky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 20, 6437–6445 CrossRef .
C. Yang, C. C. Chen, Y. Y. Pan, S. Y. Li, F. Wang, J. Y. Li, N. N. Li, X. Y. Li, Y. Y. Zhang and D. G. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 264–271 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Tanguy, H. R. Wu, S. S. Nair, K. Lian and N. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2020, 14, 1057–1067 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Chen, H. Zhuo, Y. J. Hu, H. H. Lai, L. X. Liu, L. X. Zhong and X. W. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910292 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, H. H. Rana, J. Y. Lee and H. S. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16962–16968 RSC .
Z. Y. Peng and W. B. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 7879–7891 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Peng, Y. B. Zou, S. Q. Xu, W. B. Zhong and W. T. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22190–22200 CrossRef CAS .
F. Luo, T. L. Sun, T. Nakajima, T. Kurokawa, Y. Zhao, K. Sato, A. B. Ihsan, X. Li, H. Guo and J. P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Wang, F. Chen, Z. X. Liu, Z. J. Tang, Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, S. Y. Du, Q. Chen and C. Y. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15707–15711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, T. Xia, X. W. Jia, J. Q. Zhao, Q. Y. Li, C. H. Ao, X. Y. Deng, X. M. Zhang, W. Zhang and C. H. Lu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 245, 116554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Li, F. X. Lu, C. Wang, F. L. Zhang, W. H. Liang, S. Kuga, Z. C. Dong, Y. Zhao, Y. Huang and M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24468–24478 RSC .
Q. Gong, Y. Q. Li, X. H. Liu, Z. B. Xia and Y. Yang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 245, 116611 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Li, Z. J. Tang, Z. X. Liu and C. Y. Zhi, Joule, 2019, 3, 613 CrossRef .
W. Wang, S. Yang, K. Ding, L. Jiao, J. Yan, W. Zhao, Y. Y. Ma, T. Y. Wang, B. W. Cheng and Y. H. Ni, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 129949 CrossRef .
F. N. Mo, G. J. Liang, D. H. Wang, Z. J. Tang, H. F. Li and C. Y. Zhi, EcoMat, 2019, 1, e12008 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† P. Gu and W. Liu contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the main types of biomass and chemical structures of major components of lignocellulose.25 Copyright © 2018 Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of CNF and CNC production from cellulose fiber.33 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD,41 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) Schematic illustration of the CNF/PAR hybrid substrate.37 Copyright © 2015 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Schematics of idealized cellulose nanocrystals after sulfuric acid hydrolysis of disordered regions.41 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (d) CNCs as an effective dielectric improve the performance of generators (lighting up to 100 multicolor commercials led lights).42 Copyright © 2017 Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the importance and functionality of cellulose nanomaterials in SCs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The aromatic alcohol precursors and monolignols in the lignin molecule. (b) Type of inter-lignin bond ((I) β-O-4′ sub-structure; (II) β-O-4′, α-O-4′ and 5–5′ linkage in the dibenzodioxocin sub-structure; (III) β-5′ linkage in the phenylcoumaran sub-structure; (IV) β-β′ in the resinol sub-structure; and (V) β-1′ linkage in the spirodienone sub-structure).56a Copyright © 2000 Elsevier. (c) Some lignin-based functional materials for use in flexible electronics.56b Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Science BV.56c Copyright © 2018 Nature Publishing Group.56d Copyright © 2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GMBH.56e Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Science SA.56f Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GMBH.56g Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Science BV.56h Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GMBH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Components of typical SCs.69 Copyright © 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC). (c) Pseudocapacitors (PC). (d) Hybrid capacitors (HC).70 Copyright © 2016 Royal Society Chemistry. (e) Schematic plot of the electrode potentials (V+ and V−) and cell potential (V) versus specific capacity for symmetric (blue lines) and hybrid (red lines) configurations. (f) Typical symmetric configuration featuring activated carbon (AC) as both positive and negative electrodes. (g) Example of a hybrid device consisting of an insertion metal oxide negative electrode (anode) combined with a high surface area carbon positive electrode (cathode).71 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of a metal substrate-based electrode. (b) SEM images of the active materials uniformly distributed on the substrate surface.76 Copyright © 2017 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) SEM image for the stainless steel mesh substrate. (d) The formation process of RuCo2O4 over the stainless-steel mesh by electrodeposition.77 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH. (e) SEM image of carbon paper.82 Copyright © 2014 Royal Society Chemistry. (f) Schematic diagram of the implantation of composites into carbon paper.83 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Preparation scheme to produce yarn and rope from fiber, and their SEM images.84 Copyright © 2019 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of coaxial fiber.88 Copyright © 2014 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of textile based SCs for wearable electronics.93 Copyright © 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (d) SEM images of commercial textile and active material-coated textiles.92 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (e) UV-vis transmittance spectra of a piece of commercial PET film.99 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration for the photothermal SCs packaged with the PET film under solar irradiation.100 Copyright © 2020 Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of different stress transfer mechanisms and fracture behaviors of pure GO (a–c) and Cu–CNT/GO (a′–c′) nanocomposite papers.107 Copyright © 2019 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD.	 

 	Fig. 9  Main types of FSSCs. (a) 1D linear structure.113 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH. (b) 2D interdigital structure.114 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH. (c) 3D sandwich structure.115 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the integrated wire-shaped device for photoelectric conversion and energy storage.122 Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) Schematic illustration of the structures of all solid-state, coaxial and integrated fiber devices. (c) Flexibility and weave ability of “energy fibers”.123 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (d) Design and manufacturing process flow of a nickel-pedicle SMA wire. (e) Schematic demonstration of a SMA supercapacitor woven with traditional fabric and fabrication of a shape-recoverable smart textile.128 Copyright © 2016 Royal Society Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of fiber-shaped supercapacitor and the resulting textile that are reversibly transformed into flexural or elongated states and recovered to the original shape.129 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of microbial SCs.134 Copyright © 2015 Elsevier. (b) Full-device fabrication electrochromic supercapacitors with fantastic patterns.142 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the autonomic electricity-triggered damage reporting and self-healing concept.145 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH. (d) Design and manufacturing process flow of a flexible, electrically, and mechanically self-healing supercapacitor. (e) Schematic representation of the self-healing capabilities of the electrical conductivity of SWCNT films spread on self-healing substrates.146 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (f) Design and manufacturing process flow of a magnetic-assisted self-healable yarn-based supercapacitor.147 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of components of self-healing polyelectrolyte. (h) Schematic illustration of self-healing electrolyte (3 mm thickness and 10 mm wide) to ultimately support a 100 g mass, before healing (left) and after the third breaking/healing cycle (right); red rectangles indicate the wound/healing position.148 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Science SA.	 

 	Fig. 12  Tunable elements in hydrogels that are beneficial to energy storage devices.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Fabrication of multilayer hydrogel composite materials on conductive substrates by electrochemical precipitation.162 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the PC–CNF–GG–glycerol hydrogel-based injectable electrode.163 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of fabricating a biocompatible SC and self-healing internal mechanism.164 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ low temperature cross-linking method for the fabrication of an all solid-state hydrogel supercapacitor.173 Copyright © 2019 Royal Society Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the hollow polypyrrole/cellulose hybrid hydrogel.174 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier. (c) Illustration of the fabrication process of the B–PVA/NFC hydrogel.175 Copyright © 2019 Royal Society Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the cellulose hydrogel containing high concentrated ZnCl2 and the use for ZHS.176 (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of organohydrogel electrolyte from the HPC/PVA hydrogel.177 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. Copyright © 2020 Royal Society Chemistry. (f) Equilibrium structures comprising the PAM/CNFs/LiCl hydrogel and interactions of each component with water molecules.181 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Science SA. (g) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of flexible water-deactivated polyelectrolyte hydrogel electrolyte via UV photo-induced radical polymerization and (h) internal mechanism within water-deactivated polyelectrolyte hydrogel electrolyte.183 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (i) Schematic illustration of hydrogen bonding in polymer chains and the structure of a Zr(IV) cluster and (j) coordinate bonds of Zr(IV) clusters with carboxylates and/or hydroxyls.184 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the renewable double-crosslinked lignin hydrogel.185 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier.	 

Cellulose/NaOH hydrogel	
In situ low temperature cross-linking method	N-doped graphene (NG) hydrogel or cobalt(II) carbonate hydroxide/NG hydrogel	98.8 F g−1/1 A g−1	13.5 W h kg−1/496.4 W kg−1	
173

Hollow PPy/cellulose hybrid hydrogel	
In situ implanting	Hollow PPy/cellulose hybrid hydrogel electrode	255 F g−1/0.25 A g−1	20.4 W h kg−1/—	
174

PVA/nanocellulose hydrogel	Zinc-salt-containing borax-crosslinking	Zinc metal anode/cellulose paper	56.1 mA h g−1/0.5 mA cm−2	6.22 mW h cm−3/13.9 mW cm−3	
175

Zinc ion trapping in cellulose hydrogel	—	Zinc foil/activated carbon	193 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	192 W h kg−1/499 W kg−1	
176

HPC/PVA hydrogel	LiClO4 water/glycerol mixture solution displacement strategy	Activated carbon electrodes	213.8 F g−1/0.2 A g−1	—	
177

PAM/CNF/LiCl hydrogel	—	CNT papers	110.2 mF cm−2/1 mA cm−2	—	
181

Lignin-derived hydrogel	Hybrid double-crosslinking method	PANI deposited carbon cloth	190 F g−1/0.25 A g−1	15.24 W h kg−1/—	
185


 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthetic route to xylem-like CA and dual activation.198 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of fabrication of wood-derived CNF aerogels.200 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (c) Schematic diagram of the microstructure and (d) 3D microstructure of CAs synthesized at different temperatures.201 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic view of the spherical particle production process.203 Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Science BV. (f) Preparation process of MF-CA.204 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of the shape independent ultra-thick cubic electrode.206 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (h) Schematic illustration of the preparation of hierarchical porous lignin-based CAs.207 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier. (i) Synthesis diagram of CAs and (j) SEM images and the corresponding photographs of CAs with different mass ratios of cellulose to lignin.208 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a CNF/RGO/CNT electrode.213 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration for the reduction mechanism of GO by lignin and aggregation–dispersion behavior of LRGOs.215 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (c) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of NCGA.218 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Science BV. (d) Schematic fabrication process of NSHPA.219 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of BN-MC/MnO2 formation.223 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Science BV.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the 3D hierarchical porous CA/PPy composite for a supercapacitor.231 Copyright © 2019 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (b) Preparation and synthesis process of CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels, and (c) luminance variation of an LED during cutting and self-healing processes.233 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic synthesis of thye supramolecular assembly process and their 2D structural arrangement to form 3D aerogels.235 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Preparation process of a porous CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel electrode.238 Copyright © 2017 Royal Society Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the design of CF–CNF/MWCNT/MnO2 and CF–CNF/MWCNT/AC flexible electrodes, and the construction of FSSCs.239 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Science SA. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of CNF/MWCNT/RGO/Fe3O4 electrodes, and construction of FSSCs. (d) Digital photographs of electrode materials and their SEM images.245 Copyright © 2018 Royal Society Chemistry.	 

Wood–CNF aerogel	553–689	700–1000 °C/inert gas/—	2 M H2SO4	140 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	—/48.6 W kg−1	—	
200

Lignin-based CAs	779	1050 °C/N2/KOH	6 M KOH	142.8 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	—	96%/2000	
206

Lignin/cellulose CAs	604.44	800 °C/—/—	6 M KOH	136 F g−1/5 A g−1	102 W h kg−1/175 W kg−1	98.6%/1000	
207

CNF/RGO/CNT hybrid aerogels	—	—	H2SO4/PVA-gel	252 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	8.1 mW h g−1/2.7 W g−1	99.5%/1000	
213

LRGOs hydrogels	—	—	1 M H2SO4	213.8 F g−1/1 A g−1	—	—	
215

B,N-dual doped MC/MnO2 composite	989.8	—	1 M Na2SO4	338 F g−1/1 A g−1	27.75 W h kg−1/1350 W kg−1	95.6%/2000	
223

Al/lig–NiWO4	—	—	PVA/H3PO4 gel	17.01 mF cm−2/0.13 A g−1	8.49 W h kg−1/509.48 W kg−1	97%/1000	
224

Cellulose CA/PPy	139.8	200 °C/N2/—	1 M H2SO4	387.6 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	—	92.6%/10000	
231

CNF–PPy/PB hydrogel	—	—	6 M KOH	236.9 F g−1/0.13 A g−1	—	86%/1500	
233

PANI/TOCN hydrogel	327	—	1 M H2SO4	3.06 F cm−2/0.25 mA cm−2	106 μW h cm−2/487 μW cm−2	85%/1000	
234

Cellulose/PANI/Ag aerogel	—	—	6 M KOH	217 F g−1/0.1 A g−1	—	83%/1000	
236

CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel	—	—	Ionogel	518 F g−1/1 A g−1	114 W h kg−1/442 W kg−1	98%/2000	
238

CF–CNF/MWCNT-HAs	—	—	1 M Na2SO4	661 F g−1/1 A g−1	103.45 W h kg−1/846.61 W kg−1	96.7%/3000	
239

CNF/MWCNT/RGO/Fe3O4/CF–CNF/MWCNT/MnO2	1193	—	5 M LiCl	1193 F cm−2/1 mA cm−2	2.35 mW h cm−3/—	94.7%/5000	
245

Bamboo CNFs-derived carbon fiber aerogel	910	900 °C/Ar/KOH	6 M KOH	220 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	31.25 W h kg−1/12.9 W kg−1	—	
246

CNFs/MWCNTs/PANI aerogel	—	—	1 M H2SO4	791.13 F g−1/0.2 A g−1	—	82.14%/3000	
249


 	Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of fabricating wood-derived CA.251 Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) Experimental scheme of the fabrication of an FSSC.252 Copyright © 2019 Royal Society Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustrations of the preparation of wearable SCs.253 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the preparation process for HSCCA and its micro-structure.257 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD. (e) Schematic of the fabrication process of SCs based on the PANI/β-CD conductive hydrogel polymer hydrogel.259 Copyright © 2020 Pergamon-Elsevier Science LTD.	 

Alkaline lignin/CNFs	C-AL/CNF carbon aerogel	PVA–H2SO4 gel	62.4 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	8.6 W h kg−1/250 kW kg−1	88.5%/5000	
250

Lignin	Electrospun lignin/polyacrylonitrile nanofiber	Chemically cross-linked lignin hydrogel	129.23 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	4.49 W h kg−1/2.63 kW kg−1	95%/10000	
252

Lignosulfonate/cellulose	Lig/SWCNT/HRGO composite film	Cellulose/H2SO4 hydrogel	1121 mF cm−2/5 mA cm−2	77.8 μW h cm−2/2500 μW cm−2	—	
253

Lignosulfonate/cellulose	Lignosulfonate/SWCNT hydrogel	Cellulose hydrogel	292 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	17.1 W h kg−1/324 kW kg−1	—	
254

Cellulose	PANI/β-CD hydrogel	Carbon cloths	5.01 F cm−3/1.0 mA cm−2	89 μW h cm−2/800 μW cm−2	90%/2000	
259

Footnote
† P. Gu and W. Liu contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
