The application of CeO 2 -based materials in electrocatalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA04804A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04804A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17675-17702The application of CeO2-based materials in electrocatalysis

        
          
            Jianda 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Xiao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kunming 
            Pan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Huan 
            Pang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Shizhong 
            Wei
          
        
      *b
aGuangling College, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, Jiangsu, P. R. China. E-mail: huanpangchem@hotmail.com; panghuan@yzu.edu.cn;  Web: http://huanpangchem.wix.com/advanced-material
bNational Joint Engineering Research Center for Abrasion Control and Molding of Metal Materials, Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang 471003, China. E-mail: wsz@haust.edu.cn
cCollaborative Innovation Center of Nonferrous Metals of Henan Province, The Key Laboratory of Henan Province on Nonferrous Metallic Materials Science and Fabrication Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang 471023, P. R. China
Received 
      8th May 2019
    , Accepted 14th June 2019First published on 18th June 2019AbstractSeveral studies on electrocatalytic materials have made substantial progress, and it is essential to enhance the catalytic activity of these materials. CeO2-based materials have emerged as predominant candidates for electrocatalysis, such as the excellent performance of Ni/CeO2 interfacial nanostructures on highly conductive carbon nanotubes. First, we provide a comprehensive review of the catalytic performance of varied of CeO2-based materials (nanostructured, supported, doped, hybrid, coated, amorphous CeO2-based materials) and the electrocatalytic mechanisms. Furthermore, we introduce two strategies to achieve better catalytic performance, which are increasing the number of active sites and increasing the intrinsic activity of each active site, providing reasonable guidance for the development of enhanced catalysts. Finally, we discuss the limitations and challenges of CeO2-based materials, followed by their present status and prospects for future research. We believe that this review will be helpful for researchers and scientists who are seeking promising electrocatalytic materials and useful electrocatalyst development strategies.Huan PangHuan Pang received his Ph. D. degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He is now a university distinguished professor in Yangzhou University. In the past 10 years, his group has been engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially for MOF-based materials. He is on the editorial board of FlatChem and managing editor of EnergyChem, Elsevier. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewing journals including Nature Catalysis, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy Environ. Sci., Advanced Materials, with 7600 citations (H-index = 53). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.
1. Introduction
Building a large-scale sustainable energy system for the future while protecting our environment as much as possible is one of the most important challenges facing humanity today. In addition, with the world's population growing and industrialization expanding, global energy demand is expected to increase further. Thus, major concerns have been raised about energy supplies, particularly climate change related to the use of fossil fuels. There is therefore a serious incentive to diversify our energy sources away from fossil fuels by switching to renewable sources such as solar, wind and hydropower. Fortunately, the earth's atmosphere provides a universal source of water, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen that, with good electrocatalysts, can be converted into products such as hydrogen, hydrocarbons, oxygen, and ammonia by electrochemical processes combined with renewable energy sources. For example, the splitting reaction of water, which consists of an evolutionary half reaction of hydrogen and oxygen, has received extensive attention as a sustainable hydrogen source.1,2 The key to achieving this vision is to develop improved electrocatalysts with appropriate efficiency and selectivity for the chemical transformations involved.3,4
Among varied of electrocatalysis such as oxygen evolution reaction (OER),1–12 oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),13–21 hydrogen evolution reaction (HER),22–27 hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR),28–30 methanol electrooxidation reaction (MOR),31–34 ethanol electrooxidation reaction (EOR)35–38 and electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR)39–45 plays a key role in many energy-conversion devices, which pose great scientific challenges for the development of efficient electrocatalysts. Currently, the valuable metal oxides, for example, IrO2 and RuO2, is the benchmarking electrocatalyst, however, these materials suffer from high-cost and rareness, limiting its broad uses.46,47 Fortunately, CeO2-based materials has much progress, which has widespread applications in catalyze, sensors, fuel cells especially electrocatalysis. Thus, it is of great practical significance to design and develop a variety of high efficiency CeO2-based electrocatalytic.48–52
The use of CeO2-based materials has been investigated as an effective electrocatalysis, and CeO2-based materials have attracted significant interest in recent years. As a potential candidate, CeO2 has two interesting features. Firstly, it can neatly transform between the Ce3+ and Ce4+ oxidation states, which is conducive to gain and loss of electrons, thus facilitate the electrochemical reaction. Secondly, it contains many oxygen vacancies within its structure, which is beneficial for improving oxygen mobility.53,54 Besides, the dominant mechanical resistance, as well as remarkable redox property and anticorrosion abilities in alkaline media also contribute to the wide application of CeO2-based materials in electrocatalysis.55–60
In this review, we briefly discuss the performance and technical challenges faced in developing high efficiency CeO2-based electrocatalysis. In particular, we show some recent progress in exploring CeO2-based materials as nanostructured, supported, coated, doped, hybrid, amorphous materials. We focus on the current applications and future development of CeO2 in next generation electrocatalysis technology. The weakness of CeO2-based materials for applications of electrocatalysis are also discussed. Notably, we mainly introduced two strategy to improve the performance of catalysts: increasing the number of active sites on a given electrode, for instance, via increased loading or improved catalyst structuring to expose more active sites per gram, and increasing the intrinsic activity of each active site. Finally, the prospect of CeO2-based materials and the further development of electrocatalytic applications are prospected, aiming to provide a novel and comprehensive summary of recent advances.
2. Properties
The rare earth oxides CeO2 with unique 4f electron is a technologically important material with a high abundance due to its wide applications as an excellent electrocatalyst, which has special optical, electrical and magnetic properties. The crystal structures (triclinic phase, tetragonal phase, cubic crystal phase) of CeO2 as shown in Fig. 1. Specially, CeO2 crystallizes in the fluorite crystal structure with space group Fm3m over the temperature range from room temperature to the melting point. The fluorite structure are composed of face-centered cubic unit cell of cations, and anions take up the octahedral interstitial sites.250 This structure can be regarded as a superposition of the face-centered cubic lattice of cations (Ce4+) and a simple cubic lattice of anions (O2). CeO2 with the fluorite structure shows defects depending on partial pressure of oxygen, which is the intrinsic property for the potentials in catalysis, energy conversion, and other applications. CeO2-based materials is stable in the alkaline solution, undergoes reversible oxygen ion exchange as follows: 1/2O2 (gas) + 2e− (solid) ⇔ O2− (solid)(1)
 Fig. 1  Universal crystal structures of CeO2: (A) triclinic phase; (B) tetragonal phase; (C) cubic crystal phase (fluorite structure). 
CeO2 has excellent redox capability, the switch between Ce3+ and Ce4+ oxidation states presented the reversible surface oxygen ion exchange, high oxygen-storage capacities, and good ionic conductivity.251 Besides, CeO2 could release significant levels of oxygen at low oxygen partial pressures and elevated temperatures, which lead to a mixed ionic electronic conductivity. The multivalence property of CeO2 will offer the opportunity to generate strong electron interactions with other matrices and the unique properties enable CeO2 to enhance the performance of electrocatalysts by improving charge transfer efficiency.
Besides, oxygen vacancies have a great influence on the electronic and chemical properties of CeO2.252–254 With changes in the oxidation state, CeO2 could generate defects or oxygen vacancies in the lattice structure through loss of oxygen or the electrons.255 Tao et al. synthesized defective CeO2 nanorods (NRs) via proper defect engineering.242 Notably, the Pt nucleation sites supplied by oxygen vacancies, rough surface and special interaction between Pt and oxygen vacancies rich CeO2 would fix Pt on CeO2 with unique physical and chemical properties. The electron distribution in CeO2 could modify the electronic interaction with Pt, and the surface properties of CeO2 might be tuned to improve the physical interaction. In addition, the valence state and defect structure of CeO2 are dynamic and can change spontaneously, as well as with physical parameters such as temperature, oxygen partial pressure, doping of other ions and electric field or surface stress, which shows the possibility of CeO2-based materials may own interesting features under different conditions.256
Specially, nanostructured CeO2-based materials with the decrease in particle size is helpful for forming more oxygen vacancies.257–259 The energetics for defect formation be substantially reduced in nanomaterials leading to markedly increased levels of nonstoichiometry and electronic carrier generation. Besides, the large surface area to volume ratio existing in a NP enables CeO2 to act catalytically, and result in unique properties. For example, Tan et al. reported the hybrid nanostructure Pd-encircling CeO2−x catalyst with evenly growth of the monodisperse CeO2−x NPs.112 The CeO2−x nanocrystalline accelerated the electrooxidation of the CH3CHOads strongly by providing oxygen-containing species. The high interfacial area and strong interaction strength between the CeO2−x NPs and Pd because of large surface area of CeO2−x and the unique core–shell nanostructure of the CeO2−x and Pd material. The smaller monodispersed CeO2−x center is helpful for the electronic conductibility and the cocatalytic properties. The examples clearly show it is possible to tune the specific reactivity of CeO2 NPs by controlling the size.
In conclusion, CeO2 own excellent physical and chemical properties. The unique fluorite crystal structure of CeO2 shows the potential as excellent electrocatalyst, and eminent redox capability as well as CeO2 could form oxygen vacancies, which provides the guild to design novel CeO2-based materials.
3. MOR/EOR
3.1 CeO2-based nanostructured materials
In recent years, the shape-controlled synthesis of various CeO2 surface topologies has been extensively studied, for example, NTs, NSs, NRs, and nanoflowers (Fig. 2). The dispersity as well as dimensionality of CeO2 have been proved to have a profound effect on surface activity and OSC. Therefore, Tan et al. design a novel method for the synthesis of the minuscule Co-doped CeO2 dots, which can be an effective anti-poisoning promoter for Pd catalysts to the MOR as well as EOR.135Fig. 3 demonstrates the electrocatalytic mechanism of MOR and unique structure of CeO2-based MOR and NRR materials. The CO-like poisoning intermedium is shown in Fig. 3A. As shown in Fig. 4D, the Co–CeO2 nanocrystals were well dispersed and no agglomeration was observed. Co–CeO2 dots own the unique bifunctional effect because of the improved electronic interaction between Co–CeO2, besides, Pd dots and the increased OSC of Co–CeO2 dots to promote the oxidation of COad. So that the unique zero-dimensional CeO2-based nanostructuring materials showed the improved activity and noticeable anti-poisoning capacity.
 Fig. 2  Catalyst development strategies. Schematic of various catalyst development strategies, which aim to increase the number of active sites and/or increase the intrinsic activity of each active site. 
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the MOR electrocatalytic mechanism on the surface of the Pd/Co–CeO2 nanocomposite catalyst in alkaline media; (B) TEM images of CeO2−x NPs, and the inset is schematic illustration of the electrooxidation mechanism of the CH3CHO intermediate on the Pd-around-CeO2−x hybrid nanostructure; (C) STEM image of a-Au/CeOx–RGO, and the inset is the photograph of a-Au/CeOx–RGO suspended in water; (D) TEM and (E) HRTEM images of Cu–CeO2-3.9. (F) HAADF-STEM image and (G) EDS elemental mapping images of Cu–CeO2-3.9. (A) Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (B) reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (C) reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH; (D–G) reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 4  (A) Comparison of CVs at CeO2 (30%)/Nano-ZSM-5/GCE, CeO2/GCE, and Nano-ZSM-5/GCE in the presence of 0.5 M methanol in 0.5 M NaOH solution at the scan rate of 50 mV s−1; (B) the changes of specific peak current densities of the Pt/CeO2/PANI THNRAs, Pt/PANI HNRAs, Pt/CeO2 HNRAs and commercial Pt/C catalysts with increasing cycle number; (C) CVs at CeO2 (30%)/Nano-ZSM-5/GCE in the presence of different concentrations of methanol in 0.5 M NaOH solution at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1; (D) representative microscopy images of CeO2-based MOR catalysts (reproduced with permission from ref. 112, 121, 122, 135 and 139). (A and C) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (B) reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
One of the hot research directions is designing new structures involving either nanocrystalline zeolite (Nano-ZSM-5) molecular sieves or compounds of other materials. A new synthetic method was reported for preparing CeO2 NPs modified by ZSM-5 (CeO2/Nano-ZSM-5) with a high surface area.122 The synthetic route of using a block copolymer and phthalic triphenol groups, under the action of organic/inorganic interfacial hydrogen bonding, accelerated the coassembly of a copolymer/inorganic mesostructure and generated thermally stable nanocrystalline CeO2. In the development of CeO2-based catalysts, considerable effort has been applied to shape-controlled synthesis to adjust electrocatalysis activities. Fig. 4 show representative structured of CeO2-based MOR and EOR materials and the excellent performance. The key step of this method was to directly use the self-assembled block copolymers as templates to prepare porous metal-carbon structures (Fig. 4D), and no additional steps were required to generate the templated silica structure. The excellent properties of this material were attributed to the synergistic contributions of the nanocrystalline CeO2 and acidic Nano-ZSM-5, and for the surface dispersion of the Nano-ZSM-5, a large external surface area as well as surface siloxane groups were helpful for the formation of CeO2 into nanocrystals with a high amount of the catalytic phase and stable interlinking between the catalytic regions, as shown in Fig. 4A and C, such structure is helpful for improving MOR activity.
Fusiform CeO2 with unique properties on the nanoscale was synthesized by an easy-to-operate polymer-assisted homogeneous precipitation method.120 This study proved for the first time that CeO2, with an appropriate nanostructure, can greatly improve the catalytic capacity of Pt/C toward methanol. The results show that fusiform CeO2 can produce a greater number of surface oxygen vacancy clusters with larger sizes and that there are more kinds of surface active oxygen species. In addition, at low overpotentials, there were a large number of three-phase interfacial active centers on the surface of spindle CeO2. Such structures can provide a large number of OHads for the oxidation of toxic carbon species, thus effectively avoiding the poisoning problem. Specifically, the nanofusiform structure of CeO2 can make Pt nanocrystals in the composite material, which enables better Pt–CeO2 interactions and effective dispersion.
In recent years, the design of arrayed nanostructures and hollow nanostructures has had great guiding significance for the development of electrocatalysts.123 Therefore, a new Pt/CeO2/polyaniline (PANI) three-layer hollow NR array (THNRA) was considered an advanced electrocatalyst for the electrooxidation of methanol.121 When PANI was used as the support, the anti-poisoning ability toward CO was significantly enhanced, and Pt agglomeration was effectively avoided, while the THNRAs had the advantages of a high catalyst utilization rate, fast electrolyte diffusion/penetration rate, and strong synergistic coupling effect. Therefore, the electrochemical performance is improved (Fig. 4B). In this paper, a new strategy for designing electrocatalysts with high electrocatalytic activity, low cost and high stability was proposed. Fig. 4D shows a diagram of the synthetic process used to build the THNRAs. In addition, the Pt/CeO2/PANI THNRAs can take full advantage of the CeO2 properties, that is, to provide unstable OH species for the electrooxidation of carbon intermediates adsorbed on the surface to generate the high CO tolerance of the catalyst.
In addition, the sandwich structure of CeO2/RGO/Pt combines the rigid structure of CeO2 with the good electronic conductivity of RGO, making it a highly efficient anodic electrocatalyst. CeO2/RGO/Pt sandwich nanostructures were successfully prepared by a hydrothermal method.118 This material has a unique architectural structure. The RGO is coated with the CeO2 NPs, and the Pt NPs are evenly distributed on the surface of the RGO while retaining the advantages of the carbon material and CeO2 support. This structure substantially decreased the overpotential of the MOR and had an enhanced electrocatalytic activity and stability. Herein, RGO is regarded as an indispensable intermedium for electron transmission between the Pt NPs and CeO2. In addition, the sandwich structure provides an effective and important example for the preparation of similar nanostructures to improve their electrocatalytic properties.
3.2 CeO2-based supported materials
Pt NPs are usually loaded onto carbon materials and metal oxide semiconductors, which is an immediate and effective method to improve their electrocatalytic performance.229–235 The attractive approach in catalyst development is to disperse catalyst NPs on supports with high surface area. The method could led to better dispersion and reduced aggregation of catalyst NPs, resulting in superior activity due to an increased number of active sites. For CO poisoning issues, the most common strategy is to design Pt/metal oxide composite catalysts, such as Pt/CeO2, based on electronic effects, the bifunctional mechanism, which are related to the size and shape of the metal oxide nanocrystals, supporting effects and surface area. In addition, it is necessary to investigate the structural development of the electrocatalysts to eliminate negative influences that result from the low electronic conductivity between CeO2 and Pt, which do not adhere to each other. Therefore, Chu et al. designed a novel structure and synthesized a mesoporous Pt/C–CeO2 catalyst (MP-CeO2), which was carbonized with specific amounts of a cyclodextrin-derived coating, for the first time, and these converted Pt NPs116 solved the disadvantage of the poor electronic conductivity of CeO2. In addition, the carbon coating on the surface of the MP-CeO2 catalyst reduced its corrosion, and the greater the amount of oxygen-containing carbon that was selectively deposited onto the Pt site, the better the catalytic performance of the MOR. The Pt particles were in close contact within the MP-CeO2 and primarily deposited within the native interface between carbon and MP-CeO2. The method powerfully supports the effectiveness of electrocatalyst structural design.
Besides, a new carbon core-sheath NW network (Pd–CeO2@C CSNWN) is prepared by the process of template-free and surfactant-free solvothermal.139 The especial interconnected 1D core-sheath structure could encourage immobilization of the Pd NPs, resulting in enhanced durability. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images show the rich wavy Pd–CeO2 NWs interconnected with each other, and form the NW network (Fig. 4D). Pd-NPs was deposited by microwave assisted polyol reduction using this network as an electrocatalyst support. In summary, their work combines the advantages of core-sheath nanostructures and 1D interconnected ultra-thin NWs, and the advantages of both synergism promote the activity and stability of supported catalysts: (1) Pd–CeO2 NWs have small diameter and large surface area, which is conducive to evenly catalyst loading; (2) Pd–CeO2 nucleus with small grain size and Pd doping leads to high defect and oxygen vacancy density. Therefore, the oxygen release capacity can be effectively adjusted, which is conducive to promoting the anode reaction kinetics; (3) this interrelated property makes the graded Pd–CeO2@C CSNWN less likely to aggregate and etch losses, thus improving the durability of the catalyst.
Furthermore, Gu et al. develop a novel strategy to optimize the cocatalytic action of CeO2 for MOR with using the Sn as dopant, which forms triple junction structure.113 The redox behavior (Sn4+/Sn2+) of Sn could improve the OSC of CeO2, which is helpful for CO oxidation during the MOR and EOR. In addition, Sn can be added to the lattice of CeO2 to increase the specific surface area of the composite, which improves the conductivity of CeO2 and is conducive to improving the durability of CeO2 carrier material and its electrocatalytic activity. The onset and oxidation peak potentials of Pt/Ce0.8Sn0.2O2−x–C catalyst are lower than those of Pt/CeO2–C and Pt/C catalysts.
In order to have further promising application for CeO2-based materials as the Pt support, it is essential to improve the conductivity of CeO2 and enhance the interaction between Pt and CeO2. Proper defect engineering may achieve the aim. The electron distribution in CeO2 might be modulated to change the electronic interaction with Pt, and the surface properties of CeO2 be modified to improve the physical interaction via suitable defect engineering. Typically, the electrons transfer from Pt to CeO2, resulting in an up-shift of the d-band center.
Therefore, Tao et al. successfully engineered the surface of CeO2 support by Ar plasma, resulting in oxygen vacancies-rich and roughened surface, which significantly modulated the electronic and physical interaction between Pt and CeO2. The defective CeO2 NRs (CeO2–P) with increased surface roughness and enriched oxygen vacancies were prepared by plasma irradiation. With defective CeO2 as support, Pt NPs were loaded (Pt/CeO2–P).242 The high roughness of CeO2 provides enriched nucleation sites for the growth of Pt which would significantly improve the dispersion of Pt NPs. The oxygen vacancies in CeO2 would afford surplus electrons which would transfer to the super surface of CeO2 increase its conductivity. Besides, the surplus electrons would reverse the electron transfer between Pt and CeO2, the increasing electron density of Pt would reduce the chemisorption of CO on Pt and increase activity.
3.3 CeO2-based doped materials
Furthermore, doping has become a reliable way to customize the chemical and electronic properties of materials. The doped CeO2-materials with high electrical conductivity and more oxygen vacancies have showed better catalytic and co-catalytic performance. Therefore, Chu et al. showed a method for synthesizing new coatings for doping Pt catalysts supported by CeO2 (Pt/CeO2).119 The basic idea of this strategy is to construct a special “N-doped carbon layer”. This approach not only further facilitates the formation of a delocalized conjugated system, supporting electron exchange at the interface of the metal with the hybridized carbon framework and enhancing interactions with the support metal, but also expedites Pt NP dispersion and the anchoring of Pt NPs to improve the long-term stability of electrocatalysts.
Specially, Mo or MoOx could improve the CO tolerance of the MOR/EOR, thus Zhang et al. shows Mo-doped CeO2 solid solutions with remarkable catalytic activity and stability as the catalysts.236 It can be seen that the sample is composed of NPs interface, and the agglomeration of NPs forms a porous structure. Surely, Mo-doped CeO2 with high surface area has more negative surface charge and is easy to adsorb on carbon black with positive surface charge to form hybrid support. At the same time, the Mo-doped CeO2 with rich negative charges also helps the deposition and dispersion of Pt NPs by a stronger electrostatic interaction.
3.4 CeO2-based hybrid materials
In addition, as a special electrocatalyst, metal-oxide–metal hybrid nanocomposites have attracted much attention due to their easily manipulated particle size and strong interfacial interactions.124,125 Therefore, Tan et al. prepared a hybrid nanostructure Pd-encircling CeO2−x catalyst with a uniform and dense growth of monodisperse CeO2−x NPs on the surface by using a new three-phase transfer method.112 The poisoning intermediate of ethanol, created from the dehydrogenation of ethanol, was strongly adsorbed onto the Pd NP surface, and the CeO2−x close to the Pd sites promoted the electrooxidation of the CH3CHOads strongly bound to the Pd by providing oxygen-containing species (Fig. 3B). Due to the unique core–shell nanostructure of the CeO2−x and Pd material, there was a high interfacial area between the CeO2−x NPs and Pd, and their interaction strength was high. As a result, trans-junction electron transfer optimized the local electronic structure of Pd and CeO2−x.
3.5 Summary
CeO2-based materials as the catalyst for MOR and EOR has drawn significant interests due to its high OSC, low cost and ideal anti-corrosion ability in acid media. OHad (hydroxyl absorbed species) are common active species in alkaline solutions. The presence of CeO2, the adsorption behavior of the OHad in a blank KOH solution was significantly changed. In the section we show the understand of their mechanisms and varied of facile and effective strategy to develop CeO2-based MOR/EOR materials. We reported two main strategy to enhance the electrochemical activity of CeO2-materials (increase the number of activity sites and increase the intrinsic activity) and showed a series of nanostructured, supported, doped and hybrid CeO2-based materials with excellent anti-poisoning ability and electrochemical activity.
Methanol and ethanol are significant energy resources for fuel cells due to their low toxicity, high energy density, easy storage and abundant sources. These unique characteristics are applicable to a variety of electrochemical oxidation reactions. However, MOR and EOR are still limited by the issues of poisoning and low catalytic activity. Therefore, the poisoning problem and low catalytic activity are the main obstacle of the further industrialization of MOR and EOR. To overcome these problems, it is essential to understand their mechanisms and develop a facile and effective strategy to design CeO2-based materials.113–115
4. NRR
4.1 CeO2-based nanostructured materials
Using hydrogen CeO2-based nanostructured materials as electrochemical N2 reduction catalyst is an effective strategy. Xu et al. found that the exposed Ce3+ group could be used as the surface catalytic site of adsorption gas or catalytic intermediate.238 Therefore, their group reported the reduced CeO2 NRs (r-CeO2 NRs). The SEM image shows that r-CeO2 has typical rod-like morphology (diameter: 100–200 nm, side length: 5–10 μm). The r-CeO2 NRs could achieve NH3 yield of 16.4 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at −0.5 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) and faradaic efficiency (FE) of 3.7% at −0.4 V vs. RHE (in 0.1 M Na2SO4). At the same time, r-CeO2 NRs have good wear resistance and selectivity to electrochemical NRR. Studies have shown that defect engineering can effectively control the electronic structure of CeO2, regulate the catalytic activity of N2 fixation, provide coordination unsaturated sites for the transfer of electrons to the adsorbed N2 molecules, and weaken the N2 bond.
4.2 CeO2-based supported materials
Specially, the presence of CeO2 in the electrocatalyst not only successfully resulted in the formation of amorphous as well as low crystalline materials but also provided bisubstrate with reduced graphite oxide (RGO).146–149 Previous works have found that the interactions between amorphous gold and small molecules such as N2 exhibit higher chemical reactivities than those of crystalline gold. Amorphous materials have higher concentrations of electrocatalytically active sites and larger structural distortions than do crystalline materials. Therefore, Li et al. utilized CeOx to induce the amorphization of Au NPs anchored on RGO, which was called a-Au/CeOx–RGO and was attained by an easy coreduction strategy under ambient conditions.100 CeOx played a key role in the transformation of Au into the amorphous state, and RGO acted as an excellent substrate.142 The use of CeOx and RGO as a bisubstrate led to Au NPs being well dispersed on the CeOx–RGO surface and effectively prevented agglomeration (Fig. 3C). This material contained a low amount of noble metal and achieved an ammonia yield and high FE of 8.3 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 and 10.10%, respectively, at −0.2 V versus RHE. This amorphous catalyst had excellent properties, such as high activity and low noble metal load, which may facilitate the wide application of more efficient N2 electrochemical reduction catalysts in the future.
The unique properties of amorphous electrocatalysts have attracted the attention of numerous researchers. It has been demonstrated that amorphous electrocatalysts play a key role in water splitting150 and have also been proven to have higher NRR activity than do bulk electrocatalysts,109 which is mainly due to its high surface area.151,152 Therefore, the design of amorphous noble metallic NP electrocatalysts is a fundamental challenge in applied research.153–155 Since amorphous materials are in a metastable state, numerous “dangling bonds” are generated, which result in amorphous materials being more active than crystalline materials. This strategy also has guiding significance for electric energy storage,156–182 which is helpful for the NRR and other electrocatalytic processes.183–202 Challenges and promote strategy are Table 1. The synthetic methods, morphologies and electrochemical properties of the CeO2-based materials were introduced in detail. In summary, various types of CeO2-based materials play an important role in electrocatalysis, delivering improved electrochemical performance.
Table 1 Summary of CeO2-based materials synthesis methods and key factors affecting performance in different catalyst processa




Materials
Method (characteristics)
Performance (test conditions)
Structure
Key character affecting the activity
Ref.





a (A) Overpotential (mV at 10 mA cm−2), (B) Eonset (V), (C) Tafel slope (mV dec−1).






OER



RuO2/CeO2
Wet impregnation method (forms a large number of defects)
A 2.38 (0.1 M KOH)
Defective CeO2 is decorated with nano-sized RuO2 (3–5 nm)
The increase in activity and stability stems from the formation of highly oxidized oxygen species O22−/O− in defective CeO2

74



CeO2@PIZA-1-400
Epitaxial encapsulation approach (can tune the thicknesses and calcination temperatures)
A 370 (0.1 M KOH)
The homodispersed CeO2 encapsulated cobalt-porphyrin network derived thin film
CeO2 has high oxygen storage and release capacity

68



Ce–NiO-E
Sol–gel method (reduce catalyst particle size)
A 382
NiO was embedded of CeO2 clusters
Embedding small sized CeO2 clusters into the host for the specific surface area and richer surface defects

84



C 118.7


CeO2/CoSe2 (NBs)
Polyol reduction method (a heterogeneous nucleation process)
A 44
CeO2/CoSe2 nanobelt composite
The relatively small CeO2 NPs could decrease the lattice constant and create more oxygen vacancies

101



B 1.394


C 0.288 (0.1 M KOH)


CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF (3D foam)
Colloidal synthesis method (still kept particle morphology with high crystallization)
B 0.24
CeO2 NPs were anchored on the Ni(OH)2/NOSCF substrate
CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF has higher transfer efficiency from NiII to NiIII/IV and larger charge capacity

117



C 57 (1 M KOH)


FeOOH/CeO2 (NTs)
Electrodeposition method (supported on NF)
A 300
FeOOH/CeO2 HLNTs supported on NF (lengths: ∼2 μm; diameters: ∼330 nm)
The HLNTs structure will provide efficient diffusion paths for electrolyte ions

126



B 0.21


C 92.3 (1.0 M NaOH)


Ni0.3Fe0.07Co0.2Ce0.43Ox


C 80 (1.0 M NaOH)





127



CeOx/CoS

In situ generation method (can effectively catalyze water oxidation)
A 269
Abundant mesoporous (range: 2–6 nm)
The formation of protective CeOx thin layer can effectively inhibit its corrosion by losing co3+ from the active surface into solution

240



B 50


Ni4Ce1@CP
Hydrothermal method (generate more abundant intimate hydroxide)
A 220
NixCey NSs grow on CP with the 3D open structure (the crystal size of CeO2: ∼4.5 nm)
Strong electronic interaction with interfaces of intimate Ni(OH)2–CeO2

62



B 81.9 (1.0 M KOH)






ORR



Au–GDC (NTs)
Hydrolyze method (improves the connection between Au and GDC)
(0.1 M KOH)
NTs (wall thickness: ∼25 nm; length: 1.5–2.0 um)
The maximum interaction between Au NPs and GDC nanotube support

69



Co3O4–CeO2/C
Two-step hydrothermal method (guarantee the best catalytic activity)
C 83.9
NPs
Using CeO2 as catalyst promoter

81



CeO2/δ-MnO2 (NSs)
Hydrothermal method (provides high oxygen solubility)
(1 M LiClO4)
The δ-MnO2 with ultrafine CeO2 nanocrystals decorated on it (the crystal size of CeO2: ∼5 nm)
Highly efficient co-catalytic ability and the desirable graphene like architecture

80



Pt–CeOx/C (NWs)
Carbonate precipitation method (keep wire-like structure)
C 61 (0.5 M H2SO4)
NWs (CeO2 NPs: ∼4.0 nm)
Formation of Frenkel defect clusters and Schottky defect clusters at the Pt–CeOx NW hetero-interface

84



CeGS (sandwich structured)
One-step solvothermal method (offers numerous anchoring and nucleation sites for CeO2)
B 0.02
The uniform, thin crystalline CeO2 film coating RGO nanoflake composite (CeO2 NPs: 5–15 nm)
The unique structure and valence state of the CeO2 component provides feasible conditions

128



C 111 (0.1 M KOH)


MnOx–CeO2/ketjenblack (hybrid)
Hydrothermal method (the homogeneous distribution with intimate contacted on the KB matrix)
C 94.4 (0.1 M KOH)
Particle sizes of CeO2 and Mn3O4 are in 4–8 nm
Combine MnOx with CeO2 NPs on low cost commercial conductive ketjenblack carbon to provide synergistic effects

129



La0.7Sr0.3MnO3–CeO2 (hybrid)
One-pot method (the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 particles are well distributed on the flower-like CeO2)
B 0.881
Flower-like CeO2 (diameter: ∼3 μm)
The interface contact between the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 and CeO2

130



C 71 (0.1 M KOH)


Mn0.3Ce0.7O2
Co-precipitation method (the incorporation effectively inhibit the crystalline growth)
(6 M KOH)
NPs
Effective activation of molecular oxygen over the solid solution and higher surface area

78



MnOx@CeO2 (NRs)

In situ redox reaction (preserve the pristine structure)
B 2.76 (0.1 M KOH)
NRs (average diameter: ∼50 nm; length: ∼500 nm)
Easy shift with between reduced and oxidized states

131



Pt–CeO2/C (NPs)
Continuous two-step method (employing high temperatures and high pressures)
B 0.974
NPs (3–5 nm)
CeO2 could provide additional oxygen to Pt active sites

82



C 65.5


0.1 M KOH


ZDC
Assisted solution combustion reaction (overcoming the instability of carbonate electrolyte)


Powders (pore size: 30–200 nm)
The carbon support and the high electro catalytic activity provided the fast kinetics of electron transport




Ce-HPCNs (NSs)
Aqueous solution-mediated method (the high content of Ce3+ facilitates the formation of more)
B 0.923
Leaf like porous carbon NSs
The co-existence of a Ce4+ and Ce3+ redox couple improve the O2 adsorption capability

132



C 91 (0.1 M KOH)


Ag–CeO2 (NSs)
Two step method (increased the quantity of the microspheres)
B 0.907
Ag NPs decorated on nanosheet constructing porous CeO2 (diameter of Ag NPs: 30–50 nm)
The unique morphology of Ag–CeO2 enhanced the dispersibility of the Ag NPs with the increased specific area

133



C 96 (0.1 M KOH)






MOR



CeO2/Nano-ZSM-5
Calcination method (promote the cooperative assembly of inorganic/co-polymer mesostructures)


Mesoporous structure (2–8 nm)
Large surface area and inter-crystalline mesopores

122



Pt/C–CeO2
Microwave-assisted ethylene glycol method (overall procedure does not require complicated steps)
(0.5 M H2SO4)
Mesoporous CeO2 coated with carbon (the pore-size mainly between 2 and 50 nm)
The increased electron conductivity and the decreased dissolution-corrosion

116



Pt–CeOx/C (NWs)
Alco-thermal method (can make useful nano-reactor space)


NWs (length of approximately 35 nm)
Selection of an active Pt complex for formation of a large amount of Pt–CeOx interface

54



CeO2/RGO/Pt
Hydrothermal method (CeO2 NPs are wrapped by a thin but rough-surfaced membrane)


Sandwich nanostructure (CeO2: octahedral structure: ∼200 nm in size)
The rigid structure of CeO2 and excellent electronic conductivity of RGO

118



CeO2-HP
Polymer-assisted hydrothermal (with controlled surface morphology/microstructure)
(1 M KOH)
Shuttle-shaped (∼6.8 nm)
Effect of the high surface area and larger size and number of surface oxygen vacancy clusters

134



Pt/CeO2/PANI
(Perfect inosculations of compositional and geometrical advantages)
B 0.5
Three-layered hollow nanorod arrays (diameters: ∼400 nm)
Synergistic effects and the special three-layered hollow nanorod arrays

121



Pd/Co–CeO2
Thermal decomposition method (homogenously dispersed on a carbon support)


Dots
Electronic interaction between the CeO2 dots and Pd

135



Pt/Ce0.7Mo0.3O2−x
Solvothermal method (did not employ any surfactant or stabilizer)
(0.5 M HCl)
Nanoparticles (an average size of about 6.3 nm)
Mo or MoOx improves the CO tolerance of the anode catalyst

136



Pt/Ce0.8Sn0.2O2−x–C
Solvothermal method (doping with appropriate dopants increase the concentration of oxygen vacancies)
(1 M NaOH)
Triple junction structure
Possesses a high specific surface area, an enhanced conductivity and a high oxygen storage capacity

113



CeO2·xH2O/Pt/CNT (NTs)

tert-Butylamine-assisted solvothermal method (maintains the connection)
C 122 (1.0 M KOH)
CeO2·xH2O NPs dispersed on the carbon nanotube
The adsorbed hydroxyl to activate the O–H and C–H bonds of the alcohol

137



N-doped Pt/CeO2 (NPs)
(Construct a N-doped carbon layer)


NPs
The pyridine-like and pyrrole-like nitrogen with the enhanced p-bonding in N-doped carbon layers

119



Pd/CeO2/graphene (hybrid)
Green method (the in situ growth of Pd NPs around CeO2 NPs)


Pd NPs were selectively grown around CeO2 NPs supported on graphene
The large specific surface area and 2Dl planar conjugation structure

112



Fe3O4@CeO2/Pt (microspheres)
Sol-immobilization method (uniformly distributed on the surface of the oxide microspheres)
(0.5 M KOH)
Dual heterostructural nanocrystal (300–350 nm)
Dual-heterostructural features favor reactant diffusion and active sites exposure

138







EOR



Pd/(Pd–CeO2@C) (core-sheath NWs)
Solvothermal method (surfactant-free and template-free)
(1.0 M KOH)
A uniform carbon sheath with a thickness of 1–2 nm tightly coated on the surface of Pd–CeO2 NWs
The superior oxygen species releasing capability by accelerating the removal of the poisoning

139







HER



Ni/CeO2–RGO
Chemical reduction procedure (inhibits the nickel grain growth)
C 107 (1 M KOH)
CeO2 incorporation effect on the size of the Ni NPs (almost 12 nm in the presence of ceria)
The presence of an optimized CeO2 content in the composite support leading to a reduction in the Ni NPs size

95



CoP–CeO2/Ti
Selective phosphidation method (only transforms Co3O4 into CoP)
A 43
NSs
The decreased water adsorption and optimal hydrogen adsorption free energies

97



C 45 (1 M KOH)


Ru0/CeO2
(At room temperature)
A 47
Nanopowder (Ru0 NPs supported on CeO2, average particle size: ∼25 nm)
CeO2 supported metal NPs provide outstanding catalytic activity and stability

104



C 41 (0.5 M H2SO4)


CeO2–Cu3P/NF
Hydrothermal method (NF provides a high specific surface area and electrical conductivity)
A 148
Nanosheet array
NF has a 3D interconnected bi-continuous macroscopic porous structure

105



C 132 (1.0 M KOH)


Ni/CeO2–CNT
Solvation segregation method (particle size control)
A 153 (1.0 M KOH)
NTs (CeO2 NPs size: ∼7 nm)
Synergistic effects including strong metal/oxide interactions

102







HOR



Pd/C–CeO2


C 66 (0.1 M KOH)
Pd deposits on support of CeO2 and Vulcan XC-72
The weakening of the bonding of the adsorbed hydrogen enhance the kinetics

110







NRR



a-Au/CeOx–RGO
Coreduction method (transfer the crystallized Au into the amorphous one)
Faradaic efficiency (10.10%)
The amorphous Au NPs anchored on bisubstrate of CeOx–RGO (Au with average size: ∼5 nm)
The obtained amorphous catalyst have the priority features of high performance and low-loaded noble metal

100



BVC-A
Single spinneret electrospinning method (amorphous Bi4V2O11-crystalline)
Faradaic efficiency: 10.16%
Nanocrystal
CeO2 induce the amorphous structure and establishes band alignment

99



CeO2 (NRs)
(Oxygen vacancies achieves a greatly enhanced NRR activity)
Faradaic efficiency: 3.7%
Nanorods (diameter: 100–200 nm)
Exposed Ce3+ act as surface catalysis sites for catalytic reaction intermediates

238



Cu–CeO2-3.9 (NRs)
Hydrothermal method (mesoporous structure shows high electrocatalytic activity)
Faradaic efficiency: 19.1%
Nanorods (diameter: ∼20 nm)
Cu-substituted CeO2 is electrocatalytic active sites for N2 adsorption and activation

239





4.3 CeO2-based hybrid materials
Lv et al. reported a nonnoble metal Bi4V2O11/CeO2 hybrid material with an amorphous phase (BVC-A) as the cathode for the electrocatalytic NRR.99 Oxygen vacancies can capture metastable electrons, which can then be injected into the adsorbed antibonding orbital of N2, thereby weakening the NN triple bond and subsequently activating it.141 Bi4V2O11 is a great potential candidate for catalysis due to its intrinsic oxygen vacancies. However, the intrinsic oxygen vacancies of pristine Bi4V2O11 are electrically neutral, which limits its electrocatalytic performance, and new defective sites are required. The spinneret electrospinning method, subsequent calcination and utilization of CeO2 were used to induce the transformation of Bi4V2O11 into the amorphous phase, which has a reduced energy barrier and a high density of defective sites (Fig. 5A). Fig. 5 shows the various synthesis process of typical CeO2-based materials and the images of morphology and electrochemical properties. In addition to the benefits of amorphization, this method established band alignment with amorphous Bi4V2O11 and introduced advantageous features to the abundant active sites, which could promote electron transport for N2 fixation and facilitate interfacial charge transfer. To ensure this, the NRR was performed employing the Bi4V2O11/CeO2 hybrid material as the cathodic catalyst, as shown in Fig. 5B and C, the faradaic efficiencies and high average yields of Bi4V2O11/CeO2 were approximately 10.16% and 23.21 μg h−1 mgcat.−1, respectively, which were achieved at −0.2 V vs. RHE. At the same time, since hydrazine was not detected, the high selectivity of Bi4V2O11/CeO2 could be determined. Therefore, the prepared Bi4V2O11/CeO2 electrocatalysts have excellent NRR performance, providing an opportunity for the development of efficient electrocatalysis of the NRR under environmental conditions.
 Fig. 5  (A) Illustration of fabricating BVC-C and BVC-A NRR electrocatalyst; (B) yield of NH3 with different electrocatalysts at −0.2 V versus RHE at atmospheric pressure and room temperature; (C) yield of NH3 (red) and faradaic efficiency (blue) at each given potential; (D) Tafel slopes of Ni@CP, Ni8Ce1@CP, Ni4Ce1@CP and Ni2Ce1@CP; (E) the diagram of NixCey@CP electrocatalyst; (F) schematic illustration of the synthesis of the CeO2/CoSe2 nanobelt composite by the facile polyol reduction method and the SEM image of CeO2/CoSe2 nanobelt; (G) schematic synthesis strategy for creating nanoscale Ni/CeO2 interfaces on CNTs; (H) the volcano plot of the experimentally measured exchange current density versus the DFT calculated HBE for Ni/CeO2–CNT (blue star), commercial Pt/C (green star) and common metal catalysts (black squares), data collected from ref. 98. (I) The microstructure of FeOOH/CeO2 HLNTs–NF electrocatalyst; (J) the SEM image of FeOOH/CeO2 HLNTs–NF. (A) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (B and C) reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (D and E) reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (F) reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; (G and H) reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (I and J) reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
4.4 CeO2-based doped materials
Effective strategies to regulate oxygen vacancy concentration in CeO2 are formulated, which is of great significance for electrocatalysis of N2 reduction to NH3. Therefore, Zhang et al. developed the Cu-doped CeO2 materials (Cu–CeO2-x, the x shows the mass content of the doped Cu), and Cu–CeO2-3.9 shows the best NRR activity, FE of 19.1% at −0.45 V (vs. RHE).239 The oxygen vacancy formed on the CeO2 substituted by copper is the electrocatalytic activity site activated by N2 adsorption, and thus ambient electrosynthesis of NH3. As shown in Fig. 3D–F, TEM images show that the materials are about 20 nm in diameter and 40–100 nm in length. Besides, EDS elemental mapping images demonstrate the Cu species was uniformly distributed on the whole NRs without aggregation (Fig. 3G). It was discovered that the Cu doping is helpful to the substitution of the Ce3+ sites by Cu2+ in CeO2, resulting in the decrease in the Ce3+ to Ce4+ ratio with increasing Cu content, which means a decrease of oxygen vacancies around the Ce3+ sites, but a huge increase of oxygen vacancies around the Cu2+ sites. These changes contribute to improve the NRR activity. The results of this study demonstrated the feasibility of designing high-efficiency CeO2-based doped NRR electrocatalyst.
4.5 Summary
This section presents several recent progresses in synthetic methods, structural features, and research progress in nanostructured, supported, hybrid, doped CeO2-based NRR catalyst. Previously, the production of NH3 heavily relies on the Haber–Bosch process, which requires both high temperatures (623–823 K) and pressures (150–350 atm). Fortunately, the fixation of N2 by the electrocatalytic NRR is considered a potential approach for NH3 production.140–143 Many research groups have searched for better electrocatalytic NRR centers, which can overcome the problem of nitrogen fixation, by screening different catalysts, and CeO2-based catalyst is a candidate due to its excellent performance.144 We show the mechanism of increase the number of activity sites and intrinsic activity of CeO2-based NRR electrocatalyst, this will also provide basic knowledge for further optimization of CeO2-based materials, excellent design of nitrogen reduction catalysts, and new strategies for the development of advanced functional materials.
5. ORR
5.1 CeO2-based nanostructured materials
Reducing the overpotential losses on catalyst NPs surfaces is another important issue for ORR development in the future. Using nanostructures, CeO2 is a feasible and effective method for reducing overpotential loss. The design of a Pt–CeOx NP interface structure with defects is crucial to maximize the ORR activity of CeOx NPs.83 A Pt-supported CeOx thin film was prepared on a conductive SrTiO3 single-crystal matrix, and this film had a unique large clustered structure of rare earth elements and was formed by the strong interactions between the Pt–CeOx interface and Pt. Therefore, further development of this unique structure at the Pt–CeOx interface could maximize the number of defect clusters.
However, the interfacial area of the Pt–CeOx NPs, formed from CeOx NPs and Pt, was small, which limited the ORR activity. To overcome the problem of low electrochemical activity of the surface, CeOx NWs have been prepared by Chauhan et al.84 Specifically, the Pt–CeOx NW/C material included two different defect clusters: Frenkel defect clusters and Schottky defect clusters, which contribute to the improvement of the ORR activity at the Pt–CeOx NW heterointerface. Because the surface of a CeOx NW is wide and flat, a nanoreactor can be formed to form a wider Pt–CeOx NW interface. Compared to the surface of the Pt–CeOx NP/C, most Ce3+ and Pt2+ in the NWs are located on the surface. In this work, the authors found that the surface of the Pt–CeOx NW/C was mainly composed of Pt2+ and Ce4+. The difference in surface composition between the NPs and NWs indicated that the defect structures formed at the interface are due to an improvement in the CeOx NW promoting effect. It is hoped that the strong interactions between Pt and CeOx NWs can be maximized through the formation of Frenkel defect clusters.
The available support materials contribute to improving the ORR activity, and hollow structures have been regarded as promising candidates for catalyst support because their hollow geometry favors the good dispersibility and a high specific surface area of metal NPs. A templating method is commonly used to produce these structure. In Au-nanoparticle-decorated Gd0.3Ce0.7O1.9 (Au–GDC) NTs,69 Ce3+ can be oxidized into Ce4+ by oxygen in alkaline media, and Ce4+ tends to be hydrolyzed into CeO2. By this method, residual Ce(OH)CO3 can be deposited in situ to form a core–shell structure with CeO2 as the shell and Ce(OH)CO3 as the core. It is easy to obtain Au-NP-decorated CeO2 NTs and Ce(OH)CO3 templates thanks to HAuCl4 being a strong acid and AuCl− being a strong oxidant. Au NPs with a single-crystalline structure can be evenly distributed along the internal walls of the GDC NTs with a high Au loading, the small volume and high dispersibility of the Au nanoparticles benefit O2 activation. Remarkably, the Au–GDC NTs showed great stability to the ORR because the interaction between the GDC scaffold and Au NPs was strong. It is necessary to design reason Catalyst development strategies for CeO2-based materials. Fig. 2 highlights two strategies to improve the electrochemical performance of CeO2-based materials. Specially, core–shell structures are regarded as a highly effective method for increasing the intrinsic activity (Fig. 2), the activity of the catalysts was found to increase with decreasing average core–shell distances, indicating that compressive strain exerted on the surface atoms by the core led to enhanced catalytic activity of each sites.89,90
For example, Liu et al. prepare pomegranate-like Ag@CeO2 multicore–shell structured nanocomposites by simple oxidation–reduction reaction method.247 The Ag+ is reduced to Ag NPs and Ce3+ is simultaneously oxidized to form CeO2, followed by the self-assembly to form the pomegranate-like core–shell structured Ag@CeO2 nanocomposites driven by thermodynamic equilibrium. The superior electrochemical performance with high discharge capacity of 3415 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, stable cycling and low charge/discharge polarization voltage is achieved, which is much better than that of the CeO2 or simple mixture of CeO2 and Ag. The results shows that special pomegranate-like multicore–shell nanostructures results in synergy effect between the Ag core and the CeO2 shell, and enhanced CeO2-based materials electrochemical properties.
These strategies are not mutually exclusive and ideally improve simultaneously to maximize performance. The increase of intrinsic activity leads to the direct increase of electrode activity, which is helpful to charge transfer between electrode and electrolyte. Improving the intrinsic activity of catalyst can reduce the load of catalyst and thus save the cost of catalyst.
Furthermore, La1−xSrxMnO3 (LSM) is one of the most regularly used ORR electrocatalysts in fuel cells as well as in metal-air batteries. An LSM–CeO2 composite was synthesized by a one-pot method.85 The LSM–CeO2 composite overcame the problem of a low specific surface area, and the simple one-pot synthesis is easy to scale up. Fig. 6 shows the typical structure of CeO2-based OER and ORR electrocatalysts. Fig. 6A and B show the Tafel curves of CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF, and Fig. 6C shows CV curves of Ce-species/NSC. As shown in Fig. 6D, the microstructure of the LSM–CeO2 composite showed that the LSM particles were evenly distributed over the flower-like CeO2, which had a diameter of approximately 3 mm and a thickness of ∼40 nm, formed by the aggregation of NSs. Therefore, the unique structure resulted in a strong interaction between the flower-like CeO2 and the LSM NPs and had excellent electrode kinetics. The LSM–CeO2 material had good durability, and the current retention rate after 28 h was 93%, which is better than that of Pt/C.
 Fig. 6  (A) Tafel curves for the NOSCF, CeO2/NOSCF, Ni(OH)2/NOSCF, CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF and the benchmark Ir/C electrocatalyst; (B) CV curves of Ni(OH)2/NOSCF and CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF; (C) CV curves (under saturated oxygen in 50 mM PBS solution with a scan rate of 1 mV s−1) of Ce-species/NSC-x (x = 800, 850, 900, 950 and 1000) and Pt/C; (D) representative microscopy images of CeO2-based OER and ORR electrocatalysts (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, 8, 62, 72, 85, 122 and 132). (A and B) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5.2 CeO2-based supported materials
In recent years, Pt/C catalysts coupled with metal oxides have been widely studied for improving the catalytic activity of the ORR. A highly effective technique to improve the electrocatalytic performance is to transform Pt/C catalysts with a suitable oxide promoter, such as CeO2. In addition to the aforementioned role of CeO2, utilizing CeO2 as a supporting component is a novel strategy. CeO2 has been explored as potentially supported candidate for the catalysis applications owing to its moderate band gap, multiple valence states and oxygen ion conductivity, which might be suitable for the enhanced oxygen electrode activities. It is believed that the enhanced catalytic activity and stability are associated with the supported catalysts self-redox property, continuous motion of electrons by rapid formation and elimination of oxygen vacancy defects and their stability to improve the higher oxygen translate capacity in oxygen reduction and evolution processes.
Therefore, highly dispersed Pt–CeO2/C electrocatalysts, with particle sizes ranging from 3 to 5 nm, were successfully synthesized by a consecutive two-step process.82 This method could provide a reproducible and easy preparation process for Pt and CeO2 NPs supported on carbon. Specifically, CeO2 NPs not only prevent the dissolution and agglomeration of Pt NPs on the carbon support but also extend the service life of the catalyst. The Pt NPs and CeO2 NPs are located close to each other, which may promote oxygen transport and lead to improved activity or to synergistic effects, and the continuous two-step processing method used in this work provides a simple and renewable process for the preparation of Pt and CeO2 NPs supported on carbon.
Besides, Sivanantham et al. have introduced the CeO2 supported Co/N–carbon NRs (CNR) as an efficient and durable catalyst due to the cooperative effect of lower oxidation state (Ce3+) of CeO2 with cobalt metal, fabricated by the two-step method of electro-spun, followed by annealing in ambient atmospheres.245 Electrocatalyst with CeO2 incorporation can effectively improves the surface area and the electrochemical active sites. As shown in the SEM images of CeO2 supported Co/N–CNR, which shows the existence of NPs on the surface of carbon NRs with the diameter range about 10–20 nm. The electrocatalyst surface has more roughness, these type of structure could increase the number of active sites as well as have good electrolyte utilization nature. Notably, the Co–CeO2/N–CNR electrocatalyst shows the improved oxygen electrode potential of 0.84 V (vs. RHE), it is 100 and 196 mV lower than Co/N–CNR and Pt/C, respectively, besides, electrode stability was also improved.
5.3 CeO2-based coated materials
Mn0.3Ce0.7O2 NPs were reported to have a high surface area and high-efficiency activation of molecular O2, and its electrocatalytic performance was significantly improved at high current densities because of the introduction of CeO2.78 The half-wave potential of Mn0.3Ce0.7O2 is 0.81 V, which indicates that numerous active sites form at the interfaces of the CeO2 NPs with the MnOx. The CeO2 NPs are located in the vicinity of the MnOx NPs, which can promote O2 transfer to the MnOx NPs. Due to changes in the oxygen concentration, the CeO2 can readily change between its reduced and oxidized states. Therefore, CeO2 generally acts as an O2 storage medium as well as increases the partial oxygen concentration of the catalyst. The reaction can be explained briefly as follows: CeO2 ⇔ CeO2−x + x/2O2(2)
Many research groups expect that, when the partial pressure of O2 decreases, particularly, when the O2 concentration is low and the current density is high, O2 ions adsorb onto the surface at the Ce3+ site, and the oxygen vacancies and HO2− transfer between CeO2 and the neighboring MnOx active site.
To increase the number of active sites, MnOx-coated CeO2 NRs (MnOx@CeO2) have been synthesized by an in situ redox method and are an efficient and promising catalyst (Fig. 2).79 As an “oxygen buffer”, CeO2 can not only serve as a highly efficient catalyst for the ORR but also alleviate the problem of oxygen deficiencies and improve the electrochemical performance of Li–O2 batteries. In addition, CeO2 retains its square planar structure, and even with large deviations from stoichiometry, oxygen vacancies can supply electrocatalytically active sites. Furthermore, Cao et al. reported CeO2-decorated δ-MnO2, which was successfully synthesized by a simple hydrothermal method.80Fig. 7 shows the representative strategy to improve the OER electrocatalytic performance. This loosely stacked CeO2-based material could delay the deactivation of the electrode during the discharge process, thus achieving a high capacity and low polarization. Specifically, the δ-MnO2 exhibited a 3D porous structure that included two-dimensional (2D) NSs (Fig. 7A), and the porous structure of the graphene-like 2D catalyst composed of 2D δ-MnO2 NSs with superfine CeO2 nanocrystals decoration on its surface had a typical reduction in the amount of free space (Fig. 7B).
 Fig. 7  (A) TEM image (I) and HRTEM images (II) of CeO2/δ-MnO2; (B) schematic illustration of the working mechanism of Li–O2 cells with CeO2/δ-MnO2 cathode; (C) schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hybrid nanostructure CeOx/CoS; (D) the SEM and TEM images for precursor CoS (I and II) and for 14.6% CeOx/CoS (III and IV); (E) TEM images of CeO2 and CeO2/CePO4@N,P–C (I and II), (F) formation process for CeO2/CePO4@N,P–C. (A and B) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (C and D) reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (E and F) reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, to further understand the role of CeO2 in MxOy–CeO2 catalysts and exploit these active electrocatalysts for the ORR, Liu et al. reported a Co3O4–CeO2/ketjenblack catalyst prepared by a novel two-step microthermal hydrothermal strategy, which had a high surface area, a small charge transfer resistance, and an excellent synergistic effect between the CeO2 and Co3O4.81 The CeO2 NPs both improved the dispersion of Co3O4 and directly activated oxygen during the redox process. During O2 adsorption, the electrons received at the CeO2 site form HO2− in areas with a high oxygen concentration and low current density. This material could easily transfer electrons to the adjacent Co3O4 active sites. CeO2 in the MxOy–CeO2 composite can generate local electrons in the Ce 4f orbitals, where the electrons can then be transported to and stored in the adsorbed small molecules. Thus, the presence of Ce3+ could enable the exceptionally high and effective activation of molecular oxygen and improve the electrocatalytic activity of the Co3O4–CeO2/ketjenblack material. This strategy of using CeO2 as a catalytic promoter can be applied as a good method for replacing costly noble-metal electrocatalysts due to the low cost and high electrocatalytic activity of CeO2.
5.4 CeO2-based doped materials
Doping is an effective strategy to improve the mass activity and particular activity of an electrocatalyst compared to those of the undoped catalyst.76 A promising method for preparing ORR catalysts/carriers is by doping binary or ternary heteroatoms into the carbon skeleton to form more ORR active centers. For example, the design of CeO2/oxygen sulfide catalysts with high activity and stability is a major problem in current research. To improve the ORR efficiency, Ce-species (Ce2O2S/CeO2) on N and S dual-doped carbon (Ce-species/NSC) catalysts with good oxygen release/OSC were prepared at different temperatures.86 It is worth noting that several studies have proposed the view that CeO2 supported by carbon materials contributes to increasing the available surface area as well as the conductivity, which leads to efficient oxygen adsorption. Carbon doped with pyridine can reduce the oxygen adsorption energy by changing the energy band structure between neighboring carbons, which has a positive effect on oxygen adsorption.87 In particular, dual-doped Ce2O2S/NSC is superior to single-atom doping because of the synergetic effects introduced by multiple heteroatom codoping.88 N and S dual-doped graphene not only improved the exposure of the active sites but also ensured a close contact between CeO2 and the carbon substrate and significantly improved the ORR activity.
Zhang et al. synthesized a series of Fe/N-doped porous carbon and La-doped CeO2 composite electrocatalysts using Ce/La double rare earth metal MOF as raw materials for the first time.244 Notably, 0.5La–CeNC–Fe have the best ORR catalytic activity with the halfwave potential of 0.870 V and a current density of 5.43 mA cm−2 attribute to the synergistic effect of Fe/N-doped porous carbon with La-doped CeO2 NPs. Due to the catalytic graphitization effect of Fe, a large mass of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with about 20 nm wide and several micrometers long showed in the 0.5La–CeNC–Fe. TEM images showed that small La-doped CeO2 NPs with sizes of 5–10 nm were homogeneously embedded in the CNTs/GWPC structure. The La3+ doping has many beneficial effects. On the one hand, the introduction of La3+ improves the surface area and porosity of the catalyst, which is helpful to the mass transfer during reaction. On the other hand, the lattice of CeO2 embedded by La3+ leading to high concentration of oxygen vacancies and effectively make the oxygen molecules more active. Besides, this versatile catalyst is showed to be proper for the efficient activation of other oxygen species, demonstrating the potential in other nonelectrochemical reactions.
Yu et al. synthesize hollow CeO2/CePO4 from the N- and P-doped carbon in phytic acid and obtained favorable surface polarity and electronic properties.91 The reaction of phytic acid with CeO2 generates a hollow structure because CeO2 diffuses both in and out of the phytic acid structure (Fig. 7E). In addition, N and P were effectively doped into the carbon skeleton. The P can regulate the electronic properties and surface polarity of carbon, while the N leads to a high degree of carbon disorder and more defects. During the pyrolytic process, the CeO2 cores react with carbon, introducing Ce3+ and oxygen vacancies (Fig. 7F). During the polymerization process and after pyrolytic treatment, a hollow structure with efficient codoping was realized, which ensured a high tolerance and stability for the ORR.
5.5 Summary
Until now, we have stressed the function of CeO2-based catalytic systems in changing oxygen reduction properties. The introduction of CeO2 results in changes in composition, surface morphology, electrochemical active surface area, as well as integral core–shell structure, which play a key role in improving the catalytic capabilities of the material to the reduction of oxygen at the cathodic end. In general, the ORR involves the transfer of four protons and electrons to reduce oxygen into water, and these four-electron pathways can be carried out by several mechanisms.75–77 The data indicate that the ORR activities are constrained, largely because of the low surface areas or poor conductivities of electrocatalysts. Increasing the intrinsic activity and number of active sites could improves the ORR electrocatalytic performance. Therefore, developing effective methods for designing CeO2-based materials is a key step in beginning to create near-perfect ORR catalyst performance, which will greatly improve the efficiency of various energy conversion devices. These previous work provides the unique nanostructure and noteworthy properties as the efficient method to enhance the electrocatalytic performance, which will shed some light on the exploration of some novel CeO2-based materials electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction.78
6. OER
6.1 CeO2-based nanostructured materials
The promising strategy for improving catalytic performance is through nano-structured electrocatalysts, which can effectively increase the surface area of the catalyst, which helps to increase the number of active sites. In recent years, several CeO2 structures have been developing in the field of nanomaterials, including NRs, nanotubes (NTs),69 nanowires (NWs) and nanobelts (NBs).70 Decreasing the particle size to the nanoscale greatly increases the ratio of atoms on the surface, thus increasing the release of oxygen and mobility of the contact metals. CeO2/CoSe2 NBs could sustain the current density at low overpotentials (η) of approximately 0.288 V, which is lower than those of CoSe2 NBs and a commercial RuO2 catalyst70 (Fig. 5F). The improvement of the OER activity is attributed to the chemical synergy between the CoSe2 substrate and laden CeO2 nanoparticles (NPs) and the excellent surface structure of CeO2 with high-fluidity oxygen vacancies on the nanoscale. Modification of the electronic structure could make CeO2 more acidic, thus, facilitating the excitation of H2O. In addition, after the introduction of CeO2, the conductivity of the composite increased.
To design a suitable structure and investigated the effect of the degree of crystallinity on the catalytic properties of CeO2, Sung et al. prepared single CeO2 NRs via a time-controlled hydrothermal method.243 The special single crystal structures have better electron channels because they have fewer grain boundaries. Therefore, single crystal electrocatalysts have faster electron channels and better catalytic activity than polycrystalline ones. The low-magnification TEM images showed that the single CeO2 materials showed rod-like structures. Notably, after the test, the SC-CeO2 NR electrode showed a capacity retention of more than 3976 mA h gtotal−1 and an improved final voltage gap of less than 0.1 V. At a high current rate of 1000 mA gtotal−1, the SC-CeO2 NR electrode showed a lower voltage gap and a more stable cycling performance (over 50 cycles).
Feng et al. designed new CeO2 and FeOOH heterolayer NTs (HLNTs) that were supported on a nickel foam (NF), and they were used as electrocatalysts for the OER in an alkaline environment.71 Such HLNT structures supplied efficient diffusion paths for electrolyte ions and distinctly improved the utilization ratio of CeO2 and FeOOH (Fig. 6I). In addition, FeOOH and CeO2 were in full contact in the HLNTs, which accelerated the electronic interaction between FeOOH and CeO2. A representative TEM image of the FeOOH/CeO2 catalyst shows its hollow tube structure (Fig. 6J). The electrochemistry results showed that the FeOOH/CeO2 HLNT–NF had a high oxygen-storage capacitance, which would be a helpful factor for the OER.
Liu et al. reported three-dimensional (3D) CeO2/Ni(OH)2/carbon foam as a high-performance electrode for OER catalysis.72 They choose free-standing carbon foam (CF) as the substrate due to the large surface area of its interconnected framework, which provided effective contact with the aqueous electrolytes and quick interfacial electron charge transfer. CeO2 NPs may contribute to the generation of more NiIII/IV active species, thus leading to an increase in the OER catalytic activity. Hence, using CeO2 can be used as a cocatalyst to solve the problems of poor kinetics and mass-transferability and improve the performance of OER catalysts by increasing the energy conversion efficiency. This strategy provides insights into the possibility of using rare earth CeO2-based nanomaterials to enhance OER catalysis.
Furthermore, Zhao et al. reported NixCey@carbon paper (CP) electrocatalysts with high stability and activity, which were prepared by a large number of reactions between hydroxide and the Ni(OH)2–CeO2 interfaces supported on the surface of the CP.62 Notably, NixCey nanosheets (NSs) were uniformly grown on CP with a unique 3D structure (Fig. 5D). The unique structure is helpful to the electrons transferred from CeO2 to Ni(OH)2 by the closely bound interfaces, which caused the chemical state of Ni3+ to change to Ni3−δ. Therefore, the binding energy of the intermediate product O* on the Ni4Ce1@CP is low, which result in a favorable change in the binding strength and promotes the generation of the OOH* intermediate and promotes O2 production. The Tafel slope of Ni4Ce1@CP is only 81.9 mV dec−1 (Fig. 5E). There have been many efforts to improve the electrochemical stability of OER catalysts, for example, the NiFeOx OER electrocatalyst coated by deposition of a CeOx layer, which demonstrated a promising and novel method to achieve durable OER catalysts. However, the coating area was large, which hindered the contact between the electrolyte and the active region. Therefore, the reasonable design of a unique structure for achieving both stability and activity enhancement is required. A 3D structure ensure the closely bound catalyst/oxide interface, which prevents electrocatalysts from losing their active sites under corrosive conditions (Fig. 6). All of these studies have provided important insights for developing excellent stability.
6.2 CeO2-based supported materials
In recent decades surface-science studies have proved clearly that the atomic arrangement on the support surface could influence catalytic phenomena.237 Therefore, the supported materials play an important role in electrocatalyst stability and activity (Fig. 2). It is an attractive way to improve the performance of catalyst by dispersing catalyst NPs on support with high specific surface area. This method can make the catalyst NPs have better dispersion, lower aggregation, and increase the active sites, thus enhancing the activity of the electrocatalyst. It is important to find a suitable support, and CeO2 is an excellent candidate. The inherent defects (vacancy clusters) in CeO2 are the reason for the enhanced heterogeneous catalytic activity of CeO2 supported catalyst, because the formation of more oxygen vacancy clusters will enhance the Ce redox capacity.73 CeO2 supported RuO2 is a highly efficient electrocatalyst because RuO2 can effectively become stable by being anchored onto CeO2.74 In addition, the inherent defects in CeO2 are responsible for enhancing the electrocatalytic activity of CeO2-supported catalysts. Defective CeO2 remarkably improved the stability and activity toward forming the highly oxidative oxygen species O22−/O−, which can easily shift from CeO2 to the surface of RuO2 to promote water oxidation.
6.3 CeO2-based hybrid materials
Xu et al. exquisitely developed the new hybrid materials CeOx/CoS by ways of interfacial engineering method to improve OER electrocatalytic activity (Fig. 7C).240 CeO2 with the transform between Ce3+ and Ce4+ oxidation states showed the reversible surface oxygen ion exchange. As shown in Fig. 7D, it can be observed from the SEM and TEM images that the CeOx/CoS hybrid material has the properties of rough surface and porous structure, and CeO2 NPs is evenly dispersed on the CoS polyhedron. Notably, the obtained CeOx/CoS electrocatalyst can effectively catalyze water oxidation at a low onset overpotential of 269 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and low Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1 with sizable operational stability in the alkaline environment, which is comparable to or even surpassed most reported Co-based electrocatalysts and commercial Ir/C catalyst. CeO2 play an imported role in improving OER activity, the CeOx NPs can change the surface electronic states of CoS, therefore, adjusting the ratio of Co2+/Co3+, and modify interface and increase the content of vacancies. In addition, the formation of a protective layer CeOx thin layer on the surface of CoS can effectively reduce the corrosion and cause the loss of Co3+ from the active surface to the solution. This study indicated the importance of strong multiphase interface interaction, and provided a new idea for the rapid assembly of stable and highly active CeO2-based electrocatalysts.
6.4 CeO2-based amorphous materials
Mainly, several precious metal catalysts were developed.145 However, the experimental results of these catalysts have shown very poor performances, such as high overvoltages, low selectivities and low current densities. Therefore, it is essential to design alternative nonnoble metal catalysts with the desired composition and structure. To solve these problems, we propose several strategies. Because of their unique catalytic selectivity and activity, amorphous nanomaterials have received much attention as efficient catalytic materials (Fig. 2). Because the amorphous materials usually have a large number of low coordination atoms, so there are abundant defects, which can produce more catalytic centers to improve the electrochemical properties. Furthermore, the electrochemical properties of amorphous polymetallic materials after annealing are superior to those of the corresponding crystalline materials.
In basic electrolytes, many research groups have found that transition metal oxides are high-activity OER electrocatalysts, and multi-metal oxide catalysts are superior to single-metal heterogeneous compounds. Favaro et al. reported the amorphous oxide catalyst (Ni–Fe–Co–Ce)Ox,65 which indicated that nanocrystalline CeO2 could be an important component of optimal catalysts for the OER. In the catalytic experiments, CeO2 has enhanced the catalytic activity of transition metals in the redox process, providing key design principles for the improvement of electrocatalysts and reducing the energy costs of high-powered materials. Specifically, an industrial high-throughput synthetic method and a property screening methodology are convenient to empirically find the necessary new (Ni–Fe–Co–Ce)Ox electrocatalyst materials.66 This method combines high-throughput screening and validation experiments and can be rapidly integrated into operating equipment, creating a characteristic platform for material discovery. Furthermore, this method is an amazing strategy for the development of high-performance electrocatalysts by determining the structure–property relationships in the field of multiphase catalysis. In addition, determining the relationship between the structures and the performance of heterogeneous catalytic materials is an important strategy for developing high performance electrocatalysts. Herein, another quinary oxide OER electrocatalyst, Ni0.3Fe0.07Co0.2Ce0.43Ox, was shown to have an amorphous morphology and biphasic structure.67 Two nanostructure phases were synthesized by mixing CeO2 fluorite crystals with transition metal oxide crystals of 3–5 nm in diameter. The ionic conductivity and other fundamental properties were improved due to a reduction of the crystallite sizes, which could be a design paradigm in the development of novel electrocatalysts.
The quinary metal oxide electrocatalyst (Ni–Fe–Co–Ce)Ox has excellent activity because of its unique multiphasic and amorphous nanostructure. In addition, CeO2@PIZA-1-400 were successfully improve electrocatalytic OER properties due to CeO2 has good electronic conductivity and high oxygen storage/release capacity, which could serve as an excellent cocatalyst. Li et al. synthesized uniformly dispersed CeO2-encapsulated cobalt porphyrin network films by means of external encapsulation to optimize and improve the OER performance (Fig. 2).68 At 10.0 mA cm−2, MOF-derived films provides an overpotential of 370 mV. The materials utilized the reversible transition between Ce3+ and Ce4+ to improve the electronic conductivity, which overcomes the instability problem. This strategy provided a full understanding of the OER activity of film materials.
6.5 Summary
The major obstacle of effective OER electrocatalyst is the poor conductivity and long-term durability in general. Therefore, to design a highly stable, efficient, cost-effective, as well as environmentally friendly catalyst for OER electrocatalysis is necessary. We have reported the pivotal progress and developments of recently CeO2-based OER electrocatalyst including nanostructured, supported, hybrid, amorphous materials. There has been great interest in CeO2-based catalyst for OER due to generally shows excellent catalytic abilities and durability for the oxygen evolution. OER requires enhanced electrocatalysts to improve the catalytic rate and efficiency (Table 2), and catalytic water splitting is an attractive way to produce clean, carbon-free and renewable energy.61 Enhancement of the activity is mainly due to synergistic effects, excellent surface areas, and unique structures of the catalysts.62 For example, the electrocatalyst of RuO2 supported on defective CeO2 own large surface area (31.5 m2 g−1), the good synergistic effect between CeO2 and RuO2 enables the highly oxidized oxygen species O22−/O− to migrate easily from the defective CeO2 to the surface of RuO2 to promote water oxidation. Besides, the 3D structure composed of 1D RuO2 NPs and 2D CeO2 NSs strengthens the stability and increases the number of active centers. The above characteristics greatly enhance the electrochemical properties of the electrocatalyst.74 OER catalysis has been studied for decades since the publication of Bockris and Otogawa's seminal paper on the “volcanic” relationship of OER.63 The OER is one of the most vital half reactions, for which an important bottleneck for large-scale water splitting is the anode because OER overpotential losses are usually high. To further develop electrocatalysts with high activity and durability, it is necessary to expand the basic understanding of catalytically active substances.64 Decent ionic conductivity and high oxygen storage capacity properties enable CeO2 as a cocatalyst can improve OER catalyst performance by improving charge transfer and energy conversion efficiency, which can also solve the problem of OER poor kinetics.241
Table 2 Summary of CeO2-based materials with different enhanced strategies






Materials
Ref.





Increasing number of active sites



Nanostructured materials
Pt–CeOx/C NWs

54



Au–GDC NTs

69



CeO2/δ-MnO2 NSs

80



Pt–CeOx/C NWs

84



CoP–CeO2/Ti NSs

97



CeO2/CoSe2 NBs

101



Ni/CeO2–CNT NTs

102



CeO2–Cu3P/NF NSs

105



CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF 3D foam

117



Pt/CeO2/PANI THNRAs

121



Sandwich structure CeGS

128



MnOx@CeO2 NRs

131



Ce-HPCNs NSs

132



Ag–CeO2 NSs

133



Shuttle-shaped CeO2-HP

134



Pd/Co–CeO2 dots

135



CeO2·xH2O/Pt/CNT NTs

137



Pd/(Pd–CeO2@C) NWs

139



CeO2 NRs

238



Cu–CeO2-3.9 NRs

239



Supported materials
RuO2/CeO2

74



a-Au/CeOx–RGO

100



Ru0/CeO2

104



Pt/C–CeO2

113



Pt/C–CeO2

116



Amorphous materials
(Ni–Fe–Co–Ce)Ox

65



Ni0.3Fe0.07Co0.2Ce0.43Ox

67



Coated materials
Mn0.3Ce0.7O2

78



Co3O4–CeO2/C

81



MnOx@CeO2

137







Increase the intrinsic activity of each active site



Doped materials
Ce-species/NSC

86



CeO2/CePO4

91



Ni/CeO2–CNT

102



N-doped Pt/CeO2

119



Mo-doped CeO2

236



Hybrid materials
BVC-A

99



Pd-encircling CeO2−x

112



CeOx/CoS

240





7. HER
7.1 CeO2-based nanostructured materials
Compared to its rate in acidic electrolytes, the Volmer step (H+ + e− + * → H*, where * denotes a site on the surface of an electrode) in alkaline electrolytes is slow and initially involves the dissociation of water because of the proton deficiency. To improve the HER kinetics, efficient electrocatalysts are the key to reducing the overpotential of the reaction.
A hopeful method for achieving high catalytic efficiency is by nanostructuring the electrocatalysts.212–219 For this purpose, Wang et al. explored a CeO2–Cu3P nanoarrayed electrocatalyst, which provided an overpotential of only 148 mV.105 Density functional theory calculations showed that the CeO2–Cu3P interfacial structure was conducive to water dissociation, and the catalyst had excellent long-term electrochemical durability, with a Faraday efficiency of approximately 100%. For the preparation process, a hydrothermal method was used to grow the CeO2–Cu3P NS array on a NF matrix. The array had a 3D interconnected double-continuous macroscopic porous structure with a large specific surface area (Fig. 8B).106,107 Next, CeO2–CuO underwent the process of phosphidation. The resultant CeO2–Cu3P showed no band gap because of the downshift of the Dirac cone by coupling CeO2 with Cu3P, which is helpful for enhancing the conductivity and improving the electrocatalytic activity.108 Notably, under the action of a variety of active metal catalysts, CeO2–Cu3P can conform well to the development trends of electrocatalyst. Importantly, the HER activity of CeO2–Cu3P surpasses that of common nonprecious metals on the basis of their thermodynamic ΔGH* properties.109 In this study, numerous electrocatalysts combining metal phosphates, sulfides or nitrides with metal oxides were designed to new developmental insights.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the selective phosphidation in the CoP–CeO2 catalyst synthesis and the catalytic process; (B) a schematic diagram to illustrate the preparation process of CeO2–Cu3P/NF and illustration of water dissociation and H2 generation. (A) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (B) reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A CoP–CeO2 NSs film on a Ti mesh substrate (CoP–CeO2/Ti) possessed better HER activity, achieved the same current density with a much lower overpotential (43 mV), and showed better durability compared to those of the CoP catalyst, which suggested that CeO2 stabilized the CoP catalyst to a large extent.97 Specifically, the NSs structure enhance the electronic interaction between the CoP and CeO2, compared with those of CeO2, the Ce 3d5/2 peaks in CoP–CeO2 shifted to a lower binding energy, which suggested that the stronger electronic interactions in CoP–CeO2 have an essential role in improving HER catalysis. Models of CoP/CeO2 have been used to analyze the intrinsic mechanism; first, H2O molecules are adsorbed at the interface between CoP–CeO2, for which CeO2 acts as a water dissociation promoter, to generate hydrogen intermediates, and these intermediates are adsorbed onto the adjacent CoP (Fig. 8A). The water dissociation energy barrier of the CoP–CeO2 interface was significantly reduced to 1.06 eV, which significantly promoted water dissociation and thus increased the H* formation rate at the CoP surface. The improved HER activity of the CoP–CeO2 electrocatalyst could be attributed to the optimal ΔGH*, which was closer to zero, and the low ΔGH2O.
Notably, building an effective CoP/CeO2 interface from a Co3O4–CeO2 composite by selective phosphidation is an important method (Fig. 2). During the phosphating process, CoP–CeO2 hybrid film shows superior HER activity than Co3O4–CeO2 because of the decreased water adsorption and optimal hydrogen adsorption free energies. Therefore, the study offers us a fascinating CeO2-based material for HER in alkaline media, and provides a facile and general methodology to engineer transition metal phosphide/CeO2 interface, which is helpful to further develop CeO2-based materials.
7.2 CeO2-based supported materials
Demir et al. recent reports have shown that CeO2-supported metal nanoparticles provide outstanding catalytic activity and stability in the release of H2 at room temperature. Since the advantageous standard potential of the Ce4+ → Ce3+ reduction, it is easier to form the defect of Ce3+, thus obtaining the highly active CeO2-based catalyst. Therefore, they developed the Ru0/CeO2 catalyst, which provides an overpotential of 47 mV and a much lower Tafel slope (41 mV dec−1) (Fig. 2).104 At the same time, Ru0/CeO2 is a highly stable electrocatalyst, which can be scanned 10000 times at room temperature without obvious changes in current density. CeO2 is a excellent supported material because it overcomes the problem of Ru0 aggregation and enhances the HER performance.
7.3 CeO2-based doped materials
Weng et al. reported a new strategy with strong applicability. First, CeO2 NPs were grown on CNTs, and then a metal was selectively promoted to doped of the oxide NPs to create a high-performance electrocatalytic Ni/CeO2 interface (Fig. 5G).102 The Ni/CeO2–CNT composite was used as a model to demonstrate this strategy. In this model, the CNTs not only provided the anchor point for the uniform dispersion and size control of the oxide NPs but also acted as the electron conduction pathway during the electrocatalytic process (Fig. 5H). Specifically, at 10 mA cm−2, the Ni/CeO2–CNT catalyst could provide an overpotential less than 100 mV. In particular, this strategy could be used to synthesize a variety of metal/oxide nanostructure interfaces for the study of metal/oxide interactions in the liquid phase during electrocatalysis, providing the possibility for developing efficient electrocatalytic materials.
In this study, the strategy for improving the electrocatalytic performance is by constructing a highly disperse nanometallic/CeO2 interface. Metal/CeO2 interfacial engineering is regarded as an effective method to improve the performance of the HER, but it is a field that remains to be explored for electrocatalysis.103 Interfacial structures of metal/CeO2 can generate powerful electrocatalysts for energy conversion. First, decreasing the size of the catalyst particles down to the nanoscale can improve the ratio of surface atoms. In addition, oxide supports have important roles in catalytic processes, providing a greater number of active sites at the metal/CeO2 interfaces and powerfully influencing the chemical and physical performances of metal NPs, leading to excellent catalytic activity, durability and selectivity. Therefore, to further study the application potential of the metal/CeO2 interface, it is of great importance to reasonably design and industrially synthesize a class of metal/CeO2 nanostructured interfaces on conductive supports and to discuss the role of their interactions in electrocatalysis.203–211
7.4 CeO2-based hybrid materials
Pd is regard as one of the best candidates for replacing Pt because of the relative low-cost, natural abundance, and excellent catalytic activity for HER. To further enhance the catalytic activity, Gao et al. successfully prepared the Pd/CeO2/C hybrid electrocatalyst by the facile two-step method. The electrochemical performance of the Pd/CeO2/C hybrid for the HER in alkaline environment is better than Pd/C, CeO2/C, and the only physical mixture of Pd/C and CeO2/C, which means that the enhanced performance can't attribute to simple physical blending.246 The improved HER activity and stability can be put down to the presence of CeO2 as the support for anchoring and stabilizing of Pd NPs, besides, through strong interaction between Pd and CeO2. Specially, the Pd NPs are uniformly distributed on the support in all catalysts. Gao et al. found that the intimate contact and the strong metal support interaction between Pd and CeO2 NPs. Notably, the X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements showed the existence of CeO2 be helpful for the formation of a Pd–O–Ce structure that this unique structure in the Pd/CeO2/C hybrid catalyst supply new catalytic active sites to promote the HER activity in alkaline media. The discovery may lead to further performance enhancement of non-Pt electrocatalysts toward the HER through further optimization of such Pd/metal oxide interfaces.
7.5 Summary
In this section, we summary the meaningful development of catalytic activity of CeO2-based HER materials has been achieved, and we have emphasized the strategy to improve the electrochemical performance, which provides guidance for further development of suitable CeO2-based catalysts. For instance, selective phosphidation is a useful method to prepare the superior HER activity materials due to the decreased water adsorption and excellent hydrogen adsorption free energies. As a clean fuel, hydrogen has become popular as a promising alternative for traditional fossil fuels. Sustainable hydrogen evolution from electrocatalytic water splitting has attracted growing attention. However, the huge challenges remain for nonprecious electrocatalysts to achieve high reaction rate and small applied overpotential. Active electrocatalysts are necessary to reduce the overpotential driving the HER, which is a classic example of a two-electron transfer process with a catalytic intermediate and may occur through three mechanisms.92,93 The hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH) largely determines the rate of the overall reaction.94 The necessary condition for an outstanding HER catalyst is a ΔGH close to zero.95,96 Therefore, controlling the binding energy of the reactive intermediate on the surface is the key to improving the material properties. We need not only an attractive catalytic material for water reduction but also a simple, universal approach to interface design. Building effective interface could be a feasible way to enhance the hydrogen evolution activity of the catalyst under alkaline conditions, which remains challenging and unexplored. Therefore, we need a suitable CeO2-based catalytic material for water splitting and a simple, universal approach to interface design. The schematic illustration of the selective phosphidation in the catalyst synthesis and the catalytic process is shown in Fig. 8.
8. HOR
8.1 CeO2-based hybrid materials
When the pH changes from low to high values, the activity of the HOR on Pt, Pd, Ir and other precious metal catalysts decreases. Remarkably, compared with that of a Pd/C catalyst, the anode performance can be improved by 5 times by depositing CeO2 onto the carbon support.110 Such an excellent structure is conducive to weakening the Pd–H bond and contributes to transferring OHad from CeO2 to the Pd–Had reaction site of the HOR, thus promoting the overall performance of the HOR.
Therefore, it is important to combine metal nanocomponents and CeO2, which results in novel performances that are different from the properties of each individual component (Fig. 2). Several metals catalyze electrooxidation on the CeO2 surface, and the number and density of the reaction sites can be greatly increased compared to pure metal due to the highly dispersed electrocatalyst particles. It is obvious that catalyst particles contribute substantially to the lowering of overpotentials.111 In addition, the interfacial area between the CeO2 and metal determines the properties of the catalyst. Therefore, new strategies should control the catalyst particle size and strengthen the interfacial interactions.112 This method provides guidance for the design and preparation of CeO2-based electrocatalysts. In order to further develop electrocatalysts with high activity and durability, it is necessary to expand the basic understanding of catalytically active substances. Therefore, Fig. 9 focus on the reaction mechanism, promotion strategy and main challenges of various electrocatalytic reactions (OER, ORR, HER, HOR, MOR, EOR and NRR). To overcome these problems, it is essential to understand their mechanisms and develop a facile and effective strategy to design CeO2-based materials. Table 3 discuss the requirement, challenges and promotion strategy in detail.
 Fig. 9  The reaction mechanism diagram and equations of OER, ORR, HOR, HER, MOR, EOR and NRR are presented, and introduce the promotion strategy and main challenges. 
Table 3 Requirement, challenges and promotion strategy of electrocatalytic reaction




Reaction
Requirement
Challenges
Promotion strategy




MOR/EOR
High methanol/ethanol oxidation kinetics on the electrocatalyst
Conventional anodic catalysts are susceptible to CO poisoning
Design the Pt and metal oxides co-catalyst for methanol/ethanol electrooxidation


NRR
The electrocatalyst that activate N2 to optimize electrocatalytic center
Low yields of NH3 and harsh reaction conditions expensive electrolytes
Design the amorphous electrocatalyst to improve the catalytic activity


ORR
High catalytic activity at the cathode
Poor rate capability and high charge/discharge overpotentials
Develop doped/nanostructured electrocatalyst


OER
A lower overpotential
Large anodic overpotential
Prepare electrocatalyst with high specific area to reduce overpotential


HER
High reaction rate and small applied overpotential
Adsorption and desorption of hydrogen atoms on the catalyst surface are not easy to balance
Lower the ΔGH of the electrocatalyst


HOR
Outstanding hydrogen oxidation reaction kinetics
Sluggish kinetics of electrocatalysts
Develop novel anode catalyst structures




8.2 Summary
We introduced the novel CeO2-based hybrid materials, the reaction step involved in the HOR is similar to that in the HER, except that the reaction step is reversed, and has received much less attention regarding the development of nonnoble metal catalysts.220–228 The slow kinetics of electrocatalysts is main barrier of the development of HOR electrocatalytic reaction. The CeO2-based materials have superior HOR activity by controlling the catalyst particle size and reinforcing the interfacial interactions in this section. The structure is helpful for weakening the Pd–H bonds and assists in supplying OHad from oxophilic CeO2 to the Pd–Had, the HOR reaction sites, thus accelerating the overall HOR. Understanding the differences between precious metal and CeO2-based catalysts for the HOR remains a frontier in research.111 Besides, accurately modeling expected surface structures and stoichiometries of the catalyst material during different operating conditions represents a broader challenge in HOR catalysis.248,249
9. Conclusion and outlooks
This review summarizes the application of CeO2-based materials in electrocatalysis (OER, ORR, HER, HOR, MOR, EOR and NRR). Among the emerging materials, CeO2-based materials have been widely used in the field of electrocatalysis due to a new design paradigm aimed at improving the catalytic efficiency. The two important features of CeO2, the neatly switch between the Ce4+ and Ce3+ oxidation states and abundance of oxygen vacancies within its structure, which is beneficial for enhancing CeO2-based materials catalytic performance during the electrocatalytic process. Besides, we present the latest theoretical and technological research process relating to CeO2-based materials and highlight two effective strategies to optimize catalyst performance: increasing the number of active sites and increasing the intrinsic activity. Specifically, we discuss the application potential of CeO2-based materials as remarkable electrocatalysts. In addition, we have introduced various CeO2-based materials and highlighted the guiding significance in the development of non-noble metal electrocatalysts.
Furthermore, there are still several deficiencies in the basic understanding of the specific optimization strategies for CeO2 in electrocatalysis, notwithstanding the great progress that has been made. In particular, further exploring how the physical and chemical properties of CeO2 affect the resultant stability and activity of the catalyst is essential. Therefore, we comment on the challenges and shortcomings in this promising area, identify several deficiencies and believe that the following aspects should be focused on:
9.1 Improve conductivity
To date, pure CeO2 materials have the problem of poor electrical conductivity. However, it is important to improve the conductivity. Notably, the conductivity of most CeO2-based electrocatalysts should be improved by deepening the understanding of the conductivity mechanism in non-noble metal electrocatalysts to design and develop novel conductive CeO2-based materials. In addition, the conductivity of CeO2-based electrocatalysts should be further enhanced by a number of possible methods, for example, combining highly conductive materials, doping the active element and phosphidation of the material. Weng et al. successfully constructed a Ni/CeO2 interface on an excellently conductive CNT scaffold, and the interfaces were well dispersed on the nanoscale.102 His group catalyzed hydrogen evolution by improving water dissociation and changing the binding energy of hydrogen. This kind of support plays a key role in the catalytic process. The cerium oxide support provided twice the number of active sites at the Ni/CeO2 interface and had a strong influence on the chemical and physical properties of the metal NPs. As a result, the conductivity of CeO2 was significantly improved and had good catalytic selectivity, activity and durability.
9.2 Develop synthetic method
It is essential to develop preparation methods and design strategies, which follow certain rules, for CeO2-based materials to prepare higher efficiency electrocatalysts. For example, the synthetic strategies of CeO2 hollow structures can be categorized into three main categories: (a) well-established template-assisted (soft, hard, and in situ template) methods; (b) novel emerging self-template approaches, including Ostwald ripening, selective etching, the Kirkendall effect and galvanic replacement; and (c) bottom-up self-organized formation synthetic methods (namely, self-deformation and oriented attachment).20
9.3 Optimization of the structure
Ideally, for the future improvement of highly efficient CeO2-based materials used for electrocatalysis, unique structures will be developed, such as highly porous structures, core–shell structures and sandwich structures, which show better thermal, electronic, and mechanical properties, and their active components or surfaces will be fully utilized.156,157 For example, Dai et al. synthesized and studied the results of vertical nitrogen-doped carbon NTs for use as ORR catalysts without precious metals.21 The electrocatalytic activity was far better than that of a commercial 20% Pt/C electrode, and the NT catalyst was more stable, had a lower CO poisoning effect and had no methanol crossover under alkaline conditions. Inspired by this precursory work, many endeavors have been made to develop novel noble-metal-free electrocatalysts, such as CeO2-based materials.
We believe that obtaining the knowledge in this report is helpful for achieving higher catalytic performance and allows researchers and scientists to be fully aware of the potential development of CeO2-based materials. Further efforts could apply these strategies as the foundation for attaining a basic understanding of burgeoning novel materials, in addition to developing novel techniques to measurably design nanostructures and adjust the surface structures. Finally, we hope that our personal views will supply the general synthetic principles and applications of CeO2 and provide readers with the essential background and ideas needed to develop a deeper understanding and more effective fabrication strategies for both syntheses and applications of non-noble metal catalysts. Although there are many difficulties, if engineered well, we believe that better performance and wider application of CeO2 can be achieved in the near future. Researchers and industry must work together to turn this success into the optimal CeO2-based materials for electrocatalysts. In this way, these materials can be well integrated into actual equipment that is widely used.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21671170, 21673203, and 21201010), the Top-notch Academic Programs Project of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (TAPP), Program for New Century Excellent Talents of the University in China (NCET-13-0645), Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (XKYCX17-038), the Six Talent Plan (2015-XCL-030), Qinglan Project and the Science and Technology Innovation Foster Foundation of Yangzhou University (2016CXJ010), Program for Colleges Natural Science Research in Jiangsu Province (18KJB150036). We also acknowledge the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions and the technical support we received at the Testing Center of Yangzhou University.
References
Z. Liu, H. Cheng, N. Li, T. Y. Ma and Y. Su, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3777–3784 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, H. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yu, Z. Hong, X. Zhang, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 6398–6402 CrossRef .
B. Y. Li, P. Hasin and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1926–1929 Search PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 7409–7413 CrossRef .
G. Chen, T. Y. Ma, Z. Liu, N. Li, Y. Su and K. Davey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3314–3323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, T. Ren and Z. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7337–7347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, G. Li, Y. Liu, L. Yang, X. Lian, T. Asefa and X. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4839–4847 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, X. Cao, I. G. G. Martinezb, M. H. Rümmelia and R. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 93, 35–38 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qu, Y. Zheng, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Z. Lu, T. Xu, X. Wu, Y. Tian, Y. Li and Z. Huo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500245 CrossRef .
J. Nai, H. Yin, T. You, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, P. Wang and Z. Jin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 14101880 Search PubMed .
T. Reier, M. Oezaslan and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1765–1772 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Wu, S. J. Pennycook and J. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20214–20223 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan and J. Scott, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8825–8846 RSC .
Y. Ye, L. Kuai and B. Geng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19132–19138 RSC .
Z. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez and X. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS .
K. Waki, R. A. Wong, H. S. Oktaviano, T. Fujio and T. Nagai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1950–1958 RSC .
N. R. Sahraie, J. P. Paraknowitsch, C. Go, A. Thomas and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14486–14497 CrossRef .
R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 2619–2623 CrossRef .
A. Zhao, J. Masa, W. Xia, A. Maljusch, M. G. Willinger, G. Clavel, K. Xie, R. Schlögl, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7551–7554 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2012, 18, 495–496 Search PubMed .
M. S. Faber, R. Dziedzic, M. A. Lukowski, N. S. Kaiser, Q. Ding and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10053–10061 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Carim, F. H. Saadi, M. P. Soriaga and N. S. Lewis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13835–13839 RSC .
E. J. Popczun, C. W. Roske, C. G. Read, J. C. Crompton, J. M. Mcenaney, J. F. Callejas, S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5420–5425 RSC .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, G. Wang, D. Zakhidov, E. Larios, M. J. Yacaman and J. M. Tour, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301875 CrossRef .
L. Liao, S. Wang, J. Xiao, X. Bian and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 387–392 RSC .
Z. Huang, W. Luo, L. Ma, M. Yu, X. Ren, M. He, S. Polen, K. Click, B. Garrett, J. Lu, K. Amine, C. Hadad, W. Chen, A. Asthagiri and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15181–15185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Kibler, A. M. El-Aziz, R. Hoyer and D. M. Kolb, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2080–2084 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wanga, H. Xiea, M. Chen, A. D. Aloia, J. Cho, G. Wu and Q. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 69–89 CrossRef .
S. J. Rowley-neale, G. C. Smith and C. E. Banks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22539–22548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and C. Ming, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, G. He, P. K. Shen, Z. Luo, J. Xie and M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4014–4022 RSC .
M. Yang, Q. Cai, C. Liu, R. Wu, D. Sun, Y. Chen and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13738–13743 RSC .
P. Ercius, V. R. Radmilovi and B. M. Babi, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170, 144–152 Search PubMed .
C. Koenigsmann and S. S. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1161–1176 RSC .
J. Snyder, I. McCue, K. Livi and J. Erlebacher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8633–8645 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rabis, P. Rodriguez and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 864–890 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, R. Zhang, F. Bai, H. Wu, R. Haddad and H. Fan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 827–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Li, M. T. M. Koper and F. Calle-vallejo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15694–15701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Khadka, R. D. Milton, S. Shaw, D. Lukoyanov, D. R. Dean, S. D. Minteer, S. Raugei, B. M. Ho and L. C. Seefeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13518–13524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, Z. Liu, Y. Ma, G. Cui, F. Xie, F. Wang, Y. Wu, S. Gao, Y. Xu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shi, D. Bao, B. R. Wulan, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606550 CrossRef .
M. Nazemi, S. R. Panikkanvalappil and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, S. H. Han, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhu, X. Tian, J. Zeng and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3211–3217 RSC .
G. Chen, X. Cao, S. Wu, X. Zeng, L. Ding, M. Zhu and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9771–9774 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Seitz, C. F. Dickens, K. Nishio, Y. Hikita, J. Montoya, A. Doyle, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic, H. Y. Hwang, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2016, 353, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, K. C. Chang, S. H. Chang, Y. Kang, J. Snyder, A. P. Paulikas, D. Strmcnik, Y. T. Kim, D. Myers, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14016–14021 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Su, X. Quan, X. Fan, S. Chen, H. Yu, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang and J. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1186–1191 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Wei, W. Qiu, H. Guo, X. Shi, P. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 201801357 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Abdullah, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, S. Y. Hwang, A. Trout and Z. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7805–7808 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui, L. Gan, M. Heggen, S. Rudi and P. Strasser, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, F. Lu, X. Wei, X. Song, Z. Sun, Z. Yang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4974–4981 RSC .
S. Chauhan, G. J. Richards, T. Mori, P. Yan, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, J. Zou and J. Drennan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6262–6276 RSC .
X. Liu, J. Iocozzia, Y. Wang, X. Cui, Y. Chen, S. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 402–434 RSC .
C. Yang, X. Yu, S. Heißler, A. Nefedov, S. Colussi, J. Llorca, A. Trovarelli, Y. Wang and C. Wöll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 375–379 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shinde, G. Li, L. Zhou, D. Guevarra, S. K. Suram, F. M. Toma, Q. Yan, J. A. Haber, J. B. Neaton and J. M. Gregoire, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14356–14363 RSC .
Y. Lin, C. Xu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12579–12583 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Campbell and C. H. F. Peden, Science, 2005, 309, 713–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Esch, S. Fabris, L. Zhou, T. Montini, C. Africh, P. Fornasiero, G. Comelli and R. Rosei, Science, 2005, 309, 752–755 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger and N. M. Marković, Science, 2009, 324, 48–49 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Pi, Q. Shao, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6245–6251 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 290–304 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. L. Mccrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 45, 16977–16987 CrossRef .
M. Favaro, W. S. Drisdell, M. A. Marcus, J. M. Gregoire, E. J. Crumlin, J. A. Haber and J. Yano, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1248–1258 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Haber, Y. Cai, S. Jung, C. Xiang, S. Mitrovic, J. Jin, A. T. Bell and J. M. Gregoire, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 682–688 RSC .
J. A. Haber, E. Anzenburg, J. Yano, C. Kisielowski and J. M. Gregoire, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402307 CrossRef .
D.-J. Li, Z.-G. Gu, W. Zhang, Y. Kang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20126–20130 RSC .
C. Jin, X. Cao, F. Lu, Z. Yang and R. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 847–853 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-R. Zheng, M.-R. Gao, Q. Gao, H.-H. Li, J. Xu, Z.-Y. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Feng, S.-H. Ye, H. Xu, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4698–4703 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, N. Li, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, Z. Yin and Y. Du, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3211–3217 RSC .
C. Cui, L. Gan, M. Heggen, S. Rudi and P. Strasser, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liang, Y. Yu, W. Zhou, X. Xu and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 634–640 RSC .
V. T. T. Ho, C. J. Pan, J. Rick, W. N. Su and B. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11716–11724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Seo, Y. Choi, B. Koo, A. Jang and W. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9394–9402 RSC .
J. Li, Z. Xi, Y. Pan, J. S. Spendelow, P. N. Duchesne, D. Su, J. Li, Z. Xi, Y. Pan, J. S. Spendelow, P. N. Duchesne, D. Su and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2926–2932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, H. Qiao, H. Wang and P. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12512–12518 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Liu, C. Jin, S. Bie, R. Yang and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13563–13567 RSC .
C. Cao, J. Xie, S. Zhang, B. Pan, G. Cao and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6747–6755 RSC .
K. Liu, X. Huang, H. Wang, F. Li, Y. Tang, J. Li and M. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34422–34430 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lim, W. D. Lee, D. H. Choi and H. I. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 85–96 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fugane, T. Mori, P. Yan, T. Masuda, S. Yamamoto, F. Ye, H. Yoshikawa, G. Auchterlonie and J. Drennan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2698–2707 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chauhan, T. Mori, T. Masuda, S. Ueda, G. J. Richards, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, N. Isaka, G. Auchterlonie and J. Drennan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9059–9070 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, H. Huang, H. Miao, S. Sun, Q. Wang, S. Li and Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 358, 50–60 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Z. Cai, L. Hao, Z. Xing, Y. Dai, X. Xu, S. Pan, Y. Duan and J. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22518–22529 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Zhang, R. Lv, X. Chen, B. Xue, P. Liang and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12387–12391 RSC .
Z. Wu, R. Liu, J. Wang, J. Zhu, W. Xiao, C. Xuan, W. Lei and D. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19086–19092 RSC .
C. Liu, Z. Ma, M. Cui, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, D. Su, C. B. Murray, J. X. Wang and S. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7870–7875 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, G. Gao, M. Du, J. Zhou, K. Wang, W. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Li, P. Ma, W. Dong, F. Duan, M. Chen, G. Wu, J. Wu, H. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707301 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, B. He, Y. Liao, X. Yu, Z. Mu, Y. Xing and S. Xing, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 793–798 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1053–1063 RSC .
M. Zhiani and S. Kamali, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8108–8116 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, X. Ren, S. Hao, R. Ge, Z. Liu, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, Q. Zhang and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1985–1990 RSC .
A. Bruix, Y. Lykhach, I. Matolínovμ, A. Neitzel, R. Fiala, M. Vorokhta, V. Stetsovych, S. Klμra, K. C. Prince, S. Bruy, V. Potin, F. Illas, V. Matolín, J. Libuda and K. M. Neyman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10525–10530 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lv, C. Yan, G. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Sun, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6073–6076 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Li, D. Bao, M.-M. Shi, B.-R. Wulan, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700001 CrossRef .
Y. R. Zheng, M. R. Gao, Q. Gao, H. H. Li, J. Xu, Z. Y. Wu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Weng, W. Liu, L. C. Yin, R. Fang, M. Li, E. I. Altman, Q. Fan, F. Li, H. M. Cheng and H. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7704–7710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Cao, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Xue, Q. Xu and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17329–17336 RSC .
E. Demir, S. Akbayrak, M. O. Ahmet and O. Saim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6299–6308 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Du, Z. Liu, H. Wang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2213–2217 RSC .
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804950 CrossRef .
Y. Luo, Y. Yan, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 901–924 RSC .
H. Oppermann, Erdoel, Erdgas, Kohle, 2006, 122, 128–136 CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Miller, A. Lavacchi, F. Vizza, M. Marelli, F. Di Benedetto, F. D'Acapito, Y. Paska, M. Page and D. R. Dekel, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6108–6111 CrossRef .
H. Tang, M. Zheng, Q. Hu, Y. Chi, B. Xu, S. Zhang, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13999–14024 RSC .
Q. Tan, C. Du, Y. Sun, G. Yin and Y. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1429–1435 RSC .
Y. Gu, C. Liu, Y. Li, X. Sui, K. Wang and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 265, 335–344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Katayama, T. Okanishi, H. Muroyama, T. Matsui and K. Eguchi, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2026–2034 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Gu, Y. Y. Chu, Z. B. Wang, Z. Z. Jiang, G. P. Yin and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 102, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Chu, Z.-B. Wang, Z.-Z. Jiang, D.-M. Gu and G.-P. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3100–3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, N. Li, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, Z. Yin and Y. Du, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3211–3217 RSC .
X. Yu, L. Kuai and B. Geng, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5738–5743 RSC .
Y. Y. Chu, J. Cao, Z. Dai and X. Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4038–4044 RSC .
S. K. Meher and G. R. Rao, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2795–2809 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, A. L. Wang, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5198–5206 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kaur, R. Srivastava and B. Satpati, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2654–2663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4637–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shin, S. Sinthika, M. Choi, R. Thapa and N. Park, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4074–4080 CrossRef CAS .
B. He, J. Wang, Y. Fan, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhai, Y. Wang, Q. Huang, F. Dang, Z. Zhang and N. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19075–19084 RSC .
J. X. Feng, S. H. Ye, H. Xu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 4698–4703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Favaro, W. S. Drisdell, M. A. Marcus, J. M. Gregoire, E. J. Crumlin, J. A. Haber and J. Yano, ACS
Catal., 2017, 7, 1248–1258 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, X. Wang, W. Gao, P. Li, W. Yan, S. Wu, Q. Cui, W. Song and K. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6656–6663 RSC .
J. Chen, N. Zhou, H. Wang, Z. Peng, H. Li, Y. Tang and K. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10123–10126 RSC .
Y. Xue, H. Huang, H. Miao, S. Sun, Q. Wang, S. Li and Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 358, 50–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Liu, C. Jin, S. Bie, R. Yang and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13563–13567 RSC .
W. Xia, J. Li, T. Wang, L. Song, H. Guo, H. Gong, C. Jiang, B. Gao and J. He, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1623–1626 RSC .
S. Sun, Y. Xue, Q. Wang, S. Li, H. Huang, H. Miao and Z. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7921–7924 RSC .
S. K. Meher and G. R. Rao, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2795–2809 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tan, H. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Chen, T. Jiang, C. Shu, S. Chong, B. Hultman, Y. Liu and G. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12565–12572 RSC .
G. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1481–1487 RSC .
Z. Y. Li, J. Zhou, L. S. Tang, X. P. Fu, H. Wei, M. Xue, Y. L. Zhao, C. J. Jia, X. M. Li, H. Bin Chu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2318–2326 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Li, B. Liu, Q. Dong, G. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 139–147 RSC .
Q. Tan, C. Du, Y. Sun, L. Du, G. Yin and Y. Gao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13656–13662 RSC .
C. Guo, J. Ran and A. Vasileff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
H. Hirakawa, M. Hashimoto, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10929–10936 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Y. Xie, Y. Jiao, A. Wu, C. Tian, X. Zhang, L. Wang and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704156 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. M. Van Der Ham, M. T. M. Koper and D. G. H. Hetterscheid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5183–5191 RSC .
G. Chen, X. Cao, S. Wu, X. Zeng, L. Ding, M. Zhu and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9771–9774 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, S. Zheng, G. Zhang, X. Xiao, X. Li, Y. Xu and H. Xue, Energy Storage Materials, 2017, 9, 150–169 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, S. Zheng, H. Tang, X. Guo, H. Xue and H. Pang, Energy Storage Materials, 2017, 9, 11–30 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Ding, X. Xiao, J. Shao, J. Wei, H. Pang and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12774–12781 RSC .
S. Zheng, X. Li, B. Yan, Q. Hu, Y. Xu, X. Xiao, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602733 CrossRef .
J. Masa, P. Weide, D. Peeters, I. Sinev, W. Xia, Z. Sun, C. Somsen, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502313–1502322 CrossRef .
H. Y. Wang, Y. Y. Hsu, R. Chen, T. S. Chan, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500091 CrossRef .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
Y. Lu, B. Li, S. Zheng, Y. Xu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703949 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, S. Zheng, X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Guo, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 5234–5239 RSC .
B. Li, P. Gu, Y. Feng, G. Zhang, K. Huang and H. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605784 CrossRef .
C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604103 CrossRef .
J. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Li, I. Amorim, B. Zhang, D. Xiong, N. Zhang, S. M. Thalluri, J. P. S. Sousa and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20646–20652 RSC .
W. C. Chueh, Y. Hao, W. Jung and S. M. Haile, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui and S. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1427–1437 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Feng, G. Yu, Y. Wu, G. D. Li, H. Li, Y. Sun, T. Asefa, W. Chen and X. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14023–14026 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arakane, T. Sato, S. Souma, K. Kosaka, K. Nakayama, M. Komatsu, T. Takahashi, Z. Ren, K. Segawa and Y. Ando, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 636–641 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Zheng, L. Jin, Y. Li, P. Geng, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800716 CrossRef .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2007, 315, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, M. Arenz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, C. A. Lucas, G. Wang, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 241–247 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. L. Xin, R. Hovden, H. Wang, Y. Yu, D. A. Muller, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 81–87 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Yu, H. L. Xin, R. Hovden, P. Ercius, J. A. Mundy, H. Chen, J. H. Richard, D. A. Muller, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5230–5238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cobo, J. Heidkamp, P.-A. Jacques, J. Fize, V. Fourmond, L. Guetaz, B. Jousselme, V. Ivanova, H. Dau, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612–13614 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahan, Z. Liu and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Deng, L. Yu, X. Q. Chen, G. X. Wang, L. Jin, X. L. Pan, J. Deng, G. Q. Sun and X. H. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371–375 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, P. J. Ren, D. H. Deng, L. Yu, F. Yang and X. H. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1919–1923 RSC .
J. Deng, P. J. Ren, D. H. Deng and X. H. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2100–2104 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Chen, J. P. Xiao, J. Wang, D. H. Deng, Y. F. Hu, J. G. Zhou, L. Yu, T. Heine, X. L. Pan and X. H. Bao, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3262–3267 RSC .
J. Deng, L. Yu, D. H. Deng, X. Chen, F. Yang and X. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14868–14873 RSC .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3675–3679 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Zou, X. X. Huang, A. Goswami, R. Silva, B. R. Sathe, E. Mikmekova and T. Asefa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4372–4376 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tavakkoli, T. Kallio, O. Reynaud, A. G. Nasibulin, C. Johans, J. Sainio, H. Jiang, E. I. Kauppinen and K. Laasonen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4535–4538 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Zheng, J. Deng, N. Wang, D. H. Deng, W. H. Zhang, X. H. Bao and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7143–7147 CrossRef .
M. A. H. J. van Kessel, D. R. Speth, M. Albertsen, P. H. Nielsen, H. J. M. Op den Camp, B. Kartal, M. S. M. Jetten and S. Lücker, Nature, 2015, 528, 555–559 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kandemir, M. E. Schuster, A. Senyshyn, M. Behrens and R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12723–12726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
D. Bao, Q. Zhang, F. Meng, H. Zhong, M. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. M. Yan, Q. Jiang and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604799 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, K. Neyerlin, T. S. Olson, S. Pylypenko, J. Bult, H. N. Dinh, T. Gennett, Z. Shao and R. O'Hayre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1437–1446 RSC .
Z. Yan, G. He, P. K. Shen, Z. Luo, J. Xie and M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4014–4022 RSC .
C. M. A. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3876–3893 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
S. Y. Tee, K. Y. Win, W. S. Teo, L. D. Koh, S. Liu, C. P. Teng and M. Y. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600337 CrossRef PubMed .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron and M. Mavrikakis, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Wan, S. Guo, G. Lu, J. Yao and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Strmcnik, M. Uchimura, C. Wang, R. Subbaraman, N. Danilovic, D. Van Der Vliet, A. P. Paulikas, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 300–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J. P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, H. Zhu, M. Wan, L. Dong, M. Zhang and M. Du, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 990–993 RSC .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Du, C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Lin, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2077–2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, K. Jiang, G. Wang, J. Yao and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 13051–13055 CrossRef .
Z. Zhuang, W. Sheng and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3950–3955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, X. Luo, A. J. Kropf, J. Wen, X. Wang, S. Lee, D. J. Myers, D. Miller, T. Wu and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 781–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ling, D.-Y. Yan, Y. Jiao, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. Mao, X.-W. Du, Z. Hu and M. Jaroniec, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan, X. Liu, W. Ren, X. Li, C. Cheng and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602391 CrossRef .
X. Xia, Y. Wang, A. Ruditskiy and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6313–6333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Tian, M. Q. Zhao, D. Yu, X. Y. Kong, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T.-Y. Xiao, Y.-H. Qian, S.-S. Li and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3192–3196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Silva, D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7823–7826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, L.-K. Wang, G. Wang, M.-R. Gao, J. Ge, W.-J. Yuan, Y.-H. Shen, A.-J. Xie and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4095–4103 RSC .
G. Nam, J. Park, S. T. Kim, D. B. Shin, N. Park, Y. Kim, J. S. Lee and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1870–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, G. S. Park, S. T. Kim, M. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 1060–1064 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, D. Higgins, A. Yu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167–3192 RSC .
M. Kobayashi, H. Niwa, Y. Harada, K. Horiba, M. Oshima, H. Ofuchi, K. Terakura, T. Ikeda, Y. Koshigoe, J. Ozaki, S. Miyata, S. Ueda, Y. Yamashita, H. Yoshikawa and K. Kobayashi, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8346–8351 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 RSC .
J. R. McKone, S. C. Marinescu, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 865–878 RSC .
D. V. Esposito, S. T. Hunt, Y. C. Kimmel and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3025–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cobo, J. Heidkamp, P. A. Jacques, J. Fize, V. Fourmond, L. Guetaz, B. Jousselme, V. Ivanova, H. Dau, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Liu, P. Li, G. X. Zhao, X. Wang, J. T. Kong, H. M. Liu, H. B. Zhang, K. Chang, X. G. Meng, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9128–9136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masa, P. Weide, D. Peeters, I. Sinev, W. Xia, Z. Y. Sun, C. Somsen, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502313–1502322 CrossRef .
A. Grimaud, O. Diaz-Morales, B. H. Han, W. T. Hong, Y. L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. M. Koper and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 457–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Zhou, Y. H. Du, S. M. Yin, X. Z. Tian, H. B. Yang, X. Wang, B. Liu, H. M. Zheng, S. Z. Qiao and R. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2563–2570 RSC .
X. F. Lu, P. Q. Liao, J. W. Wang, J. X. Wu, X. W. Chen, C. T. He, J. P. Zhang, G. R. Li and X. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8336–8339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Shen, P. Q. Liao, D. D. Zhou, C. T. He, J. X. Wu, W. X. Zhang, J. P. Zhang and X. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1778–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Gu, H. Fu, T. Neumann, Z. X. Xu, W. Q. Fu, W. Wenzel, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and C. Woll, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 977–983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Chang, C. W. Kung, H. W. Chen, T. Y. Huang, S. Y. Kao, H. C. Lu, M. H. Lee, K. M. Boopathi, C. W. Chu and K. C. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7229–7235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1481–1487 RSC .
Y. Yamada, C. Tsung, W. Huang, Z. Huo, S. E. Habas, T. Soejima, C. E. Aliaga, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 372–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, L. Xia, F. Zhou, R. Zhao, H. Chen, T. Wang, Q. Zhou, Q. Liu, G. Cui, X. Xiong, F. Gong and X. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Zhao, Y. Liu, W. Li, J. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2952–2955 RSC .
H. Xu, J. Cao, C. Shan, B. Wang, P. Xi, W. Liu and Y. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8654–8658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, X. Yi, F. Yin, B. Chen, G. Li and H. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6753–6755 RSC .
L. Tao, Y. Shi, Y. Huang, R. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Huo, Y. Zou, G. Yu, J. Luo, C. Dong and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 604–612 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Sung, G.-H. Lee and D.-W. Kim, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21292–21297 RSC .
Z. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Li, T. Qin, L. Wang, X. Bo, Y. Liu, L. Xu, S. Wang, X. Sun, Y. Lu, F. Luo and S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22023–22030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sivanantham, P. Ganesan and S. Shanmugam, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 237, 1148–1159 CrossRef .
T. Gao, J. Yang, M. Nishijima, H. A. Miller, F. Vizza, H. Gu, H. Chen, Y. Hu, Z. Jiang, L. Wang, L. Shuai, M. Qiu, C. Lei, A. Zhang, Y. Hou and Q. He, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 14, F1147–F1153 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Wang, L.-J. Cao, M.-Y. Yang, S. H.-S. Cheng, C.-W. Cao, K.-L. Leung, C.-Y. Chung and Z.-G. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Zhang, H.-B. Li, H. D. Yoo, X. Chi, Q. An, J. Liu, M. Yu, W. Wang and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsai, K. R. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, Surf. Sci., 2015, 640, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schwarz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 3497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Liu, Z. H. Zhang, M. Chen, H. Zhao, F. H. Duan, D. M. Chen, M. H. Wang, S. S. Zhang and M. Du, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3941–3944 RSC .
D. M. Chen, J. Y. Tian, Z. W. Wang, C. S. Liu, M. Chen and M. Du, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10668–10671 RSC .
D. Shi, R. Zheng, M. J. Sun, X. Cao, C. X. Sun, C. J. Cui, C. S. Liu, J. Zhao and M. Du, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14637–14641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, S. S. Zheng, X. Hu, Z. F. Shao, M. B. Zheng and H. Pang, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3859–3865 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Chen, N.-N. Zhang, J.-Y. Tian, C.-S. Liu and M. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2017, 5, 4861–4867 RSC .
D. M. Chen, C.-X. Sun, Y. Peng, N.-N. Zhang, H.-H. Si, C.-S. Liu and M. Du, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 265, 104–109 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Yang, X. Xiong, G. Chen, M. Huang, J.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Liu and K. Huang, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 16, 344–353 CrossRef .
J. L. Ma, J. B. Wen, Q. A. Li and Q. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14896–14902 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Ma, F. Z. Ren, G. X. Wang, Y. Xiong, Y. Q. Li and J. B. Wen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11654–11661 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Jianda Wang and Xiao Xiao contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Huan Pang	Huan Pang received his Ph. D. degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He is now a university distinguished professor in Yangzhou University. In the past 10 years, his group has been engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially for MOF-based materials. He is on the editorial board of FlatChem and managing editor of EnergyChem, Elsevier. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewing journals including Nature Catalysis, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy Environ. Sci., Advanced Materials, with 7600 citations (H-index = 53). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.
1/2O2 (gas) + 2e− (solid) ⇔ O2− (solid)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Universal crystal structures of CeO2: (A) triclinic phase; (B) tetragonal phase; (C) cubic crystal phase (fluorite structure).	 

 	Fig. 2  Catalyst development strategies. Schematic of various catalyst development strategies, which aim to increase the number of active sites and/or increase the intrinsic activity of each active site.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the MOR electrocatalytic mechanism on the surface of the Pd/Co–CeO2 nanocomposite catalyst in alkaline media; (B) TEM images of CeO2−x NPs, and the inset is schematic illustration of the electrooxidation mechanism of the CH3CHO intermediate on the Pd-around-CeO2−x hybrid nanostructure; (C) STEM image of a-Au/CeOx–RGO, and the inset is the photograph of a-Au/CeOx–RGO suspended in water; (D) TEM and (E) HRTEM images of Cu–CeO2-3.9. (F) HAADF-STEM image and (G) EDS elemental mapping images of Cu–CeO2-3.9. (A) Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (B) reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (C) reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH; (D–G) reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Comparison of CVs at CeO2 (30%)/Nano-ZSM-5/GCE, CeO2/GCE, and Nano-ZSM-5/GCE in the presence of 0.5 M methanol in 0.5 M NaOH solution at the scan rate of 50 mV s−1; (B) the changes of specific peak current densities of the Pt/CeO2/PANI THNRAs, Pt/PANI HNRAs, Pt/CeO2 HNRAs and commercial Pt/C catalysts with increasing cycle number; (C) CVs at CeO2 (30%)/Nano-ZSM-5/GCE in the presence of different concentrations of methanol in 0.5 M NaOH solution at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1; (D) representative microscopy images of CeO2-based MOR catalysts (reproduced with permission from ref. 112, 121, 122, 135 and 139). (A and C) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (B) reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 



OER

RuO2/CeO2	Wet impregnation method (forms a large number of defects)	A 2.38 (0.1 M KOH)	Defective CeO2 is decorated with nano-sized RuO2 (3–5 nm)	The increase in activity and stability stems from the formation of highly oxidized oxygen species O22−/O− in defective CeO2	
74

CeO2@PIZA-1-400	Epitaxial encapsulation approach (can tune the thicknesses and calcination temperatures)	A 370 (0.1 M KOH)	The homodispersed CeO2 encapsulated cobalt-porphyrin network derived thin film	CeO2 has high oxygen storage and release capacity	
68

Ce–NiO-E	Sol–gel method (reduce catalyst particle size)	A 382	NiO was embedded of CeO2 clusters	Embedding small sized CeO2 clusters into the host for the specific surface area and richer surface defects	
84

C 118.7
CeO2/CoSe2 (NBs)	Polyol reduction method (a heterogeneous nucleation process)	A 44	CeO2/CoSe2 nanobelt composite	The relatively small CeO2 NPs could decrease the lattice constant and create more oxygen vacancies	
101

B 1.394
C 0.288 (0.1 M KOH)
CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF (3D foam)	Colloidal synthesis method (still kept particle morphology with high crystallization)	B 0.24	CeO2 NPs were anchored on the Ni(OH)2/NOSCF substrate	CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF has higher transfer efficiency from NiII to NiIII/IV and larger charge capacity	
117

C 57 (1 M KOH)
FeOOH/CeO2 (NTs)	Electrodeposition method (supported on NF)	A 300	FeOOH/CeO2 HLNTs supported on NF (lengths: ∼2 μm; diameters: ∼330 nm)	The HLNTs structure will provide efficient diffusion paths for electrolyte ions	
126

B 0.21
C 92.3 (1.0 M NaOH)
Ni0.3Fe0.07Co0.2Ce0.43Ox	
	C 80 (1.0 M NaOH)	
	
	
127

CeOx/CoS	
In situ generation method (can effectively catalyze water oxidation)	A 269	Abundant mesoporous (range: 2–6 nm)	The formation of protective CeOx thin layer can effectively inhibit its corrosion by losing co3+ from the active surface into solution	
240

B 50
Ni4Ce1@CP	Hydrothermal method (generate more abundant intimate hydroxide)	A 220	NixCey NSs grow on CP with the 3D open structure (the crystal size of CeO2: ∼4.5 nm)	Strong electronic interaction with interfaces of intimate Ni(OH)2–CeO2	
62

B 81.9 (1.0 M KOH)


ORR

Au–GDC (NTs)	Hydrolyze method (improves the connection between Au and GDC)	(0.1 M KOH)	NTs (wall thickness: ∼25 nm; length: 1.5–2.0 um)	The maximum interaction between Au NPs and GDC nanotube support	
69

Co3O4–CeO2/C	Two-step hydrothermal method (guarantee the best catalytic activity)	C 83.9	NPs	Using CeO2 as catalyst promoter	
81

CeO2/δ-MnO2 (NSs)	Hydrothermal method (provides high oxygen solubility)	(1 M LiClO4)	The δ-MnO2 with ultrafine CeO2 nanocrystals decorated on it (the crystal size of CeO2: ∼5 nm)	Highly efficient co-catalytic ability and the desirable graphene like architecture	
80

Pt–CeOx/C (NWs)	Carbonate precipitation method (keep wire-like structure)	C 61 (0.5 M H2SO4)	NWs (CeO2 NPs: ∼4.0 nm)	Formation of Frenkel defect clusters and Schottky defect clusters at the Pt–CeOx NW hetero-interface	
84

CeGS (sandwich structured)	One-step solvothermal method (offers numerous anchoring and nucleation sites for CeO2)	B 0.02	The uniform, thin crystalline CeO2 film coating RGO nanoflake composite (CeO2 NPs: 5–15 nm)	The unique structure and valence state of the CeO2 component provides feasible conditions	
128

C 111 (0.1 M KOH)
MnOx–CeO2/ketjenblack (hybrid)	Hydrothermal method (the homogeneous distribution with intimate contacted on the KB matrix)	C 94.4 (0.1 M KOH)	Particle sizes of CeO2 and Mn3O4 are in 4–8 nm	Combine MnOx with CeO2 NPs on low cost commercial conductive ketjenblack carbon to provide synergistic effects	
129

La0.7Sr0.3MnO3–CeO2 (hybrid)	One-pot method (the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 particles are well distributed on the flower-like CeO2)	B 0.881	Flower-like CeO2 (diameter: ∼3 μm)	The interface contact between the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 and CeO2	
130

C 71 (0.1 M KOH)
Mn0.3Ce0.7O2	Co-precipitation method (the incorporation effectively inhibit the crystalline growth)	(6 M KOH)	NPs	Effective activation of molecular oxygen over the solid solution and higher surface area	
78

MnOx@CeO2 (NRs)	
In situ redox reaction (preserve the pristine structure)	B 2.76 (0.1 M KOH)	NRs (average diameter: ∼50 nm; length: ∼500 nm)	Easy shift with between reduced and oxidized states	
131

Pt–CeO2/C (NPs)	Continuous two-step method (employing high temperatures and high pressures)	B 0.974	NPs (3–5 nm)	CeO2 could provide additional oxygen to Pt active sites	
82

C 65.5
0.1 M KOH
ZDC	Assisted solution combustion reaction (overcoming the instability of carbonate electrolyte)	
	Powders (pore size: 30–200 nm)	The carbon support and the high electro catalytic activity provided the fast kinetics of electron transport	

Ce-HPCNs (NSs)	Aqueous solution-mediated method (the high content of Ce3+ facilitates the formation of more)	B 0.923	Leaf like porous carbon NSs	The co-existence of a Ce4+ and Ce3+ redox couple improve the O2 adsorption capability	
132

C 91 (0.1 M KOH)
Ag–CeO2 (NSs)	Two step method (increased the quantity of the microspheres)	B 0.907	Ag NPs decorated on nanosheet constructing porous CeO2 (diameter of Ag NPs: 30–50 nm)	The unique morphology of Ag–CeO2 enhanced the dispersibility of the Ag NPs with the increased specific area	
133

C 96 (0.1 M KOH)


MOR

CeO2/Nano-ZSM-5	Calcination method (promote the cooperative assembly of inorganic/co-polymer mesostructures)	
	Mesoporous structure (2–8 nm)	Large surface area and inter-crystalline mesopores	
122

Pt/C–CeO2	Microwave-assisted ethylene glycol method (overall procedure does not require complicated steps)	(0.5 M H2SO4)	Mesoporous CeO2 coated with carbon (the pore-size mainly between 2 and 50 nm)	The increased electron conductivity and the decreased dissolution-corrosion	
116

Pt–CeOx/C (NWs)	Alco-thermal method (can make useful nano-reactor space)	
	NWs (length of approximately 35 nm)	Selection of an active Pt complex for formation of a large amount of Pt–CeOx interface	
54

CeO2/RGO/Pt	Hydrothermal method (CeO2 NPs are wrapped by a thin but rough-surfaced membrane)	
	Sandwich nanostructure (CeO2: octahedral structure: ∼200 nm in size)	The rigid structure of CeO2 and excellent electronic conductivity of RGO	
118

CeO2-HP	Polymer-assisted hydrothermal (with controlled surface morphology/microstructure)	(1 M KOH)	Shuttle-shaped (∼6.8 nm)	Effect of the high surface area and larger size and number of surface oxygen vacancy clusters	
134

Pt/CeO2/PANI	(Perfect inosculations of compositional and geometrical advantages)	B 0.5	Three-layered hollow nanorod arrays (diameters: ∼400 nm)	Synergistic effects and the special three-layered hollow nanorod arrays	
121

Pd/Co–CeO2	Thermal decomposition method (homogenously dispersed on a carbon support)	
	Dots	Electronic interaction between the CeO2 dots and Pd	
135

Pt/Ce0.7Mo0.3O2−x	Solvothermal method (did not employ any surfactant or stabilizer)	(0.5 M HCl)	Nanoparticles (an average size of about 6.3 nm)	Mo or MoOx improves the CO tolerance of the anode catalyst	
136

Pt/Ce0.8Sn0.2O2−x–C	Solvothermal method (doping with appropriate dopants increase the concentration of oxygen vacancies)	(1 M NaOH)	Triple junction structure	Possesses a high specific surface area, an enhanced conductivity and a high oxygen storage capacity	
113

CeO2·xH2O/Pt/CNT (NTs)	
tert-Butylamine-assisted solvothermal method (maintains the connection)	C 122 (1.0 M KOH)	CeO2·xH2O NPs dispersed on the carbon nanotube	The adsorbed hydroxyl to activate the O–H and C–H bonds of the alcohol	
137

N-doped Pt/CeO2 (NPs)	(Construct a N-doped carbon layer)	
	NPs	The pyridine-like and pyrrole-like nitrogen with the enhanced p-bonding in N-doped carbon layers	
119

Pd/CeO2/graphene (hybrid)	Green method (the in situ growth of Pd NPs around CeO2 NPs)	
	Pd NPs were selectively grown around CeO2 NPs supported on graphene	The large specific surface area and 2Dl planar conjugation structure	
112

Fe3O4@CeO2/Pt (microspheres)	Sol-immobilization method (uniformly distributed on the surface of the oxide microspheres)	(0.5 M KOH)	Dual heterostructural nanocrystal (300–350 nm)	Dual-heterostructural features favor reactant diffusion and active sites exposure	
138



EOR

Pd/(Pd–CeO2@C) (core-sheath NWs)	Solvothermal method (surfactant-free and template-free)	(1.0 M KOH)	A uniform carbon sheath with a thickness of 1–2 nm tightly coated on the surface of Pd–CeO2 NWs	The superior oxygen species releasing capability by accelerating the removal of the poisoning	
139



HER

Ni/CeO2–RGO	Chemical reduction procedure (inhibits the nickel grain growth)	C 107 (1 M KOH)	CeO2 incorporation effect on the size of the Ni NPs (almost 12 nm in the presence of ceria)	The presence of an optimized CeO2 content in the composite support leading to a reduction in the Ni NPs size	
95

CoP–CeO2/Ti	Selective phosphidation method (only transforms Co3O4 into CoP)	A 43	NSs	The decreased water adsorption and optimal hydrogen adsorption free energies	
97

C 45 (1 M KOH)
Ru0/CeO2	(At room temperature)	A 47	Nanopowder (Ru0 NPs supported on CeO2, average particle size: ∼25 nm)	CeO2 supported metal NPs provide outstanding catalytic activity and stability	
104

C 41 (0.5 M H2SO4)
CeO2–Cu3P/NF	Hydrothermal method (NF provides a high specific surface area and electrical conductivity)	A 148	Nanosheet array	NF has a 3D interconnected bi-continuous macroscopic porous structure	
105

C 132 (1.0 M KOH)
Ni/CeO2–CNT	Solvation segregation method (particle size control)	A 153 (1.0 M KOH)	NTs (CeO2 NPs size: ∼7 nm)	Synergistic effects including strong metal/oxide interactions	
102



HOR

Pd/C–CeO2	
	C 66 (0.1 M KOH)	Pd deposits on support of CeO2 and Vulcan XC-72	The weakening of the bonding of the adsorbed hydrogen enhance the kinetics	
110



NRR

a-Au/CeOx–RGO	Coreduction method (transfer the crystallized Au into the amorphous one)	Faradaic efficiency (10.10%)	The amorphous Au NPs anchored on bisubstrate of CeOx–RGO (Au with average size: ∼5 nm)	The obtained amorphous catalyst have the priority features of high performance and low-loaded noble metal	
100

BVC-A	Single spinneret electrospinning method (amorphous Bi4V2O11-crystalline)	Faradaic efficiency: 10.16%	Nanocrystal	CeO2 induce the amorphous structure and establishes band alignment	
99

CeO2 (NRs)	(Oxygen vacancies achieves a greatly enhanced NRR activity)	Faradaic efficiency: 3.7%	Nanorods (diameter: 100–200 nm)	Exposed Ce3+ act as surface catalysis sites for catalytic reaction intermediates	
238

Cu–CeO2-3.9 (NRs)	Hydrothermal method (mesoporous structure shows high electrocatalytic activity)	Faradaic efficiency: 19.1%	Nanorods (diameter: ∼20 nm)	Cu-substituted CeO2 is electrocatalytic active sites for N2 adsorption and activation	
239


 	Fig. 5  (A) Illustration of fabricating BVC-C and BVC-A NRR electrocatalyst; (B) yield of NH3 with different electrocatalysts at −0.2 V versus RHE at atmospheric pressure and room temperature; (C) yield of NH3 (red) and faradaic efficiency (blue) at each given potential; (D) Tafel slopes of Ni@CP, Ni8Ce1@CP, Ni4Ce1@CP and Ni2Ce1@CP; (E) the diagram of NixCey@CP electrocatalyst; (F) schematic illustration of the synthesis of the CeO2/CoSe2 nanobelt composite by the facile polyol reduction method and the SEM image of CeO2/CoSe2 nanobelt; (G) schematic synthesis strategy for creating nanoscale Ni/CeO2 interfaces on CNTs; (H) the volcano plot of the experimentally measured exchange current density versus the DFT calculated HBE for Ni/CeO2–CNT (blue star), commercial Pt/C (green star) and common metal catalysts (black squares), data collected from ref. 98. (I) The microstructure of FeOOH/CeO2 HLNTs–NF electrocatalyst; (J) the SEM image of FeOOH/CeO2 HLNTs–NF. (A) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (B and C) reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (D and E) reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (F) reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; (G and H) reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (I and J) reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Tafel curves for the NOSCF, CeO2/NOSCF, Ni(OH)2/NOSCF, CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF and the benchmark Ir/C electrocatalyst; (B) CV curves of Ni(OH)2/NOSCF and CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF; (C) CV curves (under saturated oxygen in 50 mM PBS solution with a scan rate of 1 mV s−1) of Ce-species/NSC-x (x = 800, 850, 900, 950 and 1000) and Pt/C; (D) representative microscopy images of CeO2-based OER and ORR electrocatalysts (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, 8, 62, 72, 85, 122 and 132). (A and B) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
CeO2 ⇔ CeO2−x + x/2O2	(2)

 	Fig. 7  (A) TEM image (I) and HRTEM images (II) of CeO2/δ-MnO2; (B) schematic illustration of the working mechanism of Li–O2 cells with CeO2/δ-MnO2 cathode; (C) schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hybrid nanostructure CeOx/CoS; (D) the SEM and TEM images for precursor CoS (I and II) and for 14.6% CeOx/CoS (III and IV); (E) TEM images of CeO2 and CeO2/CePO4@N,P–C (I and II), (F) formation process for CeO2/CePO4@N,P–C. (A and B) Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (C and D) reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (E and F) reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 


Increasing number of active sites

Nanostructured materials	Pt–CeOx/C NWs	
54

Au–GDC NTs	
69

CeO2/δ-MnO2 NSs	
80

Pt–CeOx/C NWs	
84

CoP–CeO2/Ti NSs	
97

CeO2/CoSe2 NBs	
101

Ni/CeO2–CNT NTs	
102

CeO2–Cu3P/NF NSs	
105

CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF 3D foam	
117

Pt/CeO2/PANI THNRAs	
121

Sandwich structure CeGS	
128

MnOx@CeO2 NRs	
131

Ce-HPCNs NSs	
132

Ag–CeO2 NSs	
133

Shuttle-shaped CeO2-HP	
134

Pd/Co–CeO2 dots	
135

CeO2·xH2O/Pt/CNT NTs	
137

Pd/(Pd–CeO2@C) NWs	
139

CeO2 NRs	
238

Cu–CeO2-3.9 NRs	
239

Supported materials	RuO2/CeO2	
74

a-Au/CeOx–RGO	
100

Ru0/CeO2	
104

Pt/C–CeO2	
113

Pt/C–CeO2	
116

Amorphous materials	(Ni–Fe–Co–Ce)Ox	
65

Ni0.3Fe0.07Co0.2Ce0.43Ox	
67

Coated materials	Mn0.3Ce0.7O2	
78

Co3O4–CeO2/C	
81

MnOx@CeO2	
137



Increase the intrinsic activity of each active site

Doped materials	Ce-species/NSC	
86

CeO2/CePO4	
91

Ni/CeO2–CNT	
102

N-doped Pt/CeO2	
119

Mo-doped CeO2	
236

Hybrid materials	BVC-A	
99

Pd-encircling CeO2−x	
112

CeOx/CoS	
240


 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the selective phosphidation in the CoP–CeO2 catalyst synthesis and the catalytic process; (B) a schematic diagram to illustrate the preparation process of CeO2–Cu3P/NF and illustration of water dissociation and H2 generation. (A) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (B) reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  The reaction mechanism diagram and equations of OER, ORR, HOR, HER, MOR, EOR and NRR are presented, and introduce the promotion strategy and main challenges.	 

MOR/EOR	High methanol/ethanol oxidation kinetics on the electrocatalyst	Conventional anodic catalysts are susceptible to CO poisoning	Design the Pt and metal oxides co-catalyst for methanol/ethanol electrooxidation
NRR	The electrocatalyst that activate N2 to optimize electrocatalytic center	Low yields of NH3 and harsh reaction conditions expensive electrolytes	Design the amorphous electrocatalyst to improve the catalytic activity
ORR	High catalytic activity at the cathode	Poor rate capability and high charge/discharge overpotentials	Develop doped/nanostructured electrocatalyst
OER	A lower overpotential	Large anodic overpotential	Prepare electrocatalyst with high specific area to reduce overpotential
HER	High reaction rate and small applied overpotential	Adsorption and desorption of hydrogen atoms on the catalyst surface are not easy to balance	Lower the ΔGH of the electrocatalyst
HOR	Outstanding hydrogen oxidation reaction kinetics	Sluggish kinetics of electrocatalysts	Develop novel anode catalyst structures
Footnote
† Jianda Wang and Xiao Xiao contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
