Orientation of photosystem I on graphene through cytochrome c 553 leads to improvement in photocurrent generation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA02420K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA02420K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18615-18626Orientation of photosystem I on graphene through cytochrome c553 leads to improvement in photocurrent generation†

        
          
            Małgorzata 
            Kiliszek‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ersan 
            Harputlu‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Marcin 
            Szalkowski‡
c, 
      
        
          
            Dorota 
            Kowalska
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            C. Gokhan 
            Unlu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Patrycja 
            Haniewicz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mateusz 
            Abram
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kamil 
            Wiwatowski
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Joanna 
            Niedziółka-Jönsson
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Sebastian 
            Maćkowski
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Kasim 
            Ocakoglu
          
        
      *bf and 

        
          
            Joanna 
            Kargul
          
        
      *a
aCentre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Banacha 2C, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: j.kargul@uw.edu.pl
bAdvanced Technology Research & Application Center, Mersin University, Ciftlikkoy Campus, TR33343, Yenisehir, Mersin, Turkey. E-mail: kasim.ocakoglu@mersin.edu.tr
cInstitute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Grudziądzka 5, 87-100 Torun, Poland. E-mail: mackowski@fizyka.umk.pl
dDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, Pamukkale University, TR-20070 Denizli, Turkey
eInstitute of Physical Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224 Warsaw, Poland
fDepartment of Energy Systems Engineering, Mersin University, Tarsus Faculty of Technology, 33480 Mersin, Turkey
Received 
      15th March 2018
    , Accepted 28th August 2018First published on 29th August 2018AbstractWe report the fabrication of an oriented bioelectrode of photosystem I (PSI) on single-layer graphene (SLG). This bioelectrode demonstrates improved photocurrent generation, which can be directly attributed to the molecular conductive interface formed by cytochrome c553 (cyt c553) promoting the uniform orientation of PSI with its donor side towards the electrode. The conductive interface between PSI-cyt c553 and SLG is facilitated by a monolayer composed of π–π-stacked pyrene functionalized with the Ni-NTA moiety, which binds the His6-tagged cyt c553. The surface uniformity of the PSI protein orientation in the electrode structure is evidenced by cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy and fluorescence microscopy, with the latter also proving the efficient electronic coupling between majority of the PSI complexes and graphene. With the uniform organization of the biological photoactive layer, photocurrents are generated at the open circuit potential, which can be further increased when a negative potential is applied. Indeed, at the highest applied negative potential (−0.3 V), over 5-fold increase in the cathodic photocurrent for the PSI complexes conjugated via cyt c553 to the SLG substrate is observed compared with that obtained for the randomly oriented structure where PSI is physisorbed on graphene. These results indicate the key role of a strictly defined orientation of photoactive proteins on electrodes for proper electron transfer and substantial improvement in photocurrent generation in the present or similar bioelectrode architectures.
Introduction
The photosystem I (PSI) pigment–protein complex is present in the thylakoid membranes of cyanobacteria, algae, and higher plants, where it operates with an internal quantum yield close to unity for the generation of the primary charge separation state.1,2 This feature makes PSI one of the most efficient light-harvesting macromolecular machines for incorporation into devices for artificial solar energy conversion. Accordingly, PSI has been applied in many model systems to study the highly efficient photochemical conversion of light into current,3 and in some cases, solar fuels such as hydrogen.2,4 In particular, extremophilic PSI complexes such as those from thermophilic cyanobacteria and acido-thermophilic red microalgae are robust and highly abundant; thus, they have been considered as the component of choice for the construction of biohybrid photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices.5–13
One of the key requirements in applying biological macromolecules such as PSI into efficient energy-converting devices is the appropriate interface assembly between the protein and the electrode, which ensures the optimal electronic communication between both modules. Because of the anisotropy of the electron transfer within the PSI complex, it is essential to ensure the optimal orientation of PSI with respect to the electrode surface for efficient electron transfer. In particular, for random assemblies, where there is no control of the orientation of the PSI protein on the electrode, the overall efficiency of the device is compromised, often substantially.6,7
The most common strategies to obtain highly homogeneous PSI deposition on electrodes include molecular wiring of PSI with the functionalized electrode surface (e.g.ref. 8 and 9) and genetic engineering of PSI to incorporate affinity tags10 or metal binding peptides11 into its structure. Recently, fine-tuning of the electrostatic interactions between PSI complexes and the electrode surface was used for the oriented binding of this complex on a hematite n-type semiconductor substrate. Accordingly, Ocakoglu et al. constructed a PSI-based photoanode, in which the orientation of the PSI complexes was driven by pH-controlled electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged reducing side of PSI and positively charged hematite surface.13 In addition, it has also been shown that PSI complexes can be oriented on electrodes by employing direct intermolecular interaction between PSI and its natural electron donor, cytochrome c553 (cyt c553). This approach yielded a well-defined and homogenous assembly of PSI with an enhanced absorption cross-section via plasmonic excitation in the metallic nanostructures.14 Notably, manipulation of the distance/orientation between the redox-active heme group of cyt c553 and a p-doped Si electrode surface was also critical for optimizing the performance of all-solid state mediatorless devices.15
Since its discovery in 2004, graphene and its derivatives16,17 have attracted considerable attention worldwide due to their unique properties, which include being an efficient acceptor of energy in various architectures, such as graphene/semiconductors, graphene/polymers, and graphene/light-harvesting complexes.18–24 Furthermore, its two-dimensionality, mechanical strength, transparency, elasticity, flat large sp2-hybridized carbon lattice, excellent electrical and heat conductivity, and amenability for attaching functional groups offer great potential for the use of graphene as a substrate for energy conversion systems. This includes the fabrication of flexible and robust photoelectrodes and biosensors by attaching graphene, and possibly ordering (photo)electroactive proteins on graphene for an improved power output.25–30
The atomic thickness of the graphene lattice facilitates access to immobilized redox active sites, thus enhancing electronic communication with redox active proteins and the regeneration of their active sites through either direct or mediated electron transfer.31–33 Moreover, the transparency of graphene enables photovoltaic effects to be tested while using various external redox mediators and illuminating samples through both the electrode and the mediator.34 Cyclic voltammetry has been used to indicate the effective device areas and the redox reactions on single-layer graphene (SLG) and bulk graphite.35 According to these studies, redox reactions occur on clean, well-defined areas of SLG surfaces, and the electron transfer rates at SLG electrodes were found to be more than 10-fold faster than that at the basal plane of bulk graphite, which is ascribed to the corrugations in the graphene sheets.
Recently, several PSI–graphene photovoltaic devices have been reported with measured photocurrents in the nA to μA range via mediated electron transfer. The first PSI–graphene devices were prepared by directly drop-casting a PSI solution onto graphene electrodes, resulting in photocurrents in the nA cm−2 range in this proof-of-concept approach.36 The photocurrent output was improved through the formation of a PSI multilayer on reduced graphene oxide and application of various exogenous electron transport mediators, yielding current densities in the range of 1–140 μA cm−2, depending on the exogenous mediator and electrode substrate used.34,37 A more elaborate interfacing approach was reported by Feifel et al., in which a PSI complex was self-assembled on a π–π-modified graphene surface, resulting in photocurrents as high as 23 μA cm−2 at the open circuit potential.38 Notably, their study showed that the generated photocurrents were strongly dependent on the type of pyrene derivatives used for electrode surface modification and the mode of binding of PSI, where covalent bonding between the NHS-ester group of the π-5 pyrene derivative and a side chain lysine of PSI yielded the highest photocurrent values.38
Herein, we report the assembly of a highly organized PSI-based graphene photoelectrode on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate. The conductive interface between the photoactive PSI layer and graphene electrode is formed by an organic monolayer composed of π–π-stacked pyrene functionalized with nitrilotriacetic acid chelated to Ni2+ cations (Ni-NTA). Upon specific conjugation of the His6-tagged cyt c553 monolayer with the graphene–pyrene-Ni-NTA FTO electrode, the PSI photoactive layer is incorporated in an oriented manner, i.e., with its donor (P700) side towards the electrode, taking the advantage of the intermolecular interaction between PSI and cyt c553. Both the uniformity of the structure and strength of the electronic interactions between the PSI complexes and graphene are carefully evaluated via fluorescence microscopy and spectroscopy. Our electrochemical analysis results show the mediatorless generation of cathodic photocurrents on the FTO-graphene conductive substrate even at an open circuit potential, which can be further increased by the application of a negative potential. These results indicate that the specifically achieved oriented immobilization of PSI results in improved electron transfer and yields larger photocurrent values.
Materials and methods
Preparation of single-layer graphene and its transfer on to the FTO substrate
Single-layer graphene (SLG) was produced on a Cu foil via chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and then transferred onto an FTO substrate (1.5 × 1.5 cm2) (Fig. S1†). The obtained SLG on FTO was analyzed via Raman scattering spectroscopy (Fig. S2†).39–41 The intactness of the SLG monolayer on the FTO surface was confirmed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM), polarized light microscopy, and atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. S3–S7, see ESI† for details).
Functionalization of the graphene surface with nitrilotriacetic acid-pyrene
Nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA)-pyrene was synthesized as described in ref. 42 For the modification of the graphene sheet via π–π stacking interactions, a solution of 3 μL of 2 mM pyrene-NTA in N,N-dimethylmethanamide (DMF) was deposited on the SLG surface. After 1 h incubation, the NTA-pyrene/SLG/FTO substrate was rinsed thoroughly with DMF, and then incubated with 100 mM NiSO4 in Milli-Q water for 1 h to coordinate Ni2+ cations with the NTA-pyrene moiety on the SLG film.43,44 The samples (denoted as NiNTA/SLG) were analyzed via XPS spectroscopy to confirm the formation of the Ni-NTA-pyrene layers on the SLG surface (Fig. S8†).
Purification of cytochrome c553 and photosystem I
Purification of crude PSI from the extremophilic red microalga Cyanidioschyzon merolae was performed using a 3 step-anion-exchange chromatography approach, as described in ref. 13 and 45. Expression and purification of the 12-amino acid linker cyt c553 variant (12AA cyt c553) from E. coli cells were conducted using the procedure reported by Janna Olmos et al.15
Biofunctionalization of the SLG electrode
The biophotoelectrode was prepared by incubating Ni-NTA-pyrene/SLG/FTO with 30 μM 12 AA cyt c553 in 5 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7) for 2 h at room temperature. After removal of the unbound cyt c553 and formation of a cyt monolayer conjugated to the Ni-NTA-pyrene moiety, the cyt c553/Ni-NTA-pyrene/SLG substrate was incubated with 0.2 μM PSI in 5 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7) overnight at 4 °C in the dark, and then air-dried.38,46 A schematic of the bioconjugation of the SLG/FTO electrode with the protein modules (PSI@SLG) is shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the functionalization steps for the fabrication of the PSI@SLG electrode showing the Ni-NTA-pyrene moieties used for capturing the His6-tagged cyt c553 (PDB:1GDV47). The PSI complex (PDB: 1JB048) is oriented with its donor side towards the SLG/FTO electrode through intermolecular interactions with cyt c553. Structures are drawn not to scale. 
SEM and AFM imaging
Field emission-scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images were recorded using a Zeiss/Supra 55 FE-SEM microscope. Samples were coated with platinum before the measurements. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were performed in a non-contact mode using a Park System XE-100 SPM instrument under ambient conditions. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on a Specs-Flex mode instrument. Raman spectra were recorded using a WITec alpha300 Raman microscope.
Fluorescence measurements
Confocal fluorescence characterization of the PSI@SLG/FTO electrodes, including time- and spectrally-resolved experiments, was conducted using a home-built inverted microscope working in back-scattering geometry and based on a Nikon Ti–S body.14 Samples were excited using 485 nm light (power of 12 μW) from a diode laser directed by a beam-splitter to the objective 60×, (NA = 1.2, Nikon). Spectra were acquired for 2 s, while fluorescence decay curves were measured for 60 s. A Nikon Eclipse inverted wide-field microscope was used for collecting sets of fluorescence intensity maps. Samples were excited by LED illuminators with the following emission wavelengths: 365 nm, 405 nm, 480 nm, 535 nm, and 630 nm. Light of the illuminators was reflected off a dichroic mirror (Semrock, FF665 DiO2) to a microscope objective lens (LPlan SLWD 100×, NA = 0.70, Nikon), and the power was maintained at 100 μW for all the excitation wavelengths. Emission was extracted with band-pass filters (Thorlabs, FELH0650 and FB690-10), and detected using an Andor iXon3 EMCCD with an acquisition time of 0.5 s and EM gain of 300.
Electrochemical characterization
Photoelectrochemical measurements were conducted using a Versa STAT 3 (Princeton Applied Research) potentiostat/galvanostat in a three-electrode setup and with a KL 2500 LCD halogen white light source (Schott, Germany). For all experiments, Pt wire was used as the counter electrode (CE) and Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) as the reference electrode (REF). The PSI@SLG electrode was used as the working electrode (WE), with electrical contact provided through copper tape with conductive adhesive (6.4 mm width, 1181, RS Components Ltd., UK). As an electrolyte, phosphate buffer (5 mM, pH 7) was used. A custom-made Teflon electrochemical cell was constructed (see Fig. S9†), comprising two inlets for REF and CE, inlet/outlet for gasses and two circular windows. For all the experiments, Viton O-rings with an internal diameter of 7.30 mm were used as a contact with the electrolyte, providing the overall surface area of 0.4185 cm2 for all the samples. The WE had an area of about 1 × 1 cm2. For the chronoamperometric experiments, all the samples were illuminated with 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) light under aerobic conditions at room temperature. The open circuit potential (OCP) was recorded both in the dark and under illumination (typically 60 s). Photochronoamperometric measurements were conducted using different potentials (vs. REF/OCP), typically with 30 s ‘light ON/OFF’ periods. For each chronoamperometric measurement, the OCP was recorded once the potential was stabilized. All cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were conducted on an FTO electrode in argon-saturated electrolyte (5 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7) under dark conditions. The CV results were obtained versus an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, in the absence of exogenous artificial mediators.
Results and discussion
Intact single-layer graphene on FTO substrate
As the first step, we developed and optimized a simple method for attaching Ni-NTA-functionalized pyrene groups to large-area CVD graphene without diminishing the structure of graphene. Our SLG electrode design was aimed at overcoming two main sources of performance limitations of the current biophotovoltaic technology: poor coverage of photoactive proteins and non-uniform orientation of photoactive proteins with respect to the electrode surface (discussed in ref. 49).
The structural properties of CVD graphene synthesized on a Cu substrate and transferred onto FTO were characterized via Raman scattering spectroscopy, which allows to determine the number of graphene layers, the density of possible defects in the structure, and the presence of undesirable impurities. Fig. S2† presents the typical Raman spectrum of SLG on the FTO substrate. The D, G and 2D peaks were identified upon excitation of SLG on FTO substrate at 488 nm, and were observed at 1361, 1588 and 2688 cm−1, respectively (see Fig. S2†). The ratio of the D band to the G band, which is commonly used to assess the quality of a graphene layer, was 0.15, which implies a low number of defects in the π-system and the high quality of SLG transferred onto the FTO substrate.50,51 Therefore, the Raman scattering spectroscopy results confirm the successful synthesis of a high-quality defect-free graphene structure since the intensity of the D band is very low. Moreover, the sharp and symmetrical 2D band in conjunction with the high 2D/G peak ratio of 1.9 (Fig. S2†) confirms the formation of SLG in our system.39–41
The SEM and light microscopy analyses confirm that SLG completely covered the surface of the FTO substrate (see Fig. S3 and S4†). Furthermore, as indicated by the AFM analysis of the SLG/FTO electrode (see Fig. S6 and S7†), the deposition of graphene substantially reduced the roughness of the electrode surface.
Pyrene monolayer as the conductive interface
Chemical modification of graphene renders the normally inert graphene chemically sensitive. However, the appropriate approach toward SLG functionalization is crucial for its ultimate application. Covalent modification may lead to the destruction of the unsaturated structure of graphene, while non-covalent methods are believed to protect its inherent structure and physico-electrochemical properties. Non-covalent modification of graphene is usually beneficial for preserving the electrical conductivity of this material. Conversely, for maintaining the inherent mechanical stability of graphene, covalent modification is the preferred approach.52 One of the most effective methods of preserving the unique properties of graphene is to assemble non-covalent functional structures with common molecules containing π-systems, such as pyrene and its derivatives, to form a molecular conductive interface between the catalytic modules and graphene monolayer.43,53 This class of molecules has proven to be successful for the integration and preservation of the activity of redox-active catalysts, such as water-splitting Cu catalysts,54 as well as promoting energy and charge transfer between graphene and visible-light harvesting photosensitizers, such as phthalocyanine and porphyrin,53,55 and light harvesting/charge separating proteins, including PSI.38 We recently showed through combined theoretical calculations and electrochemical analysis that the formation of a Ni-NTA-pyrene self-assembled monolayer (SAM) enforces direct electron transfer from graphene to the SAM, with the directionality of electron flow affected by the presence of Ni2+ cations.56
The integration of the Ni-NTA-pyrene moiety on SLG was confirmed in the present study via XPS measurements, where the C 1s and N 1s contribution from the pyrene and graphene structures was identified (Fig. S8†). Based on the results, the very low level of oxides as well as the relatively small amount of sp3-hybridized carbon indicate the high quality of the Ni-NTA-pyrene/SLG/FTO substrate.43,57
Construction and structural characterization of PSI–graphene photoelectrodes
The photoactive protein that we implemented in the design of the photoelectrode was the robust PSI complex from the extremophilic red microalga Cyanidioschyzon merolae. The C. merolae PSI is characterized by exceptional stability and photochemical activity across a range of extreme pH, temperatures and light intensity conditions.13,45 Considering photochemistry of PSI, upon absorption of photons by the P700 reaction center (Em = +0.43 eV) composed of 2 Chl a molecules, the highly reducing excited state P700* is formed (Em = −1.3 eV), which then rapidly undergoes oxidization to P700+, followed by electron transfer from the conserved redox cofactor system involving 4 additional Chl a molecules, 2 phylloquinones, and 3 iron-sulfur [4Fe–4S] clusters. The final electron acceptor FB is formed by the iron–sulfur cluster coordinated by the Cys residues of the PsaC subunit on the acceptor side of PSI.48 The potential difference between the primary electron donor P700* and the terminal electron acceptor FB− is about 1 V, which corresponds to a thermodynamic efficiency of nearly 60%.6
The reduction of the positive hole P700+ on the donor side of PSI used in this study occurs through the specific interaction of this complex with the red algal mobile electron carrier cyt c553, which is a Type-I cytochrome and a close homolog of cyt c6.15,47 The intermolecular interaction between PSI and cyt c553 is highly domain-specific and occurs through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions between both protein partners in the vicinity of the P700 primary donor. These electrostatic interactions are due to the positive excess net-charge of cyt c553 and prominent negative net-charge at the lumenal side of PSI.58,59
Our working hypothesis was that the π-modification of SLG with Ni-NTA-pyrene moieties coordinated to a His6-tagged cyt c553 conductive monolayer will orient PSI with its oxidizing (P700) side towards the functionalized SLG electrode and promote unidirectional electron transfer from SLG to the photoactivated PSI. To verify this hypothesis, the π-modified SLG surface was conjugated with PSI complexes through domain-specific interactions with the natural electron donor of PSI, cyt c553, to which a His6 tag was genetically engineered at the C-terminus.15 In this configuration, cyt c553 was specifically bound with the Ni-NTA-pyrene moiety through its His6 tag, which formed coordination bonds with the Ni2+ cation present within the NTA structure (Fig. 1).
The CVD graphene-supported electrodes, namely, Ni-NTA-pyrene/SLG/FTO (denoted as Ni-NTA/SLG) and PSI/cyt/Ni-NTA-pyrene/SLG/FTO (denoted as PSI@SLG), were characterized structurally and optically to gain insight into the actual nanoarchitecture of the device. In addition, a third photoelectrode was fabricated (PSI/Ni-NTA-pyrene/SLG/FTO, denoted as PSI + SLG), where no cyt c553 was used and thus, no control over either the orientation of the PSI protein or PSI distance to the graphene surface was expected.

Fig. 2 shows the cross-section SEM image of the PSI@SLG electrode, including the 3D organization of the PSI/cyt c553 85 nm-thick layer, which corresponds to about 6–7 PSI monolayers when taking into account the thickness of the PSI complex in the membrane plane of 10.6 nm.48 Within the multilayers, the PSI monolayer immediately adjacent to SLG, which is critical for efficient electron transfer from SLG to the photoactive module, is likely to be uniformly oriented with the P700 side of PSI oriented towards the electrode (through the specific intermolecular interaction with immobilized cyt c553). The other PSI layers of the photoactive module may display less uniform orientation, which are formed mainly due to the hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions between the PSI complexes. Nevertheless, the cross-sectional SEM image shows that the PSI protein coverage of the electrode is rather uniform, which likely improves the overall performance of the device (see below).
 Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM image of the PSI@SLG electrode showing the 85 nm-thick cyt/PSI layer (schematically shown in the inset) on the SLG/FTO surface. Scale bar is 100 nm. 
Fluorescence studies of PSI–graphene photoelectrodes
To assess the homogeneity of the protein coverage and the electronic coupling (energy transfer or electron transfer) between PSI and SLG, comprehensive fluorescence imaging of the photoelectrodes was performed. Three types of structures were studied, where in addition to the PSI + SLG and PSI@SLG photoelectrodes, a reference Ni-NTA/SLG sample was measured. In each experiment, the same area of the sample was illuminated with five different excitation wavelengths (365 nm, 405 nm, 480 nm, 535 nm, and 630 nm), which could all excite the fluorescence emission of the PSI complex at approximately 690 nm. To minimize the photobleaching effect, an illumination sequence starting from the longest to the shortest wavelength was used. Examples of the fluorescence images obtained for the PSI + SLG and PSI@SLG photoelectrodes are compared in Fig. 3 for the two excitations of 480 nm and 630 nm. First, the images measured for both devices are rather uniform, with only a few brighter spots, which might correspond to PSI aggregates or small cracks in the graphene.24 For both excitations, rather homogenous coverage of PSI was observed despite the fact that the spatial resolution of the setup was around 300 nm, which is less than the lateral size of the protein (14 nm (ref. 60)). This observation is in accordance with the results of SEM imaging (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 3  Fluorescence intensity maps collected for the same sample area for excitations at 480 nm (a and c) and at 630 nm (b and d) for both the PSI + SLG (a and b) and PSI@SLG (c and d) photoelectrodes. The maps measured for the same excitation wavelength are shown in the same intensity scale. Histograms of the fluorescence intensities extracted for all the measured fluorescence intensity maps for excitation at 480 nm and 630 nm for both photoelectrodes (e and f, respectively). 
Importantly, we found no emission for the structure NiNTA/SLG, where only the organic molecules used for functionalization were present. Thus, the intensity measured for both the PSI + SLG and PSI@SLG samples originates entirely from the PSI emission. This is further confirmed by the fluorescence spectra (Fig. S10†) measured for the PSI-containing structures, which are identical to the fluorescence spectrum measured for pure PSI. The intensity scale is kept identical for the maps shown in Fig. 3, which were collected for the same excitation wavelength; therefore, the PSI@SLG photoelectrode shows substantially higher fluorescence intensities for both excitation wavelengths. The emission intensity measured for the 630 nm excitation, which corresponds to the Chl a absorption of the Qy band of PSI, is also significantly higher than that for the 480 nm excitation, which corresponds mainly to the absorption of carotenoids. Overall, in addition to rather uniform images, we find that the fluorescence intensity of the PSI@SLG electrodes collected for various excitation wavelengths corresponds to absorption spectrum of pure PSI.14 The relations between emission intensity are supported by the analysis of 30 sets of fluorescence images, from which intensity histograms were extracted, as plotted in Fig. 3e and f for 480 nm and 630 nm excitation, respectively. The data shown in Fig. 3e and f is corrected for the background intensity measured at a given wavelength for the Ni-NTA/SLG structure. The average values of the emission intensity determined in this way for the PSI@SLG structure are 280 cps and 460 cps for the 480 nm and 630 nm excitation wavelengths, respectively. In contrast, for the structure where the PSI complexes were not specifically bound to the SLG surface (PSI + SLG), the values of 80 cps and 220 cps for 480 nm and 630 nm excitation wavelengths were extracted, respectively.
Considering that fluorescence intensity is associated with the interactions between the PSI complexes and graphene, the observed differences suggest that the energy transfer from the photoactive proteins to graphene is more efficient in case of the PSI + SLG photoelectrode. Detailed analysis of the dynamics of the electronic states in these structures was conducted using confocal microscopy, where in addition to fluorescence maps, emission spectra and decays were measured.

Fig. 4 shows examples of approximately 10 fluorescence decays measured for the PSI@SLG (black) and PSI + SLG (red) devices and their comparison with the transient measured for a layer of PSI complexes on glass (green). Although in both cases we observe significant shortening of the fluorescence decay of the PSI complexes deposited on the SLG surface, this effect is much more pronounced in case of the PSI + SLG photoelectrode. This qualitative relation between fluorescence decay corresponds perfectly with the relation observed for the emission intensity, assuming that the deposition of PSI complexes on SLG leads to energy transfer, where the more efficient the energy transfer, the shorter the fluorescence lifetime and the lower the emission intensity.61–64
 Fig. 4  Fluorescence decays measured for the PSI complexes in the PSI + SLG (a, red curves) and PSI@SLG (b, black curves) photoelectrodes compared to the result obtained for a layer of PSI and on a glass substrate (green). The excitation wavelength of 485 nm was used. 
Clearly, the efficiency of the energy transfer is higher for the PSI + SLG structure, where there is no specific conjugation. It can be understood by assuming that without cyt c553, the PSI complexes are physisorbed on the graphene surface; thus, the distance between them is rather small, which promotes the energy transfer. In contrast, by using cyt c553 for the specific conjugation of PSI with the SLG surface, we extend the distance, thus inhibiting the energy transfer to some degree. To estimate the decay constants, we fitted the measured transients with a three-exponential function (see Fig. S11† and Table 1). The obtained values reflect the trends observed in the data displayed in Fig. 4.
Table 1 Fluorescence decay times extracted from the measured transients. The results obtained for the PSI + SLG and PSI@SLG photoelectrodes are compared with that for a PSI layer on glass







τ
1 [ns]

τ
2 [ns]

τ
3 [ns]




PSI
4.10 ± 0.10
1.12 ± 0.12
0.14 ± 0.02


PSI + SLG
3.42 ± 1.08
0.54 ± 0.27
0.08 ± 0.03


PSI@SLG
3.11 ± 1.14
0.88 ± 0.45
0.17 ± 0.07




There is another important conclusion that can be derived from the time-resolved fluorescence experiments. Although the transients are very similar to each other within a given structure, there is essentially no long fluorescence decay observed for the PSI complexes in the photoelectrode structures. This implies that all the PSI complexes forming the photoelectrode are electronically coupled to graphene, and not only the layer that is in its vicinity. This observation suggests that similar to electronic coupling, electron transfer may also take place not only between the SLG and PSI complexes directly coupled with the graphene, but also the PSI layers that are further apart, as shown in the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 2).
Overall, the fluorescence characterization of the PSI-based photoelectrodes demonstrates remarkably uniform fluorescence quenching, indicating efficient dissipation of energy to the SLG substrate. This is much more efficient for the PSI complexes physisorbed on the SLG surface compared with the cyt c553-PSI oriented architecture, which is characterized by larger separation of PSI from SLG. Furthermore, this result indicates that essentially all the PSI layers assembled on the SLG electrode are electronically coupled to the SLG substrate, which is important for understanding the electron transfer processes between the SLG and PSI within the constructed devices.
Photoelectrochemical characterization of the PSI-based graphene photoelectrodes
The photoelectrochemical performance of the PSI@SLG electrodes was examined using chronoamperometric measurements, which were conducted using the electrodes composed of PSI complexes specifically oriented on SLG via His6-tagged cyt c553 (PSI@SLG) and PSI complexes physisorbed on SLG in a random orientation in the absence of cyt c553 (PSI + SLG). Fig. 5 shows a comparison of the electrochemical performances measured for these photoelectrodes (red and black curves, respectively) with that obtained for the Ni-NTA-pyrene/SLG/FTO structure (Ni-NTA/SLG, blue).
 Fig. 5  Photochronoamperometry results for the PSI-based SLG electrodes. Graph shows the generated current versus time for the three analyzed structures: Ni-NTA/SLG (blue), PSI + SLG (red), and PSI@SLG (black). After 2 min current stabilization at −200 mV potential under dark conditions. Photochronoamperometric signals were recorded with a 30 s illumination cycle. 
The most significant enhancement of the photocurrent density (up to 370 nA cm−2) was observed for the PSI@SLG electrode (see Fig. 6), which is consistent with our hypothesis that the specific orientation of PSI with its oxidizing side towards the SLG electrode will promote the most efficient generation of photocurrents. Indeed, the photocurrent increase is much more pronounced upon the application of a negative potential, which indicates the production of cathodic photocurrents (Fig. 6). We postulate that this specific bioelectrode configuration promotes the direction of electron flow from the SLG/FTO substrate to the photoactivated PSI layer through the conductive Ni-NTA-pyrene interface56 due to the cyt c553-driven orientation of PSI with its hole-generating side towards the electrode surface. At a negative potential of −100 mV, an average photocurrent increase of 1.5-fold was observed for the PSI@SLG electrode compared with that for the NiNTA/SLG control structure. A further increase in the negative potential (to −0.3 V) yields over 10-fold increase in the cathodic photocurrent for the photoelectrode, where the PSI complexes were specifically attached to the SLG surface compared with that in the control structure.
 Fig. 6  Photochronoamperometric performances of the PSI-based SLG electrodes. Photocurrent densities from the PSI-based SLG electrodes showing the average photocurrent densities obtained for 5 distinct configurations of SLG electrodes: PSI@SLG (black), PSI + SLG (red), NiNTA/SLG (blue), NTA/SLG (grey) and SLG (white). The photochronoamperometric measurements were conducted in the absence of artificial mediators and in the presence of dioxygen-containing phosphate buffer (as the electron acceptor). Error bars correspond to the standard deviations from two independently prepared electrodes (n = 2). 
The photocurrents obtained for the PSI-containing photoelectrodes with photoactive proteins randomly deposited on the graphene–Ni-NTA-pyrene electrode (PSI + SLG) were within the range of 10–174 nA cm−2, with the highest values obtained for the highest negative potential (−300 mV) (see Fig. 6). Upon the application of −100 mV potential and with no potential, the current densities measured for the PSI + SLG electrodes were 4-fold and 1.5-fold lower compared with that for the PSI@SLG assembly, respectively. The latter observation further strengthens our hypothesis that the specific orientation of PSI through its molecular interaction with immobilized cyt c553 is pivotal for improving the direct electron transfer properties of the PSI-based photoelectrodes, which is in contrast to the electrode configuration with a random orientation of PSI. Further details about the photochronoamperometry experiments are presented in the ESI (Fig. S14–S16†).
Overall, the results of photoelectrochemical measurements show a substantial improvement in the cathodic photocurrents in the devices where the PSI complexes were specifically bioconjugated with the graphene–Ni-NTA-pyrene monolayer. This significant difference in performance observed between the randomly oriented PSI complexes (PSI + SLG) and uniformly defined architecture (PSI@SLG) indicates the critical importance of the arrangement of all the key components in this biohybrid device. Indeed, the proper spatial organization of the photoactive proteins on the electrodes led to improvement in photocurrent generation by an order of magnitude. This conclusion is strongly supported by the reversed relation between the fluorescence intensity measured for the photoelectrodes and the measured photocurrent values. In particular, the structure that exhibits stronger excitonic coupling (PSI + SLG), i.e., higher energy transfer efficiency yields lower photocurrent values. Therefore, despite the smaller distance between the PSI complexes and SLG in case of the PSI + SLG electrode, its electron transfer efficiency is inhibited compared with that in the PSI@SLG electrode, where the conjugation via cyt c553 ensures the proper orientation of the redox-active heme in cyt c553 with respect to P700 in PSI, and consequently optimizes the whole structure for more efficient direct electron transfer.
The anodic photocurrents obtained by applying positive potential during the chronoamperometric measurements were also recorded for all the three types of electrodes to assess the directionality of the electron transfer within the devices (see Fig. 6). At +100 mV, the current densities obtained for the PSI + SLG samples were similar to the values obtained for the same photoelectrode at −100 mV (13 and 11 nA cm−2, respectively), indicating averaging of the photocurrents obtained from the randomly oriented PSI complexes. Importantly, for the highly organized PSI@SLG system, the photocurrent densities were residual at positive potentials (∼8 nA cm−2), further confirming that most of the PSI complexes were specifically oriented with the donor side towards the SLG/FTO surface.
Control of the PSI complex orientation is one of the crucial issues for improving the overall performance of the photoelectrode to minimize wasteful charge recombination and short-circuiting of electron transfer. Accordingly, the interaction between PSI and cyt c553 was recently used to generate a highly ordered PSI nanoarchitecture on plasmonic metallic nanostructures. This elegant approach allowed for the significant improvement of the optical functionality of PSI by taking advantage of the plasmonic interactions between these complexes and silver nanowires.14 Analogously, the molecular interactions between PSI and cyt c553 were also successfully applied for the construction of all-solid state mediatorless PSI-based photoelectrodes on p-doped Si substrates with improved power conversion efficiency compared to PSI-based Si electrodes devoid of cyt c553.15 Therefore, the present study can be considered as another case displaying the importance of the spatial nanoengineering of photoactive proteins on surfaces, and hence supports the pivotal role of the cyt c-PSI molecular interactions for facilitating electron transfer and improving the efficiency of solar energy conversion for optimized power output.
Conclusions
The key result of this study is the experimental demonstration of the substantial improvement in photocurrent generation in a device, where PSI complexes were assembled on SLG using their natural electron donor, cyt c553, which was used as the orienting molecule for the PSI complex. The well-defined nanoarchitecture of the photoelectrode was achieved by utilizing the Ni-NTA-pyrene moiety for cyt c553 binding and orientation of PSI with its donor (oxidizing) side towards the SLG surface. Remarkably, all the PSI layers assembled on the SLG electrode are effectively excitonically coupled to the SLG substrate, as shown by the uniform fluorescence quenching. The most efficient direct electron transfer from the SLG substrate to the PSI photoactive module was observed for the configuration of the device in which the PSI complex was specifically conjugated with the SLG substrate via immobilized cyt c553, confirming the preferential orientation of the PSI complex with its hole-generating side facing the electrode. Consequently, photoactivity was observed for the PSI@SLG system even when no potential was applied, and the current was enhanced 10-fold with an increase in negative potential. The generation of cathodic photocurrents due to the preferential orientation of the PSI complexes with their donor side towards the SLG was observed not just within the PSI monolayer adjacent to the SLG, but also in the distal PSI monolayers. Thus, the control over the orientation of the PSI photoactive module with respect to the electrode surface provides a rational approach for the significant improvement in the power output and paves the way for green biophotovoltaic technology by combining the outstanding properties of graphene with cheap and abundant natural photoactive components, such as PSI. Accordingly, this strategy is promising for the construction of photoactive complex structures with improved quantum efficiency and robustness.
Author contributions
MK, EH, MS, DK, GU, MA, PH, KW, JNJ performed the experiments covering different aspects of the research reported in this study, and analyzed the data. KO, JK, and SM conceived the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Funding sources
This research has been financially supported by the Polish National Centre for Research and Development (grant no. DZP/POLTUR-1/50/2016, agreement no. 5/POLTUR-1/2016 to JK and SM), DEC-2013/10/E/ST3/00034 project from the National Science Center of Poland, and the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey, TÜBITAK (grant no. 215M389 to KO) within the framework of 1st Bilateral Polish-Turkish POLTUR program.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Grzegorz Bubak (Institute of Physical Chemistry, PAS, Poland) for help with photoelectrochemical measurements and his comments on the manuscript.
References

          J. Kargul and J. Barber, Structure and Function of Photosynthetic Reaction Centres, in Molecular Solar Fuels, T. J. Wydrzynski and W. Hillier, ed. Royal Society of Chemistry,  2011, pp. 107–142 Search PubMed .
J. Kargul, J. D. Janna Olmos and T. Krupnik, Structure and Function of Photosystem I and Its Application in Biomimetic Solar-to-Fuel Systems, J. Plant Physiol., 2012, 169(16), 1639–1653 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nguyen and B. D. Bruce, Growing Green Electricity: Progress and Strategies for Use of Photosystem I for Sustainable Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2014, 1837(9), 1553–1566 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Janna Olmos and J. Kargul, Oxygenic Photosynthesis: Translation to Solar Fuel Technologies, Acta Soc. Bot. Pol., 2014, 83(4), 423–440 CrossRef .
C. E. Lubner, R. Grimme, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, Wiring Photosystem I for Direct Solar Hydrogen Production, Biochemistry, 2010, 49(3), 404–414 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kothe, N. Plumeré, A. Badura, M. M. Nowaczyk, D. A. Guschin, M. Rögner and W. Schuhmann, Combination of A Photosystem 1-Based Photocathode and a Photosystem 2-Based Photoanode to a Z-Scheme Mimic for Biophotovoltaic Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(52), 14233–14236 CrossRef PubMed .
E. A. Gizzie, J. S. Niezgoda, M. T. Robinson, A. G. Harris, G. K. Jennings, S. J. Rosenthal and D. E. Cliffel, Photosystem I-Polyaniline/TiO2 Solid-State Solar Cells: Simple Devices for Biohybrid Solar Energy Conversion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(12), 3572–3576 RSC .
Y. Yamanoi, N. Terasaki, M. Miyachi, Y. Inoue and H. Nishihara, Enhanced Photocurrent Production by Photosystem I with Modified Viologen Derivatives, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520(16), 5123–5127 CrossRef .
M. Miyachi, Y. Yamanoi, T. Yonezawa, H. Nishihara, M. Iwai, M. Konno, M. Iwai and Y. Inoue, Surface Immobilization of PSI Using Vitamin K1-Like Molecular Wires for Fabrication of a Bio-Photoelectrode, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9(3), 1722–1726 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Das, P. J. Kiley, M. Segal, J. Norville, A. A. Yu, L. Wang, S. A. Trammell, L. E. Reddick, R. Kumar and F. Stellacci, 
            et al., Integration of Photosynthetic Protein Molecular Complexes in Solid-State Electronic Devices, Nano Lett., 2004, 4(6), 1079–1083 CrossRef .
R. F. Simmerman, T. Zhu, D. R. Baker, L. Wang, S. R. Mishra, C. A. Lundgren and B. D. Bruce, Engineering Photosystem I Complexes with Metal Oxide Binding Peptides for Bioelectronic Applications, Bioconjugate Chem., 2015, 26(10), 2097–2105 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Sokol, W. E. Robinson, J. Warnan, N. Kornienko, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Bias-free Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting with Photosystem II on a Dye-sensitized Photoanode Wired to Hydrogenase, Nat. Energy, 2018 DOI:10.1002/celc.201600506 .
K. Ocakoglu, T. Krupnik, B. van den Bosch, E. Harputlu, M. P. Gullo, J. D. J. Olmos, S. Yildirimcan, R. K. Gupta, F. Yakuphanoglu and A. Barbieri, 
            et al., Photosystem I-Based Biophotovoltaics on Nanostructured Hematite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(47), 7467–7477 CrossRef .
M. Szalkowski, J. D. Janna Olmos, D. Buczyńska, S. Maćkowski, D. Kowalska and J. Kargul, Plasmon-Induced Absorption of Blind Chlorophylls in Photosynthetic Proteins Assembled on Silver Nanowires, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(29), 10475–10486 RSC .
J. D. Janna Olmos, P. Becquet, D. Gront, J. Sar, A. Dąbrowski, G. Gawlik, M. Teodorczyk, D. Pawlak and J. Kargul, Biofunctionalisation of P-Doped Silicon with Cytochrome c553 Minimises Charge Recombination and Enhances Photovoltaic Performance of the All-Solid-State Photosystem I-Based Biophotoelectrode, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(75), 47854–47866 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films, Science, 2004, 306(5696), 666–669 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, The Rise of Graphene, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6(3), 183 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Heterojunction Photocatalysts, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(20), 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, T. Kim, S.-H. Cho and H.-J. Chung, A Role for Graphene in Silicon-Based Semiconductor Devices, Nature, 2011, 479(7373), 338 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. C. Brownson and C. E. Banks, Graphene Electrochemistry: An Overview of Potential Applications, Analyst, 2010, 135(11), 2768–2778 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Graphene-Based Materials in Electrochemistry, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39(8), 3157–3180 RSC .
M. Liang and L. Zhi, Graphene-Based Electrode Materials for Rechargeable Lithium Batteries, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19(33), 5871–5878 RSC .
M. Pumera, Electrochemistry of Graphene: New Horizons for Sensing and Energy Storage, Chem. Rec., 2009, 9(4), 211–223 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Kaminska, K. Wiwatowski and S. Mackowski, Efficiency of Energy Transfer Decreases with the Number of Graphene Layers, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(104), 102791–102796 RSC .
A. A. Babadi, S. Bagheri and S. B. A. Hamid, Progress on Implantable Biofuel Cell: Nano-Carbon Functionalization for Enzyme Immobilization Enhancement, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79(suppl. C), 850–860 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Karimi, A. Othman, A. Uzunoglu, L. Stanciu and S. Andreescu, Graphene Based Enzymatic Bioelectrodes and Biofuel Cells, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(16), 6909–6923 RSC .
S. D. Minteer, P. Atanassov, H. R. Luckarift and G. R. Johnson, New Materials for Biological Fuel Cells, Mater. Today, 2012, 15(4), 166–173 CrossRef .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Recent Advances in Graphene-Based Biosensors, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26(12), 4637–4648 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. X. Guo, S. Lim, H. Song and C. M. Li, Graphene/Carbon Cloth Anode for High-Performance Mediatorless Microbial Fuel Cells, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 114(suppl. C), 275–280 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Alwarappan, A. Erdem, C. Liu and C.-Z. Li, Probing the Electrochemical Properties of Graphene Nanosheets for Biosensing Applications, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(20), 8853–8857 CrossRef .
A. Alshammari, M. G. Posner, A. Upadhyay, F. Marken, S. Bagby and A. Ilie, A Modular Bioplatform Based on a Versatile Supramolecular Multienzyme Complex Directly Attached to Graphene, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(32), 21077–21088 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Dinesh, V. Mani, R. Saraswathi and S.-M. Chen, Direct Electrochemistry of Cytochrome c Immobilized on a Graphene Oxide–Carbon Nanotube Composite for Picomolar Detection of Hydrogen Peroxide, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(54), 28229–28237 RSC .
Y. Song, H. Liu, L. Wan, Y. Wang, H. Hou and L. Wang, Direct Electrochemistry of Cytochrome c Based on Poly(Diallyldimethylammonium Chloride)-Graphene Nanosheets/Gold Nanoparticles Hybrid Nanocomposites and Its Biosensing, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25(6), 1400–1409 CrossRef .
E. Darby, G. LeBlanc, E. A. Gizzie, K. M. Winter, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Photoactive Films of Photosystem I on Transparent Reduced Graphene Oxide Electrodes, Langmuir, 2014, 30(29), 8990–8994 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, C. Tan, M. A. Lowe, H. D. Abruña and D. C. Ralph, Electrochemistry of Individual Monolayer Graphene Sheets, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(3), 2264–2270 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gunther, G. LeBlanc, D. Prasai, J. R. Zhang, D. E. Cliffel, K. I. Bolotin and G. K. Jennings, Photosystem I on Graphene as a Highly Transparent, Photoactive Electrode, Langmuir, 2013, 29(13), 4177–4180 CrossRef PubMed .
G. LeBlanc, K. M. Winter, W. B. Crosby, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Integration of Photosystem I with Graphene Oxide for Photocurrent Enhancement, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(9), 1301953 CrossRef .
S. C. Feifel, K. R. Stieger, H. Lokstein, H. Lux and F. Lisdat, High Photocurrent Generation by Photosystem I on Artificial Interfaces Composed of π-System-Modified Graphene, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(23), 12188–12196 RSC .
H. H. Kim, B. Kang, J. W. Suk, N. Li, K. S. Kim, R. S. Ruoff, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, Clean Transfer of Wafer-Scale Graphene via Liquid Phase Removal of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(5), 4726–4733 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, B. A. Sperling, I. Calizo, G. Cheng, C. A. Hacker, Q. Zhang, Y. Obeng, K. Yan, H. Peng and Q. Li, 
            et al., Toward Clean and Crackless Transfer of Graphene, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(11), 9144–9153 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B. Han, D. Chen, R. D. Piner, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Transfer of Large-Area Graphene Films for High-Performance Transparent Conductive Electrodes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(12), 4359–4363 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Holzinger, J. Baur, R. Haddad, X. Wang and S. Cosnier, Multiple Functionalization of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes by Dip Coating, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(8), 2450–2452 RSC .
M. Singh, M. Holzinger, M. Tabrizian, S. Winters, N. C. Berner, S. Cosnier and G. S. Duesberg, Noncovalently Functionalized Monolayer Graphene for Sensitivity Enhancement of Surface Plasmon Resonance Immunosensors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(8), 2800–2803 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kondo, K. Iida, T. Dewa, H. Tanaka, T. Ogawa, S. Nagashima, K. V. P. Nagashima, K. Shimada, H. Hashimoto and A. T. Gardiner, 
            et al., Photocurrent and Electronic Activities of Oriented-His-Tagged Photosynthetic Light-Harvesting/Reaction Center Core Complexes Assembled onto a Gold Electrode, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13(2), 432–438 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Haniewicz, M. Abram, L. Nosek, J. Kirkpatrick, E. El-Mohsnawy, J. D. J. Olmos, R. Kouřil and J. M. Kargul, Molecular Mechanisms of Photoadaptation of Photosystem I Supercomplex from an Evolutionary Cyanobacterial/Algal Intermediate1, Plant Physiol., 2018, 176(2), 1433–1451 CrossRef PubMed .
K. R. Stieger, S. C. Feifel, H. Lokstein and F. Lisdat, Advanced Unidirectional Photocurrent Generation via Cytochrome c as Reaction
Partner for Directed Assembly of Photosystem I, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(29), 15667–15674 RSC .
S. Yamada, S.-Y. Park, H. Shimizu, Y. Koshizuka, K. Kadokura, T. Satoh, K. Suruga, M. Ogawa, Y. Isogai and T. Nishio, 
            et al., Structure of Cytochrome c6 from the Red Alga Porphyra yezoensis at 1.57 Å Resolution, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr., 2000, 56(12), 1577–1582 CrossRef .
P. Jordan, P. Fromme, H. T. Witt, O. Klukas, W. Saenger and N. Krauß, Three-Dimensional Structure of Cyanobacterial Photosystem I at 2.5 |[Angst]| Resolution, Nature, 2001, 411(6840), 909–917 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. Kargul, G. Bubak and G. AndryianauBiophotovoltaic Systems Based on Photosynthetic Complexes, in Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and Chemical Engineering, Elsevier,  2017 Search PubMed .
L. G. Cançado, A. Jorio, E. H. M. Ferreira, F. Stavale, C. A. Achete, R. B. Capaz, M. V. O. Moutinho, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kulmala and A. C. Ferrari, Quantifying Defects in Graphene via Raman Spectroscopy at Different Excitation Energies, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(8), 3190–3196 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-L. Liu, C.-C. Yu, K.-T. Lin, E.-Y. Wang, T.-C. Yang, H.-L. Chen, C.-W. Chen, C.-K. Chang, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Nondestructive Characterization of the Structural Quality and Thickness of Large-Area Graphene on Various Substrates, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86(15), 7192–7199 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Tang and J. J. Gooding, Strategies for Chemical Modification of Graphene and Applications of Chemically Modified Graphene, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(25), 12435 RSC .
C. B. K. C, S. K. Das, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi and F. D'Souza, Ultrafast Charge Separation in Supramolecular Tetrapyrrole–Graphene Hybrids, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48(97), 11859–11861 RSC .
P. Garrido-Barros, C. Gimbert-Suriñach, D. Moonshiram, A. Picón, P. Monge, V. S. Batista and A. Llobet, Electronic π-Delocalization Boosts Catalytic Water Oxidation by Cu(II) Molecular Catalysts Heterogenized on Graphene Sheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(37), 12907–12910 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. MacLeod and F. Rosei, Molecular Self-Assembly on Graphene, Small, 2014, 10(6), 1038–1049 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Osella, M. Kiliszek, E. Harputlu, C. G. Unlu, K. Ocakoglu, J. Kargul and B. Trzaskowski, Controlling the Charge Transfer Flow at the Graphene/Pyrene-Nitrilotriacetic Acid Interface, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(18), 5046–5054 RSC .
J. Ederer, P. Janoš, P. Ecorchard, J. Tolasz, V. Štengl, H. Beneš, M. Perchacz and O. Pop-Georgievski, Determination of Amino Groups on Functionalized Graphene Oxide for Polyurethane Nanomaterials: XPS Quantitation vs. Functional Speciation, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(21), 12464–12473 RSC .
I. Grotjohann and P. Fromme, Structure of Cyanobacterial Photosystem I, Photosynth. Res., 2005, 85(1), 51–72 CrossRef PubMed .
W. A. Cramer, H. Zhang, J. Yan, G. Kurisu and J. L. Smith, Transmembrane Traffic in the Cytochrome b6f Complex, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2006, 75(1), 769–790 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qin, M. Suga, T. Kuang and J.-R. Shen, Structural Basis for Energy Transfer Pathways in the Plant PSI-LHCI Supercomplex, Science, 2015, 348(6238), 989–995 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mackowski and I. Kamińska, Dependence of the Energy Transfer to Graphene on the Excitation Energy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107(2), 023110 CrossRef .
L. Gaudreau, K. J. Tielrooij, G. E. D. K. Prawiroatmodjo, J. Osmond, F. J. G. de Abajo and F. H. L. Koppens, Universal Distance-Scaling of Nonradiative Energy Transfer to Graphene, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(5), 2030–2035 CrossRef PubMed .
N. C. Berner, S. Winters, C. Backes, C. Yim, K. C. Dümbgen, I. Kaminska, S. Mackowski, A. A. Cafolla, A. Hirsch and G. S. Duesberg, Understanding and Optimising the Packing Density of Perylene Bisimide Layers on CVD-Grown Graphene, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(39), 16337–16342 RSC .
Z. Chen, S. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz and L. E. Brus, Energy Transfer from Individual Semiconductor Nanocrystals to Graphene, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(5), 2964–2968 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: We describe details regarding the following aspects of the study: preparation of single-layer graphene via chemical vapor deposition (CVD), transfer of large-area SLG on FTO substrate, integration of pyrene-NTA with graphene surface, setup for electrochemical characterization, fluorescence spectroscopy of biophotoelectrodes, and electrochemical characterization of the biophotoelectrodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta02420k‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the functionalization steps for the fabrication of the PSI@SLG electrode showing the Ni-NTA-pyrene moieties used for capturing the His6-tagged cyt c553 (PDB:1GDV47). The PSI complex (PDB: 1JB048) is oriented with its donor side towards the SLG/FTO electrode through intermolecular interactions with cyt c553. Structures are drawn not to scale.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM image of the PSI@SLG electrode showing the 85 nm-thick cyt/PSI layer (schematically shown in the inset) on the SLG/FTO surface. Scale bar is 100 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Fluorescence intensity maps collected for the same sample area for excitations at 480 nm (a and c) and at 630 nm (b and d) for both the PSI + SLG (a and b) and PSI@SLG (c and d) photoelectrodes. The maps measured for the same excitation wavelength are shown in the same intensity scale. Histograms of the fluorescence intensities extracted for all the measured fluorescence intensity maps for excitation at 480 nm and 630 nm for both photoelectrodes (e and f, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 4  Fluorescence decays measured for the PSI complexes in the PSI + SLG (a, red curves) and PSI@SLG (b, black curves) photoelectrodes compared to the result obtained for a layer of PSI and on a glass substrate (green). The excitation wavelength of 485 nm was used.	 

PSI	4.10 ± 0.10	1.12 ± 0.12	0.14 ± 0.02
PSI + SLG	3.42 ± 1.08	0.54 ± 0.27	0.08 ± 0.03
PSI@SLG	3.11 ± 1.14	0.88 ± 0.45	0.17 ± 0.07

 	Fig. 5  Photochronoamperometry results for the PSI-based SLG electrodes. Graph shows the generated current versus time for the three analyzed structures: Ni-NTA/SLG (blue), PSI + SLG (red), and PSI@SLG (black). After 2 min current stabilization at −200 mV potential under dark conditions. Photochronoamperometric signals were recorded with a 30 s illumination cycle.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photochronoamperometric performances of the PSI-based SLG electrodes. Photocurrent densities from the PSI-based SLG electrodes showing the average photocurrent densities obtained for 5 distinct configurations of SLG electrodes: PSI@SLG (black), PSI + SLG (red), NiNTA/SLG (blue), NTA/SLG (grey) and SLG (white). The photochronoamperometric measurements were conducted in the absence of artificial mediators and in the presence of dioxygen-containing phosphate buffer (as the electron acceptor). Error bars correspond to the standard deviations from two independently prepared electrodes (n = 2).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: We describe details regarding the following aspects of the study: preparation of single-layer graphene via chemical vapor deposition (CVD), transfer of large-area SLG on FTO substrate, integration of pyrene-NTA with graphene surface, setup for electrochemical characterization, fluorescence spectroscopy of biophotoelectrodes, and electrochemical characterization of the biophotoelectrodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta02420k
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
