Solar cells and photocatalytic systems: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5FD90002F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5FD90002F
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 313-331Solar cells and photocatalytic systems: general discussion

        
          
            Joachim 
            Maier
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pengfei 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xile 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Galen 
            Stucky
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shi-Gang 
            Sun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Han
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dong Ryeol 
            Whang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Zhan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            He
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lee 
            Cronin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Erwin 
            Reisner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lulu 
            Long
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrew 
            Mount
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ram 
            Seshadri
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xudong 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fuping 
            Pan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhonghua 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhongqun 
            Tian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Heinz 
            Frei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jingshan 
            Luo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pingwu 
            Du
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Baohua 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yicheng 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Licheng 
            Sun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Takashi 
            Hisatomi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Can 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Zhu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nam-Gyu 
            Park
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huiqiong 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      
First published on 20th February 2015

Xile Hu opened the discussion of the paper by Can Li: When you change the photoanode to a more porous structure, is the higher photocurrent due to a higher degree of light absorption, or is it due to better charge transfer kinetics?

Can Li responded: Both could be possible, but more light absorption should be considered when it is really a porous material.

Lee Cronin remarked: How stable are the plate-like WO3? Could the be used at pH 1 or below? Does the morphology change?

Can Li replied: WO3 is quite stable under acid conditions, and the morphology does not change evidently.

Pingwu Du commented: Could the enhancement of photocurrent on a nanostructured (plate-like) tungsten oxide photoanode result from an increase of the surface area, rather than its catalytic activity?

Can Li replied: Compared with the compact WO3 film, the plate-like WO3 photoanodes show more electrochemical active surface area, increased light absorption and lower electrode/electrolyte interface charge-transfer resistance. So, the improved photocurrent cannot be singly attributed to the changing surface area.

Pengfei Liu asked: According to the EIS figure, the plate-like WO3 has a much smaller Rct, which also improve the photocurrent. Accordingly, how will the morphology influence the charge transfer resistance?

Can Li responded: The morphology influences the charge separation mainly via the driving force of charge separation between the different facets.

Fei Li said: What is the difference between the non-redox metals used for the etching step?

Can Li replied: The morphologies of the resulting electrodes can be different.

Shihe Yang communicated: (1) The electrochemically active surface area of plate-like WO3 is twice as large as the sputtered compact WO3 film, and its charge-transfer resistance is also much lower than that of the compact WO3 film. Why is the photocurrent density generated by the plate-like WO3 sample just a little higher than that of the compact WO3 film? (2) What is actually the main reason for the enhanced performance for the plate-like WO3 sample? The increase in specific surface area or the improvement in catalytic activity? (3) Is there possible doping, amorphization or disordering due to etching, which could change the electronic properties of WO3?

Can Li communicated in reply: (1) This is possibly due to the poorly ordered assembly on the electrode. (2) One of the actual reasons for the increase in specific facets is due to the charge separation between different facets. (3) It is possible that the disordering on the surface could change the catalytic properties.

Jingshan Luo opened the discussion of the paper by Erwin Reisner: Regarding the J–V curve, there seems to be a peak in the curve of photosystem II; is it an oxidation peak?

Erwin Reisner replied: A small peak is observed in the J–V curve at +0.95 V vs. RHE. However, the standard deviation for this measurement (20%) makes it difficult to interpret this feature with confidence. Photodegradation of PSII or film-loss of PSII are possible explanations for the peak.

Chao Zhan addressed Can Li and Erwin Reisner: What is the concentration of PSII on the surface? I think the TOF will decrease with increasing concentration of PSII. The low stability of the ITO/PSII system may be caused by the weak interation between the substrate and PSII. This is very common in organic–inorganic system. How can this be improved?

Can Li answered: The concentration of PSII on the surface is difficult to measure because it is a weak adsorption, or physical adsorption under a dynamic state. For our case (not in this work), we tried to employ self assembly of PSII on the surface to improve the interaction.

Erwin Reisner continued: The geometrical surface density of adsorbed PSII on ITO is approximately 19 pmol cm−2. We used the total amount of PSII adsorbed on ITO to calculate the TOF, which is therefore a conservative estimate. An increasing amount of PSII could result in an apparently lower TOF because of the multi-layer formation of PSII and a consequently higher fraction of electroinactive PSII on the ITO electrode. We can increase the stability of PSII on ITO through covalent binding of PSII to the ITO surface (see M. Kato, T. Cardona, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10610–10613).

Andrew Mount remarked: In Fig. 3b(i) it was stated that it is unclear if the response actually peaks near E = 1 V, given the standard deviation of the measurements (which I presume is the s.d. for repeated measurements on different electrodes). It is also stated in the paper that this system is relatively unstable, with a lifetime of around 4 min. This opens up the possibility that if the peak were real, it could be produced by a decrease in photoactivity with time. Have the authors made or considered repeated measurements of these photocurrents in this E range on the same electrode, stepping both to increasing and decreasing values of E, to gain insight into these effects and potentially obtain standard deviations of successive measurements on the same electrode?

Erwin Reisner responded: The standard deviation of 20% for the PSII–ITO trace in Fig. 3b(i) was determined for repeated measurements on different electrodes. The large error makes it difficult to interpret with confidence the small decrease in photocurrent from 1.0 to 1.2 V. We can speculate that the decrease may be due to photo-degradation or film loss of the enzyme during the measurement. We have not stepped back and forth between the potentials to investigate the small decrease in more detail.

Xile Hu commented: What is the energy of the hole release from PSII? Do you think that the I–V curve of PSII is influenced by different recombination rates at different potentials?

Erwin Reisner responded: The hole is not ‘released’ by PSII, it is ‘consumed’ and provides the MnCa-cluster with an approximately 350 mV driving force to oxidise water to O2. We cannot exclude a dependence of recombination events on immobilised PSII on the applied potential and it would be interesting to investigate this in more detail.

Heinz Frei asked: Is there a small subset of PSII systems on your electrodes running much faster than average, while others might be very slow or not contributing at all?

Erwin Reisner responded: PSII was immobilised in a random orientation on mesoporous ITO in this study. Thus, only PSII in the correct orientation on ITO (i.e. electroactive enzyme) contributes to interfacial electron transfer, whereas all of the other PSII (electroinactive enzyme) does not. It is therefore likely that a small subset of PSII is responsible for the majority of the photocurrent and the remaining PSII shows only small or no photoactivity.

Pingwu Du asked: Why do you need the titanium for deposition (in the WO3-Ti/Ni system)? As for the photoanode functionalized with PSII, what happened to the stability during catalysis?

Erwin Reisner responded: We employed the molecular precursor of [Ti2(OEt)9(NiCl)]2 to generate hydrolytically a protecting TiO2 and a NiOx electrocatalyst layer on WO3. TiO2 is an alkaline resistant material and can partly protect WO3 from direct contact with the alkaline solution, thereby enhancing the stability of WO3. In addition, TiO2 can decrease the rate of charge recombination by serving as a charge separation layer for transferring holes from the WO3 to the catalyst. The photoactivity of the PSII–ITO photoanode decreases readily during light exposure and catalysis. The photo-degradation is due to the intrinsic photo-instability of PSII during irradiation and the fragility of the PSII–ITO interface.

Lee Cronin commented: Have you tried to pattern some electrode surfaces using nano imprint lithography (or similar) and bind the PSII into the cavities? This may allow the redox behaviour to be modified as a function of the architectures on the electrode.

Erwin Reisner responded: We have developed improved electrode materials for PSII and other enzymes over the last couple of years and we observe a substantially improved integration and activity of the proteins within tailor-made 3D architectures (unpublished work).

Andrew Mount communicated: Could you use scanning electrochemical microscopy to interrogate those quinones in your PSII layer that are reduced but are not in close enough contact with the electrode for electron transfer to occur?

Erwin Reisner communicated in reply: We considered using SECM for the study of electroactive PSII on the ITO surface by following the release of O2. I think that it would be easier to follow catalytically generated O2 than reduced quinones.

Andrew Mount communicated: Can you orient directionally PSII with respect to the surface of the electrode by directional control/functionalisation of the surface deposition?

Erwin Reisner communicated in reply: Yes, we have improved the orientation of PSII on ITO by exploiting electrostatic interactions between a self-assembled monolayer of negatively charged carboxylates with the positive dipole on the electron acceptor side of PSII (see M. Kato, T. Cardona, A. W. Rutherford, E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10610–10613).

Andrew Mount communicated: Does/could loading the PSII electrode film with more quinone mediators lead to enhanced electrode communication?

Erwin Reisner communicated in reply: Yes, we were able to improve the photocurrent response of PSII electrodes with excess quinones as electron mediator.

Zhonghua Li opened the discussion of the paper by Takashi Hisatomi: Can you compare films produced by different methods at the same thickness?

Takashi Hisatomi responded: Photoelectrodes with fewer grain boundaries and a better electric contact to a back conductive layer will show higher photocurrent if the thicknesses of the particulate photocatalyst layers are the same. Therefore, the use of single-crystalline particles would be ideal. The optimum thickness (or the particle size) would be dependent on various factors, such as the depletion layer widths at the working conditions, minority carrier diffusion lengths, electric conductivities and absorption coefficients.

Zhonghua Li commented: Why do you choose H2O2 as electrolyte?

Takashi Hisatomi responded: H2O2 was used because it had been proven to be applicable to hematite photoanodes and it was actually effective for SrNbO2N. One could also use sulfite ions, iodide ions, ferrocyanide ions or methanol as hole trapping reagents.

Chao Zhan addressed Takashi Hisatomi: In the I–V curve (Fig. 2) we can find transient currents, especially in the low bias, and the transient current induced by light-on is larger than that for light-off. Also, for the steady-state current, in the low voltage bias it is decreasing and in the high bias it is increasing – why is this? I think we can perhaps find more information from the transient and steady current, just like the time scale.

Takashi Hisatomi replied: A transient photoanodic current is observed in the negative potential region (0.3-0.9 V vs. RHE) when the potential is swept from negative to positive as shown in Fig. 2. This kind of photoanodic response is not observed when the potential is maintained or swept from positive to negative. Similar behavior is observed commonly for photoanodes modified with Co-containing catalysts and is probably due to the transient oxidation of the Co-containing species. The photoanodic current in the negative potential region is attributable to a transient oxidation process of the CoOx catalyst. On the other hand, the photoanodic current in the positive potential region is mainly attributable to continuous water oxidation, as the Faradaic efficiency of approximately 90% for water oxidation was observed. Therefore, the photocurrent increases as the potential becomes more positive. It is possible to extract the capacitance and the time scale using a more time-resolved system. Please refer to Le Formal et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26707 and J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2564.

Jingshan Luo commented: Regarding the particle transfer method, How reproducible is it? Is there any corrosion of the metal contacts if they are not fully covered by the active materials, and does the exposed metal surface have an impact on the dark current?

Takashi Hisatomi answered: The particle transfer method is mostly reproducible and also applicable to fabrication of photoelectrodes of other particulate semiconductors (e.g., Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1120–1124; Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2239–2242; J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16386–16392). Sputtering conditions of metal films, such as the temperature of a sample substrate and the pressure of a chamber, should be chosen carefully. I also think that metal layers should be sufficiently thicker than the roughness of particle layers so that they can be a continuous film.

Pengfei Liu commented: Although the electrode fabricated by the particle transfer method exhibits much improved photocurrent compared with that made of EPD, the current is still not large enough. Will electrodes prepared through in situ-growth method be more suitable for PEC?

Takashi Hisatomi replied: In situ-growth methods may be suitable for some oxide photoelectrodes but probably not for SrNbO2N and other (oxy)nitride materials. SrNbO2N was prepared by nitridation under an NH3 flow at 1173 K in this study. Many conductive substrates would not be stable in such reactive conditions. Therefore, SrNbO2N powder was firstly prepared and processed into photoelectrodes by the particle transfer method. The advantage of the particle transfer method over the conventional electrophoretic deposition method was described in the main text.

Shihe Yang opened a general discussion by addressing Can Li and Erwin Reisner: Regarding the integration of artificial and natural photosystems, how far can one go considering that the natural photosystem has a huge arsenal of support, such as self-healing mechanisms, but the artificial system is very primitive?

Can Li answered: Yes, natural photosynthesis has many merits including self-healing, and the artificial system is still quite primitive, but the artificial system based on inorganic compounds is durable and able to harvest more solar light.

Erwin Reisner responded: Most artificial photosynthetic systems indeed lack efficient self-repair mechanisms. This issue is recognised by the community and should receive more attention in the future. We have not yet addressed the photodamage issue in our PSII–ITO assembly.

Shihe Yang continued: Effective use of photosystem II is being pursued actively, as we see from the discussion. This mainly enhances the internal quantum efficiency. In fact, there are other biological systems, such as those with photonic structures (e.g., in peacock feathers), which may be used to harvest sunlight more efficiently. Is it possible to integrate these systems? What are the prospects in this direction?

Can Li answered: This is a good idea, I think it is possible to integrate these systems. The prospects in this direction may be more concerned with understanding before developing more stable and efficient photosystems.

Erwin Reisner replied: Yes, photonic structures can be used to enhance light absorption and, consequently, external quantum efficiencies. We are working on this approach.

Heinz Frei addressed Can Li: In the PSII assembly you used, is the light protection function (i.e. non-photochemical quenching (NPQ)) included? The achievable photocatalytic efficiency would be limited if NPQ is operative, while durability would be improved.

Can Li responded: You are right: the photocatalytoc efficiency is limited if NPQ is operative, while for our current system the activity is still far from the saturation, so the durability seems good.

Zhongqun Tian continued: The three speakers have demonstrated new and important progress, which is very impressive. Natural systems always use weak bond interactions to more easily and timely adjust active reaction sites for the best selectivity and yield. I just wonder if the combination of your catalytic systems with soft matter could get close to natural systems with higher efficiency?

Can Li responded: It is possible to achieve a more efficient system by building up a hybrid system of natural photosynthesis and a soft matter system.

Lee Cronin addressed Erwin Reisner: Can you imagine applying flux to a material/molecular system as it is assembled to make a non-equilibrium material, e.g. playing rock music to optimise the efficiency of a polymer solar cell?! This requires that you set up a dissipative flux during the assembly of the system. Why not shine light on your next interface when you are making it?

Erwin Reisner responded: We are interested in non-equilibrium and dynamic self-assembly of interfaces, in particular driven by solar flux. I can imagine to use it as a tool to assemble photoactive materials. I think that the assembly can also occur in situ during irradiation from a pre-organised equilibrium state.

Fei Li asked: How did you deposit the nickel oxide? Is it the same material as Nocera's Ni-Bi?

Erwin Reisner answered: We believe that the NiOx is comparable to Nocera’s Ni-Bi. NanoWO3|TiO2|NiOx was prepared by spin coating and hydrolytic decomposition of the molecular single source precursor [Ti2(OEt)9(NiCl)]2 on nanostructured WO3. NiOx is an active water oxidation catalyst in basic borate solution (Bi) and acts as electro-catalyst driven by photo-generated holes from the valence band of WO3.

Dong Ryeol Whang opened the discussion of the paper by Licheng Sun: Fig. 2 from your paper tells us that SA3 shows the highest turnover numbers (TON), as you mentioned in the talk. However, in terms of turnover frequency (TOF), SA1 is the most efficient catalyst. Can you explain why there exists the kind of trade-off between TON and TOF?

Licheng Sun replied: Both the photosensitizer and the catalyst units in SA1 and SA3 are the same; the difference in chemical structure between these two assemblies is the bridging ligands. In SA1 the bridging ligand is rigid while in SA3 the bridging ligand is flexible. Different bridging ligands might have a big influence on the forwards electron transfer from the catalyst unit to the photogenerated oxidized form of the sensitizer and the charge recombination. These factors may cause the initial rate (TOF) of light driven water oxidation to be faster in the case of SA1 and slower in the case of SA3, but with a lower TON for SA1 and a higher TON for SA3. Electron transfer studies on these assemblies by time-resolved spectroscopic techniques are in progress.

Chao Zhan asked: As we know, a conjugated system is better for charge transfer, but SA3 is better than SA1 and SA2. Why is this? Can we imagine that the better charge conduction also leads to easier charge recombination, or the time scale of the charge separation transfer and the reaction should match together? Perhaps some time related experiments are needed, using different flexible linkages like carbon? Can the linkages be designed just allowing one-direction charge transfer like in a p–n junction?

Licheng Sun replied: Typically when you have a conjugated linker between the photosensitizer and the catalyst, the electron transfer is fast, however the charge recombination is also fast; this might be the case for SA1. When you have a non-conjugated linker between the photosensitizer and the catalyst, the electron transfer is slow, however the charge recombination could also become slow; this might be the case for SA3. Indeed, a fast forward electron transfer and a slow charge recombination is the key for a long lived charge separated state, which in turn can speed up the catalysis, in our case the catalytic water oxidation.

Fuping Pan enquired: The performance of photocatalytic water oxidation can be increased by using supramolecular assemblies. Can much large molecular assemblies be built to improve the performance?

Licheng Sun replied: Yes, large molecular assemblies can be built to improve the performance of catalytic water oxidation. We are preparing a supramolecular assembly where a photosensitizer tethered with a water oxidation catalyst can be immobilized on the surface of nanostructured TiO2, aiming to create a functional device for light-driven water oxidation at the photoanode and hydrogen generation at the cathode.

Lee Cronin asked: Is it possible to devise a catalyst system that can run for trillions of turnovers? What time scale/TON/TOF can you realistically aim for?

Licheng Sun answered: First, when you design an efficient catalyst, you need a certain catalytic rate (TOF), the higher the better. However, the TOF is limited by the nature of metal ion, ligand and experimental conditions. As for water oxidation, a catalyst with a TOF of more than 300 s−1 is comparable with the OEC in photosystem II. Secondly, once you have a catalyst with high TOF, such as 300 s−1, how stable (TON) the catalyst is becomes very important. It is not impossible to have a catalyst that can run for trillions of turnovers, such a robust catalyst is desirable for practical application in functional devices.

Erwin Reisner opened the discussion of the paper by Heinz Frei by asking: Do you have any information on the ideal length and inner-diameter of your Co oxide nanotubes with respect to efficient water oxidation and product diffusion?

Heinz Frei responded: We have quantified thus far the (average) catalytic activity per Co surface center for nanotubes with a 12 nm inner diameter and 150 nm length, but not yet for other sizes and aspect ratios. Planned photocatalytic experiments with complete nanotube arrays with different tube diameters, aspect ratios and spacing between the nanotubes, which can be done by varying the structure of the Si template, will allow us to optimize the geometry of the nanotubes and the array in terms of photocatalytic yield.

Joachim Maier asked: Is it known how the protons move in silica? Perhaps by proton hopping from an internal OH−-group to regular oxygen?

Heinz Frei replied: Yes, proton conduction through silica has been reported (ref. 52–54), and our electrochemical experiments confirm both the proton conductivity and blocking of O2 (at silica layer thickness greater than 3 nm). A hopping mechanism involving internal silanol and siloxy groups is most likely, but I am not aware of direct spectroscopic evidence for the proposed mechanism.

Joachim Maier remarked: Is the proton motion in silica the same as in proton conducting perovskites (phonon assisted proton transfer from internal OH− to O2−)?

Heinz Frei answered: Proton diffusion through thin films of dense phase amorphous silica is thought to occur by proton release from internal silanol groups. I am not aware of reports on direct spectroscopic observations of the process.

Xile Hu asked: You want to make an all inorganic device, but your hole transporter is an organic molecule. How stable is it?

Heinz Frei replied: Because we are not aware of (desirable) all-inorganic hole conducting molecular wires with the HOMO at a suitable potential for transporting the hole from the light absorber to the catalyst at minimal loss of energy, organic OPPV wires seem the best approach at this time. These molecules are used in electronics applications (although not in a reactive environment), and in our system cast into silica. The latter should provide adequate protection against oxidative damage, but we have not yet investigated the durability on longer time scales.

Xile Hu enquired: Why do you have a potential gradient across your silica membrane?

Heinz Frei responded: A potential gradient is needed across the embedded organic molecular wires in order for the transient hole generated on the visible light absorber to transfer spontaneously across the wire (hence the silica layer) and inject into the Co3O4 catalyst nanotube. Therefore, there needs to be a modest potential decrease (shift to less positive potential) from the HOMO of the light absorber to the HOMO of Co3O4.

Xile Hu asked: Does your device work at all pH values? Does the pH make a difference to its performance?

Heinz Frei answered: We have conducted photocatalytic experiments so far at pH values between 4 and 8. On the water oxidation side, rates increase with increasing pH, as expected. However, our goal is to run the system with gaseous H2O and CO2, not in an aqueous solution environment. We have demonstrated with a vapor phase system the photoreduction of CO2 by H2O, but not yet for a system that features silica as separating membrane.

Lulu Long asked: What is the role of the silica layer? If we use a nanometer carbon layer instead of the silica layer, what will happen? Is the role of carbon layer similar to the silica layer?

Heinz Frei replied: The dense (pore-free) silica layer functions as a proton conducting, gas impermeable membrane for the separation of the water oxidation reaction from the light absorber and the CO2 reduction catalyst on the opposite side. O2 impermeability and proton transmission has been demonstrated, and silica is known to block desired CO2 reduction products such as methanol (silica is permeable for hydrogen, but this is not a desired product of our system). Since the membrane needs to be an insulator (the electrons are transported through embedded molecular wires with precisely tuned electronic properties); while carbon layers are semiconducting or behave like a metal, carbon layers are not suitable as membranes in this construct. Also, carbon layers may not have significant proton permeability although it might be possible to change this property through functionalization of the carbon.

Gang Chen asked: How big is the inner diameter of your core-shell nanotube? Will the small diameter of the inner tube prevent water from entering it due to surface tension, so the water oxidation reaction will not be efficient?

Heinz Frei replied: The inner diameter of the Co3O4 nanotube is determined by the diameter of the silicon nanowires that are used as sacrificial template to grow the nanotubes (by ALD). There is flexibility in selecting Si nanowire thicknesses and, therefore, in the choice of inner nanotube diameter (from tens to hundreds of nm). Our results of efficient water oxidation at Co3O4 nanoclusters grown inside the channels of mesoporous silica SBA-15 (Ref. 35) show that for nanochannels as narrow as 8 nm, access of water to the catalyst surface is not to be impeded.

Zhongqun Tian added: You have shown some very interesting approaches to artificial photosynthesis. You have designed some good artificial systems based on understanding of natural mechanisms. What is the best way to further improve the efficiency? Natural systems are very smart, as their catalytic sites change the structure dynamically for better activity during multi-step procedures. The surrounding molecules can assist each step collaboratively. For artificial photosynthesis, how can we design rationally and optimize dynamic activity in the supramolecular assemblies?

Heinz Frei responded: The primary task for improving the efficiency of complete artificial photosystems is the improvement of the yield and the energetics of charge transport between light absorbers, catalysts, and half reaction units. Equally urgent for efficiency improvement is to accomplish separation of the water oxidation catalysis from the reduction chemistry by a proton conducting, molecule-impermeable membrane, particularly in the case of carbon dioxide reduction, in order to minimize cross reactions. As the natural system shows, the dynamic involvement of the protein environment can play a key role for achieving high efficiency or selectivity of photosynthetic transformations. Some aspects, for example the tyrosine charge transport relay between the P680 light absorber and water oxidation catalyst of Photosystem II have already been successfully implemented as a design principle in artificial photosystems. Rational design of dynamic involvement of the surrounding matrix will likely be most fruitful for soft matter and molecular systems, and understanding of biological systems at the most detailed level is a powerful approach for progress in this direction. Dynamic involvement of the surrounding matrix may be harder to design rationally in the case of inorganic assemblies, but other opportunities exist for this approach, as recent discoveries illustrate. For example, nanostructured inorganic surfaces offer extremely large numbers of sites for storing transferred charge in the form of chemical change and for accomplishing subsequent catalytic transformations. Here, the sheer number of available active sites relaxes substantially constraints regarding catalytic rates of individual sites. New phenomena for the kinetic control of charge transport in all-inorganic systems are emerging that can be exploited for efficiency enhancement of photosynthetic assemblies. Progress here towards rational design of efficient assemblies requires discovery coupled with the advancement of theory and functional/atomic level characterization tools.

Licheng Sun continued: Nature indeed has created a very smart oxygen evolving complex (OEC) in photosystem II, and water oxidation occurs with the help of surrounding molecules. When we design a molecular catalyst for water oxidation, we should also consider the influence of the second and third coordination spheres, such as hydrogen bonding networks. In our Ru water oxidation catalysts with the bda ligand, the carboxylate can play such a role.

Shihe Yang communicated: Since the ionicity of SiO2 is low, proton conductivity is expected to be low. What is the actual magnitude? Is it possible through the atomic diffusion of H, which seems to be a stable species in SiO2?

Heinz Frei communicated in reply: We have measured electrochemically a proton flux of 2.5 protons s−1 nm−2 (pH 4). For our core–shell nanotube design, this is in the proper range in order for proton transport not be become rate-limiting at maximum solar intensity. If higher proton flux is needed modest doping by phosphorous or transition metals, which can be applied during the atomic layer deposition process, will be used to enhance the proton conductivity (for artificial photosynthesis, proton permeability through membranes does not need to exceed 10−4 Siemens per cm). This approach has been successfully demonstrated for silicate films used in micro fuel cell applications, although these membranes are much thicker and the flux requirements much higher. The mechanism involves proton transport across the silica, presumably by hopping along internal siloxy and silanol groups. Silica is permeable for hydrogen, but in our experiment the hydrogen is produced only after proton transport through the silica layer at the silica–Pt electrode interface.

Baohua Wang opened the discussion of the paper by Michael Grätzel: Is the film in an intermediate state when PbI2 is treated with CH3NH2I solution so it can turn back in 2-propanol?

Michael Grätzel replied: The film is not in an intermediate state as the XRD measurements show that tetragonal crystals of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite are formed. In polar solvent the reaction is reversible and the CH3NH3I is extracted from the perovskite resulting in the formation of PbI2.

Baohua Wang said: Does the perovskite film decompose in humid air? We noticed that the film will turn transparent if exposed in air for several days.

Michael Grätzel answered: Yes the perovskite film decomposes in humid air. First a colorless H2O adduct is formed and then the CH3NH3I ions are extracted by water resulting in the formation of PbI2, as shown by XRD analysis.

Ram Seshadri commented: Is it not true that the same considerations that make the halides easy to form into films, including the high mobility of ions in and out of the structures, as you described, are also considerations that might lead to decreased robustness of the materials?

Michael Grätzel answered: Your thoughts are correct. For example metal halide perovskites are very sensitive to humidity as the water leaches out the CH3NH3I ions leaving behind PbI2. This sensitivity to moisture is one of the main caveats of metal halide perovskite solar cells.

Galen Stucky remarked: What is the configuration of the printed device that you made to test the performance stability of the perovskite?

Michael Grätzel responded: The printed device has a triple layer structure comprising a mesoscopic TiO2 film supported by the transparent conducting oxide (fluorine doped tin oxide) acting as an electron selective conduct. This is covered by a mesoscopic ZrO2 film which in turn is contacted by a mesoporous carbon film acting as a back contact. The perovskite is infiltrated by drop casting into the mesoporous network. More details can be found in the following publication: A. Mei, X. Li, L.Liu, Z. Ku, T.Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M.Hu, J. Chen, Yi. Yang, M.Grätzel, and H. Han, A hole-conductor free, fully printable mesoscopic perovskite solar cell with high stability, Science, 2014, 345, 295.

Galen Stucky asked: What is the approximate mesoscopic pore diameter?

Michael Grätzel responded: For perovskite solar cells the appropriate mesoscopic pore diameter is in the 30–50 nm range.

Yicheng Zhao commented: As Professor Grätzel told us, the PbI2 can not be fully reacted into perovskite in the planar PbI2. Why are there some papers reporting high efficiency of the planar heterojunction structures by using a two-step method? Isn't this contradictory?

Michael Grätzel answered: You are that right several papers reported the formation of planar heterojunctions by the sequential conversion method from ‘planar’ PbI2 films. However solution-deposited PbI2 films are often porous, as shown in our paper. Also, more drastic steps such as heating for longer periods of time at 100 °C are often applied to drive the conversion to completion in such a case. An example for such a method has recently been published by the Huang group in Nature Communications. (DOI: 10.1038/ncomms6784).

Shihe Yang communicated: (1) While in QCM-D, the frequency change is often associated with the mass change of the film, how do we understand the dissipation factor of the perovskite film? Can the QCM-D study provide some direct information about the conversion kinetics? (2) Have you used the back converted PbI2 to prepare perovskite solar cells? And if yes, how about their performance? (3) How about the reversible transformation for the metal-halide perovskites in other solvents, such as water, ethanol, methanol and so on? Do you have any suggestions?

Michael Grätzel communicated in reply: (1) You are correct a mass change does can be directly linked to the change in the resonance frequency of the quartz microcrystal by the Sauerbrei equation which is given in section 2.5 of our paper. By contrast, the dissipation is related to the damping of the amplitude of the oscillation and is proportional to the width of the resonance signal divided by the absolute frequency at which it occurs. Thus relation is given in the same section. Thus, if during the oscillation, the crystal covered with PbI2 or perovskite dragging along solvent of the structure supported by the quartz crystal itself is soft, then this drag produces a stronger dissipation signal than in its absence. Yes: the conversion kinetics are directly reflected in the rate of mass uptake or release. (2) We are currently performing such PV studies and will submit a report soon for publication. (3) These studies are very important. For example treating CH3NH3PbI3 with water will leach out the perovskite leaving behind PbI2 which is a carcinogenic compound. Any polar solvent that only dissolves poorly the PbI2 would lend itself to such studies.

Joachim Maier opened the discussion of the paper by Nam-Gyu Park: What was the indication for ferroelectricity? Such polarization features are induced by ion conduction and stoichiometry polarization as a consequence of blocking the ions by the interfaces. Indeed, ion conductivity and such effects were confirmed by us (Yang, Gregori, Pellet, Grätzel and Maier, submitted).

Nam-Gyu Park answered: Yes, ion conduction could be one of the bases for ferroelectricity. According to impedance spectroscopy studies, we also observed a very high dielectric constant at very low frequency, which seems to be related to orientational polarization due to permanent dipoles from the methylammonium ion. Interfacial polarization cannot be excluded because charge accumulation is possible in perovskites under an external field, which may be related to ion conduction.

Lee Cronin asked: You emphasise the need for efficiency, but I wonder if this is the most important issue. Isn't scalability more important than efficiency? Will you run out of raw materials if you don't consider the ability to scale up?

Nam-Gyu Park answered: Yes, scalability is also important. However, low-cost high efficiency is very important in solar cell research and development in terms of low-cost electricity supply. Secondly, once we achieve such a goal, we will have to move on to the scalability issue, where effective processing methods should be developed.

Liang Chen addressed Michael Grätzel and Nam-Gyu Park: CH3NH3PbI3 is a good material for perovskite solar cells, but Pb is a very poisonous metal. Sn is viewed as a good alternative for Pb. However, CH3NH3SnI3 has a worse stability not only for moisture but also for oxygen. How can we solve these problems? Is Sn the best alternative for Pb, but what about other metal elements?

Nam-Gyu Park replied: Absolutely you are right. For the moment, Sn seems to be best alternative to Pb when you consider tolerance-factor calculations. We are trying to find effective ways to protect from oxygen and moisture, as well as stabilize Sn2+.

Michael Grätzel also replied: You are entirely correct that Pb is a very poisonous material and Sn analogues for CH3NH3PbI3 are very unstable in air and are also very problematic for the environment. Hence we have to extend our research to other inorganic pigments that are more benign. Using mesoscopic architectures will be of great importance to address the issue of short carrier diffusion lengths.

Shihe Yang communicated: (1) The three control samples (bare) are supposed to have the same configuration: TiO2/Sb2S3/HTM. However, their J–V data are different. Why is this the case? (2) Why is the performance of BL1/BL2 is poorer than W/ZnS (BL2)? One would expect it to be better. (3) Have you done similar work on perovskite solar cells? What do you expect?

Nam-Gyu Park communicated in reply: (1) A slight difference in J–V property for the three control samples is due to different batches. In each batch, it is difficult to have exactly the same J–V data although the same process was used for each batch. (2) We actually expected the performance of BL1/BL2 to be better than that of only BL2 or BL1. However, we found that the process of Sb2S3 deposition was not variable because the annealing and quenching processes were difficult to control. However, we would like to compare the BL1/BL2 sample with the control sample prepared at the same batch, to see what happened. We observed reproducibly higher Jsc and Voc from BL1/BL2 compared to those of the control sample. (3) We are doing the similar work, but the perovskite solar cell structure is somewhat different from Sb2S3 QD cell. We are trying to use blocking layers in perovskite solar cell for a different purpose.

Joachim Maier opened the discussion of the paper by Kai Zhu: You found the nature of the perovskite not to be decisive for transport parameters, yet you found a big difference between PbI2 and perovskite in that respect. What is your explanation?

Kai Zhu answered: It is commonly accepted that transport in dye-sensitized solar cells is limited by trapping defects at the TiO2 surface. We have shown that the transport mechanism in mesoporous-TiO2-based perovskite solar cells is similar to that in the dye cells. The density of the defects affects strongly the transport rate. Thus, the observed difference of transport between perovskites and PbI2 is likely to be caused by the different densities of defects created at the TiO2/perovskite or TiO2/PbI2 interfaces. For example, it has been shown that for perovskites only shallow traps are likely to be formed because of their low formation energies. However, the defect chemistry/physics may be very different for PbI2.

Baohua Wang commented: If the charge diffusion length of CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx is much longer than the pore size in the porous TiO2 film, can the technique used be able to tell the difference between these perovskite materials?

Kai Zhu answered: Yes. For example, there is a clear difference on transport between perovskites and PbI2, as shown in Fig. 5. Similar transport properties among all perovskite-based mesoporous cells suggest that the transport-limiting defects are similar among all perovskite based cells.

Hong Liu said: When you make MAPbX3 with X occupied by different halogen atoms, how do you quantitatively and correctly measure the content of each element in the perovskite lattice? Can you determine their chemical bonding situation in the perovskite lattice and distinguish them from other forms of existence, e.g., just as free ions or molecules?

Kai Zhu replied: We used energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis to determine the relative ratio between I, Br, and Cl in the perovskite films. At this point, we cannot determine their chemical bonding situation in the perovskite lattice.

Shihe Yang communicated: (1) The authors found that the PbI2-based device showed a much lower diffusion coefficient (about a factor of 5 lower than that of the MAPbI3 solar cells), so the PbI2 phase should be eliminated from the perovskite absorber. However, according to another paper published by Yang Yang (Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163), a certain degree of PbI2 passivation helps to reduce the recombination between the electrons from perovskite and holes from HTM. How do you rationalize it regarding the PbI2 role in the perovskite solar cell in more detail? (2) What is the cell performance difference before and after the TiCl4 treatment? What are the causes?

Kai Zhu communicated in reply: (1) This is still a subject under debate. In our lab, we found it to be critical to remove PbI2 in order to achieve devices with reasonable performance, and it is true for both mesoporous and planar perovskite solar cells. However, the exact role of PbI2 could depend on the properties of the perovskite materials (e.g., morphology, crystallinity, grain size, and other defect properties) and the relative amount of PbI2 in the perovskite film. This could vary a lot from different labs and should depend on the exact perovskite growth conditions. For example, Yang Yang’s Nano Lett. paper also shows that device performance is reduced when there is too much PbI2. (2) the device performance is better with TiCl4 treatment for mesoporous perovskite cells. As we have shown in the paper, TiCl4 treatment increases the recombination lifetime for about a factor of 4–5 for mesoporous-TiO2-based perovskite solar cells. It is known that TiCl4 solution treatment can enhance the surface roughness of TiO2 electrodes, which could improve the contact between perovskites and TiO2 to improve the quality of coated perovskite, and consequently, suppresses the back-electron-transfer from TiO2 to spiro-MeOTAD.

Yu Li opened the discussion of the paper by Shihe Yang: When you perform TRPL with the streak camera, the LPD method actually shows a slower decay than the USP counterpart. However, the recombination lifetime between them is not significantly different. How do you make sure that charge accumulation has been enhanced?

Shihe Yang responded: If the injection is slowed down and the recombination lifetime is not much different (in our case it is prolonged), more electrons will surely be accumulated in the perovskite layer. This will raise the electron quasi-Fermi level Fn.
) Fuping Pan remarked: How about the binding force between TiO2 and FTO? Can the thickness of TiO2 impact the performance of the solar cells? If so, what is optimal value of TiO2 thickness?

Shihe Yang responded: Since the interaction between TiO2 and FTO has both ionic and covalent character, it is relatively strong. There should be an optimum TiO2 thickness for solar cell performance. If it is too thin, charge recombination would be strong, but if it is too thick, it would be transport-limited. The optimal thickness has been summarized in the paper.

Zhonghua Li commented: According to your paper, holes will be transferred from the titania to the perovskite? As a result, the stability will be decreased. Why choose titania?

Shihe Yang answered: We did not state that holes are transferred from titania to perovskite. Rather, we suggested that electron injection is modulated by the titania nanolayer. We chose titania because it can be structurally and electronically controlled and it is compatible with the substrate and easy to use to form uniform films.

Zhonghua Li asked: How about the stability of this material compared to that without titania?

Shihe Yang responded: The stability is not much relevant here with or without titania. The main issue here is how the titania layer affects charge injection and recombination.

Yicheng Zhao began a general discussion by addressing Michael Grätzel: Because of the hysteresis phenomenon in perovskite solar cells, do you think if there is a need to set up a new measurement standard to testify our solar cells, like the steady-state I–V curves?

Michael Grätzel answered: Yes, ultimately one would need to measure the power produced by the solar cell in a steady state mode if the hysteresis is so severe that if cannot be removed by slowing down the scanning speed.

Liang Chen addressed Michael Grätzel and Nam-Gyu Park: 2D hybrid perovskite material often has a large band gap, but it is more stable to moisture than 3D hybrid perovskites such as CH3NH3PbI3. I wonder whether a 2D hybrid perovskite material is a good choice for solar cells if decreasing the band gap. Are there any other problems for 2D hybrid perovskite solar cells?

Nam-Gyu Park replied: This is excellent question. Yes, if the band gap of a 2D perovskite is comparable to that of a 3D one, this will be expected to be better in terms of stability. However, I am not quite sure whether or not we can still have a high absorption coefficient from a 2D perovskite.

Michael Grätzel continued: Apart from the larger band gap, there is indeed a potential problem that you raise from the anisotropy of the electrical conductivity which is excellent within the plane of the 2D perovskite, but poor in the vertical direction. Hence, if the 2D crystals lie flat on the current collectors the electronic transport across these layers would be impaired resulting in a low fill factor and small carrier collection efficiencies.

Xudong Yang asked: Why is the hysteresis so different for different types of perovskite solar cells? For example, there's always a large hysteresis in TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD based solar cells, while it is much smaller in PCBM/perovskite/PEDOT:PSS based cells. How can we reduce the large hysteresis in the first case?

Michael Grätzel responded: The cause for the hysteresis is still under active investigation. There is evidence that ions are moving under the effect of the electric field that is generated by light-induced charge separation in the perovskite. Other researchers have ascribed this to deep trapping-states present at the interface of the perovskite with the electron collecting contact. In a recent paper published in Nature Communications Professor Huang's group ascribes the decrease in the hysteresis observed for the PCBM/perovskite/PEDOT:PSS solar cells to a smaller level of defect states at the PCBM/perovskite interface (DOI: 10.1038/ncomms6784).

Jian He commented: In Fig. 8 of your paper (a) and (e) show the PbI2 film morphology, before converting to CH3NH3PbI3 and after back-conversion respectively. Before converting to CH3NH3PbI3, PbI2 slices lie on the substrate horizontally. However, after back-conversion, many PbI2 slices become vertical. What is the reason for this change? Does this change lead to a more porous surface and a larger surface area?

Michael Grätzel answered: You are correct that the PbI2 slices are more randomly oriented after back-conversion. We attribute this to the large volume expansion on converting the PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3. When the CH3NH3PbI3 is back-converted the volume of the solute contracts leaving porous space behind. Indeed, we report in section 2.5 of our paper that the porosity of the PbI2 film increases from 6.4 to 24.7% upon one cycle of conversion to CH3NH3PbI3 and back conversion to PbI2.

Zhongqun Tian asked: Recently you published a very interesting paper in Science on water photolysis at 12.3% efficiency via perovskite photovoltaics and Earth-abundant catalysts. Could you comment on the advantages and disadvantages of this new combination of perovskite photovoltaics and electrocatalysis on water splitting?

Michael Grätzel communicated in reply: The advantage of the system is that it employs only low-cost earth abundant materials that can be applied by solution processing to achieve a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 12.3%, which is substantially higher than that achieved with the combination of silicon solar cells with water electrolyzer. However the perovskite cells employed in this work were unsealed and need to be encapsulated appropriately to stabilize their power output.

Zhongqun Tian addressed Shihe Yang, Nam-Gyu Park and Michael Grätzel: You all have shown that perovskite solar cells are very promising as one of the next-generation energy devices. For the further development, it's important to have an in situ tool to charactarize the materials, especially their interfaces. What could be the best tools or combined techniques in terms of good spatial and temporal resolution?

Shihe Yang answered: Perovskite solar cells as a system involve important structures and dynamics over a broad range of spatial and time scales. A single technique cannot solve all these problems. So far transient absorption, time-resolved luminescence, electron microscopy, scanning probe microscopy, impedance spectroscopy, etc. have been used. New techniques need be developed to probe more details about the local structure and dynamics, such as molecular orientation, ferroelectric domain evolution, ionic movement, etc. The probes may be modern sources of photons, electrons, photoelectrons, etc. with high spatial, temporal and spectral resolution. This is quite challenging.

Nam-Gyu Park continued: High resolution TEM may be helpful to figure out the interfacial structure. For charge separation, photoluminesence spectroscopy may be helpful. Electron-beam-induced current (EBIC) combined with SEM can also reveal useful information on interfaces.

Michael Grätzel concluded: Indeed characterizing the interfaces of the materials is crucial for the further development of perovskite solar cells. For spatial resolution there has been, fortunately, a huge progress in electron microscopy and scanning technologies that allow atomic resolution and hence detection of defect states. To investigate the pore filling of mesoporous system tomographic HREM looks particularly promising. However the temporal resolution pulsed laser techniques combined e.g. with IR, SERS and terahertz spectroscopy look extremely interesting.

Wei Han addressed Shihe Yang, Kai Zhi, Nam-Gyu Park and Michael Grätzel: What are the advantages of inorganic solar cell materials over organic polymer solar cell materials?

Shihe Yang answered: In general, inorganic materials are more stable than organic materials. They also have higher mobilities. As for the organohalide perovskites, they are actually organic/inorganic hybrid materials and thus can combine advantages of both. There is also room for improving solar cell perfromance by modulating the organic components.

Kai Zhu continued: Inorganic solar cell materials are generally believed to be more robust than organic solar cell materials.

Nam-Gyu Park added: Inorganic light absorbers usually have higher absorption coefficients, one or two orders of magnitude higher than organic or polymeric light absorbers.

Michael Grätzel concluded: The organic polymer solar cells suffer from low efficiency and problems with stability. They are sensitive to water and oxygen and would need to be hermetically sealed to maintain their power output. Also they have a tendency to undergo phase separation, degrading their performance over time, even if they are kept in the dark in a drawer. Finally the polymers that produce the highest efficiencies (ca. 10%) are very difficult and very expensive to synthesize. Most of these disadvantages are not shared by inorganic or dye sensitized solar cells.

Shi-Gang Sun continued: Recently, the investigation of perovskite materials for solar cells has progressed very fast. As we heard in your presentation, the PCE even reached 28%, which seems not yet to be the limit. With such rapid development, what are your predictions for the future applications for perovskite solar celcomparisonarison with silicon solar cells?

Michael Grätzel answered: The certified solar to electric power conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PCE) measured under standard air mass 1.5 reporting conditions has reached 20.1%, not 28%. The PCE of 28% refers to an unpublished value obtained with a tandem configuration with silicon. Such tandem cells will certainly be of great interest in the future and may become one of the most interesting future applications of perovskite solar cells.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
