 Atomic layer deposition for nanofabrication and interface engineering  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR11875K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11875K
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1522-1528Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Atomic layer deposition for nanofabrication and interface engineering

        
          
            Monan 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianglin 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Siva Krishna 
            Karuturi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alfred Iing Yoong 
            Tok
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hong Jin 
            Fan
          
          
        
      *a
aDivision of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 637371, Singapore. E-mail: fanhj@ntu.edu.sg
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore
Received 
      29th November 2011
    , Accepted 22nd December 2011First published on 4th January 2012Abstract
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) provides a tool for conformal coating on high aspect-ratio nanostructures with excellent uniformity. It has become a technique for both template-directed nanofabrications and engineering of surface properties. This Feature Article highlights the application of ALD in selected fields including photonics, SERS and energy materials. Specifically, the topics include fabrication of plasmonic nanostructures for the SERS applications, fabrication of 3-D nanoarchitectured photoanodes for solar energy conversions (dye-sensitized solar cells and photoelectrochemical cells), and coating of electrodes to enhance the cyclic stability and thus device life span of batteries. Dielectric coating for tailoring optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures is also discussed as exemplified by ZnO nanowires. Future direction of ALD in these applications is discussed at the end.Hong Jin FanDr. Hong Jin Fan is an assistant professor at Nanyang Technological University since 2008. He received his PhD from National University of Singapore in 2003, followed by postdoc at Max-Planck-Institute of Microstructure Physics, Germany and University of Cambridge. He has published 80 journal articles, including 3 invited Review papers. He has co-organized symposia in international conferences including 2008 and 2010 MRS Spring meetings, 2011 MRS Fall meeting, and ICMAT 2011. The research interest of Dr. Fan includes atomic layer deposition, nanowires, hierarchical nanostructures and their applications in solar water splitting and supercapacitors.
Introduction

Atomic layer deposition is a vapor-phase thin film growth technique that allows atomic-scale thickness and uniformity control. It is based on a sequence of two self-limiting reactions between gas-phase precursor molecules and a solid surface, that is, the precursor reacts with the target substrate until all available surface reaction sites are consumed. Unlike chemical vapor deposition, ALD keeps the precursors strictly separated from each other in sequenced deposition cycles, thus preventing gas phase reactions and allowing atomic layer-by-layer deposition with nearly 100% step coverage. Hence, the deposition thickness on even high aspect-ratio substrates can be conveniently controlled by setting the ALD cycles. Because of these merits, ALD is becoming an important tool in the semiconductor industry for the deposition of high-koxides (e.g., HfO2 and Al2O3), diffusion barriers, and three-dimensional (3-D) trench capacitors.1 Recently ALD has started to be utilized for tailoring the physical properties of nanomaterials (e.g., mechanical strengthening of spider silk,2 addition of photocatalytic effect to magnetic materials3), and for template-assisted fabrication of complex nanostructures (e.g., hollow particles,4 tubes,5,6 peapods,7 and compound wires via interfacial solid state reactions8–12). A few recent review articles are available elaborating the basics of ALD and versatile applications in nanosciences.13,14 For a complete introduction of ALD and their applications, the readers are encouraged to refer to the recently published book “Atomic Layer Deposition of Nanostructured Materials”.15 Herein our focus is the emerging application of ALD in nanoplasmonic-related surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) structures and energy conversion and storage devices.
Essentially due to its relatively low process temperature (e.g., ∼80 °C for Al2O3 and ∼100 °C for ZnO) and 3-D conformity at the angstrom level, ALD is becoming a powerful tool for surface engineering of high surface-area nanostructures that are being studied for energy application in batteries, photoelectrochemical cells, photovoltaics, and catalysts. For example, in dye-sensitized solar cells, the carrier recombination at the interface between dye molecules and the charge transport media (TiO2 or ZnO) is one of the efficiency loss processes. An ALD thin layer could provide an inorganic “linker” that reduces the recombination rate but not the transfer rate. For photoelectrochemical cells that convert the sunlight to hydrogen or oxygen gases, the photoanode surface could be unstable due to either photocorrosion or chemical dissolution in basic electrolytes, leading to a fast decay of the function with time. Hence, the nano-surface engineering is also of major concern. Furthermore, in lithium-ion batteries, the crystal structure deterioration due to repeated Li+ intercalation is one of the major factors that determine the life span of the battery. In fact, ALD is becoming a standard tool in silicon photovoltaics for the surface passivation of emitters. In short, the increasing interest in the energy-related research brings ALD under the spotlight.
This article begins with the ALD application in the fabrication of nanogap-based SERS substrates, followed by TiO2 inverse opals for photoelectrodes, and ZnO seed layer for hydrothermal nanorod growth on 3-D substrates. For the interface engineering, our recent results on tuning of the photoluminescence of ZnO nanowire by ALD Al2O3 and metal particles are briefly introduced, followed by examples on how ALD can improve the electrode cyclic stability of photoelectrochemical cells and lithium-ion batteries. The ALD materials demonstrated here are Al2O3, ZnO and TiO2, only because of their simple processes and mature recipes. However, the essence of ALD in these applications is by no means confined to these oxides but can be extended to other oxides, sulfides and noble metals.

ALD fabrication of plasmonic SERS substrates

ALD is useful in the fabrication of plasmonic metal nanogaps for the application in Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS), in which the size and shape of nanogaps are the key to the high electric field concentration.17,18 When two metallic surfaces supporting plasmonic excitation are brought into close proximity, a nanogap with width down to a deep subwavelength scale will form and boost the local optical field greatly. To fine tune the gap between tiny metal particles, one possible way is to create two “metal fingers” first, which are then pushed closer and closer until the separation of the two fingers reaches the deep-subwavelength scale. Due to its good flexibility and easy growth, an array of vertically aligned ZnO nanorods grown on epitaxial substrates, such as sapphire or GaN, is especially ideal for developing highly sensitive SERS substrates.
Based on this idea, we succeeded in fine tuning the gap distance between vertically aligned ZnO nanorods and to realize plasmonic nanogaps packed with 3-D SERS substrates on the whole-template scale with good control in the nanostructure and enhancement strategy.16ALD was employed here to narrow down the gaps between adjacent nanorods (i.e. the gap between proximate Ag particles from two nanorods). Coating of the Ag particles was conducted by sputtering. Fig. 1a shows the SERS spectra of the nanogaps with different widths formed on the scaffold of aligned ZnO nanorods. As can be seen, the signal enhancement ratio is found to be sensitive to the ALD Al2O3 gap layer thickness. The SEM image of one of such nanogap substrates is shown in Fig. 1b.
 Fig. 1  
ALD in fabrication of metal nanogaps based on the nanowire array. (a) SERS spectra of R6G molecules with a concentration of 5 × 10−5 M, collected from the Ag-coated quasi-aligned ZnO nanorod scaffold in which the nanorod distance is reduced by ALD ZnO. Spectra from pristine ZnO nanorods and Ag thin films are also included as reference. (b) SEM image of the nanorod scaffold SERS substrates comprising a 50 nm thick ALD layer between the ZnO nanorod and Ag nanoparticle film. Reprinted with permission.16 
When a photocatalytic material (ZnO and TiO2) is combined with plasmonic metals, the substrate becomes recyclable. The idea here is the “self-cleaning” function of the substrate after SERS measurements by UV photocatalytic degradation of the target molecules rendered by ZnO or TiO2.19,20 As both materials can be readily coated on the 3-D substrate, highly ordered large-scale substrates can be realized. Fig. 2a shows our design of such recyclable SERS substrates which contains ordered arrays of Au semi-shells on hollow TiO2 spheres fabricated using nanosphere monolayer self-assembly, ALD and metal evaporation. A typical image of the Au-capped TiO2 spheres is shown in Fig. 2b. The Raman enhancement originates from the ordered gold nanogaps and the recyclability stems from the UV-photocatalytic degradation of the target molecules by the exposed surfaces of the TiO2 spheres. The size of the nanogaps is controlled by the sphere size and ALD (not by gold film thickness which would otherwise block the TiO2 surface and reduce the self-cleaning function). Sensitivity, reproducibility and recyclability are demonstrated by Raman detection of three typical molecules at concentrations down to 10−7 M. Evident Raman detection was obtained from a concentration of 10−7 M and above. Fig. 2c shows the Raman spectra of ATP adsorbed on the substrate by repeating the “detection → cleaning” procedure five times. Remarkably, the characteristic vibration patterns can be clearly identified when the analyte is present but are completely eliminated after the UV irradiation and washing. These results demonstrate the general reversibility of such an ordered array of Au–TiO2 spheres for the detection of a variety of organic molecules.
 Fig. 2  Recyclable SERS substrate based on ALD–TiO2 and gold combination. (a) Schematics of the fabrication process of the Au semi-shell on the TiO2 nanosphere array. (b) SEM image of the Au-capped TiO2 hollow spheres. (c) Raman spectra of five adsorption/UV-cleaning cycles of ATP 10−6 M. Each cycle consists of adsorption of the target solution followed by UV irradiation. 
Inverse opals by ALD for solar energy conversion

        TiO2 inverse opals are used in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) as optical elements that impart the light management within the device, thereby attracting a lot of attention for their role in enhancing the performance of DSCs. Mallouk et al. first reported the dual-layer photoanode structure, with a bottom 3-D TiO2 inverse opal film to selectively reflect the photons onto the conventional nanocrystalline TiO2 top layer and enhance light harvesting.21 The subsequent studies by Mihi and Míguez et al. extensively analyzed the enhancement mechanism.22,23 A challenging issue here is the fabrication of high quality TiO2 inverse opal. When fabricated using sol–gel hydrolysis or nanoparticle infiltration of opals to form an inverted opal structure, it is very difficult to achieve full infiltration, which, as a result, deteriorates the optoelectronic properties of the electrodes. We employed ALD to fabricate high quality inverse opals with different void sizes (288, 390, 510 nm) on a fluorine-doped tin-oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrate for DSC applications. Fig. 3a and b show the top-view and cross-sectional view of the inverse opal of 510 nm void size, highlighting periodically arranged pores of the nanostructure in hexagonal ordering. The peak position of the photonic bandgaps of the inverse opal (see Fig. 3c) originating from Bragg diffractions indicates the high filling control achieved when fabricated using the stop-flow ALD process.24 These structures were found to possess several advantages as the conformality and high filling fractions ensure the robust interfacial contact with the substrate, thereby providing good electron transport paths. The power conversion efficiencies of 2.22%, 1.81% and 1.42% (under AM1.5 illumination) were achieved with TIO288, TIO390 and TIO510 when used alone as the photoanode.25
 Fig. 3  
          TiO2 inverse opal fabrication enabled by ALD based on the polystyrene nanosphere template. (a and b) Top-view and cross-sectional FESEM images of TiO2 inverse opals made from 510 nm polystyrene particles. (c) The photonic stop band of the inverse opal. (d) Incident-photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) for dye sensitized solar cells based on different inverse opal photoanodes. Reprinted with permission.25 
Analogous to DSCs for photovoltaics, photoelectrochemical water splitting provides a promising approach to convert the solar energy into chemical energy in the form of H2.27TiO2 has been the paradigm material for this purpose due to its high photoactivity, low cost and excellent chemical stability in a wide range of pH values.28 We have recently reported a new photoanode design by a combination of TiO2 inverse opal with CdS quantum dots sensitization for photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution.26 The TiO2 inverse opals were fabricated using self-assembled polystyrene spheres as the sacrificial templates and by subsequent TiO2 infiltration using ALD. The 3-D percolated periodical pore structure of TiO2 inverse opal provides a high surface area for sensitizer quantum dots loading plus a good electrical transport path and intimate contact with the electrolyte (see Fig. 4a). While the sensitizer quantum dots acting as “light antennas” can greatly improve the visible light harvesting, the type II band alignment with TiO2 also favors the interfacial charge transfer and separation. A photocurrent density of ∼5 mA cm−2 for the 288 nm inverse opal photoanode at 0 V versusAg/AgCl bias has been achieved under AM1.5 illumination conditions (see Fig. 4b). These TiO2 inverse opals provide a unique platform for further hybridization with other photoactive nanostructures (such as ZnO nanorods) to further increase the effective surface contacts with electrolytes. In addition, the photonic bandgap features could provide the possibility to improve the photon–quantum dot interaction leading to an enhanced light absorption.29
 Fig. 4  
Quantum dot sensitized TiO2 inverse opal as photoelectrochemical anode. (a) TEM image of CdS quantum dot sensitized TiO2 hollow spheres. (b) Schematics of the photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of the QD sensitized TiO2 inverse opal anodes for solar hydrogen generation, collected both in the dark and under AM1.5 illumination. Inverse opals of three different void sizes (288, 510, 900 nm) are used for comparison. Reprinted with permission.26 
The above-mentioned photosensitizer of CdS nanoparticles was obtained by the solution coating and reaction method. It is also achievable directly by ALD. For example, Brennan et al. recently demonstrated ALD of CdS quantum dots for solid-state QD-sensitized solar cells.30 Another type of common photosensitizer, PbS, was also realized with ALD during the initial nucleation stage of PbS, which is in the form of sub-10 nm nanoislands.31 Furthermore, direct depositions of other solar energy materials by ALD are receiving wide interest and a number of reports are available. For example, antimony sulfide thin films and nanotubes were realized by the Nielsch group.32 The Gordon group recently demonstrated ALD of pure, stoichiometric, single-phase SnS film which is a p-type semiconductor and promising candidate for the absorber layer in thin film solar cells.33 These successes verify the versatility of ALD in both fabrication and surface engineering of energy materials.

ALD
        ZnO as seed layer for 3-D hydrothermal growth
The ALD ZnO film can be used as seed layer for hydrothermal growth of ZnO nanorods on various substrates. Using normal Si substrates, the optimum deposition temperature for the ALD ZnO seed layer is determined to be ≥95 °C. The conventional method for depositing the seed layer is dip coating or spin coating of colloidal ZnO nanoparticles, followed by annealing at 300–500 °C. This method works perfectly for planar and heat-resistant substrates like Si and glass, but not suitable for nonplanar 3-D surfaces or polymers. In our research, ALD ZnO is utilized as the seed layer for the subsequent solution growth of nanorods on both positive (such as CNT34 and Si nanopillar arrays35) and negative substrates (porous skeletons such as inverse opals). Two examples are shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5a, the original Si nanopillars are decorated with a shell of 80-cycle ZnO, which is continuous and uniform along the pillar. The ALD ZnO coated substrates were immersed into an aqueous solution of equimolar zinc nitrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) and hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4) in an autoclave. After the hydrothermal reaction at 95 °C for 5 h, the pillars branch out forming a nanotree array. When further decorated with Ag nanocrystals, the nanotree array has been demonstrated as an efficient 3-D SERS substrate.35
 Fig. 5  
ALD
          ZnO as seed layer for hydrothermal growth of ZnO nanorods on a 3-D substrate. Column (a): growth on the positive template of the Si pillar array. Reprinted with permission.35 Column (b): growth on the negative template of inverse opal. In both cases, the surfaces are coated with ALD ZnO (5–10 nm thick) as the seed layer. Top row: schematics. Middle row: SEM images of the template. Bottom row: the corresponding structure after ZnO nanorod growth. 

ALD
        ZnO as seed layer on a negative template is shown in Fig. 5b. The obtained nanobush structure after the same hydrothermal growth consists of 3-D ordered ZnO nanorod networks interconnected by the inverse opal. This kind of ordered growth of nanobushes is observed over the entire high aspect ratio template (down to 10 μm). Although a growth time of 9 h was chosen to achieve the longest nanowires within the pores, the nanowire length can be conveniently varied by changing the reaction time. Further, the size of the nanobushes can also be varied easily by simply choosing the opal size. As the inverse opals template is TiO2 (obtained also by ALD as discussed above) on FTO glass substrates, the nanobush represents a novel nanoarchitecture that is useful as the photoanode for photoelectrochemical cells. When sensitized with CdS quantum dots, the photoanode shows enhancement in photocurrent density by two times compared to the one comprising pure TiO2 inverse opals or pure ZnO nanorods with equal heights. This enhancement is attributed to the increased sensitizer loading and superior light scattering property.
Tuning optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures
The idea of coating semiconductor nanostructures with an ALD dielectric layer has been providing a surface passivation to reduce the unwanted carrier traps at the surface. By dielectric capping, the separation of electrons and holes within the surface depletion region is reduced, which means that more electron–hole pairs can be generated corresponding to a higher recombination probability. As a result, the bandedge emission can be enhanced while the surface defect-related emissions are suppressed. This phenomenon has been demonstrated by a few groups,36,37 but the enhancements of the bandedge emission are not substantial.
There is recently an increasing attention on tuning the optical and optoelectronic properties of ZnO by employing direct metal capping.38 However, so far the data are inconsistent in terms of enhancement ratios and enhancement mechanisms. By coating ZnO directly with sputtered metal, generally the bandedge UV emissions can be evidently increased and the defect-related visible emissions are suppressed. For certain metals such as Ag which has a wide plasmon frequency range, it allows coupling with ZnO excitons (wavelength ∼370 nm) forming exciton–plasmon polaritons. The coupling is expected to enhance the radiative carrier recombination rate. We are interested in this topic but the experiment was conducted in a modified and more systematic way. Between ZnO and metal, an ALD Al2O3 layer was added for dual purposes: first, the insulating Al2O3 layer prevents a direct charge transfer across the metal–semiconductor contact; second, with the field focusing within the dielectric layer, the trilayer system can be used to testify the coupling of ZnO excitons and metal plasmons. The coupling of two excitations is expected to be dependent on the spatial separation due to the exponential decay of their electric fields. Fig. 6 shows the photoluminescence of trilayer ZnO nanorods with three ALD Al2O3 spacer thicknesses. It is noticed that the enhancement of the ZnO bandage emission is much larger compared to direct metal capping (see the inset of Fig. 6a). More interestingly, the enhancement ratio of the UV emission is indeed very sensitive to the spacer thickness, and the optimum spacer thickness appears to be 5 nm for all metals (Au, Ag, Al and Pt) that were tested. Note that a concise conclusion about the effect of metal type on the enhancement ratios cannot be drawn here, since under the same sputtering condition (15 mA, 20 s) the metal nanoparticles are intrinsically different in size. More details about the physical mechanism will be elaborated elsewhere. Herein we show the very special function of ALD in achieving much larger enhancement ratios compared to pure metal capping.
 Fig. 6  Tuning photoluminescence (PL) properties of ZnO nanorods by ALD dielectric and metal nanoparticles. (a) Room-temperature PL spectra of ZnO/Al2O3/Au nanorods with different Al2O3 spacer thicknesses. The inset shows a comparison of PL spectra of ZnO nanorods that are coated with pure ALD Al2O3 and pure sputtered metal. (b) Plot of the enhancement ratio of UV-to-UV emission for different types of trilayer nanorods as a function of the Al2O3 layer thickness. 
It is believed that this effect should be also of great importance to the photodetection function of ZnO as well as CdS nanostructures. In the photodetection devices, the metal nanoparticles can either increase the light absorption due to the plasmonic effect or enhance the charge separation by the built-in field at the metal–semiconductor Schottky interface. For both cases, the ALD is particularly useful in providing a conformal dielectric layer as the spacer.

ALD surface engineering of electrodes
Battery electrodes made of metal oxides have higher theoretical capacities (500–1500 mA h g−1) compared to commercial graphite (372 mA h g−1). However, effective maintaining of their electrochemical and structural stability during charge/discharge cycles at high current densities and a wide temperature range still remains challenging. While the reaction kinetics can be evidently improved by using one-dimensional nanostructures such as nanowire arrays, the structure disintegration of the metal oxide nanowires is a known issue. In order to address the cycleability and safety issues, some efforts have been dedicated to surface modifications of battery electrodes. The major coating strategies have been solution-based coatings, e.g., sol–gel method, that require large amounts of solvents and precursors as well as multiple coating steps.

ALD has been demonstrated to be useful for this purpose. The ALD encapsulation protects the electrode from structural deterioration but it does not block the electron transport. The George group used ALD to enhance the performance of lithium-ion batteries by coating a thin (3–4 Å) layer of Al2O3 on the LiCoO2 cathode powders.40 As shown in Fig. 7, the capacity retention for the 2 ALD cycle sample can be improved to 89% after 120 charge/discharge cycles, compared to a 45% of the bare LiCoO2 powder. A possible reason for the improvement is that the ultrathin Al2O3 film has acted to minimize the Co dissolution or reduce surface electrolyte reactions; it simultaneously provides a better accommodation of the Li intercalation-induced volume expansion. However, thicker coatings reduce the capacity (see Fig. 7) because of the restricted electron transport and possibly the slower Li+ diffusion kinetics in the thick Al2O3 insulating layer.40
 Fig. 7  Charge–discharge cycle performance of Li-ion battery electrodes based on bare LiCoO2 powders and ALD-coated LiCoO2 powders. Reprinted by permission of ECS-The Electrochemical Society.40 
In solar energy conversion devices, application of ALD for enhancing the stability of the photoelectrodes against deleterious photocorrosion or redox reactions with electrolyte is also becoming an emerging topic. One example is ALD of ZnO:Al and TiO2 bilayer on Cu2O films in photoelectrochemical water reduction reactions as reported by the Thimsen group in EPFL.39 While Cu2O is a promising p-type semiconductor (bandgap ∼2 eV) for photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, it suffers from poor stability in aqueous solutions due to the reductive decomposition Cu2O + 2e− + 2H+ → Cu + H2O. Among various thicknesses and material combinations, a composite ALD layer of 5 × (4 nm ZnO/0.17 nm Al2O3)/11 nm TiO2 was found to achieve the best performance (5.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and a current density retention of 78% after 20 min scan time). As shown in Fig. 8, the photocurrent of the bare Cu2O electrode decreased to nearly zero only after 1.5 min. After the ALD coating, the current could stay at 3 mA cm−2 after 20 min. Herein, the ALD layer not only avoided the direct contact of Cu2O with the electrolyte but also contributes to charge separation due to the formation of a type-II band alignment between p-Cu2O and n-ZnO. In another related work, application of ALD-grown TiO2 was also demonstrated to be beneficial to stabilizing the Si wafer photoanode for water oxidation.41 Similar to the above-discussed ALD passivation in Li-ion battery cathodes, the ALD TiO2 layer is thin enough (2 nm) to permit the electron tunneling, but thick enough to protect the surface and allow an operation up to 8 h in corrosive environments without apparent structural deterioration.
 Fig. 8  Stability enhancement of an oxide photoelectrode by ALD. (a) Schematics of the ALD surface protected electrode structure. The photocurrent transients for (b) the bare Cu2O electrode and (c) the Cu2O/(ZnO:Al2O3)/TiO2/Pt composite electrode. Pt is the catalyst for water reduction reaction. Reprinted with permission.39 
In TiO2-based photoelectrochemical water splitting cells, narrow bandgap non-oxide semiconductors such as CdS and CdSe are often used as the photosensitizer for visible sunlight harvesting. However, these sulfides have a serious photocorrosion problem in aqueous electrolytes. Whether ALD will provide a reliable solution to this issue is worthy of more explorations.
Conclusion and prospective

ALD has been widely used for the fabrication of complex nanostructures, deposition of gate oxides in field effect transistors and tunneling oxides in magnetic tunneling junctions, as well as for surface engineering of functional materials. With the increasing global attention in nanophotonics and clean energy conversion and storage, it is possible that ALD becomes a routine industry tool for both surface coatings and nanofabrications. For the purpose of surface protections, it is required in certain cases that the thin ALD layer should not significantly alter the physical properties (such as light transmission, electric conductivity). On other situations especially in solar cells and light emitting diodes, add-in functions of an ALD dielectric layer for the passivation of surface/interface electronic states are essential. Furthermore, ALD might find applications in enhancing the surface hydrophobicity of solar cell panels and protecting from humidity. For catalyst applications, ALD also provides the great opportunity for the deposition of highly monodispersed noble metal nanoparticles,42–44 especially when the nanoparticles are coated on highly porous surfaces. It is believed that this topic should be of great interest to a wide range of researchers.
In the field of nanoplasmonics, ALD certainly provides a convenient tool for creating nanogaps between metals. This is a relatively new direction but certainly more attention will be drawn to the large-scale fabrication of ordered metal nanogaps of tunable size and dielectric properties. This will bring the metal nanoplasmonics closer to single molecule detection viaSERS.
For the deposition on high aspect ratio structures, there are two concerns. First is the ALD process. For substrates with deep trenches such as anodic aluminium oxide and thick inverse opals, highly packed nanoparticles such as TiO2 paste film in dye-sensitized solar cells, and other framework structures such as metal–organic frameworks (MOF), a stop-flow ALD process is preferred to the laminar-flow process. The former can facilitate pressure-induced infiltration, resulting in improved depth homogeneity. For most nanowire substrates, particularly those well-oriented nanowire arrays, this is not an issue and any ALD can make excellent coatings. The second concern is the precursors. The availability of high vapor pressure and stable precursors is still one of the major limitations in ALD for high aspect ratio structures. Development in this area is critical in order for industry to take ALD seriously.
Notes and references
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 111–131 CrossRef .
S.-M. Lee, E. Pippel, U. Gösele, C. Dresbach, Y. Qin, C. V. Chandran, T. Bräuniger, G. Hause and M. Knez, Science, 2009, 324, 488–492 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, D. M. King, J. Li, K. S. Barrett, R. B. Goldfarb and A. W. Weimer, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 6964–6971 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. A. Ras, M. Kemell, J. de Wit, M. Ritala, G. ten Brinke, M. Leskelä and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 102–106 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, M. Knez, R. Scholz, K. Nielsch, E. Pippel, D. Hesse, U. Gosele and M. Zacharias, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5157–5162 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, X. Y. Sun, J. C. Spagnola, C. Saquing, S. A. Khan, R. J. Spontak and G. N. Parsons, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 546–554 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, L. F. Liu, R. B. Yang, U. Gosele and M. Knez, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3221–3225 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, Y. Yang and M. Zacharias, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 885–900 RSC .
Y. Yang, D. S. Kim, M. Knez, R. Scholz, A. Berger, E. Pippel, D. Hesse, U. Gosele and M. Zacharias, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4068–4074 CAS .
Y. Yang, R. Scholz, H. J. Fan, D. Hesse, U. Gosele and M. Zacharias, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 555–562 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, R. B. Yang, H. J. Fan, R. Scholz, Z. P. Huang, A. Berger, Y. Qin, M. Knez and U. Gosele, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1442–1446 CAS .
H. J. Fan, U. Gosele and M. Zacharias, Small, 2007, 3, 1660–1671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Knez, K. Niesch and L. Niinisto, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3425–3438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Detavernier, J. Dendooven, S. Pulinthanathu Sree, K. F. Ludwig and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5242–5253 RSC .

Atomic Layer Deposition of Nanostructured Materials, ed. N. Pinna and M. Knez, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, L. Sun, C. Cheng, H. Hu, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3627–3630 RSC .
W. E. Doering, M. E. Piotti, M. J. Natan and R. G. Freeman, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3100–3108 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W. S. Chang, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3913–3961 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sinha, L. E. Depero and I. Alessandri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2557–2563 CAS .
X. H. Li, G. Y. Chen, L. B. Yang, Z. Jin and J. H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2815–2824 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. Van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mihi, M. E. Calvos, J. A. Anta and H. Miguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13–17 CAS .
A. Mihi and H. MÃguez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15968–15976 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Karuturi, L. Liu, L. T. Su, Y. Zhao, H. J. Fan, X. Ge, S. He and A. T. I. Yoong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14843–14848 CAS .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 CAS .
C. Cheng, S. K. Karuturi, L. Liu, J. Liu, H. Li, L. T. Su, A. I. Y. Tok and H. J. Fan, Small, 2012, 8, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS .
E. Graugnard, J. S. King, D. P. Gaillot and C. J. Summers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1187–1196 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Brennan, P. Ardalan, H.-B.-R. Lee, J. R. Bakke, I. K. Ding, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1169–1175 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Dasgupta, H. J. Jung, O. Trejo, M. T. McDowell, A. Hryciw, M. Brongersma, R. Sinclair and F. B. Prinz, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 934–940 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Yang, J. Bachmann, M. Reiche, J.r. W. Gerlach, U. Gösele and K. Nielsch, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2586–2588 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sinsermsuksakul, J. Heo, W. Noh, A. S. Hock and R. G. Gordon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1116–1125 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Chu, W. Milne and H. J. Fan, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1836–1840 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, B. Yan, S. M. Wong, X. Li, W. Zhou, T. Yu, Z. Shen, H. Yu and H. J. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1824–1828 CAS .
M. Kang, J. S. Lee, S. K. Sim, B. Min, K. Cho, H. Kim, M. Y. Sung, S. Kim, S. A. Song and M. S. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 466, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wang, C. C. Kei, Y. Tao and T. P. Perng, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, K49–K52 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Cheng, E. J. Sie, B. Liu, C. H. A. Huan, T. C. Sum, H. D. Sun and H. J. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 071107 CrossRef .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, A. C. Dillon, M. D. Groner, S. M. George and S. H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A75–A81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Dühnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Elam, A. V. V. Zinovev, M. J. Pellin, D. J. Comstock and M. C. Hersam, ECS Trans., 2007, 3, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feng, J. A. Libera, P. C. Stair, J. T. Miller and J. W. Elam, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 665–673 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Christensen, J. W. Elam, F. A. Rabuffetti, Q. Ma, S. J. Weigand, B. Lee, S. Seifert, P. C. Stair, K. R. Poeppelmeier, M. C. Hersam and M. J. Bedzyk, Small, 2009, 5, 750–757 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Hong Jin Fan	Dr. Hong Jin Fan is an assistant professor at Nanyang Technological University since 2008. He received his PhD from National University of Singapore in 2003, followed by postdoc at Max-Planck-Institute of Microstructure Physics, Germany and University of Cambridge. He has published 80 journal articles, including 3 invited Review papers. He has co-organized symposia in international conferences including 2008 and 2010 MRS Spring meetings, 2011 MRS Fall meeting, and ICMAT 2011. The research interest of Dr. Fan includes atomic layer deposition, nanowires, hierarchical nanostructures and their applications in solar water splitting and supercapacitors.

 	Fig. 1  
ALD in fabrication of metal nanogaps based on the nanowire array. (a) SERS spectra of R6G molecules with a concentration of 5 × 10−5 M, collected from the Ag-coated quasi-aligned ZnO nanorod scaffold in which the nanorod distance is reduced by ALD ZnO. Spectra from pristine ZnO nanorods and Ag thin films are also included as reference. (b) SEM image of the nanorod scaffold SERS substrates comprising a 50 nm thick ALD layer between the ZnO nanorod and Ag nanoparticle film. Reprinted with permission.16	 

 	Fig. 2  Recyclable SERS substrate based on ALD–TiO2 and gold combination. (a) Schematics of the fabrication process of the Au semi-shell on the TiO2 nanosphere array. (b) SEM image of the Au-capped TiO2 hollow spheres. (c) Raman spectra of five adsorption/UV-cleaning cycles of ATP 10−6 M. Each cycle consists of adsorption of the target solution followed by UV irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 3  
          TiO2 inverse opal fabrication enabled by ALD based on the polystyrene nanosphere template. (a and b) Top-view and cross-sectional FESEM images of TiO2 inverse opals made from 510 nm polystyrene particles. (c) The photonic stop band of the inverse opal. (d) Incident-photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) for dye sensitized solar cells based on different inverse opal photoanodes. Reprinted with permission.25	 

 	Fig. 4  
Quantum dot sensitized TiO2 inverse opal as photoelectrochemical anode. (a) TEM image of CdS quantum dot sensitized TiO2 hollow spheres. (b) Schematics of the photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of the QD sensitized TiO2 inverse opal anodes for solar hydrogen generation, collected both in the dark and under AM1.5 illumination. Inverse opals of three different void sizes (288, 510, 900 nm) are used for comparison. Reprinted with permission.26	 

 	Fig. 5  
ALD
          ZnO as seed layer for hydrothermal growth of ZnO nanorods on a 3-D substrate. Column (a): growth on the positive template of the Si pillar array. Reprinted with permission.35 Column (b): growth on the negative template of inverse opal. In both cases, the surfaces are coated with ALD ZnO (5–10 nm thick) as the seed layer. Top row: schematics. Middle row: SEM images of the template. Bottom row: the corresponding structure after ZnO nanorod growth.	 

 	Fig. 6  Tuning photoluminescence (PL) properties of ZnO nanorods by ALD dielectric and metal nanoparticles. (a) Room-temperature PL spectra of ZnO/Al2O3/Au nanorods with different Al2O3 spacer thicknesses. The inset shows a comparison of PL spectra of ZnO nanorods that are coated with pure ALD Al2O3 and pure sputtered metal. (b) Plot of the enhancement ratio of UV-to-UV emission for different types of trilayer nanorods as a function of the Al2O3 layer thickness.	 

 	Fig. 7  Charge–discharge cycle performance of Li-ion battery electrodes based on bare LiCoO2 powders and ALD-coated LiCoO2 powders. Reprinted by permission of ECS-The Electrochemical Society.40	 

 	Fig. 8  Stability enhancement of an oxide photoelectrode by ALD. (a) Schematics of the ALD surface protected electrode structure. The photocurrent transients for (b) the bare Cu2O electrode and (c) the Cu2O/(ZnO:Al2O3)/TiO2/Pt composite electrode. Pt is the catalyst for water reduction reaction. Reprinted with permission.39	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
