Optofluidics based micro-photocatalytic fuel cell for efficient wastewater treatment and electricity generation  - Lab on a Chip (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4LC00595C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4LC00595C
(Paper)
Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 3368-3375Optofluidics based micro-photocatalytic fuel cell for efficient wastewater treatment and electricity generation

        
          
            Lin 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Guanyi 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rong 
            Chen
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xun 
            Zhu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Liao
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Youxu 
            Yu
          
        
      a
aKey Laboratory of Low-grade Energy Utilization Technologies and Systems (Chongqing University), Ministry of Education, Chongqing 400030, China. E-mail: rchen@cqu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 23 65102474;   Tel: +86 23 65102474
bInstitute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400030, China
Received 
      21st May 2014
    , Accepted 9th June 2014First published on 9th June 2014AbstractIn this work, an optofluidics based micro-photocatalytic fuel cell with a membrane-free and air-breathing mode was proposed to greatly enhance the cell performance. The incorporation of the optofluidic technology into a photocatalytic fuel cell not only enlarges the specific illumination and reaction area but also enhances the photon and mass transfer, which eventually boosts the photocatalytic reaction rate. Our results show that this new photocatalytic fuel cell yields a much higher performance in converting organics into electricity. A maximum power density of 0.58 mW cm−2 was achieved. The degradation performance of this new optofluidic micro-photocatalytic fuel cell was also evaluated and the maximum degradation efficiency reached 83.9%. In short, the optofluidic micro-photocatalytic fuel cell developed in this work shows promising potential for simultaneously degrading organic pollutants and generating electricity.
1. Introduction
Every year a huge amount of organic compounds is discharged into water bodies and causes serious environmental pollution. However, organics-containing wastewater is regarded as an available energy source because it contains plentiful chemical energy. Hence, eliminating these organic pollutants while simultaneously producing electricity is a promising, yet challenging approach to address environmental and energy issues.1 Among existing wastewater treatment strategies, photoelectrochemical oxidation is an efficient way to degrade various refractory organic pollutants.2 Such a process can be realized by employing a semiconductor photocatalytic anode that is excited by light absorption. The absorbed photons generate electron and hole pairs. The holes oxidize the organic substance while the photogenerated electrons are transferred spontaneously to the cathode through an external circuit due to the potential difference between the electrodes, generating electricity. Therefore, a photocatalytic fuel cell (PFC) system is formed with organic substances as fuel, in which the chemical energy stored in organics is directly converted into electrical energy accompanied by organic compounds’ degradation.3–6 As a result, photocatalytic fuel cells enable simultaneous wastewater treatment and renewable energy production.
Unlike conventional fuel cells that usually use noble metals as anode materials to achieve high catalytic activity, a PFC oxidizes fuel using abundant and cost-effective semiconductor photocatalysts. Since the concept of PFCs has been proposed, numerous efforts have been focused on the development of materials and photocatalysts for the photoelectrodes.7,8 Besides, the design of the photocatalytic reactor has also been explored for the efficient utilization of solar energy and promotion of photocatalytic reactions. Currently, most developed PFC devices are referred to as bulk reactors with large dimensions.8–10 These PFCs face inherent problems in poor photon and mass transport, which limits the photocatalytic reaction rate.
Recently, a new technology of optofluidics that combines microfluidics and modern optics has emerged, which can leverage specific advantages of these two disciplines, such as fine flow control, large surface area-to-volume ratio and uniform light distribution.11,12 Because of these features, it has shown great potential to accelerate reaction rates by improving the mass and photon transfer and hence has become a promising platform for photocatalytic reaction systems.13 Indeed, there have been many studies demonstrating its improved photocatalytic performance by employing optofluidic reactors compared to conventional large-scale reactors in wastewater treatment, energy conversion and other photocatalytic reactions.14–17 Moreover, the use of optofluidics makes it possible to eliminate the membrane used in conventional PFCs,18 which facilitates the system simplification and integration. Therefore, the incorporation of the optofluidic technology into PFCs may address the limitation of photon and mass transfer. With this technology, not only a high degradation efficiency in wastewater treatment but also a high power output can be achieved. In this work, a membrane-free, air-breathing optofluidics based micro-PFC, termed as optofluidic μPFC, was proposed. To demonstrate the feasibility of this microdevice, glucose was used as the organic wastewater model and its electricity production performance was examined. A persistent azo-dye, methylene blue (MB), was also selected as a representative to study the degradation performance of the optofluidic μPFC. In addition, the long-term performance and effect of the operating parameters were also studied for the optimization of the optofluidic μPFC operation.
2. Device design and working principles
The proposed optofluidic μPFC was constructed by stacking a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layer and a carbon paper cathode coated with Pt black in sequence onto a FTO glass with a TiO2 film treated with a photosensitizer and a SU-8 microfluidic spacer. As shown in Fig. 1A, in this design, the FTO glass with the deposited TiO2 film serves as the photoanode to ensure both the photocatalytic reaction and electron conductivity. Meanwhile, the TiO2 film is treated with photosensitizer (75% CdS and 25% ZnS) to extend the spectral response from UV light to visible light. A carbon paper loaded with Pt black serves as the cathode to receive the electrons from the photoanode and facilitates the oxygen reduction reaction. The working principle of this optofluidic μPFC is illustrated in Fig. 1B. The reactants in alkaline media, which serve as the electrolyte, are delivered via the microfluidic pathway through the inlet into the fuel cell while oxygen is obtained from the surrounding atmosphere for the cathode. Once light illuminates the photoanode, the electrons in the valence band of TiO2 are excited to the conduction band with the assistance of the photosensitizer, and the holes (h+), which are powerful oxidants, are simultaneously generated, as represented by eqn (1). The excited electrons then go through the external circuit to the cathode while the holes along with OH− oxidize the fuel (R), as represented by eqn (2). At the cathode, the incoming electrons, water and oxygen are combined to generate OH− for the photoanode reaction.
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic display of the optofluidic μPFC. (B) Working principles of the optofluidic μPFC. (C) Image of the optofluidic μPFC. 
The photoanode reaction, TiO2 + hv → h+ + e−,(1) R + nh+ + nOH− → R′ + nH2O.(2)
The cathode reaction, 2H2O + O2 + 4e− → 4OH−.(3)
As mentioned earlier, the transport of both photons and mass significantly affects the photocatalytic reaction rate. In a conventional design, photocatalysts are usually coated onto a substrate and then distributed within the wastewater solution, leading to light attenuation and the reduction of photons arriving at the photocatalysts. Besides, bare TiO2 cannot efficiently respond to most photons because of its relatively large band gap. However, the proposed optofluidic μPFC can address the photon loss by employing FTO glass as the catalytic substrate and solar light can directly reach the catalysts without passing through the wastewater solution. Besides, the addition of photosensitizers is favorable for capturing more photons.
On the mass transfer, in traditional PFCs, the relatively large distance between the electrodes along with the membrane increases the mass/charge transfer resistance, which lowers the photocatalytic reaction rate. On the other hand, the specific reaction surface is small, which also limits the cell performance. Fortunately, these problems could be overcome by the proposed optofluidic μPFC. The small dimension between the two electrodes with the elimination of the membrane facilitates the mass and charge transfer. What's more, the intrinsic large surface-to-volume ratio also benefits the photocatalytic reaction.
Besides, the air-breathing cathode is employed in this new μPFC to handle the mass transfer of oxygen. Comparing to the common O2 supply method, the air-breathing cathode eliminates ancillary devices required for the oxygen supply, such as fan and gas compressor. Oxygen is transported from the surrounding air to the cathode reaction layer. Therefore, the proposed μPFC in this work has a simpler structure and more compact system than conventional PFCs. The parasitic power loss associated with ancillary devices is eliminated, increasing the system efficiency. Moreover, such a design will favor industrial applications with ease of operation and fabrication as well as low costs.
3. Materials and methods
3.1 Construction of the photoanode
Construction of the photoanode includes three steps: preparation of the TiO2 catalyst colloid, construction of the TiO2 film on FTO glass and formation of the CdS–ZnS composite layer. In the first step, TiO2 colloid was prepared using a sol–gel method.19 12 g TiO2 nanoparticles (Aeroxide P25, Acros, Belgium) were dispersed in a mixture of 120 ml DI water and 0.4 ml acetylacetone (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) with magnetic stirring. Then 0.2 mL of a Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was added to facilitate the spreading of the colloid. After that, 2.4 g polyethylene glycol (Aladdin, China) was added into the solution. The solution was then mixed for 12 hours. In the second step, TiO2 was deposited on a FTO glass (resistance 10 Ω per square, Xinyan Technology Co., China), which was cleaned by sonication in acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol. Then, the TiO2 colloid was diluted with ethanol and applied using a wet spray coating method with a spray gun. It was finally calcined at 550 °C for 1 h. The catalyst loading of TiO2 was 3 mg cm−2. The last step was the formation of the CdS–ZnS composite layer. The CdS75%–ZnS25% catalysts were deposited on the TiO2 film by successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR method).18 To do this, two aqueous solutions were prepared, one containing Cd (NO3)2·4H2O (Aladdin, China) and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (Aladdin, China) with a molar ratio of 3 and the other containing Na2S·9H2O (Aladdin, China). The concentration of metal ions and the corresponding concentration of sulfur ions was 0.1 mol L−1. The newly prepared TiO2 electrode was immersed in the prepared metal salt solution for 5 min and then washed with distilled water. It was then immersed in the Na2S·9H2O solution for 5 min, and washed again. This sequence corresponds to one SILAR cycle. A total of 10 SILAR cycles were performed. The formed photoanode was eventually dried at 100 °C in an oven for 10 minutes. The active area of the photocatalytic film was 2 cm2 (1 cm × 2 cm).
3.2 Construction of the cathode
The cathode was made of carbon paper with deposited carbon black and Pt black. At first, a carbon paper (HCP010, Shanghai Hesen, China) was immersed in PTFE (Teflon, 30% wt. dispersion in water, Aldrich, USA) for 10 minutes and heated for 20 min in an oven at 340 °C. The resulting loading of PTFE was 0.43 mg cm−2. Then, 0.246 g carbon black was mixed with 8 mL distilled water by vigorous mixing, which was further mixed with 0.088 mL PTFE and applied on the prepared carbon paper and then heated at 340 °C for 10 minutes. Subsequently, the catalytic layer was prepared: 0.5 g Pt black electrocatalyst (CX0375, Alfa Aesar, USA) was mixed with 2 g Nafion perfluorinated resin (D520, 5% wt. solution in lower aliphatic alcohols and water, DuPont Co., USA) and a 10 g solution containing 5 g isopropanol (Aladdin, China) and 5 g distilled water. The mixture was ultrasonically homogenized and then applied on the carbon black coated carbon paper. The electrode was finally heated at 80 °C for 30 min. The Pt loading was about 1.3 mg cm−2.
3.3 Device fabrication and assembly
Our optofluidic μPFC was constructed by stacking a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layer, a carbon paper cathode in sequence onto a FTO anode and a SU-8 microfluidic spacer. The cell chamber was defined by a SU-8 negative photoresist on FTO glass. First, the FTO was spin coated with SU-8 negative photoresist. Then the photoresist was prebaked for 30 min prior to ultraviolet (UV) exposure through a negative photomask. Following the exposure, the FTO was baked at 85 °C for 20 min and agitated in SU-8 developer for 2 min. The thickness of the achieved SU-8 layer was 200 μm, corresponding to the depth of the microchamber. A PDMS layer containing an air-breathing window was prepared by a silicon mold using standard soft-lithography techniques.20 The master mold was developed by the same way as mentioned above. Then the PDMS layer was formed on the master mold by mixing PDMS polymer base and curing agent (Sylgard 184, Dow Coming, USA) at a ratio of 10:1 and degassing. Next, the mixture was cast onto the patterned wafer and baked at 85 °C for 60 min. The PDMS was released from the patterned wafer and cut into a chip with a hollow 1.0 cm × 2.0 cm rectangle window. The assembled optofluidic μPFC used in our experiments had a 40 μL reaction microchamber, 2.0 cm in length, 1.0 cm in width and 200 μm in height. The fabricated optofluidic μPFC is shown in Fig. 1C.
3.4 Electrical measurements and experimental setup
The measurements of the open circuit voltage, short circuit current and voltage–current characteristics of the μPFC were recorded using an electrochemical workstation (Zennium, Zahner, Germany) and an electronic load system (CT-3008, Neware Technology Ltd., China). The prepared solution with 0.5 M NaOH was introduced into the optofluidic μPFC using a syringe pump (LSP04-1A, LongerPump, China). A 250 W Xe lamp (XD-300, Nanjing KWS Lighting, China) was used to simulate the solar light source and the IR-radiometer (FZ-A, Photoelectric Instrument Factory of Beijing Normal University, China) was employed to measure the light intensity. Methylene blue (MB) concentrations were determined from absorption spectra using an UV-visible spectrophotometer (TU-1901, Persee, China). The flow rate was kept at 100 μL min−1 in all experiments. All measurements were repeated at least three times.
4. Results and discussion
4.1 Discharging performance of the optofluidic μPFC

4.1.1 Photoresponse characteristics of the optofluidic μPFC. 

Fig. 2 shows the photoresponse behavior of the optofluidic μPFC under the light on/off mode. Two feature parameters of the short circuit photocurrent with respect to a zero discharging voltage and an open circuit voltage (OCV) were measured. In this test, the light intensity was kept at 55 mW cm−2 and the fuel concentration was 0.1 M. As shown in Fig. 2A, once the illumination was applied, the photocurrent at a cell voltage of 0.0 V immediately shifted from 0 mA cm−2 to about 1 mA cm−2 and then rapidly increased to 1.1 mA cm−2. When the light was off, the photocurrent was instantly restored to zero. Such behavior was well reproduced during several on/off testing cycles. Fig. 2B shows the photoresponse of the OCV to the light on/off cycles. Similarly, when the light was on, the cell voltage instantly climbed to an OCV of about 1.04 V. When the light was off, the cell voltage quickly dropped and its decreasing rate reduced with time. In a given light-off period of 120 s, the cell voltage dropped to about 0.36 V. Clearly, the responses of the short circuit photocurrent and OCV to the light illumination could be well reproduced. These results indicate that the developed optofluidic μPFC shows a good photoresponse to illumination.
 Fig. 2  (A) The photocurrent–time curve and (B) the photovoltage–time curve of the optofluidic μPFC. Glucose concentration: 0.1 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2. 


4.1.2 The polarization curve of the optofluidic μPFC. 
A typical polarization curve of the optofluidic μPFC is shown in Fig. 3A. In this measurement, the light intensity was 55 mW cm−2 and 0.1 M glucose was used as fuel. As shown, at low and moderate photocurrent densities, as the discharging photocurrent density increased, the cell voltage was reduced as a result of the increasing overpotentials of both the photoanode and cathode. At high photocurrent densities, the cell voltage sharply decreased. A maximum power density of 0.45 mW cm−2 was obtained, which was higher than previous PFCs with the same glucose concentration operation, 0.38 mW cm−2.6 In traditional fuel cells, this extremely rapid drop of the cell voltage is typically attributed to a concentration polarization, namely the mass transfer loss, because more reactants are required at high current densities. In this μPFC, a serious concentration polarization at the cathode can be neglected at high current densities. This can be evidenced by comparing the current density of the optofluidic μPFC with conventional air-breathing fuel cells,21 in which a serious concentration polarization happened at much higher current densities with the same air-breathing mode. Therefore, the rapid drop may only be caused by the photoanodic reaction. At high photocurrent densities, the cell voltage became low, indicating that the potential difference between the photoanode and cathode was lowered. In this case, the driving force for the transfer of excited electrons to the cathode is weakened. The electrons and holes were easily recombined. The reduced amount of holes led to fewer hydroxyl radicals being generated, which are the strong oxidant. As a consequence, the lowered hydroxyl radical concentration slowed down the photoelectrochemical reaction rate, which caused the overpotential of the photoanode to be rapidly upgraded. In turn, the cell voltage showed a sharp drop at high photocurrent densities. Besides, the fill factor (FF) of the developed optofluidic μPFC, that is, the ratio of a real maximum electric power output per theoretical maximum power output, was also used to characterize the μPFC performance, which can be calculated using the following equation:22 FF = JVmax/(Jsc·Voc)(4)where JVmax is the maximum power density (mW cm−2), Jsc and Voc are the short circuit photocurrent density and OCV of the optofluidic μPFC, respectively. The fill factor of this optofluidic μPFC under these given operating conditions could reach a value of 0.5, which is 66% higher than for PFCs with common dimensions.7 This improvement of FF could be ascribed to the enhanced photon and mass transfer. As mentioned above, the photons are directly transported to the photocatalysts without passing through the electrolyte solution. With respect to the mass transport enhancement, two factors resulting from the optofluidic design are dominant. First, the mass transport usually relies on diffusion. The design of the optofluidic μPFC shortens the distance between the two electrodes and thus the mass/charge transport is enhanced. Second, a larger specific area offers more active sites per unit volume for the reaction, which also boosts cell performance.
 Fig. 3  (A) Performance of the optofluidic μPFC. (B) Transient discharging voltage at a constant current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Glucose concentration: 0.1 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2. 


4.1.3 Long-term performance of the optofluidic μPFC. 
The long-term performance is an important factor describing the stability of the fuel cell operation in practical applications. For this reason, the long-term performance of the optofluidic μPFC was measured at a constant discharging photocurrent density of 0.5 mA cm−2 for 6 hours. In the test, the fuel concentration was 0.1 M and the light intensity was 55 mW cm−2. The results are presented in Fig. 3B. As shown, the cell voltage of the μPFC was very stable. No fluctuation in the cell voltage was found during the 6 h continuous operation. The cell voltage just slightly declined from 0.72 V to 0.65 V, which may be attributed to the photosensitizer decay. With this result, it is revealed that the μPFC developed in this work can yield a relatively stable performance in future applications.


4.1.4 Effect of the fuel concentration. 
The performances of the optofluidic μPFC with different glucose concentrations of 0.01, 0.05 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 M were measured and the results are given in Fig. 4. It can be seen from Fig. 4A that the performance of the optofluidic μPFC was greatly affected by the fuel concentration. When the optofluidic μPFC ran at a glucose concentration of 0.01 M, the cell voltage declined quickly with increasing photocurrent density because the extremely low fuel concentration cannot meet the requirements of the photoanode reactions, and may even cause possible light-induced damage to the photosensitizer.18 Accordingly, the Jsc was only 0.3 mA cm−2, which is much lower than those with other fuel concentrations, as illustrated in Fig. 4B. As the fuel concentration increased to 0.05 M, such sharp decrease in the cell voltage when varying the photocurrent density was not observed due to enhanced mass transport, which can also be proven by the dramatic increase in the short circuit photocurrent density. As the fuel concentration was further increased, the overall cell performance was improved. In particular, because more fuel needed to be consumed and the concentration polarization became more significant at high photocurrent densities, the increment of the cell performance with high fuel concentrations became more obvious. Meanwhile, further increasing the fuel concentration could improve the utilization rate of the hydroxyl radicals for the fuel oxidation and inhibit the recombination of the electron/hole pairs. Therefore, the short circuit photocurrent density increased from 0.9 mA cm−2 to 1.3 mA cm−2 as the fuel concentration increased from 0.05 M to 0.3 M. Similarly, the maximum power density rapidly increased from 0.15 mW cm−2 to 0.41 mW cm−2 as the fuel concentration was increased to 0.05 M. When the fuel concentration was further increased to 0.3 M, the maximum power density gradually upgraded to 0.48 mW cm−2. Although the OCV showed no significant variation under different fuel concentrations, the OCV still gradually improved from 0.98 V to 1.03 V owing to the enhanced photoanode reaction, as shown in Fig. 4B. Interestingly, different from the increase of Jsc, JVmax and Voc with an increasing fuel concentration, the FF decreased. This is because although increasing the fuel concentration could improve the maximum power density, the increase in the short circuit photocurrent density was more significant. As indicated in eqn (4), with an increase of Voc with the fuel concentration, the FF showed a decreasing trend. This fact implies that even though increasing the fuel concentration can improve the cell performance to some extent, the FF will decrease, lowering the utilization efficiency. In practical applications, both the power output and fill factor need to be considered for optimizing the optofluidic μPFC operation.
 Fig. 4  (A) Polarization curves of the optofluidic based μPFC at various glucose concentrations. (B) Variation of the short-circuit current density, open circuit voltage, maximum power density and fill factor of the μPFC with the glucose concentration. Flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2. 


4.1.5 Effect of the light intensity. 
In PFCs, the photoanodic reactions are actuated by the incident light. Therefore, the light intensity, as one of the most important parameters, has a major influence on the cell performance. Fig. 5A shows the polarization curves of the optofluidic μPFC under the light intensity varying from 22 to 112 mW cm−2 and with a fuel concentration of 0.1 M. As the light intensity increased, the performance of the optofluidic μPFC improved. It is easy to understand that the stronger the light intensity is, the more photo-generated electrons and holes are produced, which leads to increasing photo-excited current, promoting the fuel oxidation reaction. Hence, the developed μPFC could exhibit considerable improvement of the cell performance under stronger light irradiation. More detailed information can be found in Fig. 5B. The Jsc went up from 0.57 mA cm−2 to 1.82 mA cm−2 with increasing light intensity. Besides, the open circuit voltage Voc and maximum power density JVmax also improved with the light intensity. Clearly, the increased light intensity promoted the photoanode reaction. However, the fill factor reduced with increasing light intensity. This recession could be attributed to the increased probability of an electron/hole recombination at high light intensities, which lowers the utilization efficiency.
 Fig. 5  (A) Polarization curves of the optofluidic μPFC at various light intensities. (B) Variation of the short-circuit current density, open circuit voltage, maximum power density and fill factor of the μPFC with light intensity. Glucose concentration: 0.1 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1. 

4.2 Degradation performance of the optofluidic μPFC
The degradation performance of the proposed optofluidic μPFC was also examined in this work. Because methylene blue (MB) is a typical pollutant and has been extensively used in the textile industry, in previous work, MB was used as fuel to examine the degradation performance of the PFC.7 Following this, the degradation performance of the optofluidic μPFC was investigated. Attention was paid to the effects of the organic pollutant concentration and light intensity on the degradation efficiency. To do this, the μPFC was discharged at the short circuit current density to achieve maximum degradation efficiency since the photocurrent density corresponds to the maximum consumption of organics.

4.2.1 Effect of the organic pollutant concentration. 
The effect of the MB concentration on the degradation efficiency is shown in Fig. 6A. The concentrations of MB ranged from 1 × 10−5 to 4 × 10−5 M. The flow rate of the MB solution was 100 μL min−1 and the light intensity was 55 mW cm−2. It can be seen that as the MB concentration increased, the degradation efficiency of the optofluidic μPFC declined from 83.9 ± 5.3% to 23.7 ± 4.3%. This reduction results from two reasons. First, the increase of the MB concentration increased the load in the optofluidic μPFC. But the capability of the fuel cell was limited so that the overall degradation efficiency would decrease with increasing MB concentration. Second, although a higher MB concentration is favorable for the photocatalytic reaction, more intermediates are simultaneously generated, which adsorb onto the active surfaces of the photocatalysts. Thus, when the MB concentration is high, a significant amount of active surface area might be covered by intermediates, hindering the reaction and lowering the degradation efficiency.
 Fig. 6  (A) Effect of MB concentration on the degradation efficiency. Flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2. (b) Effect of light intensity on the degradation efficiency. MB concentration: 2 × 10−5 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1. 


4.2.2 Effect of the light intensity. 
The influence of the light intensity on the degradation of MB is shown in Fig. 6B. In this test, the concentration of MB was kept at 2 × 10−5 M and the flow rate was maintained at 100 μL min−1. As shown, with the light intensity increasing from 22 to 112 mW cm−2, the degradation efficiency increased from 39.2 ± 2.3% to 54.9 ± 4.4%, indicating that the light intensity has a positive effect on the degradation efficiency in this tested range. This is because the stronger the light intensity is, the more photo-induced holes will be produced, causing more MB to be reduced. However, the enhancement of degradation efficiency is limited, indicating that the effect of the light intensity is not very significant. This could be attributed to the fact that although more electron/hole pairs were formed under stronger illumination, their probability of recombination also increases at such a low cell voltage. Hence, parts of generated electron/hole pairs are recombined, limiting the increase in the amount of holes.

5. Conclusion
In this study, an optofluidics based micro-photocatalytic fuel cell with a membrane-free and air-breathing mode was developed. Various models of organic wastewater were used as substrates to evaluate its electricity generation and degradation performance. The experimental results showed that the developed optofluidic μPFC could quickly respond to illumination. More importantly, the newly-developed μPFC with the incorporated optofluidics technology could evidently enhance the electricity generation as a result of the enhanced mass and photon transfer. Parametric studies indicated that increasing the fuel concentration and light intensity could improve the cell performance. The maximum power density increased from 0.15 to 0.48 mW cm−2 as the fuel concentration increased from 0.01 to 0.3 M, while it was improved from 0.28 to 0.58 mW cm−2 as the light intensity increased from 22 to 112 mW cm−2. In addition, the developed optofluidic μPFC could also yield a good degradation efficiency with a maximum value reaching 83.9% in this work. With the results obtained in this paper, it can be shown that the optofluidic μPFC has great potential for efficient wastewater treatment and simultaneous electricity generation by utilizing solar energy.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports of the Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar of Chongqing, China (no. CSTC2012JJJQ90003), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51106188, no. 51222603 and no. 51276208), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (no. CDJZR12 14 88 01) and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-12-0591).
Reference
M. Z. Jacobson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 148–173 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Antoniadou, D. I. Kondarides, D. Labou, S. Neophytides and P. Lianos, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 592–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Antoniadou and P. Lianos, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 431–435 CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Li, B. Zhou, S. Lv, X. Li, H. Chen, Q. Chen and W. Cai, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 485–491 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Li, B. Zhou, X. Li, H. Chen, Q. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Li, J. Wang and W. Cai, Water Res., 2011, 45, 3991–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Li, Q. Chen, J. Bai and B. Zhou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 262, 304–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Li, B. Zhou, H. Chen, Z. Wang and W. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10314–10316 RSC .
B. Seger, G. Q. M. Lu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10709–10715 RSC .
K. Drew, G. Girishkumar, K. Vinodgopal and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11851–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Erickson, D. Sinton and D. Psaltis, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .
D. Psaltis, S. R. Quake and C. Yang, Nature, 2006, 442, 381–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lei, N. Wang, X. M. Zhang, Q. Tai, D. P. Tsai and H. L. Chan, Biomicrofluidics, 2010, 4, 043004 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, R. Chen, X. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Liao and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12548–12553 CAS .
S. S. Ahsan, A. Gumus and D. Erickson, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 409–414 RSC .
E. Eunjung Jung and F. R. Devin, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 3740–3745 RSC .
N. Wang, X. Zhang, B. Chen, W. Song, N. Y. Chan and H. L. Chan, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 3983–3990 RSC .
M. Antoniadou, D. I. Kondarides, D. D. Dionysiou and P. Lianos, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16901–16909 CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Müller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides, E. Ostuni, S. Takayama, X. Jiang and D. E. Ingber, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2001, 3, 335–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, Z. Zou, Q. Huang, T. Yuan, Z. Li, B. Xia and H. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 433–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic display of the optofluidic μPFC. (B) Working principles of the optofluidic μPFC. (C) Image of the optofluidic μPFC.	 
TiO2 + hv → h+ + e−,	(1)
R + nh+ + nOH− → R′ + nH2O.	(2)
2H2O + O2 + 4e− → 4OH−.	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (A) The photocurrent–time curve and (B) the photovoltage–time curve of the optofluidic μPFC. Glucose concentration: 0.1 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2.	 
FF = JVmax/(Jsc·Voc)	(4)

 	Fig. 3  (A) Performance of the optofluidic μPFC. (B) Transient discharging voltage at a constant current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Glucose concentration: 0.1 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Polarization curves of the optofluidic based μPFC at various glucose concentrations. (B) Variation of the short-circuit current density, open circuit voltage, maximum power density and fill factor of the μPFC with the glucose concentration. Flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Polarization curves of the optofluidic μPFC at various light intensities. (B) Variation of the short-circuit current density, open circuit voltage, maximum power density and fill factor of the μPFC with light intensity. Glucose concentration: 0.1 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Effect of MB concentration on the degradation efficiency. Flow rate: 100 μL min−1; light intensity: 55 mW cm−2. (b) Effect of light intensity on the degradation efficiency. MB concentration: 2 × 10−5 M; flow rate: 100 μL min−1.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
