Heterogeneous electrocatalytic reduction of CO 2 promoted by secondary coordination sphere effects  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NJ05892C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NJ05892C
(Focus)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 4246-4252Heterogeneous electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 promoted by secondary coordination sphere effects

        
          
            Junnan 
            Li†
, 
      
        
          
            Yuxuan 
            Zhang†
 and 

        
          
            Nikolay 
            Kornienko
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Université de Montreal, Roger-Gaudry Building, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada. E-mail: nikolay.kornienko@umontreal.ca
Received 
      27th November 2019
    , Accepted 16th February 2020First published on 17th February 2020AbstractThe electrochemical conversion of CO2 to fuels and chemicals is a rapidly growing area of both scientific interest and technological importance. To overcome the challenges of low rates and selectivity on heterogeneous catalysts, efforts are being directed to harness enzyme-mimetic secondary coordination sphere effects to attain a further level of control. These include hydrogen bonding, electrostatics, complexation, and sterics to promote CO2 reduction down a desired pathway on the electrocatalyst surface. This focus review is centered on key advances made in recent years in utilizing secondary coordination sphere effects on heterogeneous catalysts. We discuss how the incorporation of rationally designed electrolyte additives, grafted surface ligands, and chemically tuneable porous scaffolds facilitates enhanced reactivity for CO2 reduction and what advances still need to be made in order to elevate this technology from the lab scale to economic feasibility.Junnan Li – Middle, Yuxuan Zhang – Right, Nikolay Kornienko – LeftJunnan Li obtained her Bachelor's degree in applied chemistry at Yanshan University, working on the synthesis of Titanium-based catalysts for photocatalytic overall water-splitting. She joined the group of Prof. Kebin Zhou at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016 to conduct her Master's studies. Her research focused on using Iridium-based catalysts for a photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction. Since 2019 she has been developing metal organic framework (MOF) catalysts for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction in the group of Prof. Nikolay Kornienko at the University of Montreal.Yuxuan Zhang received her Bachelor of Engineering degree in Material Physics at the University of Jinan, China, co-supervised by Prof Weibing Wu and Prof Changhong Yang, working on electrochemical deposition and photovoltaic cells. She is beginning her Master's degree in chemistry at the University of Montreal, carrying out her research project in Prof. Nikolay Kornienko's Research Lab. Her research is aimed at elucidating and designing electrocatalysts at the molecular level utilized for the conversion of CO2 into renewable fuels and chemicals.Nikolay Kornienko obtained his B.S. at the University of Pittsburgh (with Prof. Sanford Asher, 2010 to 2011) and his PhD at the University of California, Berkeley (with Prof. Peidong Yang, 2011 to 2016) studying materials chemistry and electrocatalysis. He then carried out a Royal Society Newton Fellowship at the University of Cambridge with Prof. Erwin Reisner (2016 to 2018) investigating electroactive enzymes and microorganisms. He has recently been appointed as an Assistant Professor at the University of Montreal. His laboratory's research is centered on developing electrocatalysts through rational design and establishing operando spectroscopic techniques to probe catalytic mechanisms.
Introduction
Global industrialization and increased fossil fuel consumption has spurned many positive changes in society, ranging from increased quality of life to enhanced worldwide connectivity. However, as the global population continually grows and per-capita energy demand increases, greenhouse gas emissions stemming from fossil fuel consumption have reached the threshold of negatively affecting the global climate.1 In light of this increasingly accepted realization, efforts across all levels of society are being dedicated towards finding alternate means to power our society that do not contribute to climate change.2 Among these is the use of renewable electricity (e.g. from solar, hydro, wind etc.) to generate fuels and chemical feedstocks from raw sources of water and/or CO2 in a closed carbon cycle.3,4
The utilization of CO2, which would ideally be captured from point sources like factory exhaust or via direct air capture, is particularly appealing because hypothetically a whole array of carbon-based compounds can be generated in an electrolysis-type configuration and fed into existing infrastructure. This is also particularly useful because it presents a pathway to the storage of intermittent renewable energy. Despite this allure, the main drawback of this technology is that the catalysts that perform the chemical transformation of CO2 into the desired products are not yet selective and efficient enough to render electrochemical CO2 reduction (CO2R) economically competitive with fossil fuel-based approaches.5,6 Heterogeneous catalysts employed in CO2R typically feature a variety of active sites on their surface with different affinities for binding CO2 and/or H+ from water. Depending on the energy landscape of the reaction on the surface of the material, various reaction steps (e− transfer, H+ addition, C–C coupling) may occur and their precise rates and order will dictate the product distribution.7 Controlling this, especially for multi-step reactions, is rather difficult, and consequently most catalytic materials produce a wide array of products. Furthermore, while it would be ideal to have independent control over the free energy and binding strength of each intermediate in the reaction pathway, most intermediates share a similar metal–carbon or metal–oxygen bond and therefore their free energies scale linearly with respect to one another as the catalyst surface is altered according to the so-called scaling relationships.8–10
Enzymes, evolved over millions of years, have developed highly efficient and selective routes for catalytically transforming CO2 by not only controlling the binding of reactants to their active sites, but also through operating through secondary coordination sphere effects, defined as effects from species that are not directly bound to the reactant/intermediate. This entails the operation within a functional catalytic pocket that confers hydrophobic/hydrophilic effects, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions, substrate/reactant channels, and steric confinement to steer a catalytic reaction down only the desired reaction pathway. For example, carbon monoxide dehydrogenase from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans binds CO2 at both its carbon and oxygen atoms while also stabilizing this bound intermediate through hydrogen bonds of the oxygens to lysine and histidine amino acid residues (Fig. 1a).11
 Fig. 1  Secondary coordination sphere effects accelerate CO2R kinetics within enzymatic (a), molecular (b), and heterogeneous (c) systems by decreasing high-energy activation barriers (d). 
These functionalities have in recent years served as an inspiration in the design of catalytic systems aiming to maximize their efficacy by incorporating factors beyond simply composition and morphology tuning. Molecular catalysts are important systems with well-defined structures and ligands that can be precisely modified and considerable progress has been made in the implementation of secondary coordination effects in molecular materials.12 For example, when four positively charged trimethylanilinium groups were introduced at the ortho positions of an iron tetraphenylporphyrin at the ortho positions of the phenyls, the kinetics were enhanced considerably over the bare tetraphenylporphyrin (Fig. 1b).13 Similar functionality can be incorporated onto heterogeneous catalysts through, for example, grafted molecular species that interact with adsorbed intermediates (Fig. 1c). These effects can also be conferred by rationally modifying hydrogen bonding or electrostatic interactions with species within the electrolyte, or even within polymers and hierarchal metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). In all, these effects manifest themselves in lowering activation barriers in the free energy landscape (Fig. 1d). This mini-review will focus on heterogeneous systems and will overview electrolyte effects, ligands grafted onto the surfaces of heterogeneous catalysts, and polymeric/MOF systems which utilize secondary coordination sphere effects to enhance CO2R reactivity. While this is not meant to serve as an exhaustive list of all works that fall within this scope, we aim to touch on several representative studies that brought significance to the field. We highlight both the concepts developed and the methodology (e.g. electrokinetic analysis, spectroscopy,14 isotope experiments etc.) used to elucidate such effects.
Electrolyte tuning
The effects of ions at the catalyst–electrolyte interface have recently come under investigation, and specifically, the precise role of hydrogen bonding networks and electrostatic interactions on CO2R catalysis. In a study on CO reduction, thought as the potential determining step of CO2 conversion to multi-carbon species, Li et al. carried out a series of experiments with electrolytes featuring cations that systematically varied in size.15 The authors investigated the products resulting from CO reduction on polycrystalline Cu in different quarternary alkyl ammonium cation systems (methyl4N+, ethyl4N+, propyl4N+ and buthyl4N+). Differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) results suggest that C2H4 could be produced in methyl4N+ and ethyl4N+ containing electrolytes, but not in propyl4N+ and butyl4N+. The authors utilized surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRAS) to explore the CO coverage on polycrystalline Cu, the electric field between electrolyte and electrode, and H2O–COads interaction. The SEIRAS results revealed that the CO coverage was comparable in the all alkyl4N+ systems, and the electric field did not heavily influence the product distribution. However, when using D2O to probe the H2O–COads interaction, they found that O–D bonds directed toward the terminal oxygen of COads in methyl4N+ and ethyl4N+ cations that stabilize the CO–CO dimer intermediate through hydrogen bonding. In contrast, in propyl4N+ and butyl4N+ systems, two cations were found to interact with COads instead of H2O, and thus, a stabilizing hydrogen bond did not form. This result strongly suggests that the hydrogen bond between H2O–COads is critical for stabilizing the CO–CO dimer and consequently ethylene formation (Fig. 2a). The effects of electrolyte cations on the product selectivity of Cu electrodes have also been attributed to the varying strength of interfacial electromagnetic fields and the buffering capacity of the electrolyte within the double layer.16
 Fig. 2  The size of electrolyte cations was shown through SEIRAS experiments to determine if the CO–CO dimer would be stabilized through hydrogen bonding en route to C2H4 generation (a). Complexation with ionic liquids lowered the energy for CO2− formation and greatly enhanced reactivity (b). 
Beyond hydrogen bonding, the beneficial effects of electrostatic stabilization of CO2R intermediates were demonstrated to decrease the overpotential for CO2R. In particular, ionic liquids that contain charged imidazolium anions have been the center of recent research efforts.17,18 Rosen et al. utilized 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium (EMIM–BF4) as the electrolyte with an Ag cathode.19 Remarkably, CO was produced at an overpotential of only 0.17 V, with greater than 96% faradaic efficiency. The authors proposed that the high activity when using EMIM–BF4 stemmed from the complex formed between BF4 and adsorbed CO2 that served to reduce the activation energy for the formation of a CO2− intermediate (Fig. 2b). This line of studies was also extended to a variety of catalyst materials, notably including MoS2.20 In a mixture of 4 mol% EMIM and 96 mol% H2O, CO was produced with 98% faradaic efficiency at 54 mV overpotential. Quantum molecular dynamics simulations provided evidence that CO2 would bind to EMIM and form a [EMIM–CO2]+ complex, which reduced the energy barrier of the electron transfer from MoS2 to CO2. Furthermore, the [EMIM–CO2]+ complex readily absorbed onto MoS2 by coulombic and van der Waals coupling, facilitating the interaction between CO2 and MoS2 to initiate surface catalysis. Operando sum-frequency generation (SFG) experiments on the Ag–(EMIM–BF4) system elucidated how the ionic liquid at the Ag surface restructures at the onset of CO2R catalysis21 and how the binding of the CO intermediate (bridged or atop) is influenced by the ionic liquid–water ratio,22 further pointing to the secondary coordination effects of the ionic liquid dictating surface catalysis. Such operando spectroscopic studies are becoming increasingly important in the community to precisely link the supposed effects to surface reaction mechanisms and final product generation.
Functional surface ligands
The rational design of hybrid inorganic–organic catalytic surfaces presents an orthogonal approach to modulating CO2R through simulating the interactions of enzymatic amino acid residues with reaction intermediates. As such, the systematic variation of linkers and metal material components of molecular assembly provides an opportunity to explore and optimize catalytic structures and properties in this regard. Xie et al. enhanced the selectivity of CO2R on a series of planar and nanostructured Cu electrodes towards hydrocarbons via surface-adsorbed amino acid modifiers.23 This modification suppressed hydrogen evolution and improved the efficiency of the total hydrocarbons generated for all samples. Theoretical calculations reveal that the hydrogen bond formation between CHO* and –NH3+ ends of the zwitterionic glycine leads to additional stabilization of CHO*, which was a key intermediate in the CO2R reaction pathway towards the detected hydrocarbon.
Han et al. reported the ability of N-substituted arylpryridinium additives to tune the selectivity of CO2R on polycrystalline copper to multi-carbon products.24 After a comparison of the effects of a series of pyridinium species, the authors thought that the selectivity of the additives may arise from the ligands blocking Cu sites that catalyze C1 or H2 product formation or that the ligands restrict proton diffusion, leading to an increased local pH at the electrode surface. Pyridinium compounds with N-aryl substituents that are relatively flat showed the highest increase in C ≥ 2 selectivity, while tert-butyl substitution leads to increased H2 production. This behavior suggests that differences in binding to specific Cu sites, in the packing of the film affected by the steric profile of the pyridinium moiety, or in electrode roughness were factors that may significantly affect overall selectivity. Taken together, the combination of a metal electrode and a reducible organic additive with potential to precipitate and form a film allows for tuning of selectivity between hydrocarbons and hydrogen. While the exact surface binding motifs of the ligands and precise mechanism for altered selectivity remained unclear understanding the precise nature of the interface is a key component towards attaining the desired catalytic properties.
Li et al. electrodeposited N-aryl-substituted tetrahydro-bipyridine films onto sputtered Cu electrodes and found that this molecular layer stabilized the atop-bound CO intermediate, as evidenced with DFT calculations and operando Raman spectroscopy.25 This resulted in an optimal ratio of atop-bound and bridge-bound CO intermediates on the Cu surface (Fig. 3a), which could subsequently dimerize and form ethylene (Fig. 3b), which was detected at an optimal 72% faradaic efficiency. A volcano-shaped relationship between the ethylene selectivity and the ratio of atop-bound CO to bridge-bound CO was found and interpreted to indicate that electron donation from the bipyridine analogue to the *CO stabilizes the atop-bound CO more significantly than it does the bridge-bound CO (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  Key surface ligands promote the binding of both bridge- and a top-bound CO species (a) to enable their dimerization en route to ethylene (b). Supramolecular cages stabilize the ketene intermediate on Cu surfaces (c). Rational design of surface ligands on Ag surfaces maximizes CO2R performance by optimizing surface electronics, interactions with CO2, hydrophobicity and permeability (d). Reprinted with permission from ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1032–1040. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Gong et al. reported a supramolecular approach to CO electrocatalysis in which heterobimetallic cages were assembled directly at Cu electrodes with enhanced selectivity and activity for C2 products.26 This success of this system was attributed to the binding motif of the porphyrin cage which maintained the accessibility of the Cu surface. The observed differences in selectivity for CO reduction for varying cage sizes were speculated to result from differences in stabilization of the ketene intermediate through hydrogen-bond interactions with the porphyrin cap (Fig. 3c). In addition to enforcing a rigid cage to maintain surface accessibility and enabling hydrogen bonding to influence reaction selectivity, the porphyrin caps also allowed for further tuning through porphyrin metalation. Fe porphyrin maximized ethanol production and Tafel analysis suggested that the Fe porphyrins participate in the rate-determining step of the ethanol production pathway.
Cao et al. reported that functionalizing Pd with a chelating tris-N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) ligand (Pd-timtmbMe) leads to a 32-fold increase in activity for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to C1 products relative to a monodentate NHC-ligated Pd electrode (Pd-mimtmbMe).27 Electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) measurements of the Pd foil with and without timtmbMevia CO stripping illustrated a positive shift of the anodic CO oxidation peak upon timtmbMe functionalization. This was suggestive of an increased electron density on the palladium surface conferred by NHC functionalization. Tafel analysis revealed that the Pd-timtmbMe may undergo a pre-equilibrating one-electron transfer followed by a rate-limiting chemical step and DFT calculations showed that there is a more energetically favored pathway for COOH* formation.
Pankhurst et al. systematically explored the CO2R performance of ligand-capped Ag nanoparticles and identified key design criteria for imidazolium-based ligands (Fig. 3d).28 The anchoring group was determined to be key for optimizing the silver surface charge. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements indicated that a transfer of electron density from the metal to the ligand took place, which was consistent with the shift of the Ag surface plasmon resonance peaks observed in the UV-vis absorption spectra. The specific activity towards CO2R was linearly correlated with the Ag XPS shift, pointing to the beneficial effects of electron-withdrawing anchor groups in this system.
As the tail length of the ligand increases, hydrophobicity increases as well, thus selectively repelling water and minimizing the competitive H2 producing pathway. However, this was not the only noted effect. Upon investigating the effects of tail group length, the authors noted that for Ag particles containing methyl, octyl and trityl tail groups, there is a higher concentration of ions in the diffuse layer surrounding the NCs, giving rise to higher particle mobilities and therefore higher ζ-potentials. In contrast, the longer hexadecyl tail-groups extend so far away from the charged particle surface and Stern layer that the concentration of ions in the diffuse layer is significantly decreased, thereby diminishing the particle mobility and ζ-potentials. This effectively describes how the increasing sterics of the ligand reduce the permeability of the ligand shell around the nanoparticles. Plotting the ζ-potential values vs. CO selectivity for the nitro-containing ligands as a case study revealed a volcano-type trend with the peak corresponding to the octyl tail. This result illustrates that steric hindrance is not the only parameter playing a role in the catalysis, otherwise a linear trend would have been observed.
Polymers and porous frameworks
The utilization of polymers, MOFs, covalent-organic frameworks (COFs) and related systems allows for the implementation of secondary coordination effects by incorporating the desired functionalities within the framework/polymer structure.29 Species that modify active site electronics, hydrogen-bond with intermediates, electrostatically stabilize charged species and shuttle reactants can all be incorporated with spatial precision. Moreover, the exact nature of the pore chemistry can be controlled to optimize steric confinement and hydrophobicity. Furthermore, while the active site of molecular catalysts can be modulated to attain optimal performance, molecular catalysts are often only stable in organic media and are difficult to recycle. Heterogenizing such catalysts through polymer/framework encapsulation grants stability and recyclability while maintaining the molecular-level tuneability.
Leung et al. combined different monomer and hydrophobic functional groups to synthesize a series of polymers that incorporated a cobalt tert-pyridine molecular catalyst.30 To maximize the CO2R selectivity of the polymer system, a more hydrophobic functional group ((CH2)9CH3) was used to replace the CH3 group. The CO selectivity of the polymer system with the long alkyl chain (84%) was better than that with the CH3 group (76%), and both were significantly better than the molecular CotpyP molecular catalyst on its own (69%). The McCrory lab encapsulated molecular cobalt phthalocyanine CO2R catalysts within poly-4-vinylpyridine (PVP) polymers.31,32 Based on their Tafel analysis, the authors proposed that the rate-limiting step CO2R was altered through polymer encapsulation. Furthermore, isotopic experiments with D2O uncovered a proton-relay mechanism involving the pyridyl moieties of the polymer in shuttling protons to the Co active site.
COFs are gaining momentum in the electrocatalysis community because they possess both the advantages of homogeneous catalysts and heterogeneous catalysts. They are a particularly interesting system in CO2R because their conductive nature makes them readily amenable to electronic modification via appended electron withdrawing/donating groups. Lin et al. synthesized Co-porphyrin containing COF-366 and COF-367.33 The higher porosity of COF-367 rendered it a more active catalyst. Interestingly, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) indicated that the electronic structure of the porphyrin units within both COFs was altered relative to that of the porphyrin molecule on its own. A follow-up study systematically investigated functionalizing the COF by incorporating electron-withdrawing functional groups into the linkers in order to change the electron density of the Co active site (Fig. 4a).34 XAS spectra and simulations of the Co L-edge provided direct evidence of how the electron-withdrawing nature of the linkers (with the strongest effects conferred by fluorinated linkers) modulated the electronic structure of the Co-porphyrin active site. The trend of electrocatalytic CO2R performance of the COFs was found to be consistent with the trend of electron-withdrawing effect, which suggested that the functionalization of the organic structure of the COF with electron-withdrawing groups was an efficient strategy to enhance the CO2R efficiency.
 Fig. 4  Functional groups appended to the COF linkers directly modulate the electronic structure of the catalytic active site (a). CO2R intermediates are stabilized through interaction with proximal pyridine species within MOLs. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2018, 140, 1116–1122 and J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2019, 141, 17875–17883. Copyright 2018 and 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Intermediate stabilization through functional ligands has also been shown to be a powerful strategy for CO2R enhancement. Guo et al. synthesized metal–organic layers (MOLs) that contained both a cobalt protoporphyrin active site and pyridine motifs (Fig. 4b).35 The high efficiency and selectivity of CO production of this system was attributed to the formation of a [pyH+–−O2C–CoPP] adduct. Operando infrared spectroscopy illustrated that pyridinium formed under catalytic conditions, which was presumed to interact with CO2− through hydrogen bonding and, according to DFT calculations, lowered the activation energy for its formation.
MOFs and polymers can also be used to modify the reaction environment around nanoparticle catalysts. Installing active metals into inert MOF frameworks was accomplished by Kung et al. who embedded Cu(II) into a NU-1000 MOF film by solvothermal deposition.36 The Cu(II) was subsequently converted to Cu nanoparticles, whose size was limited by the MOF pores, through electrochemical reduction. HCOOH was produced with a maximum of 28% in this system. While the exact effects of the MOF environment around the Cu particles are not fully ascertained, there exist many possibilities for exploring the synergy between nanoparticles and MOFs which modify their reaction environment.
Future directions
While most efforts in utilizing secondary coordination sphere effects in CO2R have centered on improving the efficiency of 2-electron product yields of CO and HCOOH, there remains much to be done in translating this success to the generation of more complex, multi-carbon products. In particular, Cu is an interesting material as it can generate such products on its own, and as several reports highlighted above, tailoring its reaction environment to attain the same selectivity for complex products as can be attained for CO, for example (>95%), would constitute a significant advancement in the field.
To complement this, the use of operando spectroscopy has already given key insights into precisely how the reaction environment modulates the reaction mechanism, but many questions remain. Especially important is the elucidation of reaction pathways in CO2R that result in C2 products such as ethanol or ethylene. Complementary techniques such as infrared, Raman, SFG, and XAS may all provide important pieces to this puzzle. In addition to the detection of reaction intermediates, such techniques should be leveraged to probe whether the designed materials undergo any surface reconstruction or other structural/chemical/electronic changes throughout the catalytic process. Substantial changes, for example, have been seen in Cu,37 Cu–In/Sn,38 and MOF39 catalysts. This highlights the distinct possibility that the envisioned system may not in fact be the one that is present under CO2R conditions.
The bulk of studies mentioned in this highlight were performed in a standard three-electrode setup. While such studies are more readily amenable to mechanistic investigations, the incorporation of secondary coordination sphere effects should be translated to gas-diffusion electrodes which catalyse CO2R at a gas–liquid–solid triple phase boundary and exhibit more industrially relevant current densities.
Finally, secondary coordination sphere effects have been effective in increasing CO2R efficiency though the scope for their utilization lies beyond CO2R. Organic electrochemistry, biomass valorization, and more stand to benefit from reaction environment tuning as there are many more opportunities to interact with the various functional groups of these reactants.
Conclusions
Attaining optimal performance in a multi-step reaction in heterogeneous catalysis such as CO2R is challenging as high-energy intermediates, scaling relations, and competition between thermodynamically similar reaction pathways are all obstacles that need to be overcome. The implementation of enzyme-mimetic secondary coordination effects in heterogeneous CO2R via electrolyte tuning, ligand grafting, and three-dimensional catalysts is emerging as a promising way to do so. Though the successful studies mentioned in this focus review are a strong starting point, much still remains to be done to facilitate the translation of CO2R beyond the lab scale and to economic feasibility.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. L, Y. Z., and N. K. acknowledge the NSERC Discovery Grant R-N401-02839.
Notes and references

          J. G. J. Olivier, J. A. H. W. Peters and G. Janssens-Maenhout, Trends in global CO2 emissions, 2012 Report, Netherlands: N. p.,  2012, Web,  DOI:10.2788/33777.
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Faunce, W. Lubitz, A. W. Rutherford, D. MacFarlane, G. F. Moore, P. Yang, D. G. Nocera, T. A. Moore, D. H. Gregory, S. Fukuzumi, K. B. Yoon, F. A. Armstrong, M. R. Wasielewski and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 695–698 RSC .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. F. Khosrowabadi Kotyk and S. W. Sheehan, Chem, 2018, 4, 2571–2586 CAS .
M. B. Ross, P. De Luna, Y. Li, C.-T. Dinh, D. Kim, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 648–658 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li and Q. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600463 CrossRef .
J.-H. Jeoung and H. Dobbek, Science, 2007, 318, 1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Nichols and C. W. Machan, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Azcarate, C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Savéant, J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2016, 138, 16639–16644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Heidary, K. H. Ly and N. Kornienko, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4817–4826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Li, C. M. Gunathunge and M. M. Waegele, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 9220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Resasco, L. D. Chen, E. Clark, C. Tsai, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, K. Chan and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2017, 139, 11277–11287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Faggion, W. D. G. Gonçalves and J. Dupont, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, S. Zeng, J. Feng, H. Dong and X. Zhang, Chin. J. Chem., 2018, 36, 961–970 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Král, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. García Rey and D. D. Dlott, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20892–20899 CrossRef .
N. García
Rey and D. D. Dlott, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 10491–10501 RSC .
M. S. Xie, B. Y. Xia, Y. Li, Y. Yan, Y. Yang, Q. Sun, S. H. Chan, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1687–1695 RSC .
Z. Han, R. Kortlever, H.-Y. Chen, J. C. Peters and T. Agapie, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 853–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, A. Thevenon, A. Rosas-Hernández, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. M. Gabardo, A. Ozden, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, Y. Wang, J. P. Edwards, Y. Xu, C. McCallum, L. Tao, Z.-Q. Liang, M. Luo, X. Wang, H. Li, C. P. O’Brien, C.-S. Tan, D.-H. Nam, R. Quintero-Bermudez, T.-T. Zhuang, Y. C. Li, Z. Han, R. D. Britt, D. Sinton, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 577, 509–513 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gong, Z. Cao, W. Liu, E. M. Nichols, P. T. Smith, J. S. Derrick, Y.-S. Liu, J. Liu, X. Wen and C. J. Chang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1032–1040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, J. S. Derrick, J. Xu, R. Gao, M. Gong, E. M. Nichols, P. T. Smith, X. Liu, X. Wen, C. Copéret and C. J. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4981–4985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Pankhurst, Y. T. Guntern, M. Mensi and R. Buonsanti, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 10356–10365 RSC .
N. Heidary, T. G. A. A. Harris, K. H. Ly and N. Kornienko, Physiol. Plant., 2019, 166, 460–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Leung, J. A. Vigil, J. Warnan, E. Edwardes Moore and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7697–7701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu and C. C. L. McCrory, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1683 CrossRef PubMed .
W. W. Kramer and C. C. L. McCrory, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2506–2515 RSC .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y.-B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Diercks, S. Lin, N. Kornienko, E. A. Kapustin, E. M. Nichols, C. Zhu, Y. Zhao, C. J. Chang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2018, 140, 1116–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, W. Shi, H. Yang, Q. He, Z. Zeng, J.-Y. Ye, X. He, R. Huang, C. Wang and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2019, 141, 17875–17883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Kung, C. O. Audu, A. W. Peters, H. Noh, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2394–2401 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, C. S. Kley, Y. Li and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10560–10565 CrossRef CAS .
G. O. Larrazábal, T. Shinagawa, A. J. Martín and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1477 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-X. Wu, S.-Z. Hou, X.-D. Zhang, M. Xu, H.-F. Yang, P.-S. Cao and Z.-Y. Gu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2199–2205 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
Table Content:
Junnan Li – Middle, Yuxuan Zhang – Right, Nikolay Kornienko – Left	Junnan Li obtained her Bachelor's degree in applied chemistry at Yanshan University, working on the synthesis of Titanium-based catalysts for photocatalytic overall water-splitting. She joined the group of Prof. Kebin Zhou at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016 to conduct her Master's studies. Her research focused on using Iridium-based catalysts for a photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction. Since 2019 she has been developing metal organic framework (MOF) catalysts for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction in the group of Prof. Nikolay Kornienko at the University of Montreal.
	Yuxuan Zhang received her Bachelor of Engineering degree in Material Physics at the University of Jinan, China, co-supervised by Prof Weibing Wu and Prof Changhong Yang, working on electrochemical deposition and photovoltaic cells. She is beginning her Master's degree in chemistry at the University of Montreal, carrying out her research project in Prof. Nikolay Kornienko's Research Lab. Her research is aimed at elucidating and designing electrocatalysts at the molecular level utilized for the conversion of CO2 into renewable fuels and chemicals.
	Nikolay Kornienko obtained his B.S. at the University of Pittsburgh (with Prof. Sanford Asher, 2010 to 2011) and his PhD at the University of California, Berkeley (with Prof. Peidong Yang, 2011 to 2016) studying materials chemistry and electrocatalysis. He then carried out a Royal Society Newton Fellowship at the University of Cambridge with Prof. Erwin Reisner (2016 to 2018) investigating electroactive enzymes and microorganisms. He has recently been appointed as an Assistant Professor at the University of Montreal. His laboratory's research is centered on developing electrocatalysts through rational design and establishing operando spectroscopic techniques to probe catalytic mechanisms.

 	Fig. 1  Secondary coordination sphere effects accelerate CO2R kinetics within enzymatic (a), molecular (b), and heterogeneous (c) systems by decreasing high-energy activation barriers (d).	 

 	Fig. 2  The size of electrolyte cations was shown through SEIRAS experiments to determine if the CO–CO dimer would be stabilized through hydrogen bonding en route to C2H4 generation (a). Complexation with ionic liquids lowered the energy for CO2− formation and greatly enhanced reactivity (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  Key surface ligands promote the binding of both bridge- and a top-bound CO species (a) to enable their dimerization en route to ethylene (b). Supramolecular cages stabilize the ketene intermediate on Cu surfaces (c). Rational design of surface ligands on Ag surfaces maximizes CO2R performance by optimizing surface electronics, interactions with CO2, hydrophobicity and permeability (d). Reprinted with permission from ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1032–1040. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Functional groups appended to the COF linkers directly modulate the electronic structure of the catalytic active site (a). CO2R intermediates are stabilized through interaction with proximal pyridine species within MOLs. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2018, 140, 1116–1122 and J. Am. Chem. Sci., 2019, 141, 17875–17883. Copyright 2018 and 2019 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
