Ternary oxide nanostructured materials for supercapacitors: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA06923D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA06923D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10158-10173Ternary oxide nanostructured materials for supercapacitors: a review

        
          
            Di 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiufan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rongming 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Guozhen 
            Shen
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Mathematics and Physics, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: rmwang@ustb.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory for Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: gzshen@semi.ac.cn
Received 
      16th December 2014
    , Accepted 10th March 2015First published on 10th March 2015AbstractMaterials engineering plays a key role in the field of electrochemical energy storage, and considerable efforts have been made in recent years to fulfil the future requirements of electrochemical energy storage using novel functional electrode materials. Among the transition metal oxides, ternary metal oxides possess multiple oxidation states that enable multiple redox reactions. They have been reported to exhibit a higher supercapacitive performance than single component metal oxides, and seem to be a group of the most promising and low cost materials for pseudo-capacitors. This paper presents a state-of-the-art review on the research progress of developing ternary oxide nanostructures for supercapacitors, with the focus on the synthesis of one-dimensional (1-D), two-dimensional (2-D) and three-dimensional (3-D) nanostructures and their potential applications in energy storage devices. The remaining challenges toward the rational design of ternary oxide nanostructured electrodes for next-generation supercapacitors are also proposed.Di ChenDi Chen received her B.S. degree from Anhui Normal University in 1999. She then obtained her Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2005. She completed her postdoctoral research at the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan, and is currently a Professor at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. Her research interests focus on designing nanostructures for sustainable energy applications, including energy storage, solar cells, and photocatalysts.Qiufan WangQiufan Wang is currently a Ph.D. candidate at Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). Her current scientific interests focus on electrochemical supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries.Rongming WangRongming Wang received his Bachelor (1994) and Master's Degrees in Physics from Peking University and Ph.D. (1997) in Materials Science from Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Materials (BIAM), China. He joined Peking University as an associate professor in 2002, and Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics as a Professor of physics in 2005. He was awarded the National Prize for Natural Sciences (second class) and Scientific Chinese Prize for People in 2013. His research interests include the synthesis, atomic structure and properties of functional nanomaterials. He has co-authored over 130 peer reviewed papers and has a research H-index of 34.Guozhen ShenGuozhen Shen received his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2003. Before joining the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, he worked in Hanyang University (Korea), National Institute for Materials science (Japan), University of Southern California (USA) and Huazhong University of Science and Technology (China). His research interests include the development of low-dimensional semiconducting nanostructures and their applications in flexible electronic and printable electronic devices.
1. Introduction
With continuous increase in the demand for oil and depletion of non-renewable resources and environmental pollution, there is an urgent need for clean and sustainable energy sources.1–3 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and electrochemical supercapacitors (SCs) are two of the most popular devices used for electrochemical energy storage (EES). The key parameters to evaluate the performance of EES systems and their potential for practical applications include energy density, power density, specific capacitance, cycle life and calendar life, as well as cost and environmental safety.4,5 Although the earliest electrochemical SC patent was filed in 1957 by General Electric,14 it was not until the 1990s that the electrochemical SC technology began to draw some attention in the field of hybrid electric vehicles.15,16 SCs have very attractive features including high power delivery capability (>10 kW kg−1), long cycle life (>100000 cycles), fast charge–discharge kinetics (a few seconds), and bridging function for the power/energy gap between traditional dielectric capacitors and batteries.6Fig. 1 highlights the specific power and specific energy output of representative modern SC and battery devices.7 From this figure, we can see that SCs usually exhibit higher specific power than batteries, while still keeping reasonable specific energy.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of specific power vs. specific energy of capacitors and batteries. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission of the Nature Publishing Group. 
In general, an electrochemical SC device consists of two electrodes, an electrolyte and a separator that electrically isolates the two electrodes. Defined by the charge storage mechanism, there are two classes of SCs. The first is electrical double layer capacitors (EDLC), in which the charges are physically stored on the electrode surface via adsorbing–desorbing charged ions from an electrolyte onto high surface area electrodes forming a double layer structure. The other is known as pseudo-capacitors or redox SCs, resulting from the fast reversible redox reaction of electro-active species on the surface of the electroactive materials for charge storage. SCs can also be divided into symmetrical and asymmetrical SCs depending on whether the two electrodes of the device are the same or not.
For an electrochemical SC with charge accumulated in the electric double-layer, the capacitance can be expressed as: C = Q/V = ε0εrA/d(1)where Q is the total charge on the plates, V is the voltage imposed across the capacitor, A is the specific area of the electrode/electrolyte interface, ε0 = 8.854 × 10−12 F m−1 is the permittivity of free space and εr is the medium dielectric constant, and d is the effective thickness of the electrical double layer.
For the two electrode SC, i.e. positive and negative, the overall capacitance CT of the entire cell containing Cp and Cn can be expressed as: 1/CT = 1/Cp + 1/Cn(2)
If the two electrodes are the same, 1/Cp = 1/Cn (symmetric EC), the CT would be half of either one's capacitance, while in the case of 1/Cp ≠ 1/Cn (asymmetric EC), CT is mainly dominated by the one with the smaller capacitance.
In the pseudocapacitor, the pseudo-capacitance of metal oxides can be calculated from the CV data according to the following equation:7–11 C = (∫idV)/ν(Δν)(3)where i is the response current, ν is the potential scan rate (v s−1), and ΔV is the applied potential.
Typically, energy (E, W h kg−1) and power (P, W kg−1) are two key parameters to evaluate the performance of SCs, which can be calculated from the discharge curves by the following equations:7 (4) (5)where E is the energy density, Cs is the specific capacitance, m is the mass of the electrode material and I is the discharge current. Generally, the improvement of Cs can be got through the selection of internally active materials and the involvement of pseudo-capacitive materials. Increasing the capacitance is an effective way to improve energy density. To increase the cell voltage within the electrolyte's stability window, selecting the type of electrode materials and optimizing electrode structures can achieve high cell voltages. To improve the specific capacitance and the energy density, ideal electrode materials are required to possess: high specific surface area, which governs the specific capacitance; controlled porosity, which affects the specific capacitance and the rate capability; high electronic conductivity, which is crucial to enhance the rate capability and the power density of SCs.
Generally, high surface area carbonaceous materials are good EDLC sources and store energy at the electrode/electrolyte interface, whereas metal oxides and conducting polymers act as pseudocapacitors.6–9 As a group of promising and low cost pseudocapacitive materials, ternary metal oxides possessing multiple oxidation states have exhibited higher supercapacitive performance than single component metal oxides, which enable multiple redox reactions during electrochemical reactions. For example, NiCo2O4, ZnCo2O4 and Zn2SnO4etc. with achievable oxidation states that enable multiple redox reactions and high electrical conductivities, have been widely studied.10–13 Ternary metal oxides (AxByOz) as electrodes for SCs usually include several types of AB2O4, ABO4, and A3B2O8etc., where A and B represent the metal elements having low and high oxidation states, respectively. Both metal elements A and B play roles in the process of electrochemical energy storage.
Spinel structured oxides, with a general formula of AB2O4 are emerging as promising electrode materials for the contributions of both metals in the charge storage process. Up to now, a number of spinel compounds have been investigated for EES, including Mn3O4,17 Fe3O4,18 Co3O4,19 CuO,20 and ZnO,21 along with mixed transition metal spinels such as MnFe2O4, and NiCo2O4. Especially, nickel cobaltite has become the most investigated one because of its much better electrical conductivity and higher electrochemical activity compared with monometallic nickel oxide or cobalt oxide. The following reaction happened for NiCo2O4 and MnCo2O4 during the charge storage process. M3O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ 3MOOH + e−(6)
This two-phase reaction involves one phase transformation, which results in a constant potential during galvanostatic charge–discharge and also limits the rate capability. Here M indicates Ni, Co, or a combination of these two elements.22a Compared to Co, metal Fe is much more naturally abundant, of cheap cost and friendly to the environment. Thus, replacing Co by Fe results in another spinel structure MFe2O4 (M = Ni, Mn, etc.), which could exhibit a steady and high voltage window (1.0 V) as SC electrodes. To date, a few reports on MFe2O4 as electrodes and their pseudocapacitive behavior have been published although the electrochemical mechanism is not clear. However, it is believed that redox reactions related to both M and Fe occurred according to in situ X-ray absorption near-edge spectra of M and Fe K-edges.23a
Another group of ternary metal oxides that have been investigated recently as supercapacitor electrodes are AMoO4 (A = Ni, Co, Mn, etc.). For example, Das et al. studied the electrochemical performance of MnMoO4 in 1 M Na2SO4 solution,22b and the redox reaction can be represented as MnMoO4 + Na+ + e− ↔ NaMnMoO4(7)
They found that the obtained specific capacitance of MnMoO4 is mainly influenced by the above redox reaction. The Mo atom does not take part directly in any Faradaic process, hence almost no input towards pseudocapacitance.
In the family of M3V2O8 (M = Ni, Co, etc.), the ratio of A/B is 1.5:1, higher than that of 1:2 in AB2O4 and 1:1 in ABO4 materials, respectively. Thus, it is possible that a stronger redoxomorphism based on M2+ will happen between the electrodes and the electrolyte, resulting in a higher pseudocapacitance.23b For instance, Pang et al. reported the synthesis of Co3V2O8 thin nanoplates via the hydrothermal process.23c When the supercapacitors were fabricated, the electrodes display excellent electrochemical performance including good specific capacitance (739 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) and cycling stability (704 F g−1 retained after 2000 cycles) and thus have potential applications in energy storage devices.
This review summarizes the recent progress of nanostructured ternary metal oxides including cobaltates, molybdates, vanadates and ferrites etc. as anode electrodes for electrochemical supercapacitors (SCs). The synthetic method, electrode materials such as pure ternary metal oxides and composites with carbon, graphene or polymers, and corresponding electrochemical performances and the outlook in the field of SCs are reviewed in detail.
2. Typical ternary metal oxide nanostructured electrode materials
2.1 Synthetic methods for ternary metal oxide nanostructures
Ternary metal oxide nanostructures with higher surface to volume ratio are desirable for improving the electrochemical activities. Several methods for the preparation of nanoscaled ternary oxide materials with various microstructures have been employed widely, including hydrothermal, sol–gel, microwave, electrodeposition process and electrospinning etc.24–70 The hydrothermal procedure is one of the simplest and effective procedures to synthesize water insoluble ternary metal oxide nanostructures with high purities and controllable morphologies using water soluble metal precursors at high pressure and moderate temperature. One benefit of this procedure is that it avoids the use of any hazardous catalysts, seeds, injurious surfactants or templates and is environmentally benign.
The sol–gel method is another kind of simple and cheap method to produce nanostructures with high purity, homogeneity and porosity, which mainly includes four steps: the preparation of the precursor solutions; the formation of intermediates as sol; the transformation from sol to gel and the final calcination.24a In this process, surfactants, solvents, reaction time and temperature are the key regulatory factors to get appropriate structures with remarkable electrochemical performances.24b
The electrodeposition process occurs in the electrolysis of plating solutions where micron- or submicron-size particles are suspended, and variable amounts of these particles are embedded in the electrochemically produced solid phase with special properties.24c For instance, NiCo2O4 nanosheet arrays on flexible carbon fabric and Ni(OH)2@NiCo2O4 composite electrodes have been reported via the electrodeposition method.
Microwave synthesis has emerged as an important technique for preparing nanostructured materials with much higher reaction rates, better selectivities and shorter reaction time compared to other conventional thermal methods. As a simple and useful technique, microwave-assisted heating method is considered environmentally friendly for its direct interaction of microwave energy with the reaction system instead of the indirect transfer of energy in the conventional heating method. Therefore, it has been widely applied in chemical reactions for the fabrication of porous inorganic nanostructured materials, due to its advantages such as rapid and uniform volumetric heating and dramatic shrinkage in synthetic time.
Compared with the above processes, electrospinning is a relatively intricate but versatile and cost-effective way to produce well-defined nanostructures with diameters in the range from several micrometers down to tens of nanometers. In this process, many factors, such as metal precursor concentrations, viscosity of precursor solution, the type of polymer, and electrospinning parameters (applied voltage, working distance, and solution feed rate) have strong influences on the morphologies, size distributions, and diameters of the nanostructures. For example, via a single-nozzle electrospinning process, Luo et al. synthesized porous ZnCo2O4 nanotubes with diameters of 200–300 nm and length up to several millimeters.
2.2 1D ternary metal oxide nanostructured electrodes

2.2.1 Nanowires, nanorods, nanotubes, nanoneedles. 
2.2.1.1 Direct synthesis of nanowires, nanorods, nanotubes, nanoneedles. 
The continuous network in 1-D nanostructures including nanowires, nanorods, nanobelts, nanotubes and nanoneedles can act as the “highway” for charge transport along their longitudinal direction and the shortened ion diffusion length in 1-D nanostructures results in the increase of rate performance when applied in electrochemical energy storage devices. Moreover, 1-D nanostructures with relatively large surface areas, can form porous network microstructure that acts as the scaffold/support of metal oxides,24d,25 which facilitates the mass transport of the solvated ions in the electrolyte to the surface of electrodes.
CoMoO4 nanorods with monoclinic crystal structure were successfully synthesized by a facile chemical co-precipitation method and achieved 286 F g−1 at 5 mA cm−2.26 The EIS further displays that the prepared nanorods with the low internal resistance (Rb) and low charge transfer resistance (Rct) exhibit good electrical conductivity and high electrochemical capacitance. NiCo2O4 nanowires have also been synthesized through polymer/surfactant-assisted solution methods, exhibiting both high capacitance and good cycling stability.27,28
Srinivasan et al.29a also reported the fabrication of 1D NiCo2O4 nanotubes by electrospinning. The obtained nanotubes show porous architecture and hollow interiors and exhibit a high specific capacitance (1647 F g−1 at 1 A g−1), excellent rate capability (77.3% capacity retention at 25 A g−1), and outstanding cycling stability, which indicated that the as-synthesized nanotubes have great potential for high-performance electrochemical capacitors. Very recently, CuFe2O4 hollow fibers from the simple electrospinning process have been synthesized by Zhao and his coworkers.30 The electrochemical results suggested that the capacitance characteristic of the CuFe2O4 hollow fibers was a typical pseudocapacitive capacitance.
To meet the energy demands for next-generation SC practical applications, the energy density of SCs should be improved without sacrificing the power density and the cycle life. Most recently, an effectively promising strategy to increase the energy density and voltage window is to fabricate asymmetric SCs with a battery-type Faradic electrode and a capacitor-type electrode, which take advantages of different potential windows of the two electrodes to increase the maximum operating voltage of devices, and thus significantly improve the energy density of the SCs. For example, Lu et al. synthesized Au decorated NiCo2O4 nanotubes by simple electrospinning (Fig. 2a and b).29b The specific capacitance of the NiCo2O4@Au nanotubes researched 1013.5 F g−1 and could be maintained at 85.13% after 10000 cycles at a current density of 10 A g−1. The NiCo2O4@Au nanotubes were used as the positive electrode to fabricate an asymmetric SC device with a maximum voltage of 1.45 V, which exhibited a high energy density (19.56 W h kg−1), a high power density (2115.01 W kg−1 at 2.75 W h kg−1) and an outstanding cycling stability (79.05% retention after 4000 times).
 Fig. 2  (a–c) SEM images of NiCo2O4@Au nanotubes (NTs) at low and high magnifications. (d) TEM images of NiCo2O4@Au NTs. (c and e–h) TEM elemental mapping of Ni, Co, O and Au. (i) XRD pattern of the NiCo2O4 (black) and NiCo2O4@Au NTs (red). Reproduced from ref. 29b with permission by Nano Energy. 
2.2.1.2 Nanowires, nanorods, nanotubes, nanoneedles on conductive substrates. 
For conventional energy-storage configuration, it usually includes a separator sandwiched between two electrodes and sealed in a liquid electrolyte. The electrodes are mixed with binders and pasted on highly conductive substrates, which may decrease the performance of the electrodes and make the devices suffer from some drawbacks in many practical applications, such as wearable flexible SC applications. In consequence, many attempts have been done to directly grow nanostructures on conductive substrates, especially 3D porous substrates, which are then used as binder/additive-free electrodes for SCs. Such binder/additive-free electrodes avoid the “dead surface” in traditional slurry-derived electrodes and allow for more efficient charge and mass exchange, which can efficiently improve the interfacial contact between the current collector and the active materials and enhance ion transportation, thus resulting in greatly improved electrochemical performance.
The most commonly used conductive substrates are porous 3D nickel foams. As current collectors, they have the features of large and uniform macropores, huge supporting area, and high electrical conductivity. As an example, Li et al. grew ZnWO4 nanowall arrays on Ni foam by a hydrothermal route.31 The open network structure consisting of interconnected ZnWO4 nanowire arrays directly grown on current collectors is advantageous for electron transport and electrolyte diffusion which can facilitate the electrochemical reaction. Our group has reported the growth of ZnCo2O4 nanorods on nickel foam through a polyol refluxing process followed by thermal treatment. The as-grown nanostructures have outstanding electrochemical performance in supercapacitors with a high specific capacitance (∼1400 F g−1 at 1 A g−1), excellent rate capability (72.5% capacity retention at 20 A g−1), and good cycling stability (only 3% loss after 1000 cycles at 6 A g−1).32
NiCo2O4 is another important member of spinel MCo2O4 materials. Recent studies revealed that nanostructured NiCo2O4 electrodes are excellent candidates for high performance SCs. For example, Lou et al. successfully grew single-crystalline nanoneedle arrays of NiCo2O4 on Ni foam through a simple solution method together with a post-annealing treatment. The NiCo2O4–Ni foam binder-free electrodes exhibit greatly improved electrochemical performance with very high capacitance and excellent cycling stability.33 Our group recently also found that NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays can be easily grown onto many kinds of flexible substrates, including Ni foam, Ti foil and polytetrafluoroethylene (PET) tape. These nanowire arrays supported on Ni foam exhibit wonderful pseudocapacitor behaviour with a super-high specific capacitance of 2681 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1.34 When configured as all-solid-state symmetric SCs, the devices deliver excellent electrochemical performance with a high cell areal capacitance of 161 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 and high cycling stability even under bent and twisted conditions, which are much higher than the NiCo2O4 electrodes with organic binders/additives.35,36
3D carbon-based current collectors, such as carbon nanotube papers, graphene papers and carbon cloth, are the best alternatives to take the place of 3D nickel foam conductors due to their excellent conductivity, stability, diversity, and low cost. Commercial carbon cloth woven from carbon microfibers was recently studied as a promising current collector with the advantages of high flexibility, wearability, 3D porosity, high surface area, and chemical stability. Wang et al. reported the growth of NiMoO4 nanowires radially on carbon cloth with good electrochemical properties (Fig. 3).37 Typically, NiMoO4 nanowires directly grown on carbon cloth as electrodes in SCs possess obvious advantages: the open space between nanowires allowing for easy diffusion of the electrolyte, numerous fast electron-transport accesses, avoiding the use of a polymer binder, and excellent structural stability leading to the cycling stability and high rate capability evidently during long-term cycling at high current densities. Thus, the as-synthesized NiMoO4 nanowires yielded high capacitance performance with a high specific capacitance of 1.27 F cm−2 (1587 F g−1) at a current density of 5 mA cm−2, which was higher than the reported binder enriched NiMoO4 powders (1517 F g−1 at 1.2 A g−1).38 The asymmetric SC devices with a maximum voltage of 1.7 V have been fabricated, delivering both high energy density (70.7 W h kg−1) and power density (16000 W kg−1 at 14.1 W h kg−1). Such high ASCs at large current densities further proved the great advantages of the binder-free NiMoO4 nanowires (Fig. 3e).
 Fig. 3  (a) Optical images of the carbon substrate and NiMoO4 NWs on carbon cloth. (b) SEM images of the bare carbon cloth. (c and d) SEM images, (e) schematic illustration, (f–h) electrochemical performance of the NiMoO4 NWs on carbon cloth. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission by Nano Energy. 
Portable electronic devices with roll-up and wearable characters attracted great attention in recent years. To fulfil fully flexible electronic devices, it is vital to design flexible and wearable energy storage units. Fiber SCs or planar SCs with fiber-type electrodes were thus recently developed. Fig. 4a shows the schematic drawing of a flexible planar device with fiber-type electrodes, which consists of several ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays/carbon fibers, PET substrates, the electrolyte and two silver electrodes.39 The photograph of the as-fabricated device in bending state is shown in Fig. 4b, consisting of 14 ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays/carbon composite fibers. Fig. 4c shows the equivalent circuit of the planar-integrated fiber SCs, where the enhanced distributed capacitance effect can be theoretically derived. It is evident that this flexible device based on the planar-integrated fiber electrodes can largely reduce the size of the device and achieve superior utilization efficiency and maximum functionality.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) photograph, (c) equivalent circuit and (d) electrochemical performance of the flexible microsupercapacitors with fiber-type electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission by Wiley-VCH. (e–f) Schematic diagram and (g) volume capacitances as a function of current of the fiber solid-state NiCo2O4 SCs. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission by Nano Energy. 
Recently, we have successfully developed a coaxial-type flexible fiber supercapacitor based on NiCo2O4 nanosheets/Ni wire as the fiber electrodes.40 The fabrication process of the fiber-state SCs is displayed in Fig. 4e and f. The volume capacitance of the fiber-shaped SCs reached 10.3 F cm−3 at a current of 0.08 mA with outstanding cycling stability. An energy density of 1.44 mW h cm−3 and a power density of up to 17 W cm−3 were also obtained for the fiber SCs, which are almost 48-fold higher than the previous values. Furthermore, the coaxial-type fiber SCs do not show any apparent degradation in the bending test, illustrating the promise for use as electrodes for portable and wearable energy storage.


2.2.2 1D heterostructures. 
1D heterostructured nanomaterials have been of great scientific and technological interests due to their high versatility and applicability as essential components in nanoscaled electronics, catalysis, chemical sensing and energy conversion and storage devices. Currently, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the rational synthesis of advanced core/shell nanowire heterostructures with combination of two types of materials which show improved electrochemical performances. For example, by the refluxing process, Mai et al. successfully grew CoMoO4 nanowires onto the backbone material MnMoO4 nanowires prepared in the micro-emulsion system, fabricating hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4 nanowire heterostructures.41 The crystal growth mechanism during the complicated nano-architecture process is “self-assembly” and “oriented attachment” (Fig. 5a and b). When assembled into asymmetric supercapacitors, the specific capacitance and energy density of asymmetric SCs based on the heterostructures can reach to 204.1, 187.1, 163.4, 134.7 F g−1 and 28.4, 26.0, 22.7, 18.7 W h kg−1 at 0.5, 1, 2, 3 A g−1, which are significantly higher than that for either pure 1D MnMoO4 nanorods or CoMoO4 nanowires (Fig. 5c and d).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic model diagram, (b) SEM image, (c) specific capacitance and energy density, and (d) charge–discharge cycling of the hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4 heterostructured nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission by the Nature Publishing Group. 
Wang firstly integrated NiCo2O4 and CoMoO4 into core/shell nanowire arrays on Ni foam as binder-free electrodes.42 This unique core/shell design has the advantages such as: the highly porous NiCo2O4 nanowires with good electrical conductivity act as the backbone and electron “superhighway” for charge storage and delivery; also the high mass loading of thin CoMoO4 nanoplates onto the NiCo2O4 nanowires greatly enhances the surface area, providing more electroactive sites for Faradaic reactions. The areal capacitance of the NiCo2O4@CoMoO4 hybrid electrodes is 14.67 F cm−2 at 10 mA cm−2, which is 7 times higher than the other reported values.
1D ternary metal oxides based heterostructures could also be directly grown on substrates, such as Ni foam, carbon cloth etc. for high performance SC applications. Yu et al. synthesized hierarchical NiCo2O4@MnO2 core/shell nanowire arrays on nickel foam, which showed a high area specific capacitance of 3.31 F cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2 with a potential window of 0–0.6 V, desirable rate performance and cycling stability in a 1 M LiOH solution,43 proving the great advantages of the core/shell heterostructures. Hierarchical mesoporous NiCo2O4@MnO2 core/shell nanowire arrays on nickel foam were also synthesized by Hu et al. via the facile hydrothermal and electrodeposition processes for asymmetric SCs.44 Obviously, the combination of cobalt and nickel cations in NiCo2O4 affords binary redox couples of Co2+/Co3+ and Ni2+/Ni3+ enhancing the electrochemical performance. Moreover, the microstructures of mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanowires on Ni foam are beneficial for providing electron superhighways for charge storage and delivery. The hybrid electrodes showed a high areal specific capacitance of 2.24 F cm−2 and the asymmetric SC devices achieved a specific capacitance of 112 F g−1 at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 with a stable operational voltage of 1.5 V and a maximum energy density of 35 W h kg−1.
Liu et al. successfully anchored hierarchical NiCo2O4@NiO core/shell hetero-nanowires on carbon cloth through a co-precipitation process followed by a simple chemical bath deposition method (Fig. 6a).45 As shown in Fig. 6b, large-scale uniform flake-like NiO crystals are successfully in situ grown on the whole framework, forming a conformal NiO coating on the surface of NiCo2O4 nanowires. The assembled capacitors exhibit specific capacitances as high as 1792, 1698 and 1358 F g−1 at discharge current densities of 5, 10 and 20 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 6c), along with excellent rate capability and cycle performance (with the capacity retention of 87.5% after 5000 cycling), which is much higher than reported values.34
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth process, (b) SEM image and (c) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the hierarchical NiCo2O4@NiO nanowires on carbon cloth. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, we also fabricated core/shell CuCo2O4@MnO2 heterostructured nanowires on carbon fabrics.46 The CuCo2O4@MnO2 based electrodes deliver a high cell-specific capacitance of 327 F g−1, several times higher than that of pure CuCo2O4 nanowires. Furthermore, Liu designed a new hybrid structure of CoxNi1−xDHs coating on NiCo2O4 nanowires directly grown on carbon fiber paper and obtained a high areal capacitance of 1.64 F cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2.48 The hybrid composite electrodes also exhibited excellent rate capability, offering an excellent specific energy density (33 W h kg−1) and power density (41.25 kW kg−1) at high cycling rates (up to 150 mA cm−2), which are better than previous values.

2.3 2D ternary oxide electrodes
Compared with 1D nanostructures, 2D nanostructures including nanosheets, nanoflakes usually exhibit better electrochemical cycling performance because the 2D feature is favorable for efficient ion and electron transport and can better accommodate the structural change during the electrochemical reaction. In particular, their ultrathin nanosheet morphology and interconnected network structure are advantageous for efficient ion/electron transport and better accommodation of volume variation.50–64
Wang et al. presented a facile hydrothermal method for preparing porous hexagonal NiCo2O4 nanoplates with an average diameter of about 100 nm and average thickness of about 25 nm.57 These plate-like electrodes showed the highest specific capacitance of 294 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with a potential window of 0–0.5 V. When using plate-like oxides as a sacrificial template, novel hollow hexagonal NiCo2S4 nanoplates were prepared based on the Kirkendall effect.57 These hollow hexagonal nanoplate based electrodes also exhibit potential applications for SCs, for example, a high specific capacitance of 437 F g−1 in a 3 M KOH aqueous electrolyte at a current rate of 1 A g−1 and superior rate capability as well as coulombic efficiency stability.58,59
In order to explore the contributions of both metal elements to the pseudocapacitance of ternary metal oxides, Luo have reported M3V2O8 (M = Ni or Co) materials as a new family of high performance pseudocapacitive materials, which have been synthesized by a simple and facile chemical co-precipitation technique.64 The results show that the rate capability and cycle stability of Co3V2O8 were excellent, while Ni3V2O8 exhibited high specific capacitance. Combined the advantages of both Ni3V2O8 and Co3V2O8, they designed and synthesized the hybrids by growing Co3V2O8 nanoparticles on Ni3V2O8 nanoflakes. The resultant composite provides an excellent combination of the properties of Ni3V2O8 and Co3V2O8 and exhibited superior electrochemical performance including an ultrahigh specific capacitance, excellent rate capability, and exceptional cycle stability.
Hollow nano-structures, with a higher complexity are expected to offer exciting opportunities for both fundamental studies and practical applications. Li et al. fabricated a novel hierarchical NiCo2O4 nanosheet@hollow microrod arrays by a simple and environmental friendly template-assisted electrodeposition process followed by thermal annealing.49 The prepared NiCo2O4 NSs@HMRAs possess a large specific surface area, porous nanosheet networks, hollow microrod arrays and excellent electrical contact with the current collector (Fig. 7a and b). After electrochemical testing, the electrodes exhibited a high specific capacitance (678 F g−1 at 6 A g−1) and outstanding cycle stability (specific capacitance retention of 96% after 1500 cycles). The desirable superior capacitive performance of the NiCo2O4 NSs@HMRAs can be attributed to the large specific surface area, fast ion diffusion, and perfect charge transmission in the hierarchical microstructures. Fig. 7c and d further show SEM images of bare NiCo2O4 nanoflakes and core/shell NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4 core/shell nanoflake arrays on nickel foams, respectively.62 Different from the bare nanoflakes, the core/shell structures display porous microstructure after the chemical bath deposition process. Since both the “core” and the “shell” are ultrathin, the electrolyte can diffuse into the underneath part of the electrode materials, so all the active materials can participate in the electrochemical charge storage process, leading to a higher area specific capacitance of 1.55 F cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2 and 1.16 F cm−2 at 40 mA cm−2, the capacitance can still retain 2.17 F cm−2 after 4000 cycles at 5 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of NiCo2O4 NSs@HMRAs. (b) TEM image of NiCo2O4 NSs@HMRAs. Reproduced from ref. 49, with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry. SEM images of (c) the bare NiCo2O4 nanoflake array and (d) the NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4 core/shell nanoflake arrays grown on the Ni foam substrate. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission by the American Chemical Society. 
Due to the good conductivity and pseudocapacitive behaviour of NiCo2O4 materials, some related composites were investigated recently. For example, Ni(OH)2 nanosheets were coated on NiCo2O4 nanosheets grown on carbon fiber paper.59 When severing as the core backbone, NiCo2O4 nanosheet@NiCo2O4 nanorods and NiCo2O4 nanosheet@NiO nanoflake core/shell nanoarrays have also been prepared from the simple hydrothermal process.61 Due to the unique hierarchical core/shell architectures with faster ion/electron transfer, improved reactivity, and enhanced structural stability, all these samples as supercapacitor electrodes show excellent electrochemical performances. For instance, the two as-synthesized hierarchical nanoarrays demonstrate high specific capacitances (1925 F g−1 for NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4 and 2210 F g−1 for NiCo2O4@NiO at 0.5 A g−1, respectively), superior cycling stabilities and good rate capabilities.
2D mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanosheets with various size-distributions directly grown onto the conductive substrates of carbon fibers and Ni foams to form binder- and additive-free electrodes for SCs have been reported by many groups.51–62 It is clear that the microstructure of mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanosheets not only increases the amount of electroactive sites but also facilitates the electrolyte penetration. Furthermore, the interconnected nanosheets reinforced the electrode structure to withstand the structure collapse upon cycling. Thus, all these hierarchical architectures manifest high specific capacitance and good stability at high rates, making them promising electrodes for SCs.54,55 Ultrathin and mesoporous NiMoO4 nanosheets were also prepared on Ni foam and exhibit a high specific capacitance of 2840 F g−1 at 10 mA cm−2.53 In cycling measurements, the coulombic efficiency was nearly 100%, also 86.7% of the capacitance can be retained after 2000 cycles at a high current density of 15 mA cm−2.
2.4 3D ternary oxide electrodes
Compared with 1D nanostructures, the complex 3D architectures constructed by 1D nanostructures show unique properties different from mono-morphological structures because they combined the features of all involved nanoscale building blocks.64

2.4.1 Nano/micro-spheres and nano/micro-flowers. 
3D structured metal oxides with two or more levels of structure have caught considerable attention over the past decade due to their high specific surface area and high density of defects arising from nanometer-sized building blocks and have many potential applications in many fields such as catalysis, batteries, chemical sensors, and electrochromic devices. Generally, it is critical for SCs to achieve high specific surface area and proper pore size appropriate for toilless access for the electrolyte by modulating porous structure of electrode materials.
Recently, we have synthesized 3-D NiCo2O4 sea urchin-like architectures, which are composed of numerous small nanorods radially grown from the center and have diameters of about 5 μm.35 The as-prepared 3D NiCo2O4 sea urchins exhibited superior specific capacitance of 1650 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and excellent cycling stability with capacitance loss of only 9.2% after 2000 cycles. These results indicate that some 3D superstructures built from a large sum of small porous nanostructure units are more efficient for SCs. Thus, it can be anticipated that the spinel NiCo2O4 fashioned into 3D hierarchical superstructures composed of porous nanobuilding blocks could be a better choice for the next generation high-performance SCs.65
NiCo2O4 nano-flowers assembled by numerous nanosheets radically grown from the center were also fabricated.66 With a specific area of 212.6 m2 g−1, this electrode exhibited a superior capacitance of 1191.2 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Besides, sea urchin-like NiCo2O4 nanostructures with a specific surface area of 198.9 m2 g−1 and hierarchical flower-shaped NiCo2O4 microspheres were also synthesized via different chemical processes, exhibiting excellent electrochemical performances.67,68
Hierarchical CuFe2O4 nanospheres with porous structure were synthesized via a facile solvothermal procedure in ethylene glycol using PVP as the structure-directing agent.69 PVP molecules, in the nonaqueous system, played an important role in forming oriented aggregation by facilitating the rotation of the CuFe2O4 nanoparticles. The spaces between porous CuFe2O4 nanostructures allow easy diffusion of the electrolyte into the inner region of the electrode, which may efficiently accelerate electrode reactions. The electrochemical properties demonstrated that the as-prepared CuFe2O4 nanospheres were excellent electrode materials in SCs with high specific capacitance and good retention. The hierarchically CuFe2O4 nanospheres showed the highest capacitance of 334 F g−1, and 88% of retention can still be maintained after 600 charge–discharge cycles.
It is generally believed that pseudocapacitors store charges in the first few nanometers from the surface, and the ultrathin nanostructures with sizes of less than 10 nm would become the goal for next generation high performance SCs.70,71 Hierarchical NiCo2O4 flowers consisting of numerous nanowires have been synthesized by a one-pot hydrothermal method with polyvinylpyrrolidone as a capping agent.72 Compared to conventional flower-like NiCo2O4, this hierarchical structures exhibited excellent SC performance: the specific capacitance can reach 1619.1 F g−1 at a current density of 2.0 A g−1; when the current density is increased to 10 A g−1, a specific capacitance of 571.4 F g−1 can be obtained. Similarly, Lou et al. reported the synthesis of flowerlike nickel cobalt oxide hierarchical structures with excellent supercapacitive performance.73 Due to the desirable composition and the unique hierarchical mesoporous architectures, exceptionally high specific capacitances of 960 and 805 F g−1 were obtained under current densities of 0.625 and 6.25 A g−1, respectively, with excellent cyclic stability.


2.4.2 Hollow nano/micro-spheres. 
Hollow micro-/nanostructures with controlled size, shape, composition, and internal structure have attracted intense interest in recent years, mainly due to their promising use in many applications such as nanoreactors, drug delivery, gas sensors, and energy storage and conversion. A general approach for the fabrication of hollow structures involves the employment of sacrificial templates, either hard ones, such as monodispersed polymer, silica, carbon, and metal oxide nanoparticles, or soft ones, such as micelles.
Hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres (Fig. 8a and b) assembled entirely from ultrathin nanosheets with a thickness of a few nanometers were synthesized using silica spheres as hard templates (Fig. 8c).76 In Fig. 8d, the hollow electrode exhibited excellent pseudocapacitances of 678, 660, 648 and 540 F g−1 at current densities of 1, 2, 3 and 10 A g−1, respectively. This suggested that 79.6% of the capacitance is still retained when the charge–discharge rate increased from 1 to 10 A g−1 highlighting the prominent application of the hollow sub-microspheres as electrodes in SCs. Furthermore, the retention of the SCs during long charge–discharge cycles at high current density was about 97% (Fig. 8e), confirming the NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres to be an excellent alternative material for next-generation SCs. From a facile template-free solvothermal method, Huang et al. recently synthesized hierarchical urchin-like NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres in a mixed solution of isopropyl alcohol and water and a subsequent calcination process.75 We think that these unique structures will exhibit superior applications in electrochemical energy storage.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) FESEM images with different magnifications for the hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres. (c) Schematic illustration for the formation of the mesoporous hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres. (d) Calculated SC as a function of current density of the mesoporous hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres. (e) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the mesoporous hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microsphere as a function of cycle number at 10 Ag−1. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.4.3 Hierarchical 3D networks. 
As shown in Fig. 9, Yuan et al. recently developed a facile and scalable polymer-assisted chemical solution route to prepare 3D hierarchical NiCo2O4 frameworks.77 The unique interconnected network structure constructed by nanosized spinel NiCo2O4 building blocks of 20–30 nm creates convenient channels for better ion transport to the redox-active material, and the high degree of pore connectivity in the hierarchical porous network enhances electron transfer, avoids serious particle aggregation and decreases the great interfacial resistance. Fig. 9a shows that a SC deterioration of ∼6% was evident after continuous 3500 charge–discharge cycles at varied current densities, ranging from 2 to 16 A g−1.
 Fig. 9  (a) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the hierarchical porous network-like NiCo2O4 electrode at progressively varying current densities. (b) Schematic illustration of the charge storage advantages of the 3D interconnected hierarchical porous network-like NiCo2O4 framework electrode. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.5 Ternary metal oxide nanostructures based composites
As we know, transition metal oxides can provide higher theoretical specific capacity for SCs than conventional carbon materials and better electrochemical stability than polymer materials, which are investigated as the alternative materials for SC electrodes. However, the low electrical conductivity and the poor long-term stability due to the cracking of the electrodes during the charge–discharge processes limit their practical applications. Therefore, the combination of carbon or other high conductive polymers with metal oxides can generate a synergistic effect that contributes to overcome their inherent drawbacks, e.g., limited capacitance, poor electrical conductivity, decreased cycle stability and difficulty in morphology control.78,79

2.5.1 Ternary metal oxides/conventional carbon composites. 
Aerogels are a class of mesoporous materials possessing high specific surface areas, high porosities, and a three-dimensionally well-connected pore structure. Lu et al. used the mesoporous matrix of high electric conductivities and high specific surface areas to host NiCo2O4 to enable a full utilization of NiCo2O4 for capacitance generations.80 The NiCo2O4/carbon aerogel composites showed ultrahigh specific capacitances of around 1700 F g−1 at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1 within a potential window of −0.05 to 0.5 V in 1 M NaOH solution. The composites also possessed an excellent high rate capability and outstanding cycling stability demonstrated by a negligible 2.4% decay in specific capacitance after 2000 cycles. The good results were caused by the composite structure that enabled well exposed NiCo2O4 to the electrolyte and easy transport of charge carriers, ions, and electrons, within the composite electrode. Moreover, by a co-precipitation method, MnFe2O4/carbon black composite powders were obtained and displayed promising SC applications. Further investigations show that the pseudocapacitance was associated with the charge-transfer at both the Mn and Fe sites in solutions of chloride and sulfates.78


2.5.2 Ternary metal oxides/CNT composites. 
CNTs are one of the mostly investigated carbon nanostructures, which have a much higher electronic conductivity than amorphous ACs. Broad Faradaic peaks are observed in the MWCNT electrode during the CV scan in various aqueous electrolytes, which is due to the fact that the surface functional groups and/or the impurities act as the redox centers. CNTs have been coupled with many metal oxides to form the CNT/metal composite. Xu et al. obtained CoMoO4/CNT composites with a high surface/body ratio using CNT as the substrate.81 The prepared nanocomposites showed the highest specific capacitance of 170 F g−1 at the current density of 0.1 A g−1. Tay et al. built the 3D vertically aligned CNT/NiCo2O4 core/shell nanoarchitectures via a facile electrochemical deposition method followed by subsequent annealing in air.82 In the electrodes, vertically aligned highly conductive CNTs were used as the “cores” which provide a strong skeleton for the NiCo2O4 nanosheets, avoiding their aggregation, retaining the inter-space inside and also the large surface area. The composite electrodes exhibited an initial specific capacitance of 695 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1 and 576 F g−1 at 20 A g−1, respectively. Lee et al. also synthesized CNT/NiCo2O4 composites to increase the electron conductivity of the electrode material.83a Ultrafine NiCo2O4 nanocrystals with a diameter around 6–10 nm were formed on the functionalized CNT bundles, which not only exhibited a high specific capacitance of 1642 F g−1 within a 0.45 V but also showed an excellent cycling stability of 94.1% retention after 2000 cycles.
1D CNT/NiCo2O4 nanosheet core/shell structural nanocables were constructed by a facile chemical co-deposition route combined with post-calcination in air (Fig. 10).83b In the CNT/NiCo2O4 composites, the nanosheets were in mutual contact, which might give better mechanical strength and form a better conductive network not easily detached from the CNT core. Such nanostructures bring significant benefits by increasing the specific area while maintaining a conductive core, which was of great importance to the electrochemical performance of the electrode materials. The as-prepared CNT/NiCo2O4 nanocables have a high capacitance of 1038 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. Furthermore, the specific capacitance of the product was almost 100% retained after 1000 cycles, which indicated excellent structural and cycling stability.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of CNT/NiCo2O4 nanostructure annealed at 300 °C for 3 h in air. (b) Cycling performance of CNT/NiCo2O4 at a current density of 2 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 83b with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.5.3 Ternary metal oxides/graphene composites. 
As an ideal matrix, graphene possesses many fascinating properties, such as extraordinarily high electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, high mechanical flexibility, and pronounced thermal and chemical stability. Extensive research has been conducted in the fabrication of graphene-transition metal oxide based composites for SC applications, which can combine the advantages of both components and may generate special properties by the reinforcement or modification of each other. The metal oxides deposited on the surface of graphene keep the graphene sheets well separated by strong van der Waals interactions.84
Wang et al. used graphene as the conductive substrate to get high surface/body ratio composites and successfully synthesized CoMoO4 nanoparticles/graphene composites via a facile hydrothermal method.85 Since the oxygenated group of graphene oxide (GO) sheets could provide active sites for anchoring the metal ion (Co2+) by electrostatic interaction, CoMoO4 nanoparticles can simultaneously in situ grow on the graphene sheets. As a result, CoMoO4/graphene composites achieved a specific capacitance of about 394.5 F g−1 and a specific energy density around 54.8 W h kg−1 calculated from the CV curve at 1 mV s−1, which was higher than pure CoMoO4 (72 F g−1, 10 W h kg−1). In addition, compared with pure CoMoO4, the CoMoO4/graphene composites exhibited low electrochemical resistance, good rate capability and cycle life. The enhanced electrochemical properties of CoMoO4/graphene composites can be ascribed to the fact that the CoMoO4 nanoparticles on graphene sheets exfoliated the graphene sheets well and inhibited the stacking/agglomeration of graphene sheets, which lead to large regions to contact with OH−. Guo et al.74 also prepared FeMnO3 hollow spheres/reduced graphene oxide (RGO) composites, in which unique ferrite hollow spheres possess physical and chemical properties that differ from their solid counterparts because of their low density, high specific surface area, and varied wall thickness, which could greatly promote electron and/or ion diffusion by providing a larger solid–liquid reaction interface. More importantly, the synergetic effects between the hollow spherical structure and the high conductive RGO greatly improved the electrochemical storage energy performance of the ferrites.
2.5.3.1 1D ternary metal oxides/graphene. 
NiCo2O4 nanowires with an average size of several tens of nanometers were uniformly and densely dispersed onto graphene sheets by a facile hydrothermal method without any surfactant.86 The NiCo2O4@RGO electrodes indicate a high specific capacitance of 737 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and only 6% loss of the initial specific capacitance after 3000 charge–discharge cycles at 4 A g−1. The enhanced performance of the NiCo2O4@RGO electrodes might be attributed to the positive synergistic effects between RGO and NiCo2O4.
NiCo2O4 nanowires were also composited with graphene as a positive electrode to fabricate a high performance asymmetric electrochemical SC.87 The presence of a nanoscale graphene network “skeleton” allowed the positive electrode to charge–discharge at scan rates similar to commercial AC negative electrodes. The asymmetric cell displayed an energy density in the range of 19.5 W h kg−1 with an operational voltage of 1.4 V. The cycling test results demonstrate that the capacitance of the cell maintained 102% of the initial value after 10000 cycles. NiMoO4·nH2O nanorods were also decorated with graphene to form NiMoO4·nH2O nanorods/graphene composites.88 Besides the good conductivity, the flexibility of graphene in the composites can release the mechanical strength arising during the consecutive GCD cycles. The results showed that about an 88% specific capacitance retention was achieved after 1000 consecutive charge–discharge cycles at 5 A g−1 current density.
2.5.3.2 2D ternary metal oxide nanosheets/graphene. 
As we know, the agglomeration of graphene may limit the capacitance of SCs and cannot reflect the intrinsic capacitance of an individual graphene sheet. Keeping the graphene sheets separate by loading electroactive materials will improve the electrochemical performance of graphene-based SCs. Li first reported a facile strategy to prepare RGO/NiCo2O4 nanoflake composites by combining in situ assembling and subsequent thermal treatment.89 RGO was introduced as the binder and the conductive matrix of NiCo2O4 nanoflakes to facilitate the electron transfer between electroactive materials and the outside current collectors. Superior electrochemical performances were achieved with high specific capacitance of 1693 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, good rate capability (67.6% capacity retention at 16 A g−1) and long-term cyclability (only 9.2% loss after 2000 cycles). The intriguing capacitive behaviors are mainly attributed to the high porosity and electronic conductivity, as well as the electrochemical activity, multiple oxidation states and unique configuration of the composite.
Recently, nanohoneycomb-like strongly coupled CoMoO4/3D graphene hybrid electrodes were prepared.90Fig. 11a shows the formation mechanism of CoMoO4 honeycomb-like nanosheets grown on 3D graphene foam. Briefly, carbon was first introduced into nickel foam by decomposing CH4 at 1000 °C under ambient pressure to form 3D graphene films on the surface of the nickel foam. When the nickel substrate was etched away in 3 M HCl solution, the free-standing 3D graphene foam was obtained. Honeycomb-like CoMoO4 nanosheets on the surface of 3D graphene were then synthesized by a hydrothermal process. Fig. 11b–d show the SEM images of the 3D graphene and the hybrids, respectively. It was clear that the honeycomb-like structure with the depth of films about 500 nm provides not only stable structure for the electrodes but also the super large surface area for the ionic transportation and oxidation–redox reactions. Electrochemical measurements showed that the hybrid electrode exhibited excellent specific capacitances as high as 2741 F g−1 and 1101 F g−1 at current densities of 1.43 and 85.71 A g−1. After 100000 cycles, the hybrid electrodes could retain 96.36% of its initial specific capacitance. Asymmetric and symmetric SCs based on CoMoO4/3D graphene honeycomb-like electrodes further delivered high specific energy densities at various power densities. After cycled 10000 times, the asymmetric SC remained at 87.42% of its initial specific capacitance. The superior cycling stability of the SC device could be due to the strong coupling between CoMoO4 and the 3D graphene film.
 Fig. 11  (a) The typical synthesis procedure of honeycomb-like CoMoO4/3D graphene hybrid electrodes. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (b) 3D graphene, (c) honeycomb-like strongly coupled CoMoO4/3D graphene hybrid. (d) Cross-section SEM image of honeycomb-like CoMoO4/3D graphene hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission by Wiley-VCH. 
2.5.3.3 3D ternary metal oxides/graphene. 
Ye et al. demonstrated a facile approach to make high performance and flexible electrodes by dropping MnFe2O4/graphene hybrid inks onto flexible graphite sheets and drying under an infrared lamp.91 The results showed that the flexible SC devices can achieve a maximum specific capacitance of 120 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 and excellent cycle performance retaining 105% capacitance after 5000 cycles. It may offer a method for the fabrication of lightweight, stable, flexible and high performance energy storage devices. As shown in Fig. 12, FeMnO3 hollow spheres/reduced graphene oxide (RGO) composites have been fabricated by using carbon spheres as the hard template via the combination of a facile aging reaction and thermal treatment process.74 In these composites, the RGO also serves as the conductive substrate to load hollow spheres. The as-synthesized FeMnO3/RGO composite based supercapacitors also deliver high specific capacitance and enhanced recycling durability.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the formation process of unique FeMnO3 hollow sphere/RGO composite. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission by Elsevier. 


2.5.4 Ternary metal oxide/polymer composites. 
Electronically conducting polymers have advantage over active carbon, as an electrode material for SCs, as they have both electrochemical double layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance arising mainly due to the fast and reversible oxidation and reduction processes related to the π-conjugated polymer chain.92–94 Among the various conducting polymers, PEDOT has recently attracted worldwide research interest due to its environmental stability and controllable electrical conductivity. De et al. synthesized PEDOT-based NiFe2O4 conducting nanocomposites, which possess high inner voltammetric charge with the highest specific capacitance value (251 F g−1).95
CoFe2O4 compositing with polyaniline (PANI) may result in an enhanced electrochemical performance. However, the main shortcoming of PANI as SC electrode is the poor cycling stability derived from the volumetric changes during the doping–de-doping process. It has been verified that the introduction of graphene can effectively increase the total capacitance with simultaneously improved stability, mainly due to the fact that the presence of graphene can sustain the basic structures of PANI and avoid mechanical deformation in the redox process.96,97 Wang et al. recently reported a facile two-step method to get CoFe2O4/graphene/PANI (CGP) nanocomposites as an advanced SC material. In this method, CoFe2O4 nanoparticles dispersed on graphene sheets were achieved by a hydrothermal method, followed by coating with PANI through the in situ polymerization process (Fig. 13a).98 The specific capacitance of the resulting ternary hybrid is up to 1133.3 F g−1 and 716.4 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 for three-electrode and two-electrode systems, respectively, which were significantly higher than those of pure CoFe2O4, graphene and PANI, or binary CoFe2O4/graphene, CoFe2O4/PANI and graphene/PANI hybrids (Fig. 13b). The initial capacitance can be retained over 96% after repeated tests for 5000 cycles (Fig. 13c), demonstrating a high cycling stability. The extraordinary electrochemical performance of the ternary CGP nanocomposite can be attributed to its well-designed nanostructure and the synergistic effects of the individual components.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration for the preparation of ternary CGP nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission by Elsevier. 

3. Summary and perspectives
In this paper, we summarized the recent advances in ternary metal oxide nanostructure based electrodes for supercapacitors, ranging from 1D to 3D nanostructures, including their composites. Table 1 summaries some state-of-the-art results about the different ternary metal oxide nanostructures for supercapacitors. The main advantages of the ternary metal oxides can be summarized as: good electrical conductivity, rich electroactive centres, stable structure and environmentally benign applicability. In fact, ternary metal oxides can provide a source of high specific capacitance and high energy density, and the nanostructures with different dimensions have their own unique features, which provide the flexibility to tailor the microstructure and properties of SC electrodes.
Table 1 The electrochemical capacitances of typical ternary oxide electrodes discussed in this review




Materials
Structure
Capacitance
Reference




CoMoO4
Nanorods
286 F g−1 (5 mA cm−2)

26



NiCo2O4
Nanotubes
1647 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

29a



NiCo2O4
Nanowire arrays
2681 F g−1 (2 A g−1)

34



NiCo2O4@MnO2
Core/shell nanowire arrays
3.31 F cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)

41



NiCo2O4@NiO
Core/shell nanowire arrays
1792 F g−1 (5 mA cm−2)

44



CuCo2O4@MnO2
Core/shell nanowire arrays
327 F g−1 (1 mA cm−2)

45



NiCo2O4@CoxNi1−xDHs
Nanowires
1.64 F cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)

46



NiCo2O4@CoMoO4
Core/shell nanowire arrays
14.67 F cm−2 (10 mA cm−2)

48



MnMoO4/CoMoO4
Heterostructured nanowires
204.1 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)

49



NiCo2O4
Nanosheets
999 F g−1 (20 A g−1)

51



NiCo2O4
Porous nanosheets
2658 F g−1 (2 A g−1)

52



NiMoO4
Nanosheets
2840 F g−1 (10 mA cm−2)

53



NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4
Nanosheets
1925 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)

61



NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4
Core/shell nanoflake arrays
1.55 F cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)

62



NiCo2O4 thin-film
Thin-film
575 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

99



NiCo2O4
Sea-urchins
1650 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

35



NiCo2O4
Nano-flower
1191.2 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

66



CuFe2O4
Nanospheres
334 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

69



NiCo2O4
Hollow sub-microspheres
678 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

76



NiCo2O4
Network
587 F g−1 (2 A g−1)

77



NiCo2O4/aerogels
Composites
1700 F g−1 (25 mV s−1)

80



CoMoO4/carbon nanotube
Composites
170 F g−1 (0.1 A g−1)

81



NiCo2O4/CNT
Core/shell
695 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

82



NiCo2O4/CNT
Composites
1642 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

83



NiCo2O4@RGO
Composites
737 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

86



RGO/NiCo2O4
Nanoflakes
1693 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

89



CoMoO4/graphene
Nanohoneycomb
2741 F g−1 (1.43 A g−1)

90



MnFe2O4/graphene
Nanosheets
120 F g−1 (0.1 A g−1)

91





It is essential to further improve the performance to meet the demands of real applications including the specific capacitance, energy density, power density, rate capability, long term cyclic stability and performance. Although great progress in the ternary metal oxide nanostructures and their SC applications has been made in recent years, several important challenges still remain and have to be explored.
First, better control in the morphology and dimensions of the ternary oxides material is needed, as the morphologies of electrode materials have a substantial influence on the speed of ion transfer and the capacity of charge storage. Designing superior architectures with high surface area and special structures (such as 3D or hierarchical nanostructures, mesoporous, synergetic core/shell structures and ordered nanostructured arrays) should be addressed and optimized, as it is a possible way to maximize the electrochemically active sites for redox reactions or chemical absorption–desorption and to further increase the energy storage density.
Second, for future applications, the design engineering including the current collectors, electrolytes, membrane separators and counter electrodes, as well as the assembling of the devices need a deeper investigation. To improve the conductivity of the ternary metal oxides, the composition with carbonaceous materials and other active nanomaterials can have a synergistic effect between the components through minimizing particle size, enhancing specific surface area, inducing porosity, preventing particles from agglomerating, facilitating electron and proton conduction, protecting active materials from mechanical degradation, improving cycling stability, and providing extra pseudocapacitance. Additionally, the design of directly depositing or fabricating the materials onto conductive substrates such as carbonaceous or metal substrates can accommodate the electrolyte throughout the electrode structure and thus produce a large surface area for ion transfer between the electrolyte and the active materials, achieving ultrafast energy storage and release. Besides, nanostructured current collectors and flexible paper/textile electrodes will be also paid more attention in the future. Nanostructured current collectors, which have much larger surface areas and good mechanical robustness, can provide efficient pathways for both ion and electron transport through the entire electrode architecture.
Third, to improve the energy density, one of the effective routes is to develop hybrid SCs. An asymmetric hybrid SC incorporating a pseudo-capacitive or battery-type electrode with an EDLC-type electrode can overcome the comparatively narrow stable potential window and limited energy density of aqueous electrolytes and permit an operating voltage that may approach twice that of EDLCs.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation (61377033).
Notes and references
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Mann, R. S. Bradley and M. K. Hughes, Nature, 1988, 392, 779 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2000, 91, 37 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Rolison and L. F. Nazar, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 486 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            B. E. Conway, Electrochemical supercapacitors: scientific fundamentals and technological applications, Plenum Press,  1999 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Y. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Darowicki, K. Andrearczyk, P. Slepski, A. Sierczynska, G. Lota, K. Fic and K. Lota, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 1702–1714 CAS ; 
  (c) S. Chaudhari, D. Bhattacharjya and J. S. Yu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25120 RSC .
J. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and V. Meunier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Liu, J. Jiang, M. Bosman and H. J. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2419 RSC .
C. Z. Yuan, J. Y. Li, L. R. Hou, X. G. Zhang, L. F. Shen and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4592 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Zhang, H. B. Wu, H. E. Hoster, M. B. Chan-Park and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9453 CAS .
K. Karthikeyan, D. Kalpana and N. G. Renganathan, Ionics, 2009, 15, 107 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Bao, J. F. Zang and X. D. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. I. Becker, US Pat., 2800616,  1957 .
R. Kötz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, K. Zhu, Y. F. Yan, C. L. Perkins and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4099–4104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, A. S. Hall, J. Kim and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1158–1164 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Wang, K.-C. Ho, S.-L. Kuo and N.-L. Wu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A75–A80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Xia, J.-P. Tu, X.-L. Wang, C.-D. Gu and X.-B. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5786–5788 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. W. Huang and X. S. Peng, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 104, 289–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Li, J. Wen and X. M. Mo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 256, 206–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Yuan, J. Li, L. Hou, J. Lin, G. Pang, L. Zhang, L. Lian and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18573–18578 RSC ; 
  (b) D. Ghosh, S. Giri, M. Moniruzzaman, T. Basu, M. Mandal and C. K. Das, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 11067–11076 RSC .

  (a) S. Kuo and N. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1437–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. C. Liu, L. B. Kong, L. Kang, X. H. Li, F. C. Walsh, M. Xing, C. Lu, X. J. Ma and Y. C. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4919–4926 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. J. Zhang, Y. Y. Liu, J. Chen, Q. F. Guo, T. Wang and H. Pang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5687 CAS .

  (a) Z. Wu, Y. Zhu and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14759–14722 RSC ; 
  (b) L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33–72 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Musiani, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 3397–3402 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Zhi, N. Mariani, R. Gemmen, K. Gerdes and N. Q. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 417–420 RSC .
M. Zhi, S. Lee, N. Miller, N. H. Menzler and N. Q. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7066–7071 CAS .
M. C. Liu, L. B. Kong, C. Lu, X. M. Li, Y. C. Luo and L. Kang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 94, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, Q. M. Gao and L. Jiang, Small, 2011, 7, 2454–2459 CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Ma and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4465–4467 RSC .

  (a) L. L. Li, S. J. Peng, Y. L. Cheah, P. F. Teh, J. Wang, G. Wee, Y. Ko, C. L. Wong and M. Srinivasan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5892–5898 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Zhu, Z. Xu and B. G. Lu, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 114–123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Cheng, X. Yan, D. Sun, F. Zhu and Q. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5879–5885 RSC .
B. K. Guan, L. L. Hu, G. H. Zhang, D. Guo, T. Fu, J. D. Li, H. G. Duan, C. C. Li and Q. H. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4212–4217 RSC .
B. Liu, B. Y. Liu, Q. F. Wang, X. F. Wang, Q. Y. Xiang, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10011 CAS .
G. Q. Zhang, H. B. Wu, H. E. Hoster, M. B. Chan-Park and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9453–9456 CAS .
Q. F. Wang, X. F. Wang, B. Liu, G. Yu, X. J. Hou, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2468–2473 CAS .
Q. F. Wang, B. Liu, X. F. Wang, S. H. Ran, L. M. Wang, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21647–21653 RSC .
D. Y. Zhang, H. L. Yan, Y. Lu, K. W. Qiu, C. L. Wang, C. C. Tang, Y. H. Zhang, C. W. Cheng and Y. S. Luo, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 139 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Guo, Y. Z. Luo, X. Z. Yu, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Senthilkumar, K. V. Sankar, R. K. Selvan, M. Danielleb and M. Manickamb, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 352 RSC .
B. Liu, D. S. Tan, X. F. Wang, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Small, 2013, 9, 1998–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Wang, X. F. Wang, P. Wang, J. Xu, X. Ouyang, X. J. Hou, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 44–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Mai, F. Yang, Y. L. Zhao, X. Xu, L. Xu and Y. Z. Luo, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 381 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Cai, B. Liu, D. D. Wang, L. L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Li, Y. R. Wang, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4954–4960 CAS .
L. Yu, G. Q. Zhang, G. Z. Yuan and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 137–139 RSC .
K. B. Xu, W. Y. Li, Q. Liu, B. Li, X. J. Liu, L. An, Z. G. Chen, R. J. Zou and J. Q. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2014, 2, 4795–4802 RSC .
W. L. Yang, Z. Gao, J. Ma, X. M. Zhang, J. Wang and J. Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1448–1457 CAS .
Q. F. Wang, J. Xu, X. F. Wang, B. Liu, X. J. Hou, G. Yu, P. Wang, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 559–564 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Hong, J. F. Zang and X. D. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1215–1220 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, D. C. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng, Z. L. Wang and M. L. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3135–3139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Lu, D. J. Wu, R. Z. Li, Q. Li, S. H. Ye, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4706–4713 CAS .
R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1384–1404 RSC .
F. Z. Deng, L. Yu, G. Cheng, T. Lin, M. Sun, F. Ye and Y. F. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 202–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, G. Zhou, H. M. Zhang, C. Cheng, J. M. Ma, W. F. Wei, L. B. Chen and T. H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7405–7409 CAS .
D. P. Cai, B. Liu, D. D. Wang, Y. Liu, L. L. Wang, H. Li, Y. R. Wang, C. X. Wang, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 294–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 976–979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1470 Search PubMed .
J. Pu, J. Wang, X. Q. Jin, F. L. Cui, E. H. Sheng and Z. H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 106, 226–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pu, F. L. Cui, S. B. Chu, T. T. Wang, E. H. Sheng and Z. H. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 809–815 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wang, L. Pan, H. B. Hu and S. P. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 1899–1904 RSC .
H. J. Fan, U. Gösele and M. Zacharias, Small, 2007, 3, 1660–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, D. C. Chen, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, Z. Z. Zeng and M. L. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11159–11162 CAS .
W. W. Zhou, D. Z. Kong, X. T. Jia, C. Y. Ding, C. W. Cheng and G. W. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6310–6315 CAS .
X. Y. Liu, S. J. Shi, Q. Q. Xiong, L. Li, Y. J. Zhang, H. Tang, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8790–8795 CAS .
M. C. Liu, L. B. Kong, L. Kang, X. H. Li, F. C. Walsh, M. Xing, C. Lu, X. J. Ma and Y. C. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4919–4926 CAS .
B. X. Li and Y. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 890–896 CAS .
T. Wu, J. Y. Li, L. R. Hou, C. Z. Yuan, L. Yang and X. G. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 81, 172–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. An, Y. J. Wang, Y. N. Huang, Y. N. Xu, C. C. Xu, L. F. Jiao and H. T. Yuan, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 385–392 RSC .
J. W. Xiao and S. H. Yang, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 588–595 RSC .
X. Y. Yu, X. Z. Yao, T. Luo, Y. Jia, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3689–3695 CAS .
M. Y. Zhu, D. H. Meng, C. J. Wang and G. W. Diao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6030–6037 CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. C. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lai, J. E. Halpert and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5604 CAS .
Y. F. Zhang, M. Z. Ma, J. Yang, H. Q. Su, W. Huang and X. C. Dong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4303–4308 RSC .
H. B. Wu, H. Pang and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3619–3626 CAS .
M. L. Li, W. W. Xu, W. R. Wang, Y. P. Liu, B. Cui and X. H. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 465–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yu, X. Z. Yao, T. Luo, Y. Jia, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3689–3695 CAS .
C. Z. Yuan, J. Y. Li, L. R. Hou, J. D. Lin, G. Pang, L. H. Zhang, L. Lian and X. G. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18573–18578 RSC .
C. Z. Yuan, J. Y. Li, L. R. Hou, J. D. Lin, X. G. Zhang and S. L. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11145–11151 CAS .
S. L. Kuo and N. L. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1437–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Yuan, J. Y. Li, L. R. Hou, L. Yang, L. F. Shen and X. G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16084 RSC .
H. C. Chien, W. Y. Cheng, Y. H. Wang and S. Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 5038–5043 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Xu, Z. Li, X. H. Tan, C. M. B. Holt, L. Zhang, B. S. Amirkhiz and D. Mitlin, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2753–2755 RSC .
W. W. Liu, C. X. Lu, K. Liang and B. K. Tay, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5100–5107 CAS .

  (a) X. Wang, X. D. Han, M. F. Lin, N. D. Singh, C. L. Gan, M. Jan and P. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12448–12454 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Cai, Y. R. Kang, H. Y. Chen, M. H. Chen and Q. W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11509–11515 RSC .
S. D. Perera, A. D. Liyanage, N. Nijem, J. P. Ferraris, Y. J. Chabal and K. J. Balkus Jr, J. Power Sources, 2013, 230, 130–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Xia, W. Lei, Q. L. Hao, W. J. Wang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 99, 253–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. He, L. Wang, H. Q. Chen, X. Q. Sun and X. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 98, 164–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, C. B. M. Holt, Z. Li, X. H. Tan, B. S. Amirkhiz, Z. W. Xu, B. C. Olsen, T. Stephenson and D. Mitlin, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 605–617 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghosh, S. Giri and C. K. Das, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10428–10437 RSC .
L. Wang, X. H. Wang, X. P. Xiao, F. G. Xu, Y. J. Sun and Z. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 937–945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Yu, B. G. Lu and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1044–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Cai, T. Lai, W. L. Dai and J. S. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 170–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. S. Fu, H. Xia and X. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 122, 193–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Woo, K. Dokk and K. Kanamura, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Kim, J. M. Ko and G. G. Wallace, J. Power
Sources, 2008, 177, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sen and A. De, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4677–4684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Feng, R. M. Li, Y. W. Ma, R. F. Chen, N. E. Shi, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2989–2996 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiong, H. J. Huang and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 937–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gupta, S. Gupta and N. Miura, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Di Chen	Di Chen received her B.S. degree from Anhui Normal University in 1999. She then obtained her Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2005. She completed her postdoctoral research at the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan, and is currently a Professor at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. Her research interests focus on designing nanostructures for sustainable energy applications, including energy storage, solar cells, and photocatalysts.
Qiufan Wang	Qiufan Wang is currently a Ph.D. candidate at Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). Her current scientific interests focus on electrochemical supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries.
Rongming Wang	Rongming Wang received his Bachelor (1994) and Master's Degrees in Physics from Peking University and Ph.D. (1997) in Materials Science from Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Materials (BIAM), China. He joined Peking University as an associate professor in 2002, and Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics as a Professor of physics in 2005. He was awarded the National Prize for Natural Sciences (second class) and Scientific Chinese Prize for People in 2013. His research interests include the synthesis, atomic structure and properties of functional nanomaterials. He has co-authored over 130 peer reviewed papers and has a research H-index of 34.
Guozhen Shen	Guozhen Shen received his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2003. Before joining the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, he worked in Hanyang University (Korea), National Institute for Materials science (Japan), University of Southern California (USA) and Huazhong University of Science and Technology (China). His research interests include the development of low-dimensional semiconducting nanostructures and their applications in flexible electronic and printable electronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of specific power vs. specific energy of capacitors and batteries. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission of the Nature Publishing Group.	 
C = Q/V = ε0εrA/d	(1)
1/CT = 1/Cp + 1/Cn	(2)
C = (∫idV)/ν(Δν)	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
M3O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ 3MOOH + e−	(6)
MnMoO4 + Na+ + e− ↔ NaMnMoO4	(7)

 	Fig. 2  (a–c) SEM images of NiCo2O4@Au nanotubes (NTs) at low and high magnifications. (d) TEM images of NiCo2O4@Au NTs. (c and e–h) TEM elemental mapping of Ni, Co, O and Au. (i) XRD pattern of the NiCo2O4 (black) and NiCo2O4@Au NTs (red). Reproduced from ref. 29b with permission by Nano Energy.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Optical images of the carbon substrate and NiMoO4 NWs on carbon cloth. (b) SEM images of the bare carbon cloth. (c and d) SEM images, (e) schematic illustration, (f–h) electrochemical performance of the NiMoO4 NWs on carbon cloth. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission by Nano Energy.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) photograph, (c) equivalent circuit and (d) electrochemical performance of the flexible microsupercapacitors with fiber-type electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission by Wiley-VCH. (e–f) Schematic diagram and (g) volume capacitances as a function of current of the fiber solid-state NiCo2O4 SCs. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission by Nano Energy.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic model diagram, (b) SEM image, (c) specific capacitance and energy density, and (d) charge–discharge cycling of the hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4 heterostructured nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission by the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth process, (b) SEM image and (c) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the hierarchical NiCo2O4@NiO nanowires on carbon cloth. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of NiCo2O4 NSs@HMRAs. (b) TEM image of NiCo2O4 NSs@HMRAs. Reproduced from ref. 49, with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry. SEM images of (c) the bare NiCo2O4 nanoflake array and (d) the NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4 core/shell nanoflake arrays grown on the Ni foam substrate. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission by the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) FESEM images with different magnifications for the hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres. (c) Schematic illustration for the formation of the mesoporous hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres. (d) Calculated SC as a function of current density of the mesoporous hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microspheres. (e) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the mesoporous hollow NiCo2O4 sub-microsphere as a function of cycle number at 10 Ag−1. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the hierarchical porous network-like NiCo2O4 electrode at progressively varying current densities. (b) Schematic illustration of the charge storage advantages of the 3D interconnected hierarchical porous network-like NiCo2O4 framework electrode. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of CNT/NiCo2O4 nanostructure annealed at 300 °C for 3 h in air. (b) Cycling performance of CNT/NiCo2O4 at a current density of 2 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 83b with permission by the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The typical synthesis procedure of honeycomb-like CoMoO4/3D graphene hybrid electrodes. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (b) 3D graphene, (c) honeycomb-like strongly coupled CoMoO4/3D graphene hybrid. (d) Cross-section SEM image of honeycomb-like CoMoO4/3D graphene hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission by Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the formation process of unique FeMnO3 hollow sphere/RGO composite. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission by Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration for the preparation of ternary CGP nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission by Elsevier.	 

CoMoO4	Nanorods	286 F g−1 (5 mA cm−2)	
26

NiCo2O4	Nanotubes	1647 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
29a

NiCo2O4	Nanowire arrays	2681 F g−1 (2 A g−1)	
34

NiCo2O4@MnO2	Core/shell nanowire arrays	3.31 F cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)	
41

NiCo2O4@NiO	Core/shell nanowire arrays	1792 F g−1 (5 mA cm−2)	
44

CuCo2O4@MnO2	Core/shell nanowire arrays	327 F g−1 (1 mA cm−2)	
45

NiCo2O4@CoxNi1−xDHs	Nanowires	1.64 F cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)	
46

NiCo2O4@CoMoO4	Core/shell nanowire arrays	14.67 F cm−2 (10 mA cm−2)	
48

MnMoO4/CoMoO4	Heterostructured nanowires	204.1 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	
49

NiCo2O4	Nanosheets	999 F g−1 (20 A g−1)	
51

NiCo2O4	Porous nanosheets	2658 F g−1 (2 A g−1)	
52

NiMoO4	Nanosheets	2840 F g−1 (10 mA cm−2)	
53

NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4	Nanosheets	1925 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	
61

NiCo2O4@NiCo2O4	Core/shell nanoflake arrays	1.55 F cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)	
62

NiCo2O4 thin-film	Thin-film	575 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
99

NiCo2O4	Sea-urchins	1650 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
35

NiCo2O4	Nano-flower	1191.2 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
66

CuFe2O4	Nanospheres	334 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
69

NiCo2O4	Hollow sub-microspheres	678 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
76

NiCo2O4	Network	587 F g−1 (2 A g−1)	
77

NiCo2O4/aerogels	Composites	1700 F g−1 (25 mV s−1)	
80

CoMoO4/carbon nanotube	Composites	170 F g−1 (0.1 A g−1)	
81

NiCo2O4/CNT	Core/shell	695 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
82

NiCo2O4/CNT	Composites	1642 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
83

NiCo2O4@RGO	Composites	737 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
86

RGO/NiCo2O4	Nanoflakes	1693 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
89

CoMoO4/graphene	Nanohoneycomb	2741 F g−1 (1.43 A g−1)	
90

MnFe2O4/graphene	Nanosheets	120 F g−1 (0.1 A g−1)	
91


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
