Solvent-free, ultrafast and ultrathin PDMS coating triggered by plasma for molecule separation and release   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC00836F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC00836F
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4181-4190Solvent-free, ultrafast and ultrathin PDMS coating triggered by plasma for molecule separation and release†

        
          
            Yintao 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zisheng 
            Luo‡
abc, 
      
        
          
            Gangfeng 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tarun 
            Belwal
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xingyu 
            Lin
          
        
      *abc
aCollege of Biosystems Engineering and Food Science, Key Laboratory of Agro-Products Postharvest Handling of Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China. E-mail: xingyu@zju.edu.cn
bFuli Institute of Food Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China
cNingbo Research Institute, Zhejiang University, Ningbo 315100, China
Received 
      6th March 2021
    , Accepted 29th April 2021First published on 29th April 2021AbstractIn this work, we developed a facile, ultrafast, and solvent-free polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) coating method triggered by plasma for ultrathin coating on various nanostructured substrates at room temperature. During plasma treatment, the monomers in the bulk elastomer were excited and deposited on the surrounding substrates. The whole coating process can be completed within 15 s at room temperature, without the use of any solvent, demonstrating its green, energy-saving, and sustainable nature. The coated material and the underlying mechanism were investigated in detail by various characterization methods, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), mass spectrometry, and water static contact angle, fluorescence and electrochemical measurements, as well as simulation. The obtained PDMS coating was ultrathin, uniform, crack-free and quite stable, and was applied to the nanochannel membrane for molecular separation based on polarity. Thanks to the ultrasmall thickness and crack-free properties, a significant high flux as well as high selectivity was achieved. Furthermore, the ultrathin crack-free PDMS coating was also applied for the sealing of the nanochannel membrane for the controlled release of tripyridine ruthenium under acidic conditions. The developed green method would be potentially applied for coating of other polymers on various substrates and shows application in separation, sensing, surface modification, and protection.
1. Introduction
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is a well-known elastomer material with inert properties, which comprises –O–Si(CH3)2– repetition units.1 The strong Si–O bond guarantees good thermodynamic and chemical stability.2 Therefore, PDMS has been widely coated as thin films on various materials to enhance their water resistance, chemical stability, and antifouling properties.3,4 Besides, nanostructures with PDMS coatings could also yield superhydrophobic surfaces with self-cleaning and water/oil separation properties.5,6 Meanwhile, PDMS coating also functioned as an antireflection layer, which improves the efficiency of solar cells.7,8 Furthermore, PDMS coating is also considered as a facile strategy to overcome the defect problem in polymeric or inorganic membranes.9 Recently, ultrathin membrane/films have received much attention due to their precise and fast molecular separation ability. The flexible nature of the siloxane backbone and the rearrangement of methyl groups allow the selective transport of molecules based on polarity.10 At the same time, the ultrathin feature of the coating allows the passage of certain molecules at extremely high flux. These coatings have been applied for different substrates, like metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and mesoporous silica nanoparticles, for various applications, such as gas separation, solid phase microextraction, sensing, and selective catalysis.1,11–14
Due to its wide applications, various methods have been developed for PDMS coating, including spin-coating, spraying, grafting, dip-coating, candle soot coating, or thermal deposition.5,6,15–17 However, toxic organic solvents were inevitably used in most works to dissolve or dilute the polymer substances, followed by solvent volatilization, which was harmful to the ecological environment and human health. Meanwhile, for some coating methods like thermal chemical vapor deposition (CVD), a high calcination temperature treatment (100–400 °C) was required for a long time (1 − 24 h), which is energy-consuming, time-consuming, and uneconomical.1,13,14 Furthermore, obtaining a high quality and crack-free ultrathin PDMS coating remains challenging.
Plasma treatment is a universal PDMS treatment method. It is generally believed that after plasma treatment, the methyl groups on the surface of the PDMS oxidize and generate more silanol groups, forming a hydrophilic surface.18–20 In microfluidic research, plasma treatment was widely used for irreversible bonding between PDMS and the bottom substrate. However, no one has ever noticed the sputtering of PDMS oligomers on ambient substrates during plasma treatment.
In this work, we developed for the first time, an ultrafast and solvent-free PDMS deposition method triggered by plasma for ultrathin PDMS coating on various nanostructured substrates at room temperature (see Fig. 1). Under the excitation of plasma, PDMS oligomers come out from the elastomer, and silanol groups (Si-OH) are formed.21 These PDMS oligomers were then deposited on the nearby substrate and linked with each other via Si–OH condensation. This process is facile and ultrafast and takes only 15 s to complete the whole coating process at room temperature, demonstrating its green, energy-saving, and sustainable nature. The coated ultrathin PDMS is uniform without any obvious cracks. The coated material composition and underlying sputtering mechanism were investigated in detail by various characterization methods, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), mass spectrometry, and water static contact angle measurements. Fluorescence and electrochemical measurements were also adopted for quantitatively illustrating the spatial-temporal feature of plasma-triggered PDMS coating. The newly developed PDMS coating method was applied for precise and fast molecular separation based on polarity with high selectivity (α = 640) and high flux (J = 3.75 μmol min−1 cm−2). Furthermore, the ultrathin crack-free PDMS coating was also applied for the sealing of the silica nanochannel membrane (SNM) for the controlled release of tripyridine ruthenium under acidic conditions.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of plasma-triggered PDMS coating. 
2. Materials and methods
2.1 Chemicals and materials
All chemicals and reagents were used without further purification and all aqueous solutions were prepared with ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ cm). ITO coated glass (surface resistivity < 17 Ω per square, 10 cm × 10 cm × 0.11 cm) was purchased from Zhuhai Kaivo Electronic Components. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was purchased from Acros Organics. Ammonia aqueous solution, Ru(NH3)6Cl3, tetraethoxysilane (TEOS), and hydroxymethylferrocene (FcMeOH) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Tris-(2,2′-bipyridine)-ruthenium(II) chloride hexahydrate (Ru(bpy)32+) and K3Fe(CN)6 were purchased from Aladdin. Sylgard 184 silicone elastomer kit was purchased from Dow Corning (Midland, MI, USA). The PDMS precursor was mixed with the curing agent in the ratio of 10:1; the mixture was heated at 75 °C for 60 min, and the bulk PDMS elastomer was obtained.
2.2 Plasma-triggered ultrafast PDMS coating
For PDMS coating on an arbitrary surface, substrates for modification were put into a plasma cleaner (PDC-32G-2, Harrick, Ithaca) with PDMS elastomers nearby, and processed under low power (6.8 W) for 15 s. After this, the coated substrates could be taken out from the cleaner and used directly.
2.3 Preparation of various nanochannel membranes
Porous anodic alumina (AAO) was purchased from Shangmu Technology. The porous polyethylene terephthalate (PET) membrane and polycarbonate (PC) were purchased from Sterlitech Corporation (Kent, WA). The SNM was fabricated on the ITO electrode using the Stöber-solution growth approach as previously reported.22 In a nutshell, the cleaned ITO electrodes were immersed in a solution consisting of CTAB (0.16 g), water (70 mL), ethanol (30 mL), ammonia solution (100 μL, 2.5 wt%), and TEOS (80 μL), and heated at 60 °C for 24 h, followed by dry aging at 100 °C overnight. The templates (CTAB) in the nanochannels were removed with 0.1 M HCl/ethanol solution to obtain the SNM/ITO. It should be noted that we focus more on the development of the green coating method of PDMS, which could be coated on various substrates. Therefore, the fabrication of a specific green substrate was not optimized in this work.
2.4 Characterization and instrumentation
SEM and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) were performed using a Hitachi SU-8010 scanning electron microscope equipped with an Aztec Energy EDS Analysis System (80 mm detector). TEM images were obtained using a Hitachi-7650 transmission electron microscope. AFM images were obtained using a Bruker E500 spectrometer. A PHS-25 pH meter (INESA, Shanghai) with a glass electrode was used to measure the pH of the solution. Water static contact angles were measured using a JC2000D2 contact angle system. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Agilent 7890b-5977a spectrometer. Ellipsometry (Semilab, GES 5E) was used for calculating the coating thickness using known refractive indices of 1.44 for PDMS and 1.46 for SiO2. XPS experiments were conducted on a Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi equipped with an Al Kα source (1486.6 eV). An Ar+ beam (200 eV) was used for surface etching.
2.5 Fluorescence measurements
The SNM/ITO after spatial coating was immersed in a fluorescent dye solution (200 μM Ru(bpy)3Cl2 with 50 mM KCl) for 1 min. Thereafter, the unabsorbed dye was washed off thoroughly with DI water. The stained nanochannel electrode was then observed under a fluorescence microscope with a 1.25× objective and image sticking function (Leica DMi8).
2.6 Electrochemical measurements
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) were performed on a CHI-660D electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, Shanghai). A conventional three-electrode system was used, with a bare or modified ITO electrode as the working electrode, a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode, and a platinum wire as the counter electrode. The detection area of the working electrode was controlled by the tape at 12.5 mm × 10.0 mm. During the measurement, the concentration of probe molecules used was 200 μM, unless otherwise specified, and 0.5 M KCl was used as the electrolyte solution. All electroanalytical measurements were performed at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C).
2.7 Controlled release
Nanochannel membranes supported by the ITO electrode were immersed in 200 μM Ru(bpy)3Cl2 solution (50 mM phosphate buffered saline, pH = 7.8) for 1 min, and the residual solution on the surface was washed off with DI water and dried under N2. The nanochannel electrode with Ru(bpy)3Cl2 solution was immersed in an acid solution at pH 2 for controlled release. Cyclic voltammetry scanning was carried out every 10 min to record the probe concentration inside the nanopores.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Characterization of plasma-triggered ultrafast PDMS deposition
The developed coating process is simple and facile without tedious multi-steps. For PDMS coating on an arbitrary surface, the substrate (to be modified) together with the PDMS elastomer was placed in a plasma cleaner and processed for 15 s. The whole process is solvent-free, contact-free, and ultrafast. As illustrated in Fig. 1, during plasma irradiation, small oligomers were believed to come out from the surface of the elastomer by high energy plasma, and then coated on the nearby materials. We first use nanochannel membranes, like anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) and porous polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as substrates, which possess a high specific surface area. As shown in Fig. 2a–f, a high density of nanochannels of 20 nm and 200 nm was observed for bare AAO and PET, respectively. After modification, not much change was observed in these membranes. However, obvious Si peaks appeared on the EDS mapping, indicating the presence of ultrathin PDMS coating on these porous substrates. To clearly observe the PDMS coating, the SNM with ultrasmall nanochannels (2.3 nm) was used as a substrate. The SNM is a flat film with a high density of uniform nanochannels. These ultrasmall nanochannels were arranged in a hexagonal shape and appeared as bright dots under TEM (Fig. 2g). As shown in Fig. 2h, an SNM with a high density of nanopores could also be clearly observed in the top-view SEM image before coating. However, after modification, the pore was filled with the PDMS polymer and a smooth surface was obtained (Fig. 2i). The obtained PDMS coating was quite uniform and of high quality without any cracks on the surface. It has been reported that the plasma treatment process would form a brittle thin silica-like crust on the surface, which may cause cracks.23,24 These cracks remained a challenge for manufacturing high-quality films.25,26 However, in this work, due to the ultrafast coating time and successive deposition of new oligomers, a flat PDMS coating without cracks was obtained, which could also be confirmed by the following electrochemical characterization (Section 3.3). Meanwhile, the deposited PDMS was extremely ultrathin and could not be clearly observed in the cross-sectional view of SEM images (Fig. S1†). The high-quality ultrathin coating without cracks is a prerequisite for various cutting-edge applications, like membrane-based molecule separation.
 Fig. 2  SEM, TEM, and AFM characterization. (a and b) Top-view SEM images of AAO before and after PDMS coating. (c) EDS mapping of AAO after modification. (d and e) Top-view SEM images of PET before and after PDMS coating. (f) EDS mapping of PET after modification. (g) TEM images of the SNM. The inset diagrams are locally enlarged. (h and i) Top-view SEM images of SNM before and after PDMS coating. (j) The AFM results of silicon wafer and SNM before and after PDMS coating. 
To further investigate the morphology of the coating, AFM characterization was also conducted. A silicon wafer was used as the substrate due to its atomically smooth surface. As shown in Fig. 2j, a quite smooth surface with roughness Rq of 0.14 nm was observed for the silicon wafer before modification. After PDMS coating, its morphology did not change much, and the roughness Rq (0.17 nm) was almost the same. The thickness of the coated PDMS films was determined to be ∼1 nm by ellipsometry. Similar results were also observed for the SNM as substrates and not much difference was observed in AFM images before and after modification. These results demonstrated that the plasma-triggered PDMS coating is quite uniform and ultrathin, which will not alter the surface morphology of the original substrates.
In addition to morphology characterization, the plasma-triggered PDMS coating was also confirmed by the XPS results. As shown in Fig. 3a, after PDMS coating, a different Si2p peak appeared, which shifted towards high energy, compared with the peak of the original SNM. This is because Si in PDMS mainly exists in the form of C2–Si–O2, and manifests as a silicone peak with lower binding energy than the silicate peak in the SNM (O2–Si–O2). Detailed deconvolution of Si2p peaks of the SNM before and after PDMS modification can be found in the ESI, Fig. S2.† We also etched the SNM with an Ar+ beam for 60 s to remove the surface layer, and compared the peak signals inside the nanochannels. The C/Si ratio decreased from 0.61 to 0.09 after etching (Fig. S2†). Based on the above evidence, we believed that PDMS was deposited mainly on the top part of the nanochannel membrane. To further investigate the composition of the coating, we compared the mass information of the deposited coating and the original PDMS oligomer. As shown in Fig. 3b, for the two types of PDMS, representative ion fragments of typical siloxane were observed and were highly coincident, with characteristic m/z peaks at 73 (CH3Si+(CH3)2), 147 (CH3Si-(CH3)2OSi+(CH3)2), and 221 (CH3Si-(CH3)2OSi(CH3)2OSi+(CH3)2).27,28 This result confirms that the deposited coating on the substrate does contain the original PDMS oligomers.
 Fig. 3  (a) XPS results of the Si2p energy spectrum for the SNM/ITO and bare ITO substrates before and after PDMS coating. (b) Mass spectral information of PDMS coating and the original PDMS oligomer (extracted from the bulk PDMS elastomer). (c) The water contact angle and structure diagram of SNM before and after plasma-triggered PDMS modification. 
The water contact angle (CA) was applied to characterize the wettability behavior of the deposited coating. As shown in Fig. 3c, after PDMS coating, the CA of the modified SNM decreased from the original 39° to around 0°, because plenty of hydrophilic groups such as hydroxyl groups were generated on the PDMS coating under the plasma atmosphere. After being stored in air for a few minutes, the contact angle increased significantly from 0° to 66.1°. A similar recovery phenomenon was also be observed with bulk PDMS (Fig. S3†). The CA of bulk PDMS decreased from 113.5° to 0° after plasma treatment. After storage in air, its CA also recovered significantly due to the diffusion of unpolymerized hydrophobic oligomers inside the PDMS to the surface.29 Therefore, we believed that a high portion of original hydrophobic PDMS oligomers was present in the coated materials, and the restoration of CA was also due to the diffusion of hydrophobic PDMS oligomers. The final recovered CA value is similar to that of the SNM modified with hydrophobic PDMS using the conventional thermal method (Fig. S3†).
3.2 Spatial-temporal feature of plasma-triggered ultrafast PDMS deposition
Due to the ultrathin feature of PDMS, it was hard to precisely quantify the content of PDMS coated on the substrate by conventional characterization methods. However, the transport of Ru(NH3)63+ and Ru(bpy)32+ was fully hindered when a sufficient amount of PDMS was deposited on the nanochannels (a detailed permeability study can be found in Section 3.3). The former probe could generate an electrochemical signal and the latter probe could produce a fluorescence signal. Therefore, the disappearance of the electrochemical signal or fluorescence signal could be quantitatively measured for accurate characterization of the deposition status and the underlying mechanism of the PDMS layer. The signal comparable to that of the unmodified SNM/ITO electrode was regarded as a PDMS coverage of 0%, while the complete disappearance of the signal was regarded as full PDMS coverage of 100%.
The impact of the plasma deposition time on the coating was first investigated. With a longer plasma treatment time, more PDMS was deposited on the nearby substrates. As shown in Fig. 4a, the coverage of PDMS increases with a longer treatment time, and the coverage reaches 100% at a deposition time of 15 s. This time is significantly faster than that in the previous work using the thermal CVD method (several hours).13 Therefore, this developed coating method is more energy-efficient, economic and sustainable. Different running power of plasma was also tested. As shown in Fig. 4b, all the plasma powers we tested show the successful coating of PDMS with 100% coverage.
 Fig. 4  The underlying mechanism of plasma-triggered PDMS coating. (a) The correlation between coating coverage and deposition time. (b) The correlation between coating coverage and plasma power. (c) Effects of bulk PDMS properties on plasma-triggered deposition. (d) The photograph (left) and fluorescence image (right) of SNM after PDMS modification and Ru(bpy)32+ staining. The size of the PDMS elastomer is 1.4 mm in diameter. The dark region in the fluorescence image is where PDMS is deposited, while the bright area in the center was the position where the bulk PDMS coverage occurs. (e) Fluorescence image of SNM after coating and Ru(bpy)32+ staining using long strip PDMS. The size of the PDMS elastomer is 1.4 × 9.0 mm. (f) Simulation results of PDMS deposition. The white line is the assumed deposition boundary. 
To further understand the detailed mechanism of plasma-triggered coating, different types of bulk PDMS elastomers were used for deposition and the obtained coverage was precisely measured. As mentioned above, when a fresh PDMS elastomer was used for deposition for 15 s, a dense layer with full coverage of 100% was obtained. However, when this used PDMS elastomer was applied again for the next modification, no effective layer was formed (Fig. 4c). After a few hours of storage in air, the recovered PDMS elastomers could be used again for effective deposition. Thus, we assumed that it is the small oligomers on the external surface of the bulk PDMS elastomer that could be excited by the high-energy plasma irradiation and sputtered on the nearby substrates. When the used PDMS elastomer was used again for the next coating, the oligomers on its surface were not sufficient for another effective coating. When recovered in air, the unpolymerized oligomers inside the bulk PDMS elastomer diffused to the surface,29 and can be used again for the next deposition. Therefore, bulk PDMS can be recycled and repeatedly used, demonstrating the sustainable feature of the developed coating methods. To further support our hypothesis, the unpolymerized oligomers inside the original PDMS elastomer were removed completely by solvent extraction. In this case, no coating was found (Fig. 4c). Therefore, we believed that the low molecular weight oligomers on the surface of the PDMS elastomer were the source of plasma-triggered coating.
To investigate the spatial distribution of the deposition, Ru(bpy)3Cl2 was applied. Ru(bpy)32+ can be adsorbed by silica nanochannels and emit red fluorescence under the excitation of green light. When sufficient PDMS was deposited in the nanochannel, the permeability of Ru(bpy)32+ was hindered and thus no fluorescence was observed. Therefore, SNM after PDMS coating was stained with Ru(bpy)32+ for visual observation. As shown in Fig. 4d, using a small circular PDMS elastomer (radius of 1.4 mm) as the deposition source, a perfect circular dark spot could be observed under a fluorescence microscope whose radius was found to be 1.70 mm. The dark part indicated the effective position of the coated PDMS in this area.
If a longer PDMS elastomer was used with the same width (9.0 mm × 1.4 mm), a perfect ellipse-shaped dark region could be observed, instead of a rounded rectangle shape (Fig. 4e). Interestingly, the lateral coating distance also increased as the PDMS elastomer became longer. To understand this coating profile, both theoretical modelling and simulation were conducted. The PDMS elastomer source in this case was simplified as a line with a length of 2c. The amount of PDMS deposited on a nanopore can be integrated. We assume that the amount of polymer deposited in a nanopore with a distance of d from source (t, 0) satisfies the equation F(d). According to the experimental results, the number of oligomers deposited on the nearby substrate would decline with a longer distance. Therefore, for simplicity, we suppose that F(d) satisfies linear declination. The permeation of Ru(bpy)32+ is fully forbidden when the density of PDMS deposited in the nanopore reaches a certain threshold M. Based on the above assumptions, the effective deposition boundary satisfies the following equation. (1) (2) F(d) = Ad + B(3)where A and B are linear parameters and both are constants.
By introducing eqn (2) and (3) into eqn (1), the following boundary equation can be obtained (detailed calculation steps can be found in the ESI Note 1†): (4)where k is a constant and can be expressed as (5)

Eqn (4) is a general elliptic equation, from which the two endpoints of the line segment can be proved as focal points of the ellipse. The calculated profile fits well with the experimental data in this work.
The simulation was also conducted using MATLAB, as shown in Fig. 4f. The simulation displayed a similar elliptical deposition boundary as our experimental results. In addition to a linear decline in the distribution, other distribution patterns were also simulated and compared, as shown in Fig. S4.† We believe that the established model and simulation can be further applied for predicting the spatial distribution of PDMS with any source shapes. It should be noted that a very small bulk PDMS elastomer (only 1.4 mm in width) was used here to investigate the mechanism due to its simplified model. In a real substrate coating, a normal-size PDMS elastomer was used nearby or above the substrates, which would generate a much larger and uniform coating area.
Based on all the above characterization results, we believe that it is the low molecular weight oligomers on the surface of bulk PDMS that would be excited by the plasma and coated on the nearby substrates.
3.3 Ultrathin membranes for molecular separation and controlled release
Ultrathin membranes with the ability of molecular separation have received considerable attention, considering their potential applications in sample purification, water desalination, nanofluidics, molecular sensing, drug delivery, and energy conversion. The ultrasmall thickness of the membrane brings in a significant high flux and throughput, while the uniform and crack-free membrane would exhibit excellent selectivity. In our previous work, the silica nanochannel membrane on the solid substrate could be transferred to another porous substrate, resulting in a free-standing membrane for the molecular separation study.30 In this work, we evaluated the molecular separation performance of the nanochannel membrane with ultrathin coating via voltammetry, which is much simpler and more rapid than the conventional U-tube experiments. CV was employed for this purpose, where the peak potential (Ep) reflects the signature of permeated molecules and the peak current (Ip) represents the molecular transport flux. For a certain molecule, higher permeability in the nanochannel membrane would result in a higher current.
As shown in Fig. 5a and b, the unmodified SNM allows the transport of positively charged Ru(NH3)63+ and negatively charged Fe(CN)63−, as well as the neutral FcMeOH before modification. After coating, the transport of hydrophilic molecules, irrespective of being positively or negatively charged, was completely suppressed. The complete disappearance of the electrochemical signal after modification demonstrates that the developed PDMS coating method, although ultrathin, was quite uniform without any cracks. These perfect sealing results were consistent with the SEM results discussed above. However, the transport of nonpolar FcMeOH was still highly favorable, as shown in Fig. 5b, demonstrating its molecular separation ability based on polarity. The diffusion coefficient (D) and transport flux (J) of FcMeOH can be calculated from the peak current (ip) according to the following equations31: ip = 268600n3/2AD1/2Cv1/2(6) (7)where n is the number of electrons transferred, A is the membrane area, C is the concentration of probes, v is the scan rate, and h is the membrane thickness. In this case, n = 1 for FcMeOH, A = 1.25 cm2, C = 200 μM, and v = 0.1 V s−1. The membrane thickness was found to be 72 nm from the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. S1†). Thus, the diffusion coefficient of FcMeOH in the coating membrane was found to be 2.3 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, which is comparable to that in the bulk solution. The transport flux (J) across the PDMS/SNM can also be obtained from the current (eqn (7)), and was calculated to be 3.75 μmol min−1 cm−2. This flux is significantly higher than the flux reported in previous studies (∼10−4 μmol min−1 cm−2),32–34 which is beneficial for the ultrathin coating applied in this work.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of molecular separation using the coating membrane. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the bare ITO (black), SNM/ITO (red) and PDMS/SNM/ITO (blue) in 0.5 M KCl containing Ru(NH3)63+, Fe(CN)63− or FcMeOH. (c) Schematic illustration of controlled release using coating membrane with trapped Ru(bpy)32+. (d) Redox cycling of Ru(bpy)32+ inside the sealed nanopores. (e) Release kinetics of Ru(bpy)32+ trapped in the modified or unmodified SNM under acidic conditions (pH = 2). 
Selectivity was obtained using the following equation: (8)where ia is the peak current of transport molecules and ib is the peak current of hindered molecules. Thus, the selectivity of nonpolar molecules is calculated to be at least 640, which is excellent compared to most hydrophobic membranes. The high flux combined with high selectivity further demonstrated the perfect quality of the ultrathin coating membrane without cracks.
In addition to molecular separation, the ultrathin crack-free PDMS coating was also applied for the sealing of nanochannel membranes for controlled release (Fig. 5c). We loaded Ru(bpy)32+ inside the silica nanochannels with PDMS coating on the top. The trapped Ru(bpy)32+ could undergo oxidation–reduction cycling (redox-cycling) inside nanopores without leaking (Fig. 5d). Thus, the remaining Ru(bpy)32+ trapped inside the nanopores can be determined by CV. Release experiments were subsequently conducted in a blank solution at pH 2. Under these conditions the protonated nanochannel would reject cations, leading to the rapid release of Ru(bpy)32+. However, the presence of the PDMS coating would prevent this process. As shown in Fig. 5e, Ru(bpy)32+ inside the SNM was released immediately and almost completely within the first 10 min. However, after modification, the release of Ru(bpy)32+ in the nanochannels with PDMS coating was quite hindered. Forty percent of the absorbed RuBPY was still retained in the coated SNM after soaking in the same solution for as long as 120 min. It should be noted that the quick release of the drug in the first short interval may be due to the presence of the drug in the nanochannel orifices, while it was difficult for the drug adsorbed inside the modified nanochannels to diffuse out. The release rate of Ru(bpy)32+ in modified nanochannels was calculated to be 21.4 times slower than that in the unmodified nanochannels.
3.4 Coating stability and comparison
To test the stability of the developed coating, the PDMS/SNM/ITO substrate was immersed in water, ethanol or acetone for several hours. As shown in Fig. S5,† after four hours of soaking in ethanol and acetone, the transport of hydrophilic probes was still highly suppressed after solvent treatment, demonstrating excellent stability of this ultrathin coating. Since PDMS prefers to enter the organic phase, we assume the presence of covalent bonding between the PDMS coating and the substrate. During the plasma-triggered process, active sites would be generated on both the coating materials and the substrate surface, resulting in irreversible bonding. The developed PDMS coating method was also compared with the previous work, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1 A comparison between the developed PDMS coating and other published coating methods




PDMS coating method
Solvent
Whole processing time
Temperature
Thickness
Ref.




Dip-coating
Organic solvent needed
Several hours
Room temperature
Microns

6



Spin-coating
Organic solvent needed
Several hours
80 °C
Microns

35 and 36


Spraying
Organic solvent needed
Several hours
80 °C
Microns

16



Thermal CVD
—
Several hours to days
100–400 °C
Several nm

13 and 37


Grafting
Organic solvent needed
>24 h
Room temperature to 100 °C
Several nm

38 and 39


Plasma-triggered coating
—
15 s
Room temperature
Several nm
This work




4. Conclusions
In summary, a plasma-triggered ultrathin PDMS coating approach was developed for the first time. This process is ultrafast without the need for organic solvents and high temperatures, demonstrating the green and sustainable feature of the developed method. The coated material was analyzed in detail by various characterization methods, including SEM, TEM, AFM, XPS, mass spectrometry, and water static contact angle measurements. Fluorescence and electrochemical measurements, as well as simulation, were also adopted for quantitatively illustrating the underlying mechanism of plasma-triggered PDMS coating. The newly developed PDMS coating is ultrathin, uniform, stable, and of high quality without any obvious cracks. This coating was applied for precise and fast molecular separation based on polarity with high selectivity (α = 640) and high flux (J = 3.75 μmol min−1 cm−2). Furthermore, the ultrathin crack-free PDMS coating was also applied for the sealing of the silica nanochannel membrane (SNM) for the controlled release of tripyridine ruthenium under acidic conditions. In the future, the developed green method would be used for coating other polymers on various substrates and shows the potential application in separation, surface modification, and protection.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFC1604504), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22004107), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2020QNA6007).
References
G. Huang, Q. Yang, Q. Xu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 7505–7509 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, X. Liu, O. Akbulut, J. Hu, S. L. Suib, J. Kong and F. Stellacci, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, G. Song, X. Zhang, Q. Li, S. Yang, T. Wang, Y. Li, L. Zhang, L. Guo and Y. Fu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 325, 128810 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, J. Feng, Y. Yang, J. Shen, W. Zhang and C. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 382, 121057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Zhang, Q. Chen, Y. Pan, C. Liu and C. Shen, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126532 CrossRef CAS .
A. Syafiq, B. Vengadaesvaran, N. A. Rahim, A. K. Pandey, A. R. Bushroa, K. Ramesh and S. Ramesh, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 131, 232–239 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Yun, Y. H. Sim, S. I. Cha and D. Y. Lee, Prog. Photovolt., 2020, 28, 372–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Zheng, C. Fang, Z. Li, X. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Ruan and Y. Dai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 181, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheng, C. Wang, F. Yang, L. Xiang, X. Huang, J. Yu, L. Zhang, Y. Pan and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7760–7763 RSC .
M. P. Wolf, G. B. Salieb-Beugelaar and P. Hunziker, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 83, 97–134 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. W. Lee and W. Hwang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28869–28875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Hu, J. Ge, H. L. Jiang and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16978–16981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Park, Y. K. Cho, D. H. Kim, M.-G. Jeong, Y. H. Kim and Y. D. Kim, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10256–10262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, B. Zhang, Q. Yang, F. Yan, X. Hua and B. Su, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7821–7827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Iqbal, B. Majhy and A. K. Sen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31170–31180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, K. Li, H. Chen, Z. Wu and Z. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 127455,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2020.127455 .
W. Zhang, Y. Hu, J. Ge, H.-L. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16978–16981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Chaudhury and G. M. Whitesides, Science, 1992, 255, 1230–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Wong and C.-M. Ho, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2009, 7, 291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kreider, K. Richter, S. Sell, M. Fenske, C. Tornow, V. Stenzel and I. Grunwald, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 273, 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiong, P. Chen and Q. Zhou, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2014, 28, 1046–1054 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Teng, G. Zheng, Y. Dou, W. Li, C.-Y. Mou, X. Zhang, A. M. Asiri and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2173–2177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Morra, E. Occhiello, R. Marola, F. Garbassi, P. Humphrey and D. Johnson, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1990, 137, 11–24 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Adly, H. Hassani, A. Q. Tran, M. Balski, A. Yakushenko, A. Offenhäusser, D. Mayer and B. Wolfrum, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 6297–6303 RSC .
S. Yu, X. Zhang, X. Xiao, H. Zhou and M. Chen, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 2203–2212 RSC .
I. R. Minev, P. Musienko, A. Hirsch, Q. Barraud, N. Wenger, E. M. Moraud, J. Gandar, M. Capogrosso, T. Milekovic, L. Asboth, R. F. Torres, N. Vachicouras, Q. Liu, N. Pavlova, S. Duis, A. Larmagnac, J. Vörös, S. Micera, Z. Suo, G. Courtine and S. P. Lacour, Science, 2015, 347, 159–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mazaltarim, J. M. Taylor, A. Konda, M. A. Stoller and S. A. Morin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33452–33457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kala, E. D. Lykissa and R. M. Lebovitz, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 1267–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bodas and C. Khan-Malek, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 123, 368–373 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, Q. Yang, L. Ding and B. Su, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11266–11277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, S. Duan, X. Xu, S. Xu and C. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1981–1987 CrossRef CAS .
C. Das, B. Jain and K. Krishnamoorthy, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11662–11664 RSC .
L. Velleman, D. Losic and J. G. Shapter, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 411, 211–218 CrossRef .
J. C. Hulteen, K. B. Jirage and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 6603–6604 CrossRef CAS .
R. Iqbal, B. Majhy and A. K. Sen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31170–31180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Jiang, H. Bukhari, Z. Zhang, W. Han and E. Xie, Carbon, 2019, 155, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, X. Liu, O. Akbulut, J. Hu, S. L. Suib, J. Kong and F. Stellacci, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Teisala, P. Baumli, S. A. L. Weber, D. Vollmer and H.-J. Butt, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 4416–4431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Krumpfer and T. J. McCarthy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11514–11519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Characterization, XPS, simulation and comparison results. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc00836f‡ These two authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of plasma-triggered PDMS coating.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM, TEM, and AFM characterization. (a and b) Top-view SEM images of AAO before and after PDMS coating. (c) EDS mapping of AAO after modification. (d and e) Top-view SEM images of PET before and after PDMS coating. (f) EDS mapping of PET after modification. (g) TEM images of the SNM. The inset diagrams are locally enlarged. (h and i) Top-view SEM images of SNM before and after PDMS coating. (j) The AFM results of silicon wafer and SNM before and after PDMS coating.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XPS results of the Si2p energy spectrum for the SNM/ITO and bare ITO substrates before and after PDMS coating. (b) Mass spectral information of PDMS coating and the original PDMS oligomer (extracted from the bulk PDMS elastomer). (c) The water contact angle and structure diagram of SNM before and after plasma-triggered PDMS modification.	 

 	Fig. 4  The underlying mechanism of plasma-triggered PDMS coating. (a) The correlation between coating coverage and deposition time. (b) The correlation between coating coverage and plasma power. (c) Effects of bulk PDMS properties on plasma-triggered deposition. (d) The photograph (left) and fluorescence image (right) of SNM after PDMS modification and Ru(bpy)32+ staining. The size of the PDMS elastomer is 1.4 mm in diameter. The dark region in the fluorescence image is where PDMS is deposited, while the bright area in the center was the position where the bulk PDMS coverage occurs. (e) Fluorescence image of SNM after coating and Ru(bpy)32+ staining using long strip PDMS. The size of the PDMS elastomer is 1.4 × 9.0 mm. (f) Simulation results of PDMS deposition. The white line is the assumed deposition boundary.	 
	(1)
	(2)
F(d) = Ad + B	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
ip = 268600n3/2AD1/2Cv1/2	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of molecular separation using the coating membrane. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the bare ITO (black), SNM/ITO (red) and PDMS/SNM/ITO (blue) in 0.5 M KCl containing Ru(NH3)63+, Fe(CN)63− or FcMeOH. (c) Schematic illustration of controlled release using coating membrane with trapped Ru(bpy)32+. (d) Redox cycling of Ru(bpy)32+ inside the sealed nanopores. (e) Release kinetics of Ru(bpy)32+ trapped in the modified or unmodified SNM under acidic conditions (pH = 2).	 
	(8)

Dip-coating	Organic solvent needed	Several hours	Room temperature	Microns	
6

Spin-coating	Organic solvent needed	Several hours	80 °C	Microns	
35 and 36
Spraying	Organic solvent needed	Several hours	80 °C	Microns	
16

Thermal CVD	—	Several hours to days	100–400 °C	Several nm	
13 and 37
Grafting	Organic solvent needed	>24 h	Room temperature to 100 °C	Several nm	
38 and 39
Plasma-triggered coating	—	15 s	Room temperature	Several nm	This work
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Characterization, XPS, simulation and comparison results. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc00836f
‡ These two authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
