Lighting porphyrins and phthalocyanines for molecular photovoltaics  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CC02213F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CC02213F
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7090-7108Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsLighting porphyrins and phthalocyanines for molecular photovoltaics

        
          
            M. Victoria 
            Martínez-Díaz
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gema 
            de la Torre
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tomás 
            Torres
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049-Madrid, Spain. E-mail: tomas.torres@uam.es;  Fax: +34-91-4973966;   Tel: +34-91-4974151
bIMDEA-Nanociencia, Facultad de Ciencias, Cantoblanco, 28049-Madrid, Spain
Received 
      29th June 2010
    , Accepted 4th August 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      10th September 2010
    AbstractThe field of organic photovoltaics (OPV) represents one of the most promising technological areas. Porphyrins and phthalocyanines are perfectly suited for their integration in light energy conversion systems. These colored macrocycles exhibit very attractive physical properties, particularly very high extinction coefficients in the visible and near IR regions, where the maximum of the solar photon flux occurs, that is necessary for efficient photon harvesting, besides a rich redox chemistry, as well as photoinduced electron transfer and semiconducting capabilities.M. Victoria Martínez-DíazSince 2002 M. Victoria Martínez-Díaz is Associate Professor in the Organic Chemistry Department at Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM). Before that, she obtained her PhD in 1994 from UAM under the supervision of Prof. Torres in the field of Supramolecular Chemistry. After one year postdoc at CEA-Saclay working on the LB technique, she spent two years as a research fellow in the group of Prof. F. J. Stoddart in Birmingham (UK) studying the self-assembly of switchable interlocked molecules. Her current research, developed in Prof. Torres’s group, focuses on the synthesis, supramolecular properties and photovoltaic applications of phthalocyanine-based materials.Gema de la TorreGema de la Torre obtained her PhD in 1998 from Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), working on the chemistry of phthalocyanines under the supervision of Professor T. Torres. Following two postdoctoral stays with Professor W. Blau (Trinity College, Dublin), working on the functionalization of carbon nanotubes, and Professor N. Martín (Universidad Complutense de Madrid), working on porphyrin-fullerene ensembles, she joined Professor T. Torres´ group as Assistant Professor. From 2007 she holds an Associate Professor position in the Organic Chemistry Department at UAM. Her current research interests are the synthesis and photovoltaic applications of new phthalocyanine-based materials.Tomás TorresTomás Torres is Full Professor and Head of the Organic Chemistry Department at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. In addition to various aspects of supramolecular chemistry, his current research interests include the preparation of molecular materials based on phthalocyanines, including applications in solar cells, with a focus on nanotechnology. Prof. Torres has published 300 papers and reviews and holds 35 patents. He has been awarded the JANSSEN CILAG prize for Organic Chemistry 2005 by the Royal Society of Chemistry of Spain. In 2009 he was honoured as Doctor Honoris Causa by the Ivanovo State University of Chemistry and Technology, Russia.
Introduction
In natural systems, chlorophylls play the role of light-harvesting antennae, collecting the maximum number of incoming photons, which are efficiently transferred to the so-called special pair. The interest of porphyrins (Pors) as artificial antenna systems is, therefore, not surprising. These nature occurring macrocycles are highly conjugated heteroaromatic compounds with a very intense absorption in the visible region (namely a strong Soret band centered between 400–500 nm and a moderate Q band in the 550–650 nm spectral region) and, therefore, deeply colored. Many porphyrin models have been prepared in order to understand the natural system and, in many cases, as a means of developing solar energy conversion systems.1
Porphyrins, that have gone almost unnoticed as active components in Heterojunction Organic Solar Cells (HJs), are on the contrary among the most relevant types of photosensitizers for Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs).2 However, performances of porphyrin-based DSSCs are in general not yet comparable to the state-of-the-art ruthenium-polypyridyl-based ones. Several authors have tried to rationalize the origin of the smaller efficiency (η) values of porphyrin-sensitized solar cells regarding the Ru(bpy)2 based systems, the most recurrent argument being the increased probability of exciton quenching, a consequence of the natural tendency of porphyrins to form aggregates, and more recently, their significantly reduced electron lifetime, which directly affects the open circuit voltage.3 In addition, their insufficient light-harvesting ability in the visible has been pointed out. Indeed, the extinction coefficients of porphyrin Q bands are not very large (ca. 20 × 103). In this context, synthetic porphyrin analogues, so-called phthalocyanines (Pcs),4 have proved to fill this gap and are established among the benchmark dyes in the field5 due to their improved light-harvesting properties in the far red- and near IR spectral region and their extraordinary robustness. However, efficiency values of Pc-based DSSCs are in general below those made of their Por relatives.
Pors and Pcs also stand out as donor molecules and light harvesting systems for the fabrication of small molecule organic solar cells. From these two chromophores, Pcs hold some advantages like their already mentioned strong absorption in the red, their excellent p-type semiconducting behavior, their high thermal stability and the quality of the crystalline films prepared by sublimation of these molecules. Additional benefits of Pcs are: (i) the strong propensity to adopt horizontal orientations on the substrate, leading to high charge-carrier mobility; and (ii) the relative longer exciton-diffusion length (Zn(II)Pc can reach 30 nm)6 with regard to porphyrins (less than 10 nm), which can be related to the strong trend to cofacial molecular stacking of Pcs (while porphyrins exhibit head-to-tail molecular stacking), which probably enhances energy migration. Therefore, Pcs have been widely used for the fabrication of planar heterojunction (PHJ) organic solar cells.5,7 In fact, the PHJ concept was firstly exploited in 1986 by Tang, who reported a two-layer organic photovoltaic cell fabricated with Cu(II)Pc as the electron-donor material with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼1%.8 This pioneering work was the inspiration of many researchers for the construction and characterization of different PHJ molecular devices, which are still intensively investigated and remain an invaluable tool for the evaluation of new active materials and the study of the elementary physical processes that control the performance of organic solar cells. On the other hand, the addition of strong absorbing phthalocyanines to polymer:fullerene bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) organic solar cells has been envisioned as a plausible strategy to achieve high conversion efficiencies.
This review provides an overview on the major achievements, recent advances and current directions for optimization of the performances in both porphyrinoid-based dye-sensitized solar cells and organic solar cells. In particular, porphyrin, phthalocyanine and subphthalocyanine based solar cells are discussed. Other important porphyrinoid dyes such as chlorins and corroles are out of the scope of this review for the sake of focusing on the porphyrinoid sensitizers with a higher impact in the field. However, very important contributions have been reported, specially in the area of corrole and chlorin-sensitized solar cells.9
Porphyrins and phthalocyanines as sensitizers in DSSCs
In search of efficient, stable and low-cost alternatives to well-established but expensive silicon based solar cells, DSSCs, mainly developed by the group of Grätzel, have been shown to be the most promising candidates.10–13 In these devices, photons are collected by organic dye molecules which cover a layer of a wide band gap nanocrystalline semiconducting material like mesoporous TiO2 (anatase). It is a cheap material which can be processed in transparent flexible films which offer a huge interfacial area and high electron mobility. The third important component is the redox electrolyte, which interpenetrates the TiO2 layer. Excitation of the dye leads to injection of electrons from the dye excited state to the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 (Fig. 1). The ground state of the dye is regenerated through reduction by the electrolyte (usually I−/I3−) (Fig. 1). The dyes employed should fulfill a number of essential requirements. The need of anchoring functionalities, for attaching the dye to the semiconductor surface, has been demonstrated. In particular, carboxylate groups have shown very good electronic coupling between the π* orbital of the electronically excited complex and the 3d orbitals of the TiO2 film. The LUMO level of the dye must be sufficiently high in energy for efficient charge injection in the TiO2 CB, and the HOMO level should allow efficient regeneration of the oxidized dye by the electrolyte. In contrast, the redox mediator should not bind the semiconductor surface, since it should shuttle between the TiO2 surface and the counter electrode.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of fundamental processes in a DSSC. 
Energy conversion efficiencies up to 11%, under AM 1.5 irradiation and small active solar cell area (0.2 cm2), have been reached using Ru-polypyridyl dyes,14 but commercial applications require further improvements in efficiency and stability. Despite extensive work in the development of new dyes15–19 for DSSCs, minimal impressive progress has been reported in the last few years.
Improvement of the devices’ performances has been limited by the light-harvesting capability of state-of-the-art dyes, which lack strong absorption in the red/near infrared region where the solar flux of photons is maximum. Dyes such as porphyrinoids which have a high molar extinction coefficient in this spectral region would allow the preparation of thinner devices, minimizing charge recombination during the transport of charges to the electrode.
Pioneering work of Grätzel and Kay in 1993 already showed internal power conversion efficiency (IPCE) values of 80% and efficiencies of 2.6% for DSSCs based on porphyrin 1.20 In this section it will be highlighted how the cell efficiencies of this particular family of dyes have been improved along the years up to 7.1% (device made with porphyrin 2)21 by rational design of the porphyrin structure. Very recently, Grätzel, Diau, Yeh et al., have reported22 a device made from “push-pull” porphyrin dye 3 (R = C6H13, also called YD2) with a cell performance of ca. 11%, very close to the values characteristic of ruthenium-based DSSCs, making this porphyrin the most efficient green dye for DSSC applications (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Molecular structure of one of the pioneering (1) and two of the currently most efficient porphyrin dyes (2 and 3, also called YD2 when R is C6H13). 
On the other hand, despite the unique optical properties of Pcs, only very recently have efficiencies of Pc-sensitized solar cells jumped 1%.23 Due to their more π-extended aromatic surfaces, the tendency of phthalocyanines to form aggregates on the metal oxide surface is considerably higher than that of porphyrins and, therefore, problems associated with deactivation of the excited dye become more relevant. Within this family of dyes, intensive research has been focused on reducing the undesired aggregation phenomena of the dye on the metal oxide surface while keeping good electronic coupling between the LUMO of the phthalocyanines and the TiO2 conduction band, and good solubility of the dye in organic solvents.
Overall efficiencies above 3.5% at 1 sun and IPCE values at the Q band maximum absorption (ca. 700 nm) of 80% have been reported by the groups of Grätzel, Nazeeruddin and Torres employing highly soluble carboxy–Zn(II)Pc derivatives 4 and 5 (also called dye TT1) (Fig. 3) with a low tendency towards aggregation.24 Very recently, efficiency values of Pc-based DSSCs have substantially increased up to 4.6% when employing derivative 6, carrying peripheral highly bulky 2,6-diphenylphenoxy groups which completely suppress macrocycle aggregation when anchored to the TiO2 film.25
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures of best performance unsymmetrically substituted carboxy–Zn(II)Pcs 4, 5 (TT1) and 6. 
In addition to their light-harvesting properties, both Pors and Pcs are attractive sensitizers for DSSCs due to their appropriate redox properties for the sensitization of TiO2 films and dye regeneration by the typical I−/I3− electrolyte. That is, the LUMO level of the macrocycles lay above the TiO2 CB while the HOMO level should be close to the redox potential of the electrolyte in order to ensure efficient dye regeneration.
Optimization of the dye component of the cell usually requires a systematic structural modification. Both Pors and Pcs are highly versatile molecules whose physicochemical properties can be tuned by chemical modification of their structure. Besides the possibility of introducing a wide variety of transition metals at the inner cavity, many chemical modifications can be performed at the macrocycle periphery. Obviously, porphyrins exhibit very rich chemistry that allows their selective functionalization at either the meso or the β-pyrrolic position. In contrast, phthalocyanine chemistry is substantially limited by the lack of solubility and synthetic methods that would allow selective functionalization of the unsubstituted macrocycle, and the difficulty in preparing unsymmetrically substituted derivatives from already functionalized precursors.26 In this context, the number of porphyrins that have been tested in Grätzel cells is significantly larger in comparison with reports dealing with phthalocyanine-sensitized solar cells. Since several reviews concerning the utilization of porphyrins and phthalocyanines as dyes in DSSCs have been reported,2,5 this overview will be mainly focused on the relevant structural macrocycle modifications that have led to a rational understanding of the dye structure/device performance relationships. New strategies to develop panchromatic DSSCs, including co-sensitization with two complementary dyes and the use of supramolecular or covalent dyads, will be also discussed below.
(1) Modification of the central metal at the macrocycle cavity has been varied in order to study its influence on device performance. In most cases Zn(II) metallomacrocycles are used as photosensitizers due to their long-lived (>1 ns) singlet excited states. In this regard, it has been demonstrated that Zn(II) porphyrin 7a performs better than the Cu(II) derivative 7b (Fig. 4).2 On the other hand, macrocycle metallation is known to determine the oxidation potential energy of the excited state. Free-base porphyrins and phthalocyanines are generally poorer photosensitizers in comparison to their Zn(II) analogues, showing a remarkable decrease of photocurrent response due to their lower excited singlet state (the oxidation potential of free bases are generally more positive whereas the HOMO–LUMO gaps remain similar). Recently, Durrant and Officer have also investigated the influence of the central metal in the injection dynamics.27 They have reported faster electron injection by using Zn(II) as the central metal in porphyrin dyes, in agreement with the higher singlet excited state energy of these dyes in comparison to the corresponding free base macrocycles.
 Fig. 4  Metalloporphyrins 7 tested as photosensitizers in DSSCs. 
Structural Pc modifications such as the replacement of Zn(II) by Al(III)OH in tetracarboxy-Pc derivatives also lead to poorer efficiencies.23a Ti(IV) and Si(IV) phthalocyanine derivatives offer the possibility of introducing axial ligands that almost suppress macrocycle aggregation on the metal oxide surface. However, photovoltaic results using these types of derivatives were quite poor.28
Only Ru(II)Pcs have been seriously considered as alternatives to Zn(II)Pcs due to both their appropriate HOMO–LUMO levels and the possibility of axial coordination that avoids macrocycle aggregation. In particular, Ru(II)Pcs substituted with pyridine ligands that can additionally incorporate an anchoring group such as 8 and 9 (Fig. 5) have been tested as dyes, demonstrating that coupling of the dye excited state to the TiO2 conduction band can also occur through the axial pyridine ligand.29 In DSSCs with suitable electrolytes, Pc dye 9 (R = CN) was capable of efficient photocurrent generation, showing absorbed photon-to-current efficiencies (APCE) of up to 45%. In contrast to Zn(II)Pcs, Ru(II) derivative 9 (R = OMe) exhibits slower electron injection rate constants (hundred of ns).30 The reason for the slow injection dynamics is claimed to be due to more efficient injection from the Ru(II)Pcs' triplet state. The long lifetime of Ru(II)Pcs' T1 state (200 ns) enables electron injection into TiO2 to be slow, in competition with T1 decay to the ground state.
 Fig. 5  Molecular structures of Ru(II)Pcs 8 and 9 bearing the anchoring group for DSSCs at the axial pyridine ligand, and Ru(II)Pc 10 with the carboxy group directly attached to the macrocycle. 
The injection efficiencies and photovoltaic device performances of Zn(II)Pc 5 and the Ru(II)Pc analogue 10 (R = Me) have been tested under identical conditions, allowing an interesting comparative study of two dyes with similar structures but different photophysics,31 that is, 5 exhibits a reasonably long lived singlet state, whereas derivative 10 is considered a triplet injector. Time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) and IPCE measurements were applied to study the injection efficiency of these two Pc dyes. Despite the higher injection efficiency of Ru(II)Pc 10 in comparison to 5, the Zn(II)Pc-based cells showed higher performance, probably due to its stronger light harvesting efficiency.
(2) Influence of the spacers introduced between the anchoring group and the macrocycle. Specifically in the porphyrin family, comparisons between β- and meso-substituted monocarboxylic acid derivatives result in a considerably better performance of the β-substituted, structurally similar, porphyrin monoacids.2 In particular, ethenyl and ethynylphenyl linkers proved to be very effective π-conjugated groups for connecting the porphyrin π-system with the carboxylic anchoring group, with the number of double bonds introduced being less relevant.32 Porphyrin core and binding groups have also been successfully π-connected though aromatic heterocycles such as furan or thiophene directly linked to the porphyrin meso position.33
On the Pc side, Torres and coworkers have reported a series of monocarboxylic acid Pc derivatives (11–16) and systematically checked their performance in DSSCs compared with Pc sensitizer 5 in which the carboxy group is directly attached to the macrocycle (Fig. 6).34,35 The modification of linker groups within the series of carboxyPcs allows modulation of the orbital coupling between the dyes and the semiconductor surface. Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic results obtained. As expected, the IPCE values dramatically drop to less than 1% overall efficiency when the carboxy anchoring group is separated from the Pc by insulating alkoxy or aryloxy spacers, i.e. using Pc 11 or 13. On the contrary, rigid π-conjugated bridges do not interrupt the electronic coupling between the Pc and the semiconductor surface, rendering devices made of derivatives 12, 14 and 16 with average power conversion efficiencies of 2%. Similar to porphyrin derivatives,2 conjugation of the carboxy anchoring group through an ethenyl spacer to the dye led to superior photovoltaic responses in DSSCs. Thus, derivative 14, bearing a π-conjugated vinylenephenylene spacer, showed higher performance than phthalocyanines 16 which present an opposite arrangement of the ethenyl and phenylene groups. In spite of this, the better results obtained with Pc 5 suggest that the anchoring group should remain as close as possible to the chromophore to maximize coupling between the Pc and the TiO2.
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of Pcs 11–16 bearing different spacers between the macrocycle and the carboxylic anchoring group. 
Table 1 Comparative photovoltaic data of tri-tert-butyl carboxyZn(II)Pc dyes bearing different spacers between the Pc and the carboxy group




Pc sensitizer

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/mV

η (%)





5

7.6
617
3.52



11

0.9
550
0.4



12

4.8
610
2.20



13

1.44
611
0.67



14

6.8
613
3.10



15

5.36
579
2.20



16

4.36
587
1.87




(3) Influence of the light harvesting efficiency. The elongation of the π-conjugated system of porphyrin monoacids produces a decrease in the HOMO–LUMO gap, and a concomitant red shift in both the Soret and Q band absorptions. It was therefore predicted that improvement of the visible light harvesting efficiency in porphyrin dyes would lead to better photovoltaic responses. Indeed, several authors have demonstrated this effect by comparing the photovoltaic responses of π-elongated porphyrin monoacids with respect to derivatives lacking this property. For example, Imahori and coworkers have compared porphyrins 17 and 18,36 (Fig. 7) in which a naphthyl bridge introduced at the meso position is additionally fused to the porphyrin core in the case of compound 18, producing an efficient elongation of the π-system. The η values of cells made of 18 were significantly improved (4.1% versus 2.8% in the case of porphyrin 17) as a consequence of enhanced photocurrent generation in the region between 650 and 800 nm.
 Fig. 7  Broad absorbing monocarboxy porphyrins tested in DSSCs. 
Similarly, Lin et al. have demonstrated that porphyrin absorption properties can be significantly affected by including different acene units into the π-conjugated system of porphyrin 19.37 In particular, the incorporation of benzene, naphthalene, anthracene, tetracene and pentacene units in porphyrins 19 (Fig. 7) produce a systematic increase in the porphyrin Q band broadening and red-shifting. The best balance between improving light harvesting properties by increasing the number of acene units and performance of the DSSCs was found for derivative 19c (5.4% conversion efficiency). The remarkably poor performance of compound 19e, which exhibits very broad absorption bands, has been explained to be caused by an inefficient electron injection into TiO2 due to nonradiative relaxation of the molecule in the singlet excited state.

β,β-Fused monocarboxylic porphyrins exhibiting a π-elongated system such as 20 have also been tested in DSSCs.38 High η values (6.3%) have been obtained, further confirming the influence of the light harvesting properties in the improvement of the cell performance of porphyrin-sensitized solar cells.
The incorporation of “push-pull” porphyrin derivatives in DSSCs has led to remarkable progress in this family of sensitizers, reaching η values comparable to that of the ruthenium bipyridyl complexes. Among them, derivative 3 (R = tert-butyl) (Fig. 1), in which a diarylamino group is attached to the meso position of the porphyrin, opposite to the anchoring group, has allowed for the preparation of solar cells exhibiting 6.0% overall efficiencies.39 In fact, this success has been attributed to a good compromise between suppression of dye aggregation by introducing bulky tert-butyl groups onto the aryl substituents, extension of the π-conjugated system and enhancement of the charge transfer directionality in the excited state by introduction of an electron donating group opposite to the anchoring group, thus optimizing the device performance. Indeed, the benefit of introducing amino groups on the aryl substituent opposite to the binding group of porphyrins 21 (Fig. 8) has been demonstrated by comparing the photovoltaic responses of derivatives bearing different electron-donating or withdrawing groups.40 The superior performance of derivative 21a (6.1% efficiency), in contrast with the low efficiency values obtained with compound 21d (1.1%), has been justified by the strong electron-donating effect of the Me2N substituent, which additionally produces a broadening and red-shifting of the absorption spectrum.
 Fig. 8  Molecular structure of highly efficient “push-pull” porphyrin sensitizers 21–25. 
Recently, new porphyrin dyes 3 have been reported. In one of them, the two R groups in the diarylamino substituent were replaced by hexyl chains (derivative YD2), improving the device performance to up to 6.6% of power conversion.41 In other examples, for porphyrins 22 and 23 (Fig. 8), the influence of the nature and the position of the electron-donating group on the photovoltaic performance of these porphyrin-sensitized solar cells has been tested. Increasing the number of diarylamino and/or triarylamino groups enhances the light harvesting efficiency of the porphyrin, which is an essential requirement for DSSCs. However, dye aggregation on the TiO2 surface may be the reason for the modest device efficiencies (4.2 to 5.5%) obtained with these derivatives.42
The phenyl linker group in porphyrin 3 has been replaced either by naphthalene (i.e.24) or anthracene (i.e.25) (Fig. 8) in order to produce a red-shift in the Soret and Q bands as the π-system was expanded.43 Remarkable η values of 6.7%, beyond that of N719 (6.1%) with no added scattering layer, were obtained with the green sensitizer 24. With the addition of a scattering layer, the cell performance of porphyrin 24 was comparable to that of N719 (η = 6.9 vs. 7.3%). These results completely change the ranking of outperformance dyes for DSSCs and perspectives in the design of new sensitizers based on porphyrin and phthalocyanine macrocycles.
In the case of phthalocyanines, modification of the macrocycle periphery is the most common way to produce a red-shift in the Q band absorption. A stronger “push-pull” derivative of Pc 4 has been reported by Giribabu et al.44 The new sensitizer 26 (Fig. 9) has six electron–donor butoxy groups at the α positions that produce a 10 nm red-shift in the macrocycle Q band. However, when 26 was tested in DSSC and compared with the parent molecule Pc 4, the overall efficiency went down to ca. 1%. A possible explanation for these results is a lower electron-injection yield as a consequence of modification of the HOMO–LUMO levels of the dye.
 Fig. 9  Modification of the “push-pull” structure of Pc dyes. 
(4) Modification of the binding group. The binding of monocarboxylic acid porphyrins such as 7 to the TiO2 surface is quite weak, as dye-coated plates discolor when they are rinsed in the absorption solvent. A stronger binding produced by a more acidic anchoring group was expected to increase the device performance. Thus, sulfonic and phosphonic acid groups were tested as binding groups of the porphyrin dyes. Indeed, the new dyes could not be removed by rinsing. However, the carboxylic acid derivative was shown to be significantly superior in solar cell sensitization over either the sulfonic or the phosphonic acid porphyrins.2 In conclusion, the importance of the binding group may be mainly related with the electronic coupling between the dye and the TiO2 surface.
More recently, new porphyrin sensitizers 27 and 28 have been prepared in which the carboxylic acid based anchoring group has been modified (Fig. 10).45 In addition to stronger acidity, the introduction of an electron-withdrawing α-CN group in the anchoring unit of porphyrin 28 provokes an enhancement on the light-harvesting properties and concomitant photovoltaic performance, in comparison with the acrylic acid derivative 27 (5.2% vs. 4.0%). On the contrary, the introduction of a phthalic unit as an anchoring group in porphyrin 29 did not produce any beneficial effect in the photovoltaic properties. As mentioned above, the introduction of a malonic acid binding group in porphyrin derivatives such as 2 has led to excellent overall conversion efficiencies between 5% and 7%,21 depending on the aryl group attached to the porphyrin meso position, and are still considered one of the best porphyrin-based sensitizers.
 Fig. 10  Modification in the binding group of porphyrin sensitizers. 
Recent designs of porphyrin derivatives for DSSCs have been focused on merging all the structural considerations learnt in previous sections. For instance, derivative 3046 contains a π-extended thiophene based linker, which efficiently connects the porphyrin to the cyanoacrylic acid binding group through one of its meso phenyl substituents (Fig. 11). Power conversion efficiencies around 5% were obtained with this type of derivative.
 Fig. 11  Thiophene-linked porphyrin derivative for DSSCs. 
(5) Use of chemical coadsorbants. In the case of Pc-sensitized solar cells the introduction of coadsorbants, typically 3α,7α-dihydroxy-5β-cholic acid (CHENO), has shown to be crucial in order to get good performance devices.47 The reason for this beneficial effect is not very clearly understood. CHENO bears a carboxylic acid functional group that allows its strong binding to the TiO2 surface, in competition with the dye molecules. The addition of CHENO usually produces a remarkable increase in the photocurrent and, to a lesser extent, in the photovoltage. The increase in the photovoltage is attributed to the effect of CHENO breaking dye aggregates, thus improving electron injection into the semiconductor. In other cases, the beneficial effect of CHENO has been related to a decrease in recombination of the injected electrons with the redox electrolyte.48
In the case of porphyrin-sensitized solar cells, the effect of CHENO also produces a significant improvement in the photovoltaic parameters, i.e. the η values of porphyrin 3-based DSSCs can be increased from 5.4 to 6.0.39 However, since the CHENO coadsorbate effectively occupies the available space on the TiO2 surface, the adequate dye/CHENO ratio has to be carefully checked until finding a compromise between suppression of dye aggregation and decrease in dye loading.
The co-sensitization strategy in DSSCs
Despite their improved red photon harvesting properties and their high extinction coefficients, the η values reported using either porphyrin or phthalocyanine as DSSCs sensitizers are in general smaller than those reached with the benchmark Ru(II)-polypyridiyl dyes. However, very impressive progress has recently been published that have significantly reduced the differences between porphyrinoids and Ru(II)polypyridyl dyes. While further optimization of the dye structure is achieved, new strategies have emerged aiming to construct highly efficient DSSCs.
The combination of dyes with complementary absorbing spectra, one of them being ideally a good harvester of red or near infrared photons, is an appealing strategy to achieve panchromatic sensitization of TiO2 films. Many “dye cocktails” have been tried with limited success due to the typical decrease in the sensitizing efficiency of the individual dyes upon mixing them.49 In other cases, the co-sensitization strategy, using a combination of dyes with different light-harvesting properties, has led to cells with improved efficiencies compared to those sensitized by a single dye.50
Porphyrin and phthalocyanine dyes offer optical windows in the visible region that makes these molecules very appealing components of co-sensitizer blends. TiO2 microporous electrodes were simultaneously modified with both porphyrins and phthalocyanines.51 Indeed, the optical absorption spectrum and the photocurrent spectrum were effectively extended as a result of the co-sensitization. However, overall efficiencies were rather low. Only very recently, efficient co-sensitized DSSCs have been prepared using phthalocyanine 5 (TT1) and one of the most efficient organic dyes reported, JK2 (Fig. 12). The photoresponse of the “dye cocktail” was higher than those of the single dye-sensitized devices. The overall device efficiency was 7.7%, the highest value reported for cosensitized DSSCs.24b The key point for this success was rationalized to be related with the high extinction coefficients of the dyes, which allow the use of low dye concentrations to achieve efficient absorption and, therefore, leaves sufficient space on the TiO2 surface to attach a second dye with a complementary absorption spectrum.52
 Fig. 12  Molecular structure of JK2 dye. 
In pursuit of panchromatic sensitizers and their application in mesoporous TiO2-based solid state solar cells, Zn(II)Pc dye TT1 was firstly adsorbed over relatively thin (∼1 μm) TiO2 mesoporous films and then a visible-light absorbing polymer, namely regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene (P3HT), was incorporated into the mesopores as both a second sensitizer and a solid hole conductor. These hybrid solid state cells exhibited an overall conversion efficiency of around 1% at full sun intensity and a clear panchromatic response in incident photon-to-charge carrier generation efficiency measurements.53
Increasing the light-harvesting in DSSCs with unattached energy relay dyes
The co-sensitization strategy has an obviously serious constraint concerning the number of sites on the titania surface that are available for dye attachment. Beyond that, the use of long-range Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) has been proposed as a new concept for increasing light harvesting in DSSCs using energy relay dyes (ERDs) as co-sensitizers.54 In particular, a 26% increase in power conversion efficiency was achieved by incorporating an unattached highly luminescent PTCDI chromophore inside the liquid electrolyte in a TT1-sensitized solar cell (Fig. 13). The increase in the device performance is attributed to the increase in the short-circuit photocurrent caused by an increase in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) in the 400–600 nm region, while the open-circuit voltage remained almost unchanged.
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation of a DSSC with energy relay dyes. 
Very recently, another energy relay dye, 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(4-dimethylaminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM) (Fig. 14), has been used together with dye TT1 to increase the overall power conversion efficiency of a DSSC from 3.5% to 4.5%. In this case, the unattached DCM dyes exhibit an average excitation transfer efficiency of 96% inside TT1-covered, mesostructured TiO2 films. This paper shows that energy relay dyes can be efficiently implemented in optimized DSSCs, but also highlights the need to design highly soluble energy relay dyes with high molar extinction coefficients.55
 Fig. 14  Molecular structure of DCM dye. 
In a complementary manner, tetra-tert-butyl Zn(II)-phthalocyanine (ZnPc) has been dissolved in the electrolyte of a Ru-polypyridine sensitized TiO2-nanowire solar cell, achieving a four-fold increase in the quantum yield of red photons (between 675 and 680 nm).56 Taking into account that phthalocyanine is not directly linked to the TiO2 surface, only resonance energy transfer from ZnPc to the surface-attached N-719 dye can explain these results, demonstrating that enhancement of the photovoltaic performance is possible using energy transfer processes from a dissolved unattached luminescent dye to the surface-attached dye. In this case, the close-packed nanowire array architecture proved to be essential to ensure special energy transfer between the donor and the acceptors.
In inorganic quantum dot-based solar cells, FRET has been also employed. Hybrid-sensitized solid cells combining PbS or CdS quantum dots with the near IR-absorbing TT1 have been described. In this case, TT1 is added over the quantum dot deposited layer to strengthen the light-harvesting capabilities into the near IR region.57 Although the photocurrent decreased somewhat in the visible range compared to the original signal from PbS, photocurrents in the near IR range increased at around 690 nm where TT1 absorbs strongly. A positive cocktail effect was obtained from the combination of CdS-sensitizer.
Covalent or supramolecular dyads in DSSCs
Natural photosynthetic systems have inspired chemists to investigate the assembly of porphyrins in covalent or noncovalent arrays that mimic the way light is harvested by a multichromophoric array and, by the antenna effect, this excitonic energy is transferred to an energy acceptor. The efficiency of the intramolecular energy transfer in antennae assemblies will depend on the extent of electronic coupling between the chromophores. This can be modulated by both the bridge and the special orientation of the units. Despite the number of artificial systems that have been extensively studied in solution, surprisingly, very few examples have been applied to solar cell devices.
The rationale of this strategy is to enhance the DSSC performance by using covalent or supramolecular energy-transfer systems. That is, covalent or supramolecular dyads constituted by two complementary absorbing dyes, which additionally can undergo efficient energy transfer from the donor to the injecting acceptor, would positively contribute to the panchromatic sensitization of the TiO2 films by avoiding the competition between the dyes for the binding sites in the TiO2, since only one of the chromophoric units would bear the anchoring group to attach the whole molecule to the surface.58
Many linear and branched porphyrin arrays have been assessed as light harvesters attached to TiO2. However, only very recently porphyrin-based dyads like 31 and 32 (Fig. 15) have been successfully applied as minimalistic antenna-type multichromophoric systems for photoelectrode sensitization.59 In all cases, a porphyrin unit is attached to the TiO2 surface and is acting as energy acceptor. An improvement of the photovoltaic properties was observed and attributed to the wider solar spectral coverage in the case of the dyads.
 Fig. 15  Molecular structures of porphyrin or phthalocyanine dyads tested in DSSCs. 
Even rarer are the Pc-based dyads incorporated in DSSCs. To our knowledge, supramolecular dyad 33, containing both Ru(II)Pc and Ru(II)bis(bipyridyl) chromophores, reported by McDonagh and coworkers (Fig. 15) is a unique example.60 Unfortunately, solar cell efficiencies were not improved when compared with the reference N716 Ru(II)-bipyridyl dye. However, photocurrent generation per molecule was superior in the case of dyads. Indeed, the increased molecular size of the dyads is believed to be responsible for a concurrent decrease in dye coverage and DSC performance.
Porphyrins and phthalocyanines in all-organic solar cells. Small molecule and polymer-based devices
Organic solar cells61,62 make use of heterogeneous junction regions of conjugated hole- and electron-conducting molecules to produce separated electrical charges after photoinduced charge transfer from the electron-donor to the electron-acceptor component. The interface for charge transfer can be obtained in a planar heterojunction (PHJ) architecture, with two successively deposited films of donor and acceptor materials, typically small molecules, or in a bulk heterojunction (BHJ), where a unique blended film of donors and acceptors, small molecules and/or polymers, is present. In organic semiconductors, light absorption leads to the creation of excitons, (i.e., strong coulombically bound electron–hole pairs) through promotion of an electron from the HOMO to the LUMO level of the molecules. In order to produce separated charges, the excitons must be dissociated at the donor–acceptor interface, the driving force for this process being provided by the energy offset between the LUMO orbitals of the donor and acceptor molecules. Consequently, the four basic steps occurring in a molecular-based device are (Fig. 16): (i) light absorption/exciton generation; (ii) exciton diffusion towards the donor–acceptor junction; (iii) charge transfer/exciton dissociation; and (iv) charge collection of the separated electrons and holes at the external electrodes.
 Fig. 16  Basic steps occurring in a molecular device. 
The performance of the cells is usually determined by the analyses of the current–voltage (I–V) curves, from which key parameters such as the open-circuit voltage (VOC) (associated to the gap between the LUMO level of the acceptor and the HOMO level of the donor), short-circuit current density (Jsc) (proportional to how much light can be absorbed), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are extracted.
The main disadvantage of the above mentioned PHJ device architecture is the fact that only a very thin layer at the interface of the donor and the acceptor materials is effective in promoting exciton dissociation, as a consequence of the short exciton diffusion length in organic materials (typically 10–20 nm). However, the BHJ shows an increased active volume for efficient charge separation owing to the intimate intermixing of the components all along the active layer. High-performance BHJ devices have to meet a delicate balance between the processes of charge generation, which requires the maximum contact area in the range of the exciton diffusion length, and charge transportation, which needs the presence of bicontinuous networks as independent charge transport paths. In this regard, controlling the morphology of the blend at the nanoscale is a critical issue to achieve optimization of organic solar cell performances. This aspect is particularly important in the case of polymeric BHJ solar cells,63 which are usually prepared by spin casting of organic solutions of the hole-transport semiconducting polymers and the appropriate acceptor molecules. As a rule, solution-processed BHJs of small conjugated molecules present poor charge transport capabilities,64 and for that, co-evaporation methods are commonly applied to obtain blended films with high macroscopic order. Even so, the charge transport ability of small-molecule blended layers is rather low, a fact limiting the performance of the device. For that reason, blended donor–acceptor active layers are normally used for a better charge separation, in combination with films of highly-conductive pure donor or acceptor materials in a multilayered configuration, as we will outline in the next sections.
Pcs have been widely applied as light-harvesting/donor molecules in evaporated PHJ solar cells owing, as mentioned before in the case of DSSCs, to the high extinction coefficients of their absorption in the visible region (i.e. around 700 nm), their rich redox chemistry and remarkable p-type semiconducting behavior. Moreover, both the high thermal stability of these molecules and the quality of the crystalline films prepared by sublimation have also boosted their use in this type of devices. Structurally and electronically related Pors have been incorporated in such devices to a lesser extent, as a consequence of their reduced absorption in the red region of the visible spectrum, and the lower charge-carrier mobility and exciton-diffusion length of the evaporated films of these chromophores.
On the other hand, perylene and fullerene derivatives are key acceptor components for organic solar cells. Particularly, C60 fullerene has been recognized as an ideal electron–acceptor molecule,65 owing to its small reorganization energy, the ability to promote ultrafast charge separation and the longer exciton diffusion length with regard to other acceptor materials (∼40 nm).66 Many are the examples of organic solar cells utilizing C60 fullerene or fullerene derivatives as electron–acceptor component, both in polymeric BHJs67 and small-molecule-based devices.64
In the following section we compile the most outstanding results in pure PHJ solar cells, followed by a description of the reported examples where either a co-evaporated or a solution-processed blend has been employed at some position of the device. Concerning the latter, the combination of Pcs with polymers in BHJ cells is also considered as a new approach to higher conversion efficiencies in organic solar cells.
Planar heterojunctions
As mentioned above, the first work in Pc-based PHJs was reported by Tang, using a configuration ITO/Cu(II)Pc/perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxyl-bis-benzimidazole (PTCBI)/Ag.8 The benchmark PCE value of 1% happened to be difficult to exceed, mainly due to the fact that the exciton diffusion length is shorter than the optical absorption length in films of this type of molecular dye, thus requiring a tradeoff between using a highly absorbing, thick, resistive cell or a thin cell with low optical absorption efficiency. In 2000, Forrest and co-workers demonstrated a method for efficient photon harvesting in organic thin films.68 The authors introduced a transparent exciton-blocking layer (EBL) of bathocuproine (BCP) between the photoactive PTCBI layer and the metal cathode (Fig. 17). The role of the EBL layer is threefold: (i) it prevents damage of the acceptor layer due to cathode evaporation, (ii) eliminates undesired exciton quenching at the electron-acceptor/cathode interface and (iii) provides a spacer between the photoactive region and the reflecting cathode, thereby increasing the optical intensity at the donor–acceptor interface and, thus, the light absorption efficiency. Improving the device engineering, an ultrathin organic bilayer photovoltaic cell in a simple light trapping geometry was constructed, showing an external PCE of 2.4%.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of the Cu(II)Pc-based solar cell described in ref. 68. (b) Configuration of the tandem solar cell described in ref. 70. 
Further improvements with the same photoactive materials were achieved by applying the “tandem” concept,69 which consist of two combined unit cells, each one being a two-layer organic solar cell. Employing thin, semitransparent multiple heterojunctions separated by ultrathin discontinuous layers of Ag clusters, which serve as recombination sites for unpaired charges that are photogenerated in the device's interior, the PCEs of the two and three PHJ cells under 1 sun, AM 1.5 illumination were 2.5% and 2.3%, with Voc = 0.93 and 1.20, respectively.70
Other reported device engineering modifications over Cu(II)Pc/PTCBI PHJs have been the preparation of triple-heterojunction devices by insertion of an additional layer of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI) between the Cu(II)Pc and the PTCBI layers,71 the use of different buffer layers between the ITO electrode and the donor Cu(II)Pc,72 and modifications of the electrode configuration.73 More recently, the so-called “inverted” solar cells, structures in which the donor is placed adjacent to the transparent cathode, have become the focus of attention.74 In a related approach, some authors have constructed a device with a metal anode adjacent to the donor Cu(II)Pc, and a sputter-deposited ITO as the top transparent cathode over the PTCBI layer, thereby reversing the conventional charge extraction properties of these contacts.75
In addition to perylene derivatives, other acceptor materials have been also investigated, such as perfluorinated Cu(II)Pc,76 perfluorinated subphthalocyanines (SubPcs)77 and inorganic materials (i.e. CdS).78 However, the longer exciton diffusion length of C60 (i.e., ∼40 nm) with regard to other electron–acceptors makes fullerene a molecule of choice for the optimization of PHJ cells. After a former report on the photovoltaic properties of ITO/C60/H2Pc/Au sandwich solar cells showing energy conversion yields of 0.03% when illuminated by white light,79 a PCE of 3.6% was obtained with vacuum-deposited Cu(II)Pc/C60 PHJ photovoltaic cells incorporating a layer of BCP, and also a modified ITO anode, which was covered by a thick film of 3,4-polyethylenedioxy-thiophene:polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) in order to planarize the rough ITO surface.80 Further on, a similar PHJ device based on Cu(II)Pc and C60 thin-films but with a series resistance as low as 0.1 V cm2, as a consequence of the low device area (0.0075 cm2), was reported by the same authors.81 In this device (i.e., ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Cu(II)Pc (20 nm)/C60 (40 nm)/BCP (12 nm)/Al), a maximum PCE of 4.2% was reached under 4.4 suns intensity simulated AM 1.5G.
Key parameters for the optimization of the performance of these types of devices are the following:
(1) Tuning the chemical structure of the phthalocyanine-type donor component. Cu(II)Pc has been conventionally used as donor component in such PHJ devices; nevertheless, other different metalloPc complexes can be also exploited. In fact, a correlation of hole mobility, exciton diffusion length and solar cell performances for different MPcs (i.e., M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn and H2) in stacked metalloPc/C60 organic solar cells has been recently established,82 the best performances being obtained for Zn(II)Pc, Cu(II)Pc and H2Pc derivatives. However, using Ru(II)Pc resulted in a device showing high series resistance and strong recombination at the interface, which limited the cell performance.83 More recently, it has been shown that Pd(II)Pc is a promising donor material with long exciton diffusion length, which leads to high efficient Pd(II)Pc/C60 solar cells.84 It has been proposed that when heavy atoms with 4d or 5d valence electrons are inserted in the planar Pc, the intermolecular electron transfer through stacked molecules is facilitated by mixing between d orbitals of the metals (in addition to π-orbital interaction between macrocycles), which improves the carrier mobility.85,86 Moreover, heavy metal coordination into the Pc core provides a rapid conversion route of the singlet into the triplet excitons, which show longer lifetimes. Therefore, a PHJ Pd(II)Pc/C60 device exhibited an efficiency of 2.2%, whereas a Cu(II)Pc/C60 device with a similar structure showed a PCE of 1.6%.84 Similar results have been obtained with bilayer Pd(II)Pc/PTCDI systems. In particular, the solar cell prepared with a PTCDI derivative bearing hexyl chains at the imide nitrogen showed a PCE of 2.0%.87
This trend found in Pcs for Pd(II) complexes has also been established in Pors for heavy metal-containing complexes.88 A Pt(II) octaethylporphyrin (Pt(II)OEPor) derivative, that is also a typical triplet material, has been used as a donor component in a stacked device.89 A solar cell with a composition ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Pt(II)OEPor (30 nm)/C60 (30 nm)/BCP (8 nm)/Al showed a PCE of 2.1%. Similarly, a Pt(II) tetrabenzoporphyrin (Pt(II)TPBP) derivative has also emerged as an efficient small molecule to be incorporated in PHJs, showing a 1.9% efficiency in a ITO/Pt(II)TPBP (15 nm)/C60 (40 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Al (100 nm) device.90 From these studies, one can conclude that introducing appropriate organic materials with long exciton lifetimes is a very promising way to improve the photovoltaic performance.
Another approach towards the achievement of better efficiencies is to introduce non-planar Pcs as infrared absorbing materials. Dai et al. have used Pb(II)Pc to increase the spectral response into the near IR, resulting in photoconversion efficiencies of 1.95%.91 ClAl(III)Pc also extends the spectral sensitivity to the near IR; this material displays an enhanced VOC when compared to a CuPc/C60 control device.92 Sn(II)Pc has demonstrated significant absorption at wavelengths from 600–900 nm. An optimized device with a structure: ITO/electron blocker/Sn(II)Pc (10 nm)/C60 (40 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Al shows a PCE of 2.1% at 1 sun.93 The introduction of an EBL between ITO and Sn(II)Pc reduces the dark current resulting in a doubling of the VOC.
Ti(IV)OPc (Fig. 18a) has been also explored as a p-type, near infrared dye. Formerly, it was used in a double-layer architecture with PTCBI, with the purpose of separating the spectral sensitivity between the n-type and p-type layers, (i.e., the overlap of the optical absorptions of Ti(IV)OPc and PTCBI is small).94 Ti(IV)OPc/C60 PHJ devices have been also studied, the VOC values being ca. 0.2 V higher than those of related Cu(II)Pc-based ones.95 Another advantage of vacuum deposited Ti(IV)OPc-based heterojunction devices is that the Ti(IV)OPc films are easily converted to a polymorph with strong absorbance up to 900 nm using post-deposition solvent annealing. A recent study shows efficiencies up to 4.2% in solvent-annealed ITO/Ti(IV)OPc (20 nm)/C60 (40 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Al devices.96
 Fig. 18  Chemical structure of: (a) Ti(IV)OPc; (b) SubPc; (c) SubNc. 
SubPc (Fig. 18b) has been recently envisioned as a candidate to be used as donor component in PHJs. Forrest and coworkers reported on a double-heterostructure SubPc/C60 device, which showed an increased VOC with regard to the Cu(II)Pc-based counterpart.97 Later, Gommans et al. established SubPc as an extraordinarily efficient donor material when compared to the metalloPcs more commonly used in photovoltaic cells.98 The devices containing SubPc as a donor material showed a maximum PCE of 3.03% for an optimized structure of ITO/SubPc (13 nm)/C60 (32 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Al. Important studies have also been performed with subnaphthalocyanine (SubNc) (Fig. 18c) regarding the preparation of solution-processed films as donor layers in PHJs.99 The use of solution-processed small molecules is promising in the search for low-cost efficient organic photovoltaic devices. In particular, an optimized ITO/PEDOT:PSS/spin-coated SubNc (20 nm)/C60 (32 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Ag device showed a PCE of 1.5%.99 Indeed, PHJs with C60 on top of evaporated SubNc lead to higher PCEs, up to 2.5%, for the optimized architecture.100
(2) Improving the charge mobility. Another key issue to optimize the performance of small-molecule solar cells is the improvement of the charge mobility along the active layers. Cu(II)Pc/C60 devices suffer from a charge transport imbalance, since the electron mobility through the C60 layer (∼0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1)101 is much higher than the hole mobility through the Cu(II)Pc (∼10−3cm2 V−1 s−1),82 a fact seriously affecting the charge collection. Therefore, improving the charge transport of the Cu(II)Pc layer is desirable in terms of improving the overall efficiency. Doping the Cu(II)Pc layer with pentacene, which has a charge carrier mobility in thin film comparable to amorphous silicon, has been found to increase both the JSC and the FF of the cell with respect to the undoped Cu(II)Pc/C60 one. Therefore, a 3.06% efficiency has been obtained with an optimized ITO/pentacene (4%):Cu(II)Pc (20 nm)/C60 (60 nm)/BCP (8 nm) /Al configuration.102 Very recently, a three layer heterojunction pentacene/Zn(II)Pc/C60 device has been also constructed,103 reaching efficiencies up to 2.1%.
Controlling the packing and arrangement of the Pc molecules in the film is also a valuable tool to optimize charge mobility through the donor layer. Charge mobility in Pc films occurs along the stacking axis, due to the strong π-coupling between neighboring molecules. In the case of evaporated solar cells, the stacking axis is usually perpendicular to the optimal direction of charge transport. In order to achieve 1-D Pc columns with the stacking direction lying parallel to the surface normal, Sullivan and coworkers have deposited 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic acid (PTCDA) on the ITO surface before vacuum deposition of Cu(II)Pc,104 since it is known that PTCDA molecules arrange with their molecular planes parallel to the ITO surface and they can act as templates for the Pcs to stack following the same layout. In fact, an ITO/PTCDA/Cu(II)Pc/C60 device showed an improvement of charge collection owing to the alignment of the Cu(II)Pc columns with the optimal direction of charge transport. Since PTCDA is not the ideal surface modification in terms of energy level alignment for hole injection, the same authors have recently improved this type of PTCDA-templated devices by using ClAl(III)Pc as donor component, and a MoOx interlayer between the ITO and the PTCDA film (Fig. 19).105 An optimized cell with the configuration ITO/MoOx (5nm)/PTCDA (1 nm)/ClAlPc (20 nm)/C60 (40 nm)/BCP (8 nm)/Al showed a PCE of 3% under simulated AM 1.5G illumination. Other inducing layers such as 2,5-bis(4-biphenylyl)-bithiophene have been also used with good results.106 Improving the morphology of the n-type layer in the case of Pc/perylene-type PHJs has also been an object of study, for example, by using a liquid-crystalline PTCDI dye with a long hydrocarbon chain at the imido nitrogen.107
 Fig. 19  Arrangement of Pcs in an evaporated film over an ITO/MoOx substrate pre-treated with 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic acid (PTCDA) (side view). 
Porphyrins and phthalocyanines in co-evaporated and solution processed devices

Co-evaporated devices. 
Former investigations on the use of Pc molecules blended with n-type materials as active layers for charge separation were reported in the early 90's. Hiramoto et al. fabricated a three-layered solar cell with an interlayer of co-deposited PTCDI and H2Pc in between pure pigment layers.108 The photocurrent of the cell was twice that of a double-layered cell without the blended interlayer, due to the efficient carrier photogeneration in the co-deposited film. The energy conversion efficiency of the cell was 0.7% under white light of 100 mW cm−2. Similar results were obtained using Ti(IV)OPc as the donor material.109 From then on, some efforts have been devoted to fabricate devices containing co-evaporated layers of Pcs and n-type components, which afford improved charge separation capabilities. As the charge transport ability of the blended layers is low, the insertion of the mixed film in between layers of the pure components is a quite common approach. For instance, Sullivan et al. have reported a series of devices incorporating mixed layers of Pc and C60 in different ratios, which create a gradient of donor–acceptor compositions from the pure Cu(II)Pc layer to the pure C60 one.110 With this architecture, a PCE up to 1.36% at 1 sun AM 1.5G illumination has been reached.111 Better efficiencies (i.e. 2.15%) have been achieved by varying the deposition rate of each component to obtain the desired concentration gradient of Cu(II)Pc and C60.112
The highest efficiency values for solar cells containing Pc:acceptor blends have been reported by Forrest and coworkers. In particular, they have used 1:1 mixtures of Cu(II)Pc and C60, which is the optimal ratio to keep a balance between charge separation and charge transport along the mixed layer.113 An optimized device with the structure ITO/Cu(II)Pc:C60 (1:1) (33 nm)/C60 (10 nm)/BCP (7.5 nm)/Ag showed a PCE of 3.5% at 1 sun AM 1.5G illumination. When an additional layer of Cu(II)Pc (i.e., 10 nm) was inserted between the ITO anode and the 1:1 Cu(II)Pc:C60 blend, maximum efficiencies of 5% were achieved (Fig. 20a).114 This architecture was called a hybrid planar-mixed molecular heterojunction. In a tandem geometry consisting of two hybrid planar-mixed molecular heterojunction cells stacked in series, the authors demonstrated a further increase in power conversion efficiency up to 5.7%.115
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of the hybrid planar-mixed molecular heterojunction described in ref. 114. (b) Semitransparent p-i-n solar cell described in ref. 119. 
The introduction of layers of wide-gap transport materials between the blended Pc:acceptor layer and the electrodes is also a widespread approach that leads to considerably high light-to-current conversion performances. A pioneer study on these so-called p-i-n photovoltaic devices, combining Zn(II)Pc as donor and C60 as acceptor in the active layer, was reported by Gebeyehu et al.116 Therefore, co-evaporated Zn(II)Pc:C60 layers were sandwiched between p- and n-doped charge carrier transport layers, namely p-doped 4,4′,4′′-tris(3-methylphenylphenylamino)triphenylamine (m-MTDATA) and n-doped perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic-N,N-9-dimethyldiimide (MPP). The authors investigated how differences in the photoactive donor/acceptor layer thickness and donor/acceptor ratio affected the performance of the devices. At very low incident intensities (0.1 sun white light illumination), a 3.37% power conversion efficiency was found for the optimized device, but had only a 1.04% conversion under 1 sun intensity, as a consequence of the increase of the cells series resistance due to significant ohmic losses in the transport layers. Further improvements in terms of efficiency involved the incorporation of a neat layer of PTCBI in between the blend and the C60 layer, in order to provide good coverage of the solar spectrum. The device with a layer sequence ITO/p-MeO-TPD (50 nm)/Zn(II)Pc:C60 (1:2) (50 nm)/PTCBI (10nm)/n-C60 (50 nm)/Al showed a PCE of 1.9% under 1 sun standard AM 1.5 illumination.117 Worthy of mention is a tandem cell constructed with this conception, which shows a PCE of 2.4%.118 Leo and coworkers have notably contributed to the development of this approach by preparing better engineered devices. For instance, one of their major achievements is the fabrication of inverted, semitransparent p-i-n Zn(II)Pc:C60 cells using ultrathin metal multilayers of Al and Ag as semitransparent top electrodes, with additional capping, antireflection layers of n-doped C60, the devices exhibiting PCEs of 2.1%–2.2% (Fig. 20b).119 Another interesting variation is the replacement of the classical C60 fullerene by its higher homologue C70. After a necessary energy level alignment of the device, a 20% increase in efficiency, (i.e. a PCE of 2.87%) with regard to the related device containing C60, was reported.120
Apart from the previously outlined reports, which mainly involve the optimization of the device geometry, some effort has also been done in controlling the nanostructure of the Pc:acceptor co-evaporated layers,121 since it strongly affects the charge separation process and the mobility of the charge carriers. However, thermal annealing treatments that classically improve the morphology and the performance of polymer-based BHJs, negatively affect the PCE of the small-molecule devices.85 Nevertheless, it has been recently shown that a controlled heating of the substrate during co-evaporation of the donor and acceptor materials (i.e. Zn(II)Pc and C60) induces the formation of better charge percolation pathways within the blend.122
In this direction, new deposition techniques such as organic vapor-phase-123 and oblique-angle vacuum-124,125 deposition have recently emerged as a way to control the position and orientation of the donor and acceptor molecules in the mixed crystalline film. In this way, well-defined conducting pathways with a high interface area can be obtained. Vertically aligned nanorod arrays of Cu(II)Pc123 and tilted ClAl(III)Pc and Cu(II)Pc films on ITO124,125 surfaces have been obtained, which show a large area for charge separation. Infiltration of the fullerene derivative into the gaps of the Pc nanorods affords BHJ devices with significantly improved efficiencies with regard to related planar double layer cells.124,125 However, some optimization in the device architecture is still required to reach higher values.


Solution-processed bulk heterojunction devices. 
In terms of applicability, evaporated devices can hardly be considered as a real option for technological applications owing to the high cost of their processing. In this regard, the successful search for efficient, solution-processed Pc(Por)-based devices is, indeed, an outstanding breakthrough. Hereafter, some interesting approaches in this direction are described, including simple spin-coating of mixed solutions of soluble donor Pc(Por) and the acceptor component, the utilization of soluble covalently-linked Pc-C60 dyads, and the incorporation of Pcs in polymer-based BHJ solar cells.
Porphyrinoid/acceptor bulk heterojunctions. 
There are only a few examples where soluble Pc or Por derivatives are blended with soluble acceptor materials to form a BHJ active layer. One of the former reports describes the use of blends of a donor Zn(II)Por, substituted with alkoxyphenyl groups, and an acceptor metal-free porphyrin, susbstituted with electron-withdrawing pyridine moieties.126 More recently, a BHJ solar cell prepared by spin coating a blend of a liquid-crystalline porphyrin and the soluble 1-(3-carboxypropyl)-1-phenyl-[6,6]-C60 (PCBM) on a PEDOT:PSS coated ITO electrode, followed by thermal annealing of the active phase, showed a PCE of 0.78%. Although the conversion efficiency of this cell is low, its advantage relies on the simplicity of the device construction. Further studies developed by the same authors demonstrated that the discotic porphyrin molecules arrange in columns and PCBM disposes within the aligned liquid crystal phase.127
BHJ devices have been prepared by spin-coating a blend containing rare-earth phthalocyaninato double or triple deckers as electron donors and PTCBI as an electron acceptor. These sandwich-type Pc derivatives offer unique electronic and optical properties, including a broad absorption which extends from the UV range to the near IR, large exciton delocalization and high carrier mobility. The best cells (conversion efficiency of 1.3% under AM 1.5 solar illumination) were fabricated using a triple decker Pc derivative, and incorporating TiO2 layers between the active layer and the electrodes. In this configuration, the mesoporous TiO2 layers behave: (i) as an efficient photoanode, which improves the photovoltaic process, and (ii) as a spacer between the active layer and the counter-aluminium-electrode, which probably suppresses defects and improves charge collection and transportation.128
A more recent example reports on the preparation of Pc-based solution-processed solar cells in blends with fullerene derivatives. In this work, the authors have merged dendritic oligothiophenes, which are well-known semiconductors with good performances in BHJs, with Ru(II)Pc molecules that hold the ability of axial coordination with different ligands. Therefore, pyridine-functionalized dendritic oligothiophenes up to the third generation axially coordinate to a peripherally substituted Ru(II)Pc to form soluble, supramolecular systems with hindered aggregation. Both mono- (i.e. Ru(II)PcCO(Py-nT) 34a–c and bis-coordinated (i.e. Ru(II)Pc(Py-nT)2) systems 35a–c (Fig. 21) have been prepared, which behave as p-type components. The best performance of the series in BHJ devices with PCBM is shown by the first generation complex RuPcCO(Py-3T) 34a (PCE of 1%), whereas a PCE up to 1.6% was found when using the homologue C71 derivative (PC71BCM) as acceptor component.129 These results are remarkable, if one considers the scarce reports on solution processed Pc-based BHJ devices,130 and represents the best efficiency reported in this kind of systems.
 Fig. 21  Molecular structures of Ru(II)Pc-DOTs 34 and 35 tested in solution processed BHJs. 
Very recently, a solution-processed fabrication of devices in a three-layered p-i-n structure has been reported, in which the i-layer of metal-free tetrabenzoporphyrin (TBPor) and a new fullerene acceptor (i.e. bis(dimethylphenylsilylmethyl)-[60]fullerene, SIMEF) possess a clearly defined interdigitated structure formed by spontaneous crystalline phase separation during thermal processing (Fig. 22).131 As the TBPor is an insoluble material, the authors take advantage of the solubility of a TBPor precursor (i.e. TETBPor in Fig. 22), which can be spin-coated and, in a second step, converted into the crystalline TBPor by heating at 180 °C. SEM images of the blended layer reveal a nanoscale round-columnar, TBPor crystal formation. This device with a configuration ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BP/BP:SIMEF/SIMEF/BCP/Al shows a PCE of 5.2%, a value that ranks among the best of those reported for dye-based organic photovoltaic cells, holding the additional advantage of the low-cost solution processing employed for its fabrication.
 Fig. 22  (a) Chemical conversion of TETBPor (soluble precursor) in TBPor, the photoactive donor component. (b) Chemical structure of the acceptor fullerene-type component (SIMEF). (c) Side view of the TBPor-based column/canyon region obtained after spin-coating of the TETBPor:SIMEF mixture, subsequent heating to 180 °C and final removal of the SIMEF acceptor by washing with toluene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Covalent phthalocyanine-C60 approach. 
As it has been shown above, structural variations of the components can also be a tool for improving the benchmark performances of Pc-based devices. In this regard, some authors have envisioned that chemically fixing the donor Pc component and the acceptor fullerene, instead of the classical blended systems, is a route to avoid macroscopic phase segregation and to ensure full charge separation along the active layer. In fact, efficient photoinduced electron transfer in covalent Pc-C60 dyads has been largely demonstrated in solution experiments.7 In order to evaluate the potential of covalent Pc-C60 systems, solar cells were fabricated by spin-coating from toluene solution of a soluble Pc-C60 dyad 36 (Fig. 23) on PEDOT:PSS modified ITO electrode. The device showed a VOC of 0.32 V and a short circuit photocurrent of 0.2 mA cm−2, resulting in low PCE (i.e., 0.02%).132,133 A Pc with two covalently attached C60 spheres was also evaluated, but the efficiencies were also rather low.134
 Fig. 23  Molecular structure of covalently-linked Zn(II)Pc-C60 dyad 36 and Pc- and C60-containing co-poly(norbornene) 37, used as photoactive components in ref. 133 and 135, respectively. 
Another approach to link together the Pc and C60 moieties is by their covalent bonding as pendant groups of a macromolecular polymeric structure. Therefore, Pc- and C60-containing co-poly(norbornenes) 37 (Fig. 23) were explored as active components of solution-processed solar cells, since photoinduced electronic communication between the Pc and C60 fullerene had been observed in solution.135 However, the devices showed low PCE (ca. 0.07%) under simulated solar illumination. Even though these preliminary results with covalently linked donor–acceptor systems are not promising, some device engineering remains necessary. In addition, a morphological control of the active phase, for instance, a segregated packing of the Pc and C60 components of the dyad within the active layer would create appropriate pathways for the mobility of the corresponding charges.
Phthalocyanines in polymer-based solar cells. 
BHJs of semiconducting polymers and fullerene derivatives have been particularly successful for the development of highly efficient organic solar cells.63b,67 The most widely studied combination in polymer-based BHJ photovoltaic devices is that formed by the mixture of poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT) and PCBM. However, the narrow absorption spectrum of P3HT in 300–650 nm is one of the main hindrances to further improvement of the efficiencies of P3HT-based devices. To overcome this problem, some low-band-gap polymer materials with broader absorption have been successfully applied to photovoltaic devices, thus leading to large Jsc and higher efficiencies than P3HT/PCBM solar cells.136 The incorporation of PC71BCM with stronger absorption in the visible and higher LUMO is also a tool to enhance the VOC, Jsc and PCE of the polymer-based devices.137,138 By combining these two elements, record efficiency values are currently over 7%.139 Another exciting approach to enhance the absorption of polymer BHJs is the incorporation at some point of the device of small organic molecules absorbing in the near IR region. As mentioned before, the addition of dyes such as Pcs with a good match to the maximal photon flux (i.e., between 600–800 nm) to polymer:PCBM BHJs has been envisioned as a plausible strategy to achieve high conversion efficiencies. Former studies indicated that the addition of H2Pc to a poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV)/C60 blend induces an increase of the photocurrent and the VOC.140 More recently, photoconversion properties extended more than 150 nm toward longer wavelengths have been demonstrated on a P3HT/PCBM blend mixed with a peripherally substituted octabutoxy H2Pc, as compared to a device without such Pc-sensitization.141 Maximum internal quantum efficiencies of ca. 40% were observed in the main absorption region of the Pc (i.e., around 700 nm) for a 10:10:1 ratio of P3HT, PCBM and H2Pc, respectively. Transient laser spectroscopy measurements of the blends show that after excitation of the H2Pc, an electron transfer occurs from the Pc to PCBM, and a subsequent hole transfer from the Pc to P3HT, which results in a long-lived P3HT+/dye/PCBM− charge-separated state.
A PCE of 2.7% has been measured on annealed, spin-coated BHJs devices containing a 10:10:1 ratio of P3HT, PCBM and silicon(IV) Pc derivative 38, (Fig. 24), a 20% larger value than the corresponding control device without Pc-sensitization (i.e., 2.2%).142 The key issue of this result is that the Si(IV)Pc derivative 38 holds axially-linked, branched hydrocarbon chains, which avoid the formation of Pc-aggregates and therefore, permit the allocation of the Si(IV)Pc molecules at the donor (P3HT)/acceptor (PCBM) interface. External quantum efficiency measurements indicate that there are two origins for the increase in the photocurrent by introducing Si(IV)Pc molecules: they can contribute to the photocurrent generation by direct photoexcitation, and also behave as energy funnels for P3HT excitons at the P3HT/PCBM interface through energy transfer from P3HT to the Si(IV)Pc molecules.
 Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structure of the Si(IV)Pc derivative 38 used in the Pc-sensitized, P3HT:PCBM BHJ device. (b) Schematic representation of the energy levels of the device's components and charge-separation process taking place in the blend. 
Following the same motivation, Neugebauer et al. have prepared devices composed of a solution-processed blend of MDMO-PPV and a covalently linked Zn(II)Pc-C60 dyad 36 in a 10:1 ratio, respectively, where the Zn(II)Pc component is expected to improve the light absorption of the device, and also contribute to the charge separation process.143 Also in this case, energy transfer process was found to take place from MDMO-PPV to the Zn(II)Pc component of the dyad. The VOC of the solution processed device was 0.5 V, but the low Jsc indicates charge transport problems within the device.
The introduction of Pc-C60 dyad 39 (Fig. 25) as a spin-coated film in a bilayer cell made of P3HT and C60 (or PTCDI) leads to an enhancement in the power conversion efficiency (between one and a half and three times compared with the corresponding reference systems), as a consequence of an increase of the Voc.144 In other words, the dyad produces two different junctions in the cell (P3HT/dyad, and dyad/C60 or PTCDI) contributing to a more efficient charge transport towards the electrodes. Photoinduced electron transfer should take place in the dyad layer, and subsequently the P3HT or acceptor layer would act as antenna and secondary electron–donor, providing electron or holes to the dyad.
 Fig. 25  Molecular structure of dyad 39 employed as active component in ref. 145. 
Another picture for Pc/polymer-based organic solar cells is the fabrication of multilayered devices. Therefore, Sariciftci and coworkers145 have utilized a blend of fullerene derivatives, namely PCBM and a pyridine-containing C60-fullerene, which have been mixed in different ratios with MDMO-PPV and spin-coated on the Zn(II)Pc film sublimed on an ITO substrate. The presence of pyridine moieties in one of the C60 derivatives permits axial coordination of these pyridine moieties to the central zinc atom of the pure Zn(II)Pc layer underneath and, thus, a better interfacial charge separation. Optimized devices demonstrated a PCE up to 2% under simulated illumination. Following a similar approach, a ZnPc:C60/P3HT:PCBM tandem device exhibited an efficiency of 2.3%, 1.6 times larger than the subcells alone.146
In this regard, a remarkable result is that obtained with a tandem solar cell based on the combination of a P3HT/PCBM blend as active layer of the subcell, and a Cu(II)Pc:C60 blend, processed by a gradient co-evaporation, as active layer in the top cell.147 A highly transparent, high-work function WO3 layer has been used as a component of the interconnecting system for the two subcells. The efficiency of the stacked device was as high as 4.6%, which is close to the sum of the efficiencies of the individual subcells. In similar “tandem-like” cells, PCBM was employed simultaneously to form a bilayer heterojunction subcell with the underlying Cu(II)Pc and a BHJ subcell with blended P3HT.148 An additional advantage of this device is that it lacks the classical intercellular connection layer, thus reducing the complexity of the device and the light loss. The PCE of the tandem structure (2.79%) is nearly the sum of those of the stand-alone cells of Cu(II)Pc/PCBM (0.43%) and P3HT:PCBM (2.50%).

Conclusions
Regarding dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), porphyrins have a significant potential to provide major efficiency breakthroughs. Efficiency values higher than 10% are expected for novel “push-pull” porphyrins, taking advantage of the synthetic flexibility of these compounds. On the other hand narrowly absorbing, stable, near infrared dyes with absorption at wavelengths higher than 750 nm, a lower tendency to aggregate, high internal quantum efficiencies and large open-circuit voltages should be developed. Push-pull phthalocyanines are promising targets for this purpose. Future efforts will also focus on developing soluble energy relay dyes (ERDs). This kind of highly absorbing photosensitizer unattached to the TiO2, in combination with an appropriate, attached sensitizing dye, with strong emission/absorption overlap for Förster resonance energy transfer from the ERD to the dye, could be incorporated into state-of-the-art DSSC systems, giving rise to important increases in the efficiency. Finally, tools on the way to molecular engineering for efficient and stable porphyrinoids in DSSCs are required. Design strategies of new sensitizers based on porphyrins and phthalocyanines with novel or multiple anchoring groups onto TiO2 would provide dramatic improvement in stability and light soaking under particular temperature conditions.
On the other hand, concerning porphyrins and phthalocyanines for small-molecule or polymer solar cells, the complexity of the organic heterojunction stems from the delicate balance that exists between the different optimization parameters that control the performance of the cells. Whereas porphyrins have a less relevant contribution in heterojunction organic solar cells, phthalocyanines have been largely and successfully utilized in different device configurations, but the challenge of improving the current record efficiencies still remains. Key parameters for optimization include a rational chemical tuning of the molecular properties, a control of the way in which molecules pack and arrange themselves and an intelligent design of device geometry. In this connection, attention should be paid to emerging porphyrinoid structures with particular organization properties, like subphthalocyanine derivatives. Finally, new approaches seem necessary to obtain higher efficiency values using low-cost processing techniques.
Financial support from MEC (Spain) (CTQ2008-00418/BQU, CONSOLIDER-INGENIO 2010 CDS 2007-00010 and PLE2009-0070), CAM (MADRISOLAR-2, S2009/PPQ/1533) and European Union (EU Project ROBUST DSC, FP7-Energy-2007-1-RTD, No. 212792) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references

  (a) M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. D'Souza and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4913–4928 RSC ; 
  (c) D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2007, 5, 1679–1691 RSC ; 
  (e) S. Fukuzumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 981–991 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. L. Sessler, C. M. Lawrence and J. Jayawickramarajah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 314–325 RSC ; 
  (g) L. Sánchez, N. Martín and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5374–5382 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 525–536 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) A. K. Burrell, D. L. Officer, P. G. Plieger and D. C. W. Reid, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2751–2796 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Imahori, T. Umeyama and S. Ito, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1809–1818 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. M. Campbell, A. K. Burrell, D. L. Officer and K. W. Jolley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1363–1379 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mozer, P. Wagner, D. L. Officer, G. G. Wallace, W. M. Campbell, M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara and S. Mori, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4741–4743 RSC .

  (a) G. de la Torre, C. G. Claessens and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2000–2015 RSC ; 
  (b) C. G. Claessens, U. Hahn and T. Torres, Chem. Rec., 2008, 8, 75–97 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Rio, M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade and T. Torres, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 1877–1894 RSC .

  (a) X. Li, H. Wang and H. Wu, Struct. Bonding, 2010, 135, 229–274 CAS ; 
  (b) 
            M. V. Martínez-Díaz and T. Torres, Handbook of Porphyrin Science, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, Singapore,  2010,Vol. 10,141–181 Search PubMed .
H. R. Kerp, H. Donker, R. B. M. Koehorst, T. J. Schaafsma and E. E. van Faassen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 298, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, T. Torres and D. Guldi, Chem. Rev., 2010 DOI:10.1021/cr900254z  , ASAP.
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Walker, S. Chappel, A. Mahammed, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler, H. B. Gray, Z. Zaban and Z. Gross, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2006, 10, 1259–1262 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Aviv and Z. Gross, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1987–1999 RSC ; 
  (c) X.-F. Wang, O. Kitao, H. Zhou, H. Tamiaki and S.-I. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7954–7961 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6850 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Gao, Y. Wang, D. Shi, J. Zhang, M. Wang, X. Jing, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S.-M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10720–10728 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Cao, Y. Bai, Q. Yu, Y. Cheng, S. Liu, D. Shi, F. Gao and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6290–6297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ooyama and Y. Harima, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2009, 2903–2934 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2338–2345 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Durrant, S. A. Haque and E. Palomares, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3279–3289 RSC .
Y. Rio, P. Vázquez and E. Palomares, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 645–651 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6272 CrossRef .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11760–11762 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bassho, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C.-Y. Yeh, E. W.-G. Diau and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010 DOI:10.1002/anie.201002118 .

  (a) M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel, D. Wöhrle, G. Schnurpfeil, G. Schneider, A. Hirth and N. Trombach, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 1999, 3, 230–237 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. He, G. Benkö, F. Korodi, T. Polivka, R. Lomoth, B. Åkermark, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and V. Sundstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4922–4932 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Reddy, L. Giribabu, C. Lyness, H. Snaith, C. Vijaykumar, M. Chandrasekharam, M. Lakshmikantam, J. H. Yum, K. Kalyanasundaram, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 373–376 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J.-J. Cid, J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Martínez-Ferrero, E. Palomares, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8358–8362 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mori, M. Nagata, Y. Nakahata, K. Yasuta, R. Goto, M. Kimura and M. Taya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4054–4055 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Martínez-Díaz, M. Quintiliani and T. Torres, Synlett, 2008, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dos Santos, A. Morandeira, S. Koops, A. J. Mozer, G. Tsekouras, Y. Dong, P. Wagner, G. Wallace, J. C. Earles, K. C. Gordon, D. Officer and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3276–3279 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Palomares, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, S. A. Haque, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2112–2113 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Macor, F. Fungo, T. Tempesti, E. N. Durantini, L. Otero, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 529–534 RSC .

  (a) M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel and B. A. Murrer, Chem. Commun., 1998, 719–720 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Yanagisawa, F. Korodi, J. He, L. Sun, V. Sundstrom, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2002, 6, 217–214 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Yanagisawa, F. Korodi, J. Bergquist, A. Holmberg, A. Hagfeldt, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2004, 8, 1228–1235 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morandeira, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, B. O'Regan, C. Shuttle, N. A. Haji-Zainulabidin, T. Torres, E. Palomares and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9250–9251 CrossRef CAS .
A. Listorti, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, T. Torres, T. DosSantos, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010 10.1039/C0EE00083C .
C.-Y. Lin, C.-F. Lo, L. Luo, H.-P. Lu, C.-S. Hung and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 755–764 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eu, S. Hayashi, T. Umeyama, A. Oguro, M. Kawasaki, N. Kadota, Y. Matano and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3528–3537 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Cid, M. García-Iglesias, J.-H. Yum, A. Forneli, J. Albero, E. Martínez-Ferrero, P. Vázquez, M. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Palomares and T. Torres, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 5130–5137 CrossRef CAS .
F. Silvestri, M. García-Iglesias, J.-H. Yum, P. Vázquez, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, M. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and T. Torres, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 369–375 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Tanaka, S. Hayashi, S. Eu, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano and H. Imahori, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2069–2071 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Hayashi, M. Tanaka, H. Hayashi, S. Eu, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, Y. Araki and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15576–15585 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin, Y.-C. Wang, S.-J. Hsu, C.-F. Lo and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 687–693 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Eu, S. Hayashi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, Y. Araki and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4396–4405 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Kira, Y. Matsubara, H. Iijima, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Ito, M. Niemi, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11293–11304 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Lee, H.-P. Lu, C.-M. Lan, Y.-L. Huang, Y.-R. Liang, W.-N. Yen, Y.-C. Liu, Y.-S. Lin, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1403–1412 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Lo, S.-J. Hsu, C.-L. Wang, Y.-H. Cheng, H.-P. Lu, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12018–12023 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Hsieh, H.-P. Lu, C.-L. Chiu, C.-W. Lee, S.-H. Chuang, C.-L. Mai, W.-N. Yen, S.-J. Hsu, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1127–1134 RSC .
S.-L. Wu, H.-P. Lu, S.-H. Chuang, C.-L. Chiu, C.-W. Lee, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 949–955 RSC .

  (a) H.-P. Lu, C.-L. Mai, C.-Y. Tsia, S.-J. Hsu, C.-P. Hsieh, C.-L. Chiu, C.-Y. Yeh and E. W.-G. Diau, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10270–10274 RSC ; 
  (b) H.-P. Lu, C.-Y. Tsai, W.-N. Yen, C.-P. Hsieh, C.-W. Lee, C.-Y. Yeh and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20990–20997 CrossRef CAS .
L. Giribabu, C. Vijay kumar, V. G. Reddy, P. Y. Reddy, C. S. Rao, S.-R. Jang, J. H. Yum, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1611–1617 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, W. M. Campbell, E. E. Bonfantani, K. W. Jolley, D. L. Officer, P. J. Walsh, K. Gordon, R. Humphry-Baker, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15397–15409 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Xiang, X. Feng, P. Shen, W. Zhou, C. Weng, B. Zhao and S. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2499–2501 RSC .
A. Morandeira, I. López-Duarte, B. O'Regan, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Forneli, E. Palomares, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5016–5026 RSC .
J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel, J.-J. Cid, T. Torres and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5636–5640 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. H. Deng, Z. H. Lu, Y. C. Shen, H. F. Mao and H. J. Xu, Chem. Phys., 1998, 231, 95–103 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Zhao, Y. J. Hou, X. S. Wang, B. W. Zhang, Y. Cao, R. Yang, W. B. Wang and X. R. Xiao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 58, 173–183 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Ehret, L. Stuhi and M. T. Spitler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9960 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. Otaka, M. Kira, K. Yano, S. Ito, H. Mitekura, T. Kawata and F. Matsui, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 67–73 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) V. P. S. Perera, P. K. D. D. P. Pitigala, M. K. I Senevirathne and K. Tennakone, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 85, 91–98 CAS ; 
  (f) C. Siegers, U. Würfel, M. Zistler, H. Gores, J. Hohl-Ebinger, A. Hinsch and R. Haag, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 793–798 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Sayama, S. Tsukagoshi, T. Mori, K. Hara, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpou, Y. Abe, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 80, 47–71 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Guo, P. Diao, Y.-J. Ren, F. Meng, H. Tian and S.-M. Cai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 88, 23–35 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Chen, Z. Zeng, C. Li, W. Wang, X. Wang and B. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 773–776 RSC .

  (a) H. Deng, H. Mao, Z. Lu, J. Li and H. Xu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 110, 47–52 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Fang, H. Mao, J. Wu, X. Zhang and Z. Lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1997, 119, 237–241 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Deng, Z. Lu, Y. Shen, H. Mao and H. Xu, Chem. Phys., 1998, 231, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1012–1013 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Lee, H. C. Leventis, S. A. Haque, T. Torres, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Power Sourc., 2010 DOI:10.1016/j.jpowersour.2010.06.096 .
B. W. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, P. B. Armstrong, J.-H. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. M. Frechet, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406–411 Search PubMed .
B. E. Hardin, J.-H. Yum, E. T. Hoke, Y. C. Jun, P. Pechy, T. Torres, M. L. Brongersma, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, M. M. Grätzel and D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3077–3083 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, X. Feng and C. A. Grimes, ACSNano, 2009, 3, 788–794 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, H. C. Leventis, S.-J. Moon, P. Chen, S. Ito, S. A. Haque, T. Torres, F. Nüesch, T. Geiger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2735–2742 CrossRef CAS .
C. Siegers, J. Hohl-Ebinger, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, R. Mülhaupt, A. Hinsch and R. Haag, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1548–1556 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. J. Mozer, M. J. Griffith, G. Tsekouras, P. Wagner, G. G. Wallace, S. Mori, K. Sunahara, M. Miyashita, J. C. Earles, K. C. Gordon, L. Du, R. Katoh, A. Furube and D. L. Officer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15621–15623 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. K. Park, J. Chen, H. R. Lee, S. W. Park, H. Shinokubo, A. Osuka and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21956–21963 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Y. Lee and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3760–3765 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C.-L. Mai, W.-K. Huang, H.-P. Lu, C. Wei Lee, C.-L. Chiu, Y.-R. Liang, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 809–811 RSC .
T. Rawling, C. Austin, F. Buchholz, S. B. Colbran and A. M. McDonagh, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 3215–3227 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Bredas, J. E. Norton, J. Comil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Armstrong, W. Wang, D. M. Alloway, D. Placencia, E. Ratcliff and M. Brumbach, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 717–731 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Peet, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1700–1708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roncali, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1719–1730 CrossRef CAS .
L. Echegoyen and L. E. Echegoyen, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 593–601 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. A. Petterson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganäs, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
P. Peumans, V. Bulovic and Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2650–2652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, M. Suezaki and M. Yokoyama, Chem. Lett., 1990, 327–328 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1667–1668 CrossRef CAS .
K. Triyana, T. Yasuda, K. Fujita and T. Tsutsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Lare, A. Godoy, L. Cattin, K. Jondo, T. Abachi, F. R. Diaz, M. Morsli, K. Napo, M. A. del Valle and J. C. Bernede, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 6615–6619 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Khodabakhsh, B. M. Sanderson, J. Nelson and T. S. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Singh, R. S. Singh, B. Parthasarathy, A. Aguilera, J. Anthony and M. Payne, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 082106–082106 CrossRef .

  (a) D. Woehrle, L. Kreienhoop, G. Schnurpfeil, J. Elbe, B. Tennigkeit, S. Hiller and D. Schlettwein, J. Mater. Chem., 1995, 5, 1819–1829 RSC ; 
  (b) Q. L. Song, M. L. Wang, E. G. Obbard, X. Y. Sun, X. M. Ding, X. Y. Hou and C. M. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 251118–251118 CrossRef .
X. Tong, R. F. Bailey-Salzman, G. Wei and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 173304–173304 CrossRef .
A. Opitz, J. Wagner, W. Brütting, A. Hinderhofer and F. Schreiber, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 2683–2694 CAS .
H. Gommans, T. Aernouts, B. Verreet, P. Heremans, A. Medina, C. G. Claessens and T. Torres, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3435–3439 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Grynko, V. V. Kislyuk, P. S. Smertenko and O. P. Dimitriev, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 195104–195104 CrossRef .
K. Murata, S. Ito, K. Takahashi and B. M. Hoffman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 427–429 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terao, H. Sasabe and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 103515–103515 CrossRef .
A. Capobianchi and M. Tucci, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 33–36 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, H. M. Haverinen, Z. Wang, S. Madakuni, Y. Kim, J. Li and G. E. Jabbour, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4256–4260 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Calvete, G. Ying Yang and M. Hanack, Synth. Met., 2004, 231–243 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, H. M. Haverinen, Z. Wang, S. Madakuni, J. Li and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 023305–023305-3 CrossRef .
J. E. Kroeze, T. J. Savenije, L. P. Candeias, J. M. Warman and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 85, 189–203 .
Y. Shao and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2841–2844 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Perez, C. Borek, P. I. Djurovich, E. I. Mayo, R. R. Lunt, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1517–1520 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Dai, X. X. Jiang, H. B. Wang and D. H. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 253503–253503 CrossRef .
R. F. Bailey-Salzman, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 013508–013508 CrossRef .
N. Li, B. E. Lassiter, R. R. Lunt, G. Wei and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 023307–023307 CrossRef .
H. Tanaka, T. Yasuda, K. Fujita and T. Tsutsui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253506–253506 CrossRef .
M. Brumbach, D. Placencia and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3142–3151 CrossRef CAS .
D. Placencia, W. Wang, R. C. Shallcross, K. W. Nebesny, M. Brumbach and N. R. Armstrong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1913–1921 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Mutolo, E. I. Mayo, B. P. Rand, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8108–8109 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gommans, D. Cheyns, T. Aernouts, C. Girotto, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2653–2658 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, C. H. Woo, Y. Miyamoto and J. M. Fréchet, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1413–1417 CrossRef CAS .
B. Verreet, S. Schols, D. Cheyns, B. P. Rand, H. Gommans, T. Aernouts, P. Heremans and J. Genoe, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5295–5297 RSC .
S. Kobayashi, T. Takenobu, S. Mori, A. Fujiwara and Y. Iwasa, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2003, 4, 371–375 CrossRef CAS .
W.-B. Chen, H.-F. Xiang, Z.-X. Xu, B.-P. Yan, V. A. L. Roy, C.-M. Che and P.-T. Lai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 191109–191109 CrossRef .
Z. R. Hong, R. Lessmann, B. Maennig, Q. Huang, K. Harada, M. Riede and K. Leo, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 064511–064511 CrossRef .
P. Sullivan, T. S. Jones, A. J. Ferguson and S. Heutz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 103515–03515 CrossRef .
K. V. Chauhan, P. Sullivan, J. L. Yang and T. S. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3304–3308 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, L. Huang, H. Wang and D. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1017–1020 CAS .
J. Y. Kim and A. J. Bard, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 383, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Hiramoto, H. Fujiwara and M. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 1062–1064 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Hiramoto, H. Fujiwara and M. Yokoyama, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 3781–3787 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuzuki, Y. Shirota, J. Rostalski and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sullivan, S. Heutz, S. M. Schultes and T. S. Jones, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1210–1212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heutz, P. Sullivan, B. M. Sanderson, S. M. Schultes and T. S. Jones, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 229–245 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Tang, X. Fan, C. Zhang, Z. Chu, D. Wang and D. Zou, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 724–728 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uchida, J. Xue, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4218–4220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5757–5759 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gebeyehu, B. Maennig, J. Drechsel, K. Leo and M. Pfeiffer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Gebeyehu, M. Pfeiffer, B. Maennig, J. Drechsel, A. Werner and K. Leo, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 29–32 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Maennig, J. Drechsel, D. Gebeyehu, P. Simon, F. Kozlowski, A. Werner, F. Li, S. Grundmann, S. Sonntag, M. Koch, K. Leo, M. Pfeiffer, H. Hoppe, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, I. Riedel, V. Dyakonov and J. Parisi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Drechsel, B. Mannig, F. Kozlowski, D. Gebeyehu, A. Werner, M. Koch, K. Leo and M. Pfeiffer, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 515–517 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meiss, K. Leo, M. K. Riede, C. Uhrich, W.-M. Gnehr, S. Sonntag and M. Pfeiffer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 213306–213306 CrossRef .
S. Pfuetzner, J. Meiss, A. Petrich, M. Riede and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223307–223307 CrossRef .

  (a) K. Suemori, T. Miyata, M. Yokoyama and M. Hiramoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063509–063509 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Yang and S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pfuetzner, J. Meiss, A. Petrich, M. Riede and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 253303–253303 CrossRef .
F. Yang, M. Shtein and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, R. Bekele, J. Ouyang and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1621–1625 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 123309–123309 CrossRef .
K. Takahashi, T. Goda, T. Yamaguchi, T. Komura and K. Murata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4868–4875 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, S.-W. Kang, S. Kumar, R. R. Kulkarni, S. Z. D. Cheng and Q. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3551–3553 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Li, X. Yan, M. Rathi, M. Ropp, D. Galipeau and J. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073303–073303 CrossRef .
M. K. R. Fischer, I. Lopez-Duarte, M. M. Wienk, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, R. A. J. Janssen, P. Bauerle and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8669–8676 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Petritsch, J. J. Dittmer, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, A. Lux, G. G. Rozenberg, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 63–72 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Benten, N. Kudo, H. Ohkita and S. Ito, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2016–2022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuo, Y. Sato, T. Niinomi, I. Soga, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16048–16050 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, P. Denk, H. Hoppe, H. Neugebauer, C. Winder, D. Meissner, C. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Gouloumis, P. Vazquez and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 700–704 RSC .
M. A. Loi, P. Denk, H. Hoppe, H. Neugebauer, D. Meissner, C. Winder, C. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Gouloumis, P. Vazquez and T. Torres, Synth. Met., 2003, 137, 1491–1492 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gouloumis, A. de la Escosura, P. Vazquez, T. Torres, A. Kahnt, D. M. Guldi, H. Neugebauer, C. Winder, M. Drees and N. S. Sariciftci, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 5187–5190 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, T. Torres, R. H. Grubbs, D. M. Guldi, H. Neugebauer, C. Winder, M. Drees and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem.–Asian J., 2006, 1, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and Y. Cao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1709–1718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Wu, D. Feng, S.-T. Tsai, H.-J. Son, G. Li and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 56–57 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, R. I. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Wu and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15586–15587 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 Search PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 135–138 CrossRef .
A. Ltaief, R. B. Chaabane, A. Bouazizi and J. Davenas, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2006, 26, 344–347 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. J. Johansson, A. Yartsev, H. Rensmo and V. Sundström, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3014–3020 CrossRef .
S. Honda, T. Nogami, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 804–810 Search PubMed .
H. Neugebauer, M. A. Loi, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Cerullo, A. Gouloumis, P. Vazquez and T. Torres, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vivo, M. Ojala, V. Chukharev, A. Efimov and H. Lemmmetyinen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 203, 125–130 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin, R. Koeppe, A. S. Peregudov, S. M. Peregudova, M. Egginger, R. N. Lyubovskaya and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, H. J. Prall, R. Koeppe, M. Egginger, R. Autengruber and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 073502 CrossRef .
A. G. F. Janssen, T. Riedl, S. Hamwi, H. H. Johannes and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 073519–073519 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, S. W. Tong, C. Jiang, E. T. Kang, D. S. H. Chan and C. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083310–083310 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
M. Victoria Martínez-Díaz	Since 2002 M. Victoria Martínez-Díaz is Associate Professor in the Organic Chemistry Department at Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM). Before that, she obtained her PhD in 1994 from UAM under the supervision of Prof. Torres in the field of Supramolecular Chemistry. After one year postdoc at CEA-Saclay working on the LB technique, she spent two years as a research fellow in the group of Prof. F. J. Stoddart in Birmingham (UK) studying the self-assembly of switchable interlocked molecules. Her current research, developed in Prof. Torres’s group, focuses on the synthesis, supramolecular properties and photovoltaic applications of phthalocyanine-based materials.
Gema de la Torre	Gema de la Torre obtained her PhD in 1998 from Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), working on the chemistry of phthalocyanines under the supervision of Professor T. Torres. Following two postdoctoral stays with Professor W. Blau (Trinity College, Dublin), working on the functionalization of carbon nanotubes, and Professor N. Martín (Universidad Complutense de Madrid), working on porphyrin-fullerene ensembles, she joined Professor T. Torres´ group as Assistant Professor. From 2007 she holds an Associate Professor position in the Organic Chemistry Department at UAM. Her current research interests are the synthesis and photovoltaic applications of new phthalocyanine-based materials.
Tomás Torres	Tomás Torres is Full Professor and Head of the Organic Chemistry Department at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. In addition to various aspects of supramolecular chemistry, his current research interests include the preparation of molecular materials based on phthalocyanines, including applications in solar cells, with a focus on nanotechnology. Prof. Torres has published 300 papers and reviews and holds 35 patents. He has been awarded the JANSSEN CILAG prize for Organic Chemistry 2005 by the Royal Society of Chemistry of Spain. In 2009 he was honoured as Doctor Honoris Causa by the Ivanovo State University of Chemistry and Technology, Russia.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of fundamental processes in a DSSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Molecular structure of one of the pioneering (1) and two of the currently most efficient porphyrin dyes (2 and 3, also called YD2 when R is C6H13).	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures of best performance unsymmetrically substituted carboxy–Zn(II)Pcs 4, 5 (TT1) and 6.	 

 	Fig. 4  Metalloporphyrins 7 tested as photosensitizers in DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular structures of Ru(II)Pcs 8 and 9 bearing the anchoring group for DSSCs at the axial pyridine ligand, and Ru(II)Pc 10 with the carboxy group directly attached to the macrocycle.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of Pcs 11–16 bearing different spacers between the macrocycle and the carboxylic anchoring group.	 


5
	7.6	617	3.52

11
	0.9	550	0.4

12
	4.8	610	2.20

13
	1.44	611	0.67

14
	6.8	613	3.10

15
	5.36	579	2.20

16
	4.36	587	1.87

 	Fig. 7  Broad absorbing monocarboxy porphyrins tested in DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular structure of highly efficient “push-pull” porphyrin sensitizers 21–25.	 

 	Fig. 9  Modification of the “push-pull” structure of Pc dyes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Modification in the binding group of porphyrin sensitizers.	 

 	Fig. 11  Thiophene-linked porphyrin derivative for DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular structure of JK2 dye.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of a DSSC with energy relay dyes.	 

 	Fig. 14  Molecular structure of DCM dye.	 

 	Fig. 15  Molecular structures of porphyrin or phthalocyanine dyads tested in DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 16  Basic steps occurring in a molecular device.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of the Cu(II)Pc-based solar cell described in ref. 68. (b) Configuration of the tandem solar cell described in ref. 70.	 

 	Fig. 18  Chemical structure of: (a) Ti(IV)OPc; (b) SubPc; (c) SubNc.	 

 	Fig. 19  Arrangement of Pcs in an evaporated film over an ITO/MoOx substrate pre-treated with 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic acid (PTCDA) (side view).	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of the hybrid planar-mixed molecular heterojunction described in ref. 114. (b) Semitransparent p-i-n solar cell described in ref. 119.	 

 	Fig. 21  Molecular structures of Ru(II)Pc-DOTs 34 and 35 tested in solution processed BHJs.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Chemical conversion of TETBPor (soluble precursor) in TBPor, the photoactive donor component. (b) Chemical structure of the acceptor fullerene-type component (SIMEF). (c) Side view of the TBPor-based column/canyon region obtained after spin-coating of the TETBPor:SIMEF mixture, subsequent heating to 180 °C and final removal of the SIMEF acceptor by washing with toluene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Molecular structure of covalently-linked Zn(II)Pc-C60 dyad 36 and Pc- and C60-containing co-poly(norbornene) 37, used as photoactive components in ref. 133 and 135, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structure of the Si(IV)Pc derivative 38 used in the Pc-sensitized, P3HT:PCBM BHJ device. (b) Schematic representation of the energy levels of the device's components and charge-separation process taking place in the blend.	 

 	Fig. 25  Molecular structure of dyad 39 employed as active component in ref. 145.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
