Heterogeneous catalytic conversion of CO 2 : a comprehensive theoretical review  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR00092K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR00092K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8663-8683Heterogeneous catalytic conversion of CO2: a comprehensive theoretical review

        
          
            Yawei 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Siew Hwa 
            Chan
          
          
        
      acd and 

        
          
            Qiang 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *ab
aSingapore-Peking University Research Centre, Centre for Research Excellence & Technological Enterprise (CREATE), Singapore 138602, Singapore. E-mail: sunqiang@pku.edu.cn
bCenter for Applied Physics and Technology & Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
cSchool of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore
dEnergy Research Institute at NTU (ERI@N), Nanyang Technological University, 1 CleanTech Loop #06-04, Singapore 637141, Singapore
Received 
      7th January 2015
    , Accepted 14th April 2015First published on 16th April 2015AbstractThe conversion of CO2 into fuels and useful chemicals has been intensively pursued for renewable, sustainable and green energy. However, due to the negative adiabatic electron affinity (EA) and large ionization potential (IP), the CO2 molecule is chemically inert, thus making the conversion difficult under normal conditions. Novel catalysts, which have high stability, superior efficiency and low cost, are urgently needed to facilitate the conversion. As the first step to design such catalysts, understanding the mechanisms involved in CO2 conversion is absolutely indispensable. In this review, we have summarized the recent theoretical progress in mechanistic studies based on density functional theory, kinetic Monte Carlo simulation, and microkinetics modeling. We focus on reaction channels, intermediate products, the key factors determining the conversion of CO2 in solid–gas interface thermocatalytic reduction and solid–liquid interface electrocatalytic reduction. Furthermore, we have proposed some possible strategies for improving CO2 electrocatalysis and also discussed the challenges in theory, model construction, and future research directions.Yawei LiYawei Li received his BS degree in 2011 from Peking University, China. He is currently studying towards a PhD degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Peking University under the supervision of Professor Qiang Sun. His research interests are focused on computational materials design for energy conversion. From October 2014 to April 2015, he visited the Singapore-Peking University Research Centre.Siew Hwa ChanDr Chan is a professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He graduated with a PhD degree in Internal Combustion Engines from Imperial College London in 1991. His current research is focused on fuel cells and hydrogen technologies. Dr Chan is the recipient of the George-Stephenson Award from IMechE, UK and also the “World's Most Influential Scientific Minds 2014” Award from Thomson Reuters. He is an editorial board member of Fuel Cells and Journal of Power Technologies. Dr Chan is a member of the Management Board of Energy Studies Institute as well as a member of the Advisory Board of Horizon Fuel Cell Technologies.Qiang SunDr Qiang Sun is a professor at Peking University, China. He graduated with a PhD degree in Physics from Nanjing University in 1996. His current research interest is in computational materials design for energy and environment applications. These include hydrogen storage, fuel cell, solar energy, CO2 capture and conversion. He serves as an Associate Editor of Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy and is an editorial board member of Materials Transactions and Annals of Materials Science & Engineering.
1. Introduction
The increasing concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere and the resulting global warming have compelled human society to seek effective ways to convert CO2 into valuable fuels and chemicals to achieve an anthropogenic and sustainable carbon cycle. Among the different approaches to catalytically transform CO2 to high calorific fuels as ideal energy storage media, thermocatalysis and electrocatalysis utilizing heterogeneous catalysts have become hotly pursued topics due to the fact that the reactions on solid–gas or solid–liquid interfaces are facile and the catalysts exhibit better durability as compared to homogeneous transition metal complexes.
Basically both solid–gas interface thermocatalysis and solid–liquid interface electrocatalysis for CO2 reduction need to be combined with hydrogen sources, i.e., either atomically activated H* (* denotes surface adsorbed species) or proton–electron pairs (H+ + e−). Therefore, a good catalyst must have the ability to dissociate hydrogen sources such as H2O and H2 into atomic H* or to promote proton–electron transfer with relatively low energy barriers. However, using only a single descriptor to discover better CO2 reduction catalysts is not enough. Actually, all the reaction intermediates associated with CO2 reduction need to be carefully scrutinized. Although dramatic progress has been experimentally made in CO2 catalytic reduction in the last 20–30 years, only limited intermediates such as CO* and HCOO* have been recognized by experimental methods due to the limitation of experimental techniques as well as transient lifetimes of reaction intermediates. Moreover, it is even more troublesome to identify the transition states involved in CO2 catalytic reduction and constituent elementary reactions using merely kinetic experiment data.
To overcome this inability, theoretical calculations have become powerful tools to investigate reaction mechanisms. Among them, density functional theory (DFT), which computes ground-state energy and its derived properties using electron density instead of wave functions, has substantially reduced computational cost and makes possible calculation of relatively larger systems such as nanoparticles and periodic surfaces. In particular, the first-principles derived energetics, atomic configurations, transition states, energy barriers, and reaction channels can be used to predict the catalytic activities at an atomic level. Furthermore, DFT calculations can also be used to validate the experimental observations or to give explanations in depth. On the other hand, experimental data can be used to fit the input parameters for successive kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) or microkinetic simulations. The KMC and microkinetic simulations reveal macroscopic product distribution with temperature, reactant pressure as well as applied potential, which serve as an effective supplement to DFT. In the past few decades, numerous theoretical studies, aiming to identify the real active sites in real-world catalysts and design new candidates, have been performed in the field of catalytic CO2 conversion. Most of them provide good agreements with the experiments.
Despite the rapid development in theoretical heterogeneous CO2 catalysis, only limited reviews summarizing the progress in this field are available. Moreover, most of them focused on the reactions that happened at the solid–gas interface. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no literature reviews comprehensively discussing heterogeneous CO2 conversion that happened at the solid–liquid interface. Herein, we mainly focus on recent theoretical advances in unraveling the reaction mechanisms and designing new catalysts for CO2 conversion at the solid–gas/solid–liquid interface. The review is organized as follows: in section 2, we outline thermocatalytic CO2 reduction with respect to different products and possible mechanisms, while electrocatalytic CO2 reduction at the solid–liquid interface is discussed in section 3 based on both thermodynamic and kinetic solvent models. Section 4 is devoted to discussions on some existing problems and outlooks for the future research in this field.
2. Solid–gas interface thermocatalytic CO2 reduction
CO2 is a linear molecule with a large ionization potential and a small electron affinity, and so, compared to donating electrons, accepting electrons from catalyst sites is more feasible for a CO2 molecule. Therefore, to achieve solid–gas interface thermocatalytic CO2 conversion, the active sites must have the ability to inject electrons into the antibonding orbital of CO2. At the same time, as thermocatalytic CO2 conversion needs H2 feed gas as a reducing agent, the active sites should possess a moderate ability to dissociate H2 feed gas into atomic adsorbed H*. Both of these two factors correlate well with the material's electronic structures, such as the d-band center in metals or defect states in oxides. A deeper insight into the underlying factors that control the catalyst performance is thus needed from theoretical efforts. In the past few years, several theoretical reviews have well summarized the theoretical model catalysts that have been used in experiments.1,2 We focus here on key intermediates in the different reactions, aiming to identify factors that may improve the thermocatalytic performance. We divide this section into three parts based on three main products detected experimentally, namely methanol (CH3OH), carbon monoxide (CO) and formic acid (HCOOH). Methane (CH4) formation is not discussed in this review because of its lower importance in producing portable liquid fuels.
2.1. CO2 reduction to CH3OH
CO2 has been co-fed with CO and H2 to produce hydrocarbons, Cn (n > 2) oxygenates (like alcohols), CH4 or CH3OH, depending on catalyst composition and reaction conditions. Among them, liquid products such as methanol are more desirable because of their potential use in alleviating the dearth of fossil fuels. CH3OH synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation (CO2(g) + 3H2(g) → CH3OH(g) + H2O(g)) is a reverse process of methanol reforming. Its standard enthalpy is −49.3 kJ mol−1 at 298.15 K. Such a negative enthalpy indicates that the reaction is thermodynamically favorable and that the reaction temperature needs to be controlled at a moderately low level to repel side and reverse reactions.
Among all metal elements, only Cu has been identified to exhibit the ability to catalyze CO2 hydrogenation to methanol on an industrial scale.3,4 In fact, the Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalytic system is used to convert syngas mixtures (H2/CO2/CO) into methanol industrially at moderate pressures (50–100 bar) and temperatures (473–573 K).5,6 Despite its wide use, the underlying catalytic mechanism and active sites are still under debate.3 Basically, three main mechanisms have been proposed based on the nuance of interface models and chosen pathways, namely the formate (HCOO*) mechanism, the reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) mechanism and the trans-COOH mechanism. In the following, we will present the reaction pathways of the three mechanisms on Cu, as well as their extension to supporting oxides and non-Cu based systems in sections 2.1.1–2.1.3. Mechanisms other than the three main ones are also briefly discussed in section 2.1.4.

2.1.1 HCOO mechanism and its revision. 
In the HCOO mechanism, formate (HCOO*) is the key intermediate in the reaction pathway. This is based on the fact that earlier X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and temperature programmed desorption (TPD) experiments detected almost a full monolayer of HCOO* on the Cu surface.7,8 It has been claimed that HCOO* is the key intermediate for CO2 hydrogenation to CH3OH.9 The rate-determining step (RDS) is therefore believed to be controlled by the formation and hydrogenation of HCOO*. Accordingly, earlier theoretical studies mainly focused on unveiling low-barrier steps after the formation of HCOO* with respect to different Cu surface structures and Cu–oxide interactions in the industrial Cu/ZnO catalyst. Using ab initio molecular orbital (MO) calculations and a simplified cluster model, Kakumoto et al. argued that hydrogenation of CO2 on the Cu/ZnO catalyst primarily happened on the Cu+ site with the formation of the HCOO* intermediate bridged on two Cu atoms.10 Then two surface-adsorbed H* atoms attacked the adsorbed formate, generating dioxomethylene (H2COO*) and further breaking into formaldehyde (H2CO*) and hydroxyl (OH*) species. The resulting H2CO* further reacts with two H*, leading to the formation of methoxy (CH3O*) and finally to CH3OH (CO2 → HCOO* → H2COO* → H2CO* → CH3O* → CH3OH). The calculated vibrational modes of the intermediates were in excellent agreement with earlier experimental data. They further found that the catalytically active cationic Cu+ sites are mainly located in the interface between metallic Cu and oxide substrate, suggesting a synergetic interaction between Cu and oxides.11
The morphology effect has also been taken into account in DFT calculations. Using a Cu(111) three-layer slab and a Cu29 nanoparticle as calculation models, Yang et al. concluded that the Cu29 nanoparticle exhibits superior catalytic activity towards CO2 hydrogenation to methanol owing to its flexibility and the presence of low-coordinated active Cu sites.12 These low-coordinated active metal sites could stabilize key intermediates such as HCOO* and H2COO* and lower the barrier of their hydrogenation. Therefore, design of better catalysts for methanol synthesis should contain enough coordinatively unsaturated Cu sites and positively charged Cu+ cations if methanol is produced via the HCOO mechanism.
More recently, instead of claiming hydrogenation of HCOO* and H2COO* and concomitant C–O bond dissociation as rate-limiting steps, Grabow and Mavrikakis13 reported that formic acid (HCOOH) rather than H2COO* was the major hydrogenation product of the HCOO* intermediate, where HCOOH was then further hydrogenated to H2COOH* species and subsequently underwent C–OH bond dissociation to generate H2CO*.13 We denote it as the revised HCOO (r-HCOO) mechanism. The comparison of relative activation energies for HCOO and r-HCOO mechanisms is illustrated in Fig. 1. The activation barriers for HCOO* hydrogenation to HCOOH* are much smaller than HCOO* to H2COO*; meanwhile, CH3O2* dissociation to CH2O* is also preferable to H2COO* dissociation to CH2O*. Both of these two reaction steps suggest that the r-HCOO mechanism is more likely to dominate on Cu(111). Based on their KMC study, the identified rate-limiting steps included HCOOH hydrogenation as well as CH3O* formation at low CO2 flow concentrations or CH3O* hydrogenation at high CO2 flow concentrations.
 Fig. 1  Potential energy surface and reaction intermediates of CH3OH synthesis from CO2 thermocatalytic hydrogenation on Cu(111) via HCOO and r-HCOO mechanisms [reproduced with permission from (ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384). Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society]. 
Following the r-HCOO mechanism, Behrens et al.5 confirmed the main conclusions drawn by Mavrikakis et al., and they also emphasized the importance of the existence of step defects such as Cu(211) in conjunction with alloyed or doped Znδ+ atoms. They found that the higher oxophilicity of Zn would further enhance the stability of oxygen-bound intermediates such as CH3O*, leading to decreased thermodynamic and kinetic barriers for converting CO2 into methanol (Fig. 2). More important was the excellent agreement between DFT calculated barriers with the observed activity of their synthesized flat and stepped Zn free and Zn doped nanostructures. All of the above theoretical studies indicate that the r-HCOO mechanism is at least one dominant cause of CH3OH production from CO2.
 Fig. 2  Gibbs free energy diagram obtained from DFT calculations for CO2 hydrogenation to CH3OH on close-packed (black), stepped (blue) and Zn substituted steps (red) [adapted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright (2012) American Association for the Advancement of Science]. 
Apart from ZnO, zirconia (ZrO2) has also been chosen as an efficient promoter and support for the Cu catalyst.14–16 It has been found that the cationic Zr site with considerable oxophilicity like Zn could be the key to enhance the CO2 conversion rate and methanol selectivity.14,15 Initially, ZrO2 acted as the adsorption site for CO2, while H2 dissociated on the Cu side, emphasizing both the metal and the oxide support effect in modeling.
The role of DFT can also be embodied in modeling of existing non-copper systems. French et al. employed the DFT/MM approach and the embedded cluster method to study methanol synthesis on ZnO, the pure oxide substrate without Cu.17 They found that hydrogenation of the HCOO* intermediate could generate both HCOOH* and H2COO*. Ye et al. applied DFT slab calculations in the investigation of such reactions on the In2O3 (110) surface.18,19 They suggested that hydrogenation of CO2 to HCOO* was more favorable to bicarbonate, and HCOO* hydrogenation to H2COO* was slightly endothermic with an activation barrier of 0.57 eV. The rate-limiting step was hydrogenation of H2CO* to H3CO* with an activation barrier of 1.14 eV. Both ZnO and In2O3 provided oxygen vacancy defects, which would be filled by one of the two oxygen atoms of the H2COO* intermediate. Calculations by the same group revealed that elimination of surface hydroxyl on the Al2O3 substrate would facilitate the formation of HCOO* and inhibit CO* formation on supported Ni clusters.20 These studies suggest that caution is needed concerning the surface morphology and the adsorption state in modeling oxide substrates where defects may be induced.21
In summary, the major dispute in the HCOO/r-HCOO mechanism is whether HCOOH* or H2COO* is the preferable hydrogenation product of HCOO*. The recent experimental and theoretical efforts tend to prove that the r-HCOO mechanism is more favorable.


2.1.2 RWGS mechanism. 
In contrast to the HCOO mechanism, in the RWGS mechanism CO* instead of HCOO* is identified as the key intermediate in methanol synthesis. In other words, CH3O and CO generations share the same route. CO* was generated upon the hydrogenation of the COOH* intermediate, while HCOO* was regarded as a dead-end spectator species because of the experimental observation that HCOO* hydrogenation kinetics did not match with that of methanol formation.22 However, theoretical studies reveal that the RWGS route is at least not feasible on pure Cu surfaces. According to the analysis by Yang et al., formyl (HCO*) was not stable and preferred to dissociate into CO* and H* species rather than undergo the reverse pathway on Cu.12 Therefore, only a small fraction of CO* generated from the RWGS reaction on Cu nanoparticles could be further converted to methanol and most CO* would become desorbed on the surface. The selectivity of methanol was therefore significantly hindered.
Promoters or dopants were thus needed to stabilize HCO*. This is actually the case in industrial examination. Indeed, many different elements have been doped into the Cu-based catalyst to improve its performance on methanol production.3 Based on a combination of DFT and KMC simulations, Yang et al.23 obtained the activity sequence of different metal doped Cu towards methanol synthesis. They found that the Ni-promoted Cu nanoparticle exhibited the best catalytic performance due to its stabilization of HCO*.23 In other words, Ni dopants in Cu nanoparticles could facilitate CH3OH formation through the RWGS pathway and reduce CO side product generation, as demonstrated by many experimental studies.24–26
Several kinds of fabricated non-copper-based materials also possess notable catalytic activity in transforming CO2 to CH3OH via RWGS mechanisms. Theoretical investigations on Cu-free systems were thus stimulated. The DFT method can serve here as an important tool in designing ideal catalytic systems. Liu et al.27 used Mo6S8, a structural building block of MoS2, to study CO2 hydrogenation and found that different from periodic MoS2 which broke C–O bonds of the HxCO intermediate to form hydrocarbons, Mo6S8 catalyzed CO2 hydrogenation to methanol with moderate activity. CH3OH was produced via the RWGS route with COOH* as the intermediate (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Optimized potential energy diagram for methanol synthesis from CO2 and H2 on a Mo6S8 cluster via the RWGS mechanism [reproduced with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 114, 3888–3895). Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society]. 
Apart from COOH* hydrogenation, CO has also been observed to emerge by direct CO2 dissociation on promoted Cu catalysts. Experimental efforts on Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 and DFT investigation of Cu–ZrO2 model catalysts both confirmed that CO could be produced by direct CO2 dissociation (CO2* → CO* + O*) without the intermediate COOH*.14,28 The complete reaction network incorporating both HCOO and RWGS mechanisms, as depicted by Tang et al.,14 is shown in Fig. 4. KMC simulations with a large time scale have been used to test the feasibility of CO hydrogenation to CH3OH with respect to CO2 under realistic reaction conditions. It was found that a ratio 1:1 of CO2:CO mixture gas leads to ∼2/3 CH3OH production by CO2 and ∼1/3 by CO,13 while pure CO2 gas resulted in ∼85% CH3OH production by CO2 and ∼15% by CO from CO2 dissociation.14 The KMC simulations reveal that, under the reaction conditions for CH3OH synthesis, CO2 hydrogenation without the generation of the CO* intermediate is dominant, while hydrogenation of CO through the RWGS mechanism contributes to a small amount of CH3OH.
 Fig. 4  Reaction network, the intermediates and the transition states for methanol synthesis from CO2/H2 over the Cu/ZrO2 interface [reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright (2009) Elsevier Inc.] 
From the above discussions, one can find that the RWGS mechanism cannot be completely ruled out although most theoretical studies claimed that the HCOO* was the key intermediate and CH3OH synthesis went through the r-HCOO mechanism. The highest barrier of CO hydrogenation was only slightly higher than that of HCOO* hydrogenation to CH3OH. This could account for the observed discrepancy between HCOO* and CH3OH formation rates. In the following, we will further show that, in the presence of water molecules in the mixed CO2/H2 gas, the CH3OH production would arguably follow a different mechanism.


2.1.3 
            trans-COOH mechanism: the presence of water. 
Water is an important factor affecting CO2 thermocatalytic conversion as found in industrial processes where a considerable amount of gaseous water can be produced by the RWGS reactions. Interestingly, although Tang et al.14 concluded that the r-HCOO mechanism was overwhelming in CH3OH synthesis from CO2, they found that the difficulty in CH3O* hydrogenation by surface H* could be overcome in the presence of H2O molecules via a smaller barrier.14 Their theoretical investigations have suggested that water might affect reaction barriers of CO2 hydrogenation, and might even change the preferable reaction routes. In a recent study, Zhao et al. indeed proposed an alternative reaction pathway called the trans-COOH* mechanism,29 with the generation of trans-COOH* rather than HCOO* as the key limiting step on Cu(111) due to the large barrier of HCOO* hydrogenation. They found that the presence of water could further lower the formation barrier of trans-COOH* and thus promoted CH3OH synthesis. With the water physisorbed or chemisorbed, the CO2 hydrogenation barrier was reduced to 0.17 or 0.77 eV, respectively, from 1.17 eV without water molecules (Fig. 5). The trans-COOH* would quickly transform into COHOH* and subsequently COH*, in contrast to the RWGS mechanism where COOH* would transform into CO* and subsequently CHO*. It is interesting to note that COH* has been identified as a key intermediate in electrochemical reduction of CO2 on Cu(111), which will be discussed later. CH3OH was produced upon the hydrogenation of COH*, ruling out the existence of both HCOO* and CO* intermediates. This study from another perspective explained why trace amounts of water can improve methanol synthesis performance when using a Cu catalyst.
 Fig. 5  Potential energy surfaces for CO2 hydrogenation to CH3OH on Cu(111) via the HCOO, trans-COOH and water promoted trans-COOH mechanisms [reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2011) Elsevier Inc.] 
For clarity, in Fig. 6 we summarize the three main reaction mechanisms and the corresponding intermediates during CH3OH synthesis from a CO2 thermocatalytic reduction on Cu surfaces. The HCOO mechanism emphasizes the crucial role of the HCOO* intermediate, while HCOO* is regarded as a dead-end species in RWGS and trans-COOH mechanisms. In addition, whether CO2 or COOH* plays a crucial role in CO* intermediate formation in the RWGS mechanism remains a matter of dispute. In the HCOO mechanism, earlier studies widely accept HCOO* hydrogenation to H2COO* as a rate-determining step,10,11 while recent studies suggest HCOO* hydrogenation to HCOOH* to be of extraordinary importance.5,13 The acidic sites in the interface of metal/metal oxide are believed to significantly enhance methanol productivity and selectivity.11,14,16 Promoters (dopants, water, etc.) are supposed to have two primary functions: one is to reduce the barrier of HCOO* hydrogenation or trans-COOH* formation,14,29 while the other is to stabilize HCO* and bind CO* more strongly to inhibit direct desorption of CO.23,30
 Fig. 6  All possible reaction routes and the corresponding intermediates during methanol synthesis from CO2 thermo-reduction on Cu. The pink arrows denote the most favorable route for CO2 reduction while the cyan arrows denote the most favorable route for CO reduction. 


2.1.4 Other mechanisms of designed non-Cu catalysts. 
Mechanisms different from the above-mentioned ones are proposed with the emergence of designed Cu free catalysts. In zeolitic materials containing singly dispersed metal sites, employing DFT in combination with ab initio MO theory, Chan et al. identified that CO2 hydrogenation underwent a concerted reaction pathway as CO2 → HCOOH → H2CO → CH3OH with a significantly low barrier,31,32 which does not exist in Cu and defect containing oxides. When incorporating alkaline metal cations combined with Ge and N, the Al-based zeolite possessed the best catalytic activity, which is different from conventional acidic zeolite for ethylene hydrogenation. These studies embody that future CH3OH synthesis catalyst design should not be limited to metal catalysts and oxide catalysts. Metal–organic nanostructures with a similar function as metal-containing zeolites might also be promising candidates for efficient catalyst conversion of CO2 at low temperatures.

2.2. CO2 reduction to CO (RWGS reaction)
While Cu-based catalysts are the most extensively utilized for methanol production, many metal elements have been found to be active in catalyzing the CO2 reduction to CO both experimentally and theoretically. Although Cu-based catalysts have been extensively studied, their applications have been limited as compared to those in methanol synthesis. The main reason is that the RWGS reaction is endothermic and needs higher temperature operation, where Cu-based catalysts suffer from stability issues.
The mechanism of CO2 reduction to CO on various metal surfaces has also been a subject of dispute for a long time. There are two well established mechanisms named the redox mechanism and the COOH* mechanism. Wang et al. performed DFT-GGA calculations of the RWGS reaction on various Cu surfaces according to the redox mechanism, namely, CO2 dissociates to CO and O before hydrogenation.33 Their calculations well reproduced the experimentally observed potential diagram, in which the dissociation of CO2 was the rate-determining step. The dissociation barrier decreased in the order of Cu(111) > Cu(100) > Cu(110). As the geometries of transition states (TS) were found to be similar to the final state (FS), the adsorption energy of surface O* was actually the determining factor. Systematic calculations ignoring the surface H* effect suggested that among Fe(111) to Cu(111) surfaces, Co(111) and Ni(111) exhibited the best catalytic activity in dissociating CO2 to CO via the redox mechanism.34 Vesselli et al. studied RWGS reactions that happened on Ni(110), but gave a conclusion that CO was generated from CO2via the Eley–Rideal (ER) mechanism, with COOH* as an intermediate.35,36 This COOH* mechanism is different from the redox mechanism because CO2 dissociation occurred after its first hydrogenation.
Several supported or free-standing cluster model catalysts were also studied. DFT calculations on molybdenum carbide indicated that adsorbed CO2 favored the process of splitting into CO and OH species upon approaching an H atom, similar to the redox mechanism.37 However, calculations on various TiC supported metal catalysts revealed that the major product CO was produced through the COOH* mechanism.38 CO formation on Al2O3 supported Ni4 clusters also passed through an COOH* intermediate and the emergence of surface hydroxyl could further lower the reaction barrier for the RWGS reaction, leading to selectivity towards CO instead of methanol.20
2.3. HCOOH synthesis
HCOOH was not considered as ideal energy storage media initially. However, recently HCOOH has been suggested as a suitable material for hydrogen storage because of a considerably high volumetric capacity of 53.4 g L−1 at standard temperature and pressure (STP). Hydrogen stored in HCOOH can be released on demand by decomposing HCOOH into H2 and CO2 at ambient temperature by employing suitable metal catalysts in direct formic acid fuel cells. Therefore, theoretical investigation on catalysts for HCOOH production and decomposition will establish a full energy conversion cycle in hydrogen medium from a computational materials science perspective.
In contrast to many options of metal catalysts such as Pd, Pt, PdAg and PdAu alloys for HCOOH decomposition, heterogeneous thermocatalysts that catalyze HCOOH production effectively remain lacking. DFT calculations were thus primarily conducted to give mechanistic insights rather than materials design and experimental confirmation. Peng et al. explored CO2 hydrogenation to HCOOH by surface H and subsurface H on Ni(110) and Ni(111).39,40 They found that both HCOO* and COOH* routes for HCOOH production needed to overcome a large barrier depending on formate hydrogenation or carboxyl formation. Subsurface H might lower the energy barrier and lead the whole reaction from endothermic to exothermic. More recently, Zhang et al. hybridized a highly active Lewis base W site into the well Cu-BTC metal organic framework and found that such W sites would catalyze CO2 into HCOOH effectively.41
The DFT based screening technique was also applied to identify HCOOH decomposition to H2 catalysts and to confirm experimental results.42 H2 generation passed through either HCOO* or COOH* depending on metal elements. Turnover frequency (TOF), denoted as the number of products produced per catalytic site per unit time, is often used to characterize the catalyst activity. The TOF for formic acid decomposition over the transition-metal surfaces and the selectivity of H2 generation were described as functions of CO* and OH* adsorption energies. Pd–Ag alloys exhibited the best catalytic activity and moderate selectivity, and the Cu–Pt alloy was claimed to have better selectivity to suppress the CO generation route in HCOOH decomposition.42
In summary, nanotechnology has had a significant impact on developing ways to control the size, shape, and local composition of Cu and non-Cu based CO2 thermocatalysts at the nanometer scale. CH3OH, CO and HCOOH constitute the main products and the underlying mechanisms are well documented. However, to date, much fewer theoretical investigations have been done in the area of long chain hydrocarbons and higher alcohol thermocatalytic synthesis despite the abundance of experimental practices. We will give further discussions and outlooks in section 4.1.
3. Solid–liquid interface electrocatalytic CO2 reduction
Compared to solid–gas interface thermocatalytic CO2 reduction that requires higher operation temperature as well as elevated partial pressure of gaseous reactants, CO2 reduction that happened on the solid–liquid interface requires merely ambient temperature. Electroreduction of CO2 is advantageous over other reduction processes that happened in liquids because reactions between CO2 and electrons (e−) can be directly coupled to proton sources to lower the reduction potential. Meanwhile, product distribution can be tuned by changing the applied potential, cathode composition, surface morphology, electrolyte composition, pH value, and so on. Compared to anodes where a proton (H+) is generated from the introduced H2, cathodes where CO2 receives an e− or proton–electron pair (H+ + e−) are found to be of more importance in determining the whole reduction process. As a result, earlier experimental efforts mainly focused on which cathode would give a better performance. Metal cathodes are the most intensively investigated because of their low cost and high electric conductivity in liquid electrolytes. Among all the metal cathodes, Cu is the only one found to possess high faradaic efficiency towards CO2 electroreduction to methane (CH4) and ethylene (C2H4),43–47 while Au is characteristic in selectively generating CO.48 Such phenomena stimulate theoretical efforts to uncover the underlying factors that dictate strong element dependence.
Nevertheless, modeling the electrochemical environment in CO2 reduction is very challenging. First-principles methods are inadequate in representing the length and time scales associated with a solid–electrolyte interface. Besides, at an electrochemical interface, a charge separation between the electrode metal surface and electrolyte-phase counter ions leads to an electrostatic potential drop, which may affect the local structures and stability of the surface adsorbates. Incorporating these factors into first-principles calculations is thus extremely challenging. As a result, to date various types of model approximations have been developed to theoretically investigate the electrode–electrolyte interface. In the following, we will introduce two kinds of widely-used models as well as their applications to real world electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. The computational hydrogen electrode model and its applications are presented in section 3.1. In section 3.2, we outline another model denoted as the water solvated and shuttling model. The comparison between experiments and different models is briefly introduced in section 3.3. Note that the models that mimic the solid–liquid interface mainly handle the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) steps, which are susceptible to the electrolytes and the applied potential. In contrast, the C–C coupling steps, which are important in C2H4 production, are non-electrochemical and are hardly affected by the solvents. We thus elucidate the two models with respect to mainly CH4 and CO production and mainly focus on these in sections 3.1 and 3.2. The possible non-electrochemical C–C coupling steps are briefly presented in subsection 3.1.4.
3.1. Computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) model

3.1.1 Origin of CO2 reduction overpotential. 
Given the fact that electrocatalytic CO2 reduction happens at various electrode–electrolyte interfaces, the commonly adopted criterion for evaluating kinetic feasibility is noted as overpotential, which is the potential difference between the reduction potential thermodynamically determined for a half-reaction and the potential at which the redox event is experimentally observed (which means that the measured current starts to increase from 0). In an electrolytic cell, the overpotential determines the amount of energy required to drive a reaction, so it should be as low as possible.
The thermodynamically determined equilibrium potentials for CO2 reduction to several most common products are listed below:  CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH(aq) (U = −0.20 V)CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O (U = −0.11 V)CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → CH2O(aq) + H2O (U = −0.07 V)CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH(aq) + H2O (U = +0.03 V)CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O (U = +0.17 V)
It is evident that direct electron transfer to CO2 is much more unfavorable compared to PCET steps. Among different PCET mediated CO2 reductions, one can see that CO2 electro-reduction to the simplest hydrocarbon, CH4, should be feasible at a standard potential of +0.17 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). However, a substantial overpotential of about −1.0 V on the Cu cathode is required to perform CO2 electro-reduction to CH4 at a high current density. Moreover, at low overpotentials, side products such as CO, HCOOH and H2 would become dominant. A similar giant overpotential of more than 0.3 eV is also observed on CO2 electro-reduction to CO on Au electrodes. A recently proposed computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) model serves as a powerful tool in explaining the origin of the overpotential from a purely thermodynamic perspective.
The CHE model was first proposed by Nørskov et al. to account for the origin of the overpotential of oxygen reduction reaction (O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O) on a Pt electrode.49 The theoretical basis for the validity of the CHE model is that PCET steps that happened in the solution normally possess small kinetic barriers, which are surmountable at room temperature.50,51 The reaction kinetics will thus be dictated by merely the free energy difference of each PCET step. The step with the most positive free energy difference is therefore the rate-determining step (RDS).
Apart from omitting PCET kinetic barriers, the kernel idea of the CHE model is that the free energy difference will be quantitatively corrected by the applied potential U. The derivation of free energy correction by U will be presented in the following way: in the RHE, the protons and electrons are in equilibrium with gaseous H2 at 0 V, all pH values and 1 atm of pressure . Under these conditions, the chemical potential of  is equivalent to that of a proton–electron pair H+(aq) + e−, namely  
The inclusion of an electron into a proton–electron pair will cause the chemical potential of H+(aq) + e− to increase by eU when applying an external bias U:  
When evaluating the free energy difference of a PCET step by calculating the free energy of  rather than that of H+(aq) + e−, the free energy difference of the step ΔG(U) is equal to: ΔG(U) = ΔG(U = 0) + eU, where ΔG(U = 0) can be computed using gas-phase free energy data with apposite empirical solvation correction. The corresponding limiting potential UL at which the free energy difference of RDS turns into 0 is therefore expressed as .
Hence, under the above-mentioned presumptions and approximations in the CHE model, it is possible to investigate the most favorable mechanism as well as the overpotential of a given electrochemical reaction using only gas-phase acquired free-energy data. The application of the CHE model to the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on a Pt cathode has proven that despite the complexity of ORR, when taking the four PCET steps into account, the last PCET step (OH + H+ + e− → H2O) was identified as the rate-determining step and the overpotential is about 0.45 V.49 The overpotential value is very close to what is observed experimentally. Inspired by the successful application of the CHE model to ORR and other electrochemical processes and in order to describe why Cu is the most widely used metal electrode for CO2 electro-reduction to methane and why such a large negative potential is required, Peterson et al. performed DFT thermodynamic calculations in conjunction with the CHE model to explore the preferable elementary steps on Cu(211).52 The preferred reaction intermediates as well as the free energy difference of each PCET step are illustrated in Fig. 7. They found that the protonation of CO* to CHO* was the key rate-determining elemental step due to its most positive thermodynamic free energy difference of 0.74 eV at 0 V vs. RHE. This means that the whole reaction pathway would be open at a limiting potential of −0.74 V, equal to an overpotential of 0.91 V, which was in qualitative agreement with the experimental overpotential.52
 Fig. 7  Free energy diagrams for the lowest energy pathways to H2, HCOOH, CO and CH4 in CO2 electroreduction on Cu(211) [reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
The CHE model reveals that the overpotential for CO2 electro-reduction to CH4 on the Cu cathode results from a notably positive free energy change in the PCET step CO* + H+ + e− → CHO*. Using a similar approach, Hansen et al. identified that the overpotential for CO2 electro-reduction to CO on the Au cathode was determined by the free energy change in CO2 + H+ + e− → COOH*,53 and the overpotential value was in agreement with experiments.48 One can see that the CHE model, although empirical and using gas-phase free energy calculation data, can show remarkable accordance with earlier experimental studies. That is why most of the state-of-the-art theoretical efforts on CO2 electro-reduction still adopt the CHE model.
Taking the coverage effect into account, even the product distributions and current changes as a function of the applied potential on the Cu cathode can be fully understood using the purely thermodynamic CHE model. For generations of H2, HCOOH, CO and CH4, the corresponding overpotential values change in the following order: the value of H2 generation is the least, followed by HCOOH and CO and CH4 generation. That explains why at low applied potential, H2, HCOOH and CO are the main products on the Cu cathode. Furthermore, it is well known that the generated CO will be adsorbed onto the Cu surface at a high coverage and block the active sites. This results in a decreased production of H2 and the total current density. Only at the potential where CO* + H+ + e− → CHO* becomes exergonic, the CO will be removed and the total current will recover.52 The above analyses indicate that the CHE model not only can identify the PCET step where the overpotential is produced, but also can account for many reactions that happened on the cathode.
Besides, the CHE model can be applied to identify stable metal surface phases under realistic electrochemical conditions such as different pH values and applied potentials. Recent experimental breakthroughs verify the promoting interaction for overpotential reduction on Cu and Sn electrodes by their surface oxides as well as derived metallic nanocrystals.54–56 Probing the oxide surface structure and adsorption states for CO2 reduction intermediates with the DFT technique will thus be helpful for clarification. For example, Nie et al. successfully identified O vacancies generated at potential ranges where CO2 reduction happened on Cu2O(111),57 which accorded well with experimental findings of facile CO2 reduction on Cu2O and its derived Cu nanostructures.58
Nevertheless, without a full understanding of catalyst electronic structures, the CHE model is still unable to give the reason why Cu and Au are experimentally found to be the best metal cathode for CH4 and CO production, respectively. Only by combining the well-documented d-band center theory with the CHE model, researchers are able to understand these phenomena via a clarified single/double descriptor that depicts a volcano plot. In the next section, we shall explain the basic concepts underlying the volcano plot and present its applications.


3.1.2 Identification of the best metal cathodes—scaling relation and volcano plot. 
To analyze why Cu is the best cathode candidate for CH4 production from CO2 electroreduction, one needs to consider a myriad of metal elements that are commonly used as electrode materials. The considerable positive free energy difference for the process of CO* + H+ + e− → CHO* indicates that CO* is stabilized to a larger extent with respect to CHO* on Cu. If there is one kind of metal electrode that stabilizes CHO* in a more pronounced way without strongly binding CO, then the large overpotential for CH4 generation might be overcome. Nevertheless, there is no such metal cathode that satisfies this criterion because a strong linear correlation between binding energies of CO* and CHO* exists among all the commonly used metal electrodes. Actually, as illustrated in Fig. 8, apart from CO* and CHO* species, other intermediates that bind on metal surfaces through the C atom also have binding energies that linearly scale with that of CO*. Meanwhile, the adsorption energies of intermediates that bind through the O atom linearly correlate with that of OH*.59 It is not surprising to discover such strong linear scaling relations because the position of metal d-band centers affects intermediate adsorption strengths in linear scales.
 Fig. 8  Adsorption energy scaling of the intermediates in CO2 electro-reduction on metal surfaces [reproduced with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society]. 
The free energy difference of a given PCET step A* + H+ + e− → B* can be expressed as . As the chemical potential of adsorbate species is directly determined by its binding energy on the metal surface, the free energy difference as well as the limiting potential of each PCET step can be transformed to a function of the binding energies of core adsorbate species, CO* and OH*. That results in volcano-like plots between the limiting potential of RDS and the binding energy of crucial adsorbate species,59 as illustrated in Fig. 9, and we call them overpotential volcanoes. The overpotential volcano plots contain a multitude of useful information for better cathode design of CO2 electro-reduction.
 Fig. 9  Overpotential volcano plot of CO2 electroreduction on metal surfaces [adapted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society]. 
First, the overall predicted limiting potential of the RDS is basically determined by the correlation line between CO* and CHO* because this line stays at the bottommost part of the volcano plots for most part of the binding energy range of CO*. Intermediates that bind to metal with oxygen atoms are in general unable to compete with CO* and CHO* in inducing a more negative limiting potential. The Cu cathode has the best performance for efficient CH4 generation at high Faradaic yields because it lies near the top of this volcano plot among all the investigated metals. However, the slope of the CO* and CHO* binding energy scale is 0.88, meaning that cathode element change will cause CO* and CHO* to stabilize/destabilize by a similar amount, making the limiting potential of RDS (and therefore the overpotential) alter very little with the cathode material. It is clearly seen from the volcano plot that even if there is a kind of material that lies exactly at the top of the volcano, the limiting potential is still much more negative than −0.5 V. The CHE model derived thermodynamic volcano plot explains why Cu is the best cathode to produce CH4 and why such a considerable overpotential is needed to initiate CH4 production.
Second, CO* + H+ + e− → CHO* determines the left part of the volcano, while CO2 + H+ + e− → COOH* the right part. Interestingly, based on a free energy analysis, it is found that when the CO binding energy is larger than −0.5 V, CO* prefers to undergo desorption rather than transformation into CHO*. From the volcano plot in Fig. 9, one can see that the right hand site of the volcano plot coincides with the region where CO undergoes desorption. This explains why Ag and Au cathodes generate CO instead of CH4 and why Au is the best choice for CO generation among metals. Furthermore, CO* + H+ + e− → CHO* dictates the overpotential of CH4 generation on Cu, and CO2 + H+ + e− → COOH* determines that of CO production on Au and Ag.
Third, the coverage effect on CO2 reduction and side reactions can be clearly seen on the overpotential volcano. CO molecules generated during CO2 electro-reduction will block the available metal sites. However, several research groups found that the repulsive interaction between CO* and H* as well as between 2CO* would decrease the binding energy of CO* and H*, leading to the point shifting to the right side of the volcano.60,61 It is therefore possible to selectively enhance CO2 reduction but inhibit hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) side reactions in a specific range of the volcano plot.61,62
The overpotential volcano reduces the number of descriptors about overpotential into a single one based on the d-band theory. Combining the CHE model and microkinetic simulation, another kind of volcano plot can be generated, which is called an activity volcano. In contrast to the microkinetic simulations applied in solid–gas interface thermocatalysis, the kinetic barriers of PCET steps are omitted as indicated in the CHE model. Instead, the pre-exponential factors in the microkinetic simulations of electrocatalysis are fitted based on experimentally measured current densities. The corresponding PCET reaction rate constants are thus determined only by the free energy differences and the applied potential. Given the complexity of eight PCET steps contained in CO2 reduction to CH4, only the CO2 electro-reduction to CO is investigated by Hansen et al. in this approach.53
The corresponding activity volcano at a specific applied potential is shown in Fig. 10, where the partial current density is a function of both COOH* and CO* binding energies that scales with the d-band center among metal cathodes, and the COOH*–CO* binding energies are essentially linearly correlated. The activity volcano plot fits the experiments well and explains why Au and Ag possess the best performance in catalyzing CO2 to CO and why it is difficult to improve the performance of metal cathodes to a larger extent.
 Fig. 10  Activity volcano plot and scaling relation of CO2 electroreduction to CO on metal surfaces [reproduced with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society]. 
The scaling relations and volcano plots unveil the electronic structure factors that hinder the improvement of metal cathode performance. In the following, we will summarize several approaches to improve the cathode catalytic performance based on tuning the electronic structure of the cathode.


3.1.3 Strategies to improve the catalytic performance. 
The volcano plots derived from the CHE model not only uncover the determining PCET steps that lead to the large overpotential, but also reveal that the notable overpotentials irrespective of cathode metal choice originate from a strong linear correlation between the adsorbates that bind to the metals via the same atom. Given the fact that the CHE model is an empirical approximation to the solid–liquid interface and actually adopts gas-phase DFT results, it indicates that the d-band center theory of the metal surface state is not only validated in solid–gas interface thermocatalysis63,64 but also effective in solid–liquid interface electrocatalysis.
To seek suitable cathodes that alleviate the large overpotential in CO2 electro-reduction, materials that reside closer than Cu or Au to the top of metal overpotential volcano are certainly a kind of choice. However, a more intriguing idea is that the adsorption strengths of PCET intermediates should not conform to the scaling relations found on metal cathodes. It implies that promising cathode materials search should not be limited to pure metals as the traditional d-band center theory is always applicable therein. To the best of our knowledge, several strategies abiding by the two ideas have been proposed in the literature as described below.
3.1.3.1. Tuning the surface geometry and size effect. 
Although Cu is found to have the best performance for CH4 generation and Au for CO production, different facets would exhibit different intermediate binding energies because of the different positions of the d-band center. By directly tuning the geometry and nanoparticle size, the overpotential might be further lowered compared to the model Cu(111) and Au(111) surface. Durand et al. studied the surface structure effect on Cu electrodes and found that the stepped Cu(211) surface was the most active surface in producing CH4.65 Lim et al. proved that a supported Cu55 nanoparticle with more coordinatively unsaturated edges and vertices could also decrease the overpotential needed compared to the Cu(111) terrace.66 Zhu et al., on the other hand, found that the enriched ratio of edge sites in size selected Au nanoparticles account for COOH* stabilization and overpotential diminish with respect to Au(111) and Au(211).67 The performances of both Cu and Au nanoparticles have been well characterized in subsequent experimental studies,67–69 indicating that further efforts at morphology control are underway.
3.1.3.2. Increasing the oxophilicity of the active sites59. 
CO* tends to bind to the active sites in an upright configuration with respect to the C atom. In contrast, CHO* and COOH* bind to the active surface sites with the CO bond nearly parallel to the surface in some cases. When the designed catalyst has more sites with higher oxophilicity, the CHO* and COOH* intermediates will bind to the active sites stronger with both C and O atoms whereas the CO* intermediate will not be affected. The strong binding of CHO* and COOH* will break the linear correlation between adsorbates, making the designed materials reside closer to the top of the current density volcano as well as possess lower overpotentials.
3.1.3.3. Designing materials that bind different adsorbates with different element sites. 
In electrocatalytic CO2 reduction on metal cathodes, crucial intermediates such as CO*, COOH* and CHO* will bind to the surfaces with the same C atom and at the same element sites. Based on the d-band center theory, the nearer the d-band center is to the Fermi level, the stronger the adsorbate–metal interaction is. The strong correlation between different adsorbates is therefore not unexpected. By decoupling these intermediates into distinct adsorption sites composed of different elements, the conventional scaling relations that impose limitations on metal cathodes will not be valid while new scaling relations will be constructed, which might pass through the top of the activity volcano.
Enzyme arrays immobilized on metal cathodes based on such a design principle exhibit much higher current densities than traditional metal cathodes at the same applied potential. For example, Parkin et al.70 discovered that the enzyme ChCODH I immobilized on a graphite edge electrode could convert CO2 to CO with a notable current density of 0.05 mA cm2 at only a 0.15 V overpotential. By theoretically investigating the C cluster structure of the CODH enzyme that contains M4S4/M4S5 (M = Ni, Fe) in a cubane structure, Hansen et al.53 and Varley et al.71 identified that the C atom of COOH* and CO* intermediates bound to the S site and the M site, respectively. The different element composition of the active binding sites gave rise to a unique scaling line of adsorption energies between CO* and COOH*, and the line directly passed through the center of the activity volcano (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Activity volcano plot and scaling relation of CO2 electroreduction to CO. The binding of COOH with sulfur in CODH enzyme (left) leads to a unique scaling relationship that passes through the center of the activity volcano (right) [adapted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392) and (ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2640–2643). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society]. 
Metal dichalcogenides are another example. Based on first-principles calculations, Chan et al. identified that COOH* and CHO* intermediates preferred to adsorb on the S or Se sites at the edge of MoS2/MoSe2, whereas CO* was likely to bind to the Mo sites (Fig. 12a).72 The enhanced adsorption of COOH* and CHO* on S/Se sites accounted for the lowered overpotential and a significant improvement in catalytic activity. Electronic structure analyses of MoS2 performed by Tsai et al.73 revealed that there was a negative correlation between adsorbate–edge Mo binding and the d-band center of edge Mo atoms, similar to that between adsorbate–metal binding and the d-band center of surface metal on metal cathodes. Interestingly, they observed a positive correlation between adsorbate–edge S binding and the d-band center of edge Mo atoms (Fig. 12c), which was believed to lead to the unique location of intermediate adsorption strengths as revealed in Fig. 12b.73 Indeed, a recent experimental investigation confirmed that the edge-rich MoS2 in 4% EMIM-BF4 ionic liquid had the lowest onset overpotential (54 mV), the highest current density (65 mA cm2) and an extremely high Faradaic efficiency (∼98%) at higher overpotential (0.654 V) reported to date in CO2 electroreduction to CO.74 Both CODH enzymes and metal dichalcogenides possess edge S, suggesting that incorporation of new materials containing group 16 elements is an effective way to break the scaling limitations that existed in pure metals.
 Fig. 12  Adsorption configurations of COOH*, CO* and CHO* on MoS2 edges (a); deviation of scaling relationships for metals on MoS2 and MoSe2 (b); reverse correlations between adsorbates on S and adsorbates on Mo with respect to the Mo d-band center (c) [adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2014) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; adapted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3884–3889). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society]. 
Apart from new cathodes that are not based on metals, p-block element doped in metal cathode surfaces will also disrupt the correlation between adsorption energies of PCET intermediates. Lim et al. found that the d-block dopants in the Ag cathode would not decouple the correlation between the d-band center of Ag and binding energies of CO and COOH, while the p-block dopants gave rise to a significant decoupling.75 Among the different p-block elements, S and As dopants both withstood subsurface diffusion and lessened the overpotential to a larger extent as could be seen in the center of the overpotential volcano plot. The stronger binding of ˙COOH at the S/As site than CO at the fcc hollow site was attributed to the least energy cost for singly occupied pz orbital generation as well as the largest covalent bonding energy gain (Fig. 13). This pioneering research suggests that active site engineering is also practically effective in traditional metal cathodes.
 Fig. 13  Variations of ˙COOH and CO stabilization depending on the dopants and their correlation with the d-band center (a–d); schematic diagram of the ˙COOH binding mechanism on p-block dopants (e) [reproduced with permission from (J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11355–11361). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society]. 
3.1.3.4. Inserting organometallic porous nanomaterials. 
It has been well established that organometallic Co-porphyrin is able to homogeneously catalyze CO2 electro-reduction both experimentally and theoretically.76–78 Extending this kind of structure to a periodic counterpart, Tripkovic et al. systematically studied various porphyrin like metal–graphene divacancy (GDV) structures.79 The scaling relationship changed substantially as compared to the extended metal surfaces, resulting in an overpotential decrease in several kinds of metal–GDV such as Rh–GDV. The unique scaling relationship arose from atomic-like sharp d-band peaks observed in metal–GDV structures.
Through our elucidation using PCET steps in CH4 and CO production from CO2 electrocatalysis as subjects, one can find that the CHE model and overpotential or activity volcano plots not only uncover the electronic factors that determine the overpotential that existed among metal cathodes, but also provide useful guidance for better catalyst design. For a better understanding of some crucial reaction intermediates and the origins of reaction overpotential, in the next part, a brief introduction is given for the CHE model extended to C2 products such as C2H4.


3.1.4 Mechanism for C2H4 production. 
CO2 electro-reduction to C2H4 shares some similar features with that to CH4 where CO* has been identified as a crucial reaction intermediate. Nevertheless, C2H4 formation includes non-electrochemical C–C coupling steps that cannot be handled by the CHE model. Montoya et al. carried out a first-principles theoretical study on C–C coupling in CO2 electro-reduction on the Cu(211) surface.80 They found that the kinetic barriers for 2 CO* dimerization were kinetically unfavorable and protonation of CO* to form CHO* must become exergonic before favorable kinetics could be achieved. Their results accounted for the similar onset potentials for CH4 and C2H4 in experiments. Furthermore, the experimental trend of higher C2H4 selectivity at onset potentials of CH4 and C2H4 was also corroborated by the DFT results that C–C coupling possessed lower barriers at low overpotentials, while CHO* hydrogenation was more favorable at high overpotentials. Contradictory to their conclusions, Koper et al., who observed high C2H4 catalytic activity of the Cu electrode experimentally,81,82 argued that the CO coupling step proceeded via CO* interacting with a non-adsorbed CO molecule on Cu(100), and only needed to overcome a 0.52 eV small barrier to form CO–CO* dimer species with electron and proton transfer decoupled at −0.40 eV,83 the typical onset potential for ethylene production. C2H4 was further hydrogenated from CO–CO* under several typical PCET steps (Fig. 14). Their results were in better agreement with their experimental findings that only C2H4 was produced at low overpotentials and the C–C coupling step was pH independent.82 The CHE model, despite being inapplicable in C–C coupling steps, is still valid for PCET steps and provides reasonable agreement with experiments in C2H4 production.
 Fig. 14  Lowest free energy pathway of CO2 electroreduction to C2H4 and C2H5OH [reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2013) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]. 
To summarize in short, the CHE model has been proven to be effective in unraveling rate-determining PCET steps, regardless of the product type. The linear scaling relation between adsorption intermediates is able to simplify the complicated multiple PCET steps into single/double descriptor space volcano plots, providing opportunities to design novel cathodes that possess less negative overpotential and higher current density. Nevertheless, as discussed below, another kinetic model used in modeling practice provides different insights into several aspects such as the origin of the overpotential, the reaction intermediate.

3.2. Water solvated and shuttling model
The above-mentioned theoretical investigations on CO2 electrocatalysis to CO, CH4 and C2H4 are all based on the purely thermodynamic CHE model, and the calculations were mainly performed just as those in a vacuum (solid–gas interface thermocatalysis). As alternatives to this thermodynamical approach with the empirical solvent correction term, many kinds of kinetic models that incorporate explicitly water molecules, although to a limited extent, have been proposed in the literature.50,51,84,85 To the best of our knowledge, only two models have been utilized in CO2 electro-reduction environments.
Shi et al. studied CO2 electro-reduction on Pt(111) using an electronic double layer model.86 In this model, a hexagonal water layer was put above the Pt(111) surface. In addition, a proton was added to one of the water molecules near the adsorbate. The function of the introduced proton was to induce charge separation between the metal surface and the water layer, simulating a double layer in reality. They found that from CO2 to surface C* species, the proton transfer barriers and C–O bond dissociation barriers were in the range of ∼0.1 eV and ∼0.5 eV, respectively. Such small barriers were easy to be surmounted, proving the validity of using the CHE model.
Nie et al. studied CO2 electro-reduction on the Cu(111) surface employing a two-layer water model or inclusion of 1–2 water molecules.87 However, they adopted a constant-potential approach88 rather than the constant-charge method by Shi et al.86 In this approach, a surface H* adsorbed on Cu instead of a hydrated proton was used to represent a proton–electron couple. A PCET step A* + H+ + e− → B* was then replaced by: A* + H* → B*.
An equilibrium potential U0 was calculated using the criterion that the free energy difference between both sides of the following reaction was zero:A* + H+ + e− → A* + H*
Note that the free energy of the proton–electron couple at the left side is calculated in terms of that of  like in the CHE model.
Then, the calculated reaction barrier E0a was extrapolated to different applied potentials U using the Butler–Volmer equation:89Ea(U) = E0a + β(U − U0)where β is a symmetry factor which is approximated as 0.5.
Based on the potential-dependent reaction barrier, two models were proposed, namely, the solvated model and the shuttling model, as depicted in Fig. 15. In the former one, the adsorbed H* directly reacted with reaction intermediates while in the latter one, H* underwent shuttling through 1 or 2 water molecules and one of the water molecules transferred H to intermediates.
 Fig. 15  Proposed reaction paths for CO2 electrochemical reduction on Cu(111), schematic presentation of the solvated model (a) and the shuttling model (b), relative free energy diagrams for reaction path II through a COH* intermediate, at 0 and −0.98 V vs. RHE [adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2014) Elsevier Inc.]. 
Nie et al.89 suggested that CHO* formation from CO* was preferable via the solvated model, while COH* was likely to be produced via the shuttling model. Furthermore, they found that CO* to COH* rather than CHO* needed a less negative potential to make the hydrogenation surmountable (0.4 eV). COH* then accepted a proton and removed a water molecule to become surface C* species and subsequently the final product CH4 (Fig. 15). The corresponding kinetic barriers were surmountable in an ambient water environment with an applied bias of −0.98 V, in quantitatively agreement with the experiment overpotential for an appreciable current density.87 In contrast, CH3O* was preferentially reduced to CH3OH via the H shuttling route, suggesting that CH3O* would not be the intermediate for CH4 production, thus further ruling out CHO* formation as the key intermediate. These studies highlight the importance of considering kinetic factors in solutions in a more comprehensive way when studying electrocatalysis with respect to solid–gas interface thermocatalysis.
3.3. Comparison with electrochemical experiments

Fig. 16 lists the routes for CHO* and COH* in CO2 electrocatalysis to methane based on the CHE model and the water shuttling model, respectively. The thermodynamic CHE model and the kinetic water shuttling model both depict CO2 electro-reduction on Cu quantitatively well. However, they exhibit notable discrepancy in several aspects. The electrochemical experiments showed that CO2 and CO electro-reduction led to similar product distributions,46,47,90,91 suggesting that CO* was generated during CO2 electro-reduction. Both the CHE model and the water shuttling model confirm the generation of CO as a crucial step during CO2 electro-reduction because CO is both thermodynamically and kinetically favored. The discrepancy between the two models happens along the steps where CO undergoes further reduction. CHO* is identified as the key intermediate in the CHE model while COH* is believed in the water shuttling model. Their explanations of the origin of the overpotential are also different. In the CHE model, the origin of the overpotential comes from the most positive free energy change from CO* to CHO*.52 In the water shuttling model, it is the H shuttling barrier to generate COH* that determines the overpotential.87
 Fig. 16  CO2 electrocatalysis to CH4 on the Cu electrode via the COH* mechanism (pink arrows) or the CHO* mechanism (cyan arrows); e− denotes electron transfer. 
In gas phase thermocatalysis, although Cu is also used as the most effective catalyst, CH3OH is the main product instead of CH4. The origin of the difference of product distribution between electrocatalysis and gas phase thermocatalysis is also argued by the two models. In the CHE model, a more negative free energy gain in CH4 production and the geometrical feasibility for proton transfer to the CH3 moiety of OCH3* are believed to be the cause of the overwhelming CH4 production in liquid phase electrocatalysis.52 In the water shuttling model, the lower barrier for proton shuttling to the O atom of CO cannot happen in gas-phase thermocatalysis, leading to the difference of product distribution.87 The experimental progress in characterizing CO2 electro-reduction intermediates may provide useful insights into which mechanism is more conceivable.
CH2O is the further reduction product of CHO* in the CHE model. Electrokinetic experiments held by Hori et al.45 and Schouten et al.81 both observed that CH2O reduction mainly produces methanol and H2 with a small amount of methane, which indicates that the formation of CH2O will not occur in the dominant path of CO2 or CO electro-reduction on Cu. Furthermore, DeWulf et al. observed a graphitic carbon species based on the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) performed in situ during CO2 electro-reduction experiments.46 These studies suggest that COH* and further C* generations from CO are more likely to happen, as illustrated by the water shuttling model, and that kinetics for proton transfer should not be entirely omitted.
4. Discussion and future outlook
We have reviewed recent theoretical advances in solid–gas thermocatalytic and solid–liquid electrocatalytic conversions of CO2 to CO, CH4, CH3OH, HCOOH, long chain hydrocarbons and alcohols based on the studies using density functional theory, KMC simulation, microkinetics modeling and different solvent models, which have been proven to be useful in catalyst design as well as in clarifications and corroborations of experimental mechanisms. However, challenges still remain to be overcome in many aspects including: (1) an explanation of the low yield of long-chain hydrocarbons and oxygenates is still lacking; (2) accurate description of CO2 cannot be achieved by the traditional generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional; (3) theoretical studies on semiconductor catalysts in solution are scarce, which is important in photo-electrochemical CO2 conversion; (4) modeling methods need to be improved. More details will be given below.
4.1. Monocarbon product preference in thermocatalysis on Cu and further outlook for long chain carbon fuel production
For thermocatalytic CO2 reduction on Cu-based catalysts, the monocarbon species constitute the main products. In contrast, CO/H2 mixed gas is used industrially to produce long-chain hydrocarbons and oxygenates on dopant promoted Co- and Rh-based catalysts, respectively, namely Fischer–Tropsch (FT) synthesis.3,92 The distinct product distribution between CO2 reduction and CO reduction motivates us to analyze why C–C coupling steps are hard to occur on Cu based catalysts.
In the forming HCOO process, CO2 reduction shares the same route with CO after the formation of CH2O*; thus, we first analyze the steps after CH2O* formation. If one wants to improve the yields of C2 or Cn (n > 2) products, then there should be efficient C–C coupling steps after CH2O* formation. Unfortunately, this is not the case for Cu-based catalysts. Previous theoretical studies on Fischer–Tropsch synthesis on various metals have already found that CH2O* hydrogenation to CH3OH on Cu is the most favorable.93 In contrast, CHxO* (x = 0–3) dissociation to CHx as well as CHxO insertion to CHx need to surmount a much larger barrier on pure Cu.94 These findings suggest that CO2 reduction is not likely to give rise to C2 or Cn (n > 2) products on Cu through the CO intermediate.
Next, we analyze the steps before CHO* formation. The crucial intermediates before CHO* formation are HCOO*, H2COO*, HCOOH, and H2COOH. C-bonding patterns are nearly saturated in these intermediates and thus these intermediates are not likely to couple with each other. Similar situations can also be found in the intermediates according to the trans-COOH* mechanism. Therefore, regardless of steps before or after CH2O* formation, the C–C coupling steps are always unfavorable. That is why Cu-based catalysts tend to produce monocarbon species from CO2/H2.
Based on the fact that HCOO*, H2COO*, HCOOH, and H2COOH are difficult to couple with each other or other intermediates, the most promising approach to achieve large-scale long chain carbon fuel production is modified FT synthesis, namely, generating CO first and producing long chain carbon fuel using CO as a feedstock. Therefore, to promote the synthesis of C2 or Cn (n > 2) products (hydrocarbons and alcohols), future efforts should focus on discovering new catalysts that promotes CO generation from CO2/H2, C–O bond dissociation from CHxO and CO/CHO insertion to CHx simultaneously. Experimentally, Fe-based catalysts have been identified to be promising for long-chain olefin generation.95,96 However, the catalysts are highly susceptible to deactivation from coking.97 Furthermore, the catalyst activity was proved to be highly dependent on promoters (such as K),98–101 substrates (Al2O3, SiO2)101–103 as well as catalytic phases (Fe oxides and carbides).95,96 Similarly, Fe/Rh-based catalysts possess notable catalytic activity towards long chain alcohol formation with appropriate dopants and promoters.104,105 However, the selectivity is still relatively low and large amounts of CO intermediates generated from CO2 reduction are consumed in the undesired methanation reaction.104 Therefore, to optimize the catalyst performance, further theoretical efforts should be devoted to the area of CO2 thermocatalytic reduction to long chain carbon fuels. Unfortunately, little attention has been paid to Fe-based catalysts in theoretical modeling, although a lot of theoretical studies aiming at traditional FT synthesis catalysts using CO as a feedstock have emerged in recent years.92,93,106–118 More theoretical investigations are needed to clarify the decisive factors in improving Fe-based catalyst performance and discover better catalysts, with the combination of experimental findings.
Furthermore, it is also important to note that although CO is a crucial intermediate in CO2 thermocatalytic reduction to long chain carbon fuels, the product distribution varies a lot when using CO2 instead of CO as a feedstock on certain catalysts. For example, Co-based catalysts that perform well in FT synthesis using CO as a feedstock are weak in transforming CO2 to the desired hydrocarbons.102 Instead, methane becomes the main product even when Co is mixed with Fe or other elements.102,119 This implies that the adsorption properties of CO2 might also need to be fully considered in theoretical modeling and simulations.
4.2. Difference between Cu-based CO2 thermoreduction and electroreduction
To unveil why electrocatalytic CO2 reduction leads to more C2 species, one should first address the analogies and differences between solid–gas and solid–liquid CO2 conversions. We have already discussed in section 3.3 that CO* is the crucial intermediate in electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. Using the CHE model, Montoya et al. and Calle-Vallejo et al. identified 2CHO* coupling on Cu(211) and CO* coupling to CO(g) on Cu(100) as the rate-determining step, respectively.80,83 Moreover, Nie et al. identified 2CH2* coupling on Cu(111) as the rate-determining step based on the water shuttling model.89 Despite the fact that their studies were handled on different facets, there is one aspect shared by them that there are reaction steps either before C–C coupling or during C–C coupling that are controlled by the applied potential. The reaction barriers are able to be reduced with the applied potential becomes larger. Such potential-controlled reaction steps cannot be achieved in solid–gas thermocatalysis. That is why more C2 and longer carbon chain products can be produced via CO2 electroreduction on Cu, while Cu-based catalysts are much more likely to produce monocarbon products via CO2 thermoreduction.
Based on the difference in the above-mentioned mechanism between CO2 thermoreduction and electroreduction on Cu-based catalysts, it is obvious that the theoretical approach can be used to search for novel electrocatalysts that are capable of producing liquid fuels. CO* and OH* binding strengths are identified as the two most important factors in deciding product distribution and selectivity (especially for CH3OH and CH4 products).52,120 For instance, new alloy catalysts such as WAu were identified to possess high selectivity towards CH3OH production with a careful consideration of OH* adsorption energies.120
4.3. Deficiencies in theory and modeling & future directions
From sections 2 and 3 we can see that DFT plays a major role in suggesting possible catalytic mechanisms, finding reasonable elementary steps, giving insight into catalyst geometries, calculating energy barriers of certain surface reactions, and determining the theoretical overpotentials in both thermocatalytic and electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. However, at the macroscopic length and time scale, statistical and empirical simulations are highly preferred in order to unravel the interplay between elementary chemical reactions that occurred under real-world operating conditions. KMC and microkinetics simulations have become representatives of such simulation methods in modelling CO2 reduction in recent years, and they have often been utilized in combination with DFT to realize a multi-scale investigation.
On real-world catalytic surfaces, the reactants, intermediates and products adsorb and desorb continuously. One aspect that DFT cannot tackle well is that the time between instantaneous elementary steps is much longer, which is called the rare-event dynamics.121 Furthermore, the interplay between different reactants, intermediates and products often happens at a larger spatial scale than DFT that is capable of resolving. Atomistic scale KMC simulations, based on the statistical model and algorithm, combine the elementary processes and focus on their interplay statistically, with the aim of appropriately estimating the surface chemical kinetics. Therefore, KMC simulations are able to reveal the chemical composition, reactant/product distribution and expected activity parameters in a long period of simulation time, with the integration of accurately calculated first-principles calculated rate constants.
If the length and time scales are beyond the scope of both DFT and KMC, microkinetic modelling, one important part of continuum modelling, will instead be an ideal framework for integrating the data generated by DFT and KMC. Microkinetic modelling shares the same point with KMC that they both concentrate on product distribution and estimating the catalyst activity in steady state kinetics. However, distinct from the fact that KMC is operated in a relatively small time and length scale and that KMC includes all possible reaction paths without imparity, microkinetic modelling generally requires a particular reaction mechanism and paths in terms of the most elementary steps. Furthermore, the input data required to establish a microkinetic model are distributed more widely, often not only including first-principles, but also experiments. Due to its larger time and length scales, microkinetic modelling is more susceptible to mass transfer effects.122
Combining DFT, KMC and microkinetic approaches makes the technical sense of multiscale modelling. The DFT data can be used as input parameters for larger scale atomistic simulation and continuum modelling, and the preferred structural parameters and intermediate geometries obtained at the steady state by KMC and microkinetics can in turn be better analyzed in detail by DFT. It has been proven to be very effective in many theoretical studies on CO2 reduction.13,14,53 However, there are still some notable deficiencies in currently used theory and modeling methods. For thermocatalytic CO2 reduction (especially to CH3OH), DFT calculations can be used to search for the more probable reaction paths with relatively small energy barriers. Since the surface coverage of intermediates correlates closely with different mechanisms that existed in parallel, it would be more reasonable that the CO2 heterogeneous reduction to methanol may proceed via various low-barrier paths with different probabilities. However, in practice, due to structural complexity of catalytic materials, only a small subset of reaction paths is chosen to reduce the computational cost in DFT computations, and the employed models such as extended12,13,29 or simple stepped5 or defected17,21 surfaces cannot be fully informative. Moreover, there are several intrinsic shortcomings of DFT methods in describing the energies of several reaction intermediates, for example: (1) overestimation or underestimation of CO and CO2 adsorption energies on transition metal-based catalysts when using DFT instead of DFT+U, especially in semiconductors;76,77,123 (2) overestimation of CO2 hydrogenation energy.15 These limitations also indicate the need to seek for the above-mentioned microkinetics modeling and the KMC method to complement the traditional DFT computations for addressing product selectivity and reaction rates, not only for a wider time and length scale, but also for a better computational accuracy.
On the other hand, although KMC methods were claimed to be more accurate and reliable for heterogeneous catalytic reactions,15,124,125 the computational cost is too excessive. Microkinetics, superior in alleviating the computational cost, is insufficient to account for fluctuations and usually overestimates the surface adsorbate coverage because it assumes intermediates diffusing and contacting with the solid phase in an optimum manner, which is usually not the case. However, microkinetics modeling is more effective and can still give turnover frequencies (TOFs) that are in qualitative agreement with those given by KMC. More information can be found in ref. 63, 64, 126–130. Particularly, Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi (BEP) relationships64 are helpful in giving linear correlations between adsorption energies of transition states and those of reaction intermediates; and the Sabatier principle127 is fundamental to the volcano plot. The combination of these two would result in a universal scaling relationship as well as thermodynamic activity volcanoes, which have been proven to give an excellent agreement between theory and experiment data in many heterogeneous catalytic processes.131,132 Although volcano plots and microkinetics have been adopted in CO thermocatalytic conversion132 and CO2 electrocatalytic conversion,53 we have not found similar practices applied to CO2 thermocatalytic conversion. It is therefore of great promise to apply volcano plots and microkinetics analysis for better CO2 heterogeneous catalyst design.
In CO2 electrocatalysis, there are also several challenges in theory and modeling: (1) modeling of the semiconductor–liquid interface and electrolytes that assist in electron injection to CO2 remains to be scarce.74,133–135 Most of the current theoretical studies focus merely on metal cathodes, paying little attention to semiconductors as well as the chemical composition and effect of electrolytes. The explicit charge–countercharge solvated models such as those used in the double-reference method contain much more solvent molecules and are often accurate enough to describe the effect of solvation and electrode potential. However, the computation costs in these explicit models are too demanding. Furthermore, to date only PCET steps have been intensively investigated, without the consideration of other kinds of induced electron transfers such as photoeffect. Future research on photo-electrochemical CO2 reduction and using less solvent molecules to achieve a tradeoff between accuracy and computational cost will be beneficial in designing more efficient catalytic materials. (2) Surface morphology effect is largely omitted. Nie et al. have claimed that with respect to different facets of the Cu cathode, the relative stability between CHO* and COH* intermediates can be reversed.89 Furthermore, electrochemical tests by Schouten et al. also revealed that the onset potential is almost equal between CH4 and C2H4 synthesis on Cu(111), while it is much smaller for C2H4 production on Cu(100).82 Detailed investigation of surface morphology might give explanations of the above-mentioned discrepancies between the CHE model and the water shuttling model applied to different facets in section 3.3, corroborating the rationality of both models. (3) Input geometries might also influence final results significantly. For instance, in the water shuttling model, the activation barrier of COOH* generation from CO2 depends largely on the input geometry. Zhao et al. used a bent CO2 initial geometry with strong interaction with Cu(111) and proposed the trans-COOH mechanism.29 However, Nie et al. claimed that the linear CO2 molecule weakly adsorbed on Cu(111) was more stable than the bent configuration and that actually H* transfer to CO2 to generate COOH* had a much larger barrier.89 A similar conclusion has also been drawn on Cu2O(111) by Bendavid et al.123 It is never too important to scrutinize the most stable initial geometry configurations in future theoretical studies. (4) Extending successful approaches in handling other electrochemical processes into CO2 electrocatalytic reduction. It would be worthy to note that in the field of ORR and HER electrocatalysis, many theoretical studies focused on the nature of the solid–liquid interface.85,136,137 These techniques of modeling complex solid–liquid interfaces (such as the double reference method136) are highly desirable in the field of CO2 electrocatalysis with the advancement of computational resources. Therefore, to explore the mechanisms of CO2 electrocatalysis in depth, we believe that it would be worth paying attention to the following aspects in the future research: (1) an electrochemical phase diagram as a function of the applied potential;136 (2) the modified Poisson–Boltzmann approach for Tafel lines generation;138 (3) constant-charge or constant-potential, which is better in modeling the electrolyte–catalyst interface (electrochemical double layer); (4) cyclic voltammetry curves simulation using KMC methods;139 (5) unifying the thermodynamic and kinetic volcanoes.140 Although these methods or models have been employed in ORR and HER, applications to CO2 electro-reduction have not been reported due to a complicated electron process involved in electrocatalysis. So, using multiple methods to synergistically elucidate the reaction mechanisms and pathways of CO2 electro-reduction will be of paramount interest for future research.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by grants from the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme and from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21173007, 11274023), as well as from the National Grand Fundamental Research 973 Program of China (2012CB921404).
Notes and references
D. Cheng, F. R. Negreiros, E. Aprà and A. Fortunelli, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 944–965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Q. Ge, in New and Future Developments in Catalysis, ed. S. L. Suib, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2013, pp. 49–79 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
X.-M. Liu, G. Q. Lu, Z.-F. Yan and J. Beltramini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 6518–6530 CrossRef CAS .
M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kühl, M. Hävecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B.-L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Nørskov and R. Schlögl, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. J. Bart and R. P. A. Sneeden, Catal. Today, 1987, 2, 1–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoshihara, S. C. Parker, A. Schafer and C. Campbell, Catal. Lett., 1995, 31, 313–324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoshihara and C. T. Campbell, J. Catal., 1996, 161, 776–782 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujitani, I. Nakamura, T. Uchijima and J. Nakamura, Surf. Sci., 1997, 383, 285–298 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kakumoto, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36, 661–664 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kakumoto and T. Watanabe, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Evans, J. A. Rodriguez, M. G. White and P. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9909–9917 RSC .
L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-L. Tang, Q.-J. Hong and Z.-P. Liu, J. Catal., 2009, 263, 114–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-J. Hong and Z.-P. Liu, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 1869–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun and Z. Liu, Front. Chem. China, 2011, 6, 164–172 CrossRef .
S. A. French, A. A. Sokol, S. T. Bromley, C. R. A. Catlow, S. C. Rogers, F. King and P. Sherwood, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4437–4440 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, C. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7817–7825 CAS .
J. Ye, C. Liu, D. Mei and Q. Ge, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1296–1306 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-x. Pan, C.-j. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Catal., 2010, 272, 227–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao and T. Frauenheim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2638–2642 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Taylor, P. B. Rasmussen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1995, 91, 1267–1269 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. G. White and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 248–256 Search PubMed .
E. Vesselli, E. Monachino, M. Rizzi, S. Furlan, X. Duan, C. Dri, A. Peronio, C. Africh, P. Lacovig, A. Baldereschi, G. Comelli and M. Peressi, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1555–1559 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nerlov and I. Chorkendorff, Catal. Lett., 1998, 54, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nerlov and I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal., 1999, 181, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Choi, Y. Yang and M. G. White, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 114, 3888–3895 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Elliott, R. A. Hadden, J. Tabatabaei, K. C. Waugh and F. W. Zemicael, J. Catal., 1995, 157, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Mims, C. H. F. Peden, J. Li and D. Mei, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 199–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yin and Q. Ge, Catal. Today, 2012, 194, 30–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chan and L. Radom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5322–5323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chan and L. Radom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9790–9799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-C. Wang and J. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3053–3057 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, T. R. Cundari and A. K. Wilson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5681–5688 CAS .
E. Vesselli, L. D. Rogatis, X. Ding, A. Baraldi, L. Savio, L. Vattuone, M. Rocca, P. Fornasiero, M. Peressi, A. Baldereschi, R. Rosei and G. Comelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11417–11422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Vesselli, M. Rizzi, L. De Rogatis, X. Ding, A. Baraldi, G. Comelli, L. Savio, L. Vattuone, M. Rocca, P. Fornasiero, A. Baldereschi and M. Peressi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 402–406 CrossRef .
H. Tominaga and M. Nagai, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 282, 5–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez, J. Evans, L. Feria, A. B. Vidal, P. Liu, K. Nakamura and F. Illas, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 162–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Peng, S. J. Sibener, G. C. Schatz, S. T. Ceyer and M. Mavrikakis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 3001–3006 Search PubMed .
G. Peng, S. J. Sibener, G. C. Schatz and M. Mavrikakis, Surf. Sci., 2012, 606, 1050–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Cao, B. Li and L. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2708–2715 RSC .
J. S. Yoo, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and F. Studt, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1226–1233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1985, 14, 1695–1698 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi, A. Murata and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1986, 15, 897–898 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309–2326 RSC .
D. W. DeWulf, T. Jin and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1686–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Kim, D. P. Summers and K. W. Frese Jr., J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1988, 245, 223–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 728–729 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
M. J. Janik, C. D. Taylor and M. Neurock, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B126–B135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tripković, E. Skúlason, S. Siahrostami, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7975–7981 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 CAS .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986–1989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Nie, G. L. Griffin, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, Catal. Commun., 2014, 52, 88–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Le, M. Ren, Z. Zhang, P. T. Sprunger, R. L. Kurtz and J. C. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, E45–E49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shi, H. A. Hansen, A. C. Lausche and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4720–4727 RSC .
Y.-J. Zhang, V. Sethuraman, R. Michalsky and A. A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3742–3748 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karamad, V. Tripkovic and J. Rossmeisl, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2268–2273 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, S. Bahn, L. B. Hansen, M. Bollinger, H. Bengaard, B. Hammer, Z. Sljivancanin, M. Mavrikakis, Y. Xu, S. Dahl and C. J. H. Jacobsen, J. Catal., 2002, 209, 275–278 CrossRef .
T. Bligaard, J. K. Nørskov, S. Dahl, J. Matthiesen, C. H. Christensen and J. Sehested, J. Catal., 2004, 224, 206–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Lim, J. H. Jo, D. Y. Shin, J. Wilcox, H. C. Ham and S. W. Nam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5087–5092 RSC .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, Ö. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Manthiram, B. J. Beberwyck and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13319–13325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Parkin, J. Seravalli, K. A. Vincent, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10328–10329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Varley, H. A. Hansen, N. L. Ammitzbøll, L. C. Grabow, A. A. Peterson, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2640–2643 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chan, C. Tsai, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1899–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3884–3889 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Král, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 DOI:10.1038/ncomms5470 .
H.-K. Lim, H. Shin, W. A. Goddard, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min and H. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11355–11361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. B. Nielsen and K. Leung, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 10166–10173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Leung, I. M. B. Nielsen, N. Sai, C. Medforth and J. A. Shelnutt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 10174–10184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fujita, C. Creutz, N. Sutin and D. J. Szalda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 343–353 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tripkovic, M. Vanin, M. Karamad, M. E. Björketun, K. W. Jacobsen, K. S. Thygesen and J. Rossmeisl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9187–9195 CAS .
J. H. Montoya, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 737–742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. P. Schouten, Y. Kwon, C. J. M. van der Ham, Z. Qin and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1902–1909 RSC .
K. J. P. Schouten, Z. Qin, E. P. Gallent and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9864–9867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7282–7285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Taylor, S. A. Wasileski, J.-S. Filhol and M. Neurock, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2006, 73, 165402 CrossRef .
E. Skúlason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Björketun, S. d. Gudmundsdóttir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18182–18197 Search PubMed .
C. Shi, C. P. O'Grady, A. A. Peterson, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7114–7122 RSC .
X. Nie, M. R. Esopi, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2459–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Wasileski and M. J. Janik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3613–3627 RSC .
X. Nie, W. Luo, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, J. Catal., 2014, 312, 108–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi and S. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 5022–5023 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Zhao, K. Sun, X. Ma, J. Liu, D. Sun, H.-Y. Su and W.-X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5335–5338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi and P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13054–13061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, G. Wang, B. Wang and L. Ling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5243–5254 CAS .
T. Riedel, H. Schulz, G. Schaub, K.-W. Jun, J.-S. Hwang and K.-W. Lee, Top. Catal., 2003, 26, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schulz, T. Riedel and G. Schaub, Top. Catal., 2005, 32, 117–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Lee, J.-S. Kim, W. C. Shin, M.-J. Choi and S.-J. Choung, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 301, 98–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Niemelä and M. Nokkosmäki, Catal. Today, 2005, 100, 269–274 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ning, N. Koizumi and M. Yamada, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4696–4700 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arakawa and A. T. Bell, Ind. Eng. Chem. Proc. Des. Dev., 1983, 22, 97–103 CAS .
G. Zhao, C. Zhang, S. Qin, H. Xiang and Y. Li, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 286, 137–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Riedel, M. Claeys, H. Schulz, G. Schaub, S.-S. Nam, K.-W. Jun, M.-J. Choi, G. Kishan and K.-W. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 186, 201–213 CrossRef CAS .
S.-R. Yan, K.-W. Jun, J.-S. Hong, M.-J. Choi and K.-W. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 194–195, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inui, T. Yamamoto, M. Inoue, H. Hara, T. Takeguchi and J.-B. Kim, Appl. Catal., A., 1999, 186, 395–406 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kusama, K. Okabe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Catal. Today, 1996, 28, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, P. Hu, P. Ellis, S. French, G. Kelly and C. M. Lok, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9464–9473 CAS .
O. R. Inderwildi, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1305–1307 CAS .
Z.-J. Zuo, L. Wang, L.-M. Yu, P.-D. Han and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12890–12898 CAS .
T. H. Pham, X. Duan, G. Qian, X. Zhou and D. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10170–10176 CAS .
L. Joos, I. A. W. Filot, S. Cottenier, E. J. M. Hensen, M. Waroquier, V. Van Speybroeck and R. A. van Santen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5317–5327 CAS .
R. A. van Santen, A. J. Markvoort, M. M. Ghouri, P. A. J. Hilbers and E. J. M. Hensen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4488–4504 CAS .
C.-F. Huo, Y.-W. Li, J. Wang and H. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14713–14721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Loveless, C. Buda, M. Neurock and E. Iglesia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6107–6121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tuxen, S. Carenco, M. Chintapalli, C.-H. Chuang, C. Escudero, E. Pach, P. Jiang, F. Borondics, B. Beberwyck, A. P. Alivisatos, G. Thornton, W.-F. Pong, J. Guo, R. Perez, F. Besenbacher and M. Salmeron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2273–2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. van Santen, A. J. Markvoort, I. A. W. Filot, M. M. Ghouri and E. J. M. Hensen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17038–17063 RSC .
R. A. van Santen, M. M. Ghouri, S. Shetty and E. M. H. Hensen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 891–911 CAS .
F. Li, D.-E. Jiang, X. C. Zeng and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1123–1129 RSC .
R. A. van Santen, M. Ghouri and E. M. J. Hensen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10041–10058 RSC .
F. Tihay, A. C. Roger, G. Pourroy and A. Kiennemann, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1271–1276 CrossRef CAS .
S. Back, H. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 965–971 CrossRef .

          K. Reuter, in Modeling Heterogeneous Catalytic Reactions: From the Molecular Process to the Technical System, ed. O. Deutschmann, Wiley-VCH,  2011, pp. 71–111 Search PubMed .
L. J. Broadbelt and R. Q. Snurr, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 200, 23–46 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Bendavid and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26048–26059 CAS .
R. M. Ziff, E. Gulari and Y. Barshad, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 2553–2556 CrossRef CAS .
B. Temel, H. Meskine, K. Reuter, M. Scheffler and H. Metiu, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 204711 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Gokhale, S. Kandoi, J. P. Greeley, M. Mavrikakis and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 4679–4691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt and T. Bligaard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 937–943 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hafner, C. Wolverton and G. Ceder, MRS Bull., 2006, 31, 659–668 CrossRef .

          B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, in Advances in Catalysis, ed. H. K. Bruce and C. Gates, Academic Press,  2000, vol. 45, pp. 71–129 Search PubMed .
M. P. Andersson, T. Bligaard, A. Kustov, K. E. Larsen, J. Greeley, T. Johannessen, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2006, 239, 501–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, Q. Wu, A. D. Jensen, B. Temel, J.-D. Grunwaldt and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2012, 293, 51–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Ertem, S. J. Konezny, C. M. Araujo and V. S. Batista, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 745–748 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4058–4063 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Muñoz-García and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13600–13603 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-S. Filhol and M. Neurock, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 402–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 84, 3–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Fang and Z.-P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18214–18222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, T. F. Jaramillo, H. Pitsch and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4698–4704 CAS .
H. A. Hansen, V. Viswanathan and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6706–6718 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Yawei Li	Yawei Li received his BS degree in 2011 from Peking University, China. He is currently studying towards a PhD degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Peking University under the supervision of Professor Qiang Sun. His research interests are focused on computational materials design for energy conversion. From October 2014 to April 2015, he visited the Singapore-Peking University Research Centre.
Siew Hwa Chan	Dr Chan is a professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He graduated with a PhD degree in Internal Combustion Engines from Imperial College London in 1991. His current research is focused on fuel cells and hydrogen technologies. Dr Chan is the recipient of the George-Stephenson Award from IMechE, UK and also the “World's Most Influential Scientific Minds 2014” Award from Thomson Reuters. He is an editorial board member of Fuel Cells and Journal of Power Technologies. Dr Chan is a member of the Management Board of Energy Studies Institute as well as a member of the Advisory Board of Horizon Fuel Cell Technologies.
Qiang Sun	Dr Qiang Sun is a professor at Peking University, China. He graduated with a PhD degree in Physics from Nanjing University in 1996. His current research interest is in computational materials design for energy and environment applications. These include hydrogen storage, fuel cell, solar energy, CO2 capture and conversion. He serves as an Associate Editor of Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy and is an editorial board member of Materials Transactions and Annals of Materials Science & Engineering.

 	Fig. 1  Potential energy surface and reaction intermediates of CH3OH synthesis from CO2 thermocatalytic hydrogenation on Cu(111) via HCOO and r-HCOO mechanisms [reproduced with permission from (ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384). Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 2  Gibbs free energy diagram obtained from DFT calculations for CO2 hydrogenation to CH3OH on close-packed (black), stepped (blue) and Zn substituted steps (red) [adapted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright (2012) American Association for the Advancement of Science].	 

 	Fig. 3  Optimized potential energy diagram for methanol synthesis from CO2 and H2 on a Mo6S8 cluster via the RWGS mechanism [reproduced with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 114, 3888–3895). Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 4  Reaction network, the intermediates and the transition states for methanol synthesis from CO2/H2 over the Cu/ZrO2 interface [reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright (2009) Elsevier Inc.]	 

 	Fig. 5  Potential energy surfaces for CO2 hydrogenation to CH3OH on Cu(111) via the HCOO, trans-COOH and water promoted trans-COOH mechanisms [reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2011) Elsevier Inc.]	 

 	Fig. 6  All possible reaction routes and the corresponding intermediates during methanol synthesis from CO2 thermo-reduction on Cu. The pink arrows denote the most favorable route for CO2 reduction while the cyan arrows denote the most favorable route for CO reduction.	 

 		 
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH(aq) (U = −0.20 V)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O (U = −0.11 V)
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → CH2O(aq) + H2O (U = −0.07 V)
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH(aq) + H2O (U = +0.03 V)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O (U = +0.17 V)

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Free energy diagrams for the lowest energy pathways to H2, HCOOH, CO and CH4 in CO2 electroreduction on Cu(211) [reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 8  Adsorption energy scaling of the intermediates in CO2 electro-reduction on metal surfaces [reproduced with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 9  Overpotential volcano plot of CO2 electroreduction on metal surfaces [adapted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 10  Activity volcano plot and scaling relation of CO2 electroreduction to CO on metal surfaces [reproduced with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 11  Activity volcano plot and scaling relation of CO2 electroreduction to CO. The binding of COOH with sulfur in CODH enzyme (left) leads to a unique scaling relationship that passes through the center of the activity volcano (right) [adapted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392) and (ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2640–2643). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 12  Adsorption configurations of COOH*, CO* and CHO* on MoS2 edges (a); deviation of scaling relationships for metals on MoS2 and MoSe2 (b); reverse correlations between adsorbates on S and adsorbates on Mo with respect to the Mo d-band center (c) [adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2014) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; adapted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3884–3889). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 13  Variations of ˙COOH and CO stabilization depending on the dopants and their correlation with the d-band center (a–d); schematic diagram of the ˙COOH binding mechanism on p-block dopants (e) [reproduced with permission from (J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11355–11361). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 14  Lowest free energy pathway of CO2 electroreduction to C2H4 and C2H5OH [reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2013) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim].	 
A* + H+ + e− → A* + H*
Ea(U) = E0a + β(U − U0)

 	Fig. 15  Proposed reaction paths for CO2 electrochemical reduction on Cu(111), schematic presentation of the solvated model (a) and the shuttling model (b), relative free energy diagrams for reaction path II through a COH* intermediate, at 0 and −0.98 V vs. RHE [adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2014) Elsevier Inc.].	 

 	Fig. 16  CO2 electrocatalysis to CH4 on the Cu electrode via the COH* mechanism (pink arrows) or the CHO* mechanism (cyan arrows); e− denotes electron transfer.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
