Chlorine: the only green element – towards a wider acceptance of its role in natural cycles  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B003394O View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B003394O
(Review Article)
Green Chem., 2000, 2, 173-225Chlorine: the only green element – towards a
wider acceptance of its role in natural cyclesNeil WintertonThe Leverhulme Centre for Innovative Catalysis, Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK L69 3BX. E-mail: N.Winterton@liverpool.ac.ukReceived 10th March 2000First published on UnassignedUnassigned4th October 2000AbstractApproximately 2000 compounds of chlorine, both inorganic and
organic, are known to be produced, transformed, transported and degraded in
a range of natural geological, chemical or biochemical processes in most of
the earth’s environmental compartments. Chloroform, chlorophenols,
chloroacetic acids and polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans, long believed only to have arisen from man’s
activities, have significant natural sources, some of which predate
industrialization. The presumption that such materials are solely man-made
must now be seen as incorrect. In fact, sufficient is known to suggest that
natural cycles involving both organic and inorganic chlorine should be more
widely recognised. Their characteristics should be more fully understood so
as to put emissions of related synthetic materials and associated control
and remediation measures into better context. The role played by
organochlorine compounds, synthesised and utilized by a range of aquatic
and terrestrial organisms (including humans) and the biosynthetic pathways
leading to their formation and transformation are areas of research worthy
of further study. Neil Winterton
Neil Winterton joined ICI’s Corporate Laboratory in 1973 after 8
years’ research in inorganic reaction mechanisms, organometallic and
coordination chemistry at University College, London, the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the University of Warwick. He moved to
ICI’s Mond Division (later ICI Chlorchemicals) in 1977 where he
worked on product R&D on a range of halogenated materials, for which he
was appointed a Research Associate in 1985. His interests at ICI developed
to include C60 chemistry, applications of ionic liquids, cleaner
technology and the natural chlorine cycle. He was a founding member
(subsequently Deputy Chairman) of the Industrial Advisory Board of the
Questor Centre, the Queen’s University of Belfast (1988–1998),
Visiting Industrial Professor at Queen’s (1993–1994) and a
member (later Chairman) of the Natural Chlorine Cycle Working Group of Euro
Chlor (1995–1999). He joined the Leverhulme Centre for Innovative
Catalysis in the Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool, in 1999,
to pursue his interests in industrial and catalytic applications of ionic
liquids, cleaner technology and high-throughput testing.Green ContextThe area of chlorine and its compounds has become a very contentious
issue in the last few years, with conflicting claims and counterclaims.
This review represents a thorough and comprehensive study of the subject
area from many points of view, and is a carefully thought out and
dispassionate piece of work. The article makes clear the issues which must
be addressed in evaluating the fate of chlorine and its compounds, by
putting all the evidence in context.DJM1. IntroductionMost scientists, particularly those who have prepared, handled or simply
seen the seventeenth element of the periodic table, will judge the headline
title of this review to be a factually correct statement (notwithstanding
unsubstantiated claims1 to the contrary). To
others, particularly those who have been concerned with the environmental
impact of some persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic compounds containing
chlorine, the title may appear flippant, provocative or even heretical. Yet
others, aware of my former industrial affiliation, might search for some
ulterior motive in the sub-text of my survey. (Indeed, the very language in
which environmental issues are presented and debated has itself become a
separate topic for academic study.2)That all these reactions are possible says much about the public
perception of chemicals in general and of those containing chlorine in
particular. For example, while water purification and disinfection has been
ranked 46th by Life Magazine3 in its top one
hundred advances of the millennium, concerns arising from epidemiological
evidence,4 suggesting a statistically weak
association between the consumption of chlorinated drinking water and liver
cancer, led the authorities in Peru, presuming a causal link, to stop
chlorinating drinking water. The cholera epidemic5 that ensued killed more than 10000 people.
Fortunately, more rational judgements about the balance of benefits arising
from the use of chlorine are beginning to appear.6–12The purpose of this review is to encourage a more informed awareness of
the fascinating chemistry and biochemistry of chlorine in the natural world
(for a series of short accounts see ref. 13) and, thereby, to correct the
erroneous perception that all organochlorine compounds found in the
environment are present solely as a result of man’s activities. The
survey will cover the variety, abundance, sources, and functions of
chlorine-containing compounds, inorganic and organic, present naturally in
the environment now and over geobiological time. To provide a further
perspective for the current debate regarding chlorine and chlorinated
chemicals the many significant developments in the natural chemistry of
this element and its compounds are discussed, including new reports that
the element itself has unequivocally been directly detected in the
unpolluted marine atmosphere,14 that
organic compounds containing covalently bound chlorine are themselves
synthesised in the human body15 and that
the 3000th naturally occurring haloorganic has been described16 (for it is not possible to give a satisfactory
review of the natural chemistry of chlorine without some mention of that of
other halogens, particularly bromine and iodine).The detection in the environment of certain persistent organochlorine
compounds17– 20 and
their association with deleterious environmental and toxicological
effects21–23 has led to
their control and where necessary their elimination. The conflicting issues
associated with the actual or suspected consequences of the presence of
these compounds in the environment are exemplified in a series of brief
articles24–28
(though even here the role of naturally produced materials receives no
mention). The heightened public concern has coincided with, and may have
been responsible for, a shift from the historical perspective of concern
largely for man’s welfare to one of regard for adverse effects (or
possible or potential effects) on all living things, the broad acceptance
of which is the legacy of the efforts of the ecological and environmental
movements over the last forty or so years.While the proper regulation of persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic
chemicals is necessary and, in the case of organochlorine compounds, is
having the desired effect in reducing the measured levels of such compounds
in biota29–32 (and
while also accepting the need for further environmental monitoring33, 34), the closure of the chlorine industry
would not achieve the avowed purpose of its proponents, namely, the
elimination of all chlorinated organics (nor even all the
compounds of concern) from the environment. The latter would also require
the elimination of the many life-forms, fish, sponges, algae, phytoplankton
and other marine dwellers, insects, worms, fresh-water amphibians, flowers
and vegetables, fungi and even humans, that produce and emit them
naturally.In addition, opportunities for the beneficial application of
organochlorine compounds, such as in the treatment of disease, would be
lost. For instance, the use of existing antibiotics, such as vancomycin
1, and new compounds currently in clinical trials against HIV,
935U83 235 and Efavirenz
336,37 as well as lead
compounds against certain mycobacteria (such as the pathogen responsible
for tuberculosis) maracen A 438
and against tumours, (±)-halomon 5,39 or the cryptophycins 640 and 741
all of which contain chlorine, would have to cease.  The
very detection of a material claimed to be a pollutant in the environment
now leads to calls for immediate controls. Bearing in mind the exquisite
sensitivity of analytical techniques (for instance, it is now
possible42–44 to estimate
one part of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and furans in
1018 (0.001 ppq)) and the likelihood that further reductions in
the limits of detection will be achieved, the challenge to government and
regulators will be to assess the significance of such scientific evidence,
and the weight to be attached to any conclusions derived from it, in the
context of risk assessment and management, also bearing in mind the
impossibility of eliminating all risk and the misdirected costs of seeking
to do so.It is also now quite clear that many materials believed to be man-made
pollutants, such as chloroform, chlorinated acetic acids, chlorinated
phenols, polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and dibenzodifurans, are also
produced naturally, some contributing significantly to the overall global
environmental burden, having done so over geobiological time. Nothing
illustrates this paradox more than the fact that the widespread production
of chlorinated anisyl derivatives, such as 8, by several species
of fungi,45 common in woodland, may yield
biomass containing as much as 1% of mycelium dry weight as organically
bound halogen, such that it would require labelling as hazardous waste if
produced by industry.46 All this being
said, exposure to harmful amounts of a compound does not become acceptable
because of its natural origin.As increasing numbers of chemicals present in the environment are shown
to be produced naturally, studies of suggested pollution events will need
to test whether natural sources of the chemical of concern are possible and
whether the concentrations present pose significant risk. The natural
‘background’ concentrations of the material may then be a more
appropriate base-line or reference point to which any remediation or
control measure should be targeted. This is particularly relevant for the
organohalogen compounds, for which Gribble16 has documented over 3350 examples from marine
and terrestrial organisms, including nearly 2000 which contain chlorine,
with the latter widely but erroneously perceived to be entirely
anthropogenic. Such is the quantity, variety and ubiquity of organohalogen
compounds containing chlorine found to occur naturally that it now cannot
automatically be assumed, as has been the case hitherto, that an
organochlorine (or organobromine) compound found in the environment has an
anthropogenic origin. The possibility of its arising from natural processes
must be addressed.The ubiquity of chloride ion and its essentiality to all life is
established and incontrovertible (notwithstanding the on-going controversy
about the acceptable amount of common salt in our diet47). This is most potently illustrated by the role
of chloride ion as an essential co-factor in the photosynthetic production
of oxygen.48,49Bearing in mind that the primary production of biomass in the seas and
oceans is of the order of 1011 tons (dry-weight) per year50 in the presence of sodium chloride (at
concentrations of ca. 3–4% by weight; total weight of salt
in the seas and oceans ca. 1016 tons51), more remarkable might be the assertion that no
organochlorine compounds are produced naturally in the marine
environment.It is over 20 years since Lovelock, having detected52,53 chloromethane in unpolluted marine air, proposed its
role as a natural regulator of stratospheric ozone. More recently, it has
been suggested that chloromethane, a mutagen, may have played a role in
evolution.54 In the very limited number of
instances in which their role has been investigated, natural chloroorganics
are believed to have identifiable physiological functions which benefit the
organisms that produce them. The further investigation of their role
represents an important area of future research.Such are the lifetimes of these and other haloorganics in the
environment, that estimates of their present environmental concentrations
suggest that natural mechanisms must also exist to transform and degrade
them. Much research has been undertaken primarily to investigate the
biotransformation, fate and natural destruction of organochlorine
pollutants. Because of the ancient origin of many organochlorine compounds,
it is reasonable to suggest that there is also a widespread and ancient
capacity to break down organohalogens of all types, both naturally
occurring and man-made, with such processes making up part of a
geobiochemical cycle. The ultimate destruction of the haloorganic to
release halide ion, water and carbon dioxide would thereby close the
cycle.In seeking better understanding of the processes of formation,
transport, transformation and destruction of natural organochlorines,
further research, such as the recently published global inventory of
emissions of reactive chlorine-containing compounds to the
atmosphere,55–62 should provide additional evidence for, and a
more quantitative description of, the natural cycles involving chlorine,
analogous to the well established geochemical and biogeochemical
cycles,63–65 for
oxygen,66 sulfur,67,68 phosphorus,69
nitrogen70 and carbon.71Such a cycle would define and quantify the sources, sinks, reservoirs,
fluxes, budgets, abundances and distributions, speciation, forms and
functions for critical inorganic and organic compounds of chlorine in and
between the various compartments of the earth (rock, soil, freshwater (and
glaciers) and saltwater (and ice caps) and the atmosphere) and the
life-forms which inhabit them.To enhance awareness of the existence of global cycles for chlorine,
this review surveys what is known of the inorganic and organic chemistry of
chlorine relevant to environmental processes and also highlights some areas
for further study for their better foundation.2. Chlorine: the element, its origins, forms,
distribution and cyclesChlorine†
 exists predominantly in nature as chloride ion, a trace component of all
the earth’s geological compartments other than the oceans, its
primary sink.72 The reactivity of molecular
chlorine prevents the element’s accumulation, though the importance
of chlorine atoms in tropospheric as well as stratospheric chemistry is
increasingly recognised (see Section 2.5). Considering its essentiality to
life (for example, as an obligatory co-factor in photosynthesis (see
Section 2.6)), it is surprising that the distributions and fluxes of
compounds of chlorine are not better understood. It is also surprising that
chlorine’s ubiquity and biological and biochemical importance has not
led to a wider awareness of its natural organic chemistry, discussed in
Section 3.While aspects of the geochemical cycles for inorganic chlorine as
chloride ion have been extensively described (see for instance ref. 51),
important questions remain, particularly concerning the role of chlorine in
the atmosphere, as HCl, atomic chlorine or inorganic compounds of its
higher formal oxidations states, such as HOCl, ClNO2,
ClO2, which, because of their high reactivity, pose much greater
experimental and analytical challenges in their detection and
quantification.73 The biogeochemical cycles
for chlorine, both inorganic and organic, have not been studied in the same
depth as for those of other elements. However, the recent Reactive Chlorine
Emissions Inventory study55–62 has made an important step by
providing global estimates, apportioned to a 2.8 × 2.8°
longitudinal × latitudinal grid, of the sources to atmosphere of HCl
and ClNO2, as well as of selected volatile organic species (on
the 64 800 1°
× 1° gridded elements of the earth’s
surface), viz. chloromethane, (see also ref. 74) dichloromethane,
chloroform, (see also ref. 75) methyl chloroform, trichloroethylene and
perchloroethylene from anthropogenic and natural sources, including oceanic
and terrestrial biogenic formation, biomass burning and sea-salt
aerosol.Relevant topics in the inorganic geochemistry, marine and tropospheric
chemistry of chlorine will be surveyed in the following section, in
preparation for later sections dealing with the organic, biochemical and
biogeochemical role of chlorine. The latter will include relevant aspects
of the organic chemistry and biochemistry of chlorine in the hydrosphere,
atmosphere, lithosphere and biosphere.2.1 Chlorine: origins and abundanceChlorine (from χλoρoς, ‘chloros’,
meaning yellowish-green) is a member of the halogen (salt making) family,
so named by Humphrey Davy in 1811 because, at that time, chlorine was
unique in its ability to combine with metals directly to give salts.As with all elements, the overall abundance of chlorine in the universe
is governed by its formation and transformation in the process of
nucleosynthesis in stars.76,77 The
proportion of chlorine in interstellar gas and dust has been estimated from
the analysis of meteorites.78,79
Early analyses have shown the presence of 19 Cl atoms per 10000 Si
atoms78 and, more recently, 52 Cl atoms per
10000 Si atoms.79 Given that silicon is 15%
by weight of the earth,80 which itself
weighs 5 980 × 1018 t,63
it is thus possible to estimate the chlorine content of the earth’s
interior to be between 2 and 6 × 1018 t. The more recent
estimate from Anders and Ebihara79 places
chlorine 19th in the list of overall elemental abundance. Thus, while
chlorine is a trace element, except in the hydrosphere and in salt
deposits, the overall amounts present in the earth are still massive.Standard texts on geochemistry and environmental chemistry, including
later editions, for example, refs. 81–84, ignore totally or focus little on the
geochemical or biogeochemical cycles of chlorine, except in relation to the
role of chlorine in the catalysis of ozone decomposition in the
stratosphere. However, excellent recent reviews on chlorine geochemistry
have appeared from Graedel and Keene51,73 and on chlorine chemistry in soil by
Öberg85 to which readers are directed
for more detailed accounts of what is currently known.The earth may be divided into a number of geological compartments that
make up the core, mantle and crust. The crust comprises those
sub-compartments of most importance to a consideration of man’s
environment and cohabiting life-forms and which are the prime focus of this
review, viz. the atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere, pedosphere
(the soil, characterised by the presence of material in all three phases
and including an intimate mixture of living and dead organic matter) and
biosphere. Some writers82 have added the
‘anthrosphere’ to define a differentiated compartment dominated
by man’s activities.Over geological time, all components migrate within and between
geological compartments and are transported and transformed, giving rise to
global cycles and to associated ‘endogenic’ and
‘exogenic’ sub-cycles. Endogenic sub-cycles involve transport
of non-volatile elements via the magma and igneous, sedimentary
and metamorphic rocks. Exogenic sub-cycles involve volatile and
water-soluble elements in the hydrosphere, atmosphere and biosphere. These
are represented in Fig. 1, 263 and 3.85 Fig. 1  Endogenic cycles connecting the principal reservoirs in the
earth’s interior. After Faure,63
reproduced with permission.  Fig. 2  The main exogenic cycles and associated reservoirs at the earth’s
surface. After Faure,63 reproduced with
permission.  Fig. 3  Transport, transformation and storage of chloride and chloroorganic
compounds in soil. After Oberg,85
reproduced with permission. Some of the physical, chemical and biochemical processes involving
compounds of hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, sulfur and nitrogen (including
H2O, CO2/[CO3]2−,
CH4, NO2/[NO3]−,
[SO4]2−) occurring in and between these
compartments have been revealed from a range of geochemical studies
including those on the fractionation of natural isotopes. Developments in
sampling and analytical techniques used in these approaches are now
permitting such studies on the natural stable isotopes of chlorine,
35Cl and 37Cl63,86,87 and to a lesser extent on 36Cl formed
naturally by nuclear reactions involving atmospheric argon and present also
as a consequence of atmospheric nuclear weapons tests.88 The application of these techniques to attempt
to distinguish natural and anthropogenic organochlorine compounds is dealt
with in Section 7.2.2 Chlorides and the hydrosphereTables 1 and 2 and Fig. 4, taken
from the useful summary prepared by Graedel and Keene,51 list the major global reservoirs of chlorine and
estimates of the flows between them.
Table 1 Chlorine content of earth’s reservoirs51

ReservoirChlorine content (106 t)Mantle 22 × 1012Crust 60 × 109Oceans 26 × 109Pedosphere 24 × 103Freshwater320 × 103Cryosphere0.5 × 10−3Troposphere5.3Stratosphere0.4
Table 2 Estimated flux (106 t per year) of chlorine between
reservoirs51

Inter-reservoir
transferFluxMantle to troposphere 2Pedosphere to troposphereMineral aerosol15Biomass burning 3Bioproduced 0.5Crust to freshwater 175Pedosphere to freshwaterPrecipitation passthrough34Evaporite beds11Freshwater to oceans 220Oceans to troposphereSeasalt injection6000HCl from seasalt (a proportion of
seasalt injection flux)25Magma intrusion 4Bioproduced 2Troposphere to surfaceOceans5990Pedosphere34Cryosphere 6Troposphere to stratosphere 0.03Stratosphere to troposphere 0.03Oceans to crust17 Fig. 4  The earth’s major reservoirs of chlorine and natural processes
which transfer chlorine between reservoirs (see Table 1 for reservoir sizes and Table 2 for fluxes). After Graedel and
Keene,51 reproduced with permission. Chlorine is the 20th most abundant element in crustal rock,89 which Graedel and Keene51 estimate to contain 60 × 1015
t. Because of their aqueous solubility, inorganic chloride salts enter the
hydrosphere90 and, by various processes,
chloride is distributed between the hydrosphere’s sub-compartments
coupled by the hydrological cycle, viz., the oceans50,91–94 (97% of the
hydrosphere), ice sheets and glaciers (2%), deep (0.4%) and shallow (0.3%)
groundwater, lakes (0.01%), soil moisture (0.005%), rivers (0.0001%) and
the atmosphere, which contains a further 0.001% as water vapour. Estimates
of some of the fluxes of chlorine between these compartments have also been
collected by Graedel and Keene.51 The
chloride balance in soils has been reviewed by Öberg.85Dissolution of chloride in water, a consequence of the chemical and
physical weathering of igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks in
contact with water, and subsequent riverine transport, has led to the
enrichment of sea water compared with average river water by a factor of
ca. 2500. Meybeck has estimated a net flux of 3.3 ×
1012 mol Cl per year in a total discharge of 37.4 ×
1015 L of river water per year.95Elements, such as chlorine (and bromine), which are present as their
anions at high concentrations in sea water compared with river water (that
is, have high enrichment factors) are believed to be relatively unreactive
compared with elements and species with low enrichment factors, such as
sulfur or iodine. The latter are thought to be relatively rapidly removed
from seawater by various processes, including deposition in sediments
(which leads ultimately to diagenesis, i.e., re-entry into the
rock-forming cycle) or by other physical, chemical or biological processes.
An estimate of ca. 108 years has been made50 for the mean ocean residence time of chloride,
providing a measure of the apparent timescale of geological and geochemical
processes driving some of the cycles involving chloride.This apparent relative global unreactivity of chloride may have been
seen as indicating the complete lack of, or the relative unimportance of,
processes driving other geochemical or geobiological cycles involving
chlorine. However, evidence collected in other sections of this review
reinforces the view that an organic cycle for chlorine should now be
recognised, in addition to its inorganic cycle, and its important
characteristics should be better defined.The oceans, the main reservoir for chloride in the hydrosphere, contain
an estimated 26 × 1015 t of chloride.51 While it is generally thought50 that
the average concentration of chloride in sea-water has remained roughly
constant over the past 600 million years, the variation of the salinity of
the oceans over geological time is still a matter of debate.96 It is has also been argued97 that there is more chloride (and other elements
such as sodium, magnesium and potassium) in the oceans than can be
accounted for by weathering of igneous rocks in the crust, a conclusion
that relies on values of the balance ratio for chloride [balance ratio =
(the ratio of the average concentration in sedimentary rocks + oceans)/(the
average concentration in crustal igneous rocks)]. Most elements have
balance ratios98 in the range 0.8 to 1.3,
whereas, for chlorine, this ratio is ca. 150. Schilling and
co-workers have proposed99 that chlorine
from the mantle is continuously transferred into the oceans by volcanic
processes at the mid-ocean ridge and other hot-spots. Transfers of chlorine
between the mantle and surface reservoirs have also been discussed in terms
of the effects of plate tectonic processes.100Were there to be a steady state for chloride inputs to and outputs from
the oceans, then, it was believed, river-borne inputs would be balanced by
outputs to pore water buried with sediment, ion-exchange, diagenesis (the
movement of sediment into the mantle (see ref. 100)) and chemical and
biochemical processes. Only the first of these was thought to be important
for chloride. With an input to output ratio for chloride estimated to be
ca. 10, there appears to be more entering the oceans than leaving
them than could be accounted for by episodic marine evaporation that has
given rise to the enormous sodium chloride deposits around the world. It
now also appears that sea water may enter the earth’s crust along the
crest of the volcanic mid-ocean ridges to reappear as hot springs and
‘smokers’, the latter at temperatures of ca.
350°C. (See, for instance, refs. 99–102.)2.3 Sea-salt aerosolWhile it is possible that the salinity of the seas is, in fact,
increasing with time, significant losses of salt from the sea to the
atmosphere are also believed to arise in the form of marine or sea-salt
aerosol (concentrated droplets containing a variety of ionized salts (plus
smaller quantities of organic species) formed by turbulent wind and
associated wave action at the surface of the oceans103) and its redeposition over the continents. The
riverine input to the oceans must, therefore, include some redeposited
chloride in addition to that arising from dissolution by weathering.Data summarised by Graedel and Keene suggest that sea-salt aerosol
injects ca. 6 × 109 t per year of salt into the
marine boundary layer (that is, the 1 000 m of the troposphere above the
ocean’s surface). Most of the larger aerosol particles are deposited
back into the sea or washed out of the atmosphere in marine precipitation,
which contains on average 100–200 μmol
Cl−L−1. Some particles are small enough
to be transported over land where similar processes of dry deposition or
dissolution and precipitation can transfer chloride onto the continents.
The higher chloride content of vegetable matter near coasts is consistent
with this. Continental rain contains up to 15 μmol
Cl−L−1, with ca. 20 ×
106 t Cl per year of an estimated total of 34 ×
106 t Cl per year deposited on land masses arising from
precipitation. More recent estimates,58
computed with a dynamic sea-salt aerosol model coupled with a series of
relevant chemical processes described in more detail below, suggest that
sea-salt aerosol injects 2.8 × 109 t NaCl per year (1.8
× 109 t Cl per year) into the marine boundary layer, lower
than previous estimates.The importance of chlorine as a component of air over the oceans was
first recognised by Smith in 1872 who also suggested the formation of HCl
by acid displacement from sea-salt aerosol by atmospheric sulfuric
acid.104 The geochemical significance of
sea-salt deposition as the origin of most of the chloride in river water
was also recognised in 1877 by the Hungarian geologist, Posephny.105,106 (The role played by sea-salt
particles in the condensation of clouds was also recognised earlier this
century by Kohler.) The wider role of atmosphere–ocean aerosol
exchange in the biogeochemical cycling of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur and
phosphorus has been reviewed by Duce.107The suggestion that sea salt may be the source of both atmospheric HCl
as well as oxidizing chlorine-containing species has been the subject of
speculation in many early studies. This early work has been reviewed by
Altshuller108 and Eriksson.105,106 First Smith,104 then Eriksson105,106 and Robbins et al.,109 proposed that HCl is released from sea-salt
particles as a consequence of pH reduction (sea-salt aerosol from
unpolluted regions is alkaline, becoming acidic in polluted marine
air110) associated with the dissolution of
the oxides of sulfur and nitrogen or their associated acids [eqns. (1) and (2)],
which are atmospheric components with significant anthropogenic
sources. HNO3 (g) + NaCl (s) = HCl
(g) + NaNO3 (s)(1) H2SO4 (g) + 2 NaCl (s) =
2 HCl (g) + Na2SO4 (s)(2)
Nikonova and Epshtein111 showed
experimentally that solid NaCl (and, by inference, salt in sea-salt
aerosol) could react with nitric acid to produce sodium nitrate, NOCl,
molecular chlorine and water. This process was judged to be of little
importance, though, following work by Cadle and Robbins,112 Eriksson106
accepted that HNO3 could displace HCl in a manner similar to
H2SO4. In addition, Valach113 believed that the amounts of HCl found in the
atmosphere could not be accounted for by the process of
H2SO4 displacement and suggested volcanoes as an
alternative source, a suggestion refuted by Duce.114It was Cauer who, in 1938115 and again
in 1951,116 first proposed that gaseous
chlorine as Cl2 could be released from sea-salt particles. He
proposed ozone as the oxidant for chloride, though Eriksson106 argued that this reaction was probably too
slow to account for the observed amounts of chlorine in the atmosphere.
Using data from Yeatts and Taube,117
Eriksson105,106 estimated a
half-life for the conversion of chloride to hypochlorite ion (the precursor
for molecular chlorine formation) as >103 years in sea
droplets, requiring, in Eriksson’s view, a five orders of magnitude
acceleration of reaction in sea-salt particles, which he judged unlikely.
However, this would very much depend on sea-salt pH, the calculation of
which is itself dependent on the Henry’s Law constant for HCl, which
may vary widely. More recent work on halogen displacement from sea-salt
aerosol is discussed below.2.4 Hydrogen chloride and the atmosphereThe early work of Junge118 suggested
that the only gaseous form of chlorine was HCl and derived products, such
as ammonium chloride, the HCl arising from volcanic sources and sea-salt
aerosol. Junge concluded that elemental chlorine could not be formed. See,
however, Section 2.5.The main sources of atmospheric HCl are anthropogenic (such as from coal
burning and waste combustion), natural (from volcanoes and sea-salt
aerosol), a combination of the two (such as from biomass burning) and
indirectly anthropogenic (from sea-salt aerosol by reaction with the
anthropogenic component of the acids, HNO3 and
H2SO4). The latest global estimate60 suggests that (4.6 ± 4.3) ×
106 t HCl arose in 1990 from the combustion of coal (the
chloride content of coal varies between tens of parts per million (ppm) to
> 1%). In the same study, an estimated (2 ± 1.9) ×
106 t HCl was thought to arise from the burning of municipal and
domestic waste. Biomass burning62 gives
rise to volatile inorganic chlorine (predominantly HCl) and particulate
chlorine amounting to 6.3 (4.4–8.3) × 106 t, with
much uncertainty associated with variation in agricultural practice, fuel
and vegetation type and its chlorine content, combustion conditions,
seasonal factors and plume chemistry. It has been estimated119 that ca. 90% of biomass burning is of
non-industrial anthropogenic origin (savanna fires and wood and charcoal
burning being the major contributors62)
with wholly natural processes, such as fires caused by lightning strikes
and volcanic lava flows, being relatively unimportant. Graedel and
Keene73 estimate annual emissions of HCl
from volcanoes to be ca. 2 × 106 t.Because of its water solubility, HCl is readily removed from the
atmosphere in precipitation and has an associated atmospheric lifetime of
ca. 1.5 days.58,60 Some HCl
escapes from the upper atmosphere into the stratosphere, sufficient to
cause slight increases in the stratospheric global chlorine burden
particularly following substantial volcanic eruptions. For instance, the
Mount Pinatubo eruption of June 1991 released an estimated 4.5 ×
106 t of HCl,120 most of which
was scavenged in condensed water in the plume produced by the
eruption.121 The changes in the
concentration of HCl in the lower stratosphere which followed the Mt.
Pinatubo eruption have been monitored.122
(It is worth noting here that the injection of aerosols from the Mt.
Pinatubo eruption has been associated with increased chlorine dioxide
formation and with the depth and area of the Antarctic ozone hole in
1992.123)10–300 parts per trillion by volume (1 part in 1012;
pptv) HCl is commonly found in the atmosphere at the surface of remote
ocean regions, with variations over land and coastal areas. HCl
concentrations also have been found to vary with time of day, with, in
urban areas, a maximum in the afternoon. This peak may possibly be
associated with an earlier peak in HNO3, suggesting that sea
salt may be the dominant source of this HCl, via an acid
displacement process.73Sea-salt aerosol is thought to be the largest atmospheric source of HCl,
though flux estimates vary. The variation in the analyses of chloride and
other ions in sea-salt aerosol, compared with the ion content of the sea
from which the aerosol arose, consistently points to a variable chloride
ion deficit, associated with sea-salt particle size, its history, and the
local environment. The greatest chloride ion deficits are seen in particles
exposed to the most heavily polluted air masses in the northern hemisphere.
Changes in the Cl:S and Cl:N ratios point to displacement processes,
involving atmospheric sulfuric and nitric acids, which result in the
removal of chlorine as HCl from sea-salt aerosol, according to processes
shown in eqns. (1) and (2).This has been verified by Keene et. al.124 and a mechanism proposed by Laux et
al.125 Direct observation of the
replacement of chloride by nitrate on single tropospheric sea-salt
particles has been described by Prather et al.126 using aerosol time-of-flight mass
spectrometry. While estimates are currently uncertain, Graedel and
Keene,73 using two different methods,
estimated the HCl flux from this source to be ca. (37–73)
× 106 t C per year or (50–85) × 106
t Cl per year. However, more recently, an estimate (net of interparticle
exchange) smaller by a factor of about 10, 7.6 × 106 t Cl
per year, has resulted from studies58 which
modelled sea-salt production and some aspects of sea-salt chemistry in the
marine boundary layer (including reactions involving gas phase
HNO3, N2O5, NH3,
SO2, H2SO4, H2O2 and
O3). The dependence of HCl flux on sea-salt particle size, month
(greatest in February, least in July) and location (varying from 1 to 300
mg Cl m−2 per year) was also reported. The model studies
also suggest that significant fractions of HCl volatilized by acid
displacement processes may be scavenged by aerosol, resulting in a net
transfer of acid from small to large and from old to young aerosol
particles.2.5 ‘Reactive’ chlorine in the
atmosphereAn understanding of natural atmospheric chemistry is important because
many organic materials, some chlorine-containing, degrade and mineralise in
the troposphere or stratosphere, with concomitant significant direct and
indirect environmental effects, local, regional or global. It is important
for the minimisation of any deleterious impact arising from an
anthropogenic input of both chlorine-free as well as chlorine-containing
materials that such chemistry is understood.Work reviewed by Cicerone127 and by
Ryan and Mukherjee128 has highlighted the
impact on stratospheric photochemistry of long-lived chlorine-containing
materials produced and emitted anthropogenically. Chlorine atoms, oxychloro
radicals and chlorine nitrate (derivatives of so-called
‘reactive’ chlorine) are now known to be important (and
detectable) intermediates in the stratosphere129–132 with chlorine atoms and
ClO• involved directly in various cycles that lead to the
catalytic decomposition of stratospheric ozone.133Recently, the role of shorter-lived compounds (particularly of bromine,
such as bromoform (global flux 0.3 × 106 t per year;
tropical tropospheric lifetime 2–3 weeks) and dibromomethane (global
flux 0.05 × 106 t per year; tropical tropospheric lifetime
2–3 months), though also of chlorine) has been included134 in stratospheric ozone models to improve
treatment of ozone depletion in the lower mid-latitude stratosphere.
Indeed, a significant proportion (ca. 15–20% 135,136) of stratospheric ozone destruction
catalyzed by chlorine arises from atomic chlorine formed photolytically
from an everpresent background level of chloromethane.Much less attention has been devoted to the tropospheric chemistry of
reactive chlorine, though developments have been reviewed by Graedel and
Keene,73,124 Keene137 and very recently by DeHaan et
al.138 It is the result of careful
work done over the past decade that the assumption that the sole (or
chemically most important) tropospheric form of volatile inorganic chlorine
is HCl has been questioned once more and the suspected role of other
inorganic chlorine-containing species127
confirmed. Pszenny et al.139
Impey et al.140,141 and
Spicer et al.14 have recently
detected oxidizing chlorine-containing species in the marine atmosphere.
While the precise chemical nature, abundance and distribution of these
additional species remain to be unequivocally established, there is no
doubt that they are either elemental chlorine, derivatives of chlorine in a
positive oxidation state, such as HOCl, ClNO2 or
ClNO3, or other derivatives, such as BrCl, from which atomic
chlorine may be generated photochemically.The first evidence of inorganic reactive-chlorine-containing species was
reported by Pszenny et al.139 who
proposed that, on average, 100–150 pptv of such species may be
present in surface marine air, and, though the pattern of formation was
different from that for HCl, sea salt was the source.Because of the very considerable experimental and analytical challenges
involved in collecting and analysing sea-salt aerosol, it is not surprising
that there have been a number of laboratory studies which sought to mimic,
with varying degrees of success, the interactions of synthetic sea-salt
aerosol (or some surrogate) with possible oxidising tropospheric components
(HNO3, N2O5, NO2,
O3, HOBr) and to study the effect of atmospheric variables such
as temperature, humidity and light. Early investigations have already been
mentioned.105,106,111,115,116 Attention is increasingly being
focused on tropospheric ozone destruction in the Arctic, particularly
during the polar sunrise, where processes involving bromine are thought to
be more important than those involving chlorine.141–149 Iodine chemistry may also play a
role.150–152The need to understand these critical heterogeneous processes in the
atmosphere has stimulated many fundamental studies. A selection of very
recent reports includes the laboratory study of the dynamics of reactions
involving chlorine and bromine-containing or -producing atmospheric
components such as HOBr,153
N2O5, NO3 and HNO3,154–159
and XNO2, X = Cl, Br,160 with
solid alkali metal halides, of ClONO2, HCl and HOCl,161–165
BrONO2,143
ClONO2166,167 or
NO3,158 on water ice, of
XNO2168,169 or
HOBr144 on salt solution droplets and of
ClONO2 on sulfuric acid aerosol.170–172 Physical chemical studies of HOBr solubility
in sulfuric acid (and of its reaction with HCl to give BrCl),173 of Cl2 formation from aqueous HCl
and HNO3,174eqn. (3), and of BrCl aqueous solution–vapour
equilibria175 have been undertaken because
of their relevance to atmospheric processes on and in aerosol droplets (of
whatever type or origin176). 4 H+ (aq) + NO3−
(aq) + 3 Cl− (aq) = NOCl (aq)+ Cl2 (aq) + 2
H2O (l)
        (3)
      Of particular relevance is the work of Finlayson-Pitts et
al.,177–182 Behnke and Zetzsch,183–189 Vogt
et al.145,151 Sander and
Crutzen190 and Mozurkevich191 who have examined processes exemplifed by
eqns. (4)–(8) involving
simulated sea-salt aerosol. N2O5 (g) + NaCl (s) =
ClNO2 (g) + NaNO3 (s)(4a) N2O5 (g) +
Cl− (aq) = ClNO2 (g) +
NO3− (aq)(4b) 2 NO2 (g) + NaCl (s) = NOCl (g) +
NaNO3 (s)(5) O3 + 2 NaCl(s) + H2O =
Cl2 (g) + 2 NaOH (s) + O2 (g)(6) ClNO2 + H2O = HOCl +
HNO2(7) HOBr + Cl− + H+ =
BrCl + H2O(8)
In 1974, Schroeder and Urone192 first
reported that nitrosyl chloride and sodium nitrate could be formed in the
heterogeneous reaction of NO2 with crystalline sodium chloride,
eqn. (5). Recent work by Weis and
Ewing193 has established the stoichiometry
for this process in situ by exposing particles produced by
atomizing aqueous synthetic sea-salt solutions to 1–3 mbar
NO2 at low (9–30%) relative humidity (RH).
Finlayson-Pitts181 showed that this
reaction occurs down to ppm levels of NO2, suggesting that it
should be considered alongside reactions of HNO3 and
N2O5. However, it is N2O5 which
is thought to be the most significant source of ClNO2 formed
via a night-time reaction with sea-salt aerosol.
N2O5 may be formed in the atmosphere from the
reaction of NO2 and ozone, giving NO3 which reacts
further with NO2. Laboratory measures of the reaction
probability associated with eqn. (4a)
decline with increasing humidity, but yields are still ca. 30%
even at RH of 92%.187,188 Reactions
involving ozone have also been studied,146,180,184–186,189,194
including a very recent laboratory investigation195 of the oxidation of mixed solutions of NaBr,
NaCl and HNO3 in which ozone reacts with bromide according to a
variant of eqn. (6), viz. eqn. (6a), followed by eqn.
(8). O3 + H+ +
Br− = O2 + HOBr(6a)The reaction of ozone, hydrocarbons and sodium chloride aerosol (in smog
chamber experiments189) is found to
require the presence of bromide in the aerosol for activation.Vogt et al.145 have proposed
an autocatalytic role for bromide in the formation of
‘positive’ chlorine-containing species in the remote and
unpolluted marine boundary layer. Hypobromous acid, formed by bromide
oxidation, may itself be scavenged by chloride ion in sea-salt aerosol to
generate bromine chloride according to eqn.
(8) which may be subsequently photolysed, eqn. (9). Reactive bromine is also reportedly
released from the  BrCl +
hν = Br• + Cl•(9)
Dead Sea, though by processes occuring on the surface of salt pans, rather
than as a consequence of reactions on aerosols.147 Very recently, Vogt et al.151 have suggested from modelling studies that
iodine (originating from the atmospheric degradation of biogenic alkyl
iodides, particularly CH2I2, CH2ClI,
CH3I, C2H5I and
C3H7I) may further accelerate bromine and chlorine
release from sea-salt aerosol by processes such as eqns. (8a) and (8b). HOI +
Cl− + H+ = ICl +
H2O(8a) HOI + Br− + H+ =
IBr + H2O(8b)Species such as IO196 (also recently detected at lower
latitudes152) and BrO147,196 (see ref. 197 for a recent study)
have been estimated spectroscopically in the polar marine boundary layer.
Modelling suggests such species have a profound influence on ozone-loss
processes.Only very poor estimates for the overall production rates of reactive
chlorine species are currently available, spanning the range
<100–800 × 106 t Cl per year.73 There are also few reliable estimates for the
production rates of individual species. Erickson et al. have
suggested from recent modelling studies58
that ca. 60 × 103 t Cl per year arise in the form
of ClNO2. There is thus a major need for further research to
better understand these processes, fluxes and their implications.Species such as BrCl, Cl2, ClNO2 and HOCl may
photolyse to generate chlorine atoms (eqns.
(9)–12)) the
most likely fate of which is to react, as in eqn.
(13), with C–H groups by atom abstraction to form HCl and
organic radicals which may react further with oxygen via well
known reaction pathways. The  Cl2 +
hν = 2 Cl•(10) ClNO2 + hν =
Cl• + NO2(11) HOCl + hν = HO• +
Cl•(12) Cl• + R-H = HCl +
R•(13)
potential for the HCl produced to be scavenged by undersaturated sea salt
would complete a cycle proposed by Keene et al.110,124 and modelled by Erickson et
al.58 Other possible fates of such
chlorine-containing species are discussed below.In addition to chlorine-atom formation from eqns. (9)–(12), eqns.
(14) may also be a possible
source. HCl + OH• = H2O +
Cl•(14)
These possibilities have led to a discussion of the role of chlorine atoms
in atmospheric oxidation chemistry, as the hydrogen abstraction reaction by
chlorine atoms (eqn. (13)) is generally
faster than the corresponding process for hydroxyl radical, (eqn. (15)),198 the
principal atmospheric oxidant. For  OH• +
R-H = H2O + R•(15)
example, for R = CH3 at 298 K, the second-order rate constant
for reaction with Cl• is ca. 15-fold larger than
for the corresponding reaction with OH•. It is possible,
therefore, that relatively small concentrations of chlorine atoms could
still play a significant part in atmospheric oxidations. It is to be
expected that processes involving ‘reactive’ chlorine will be
most important in the marine boundary layer.The acceptance of the importance of processes involving chlorine atoms
depends crucially on estimates of the chlorine atom concentration in the
atmosphere and the unequivocal detection in the unpolluted atmosphere of
elemental chlorine from a natural source. It is significant, therefore,
that Spicer et al.14 have recently
reported the direct observation of elemental chlorine at concentrations
between <10 and 150 pptv, at night-time at a North American coastal site
during the flow of onshore winds from unpolluted marine sources.Graedel and Keene73 have brought
together estimates of chlorine-atom concentrations in the marine boundary
layer. These range from 103 atoms cm−3 (in the
global troposphere, from models of eqn.
(14)) to 105–106 atoms
cm−3 (estimated for the North Atlantic in summer from
Cl-deficits in sea-salt aerosol, assuming chlorine to be the primary
species produced). Such estimates are controversial, since if the
concentration is >104 atoms cm−3, elemental
chlorine must be seen as playing an important and hitherto unacknowledged
role in atmospheric chemistry of the marine boundary layer.Indirect evidence for the role of chlorine (and other halogens) in
atmospheric chemistry has been sought from field observations and modelling
of ozone depletion in the Arctic troposphere199 and from the simultaneous measurements of the
concentrations of nonmethane hydrocarbons, such as ethane, propane and
n-butane, in aged air masses arriving at a sampling point. Changes with
time in the ratios of one hydrocarbon in an air mass to another (and plots
of ln[alkane(1)]/[alkane(2)] vs. ln[alkane(3)]/[alkane(2)])
(assuming, amongst other things, that diluting air adds neglible additional
hydrocarbon) have been simulated using kinetic data for reaction of the
alkanes with hydroxyl radical. The involvement of other oxidants, such as
halogen atoms, has been invoked to improve the fit between calculation and
observation. Parrish et al.,200
Singh et al.201 and Rudolph
et al.202 have concluded that
chlorine chemistry is not important in these processes. On the other hand,
in studies of the Arctic polar sunrise in 1992 (Jobson et
al.203), 1994 (Ariya et
al.204) and 1995 (Ariya et
al.205), chlorine atoms have been
implicated in ozone depletion events and alkane chemistry after the polar
sunrise (hydroxyl-radical chemistry dominating prior to the sunrise). In a
recent report,206 model-fitting of
experimental data from over 1400 whole air samples collected over the
southern ocean, 700 from the marine boundary layer, 300 from the free
troposphere and the remainder from the buffer layer, produced estimates of
average [HO•] of (6.1 ± 0.3) × 105
radicals cm−3 and [Cl•] of 720 ±
100 atoms cm−3. The change in the ratio of the
concentrations of a pair of reactive tropospheric organics is likely to be
greater, the greater the difference in rate constants for reactions with
different oxidants. On this basis, Rudolph et al.207 estimated, from measurements of tropospheric
ethane and tetrachloroethylene, upper limits for chlorine-atom
concentrations in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres to be 1 ×
103 and 2 × 103 atoms cm−3,
respectively, concluding that chlorine-atom induced processes were
unimportant. Remeasurement of the rate constants for the reaction of
tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene with chlorine and bromine atoms
enabled Ariya et al.208 to model
Arctic troposphere ozone depletion episodes which yielded much higher
estimates of the (daytime) concentration of bromine (107 atoms
cm−3) compared with chlorine (104 atoms
cm−3). The basis of these studies could be confounded were
significant local natural sources of trichloroethylene and
tetrachloroethylene to be found, a possibility that is discussed further in
Section 4.2. The variation of the concentration of ethyne during the Arctic
sunrise also points to a significant role for bromine atoms. In very recent
work, Ramacher et al.209 propose,
from hydrocarbon measurements, that free chlorine contributes only
ca. 1% of the ozone loss during episodic tropospheric ozone
depletion events which occur during the Arctic spring, with bromine atoms
being the predominant cause (>92%) of depletion. This further reinforces
suggestions (see refs. 141–149, 204 and elsewhere) that tropospheric
ozone loss in the marine boundary layer, particularly during the Arctic
sunrise, is driven primarily by autocatalytic processes involving bromine.
Barrie and Platt199 and Platt and
Moortgat210 have provided brief overviews
of this topic. Sunrise ozone destruction in the sub-tropical marine
boundary layer has also been associated with chemical processes involving
bromine.211 Rudolph et al.212 have recently employed halogen-atom
concentration estimates obtained from studies of hydrocarbon losses to
investigate the possible effect of bromine and chlorine chemistry on the
concentration of formaldehyde in the Arctic troposphere during ozone
depletion events at the polar sunrise. Recently, reductions in the
13C/12C ratio for carbon monoxide which occurred
during episodes of ozone depletion during the Arctic spring have been
ascribed to oxidation of methane initiated by elevated concentrations of
chlorine atoms formed during these episodes.213Ragains and Finlayson-Pitts214 (and
more recently Wayne and colleagues215)
have studied the kinetics and mechanism of the gas-phase reaction of
chlorine atoms and isoprene 9 (450 × 106 t of
which is emitted naturally to the atmosphere each year216), methacrolein and methyl vinyl ketone.
Product studies217 suggest that
ca. 15% of the reaction proceeds via an allylic
hydrogen-atom abstraction and the remainder via chlorine addition
to a double bond, giving compounds such as 10 whose detection in
the environment (as ‘sentinel’ compounds) would provide
evidence of the importance of these natural processes. An excellent
precedent that the collection of such evidence may be possible arises from
recent reports of the detection in ambient air of five organic nitrates
derived from isoprene.218 Mechanistic
studies for the reaction of 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol with HO•
and Cl• have also been reported.219  Chlorine photochemistry has also been proposed to account
for anomalies in the oceanic sources and sinks for atmospheric dimethyl
sulfide which cannot be accounted for satisfactorily by processes involving
known oxidants such as hydroxyl and nitrate radicals.220 Discussions of the atmospheric decay of
dimethyl sulfide have also suggested a role for bromine chemistry.221The linkage between cycles involving the halogens, iodine, bromine and
chlorine has already been mentioned (and will be discussed further in
Sections 5 and 7 in the light of recent work222 on enzyme-mediated halide exchange on
monohalomethanes). Japanese workers have recently described the formation
of bromine from the interaction of chlorine and both synthetic and natural
sea salt.223 On the other hand, Goliff and
Rowland have concluded that replacement of iodine or bromine by atomic
chlorine is not important as a source of atmospheric CH3Cl,
having shown224 experimentally that
CH3I and CH3Br yield only 8.6 and 0.6% of
CH3Cl respectively on reaction with thermal chlorine atoms.2.6 Chloride as an essential co-factor in
photosynthesisThe oxidation of water to oxygen in photosynthesis is essential to most
life on earth.48 Two photosystems (PSI and
PSII) are involved in the critical parts of the photosynthetic process.
PSII, a transmembrane protein complex, catalyzes water oxidation (and the
reduction of plastoquinone to plastoquinol). A photoexcited chlorophyll
species, P680, loses an electron to become P680+, the electron
acceptor in water oxidation, which is rereduced by a manganese cluster
complex.48,225 This oxygen-evolving
complex consists of a cluster at the core of which are 4 manganese
ions.226 The complex is oxidised by
P680+via a series of five cluster oxidation states
(designated S0–S4) with concomitant oxidation
of water to oxygen, the latter released on production of S4.
Chloride ion has been found to be an essential co-factor in these
processes,48,49,226–231 with Cl− depletion
leading to a complete (though reversible) inhibition of oxygen evolution.
This is thought to occur by interference with the redox chemistry of the
manganese cluster. Fine and Frasch232 show
that chloride prevents the formation of hydrogen peroxide and suggest that
chloride prevents access to the active site of the oxygen-evolving complex
until the accumulation of the four oxidizing equivalents needed to convert
water to O2. More recently, chloride ion has been found to be
necessary for the S2–S3 and
S3–S0 transitions but not the
S0–S1 or S1–S2
transitions.233 The synthesis of model
clusters containing the [Mn4O3X] core, X = Cl, Br,
has been reported (see for example ref. 234) which display some of the
physical and chemical characteristics of the oxygen-evolving complex,
though none yet replicates all the critical features.3. Organochlorine compounds: diversity, ubiquity
and functionAny attempt to define an elemental cycle must seek to establish the
identity, sources, sinks, distribution, reservoirs and fluxes of all
materials containing the element, organic and inorganic, within and between
the various geological and environmental compartments and sub-compartments,
as well as providing an understanding of the processes, physical, chemical
and biological, that give rise to their formation, transformation,
transport, storage and destruction, and an appreciation of the consequences
of their presence, and how all these phenomena change on various spatial
and temporal scales. Even well studied cycles, such as those for carbon and
oxygen, are far from complete.Despite much work, the definition of a cycle for chlorine is, to say the
least, at its very early stages. However, in one respect, a great deal is
now known. This section summarises evidence concerning the natural
formation of organic compounds containing chlorine.3.1 HistoryGeneral perceptions regarding the non-natural origins of organochlorine
compounds may be contrasted with the wider recognition of natural sources
of organic compounds of iodine, such as thyroxine 11 and
3,5-diodotyrosine 12. In 1896 Dreschel reported the isolation from
the gorgonian Gorgonia cavolinii of an organic compound with the
empirical formula C4H8NIO2, the first
natural product demonstrated to contain carbon–halogen bonds.235 The isolate was subsequently shown to be
3,5-diodotyrosine by Henze in 1907.236,237 The isolation of the hormone thyroxine was not
reported until 1915.238 However, it is
Tyrian purple, the royal purple dye of antiquity,239,240 produced from the extracts of the Mediterranean
mollusc, Murex brandaris, that can probably lay claim to be the
first known organohalogen. The production and use of Tyrian purple was
described in the first century AD by Pliny the Elder,241 though it was not until 1909 that
Friedländer established it to be the dibrominated indigo derivative
13.242 Diploicin 14, a
depsidone extracted from a lichen by Zopf in 1904,243 may be considered to be the first isolated
chlorine-containing metabolite, though reports of its characterisation did
not appear until June 1934.244,245
However, chloratranorin (another ubiquitous chlorinated depside isolated in
1907, also by Zopf246) probably qualifies
as the first chemically characterised example. The characterisation of
chloratranorin as 3-hydroxy-4-methoxycarbonyl-2,5-dimethylphenyl
3-chloro-5-formyl-4,6-dihydroxy-2-methylbenzoate 15 was announced
by Koller and Pöpl in May 1934,247
and described more fully shortly afterwards.248 St. Pfau (in a paper received for publication
on 30 August 1934249) also reported its
isolation and structure at about the same time. The subsequent discoveries
of erdin 16, geodin 17 in 1936 (in a study partly funded
by ICI),250 griseofulvin 18 (in
1939)251 and caldariomycin 19 (in
1940)252 began a slow progression of
reports that, by the time of Fowden’s survey in 1968,253 had amounted to only 30 or so natural
organochlorine compounds. This enabled Doonan, in a review of the
biochemistry of carbon–halogen bonds published in 1972,254 to say ‘The number of compounds
containing covalently bound halogens which are produced by living organisms
is very small’. On the other hand, Fowden, writing at the same time
and more circumspect regarding the paucity of evidence, wondered
‘just how restricted the distribution of this class of compounds
would appear if a systematic survey of living organisms were made using
more sophisticated methods for detecting halo-constituents?’.253  Fowden’s scepticism proved well founded with evidence
of the diversity of naturally occurring organohalogen compounds having
become recognised only in the past 10 or so years, particularly since the
First International Conference on Naturally Produced Organohalogens255 in Delft in 1993. Gribble has been especially
assiduous in tracking these developments in a series of authoritative and
comprehensive reviews.256–261 (See ref. 257 for a listing of earlier
surveys). At the latest count (April 2000),16 Gribble has documented 3357 organohalogens, 1978
of which contain chlorine. New reports now amount to several hundred per
year. Wider awareness of, and appreciation of the significance of, the
range of chemical types, the array of organisms which produce them, their
distribution, abundance and role, is occurring more slowly. In 1993, the
year of the Delft conference, it was possible to be told with apparent
authority: ‘Another category of materials which raise particular
problems in the environment is that of synthetic substances; that is,
substances which do not exist in any signficant quantity in nature, but
only arise as a result of anthropogenic activities. Among this category,
for instance, we find almost all the chlorinated organic
compounds’.262 As late as 1998, a
review on drinking water disinfection by-products failed to draw attention
to the natural contribution to the formation of such materials.263In the section that follows, typical examples are given to illustrate
the structural diversity of organochlorine compounds found in nature and
the many chemical functionalities now known to be present in
chlorine-containing compounds produced and transformed biotically and in
other natural processes. This illustrative selection is not intended to be
comprehensive. For this, the reader is referred to Gribble’s
compendious review of 1996257 and later
surveys. Later sections in this review deal with the sources, functions and
transformations of organochlorine compounds. These will introduce
additional examples of this class of materials.3.2 DiversityA large number of chlorine-containing C1 - C2
alkanes, such as 20, 21 and 22, are known, some
with wide distribution and great abundance, arising from many terrestrial
and marine sources, discussed further in Sections 4 and 5. Chlorinated
alkenes 23,264 polyenes
24265 and alkynes (including
polyacetylenes 25266 and
enediynes 26267) have also been
described. Functionalised cycloaliphatics, such as caldariomycin
19,25227268 and 28268,269 isolated from the fungus, Mollisia
ventosa, are also known and contain high proportions of covalently
bound chlorine.Marine and terrestrial organisms are responsible for the production of a
wide range of terpene derivatives, many of which are halogen-containing.
Chlorine-containing materials include monoterpenes, such as
29,270 alicyclic monoterpenes
(e.g. 30,271,272
one of several isolated from the ubiquitous red alga, Plocamium
cartilageneum) sesquiterpenes, such as jaeschkenol 31,273 from an Himalayan plant, diterpenes and higher
terpenes.  Heterocycles are exemplified by pyrroles, such as
32,274 a natural product (unusual
in also having a nitro-group) with antibacterial properties, Tyrian purple
13,239,240 indoles with
growth-promoting properties isolated from peas 33,275–279
carbazoles (e.g.34 being a very rare example of a
chloroorganic isolated from a mammal280)
carbolines, furanones, benzofurans, and other aza- and oxa-heterocycles
(including many glycopeptides, exemplified by the important antibiotic,
vancomycin 1). Surprisingly, chlorinated benzodiazepines
(e.g. diazepam,
7-chloro-2,3-dihydro-1-methyl-5-phenyl-1,4-benzodiazepin-2-one 35)
also have natural sources. Using monoclonal antibody techniques the
existence in the brain of benzodiazepine-like compounds has been
demonstrated.281 Studies on brains stored
in paraffin since 1940 (that is, prior to the introduction of synthetic
benzodiazepines) and on a food product harvested in 1958 suggest that the
presence of benzodiazepines, such as diazepam, does not arise from
environmental contamination. Increased levels of benzodiazepines in
germinating wheat and potato favour the view that these materials are of
plant origin. That found in mammalian tissue probably arises from food
intake. The amounts concerned are tiny, since about 10 ×
103 t of potatoes would have to be consumed instantly for any
pharmacological effects to be experienced.281  Chlorinated steroids (the first reported example being
36282), the fatty compound
malhamensilipin A (noteworthy for containing the 2-chlorovinylsulfate
moiety 37283), prostaglandins
(e.g. 38284 from a brown
alga), amino acids and peptides (such as the bis(trichloromethyl)
derivative dysidenin 39,285 from
a marine sponge), alkaloids (40,286 a potent analgesic, from an Ecuadorean tree
frog or 41287), macrolides and
quinones (3-chloroplumbagin, 42288) have all been isolated and characterised from
natural sources.In addition, a range of phenols (e.g.43289–291) and the fungal
metabolites 44292 and
845 (representative of an
extensively studied group of natural products discussed in more detail in
Section 4.3), derivatives of tyrosine (such as 45293) and more complex compounds containing
carbonimidic dichloride 46,294
cyclopropane 47,295 cyclobutane
48,296 epoxy, lactone,
N-oxide 49,297
isonitrile 50,298 and
trichloromethyl 39285 and
51299,300 moieties have
been isolated from bacteria, phytoplankton, fungi, algae and lichen,
bacteria, terrestrial and marine plants, sponges, ascidians, bryozoans,
worms, corals, insects, higher animals, frogs and humans, volcanoes,
minerals and meteorites, sediments and soil.  Noteworthy among more recent developments is the isolation
and partial characterisation301 from the
eggs of a range of sea birds of a series of halogenated bipyrroles, the
most abundant of which is a
1,1′-dimethyl-tetrabromodichloro-2,2′-bipyrrole 52.
The highest concentrations (34–140 ng g−1 (wet
weight)) are found in Pacific Ocean surface feeders, though significantly
none is found in herring gulls from the relatively more polluted Great
Lakes region of North America. Gribble et al.302 have recently communicated the independent
synthesis and characterisation of
5,5′-dichloro-1,1′-dimethyl-3,3′,
4,4′,-tetrabromo-2,2′-bipyrrole, the most abundant of the
series isolated by Tittlemier et al.301 The related hexabromo-2,2-bipyrrole is a known
marine bacterial metabolite.303 Seven
organochlorine metabolites, 53–59, isolated
recently304 from diseased bulb-scales of
the edible lily, Lilium maximowiczii, are believed to arise from
enzymatic chlorination following infection by the fungal pathogen
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. Lilii.3.3 UbiquityIt is reasonable from the foregoing to conclude that organochlorine
compounds may be present in all the earth’s environmental
compartments. (In fact, there is an early report,305 independently confirmed,306 that chlorine-containing compounds may be
found, along with other predominantly aromatic material, in carbonaceous
chondrites, that is, meteorites containing about 1% extractable organics.
It is suggested306 that these compounds
arise from from equilibrium processes in the solar nebula, though their
formation from reactions of chlorine atoms produced radiolytically by the
interaction of chloride with cosmic rays cannot be ruled out. The possible
extra-terrestrial origin of organic compounds is a matter of current
controversy.307,308) As inorganic
chlorine is widely distributed throughout the earth’s crust and the
oceans,51 it is also reasonable, a
priori, to suggest that organochlorine compounds may also be produced
naturally in any of these compartments. The fluxes of such naturally
occurring chlorine-containing organics in and between these compartments
and the associated sources, sinks and reservoirs would thus characterise a
series of geochemical and biogeochemical cycles and sub-cycles. The nature
and extent of these fluxes, sources, sinks and reservoirs will be
determined by the processes which generate the chloroorganics, the physical
properties of the compounds formed and the chemical and biochemical changes
to which they may be subjected.We discuss in this section some of the factors which govern the extent
to which organochlorine compounds may be found and formed in the
earth’s major environmental compartments, viz. the
atmosphere (Section 3.3.2), oceans and the polar ice caps (the
‘cryosphere’), fresh-water bodies, such as rivers and lakes
(Section 3.3.3), soil, sediment and groundwater (Section 3.3.4). Naturally
formed chloroorganics differ widely in terms of their physical and chemical
characteristics, being volatile, semi-volatile, involatile, hydrophilic and
lipophilic, reactive or inert, depending on their chemical structure. As a
consequence, a chloroorganic produced in one compartment may exchange into
other compartments via gaseous, liquid or solid phase transfer
and, thereby, become more widely distributed. Transfer into a different
medium will lead to further opportunities for chemical and biochemical
transformation and even ultimate mineralization to release inorganic
chlorine.These inter-reservoir or inter-compartment processes are particularly
important for an appreciation of the global distribution of alkyl halides
(Section 4.1), the origins and fluxes of trichloroacetic acid (Section
4.2), formation of fungal metabolites (Section 4.3), the origins and nature
of soil-derived chlorinated organics (Section 4.4) and of
‘dioxin’ (Section 4.5).To characterise fully a chlorine cycle, therefore, it will be necessary
to (i) quantify the amounts of specific compounds, organic and inorganic,
in the various compartments, (ii) identify their source strengths and fate,
(iii) establish mass balances within defined compartments and
sub-compartments of the different compounds of organic and inorganic
chlorine, (iv) quantify the fluxes of compounds between and within
compartments, (v) identify the physical processes by which transport and
phase transfer are brought about, (vi) establish the precise mechanisms
(and associated critical variables) by which chlorine-containing compounds
are formed and the factors which influence the propensity for these
processes to occur, (vii) measure the variation of these fluxes temporally
(diurnally, seasonally), spatially (locally, regionally, globally) and
climatically and (viii) characterise any interaction with other important
elemental cycles and associated geochemical and geophysical phenomena, such
as global atmospheric and oceanic circulation.The collection of data on which such understanding will arise has hardly
begun. The challenge is clearly linked with the complexity,
inter-relatedness and dynamics of the processes which characterise the
natural world. Some of these factors are introduced here. For further
information the reader is referred to standard texts such as refs.
81–84 and 94.3.3.1 Biotic vs. abiotic. Earlier sections have considered geochemical sources and fluxes of
inorganic chloride. It is, of course, possible that chloride ion and HCl
may generate organochlorine compounds naturally by chemical processes known
to occur in vitro, provided suitable substrates are present under
conditions in which a chlorinated product might form and accumulate.
Volatile organochlorine compounds emitted from volcanoes may well have
arisen from (possibly metal-catalyzed heterogeneous) chlorination and
oxychlorination processes occurring at the elevated temperatures
involved.309 In addition, it has been
proposed that chloromethane may arise from bromomethane or iodomethane by a
simple nucleophilic displacement involving chloride ion310–314 [eqn. (16)] (processes recently shown to be mediated
enzymatically222). MeBr (aq) + Cl− (aq) = MeCl (aq) +
Br− (aq)(16)
Abiotic halomethane formation has very recently been reported315 to arise from the oxidation of guaiacol
(2-methoxyphenol, a humic acid surrogate) by iron(III) (in the
form of ferrihydrite (5Fe2O3·9H2O))
in the presence of halide ion.With brominated compounds such as bromoform being formed in large
quantities (0.1–1.0 × 106 t per year) particularly
in the polar regions, it is likely that CHCl3 and the mixed
haloforms, CHClBr2, CHCl2Br, may also arise, at least
in part, by halide-exchange reactions.316
By analogy, this allows the speculation that reaction of chloride ion with
ethylene dibromide, detected in significant quantities in ice pools in the
Arctic,317 may lead to
1-bromo-2-dichloroethane and ethylene dichloride. The latter has hitherto
been thought to be entirely man-made, being produced (though not emitted)
in huge quantities industrially for conversion to vinyl chloride and thence
to PVC. This example serves to underline the importance of the need fully
to characterise and understand the chlorine cycle and its inter-related
natural and anthropogenic components.Organochlorine compounds also arise via biochemical
chlorination (discussed in detail in Section 5). In fact, reaction 16 is
now known to be enzymatically catalyzed by a soil organism, though much
more extensively studied are the enzymatic reactions involving
peroxide-induced oxidation of chloride ion which give hypochlorous acid.
There is also evidence that hypochlorous acid may be formed from
peroxidases, hydrogen peroxide and chloride ion in soil. Such processes may
lead to a range of products of electrophilic chlorination derived from soil
organic matter such as humic and fulvic acids. The extent to which these
reactions should be viewed strictly as biotic or abiotic chlorinations is a
moot point and will be governed by the degree to which free hypochlorous
acid is released to the ambient environment. We have also seen that
so-called ‘reactive’ chlorine (possibly HOCl or a reservoir of
electrophilic chlorine, such as ClNO2, ClONO2) may be
formed on or in sea-salt aerosol by oxidation with O3,
NO3 or NO2. While there is, so far, no evidence that
such reactive chlorine is the source of organochlorine compounds this
cannot be entirely ruled out.Whatever their function, and this is discussed in Section 3.4, it is
undoubtedly the case that many chlorine-containing organic natural products
are to be found in the aqueous and terrestrial environment and in the
atmosphere, being formed biotically (from bacteria, phytoplankton, fungi,
algae and lichen, terrestrial and marine plants, sponges, ascidians,
bryozoans, worms, corals, insects, frogs, higher animals, including humans)
and from natural geochemical and atmospheric processes. Gribble has very
recently surveyed259 organochlorine
compounds from the point of view of their origins. The presence of
organochlorine compounds in coal deposits testifies to the ancient capacity
of the earth to produce compounds containing carbon–chlorine bonds.
Reports of their isolation from carbonaceous meteorites point to possible
extra-terrestrial sources.305,3063.3.2 Atmospheric. The atmosphere, including the troposphere and stratosphere, will be the
most important reservoir for volatile compounds, including halogen- and
chlorine-containing organics. Emissions to the atmosphere will arise from
the oceans, seas, lakes and rivers, from volcanic activity (a recent
report318 suggests that, of >300
organic compounds emitted from four volcanoes, 100 were
chlorine-containing), from land-based biota (arising directly from natural
biological processes and from the combustion of biomass), from soils and,
of course, from human activity in all its forms. Emissions may occur
directly or the chloroorganic may be conveyed into the atmosphere by
aerosols and particulates, arising from wind and wave activity at the
surface of the seas and oceans, from dust particles originating from soil
erosion, volcanic activity or from soot arising from combustion processes.
Losses from the atmosphere may involve transfer to (and via) such
particulates (and precipitation) which themselves may be deposited on the
seas, polar ice-caps and land masses. An organochlorine, emitted locally
from a point source, will be dispersed and diluted by the expected physical
processes driven by concentration and temperature gradients and by
meteorological processes driving the movement of air masses, locally and
globally. Atmospheric transport via particulates (e.g. of
the dioxins or polychlorinated biphenyls, PCBs) and in precipitation
(e.g. of the haloacetic acids, such as trichloroacetic acid) are
important processes for the movement of semivolatile, involatile and
hydrophilic compounds, even though there is a negligible atmospheric burden
of these materials. Some losses occur via the stratosphere to
space. Global circulation, meteorological and climatic factors, and
inter-hemispheric exchange will lead to transport and mixing. The burdens
of a particular material detected at a particular point in space and time
will be governed by an integration of these various factors along with its
atmospheric lifetime, linked to the susceptibility of the material to
atmospheric degradation, particularly by photochemical or oxidative
decomposition. (The role of hydroxyl radicals and the possible involvement
of chlorine atoms in this latter process has been discussed in Section
2.5.)As noted earlier, the Reactive Chlorine Emission Inventory (RCEI) study
has provided the most authoritative assessment to date55–62 of the
distribution of the sources (natural and anthropogenic), reservoirs and
fluxes of the most important atmospheric chloroorganics (chloromethane,
dichloromethane, chloroform, trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene).
However, indicative of the uncertainties in the available data (including
such fundamental parameters as Henry’s Law constants (see, for
example, ref. 319)) and the tentative and provisional nature of conclusions
based on them, the RCEI study has revealed that the sources of
chloromethane, the best studied of all the organohalogens, may need to be
split more evenly between marine and terrestrial sources. In addition,
insufficient source strengths have been identified to account for the
(3–5) × 106 t annual production necessary to
maintain its global mean tropospheric concentration. The hunt for
additional sources of (1–2) × 106 t per year of
chloromethane is now on. Recent studies have focused on salt marshes,
wetlands and ruminants as possible sources. Coastal salt marshes, in which
chloromethane-producing halophytes, such as Mesembryanthemum
crystallium and Batis maritima,320,321 grow in great abundance, give rise to an estimated
170 × 103 t of chloromethane of natural origin.322 Recent atmospheric halomethane
measurements323, 324 confirm the
potential importance of coastal sources. Estimates based upon studies of
wetland sites in the northeastern USA suggest that the global annual flux
of MeCl from this source may be only ca. 50 × 103
t.325 CH3Cl emission from
cattle is an insignificant source amounting to only ca. 1 ×
10−3 g/cow/day (compared with ca. 150 g
methane/cow/day) (amounting to a total source strength from cattle
worldwide of ca. 500 t per year).326 Natural formation of volatile halogenated
methanes has been reviewed by Wever327,328 and Harper.329–331 Of relevance are two recent
reports332,333 which conclude that
higher plants may be both sources and sinks for bromomethane in the
atmosphere.Chloromethane is approximately uniformly distributed in the atmosphere,
consistent with predominantly natural sources, at a concentration of
ca. 600 pptv. There are few studies of its seasonal
variation,74 but such variation appears to
be linked with the cycle of OH•, the oxidant which
initiates MeCl removal from the atmosphere. About 85% of the MeCl emissions
arise in the tropical and sub-tropical latitudes, between 30° S and
30° N. While marine sources, such as algae and phytoplankton, have
previously been considered most important (see Section 4.1), a reassessment
of the inputs from terrestrial sources, such as biomass burning,62,334–338
and from wood-rotting fungi,339 is
timely.Crutzen et al. were the first to detect chloromethane as a
product of biomass burning.334 Global
emissions, based on a small savanna region in Western Africa, were
estimated to be ca. 0.5 × 106 t per year.335 Biomass burning is also an important source of
dichloromethane and a possible minor source of C2Cl4,
C2HCl3, CHCl3 and CCl4. The
amounts produced are dependent on the types of biomass burned, its chloride
content, combustion efficiency and the rate of heat release.336 It has been estimated that ca. 70% of
chloromethane emitted during biomass burning occurs at the smouldering
stage.340 The best estimates of global
emissions are 0.64 × 106 t Cl per year for MeCl and 49
× 103 t Cl per year for
CH2Cl2.62An early report of the formation of chloromethane by potato
tubers341 (a minor source) has recently
been confirmed,342 with a biogenic origin
established342 rather than the initially
proposed accumulation from the atmosphere.341In addition to the C1 species, chloromethane,
dichloromethane, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, partially brominated and
iodinated analogues, and even chlorofluorinated materials (such as
CFCl3, CF2Cl2,318,343–345 in volcanic gases emitted
to the atmosphere at 103 to 104 times background
concentrations, though contributing only minimally to the global burden of
these compounds), higher chloroalkanes, including derivatives of propane,
butane and pentane, have been reported, largely from marine sources such as
algae, studied in situ or in the laboratory. Unfortunately,
accurate source data for chlorine-containing alkanes, other than the simple
C1 and C2 chloroorganics, are few and flux estimates
even less reliable.Chloroform, with an average atmospheric concentration at the
earth’s surface of 18.5 pptv and a global emission rate of
(0.35–0.60) × 106 t per year,75 has both marine and terrestrial sources, from
algae, fungi,346 trees and fruit. It is
also transformed from brominated precursors by halide exchange and arises
from soil processes involving humic materials, chloroperoxidase,
exocellular hydrogen peroxide and chloride ion (see Section 4.3).
Australian termites are known to produce chloroform at 1000 times higher
concentrations in their mounds than in ambient air and give rise to a
signficant flux to the atmosphere.347 Soil
fungi also produce chloroform de novo346 and release it to soil air. From studies in
Danish forests,348 chloroform
concentrations in soil air were, respectively, 6.7-, 4.3- and 4.6-fold
higher than ambient for spruce forest, beech forest and grassland.
Release-rate studies in a spruce forest point to a biogenic origin.Atmospheric and oceanic analyses (including several reports of
oversaturation of trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene in the remote
oceans) and inventories of industrial production and use point to
significant larger global fluxes of the industrially important solvents
(used predominantly in dispersive uses) trichloroethylene,
perchloroethylene and dichloromethane than can be accounted for from
anthropogenic sources. In fact, the recent Reactive Chlorine Emissions
Inventory study has concluded56 that
ca. 25% of CH2Cl2, 10%
C2HCl3 and 5% of C2Cl4 detected
in the atmosphere are emitted from the oceans. Recent reports that algae
produce trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene349–351 have not been confirmed,
however,352,353 though evidence for
natural sources of both trichloroethylene354 and perchloroethylene355 continues to be reported.Recent evidence for the role of chlorine atoms as atmospheric oxidants
will focus attention on the possible formation of compounds with
carbon–chlorine bonds in the atmosphere from reaction with chlorine
atoms and their abundance, flux and function. The primary product of the
reaction of chlorine atoms with hydrocarbons present in the atmosphere is
expected to be HCl, formed by hydrogen-atom abstraction. However, addition
of chlorine atoms to unsaturated atmospheric components is also possible,
though subsequent reactions may simply lead to complete oxidative
breakdown. Very recently, though, Finlayson-Pitts and co-workers217 have suggested that isoprene, an important
naturally occurring hydrocarbon in addition to generating non-chlorinated
oxidation products during atmospheric breakdown mediated by chlorine,
produces the chlorine-containing product 1-chloro-3-methyl-3-buten-2-one
10. Such compounds may, therefore, act as markers
(‘sentinel’ compounds) for inorganic reactive chlorine in the
atmosphere.In addition to being an important vehicle for removing inorganic
chloride from the atmosphere, precipitation in all its forms can do the
same for hydrophilic chloroorganics, such as the chloroacetic acids. Global
atmospheric circulation ensures that such precipitation in remote regions,
such as the Arctic and Antarctic, may contain such material, depending on
their distribution (and that of their precursors) and atmospheric lifetime.
The environmental chemistry of the chloroacetic acids is dealt with more
fully in Section 4.2.Precipitation in the form of partially consolidated snow
(‘firn’) may trap ambient air. In the polar regions where such
material collects continuously, analysis of the trapped air for trace
haloorganics has allowed depth (and hence age) profiles for these materials
to be obtained (below about 30 m, transport of constituent gases is
believed to occur mainly by molecular diffusion). Using air samples from
firn collected at three sites, two in the southern hemisphere, Butler
et al.356 have established
preliminary histories for the concentrations of CFCs in firn air consistent
with their recent anthropogenic origin. The concentration of chloromethane
over most of the 20th century appears to have been roughly constant.3.3.3 Hydrosphere. 3.3.3.1 The seas and oceans. The hydrological cycle links the oceans, the earth’s crust, land
surface, including lakes, terrestrial ice fields and groundwater, and the
atmosphere. The water fluxes between these reservoirs are prodigious. Their
importance in the cycle of inorganic chlorine has already been
described.To an extent limited by the availability of appropriate nutrients and
energy sources, the oceans’ biota (see, for example, Fig. 2 of ref. 357) is dependent on the production
of organic matter by the primary producer, phytoplankton. Photosynthesis
occurs in a relatively shallow surface layer (<200 m). Primary
production can also occur in the isolated ecosytems located near
hydrothermal vents. An important component in the seas’ life-cycles
is the production and consumption of particulate organic matter (arising
from the excretion from and death of marine organisms) either in suspension
or following deposition in marine sediments.The organic chemistry of marine metabolites is, surprisingly, itself
only a relatively recent area of major study.357 Most of the marine organic matter comprises
compounds of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur. Some of these
will be volatile or capable of dissolving or being solubilised in seawater.
These can be transported and lost from the oceans to the atmosphere,
accumulated by other organisms, transformed chemically or biochemically to
other compounds or completely decomposed to inorganic species, such as
water, bicarbonate, nitrate and sulfate. The fate of these marine organic
compounds will depend on their stability and reactivity and the location of
their production. It is possible that they may be adsorbed onto
particulates and deposited in sediments and ultimately be processed by
diagenesis into crustal rocks. The seas are the source of a wide range of
exquisitely complex organic compounds, a proportion of which are also
halogen- and, more particularly, chlorine-containing. The structural types
and functionalities represented among the non-halogenated metabolites are
also typical of those seen for halogen-containing metabolites, suggesting
that the latter do not represent a unique class of marine natural products.
Such compounds are produced by various marine organisms, including seaweed,
microalgae and phytoplankton, sponges, sea hares, sea slugs, coral and
fish. Bearing in mind the enormous oceanic production of biomass in the
presence of chloride ion at ca. 0.1 M NaCl, it would be
surprising if this were not the case. Future research will undoubtedly add
to the number and diversity of both chlorine-containing organics and
chloro-organic producing organisms.Marine sources of the halomethanes are discussed in more detail in
Section 4.1. Volatile organochlorines produced by marine organisms will
partition into the aqueous phase and be transported, vertically and
horizontally, along oceanic currents and to the sea-surface where they will
equilibrate with the ambient atmosphere. It is possible that some of the
volatile organochlorine compounds found in the sea may have originated from
atmospheric (and from terrestrial) sources and have partitioned into the
sea in the reverse of this process. Local high marine production of a
volatile organochlorine may lead to the phenomenon of oversaturation
(governed by factors such as sea temperature and the compound’s
concentration in adjacent air masses and their temperatures). Observation
of such phenomena may provide support for a natural marine source of an
organohalogen, but this is not invariably the case. For instance, a
volatile organohalogen in the atmosphere may equilibrate with a sea mass
with which it is in contact at a low temperature. The sea mass may then be
transported to a region of higher temperature. Slow sea-to-air mass
transfer may lead to oversaturation. The tendency therefore for the sea to
be either a source or sink for volatile organohalogen compounds (such as
the haloalkanes and haloalkenes) is evident and arguments for a natural
source based on oversaturation should be treated cautiously in the absence
of additional evidence. This is discussed further in Section 4.1.Involatile organochlorine compounds produced by marine organisms may be
deposited in marine sediment on excretion or on the death of the organism.
Some may be solubilised by marine surface-active agents and collect in the
lipophilic microlayer that exists on the surface of natural waters,
including the oceans.176,358 It is
possible that some of the organic material which collects at the ocean
surface may be entrained in sea-salt aerosol and be subject to further
physical transport and possible chemical change (including chlorination,
though evidence on this latter point has not so far been described).Some organochlorine compounds, natural or anthropogenic, will also find
their way into the seas as components of river water. Much of this will be
so-called adsorbable organic halogens (AOX) derived from humic material
arising from the breakdown of vegetation and other biotic debri. Some mass
balance studies of the transport to the sea from the drainage of river
systems have been undertaken which confirm the need to recognise natural
sources in addition to anthropogenic.359
The deep sea has been suggested360,361 as the ultimate global sink for persistent organic
pollutants.3.3.3.2 Rivers and lakes. Fresh-water natural sources of organochlorine compounds are also known,
arising from aquatic organisms or by processes associated with the
transformation and degradation of soil organics, particularly fulvic and
humic acids. Establishing that, in part at least, these chlorine-containing
products are truly of natural origin has posed a number of experimental and
analytical challenges, not least associated with their polydispersity and
complex nature. In fact, the greater part of such organochlorines is
extremely difficult to characterise and is known collectively as AOCl
(adsorbable organic chlorine). Much of that finding its way into rivers or
streams is likely to have originated from waters leaching or draining from
the soils (see Sections 3.3.4 and 4.4). Very little is known of their
precise chemical structure, though some clues arise from an awareness of
common structural elements found in humic substances, from studies of model
systems and from the nature of chlorinated aromatic and other compounds
isolated from soil environments.Additional complexities have arisen because of the chemical similarity
(and in some cases identity) between anthropogenic pollutants (or their
degradation products) and materials generated naturally, as well as the
similarity of the chemical processes responsible for natural chlorination
of humic materials and those involved in water disinfection using chlorine.
It is an intriguing possibility that mutagenic compounds detected in water
treated with chlorine, such as 60, and thought to have arisen from
humic materials as a consequence of such treatment, may also arise through
similar processes involving natural chlorination.  Particular environmental concerns have arisen from the
release into the aquatic environment of chlorinated materials in the form
of pulp mill effluent associated with chlorine bleaching processes in paper
making. Such effluent comprises a complex mixture of several hundred
chlorinated organics. Fresh water mussels, Anodonta anatina, from
an unpolluted lake in Finland, incubated for 12 months in a lake which
received pulp- and paper-mill effluent, led to an extractable organic
halogen (EOX) content of the mussels of 2045 μg g−1 of
lipids, pointing to significant bioaccumulation of organochlorines.362 Of interest, however, was the observation that
the mussels prior to exposure to the polluted lake contained 690 μg EOX
g−1 of lipids. While atmospheric deposition might account
for some of the detected organochlorines in mussels from the unpolluted
lake, it was concluded that an additional natural source was necessary.
Evidence that the chlorinated fatty acids, particularly dichloromyrisitic
acid, present in mussels and fish, may be of partly natural origin is
discussed by Mu et al.363,364 Similar material, quite probably the 9,10-isomer,
CH3(CH2)3CHClCHCl(CH2)7
CO2H, has also been isolated from the digestive gland of
lobster.365 (The care needed in
approaching the discussion of the possible natural or anthropogenic origin
of a chlorinated organic in such systems is underlined by the observations
of Hamilton et al. who have shown that bacteria grown on
chloroalkanes may incorporate chlorine into long-chain fatty acids in
cellular lipids rather than effect complete mineralization.366,367) That the AOX present in river
systems may, in part at least, be of natural origin is supported by
observations on the river Rhine discussed in more detail in Section
4.4.368–3703.3.4 Pedosphere. 3.3.4.1 Soils. The soil comprises an intimate, complex and dynamic mixture of minerals
and the organic debris (‘humus’) from dead plants, animals and
microorganisms, undergoing chemical and biochemical aerobic and anerobic
change on various timescales, with some of the products of such change
being released into soil air (which will slowly equilibrate with the
ambient atmosphere) or dissolved, solubilised or suspended into water
deposited as precipitation, and which leaches through the various soil
layer into groundwater. The chemical transformations of humic materials
have recently been reviewed.371The health and productivity of soil is vital for its continuing
contribution to photosynthesis as well as its use in agriculture. In the
latter context, a current controversy surrounds the use of bromomethane as
a soil fumigant. Accurate estimates of the emissions of bromomethane from
soil are necessary for a proper assessment of the contribution of such an
agricultural use to ozone depletion by bromomethane. Uptake of bromomethane
by soils has thus been subjected to various studies. (See for instance
refs. 372, 373 and a recent relevant report.222)Organochlorine production in soil and sediment has been less extensively
investigated. Local, regional and episodic studies however have permitted
tentative estimates of the quantities of organochlorine compounds present
to be made. For example, Öberg85 has
concluded that the chlorine content of organic material in soil is similar
to that of phosphorus, thus highlighting a significant though largely
overlooked constituent of soil.Soil organisms are important potential sources of organochlorine
compounds. For instance, an actinomycete, Saccharothrix
aerocolonigenes, isolated from a soil sample from Panama, in culture
biosynthesis,374 rebeccamycin 61,
reported to inhibit the growth of human lung adenocarcinoma cells.375 The role of fungi, known to produce both
volatile and involatile organochlorines in considerable quantities, is
dealt with in more detail in Sections 3.4 and 4.3.Studies reviewed by Öberg85 suggest
that the organic matter to be found in temperate evergreen forest soils
contains 0.05% of organically bound chlorine. The degree of chlorination
increases with soil depth (possibly associated with leaching), reaching
2–10 mg organically bound chlorine per g organic carbon. Estimates of
the reservoir of organically bound chlorine in the top 60 cm of such soil
range up to 0.6 t ha−1. The factors which control
productivity and distribution of these materials have been little
studied.In addition to the introduction of pollutants, organochlorines in soil
may arise from deposition from the atmosphere, from vegetation or from
processes of soil chemistry and biochemistry371 (such as may arise from the presence of
chloroperoxidase-like enzymatic activity in soil376). It is believed85 that processes of chlorination are particularly
efficient since the net rate of organochlorine formation is independent of
chloride ion concentration in the soil (which varies from a few to hundreds
of ppm). Natural organochlorine production is proposed to account for the
four-fold greater average total organic chlorine content of water draining
from 32 different forest and bogs in Finland compared with the rain water
deposited on the forests and bogs.377Immobilization (and remobilization) of organochlorines in soil humus has
also been reported, with such studies, having initially been devoted
primarily to discovering the fate of chloroorganic pollutants, now
demonstrating that naturally occurring analogues may also be
involved.378–384 It is likely that similar processes will
also immobilize and remobilize chlorine-containing materials that arise
de novo in the soil by natural processes. In laboratory studies,
complete reductive dechlorination of trichloroethylene (giving ethane and
ethylene as the major products) was reported385 to occur involving titanium citrate and nickel
complexes of humic acid, giving rise to the speculation385 that humic acid–metal complexes may
mediate related reductions in the environment. Other recent studies have
suggested that humic substances may effect dioxin dechlorination.3863.3.4.2 Sediments. Sediments arise from the deposition of fine particulate matter (and
entrained water) from lakes, rivers, estuaries and the seas. Sediment will
thus comprise both mineral, organic and living material, some dissolved in
pore water, some adsorbed on the surface of particles. Chemical and
biochemical transformation will also occur on a range of timescales, though
bearing in mind the location of sediment with limited access to atmospheric
oxygen, these are likely to be predominantly anaerobic reductive processes.
Some physical transport may take place within these sediments associated
with the movement of organisms (‘bioturbation’). However, at
depth in thick sediment bioturbation may be quite limited, enabling
depth-profiling and aging to occur, so that the history of the sediment and
its composition may be traced (‘paleolimnology’ or
‘chronostratigraphy’). This has enabled the build-up and
transformation of pollutants to be studied, and the presence of materials
such as dioxins in the sediments to be traced back to before the advent of
large scale purposeful production, use and emission of organic compounds
containing chlorine.3.3.4.3 Groundwater. Accumulation of groundwater in aquifers provides important sources of
drinking water.The presence of any potentially toxic material in such water
bodies will be of concern. The poor storage and unacceptable disposal
practices of hydrocarbon and chlorine-containing organics has resulted in
the contamination of some groundwaters used for the supply of drinking
water.However, groundwater collects having trickled though the soil
(‘infiltration’), after having been deposited on the soil in
the form of precipitation. Such precipitation may contain organics (some of
which may be chlorinated) washed out from the atmosphere (or contain
particulates as condensation nuclei on which semivolatile or involatile
organics (some chlorine-containing) have been deposited). Further organic
material may be picked up from vegetation with which the precipitation
comes in contact before entering the soil (‘throughfall’).The residence time for groundwater may be very long, so the detection of
chlorinated organics (such as AOX) in aquifers containing water as old as
the end of the last ice age would provide further evidence that some
organochlorine compounds have ancient origins. However, determination of
the age of dissolved organic material by 14C isotope
measurements is fraught with difficulties and uncertainties remain in their
interpretation. Chlorinated organics in groundwater may be subjected to
both aerobic and anaerobic degradation, the former being associated with
groundwater closer to the surface. Release of chloride ion may lead to
materials with a lower degree of chlorination. Furthermore, the processes
of chemical and biochemical breakdown may generate products of low enough
molecular weight or with appropriate functionality to permit the release of
halogen-containing compounds from sediment into groundwater.Much more data are required (and of greater precision) before it is
possible to quantify the sources, fluxes and sinks of organochlorine
compounds for an overall chlorine cycle However, it is pertinent to point
out the very great difficulty in unequivocally distinguishing between those
materials which arise directly from the release of man-made organochlorine
compounds (or which are produced adventitiously from industrial processes),
those formed by human non-industrial activities, those generated naturally
and those transformed in the environment. This important aspect is dealt
with in Section 7.It is however now beyond reasonable doubt that the presence of
organochlorine compounds in the environment predates the advent of the
modern chlor-alkali industry and even the period which saw the evolutionary
development of early man. Evidence exists (some of which is discussed in
more detail in Section 4.4) of the presence of organochlorine compounds in
ancient coal deposits of pre-historic origins, in sediments and groundwater
thousands years old and even in meteorites.3.4 FunctionHaving established that natural compounds of chlorine are abundant,
widespread, chemically diverse, and produced (and released) by many
different organisms, it is reasonable to address how these compounds arise
(discussed in Section 5.1), whether these materials have any identifiable
function and, if so, what these might be. The few instances where these
questions have been addressed are described below. This should become a
very active and fruitful area of future research.Much of the early interest in organochlorine metabolites centred on the
antibiotic properties of fermentation products, such as chloramphenicol
62, griseofulvin 18, aureomycin 63 and
vancomycin 1.387 However, later
work on the toxicology and pharmacological properties of some reactive
polychlorinated organic pollutants led to the generalisation22 that the presence of chlorine must automatically
render a compound more toxic than its non- or less-chlorinated analogue. In
a recent survey, Naumann388 using hitherto
unpublished data, finds this generalisation to be erroneous, showing, not
surprisingly, that organically bound chlorine may behave like any other
chemical substituent to affect, either beneficially or deleteriously, some
required characteristic in fulfilling a particular biological or
pharmacological function, often by position rather than by mere presence.
This may be illustrated with three of the many examples assembled by
Naumann: replacement of the 4-chloro by H in griseofulvin 18, or
moving it to the 2-position, renders the material inactive; the highly
active insecticide imidachloprid 64 is rendered barely active by a
shift of the 2-chloro to the 6 position, as in 65. The well known
(non-chlorinated) fungicide benomyl 66 is rendered much less
active by the incorporation of a chlorine into the benzene ring
67.Chlorine affects the physiological or biological properties of a
molecule by altering its physical or chemical properties. It is the
differences in combinations of effects, governing the solubility, polarity,
partition coefficient, enzyme active-site binding constant and reactivity,
that control the differing biological properties of a pair of molecules,
differentiated only by the presence, absence or site of substitution of a
chlorine atom. The chlorine atom need not be reactive to have a biological
effect. It may change the acidity or basicity (or electrophilicity or
nucleophilicity) of a nearby group through inductive or conjugative
transmission of its electronic influence. Because of its relatively large
van der Waals radius, it may affect non-bonding interactions at active
sites or even dictate conformational preferences necessary for biological
activity. (In the case of the antibiotic vancomycin 1, chlorine is
found to be crucial in enforcing the required conformation to achieve
receptor binding.389) Chlorine’s
lipophilicity and effect on dipole moment may also affect solubility and
partitioning. It may engage in hydrogen-bonding. A chlorine substituent may
render a molecule more reactive, hydrolytically, reductively or
oxidatively. It will be a combination of all these factors that governs at
the molecular level the physiological role of organochlorine compounds
produced by organisms and their effect on other organisms with which they
come in contact. The overall conclusion is that chlorine is not an
intrinsic toxophore.388It seems likely that, in some cases at least, living organisms produce
organochlorine compounds to fulfil specific purposes, though at present
these functions are poorly understood. For example, formation of volatile
organochlorine compounds, such as chloromethane, may effect the removal of
chloride ion. Saini et al.390
have proposed that higher plants which find halide ion (and hydrogen
sulfide ion) phytotoxic may eliminate them in this way. On the other hand,
bearing in mind that the generation of oxidants, such as hypochlorous acid,
is used for biological defence, such as phagocytosis, it is also possible
(as most organisms appear to accumulate halide ions in excess of the
minimum needed for normal growth253) that
some chlorinated organics arising from hypochlorous acid are adventitious
by-products devoid of utility. The recent report15 that tyrosine residues in human low density
lipoprotein may be chlorinated in vivo by the body’s defence
processes may provide such an example, though more work needs to be done to
establish this point. Bearing in mind the association of the chlorinated
protein with atherosclerotic lesions, a possibly fruitful line of enquiry
may arise from work on the role that chlorine-containing tyrosines, such as
68, 69 and 70, found in proteins, isolated from
the cuticle of locusts293 and from
molluscs,391 play in the enhanced adhesion
between protein fibres and sheets.392 In
the human body, halogenated products such as thyroxine 11 have an
established physiological role and the brominated product,
1-methylheptyl-γ-bromoacetoacetate 71,393,394 probably so, but this requires further study (see
Section 5.3).  On
the other hand, organohalogen compounds in general and organochlorine
compounds in particular are purposefully produced for defensive purposes
(and as anti-feedants), particularly by a range of marine organisms. For
example, Haminoea cymbalum (the Guam ‘bubble shell’)
uses kumepaloxane 72 as a feeding deterrent against carnivorous
fish.39572 is exuded in the
mucus when the organism is disturbed. It is not known whether 72
is acquired by the organism in its diet or whether it is biosynthesized.
However, it is not found in the green alga Canterpa racemosa on
which the bubble shell grazes. The sea-slug, Diaulula
sandiegensis, is also known to secrete a number of chloroacetylenes
(e.g. 25266) as
defensive agents. The organochlorine metabolites
53–59, isolated304
from diseased bulb scales of the edible lily, Lilium maximowiczii,
function as antimicrobial compounds (‘phytoalexins’) in a
process of dynamic resistance. The fact that these naturally formed
pesticides are unstable points to the possibility of designing
chlorine-containing pesticides with lower environmental persistence.
Epibatidine, a toxin isolated from the skin of the Ecuadorian tree frog,
Epibobatides tricolor,286 having
the structure 40, was subsequently found to have analgesic
activity significantly greater than that of morphine. The activity arises
from a completely different mechanism of action. Because it is possible
that a class of pain-killers devoid of the dependency problems of morphine
may arise, several pharmaceutical companies have taken an interest in
epibatidine to establish wholly synthetic routes.396,397 However, epibatidine itself was found to be
unacceptably toxic. Synthetic analogues such as
(R)-5-(2-azetidinylmethoxy)-2-chloropyridine 73 have been
subsequently identified with improved therapeutic ratios with,
significantly, chlorine still needed for activity.398In contrast, the chlorinated compounds 2,6-dichlorophenol 43
and blattellastanosides A 74 and B 75 behave as
attractants rather than repellants, that is, as insect pheromones. The
phenol acts as a sex pheromone for several species of tick.289,290 Studies of the incorporation of
36Cl from 36Cl-enriched NaCl into 2,6-dichlorophenol
establishes a de novo synthesis by the tick.291 The German cockroach, Blattella
germanica, uses 74 and 75 as aggregation pheromones
to mark its harbouring sites.399 The use
of 36Cl-labelling also reveals de novo synthesis400 of
1-(3,5-dichloro-2,6-dihydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)hexan-1-one 76,
produced by the slime mould, Dictyostelium discoideum, to trigger
morphogen differentiation, that is, the transformation of undifferentiated
cells into fruiting bodies.401
4-Chloroindole-3-acetic acid 33 (first isolated from peas in
1968276,277) and its methyl ester,
are among a number of chlorinated compounds isolated from higher
plants.278 It is known from
36Cl labelling experiments278
that many such plants incorporate chloride ion into organic compounds
similar to the chloroindole derivatives. Compound 33 and its
methyl ester have been shown to be present at between 0.01 to 10 mg
kg−1 (fresh weight) in a range of leguminous plants such
as green pea, sweet pea, lentil, vetch. They are believed to be natural
plant growth hormones involved in seed development.279The extensive study of the formation of chlorinated secondary
metabolites from fungi (see Sections 4.3 and 5.1) has included
investigation of their possible function. Harper has demonstrated402–410 that chloromethane acts as a methylating
agent or methyl donor in the biosynthesis of anisoles and methyl esters by
a range of fungi (some, in fact, not chloromethane emitting) involved in
the degradation of lignin.411 The related
chlorine-containing anisyl metabolites e.g.8,
77, 78 studied by de Jong et al.412,413 have a physiological role in lignin
degradation, serving as substrates for aryl alcohol oxidases involved in
extracellular hydrogen peroxide production. This is further described in
Section 4.3.Bearing in mind its ubiquity, massive global natural production and
atmospheric lifetime, tropospheric chloromethane currently contributes
significantly to the chlorine loading in the stratosphere.134,135 As there are likely to have been
marine and terrestrial natural sources of chloromethane for as long as
algae, fungi and other organisms have existed, chloromethane will have been
involved in processes of catalyzed stratospheric ozone decomposition over a
similar period. Lovelock has, thus, proposed that chloromethane acts as a
natural regulator of stratospheric ozone.52,53 It is not known whether or not the absolute
contribution to stratospheric chlorine loading from chloromethane has
remained constant over time. However, bearing in mind that one source,
rotting wood, is likely to have declined significantly over human history
because of deforestation, it is possible that the current contribution from
this source is also lower than before significant forest clearance
began.3394. Important natural sources of organochlorine
compoundsSome aspects of the organic chemistry of chlorine occurring naturally to
have been subjected to particular scrutiny are reviewed in this section.
Much of this work has been driven by the need to understand the impact of
some industrial processes which directly or indirectly release chlorinated
organics into the environment. While potentially hazardous releases of any
man-made chemical should be avoided, the formation (and destruction)
through natural processes of such materials should provide evidence-based
targets for future environmental quality standards as well as insights on
which to base approaches for the remediation of polluted sites.4.1 Chloroalkanes from marine sourcesThe detection of low molecular weight halocarbons in sea water may
signify either a pollution source or a natural source. Air–sea
exchange may lead to loss to or pick up from the atmosphere. Oceanic and
atmospheric transport will globally distribute such compounds.
Transformation and degradation, both biotic and abiotic, can be also
expected. Early work on this topic has been summarised by Fogelqvist414 and Fabian.415The oceans are important sources (as well as sinks416) of polyhalogenated alkanes.417–419 Even algal communities
found under polar ice shelves generate these compounds in significant
quantities.420,421 Evidence
suggests that chlorinated products may be formed directly but, in addition,
chemical exchange between biogenically produced brominated and iodinated
materials and chloride ion is also possible. Lovelock first suggested that
the ocean was a major source of chloromethane.52,422–424 Manley and Dastoor
reported,425 from both field and
laboratory culture studies, that CH3Cl, CH3Br and
CH3I formation is associated with the giant kelp,
Macrocystis, preferring a kelp-metabolism source rather than one
involving ‘epiphytes’, i.e., algae or bacteria
associated with the seaweed. However, they concluded that chloromethane is
not formed as a consequence of the known abiotic halogen exchange reaction
with iodomethane.310–314 Further studies have investigated
Arctic426–428 and
Antarctic426,429–432 red, brown and green macroalgae.
Antarctic macroalgae show429 10–50
fold lower rates of release of MeCl (34.7 pmol g−1 (wet
algal weight)9 per day) MeBr (1.98) and MeI
(1.68) compared with temperate species. Interestingly, among the several
brominated compounds produced in significant quantities is
1,2-dibromoethane,426,431 a
compound also detected in Arctic ice pools.317 While variation in light conditions influenced
the formation and release of 12 volatile halogenated compounds from four
species of Antarctic macroalgae, including chloromethane, no clear
relationships could be delineated.430
Pedersén et al.433 have
related halocarbon production to illumination and the presence of hydrogen
peroxide and propose that these products are formed in the scavenging of
H2O2 and could possibly simply be secondary products
resulting from oxidative stress. Release of halogenated compounds was found
to occur from all parts of the thallus of a series of 28 Antarctic
macroalga.431 From more detailed studies
on 6 species, it was observed that the highest rates of production came
from species with highest surface-to-volume ratio, indicating the formation
of volatile halogenated organic compounds in photosynthetically- and
metabolically active cortex (surface-located) cells. Brominating and
iodinating activity was found432 in 18
cultivated species of red, brown, and green macroalgae from the Antarctic.
Chlorinating activity was detected in only the red alga, Plocamium
cartilageneum. Brominating activity was found428 in the blade only, while iodinating activity
arose in the whole thallus of Arctic macroalgae. No evidence for
chlorinating activity was found. Because estimates of chloromethane
productivity of seaweeds fall far short of the proposed total oceanic
source, attention has also been focussed on phytoplankton as sources of
haloorganics in general434 and
chloromethane in particular, with Tait and Moore providing the first
evidence of MeCl production associated with phytoplankton cultures.435 Seven species of phytoplankton (including
cold- and warm-water organisms) were found to produce MeCl and to continue
to do so after cell death. Formation of MeCl, MeBr and MeI by phytoplankton
under axenic conditions has now been confirmed by Scarratt and
Moore.436,437 However, direct
measurements of the chloromethane concentration in sea water (and a recent
determination of the Henry’s Law constant for MeCl319) suggest that the contribution to global
oceanic chloromethane production from this source is insignificant,438 with the net flux estimated to be
(0.3–0.4) × 106 t per year.319 A similar conclusion has been arrived at
independently for iodomethane production.439Variations in the chloromethane concentrations and partial pressures in
waters of the NW Atlantic and Pacific Oceans can be accounted for by
variations in sea-surface temperature, with warmer waters all consistently
supersaturated. However, there was no correlation440 between chloromethane concentrations and the
presence of chlorophyll a (an indicator of biological activity and
biomass productivity; see for example ref. 441). For bromethane, similar
studies suggest, for waters of the Labrador Sea, that a biological
consumption process is likely.442
Measurements of negative saturation anomalies for bromethane in the
Southern Ocean point to a similar sink for this compound443 (see also ref. 444). Happell and
Wallace445 conclude that photochemical
production of iodomethane is the dominant source in the open ocean.Bromoform has a natural flux of ca. 106 t per year
and its marine origins have been extensively studied.420, 446–448 Chemical exchange to give
CHClBr2, CHCl2Br and CHCl3 is possible,
though in a study of volatiles produced in beds of Laminaria
digitata off the west coast of Scotland, Nightingale et
al.449 confirmed the in situ
production of haloorganics (CH3I, CH2Br2,
CHBr3, CHBr2Cl, CHBrCl2,
CHCl3). The authors do not favour formation of these compounds
by release of HOBr into seawater and subsequent reaction. Release rates can
be influenced by partial dessication, light availability, tissue age,
tissue wounding and grazing. No CCl4,
C2Cl4 or C2HCl3 was detected.
The authors suggest that chloroform can be produced directly in the
presence of a chloroperoxidase. D-Mannitol has been proposed as
a possible precursor to haloform formation from marine algal
byproducts.450Walter and Ballschmiter have shown that when commercial chloroperoxidase
(not of marine origin) and biogenic carbonyl compounds are incubated
together with chloride, bromide or sea salt as halogen source, a variety of
polyhalogenated methanes and acetones are produced.451 Related studies on acetic
acid/KBr/chloroperoxidase gave CHBr3 as the main product and
CHBr2Cl and CHCl2CHCl2 as
by-products.452 The chlorinated products
were believed to have arisen from the 500 μg g−1 of
Cl− in the KBr reagent. Interestingly, Urhahn and
Ballschmiter report453 that when
methionine methyl sulfonium chloride,
[(HO2C)CH(NH2)CH2CH2SMe2
]+Cl−, was incubated with commercial
chloroperoxidase, halide ion and hydrogen peroxide only the
monohalomethanes were formed in high yield, whereas substrates with
carbonyl- and sulfur-activated methyl groups, –C(O)CH3,
–S(O)nCH3, n = 0, 1, 2, gave
di- and trihalomethanes and no monohalomethanes. Interestingly, amino acids
and natural peptides produce dihalogenated acetonitriles,
CHCl2CN (see also ref. 454) or CHBr2CN (characterised
by GC retention times compared with reference compounds), materials already
identified as being produced during deliberate chlorination of natural
waters, and other as yet uncharacterised compounds. The authors suggest
that halogenated nitriles may be ubiquitous in the natural environment.
Biogenic formation of monohalomethanes appears to proceed via a
metabolic pathway not involving the haloperoxidases.4.2 Chlorinated acetic acidsNothing exemplifies better the uncertainties (and the associated
controversy) surrounding the origins of chlorinated organic compounds found
in the environment than the case of the chloroacetic acids, particularly
trichloroacetic acid (TCA) which was used as a herbicide for many years
though its use is now regulated. On the basis of a half-life for
biodegradation in soil estimated455 to be
between 14 and 90 days, trichloroacetic acid is not expected to accumulate
in soil. Because of their low Henry’s Law constants (expressed as atm
M−1),456 chloroacetic
acids formed in atmospheric processes will be very efficiently scavenged by
precipitation and may be introduced into the soil by this pathway. However,
concentrations of TCA found in soil457
cannot be accounted for solely by that deposited in precipitation, pointing
to natural sources in the soil. Partitioning from water to air can be
considered negligible, resulting in different distributions in and
transport between environmental compartments of chlorinated acetic acids
compared with those for weakly dipolar low molecular weight chlorinated
organics.The ubiquitous presence of chlorinated acetic acids, particularly
trichloroacetic acid, in precipitation thus points to an atmospheric
source, possibly from the degradation of volatile organochlorine compounds.
The detection of TCA in arboreal lichens on conifers was also ascribed to
an atmospheric source. Concern has arisen because the presence of
chlorinated acetic acids has been associated with tree damage in
forests.458–463 While haloacetic acids are demonstrably
phytotoxic at high concentrations, others remain sceptical that, at the
concentrations typically detected in rainfall and surface waters, they are
the prime cause of forest decline. For instance, Finnish workers have
undertaken studies on germination, growth and related studies on pine
seedlings.464–467 Concentrations of TCA in conifer needles
taken from rural forests of northern Finland,465 which vary between 1–180 μg
kg−1, are similar to those in needles taken from the
relatively more polluted areas in central Europe.468 Other studies show that Scots pine
seedlings464 take up TCA both via
the needle surface and the roots. In exposure studies,467 repeated application of TCA over two simulated
growing seasons via either the root or the needles of pine
seedlings at concentrations higher than those found in rain and soil water
resulted in no visible symptoms of stress. However, a consequence of this
exposure was the metabolic breakdown of TCA and the observation of enhanced
activity of enzymes in the pine needles associated with detoxification
processes.The proposition that chlorinated acetic acids (and some carbon
tetrachloride) arise primarily from the degradation of synthetic
chlorinated solvents, such as perchloroethylene, trichloroethylene and
1,1,1-trichloroethane in the troposphere has been widely repeated.460,461 Certainly, the detection462 of locally high concentrations of
trichloroacetic acid in pine needles taken from 13 sites in the catchment
area of the Caspian Sea has been linked with inputs of perchloroethylene of
an industrial origin. However, the general presumption that TCA in
vegetation or precipitation in remote regions arises solely or
predominantly from anthropogenic precursors has only more recently been
challenged,468,469 opening up a
fierce debate.470 This has arisen as a
consequence of better understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of these
products and evidence to suggest that some of the chlorinated solvents may
themselves have natural sources. 1,1,1-Trichloroethane, which has no
significant natural sources (though some may be produced in biomass
burning62), is believed by Jordan and
Frank470 to be the prime source of
atmospheric TCA, arising from the oxidation in cloud water of chloral
generated by photo-oxidation of 1,1,1-trichloroethane. However, Hoekstra
and Juuti470 have challenged this view
citing estimates471 that only 0.06%
1,1,1-trichloroethane degrades in the atmosphere to give TCA via
formation of chloral, despite the dominant importance of chloral as a
primary degradation product. Franklin and Sidebottom472 suggest that only 1.6% of chloral is taken up
by clouds. Assuming complete conversion of all chloral hydrate in cloud
water to TCA, e.g. by processes analogous to those known to
convert formaldehyde hydrate to formic acid473 leads to estimates of TCA concentrations in
precipitation472 of ca. 20 ng
L−1 (based on 1,1,1-trichloroethane levels in the
atmosphere in the early 1990s). These levels are ca. 10 times
lower than those measured in central Europe between 1991 and 1997.With atmospheric lifetimes of 19 weeks and 6.5 days respectively, for
C2Cl4 and C2HCl3, most of these
chlorinated olefins will be degraded in the troposphere and little
transported to the stratosphere. (Degradation in the stratosphere is likely
to lead to phosgene stable enough to be transported to the troposphere and
hydrolysed.474,475) It is thus
important to know the relative contributions of the different pathways and
the identity of intermediates and final products associated with the
atmospheric degradation of unsaturated chlorinated organics such as
C2Cl4 and C2HCl3. See ref. 476
for a review on the atmospheric fate of C2Cl4. A
particular difficulty has been applying understanding of oxidation
processes under laboratory conditions to the circumstances of the
atmosphere. Laboratory studies on the free-radical oxidation of
C2Cl4 and C2HCl3 show that it
is initiated by chlorine-atom addition, giving dichloroacetyl chloride and
trichloracetyl chloride as the main products, respectively (hydrolysis of
which leads to DCA and TCA). However, atmospheric degradation of organic
compounds is believed to be dominated by reactions with hydroxyl radicals.
On the other hand, the rate constant for chlorine addition to
C2Cl4 is ca. 300-fold larger than that for
the addition of OH.476 (The critical ratio
of chlorine to hydroxyl addition rates to C2HCl3 is
only 30.) The importance of these two pathways, eqns. (17) and (18), to chloroacetic acid formation will thus
depend on the relative concentrations of Cl• and
OH• in the atmosphere and on the nature of the products
arising from the pathway initiated by hydroxyl addition. CCl2CCl2 +
Cl•
→
CCl3CCl2•(17) CCl2CCl2 +
OH•
→
HOCCl2CCl2•(18)Hithero, chlorine atoms have not been considered important in
atmospheric oxidation processes, a conclusion that is being reconsidered in
the light of recent observations summarised in Section 2.5. Franklin and
Sidebottom,472 using published rate data
and averaged [OH•] and [Cl•] of
106 and 500 radicals cm−3, respectively, have
calculated that 87% of tropospheric C2Cl4 reacts with
hydroxyl and 13% with chlorine atoms. However, it is recognised that these
are rough global averages and that the
[Cl•]∶[OH•] ratio is likely to vary
spatially and temporally (see Section 2.5). Franklin and Sidebottom472 further assumed that only the Cl
atom-initiated oxidation pathway leads ultimately to TCA, via the
intermediate formation of the pentachloroethoxy radical, which breaks down
mainly (85%) to CCl3C(O)Cl, the latter being either photolyzed
to one-carbon fragments (54%) or taken up by clouds and hydrolyzed to TCA
(46%). On this basis, Franklin and Sidebottom472 have estimated a TCA yield from
C2Cl4 of ca. 5%, a value with considerable
uncertainty, though one which converts472
into TCA concentrations in European precipitation of ca. 120 ng
L−1, similar to those observed. (Oxidation of
C2Cl4 and C2HCl3 initiated by
hydroxyl radicals also yields the two acyl chlorides, CCl3C(O)Cl
and CHCl2C(O)Cl but, importantly, when carried out in the
presence of a scavenger for chlorine atoms, such as ethane, their formation
is greatly reduced.477 In systems
confirmed to be free of chlorine atoms, the formation of C2
products of any sort is negligible.478,479 The quantification of the atmospheric
concentration of chlorine atoms and their spatial and temporal variation
thus assumes additional significance.)Global budget analyses for C2Cl461,355 remain tentative associated with
uncertainties in the source data. On the other hand, one might expect the
relative concentrations of TCA measured in the northern and southern
hemispheres to reflect the 6∶1 ratio of the average concentrations of
C2Cl4 measured480 in
the two hemispheres. Franklin and Sidebottom472 have estimated TCA concentrations in
precipitation (arising from a combination of 1,1,1-trichloroethane and
perchloroethylene degradation) to be 57 and 19 ng L−1 in
the Arctic and Antarctic, respectively, whereas the observed levels for the
Arctic and Antarctic481–484 are in the ranges <5–53 and
22–348 ng L−1, respectively.The abundances of C2Cl4 and
C2HCl3 themselves, the putative precursors to TCA and
DCA in the remote marine atmosphere, have been the subject of a number of
analytical480,485 and
modelling485,486 studies. From an
assessment of known industrial emissions of C2Cl4 and
C2HCl3, significant natural fluxes of these materials
of the order of 50 × 103 and 1.3 × 106 t
per year, respectively, have been suggested,486 particularly in the southern hemisphere where
anthropogenic emissions are low. For the suggestion of natural sources to
be wrong, either there are major unknown industrial sources in the southern
hemisphere, the rate of atmospheric degradation is incorrect or the
analytical and inventory data are incorrect. While none of these is thought
probable, it is still not entirely clear what the additional sources of
these materials may be. For instance, VOC emissions from coal-fired power
stations are reported to include C2Cl4.487 There is also evidence of oversaturation of
remote ocean water in C2Cl4 and
C2HCl361 which may
be indicative of a marine source (though, alternatively, this may simply
indicate a water mass previously equilibrated with atmospheric
C2Cl4 and C2HCl3 at a lower
temperature). Abrahamsson’s observations of significant
C2Cl4 and C2HCl3 production by
marine macroalgae349–351 suffer because of a failure unequivocally to
identify these products. Furthermore, attempts to reproduce353 or extend352
the observations (using cultured algae rather than from field
studies351) using GC mass spectrometry to
characterise these products have been unsuccessful. On the other hand, it
is known that algal species sampled from one site can produce a different
range of halometabolites from the identical species sampled from another
site. See for example ref. 264.The detection of chloroacetic acids in ancient ice481–484 from the Arctic and Antarctic
and from an ice core dated ca. 1900 from an alpine glacier (100
± 40 ng L−1) suggests that sources of these
materials, possibly of geological origin,482 were available before the development of the
modern chlorine industry. Grimvall and colleagues have shown488,489 that the 1–30 μg of
organohalogens (AOX, expressed as Cl−) per L of rain or
snow from urban and rural sources in Poland, Germany and Sweden contain
several different types of compounds, including polar non-volatile,
non-polar semi-volatile and very volatile compounds whose distribution in
the samples is not site-specific. Specific compounds, such as PCBs and
chlorine-containing pesticides, generally represent only a small fraction
of the organic material detected. Up to 20% of the AOX is associated with
chlorinated acetic acids. Using atomic emission (element-specific)
detection methodology and by concentrating the organohalogens by rotary
evaporation, Grimvall et al. have sought to characterise some of
the unknown halogenated material.488,489 Only two additional materials were characterised,
namely 1,4-dichlorobenzene and tris(2-chloroethyl)- phosphate. The results
suggest that the AOX in precipitation arises to only a minor degree from
the presence of volatile and readily extractable organohalogens. The
difficulty in characterising the medium molecular weight organohalogen
bases arises from their alkaline lability.In addition to its ubiquitous presence in precipitation, there is now
evidence to suggest that soil may be an additional natural source of
trichloroacetic acid.457,490–493 In laboratory studies, Hoekstra and de
Leer457,490,491 have found
that, in the presence of chloroperoxidase, humic acid reacts with chloride
ion and hydrogen peroxide to generate both chloroform and di- and
trichloroacetic acids. In analytical studies on the soil content of TCA and
soil air content of chloroform and the solvents
C2Cl4, C2HCl3 and
1,1,1-trichloroethane in different soils, Hoekstra et al.492 have shown that TCA concentrations in soil are
not significantly associated with the soil air concentrations of its
putative precursors, C2Cl4,
C2HCl3 or 1,1,1-trichloroethane. However, a
statistically significant positive correlation was seen between the
incidence of chloroform and that of TCA. Chemical decarboxylation of TCA to
chloroform under soil conditions is expected to be very slow, suggesting
the latter does not arise simply from the former. Haiber et
al.493 have carried out similar
experiments, incubating humic acid and a range of naturally occurring
carboxylic acids (acetic, malic, lactic, citric) with chloride ion and
hydrogen peroxide, with and without chloroperoxidase (from the fungus
Caldariomyces fumago), and confirmed that TCA and DCA, as well as
chloroform and chlorinated acetones, are formed. Haiber et al.
also report the surprising formation of TCA even without added
chloroperoxidase, most notably with humic acid. They find also that TCA
rapidly became bound, either physically or chemically, to humic acid
suggesting that, in some circumstances, an inability to detect TCA may not
be evidence of its non-formation. The TCA detected in rainwater which had
been allowed to trickle through soil from one site showed seasonal
variations, being lower in November/December (<100 ng
L−1) and higher in June (ca. 2000 ng
L−1), a trend observed earlier by Fillibeck et
al.494 and also by Reimann et
al.495 However, no such trend was
seen in rainwater from a second site. It was also shown that TCA-containing
rain water allowed to trickle through soil prior to collection lost
80–90% of the TCA. High levels of TCA (300–1000 ng
L−1) found in bog waters (containing high levels of
dissolved organic carbon, including humic materials) was unexpected, but
pointed to a net production of TCA in such media, possibly associated with
their relatively acidic pH (pH 4). Chlorobenzoic acids have also been found
in bog water, with the concentration of 2,4-dichlorobenzoic acid being
correlated with that of TCA, suggesting a common natural source496 rather than one from degradation of
polychlorinated biphenyls.4.3 Fungal metabolitesFungi play an important role in soil chemistry, with the basidiomycetes
responsible for breaking down lignocellulosic components of wood and other
vegetable matter. In so doing, these fungi produce and transform a diverse
a range of chlorine- (and halogen-) containing natural products,497 many in prodigious quantities and as a very
high proportion of biomass dry-weight, much of it difficult-to-characterise
material analyzed as AOX, adsorbable organic halogen. Chlorinated natural
products include C1 chlorocarbons, such as chloromethane and
chloroform,346 a wide range of chlorinated
phenols, anilines, anisoles (see also refs. 498, 499) and related aromatic
aldehydes, as well as more complex structures, such as periconin B
47, isolated from the fungal pathogen, Periconia
circinata.295 These materials are not
surveyed comprehensively; the purpose of this section is to highlight the
contribution that these organisms (and, with algae, as lichens) make to the
natural organic cycle of chlorine and to underline, once more, their
importance as major sources of materials hitherto thought solely to be
man-made pollutants. It was from a lichen (a ‘symbiont’ of a
fungus and an alga) that diploicin 14 was first isolated and
characterised over 90 years ago. Since then, fungi have been the sources of
many important early antibiotics, produced industrially by fermentation,
such as griseofulvin 18, chloramphenicol 62, aureomycin
63 and caldariomycin 19. Some products of fungal origin
are surprisingly highly chlorinated, with 79,
C7H4Cl8O2, isolated from the
fungus Mollisia ventosa, containing 70.3% by weight of
chlorine.268,269
3,5-Dichlorohexanophenone 75, produced by the slime mould,
Dictyostelium discoideum,401 has
a quite precise physiological function already discussed in Section
3.4. Drosophilin A 44 a chlorinated antibiotic,292 and the related
tetrachloro-1,4-dimethoxybenzene 80, are reported to be produced
de novo by 5 of 92 screened lignolytic fungi500 (that is, those capable of breaking down the
woody component of vegetable matter). Recently two novel
chlorine-containing 2,3-dihydro-1-benzoxepins 81 and 82
have been isolated from Mycena galopus.501  Renewed attention is being focused on terrestrial fungi,
particularly wood-rotting fungi,410 as
possible sources of chloromethane, as a consequence of a conclusion from
the recent Reactive Chlorine Emissions Inventory study that the known
marine sources of chloromethane cannot account for its global annual
production. It was Hutchinson502,503 who first established that chloromethane could be
produced by fungi, and Harper and colleagues who later established it to be
a secondary metabolite339,504 from
fungi grown on a range of substrates. Yields of chloromethane based on
chloride ion in the growth medium were as high as 90%. Fungal biosynthesis
of chloromethane was found to be widespread in a family of white rot fungi,
the Hymenochaetacaeae, with 54% of 63 species from 6 different genera
releasing chloromethane in the presence of chloride ion. Harper et
al.403 also identified methyl esters
of benzoic, 2-furoic and salicylic acids amongst volatile products from
cultures of Phellinus pomaceus and again showed this
characteristic to be widespread amongst chloromethane producers (and absent
from non-chloromethane producers), suggesting the two processes of ester
formation and chloromethane production were associated. Studies402,405,408,409,505
using deuterium-labelled amino acids, such as
L-[methyl-d3]-methionine,
CD3SCH2CH2CH(NH2)CO2
H 83, indicated that such materials could be precursors to
both chloromethane and the methyl esters of benzoic and furoic acids. More
importantly, Harper and Hamilton established402 that methyl ester formation for benzoic acid
employed chloromethane as methylating agent and also that other substrates
such as phenols could be methylated.404
Such chloromethane utilization was shown to be widespread even amongst many
wood-rotting fungal species which do not release chloromethane during
growth, with label-incorporation into veratryl alcohol (3,4-dimethoxybenzyl
alcohol 84, a key secondary metabolite involved in lignin
degradation) isolated from cultures of Phanerochaete chrysosporium
being more efficient in the presence of added CD3Cl than added
CD3-labelled methionine 83 or CD3-labelled
S-adenosylmethionine 83a, the conventional biological
methyl donor.405,408,409 It
was suggested404 that the participation of
chloromethane as a metabolic intermediate in primary fungal metabolism
observed in these investigations was the first unequivocal evidence to
support the contention by Neidleman506,507 that some halometabolites may have roles as
transient intermediates in the biosynthesis of halogenated products.
(Biochemical methylation of chloride ion is discussed further in Section
5.1.)The ubiquity of natural halogenated organic production (measured using
the parameter AOX, adsorbable organic halide) from basidiomycetes was shown
from a study of 191 fungal strains, many important ecologically, 50% of
which produced AOX when grown on a specific medium.508,509 Production of halogenated species from the genera
Hypholoma, Mycena and Bjerkandera showed specific AOX
production in the range 1–31 g AOX kg−1 dry weight
of mycelial biomass. Cultivation on natural lignocellulosic substrates such
as forest litter also led to AOX formation.Over 60 low molecular weight, mostly chlorine-containing, aromatic
compounds have now been isolated from fungi and shown to be widespread in
the natural environment.497,510
Among the characterized species are 77, 78, 84,
2,4,6-trichloro-3-methoxyphenol 85,511 3,5,6-trichloro-2,4-dimethoxyphenol
86,511
3,4,6-trichloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenol 87,511 as well as 44, 88 and
89 reported from the early studies by Anchel292 and Thaller and Turner.512 The white-rot fungus Bjerkandera sp.
BOS55 has recently513 been shown to
produce deuterated veratryl chloride (3,4-dimethoxybenzyl chloride
90) from deuterated benzoic acid, the first example of a biogenic
benzyl chloride. While chloroperoxidases have been isolated from several
fungi (see Section 5.1), the biosynthetic routes to these products remain
fully to be established, though de novo production has been
established in some instances. Very recent work on Hypholoma
fasciculare shows that AOX production takes place during the
transition between the primary and secondary metabolic phases of the growth
cycle of the fungus, with maximum AOX production rates of 0.63–3.23
mg AOX g−1 dry mycelium per day and final yields ranged
from 0.88–1.50% of dry weight of mycelium on five different
substrates including natural woody substrates. The composition of AOX
changes with time, with initially most of the AOX accounted for by
3,5-dichloro-p-anisyl alcohol 8 which, after prolonged
incubation, was converted mainly into 3,5-dichloro-p-anisic acid
78 or unidentifed organohalogens, depending on the nitrogen
content of the medium.45,514 These
observations, with other data, led to estimates that this species alone
contributes, where found, ca. 110 g of AOX per hectare per
year.Studies by de Jong, Field et al. have established that
chlorinated anisyl metabolites have a physiological role in lignin
degradation, serving as substrates for aryl alcohol oxidases involved in
extracellular hydrogen peroxide production.412,413 The oxidases have a much higher affinity for
chlorinated anisyl alcohols, such as 8, than related
non-halogenated secondary metabolites (e.g. veratryl alcohol),
oxidising the alcohols to the corresponding aldehyde (e.g.
77) (which is subsequently rereduced to the alcohol),
reducing dioxygen to H2O2 as they do so. Hydrogen
peroxide is a required co-substrate for exocellular peroxidases which are
key to the degradation of lignin. The chlorinated substrates are also
thought to be less susceptible to lignin-peroxidase-mediated oxidation than
the non-chlorine-containing analogues, possibly because of the effect of
the chlorine substituent on relevant redox potentials.
2-chloro-1,4-dimethoxybenzene 91 can also mediate the oxidations
by lignin peroxidase, since the oxidations studied515 did not proceed in the absence of the
secondary metabolite.That fungi can bring about a series of chlorinations involving
biochemical redox processes and the fact that such materials are found not
to accumulate in the environment where they are formed suggests that
processes of dechlorination have also evolved. Biotransformation of
chlorinated soil components leading to complete mineralization or to
incorporation into soil humus497 is
discussed in Section 5.2. Such chlorinated components may, of course, be
either natural or man-made.4.4 Chlorinated organics in soil, groundwater and
freshwater sedimentWhile the relevant data remain limited, the greatest quantity and
variety of chlorinated organics are likely to be found in the marine
environment. On the other hand, we also know that the terrestrial and
non-marine aquatic environment receives significant fluxes of inorganic
chloride from the deposition of sea-salt aerosol, in precipitation (also
from sea-salt aerosol and from emissions of HCl from volcanoes and
combustion processes, as well as from the decomposition of man-made
organochlorine compounds) and from weathering processes of rocks. However,
the terrestrial biogeochemistry of chlorine, and its cycling between soil,
water, biota and dead organic matter, is a relatively unresearched area.
See ref. 85 for a recent review.The lower concentrations of chloride in fresh water and soil might point
to the unimportance of natural terrestrial chlorination as a source of
organochlorine compounds and explain the only relatively recent recognition
of their presence (surprising, perhaps, when one considers the very many
studies on the presence of man-made materials). In fact, the detection of
chlorinated organics, including chloroform, chlorinated phenols and the
potent mutagen, MX
(3-chloro-4-(dichloromethyl)-5-hydroxy-2(5H)-furanone
60516,517) in drinking
water has been associated with the extensive use of chlorine for the
disinfection of drinking water. However, there are now a number of studies
which demonstrate that natural chlorination leading to chloroform,518–520 trichloroacetic acid
(described in detail in Section 4.2)457,520 and chlorinated phenols and benzoic acids,521 is widespread. Their presence in soils and
groundwater thus arises not only as a consequence of water disinfection
using chlorine.522 Brominated disinfection
byproducts may arise in a similar fashion.454,518,523 (Interestingly, dibromoacetonitrile may be
detected as the only brominated compound in the treatment of
(bromide-containing) water with ozone,454
the CHBr2CN being present also, at lower concentrations, in
untreated water.) The important question which arises, namely, to
distinguish between the natural and anthropogenic origin of a chlorinated
compound, is discussed in Section 7.Terrestrial biota, such as fungi, plants, animals and insects, are also
now known to be de novo producers of low molecular weight
chloroorganics. Important chlorine-containing antibiotics have long been
produced on the industrial scale (albeit in vitro) by bacteria
originally isolated from soil. A species of freshwater mussel itself
appears to produce or accumulate chlorinated lipid fatty acids in a
non-polluted environment similar to those it accumulates from a polluted
one.362 We know also that the burden of
chlorinated organics in the river Rhine, originally believed to have been
derived solely from the pulp and paper industry, includes368,369 a significant (ca. 50%)
natural source.This section reviews additional evidence that higher molecular weight
organic matter found in soil, groundwater524 and sediment has a significant organochlorine
content of natural origin.525–530 The focus will be on the sources,
nature and transformations of so-called ‘AOX’, adsorbable
organic halogen, a standard analytical parameter531–533 used to characterise the complex high
molecular weight involatile halogenated organic content of environmental
waters, particularly that derived from dead organic material. The latter is
made up of fulvic and humic substances, the extremely complex organic
structures produced during the breakdown in the soil of organic matter of
plant and animal origin.371 Such material
is difficult to isolate, analyse and study.Three different Swedish groundwaters,531 estimated from 14C measurements on
the fulvic acid content to be between 1300 and 5200 years old, hence
(within the uncertainties of the measurements) formed well before
industrial use of chlorine and its compounds began, were shown to contain
230–370 μg AOX g−1 organic matter.531 AOX measurements on a raised bog in a remote
region of Sweden suggest the presence of amounts of AOX ca. 300
larger than expected from annual deposition of organochlorine pollutants.
The presence529 of AOX (1–80 μg
L−1) in all but one groundwater samples drawn from 145
wells in Denmark suggests the ubiquitous presence of organohalogen
compounds.Related studies of sediments (from rivers, reservoirs and lakes, as well
as from the sea),534–537 of peat, lignite, bituminous coal and
anthracite534 and of a soil humic
acid538 all reveal the presence of
significant amounts of organohalogen compounds believed to be of natural,
and sometimes ancient,534,536
origin. Studies have also been undertaken to characterise the processes in
soil which generate organically bound halogens in situ. Particular
attention539 has been given to coniferous
forest soil, with the concentrations of organohalogens (μg Cl
g−1 soil) decreasing with increasing depth (associated
with a decline in organic matter with depth) though the proportion of
organic chlorine to organic carbon (mg Clorg
g−1 Corg) increases with depth. Studies539 of leaf-litter from Norway spruce showed a net
production of organically bound halogen during leaf-litter decomposition.
Significantly, both incorporation of inorganic chloride into organic matter
as well as its release from organic matter occurred during decomposition.
In addition to the organohalogen material generated by these processes,
studies of seasonal effects, wind-direction, collector position on the
deposition of organics in throughfall onto the spruce forest floor, suggest
that both organic carbon and organic halogen may arise from leaching from
the tree canopy.539–542 Significantly, the pool of organically bound
chlorine in the soil of the spruce forest floor was estimated to be 630 kg
ha−1, with an accumulation of 0.35 kg
ha−1 per year per year from litterfall and loss by
leaching of 0.63 kg ha−1 per year.540,541 Contributions from throughfall were estimated to
be 0.38 kg ha−1 per year and net formation within the soil
0.36 kg ha−1 per year.540,541 (Chlorinated organics in precipitation are dealt
with in Section 4.2.) Attempts to characterise these complex materials have
shown only that chlorinated aromatic moieties are present (being similar to
those produced during bleached kraft mill effluent).543–547 The similarity between
these products and the lignin-derived chlorinated metabolites from
wood-rotting fungi previously discussed in Section 3.4 is striking.If, as seems likely, the processes of chlorinated organic production in
soils are widspread, then massive quantities of organochlorines are likely
to be present in soil, with estimates as high as 109 t having
been made.257 The nature of the sorption
of such materials (and related anthropogenic pollutants) by sediments and
soils and the processes of desorption and mobilisation (important for
discussions of bioavailability and processes of attenuation) are complex,
not well understood and difficult to predict.548 These soil components may be linked more
generally to the cycling of organic matter in the soil and thus to the
carbon cycle. It is hoped that by understanding the biogeochemical cycles
of these naturally-occurring organochlorine compounds that the breakdown
and fate of anthropogenic compounds, their environmental impact and
approaches to the remediation of contaminated sites can be better
understood. At present, the mechanisms by which they are formed are not
well understood, though chloroperoxidase-type enzymes, capable of
chlorinating fulvic acid, are present in soils,376,549,550 including spruce forest soil.550 In addition to the characterisation of
products formed from chlorination of humic materials,528,530,551 studies of the chlorination of
resorcinol,552 chosen as a surrogate for
humic acids, has established an unequivocal link, using isotopic labelling,
between structural units present in humic materials, and chloroform,
trichloroacetic acid and other chlorinated disinfection by-products.
Bearing in mind the similarities between such natural processes of
chlorination and those arising from water disinfection using molecular
chlorine, the possible natural formation of the potent mutagen, MX
60, cannot be ruled out.Our ability to establish the precise origin of chlorinated products in
soil, and to apportion the sources between natural and anthropogenic is
complicated by the fact that low molecular weight organics (chlorinated and
non-chlorinated; anthropogenic and naturally produced) may be incorporated
into soil humus during humification.378–380 Such processes have been considered as a
means of sequestering chlorinated phenols and rendering them unavailable,
though the possibility that 2,4-dichlorophenol incorporated into humic acid
may subsequently be released has also been investigated.381 Both 2-chlorophenol and 4-chlorophenol are
incorporated into humic acids in the presence of horseradish
peroxidase,381,382 suggesting one
mechanism by which a chlorine-containing humic acid might be formed. Direct
chlorination of a humic acid, mediated by a chloroperoxidase553 has been described and haloperoxidase-type
activity in soil has been confirmed.5494.5 ‘Dioxin’Of the several groups of chlorinated materials found in the environment,
none has given rise to more public concern than ‘dioxin’.
So-called dioxin, in fact a collection of 210 compounds consisting of two
groups of chlorine-containing tricyclic aromatic compounds, derivatives of
dibenzo-p-dioxin 92 (the 75 polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs)) and of dibenzofuran 93 (the
135 polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs)) are collectively better
described by the shorthand PCDD/Fs.554–556 PCDDs and PCDFs display a range of
toxicities, with only 17 (those with chlorines in the 2, 3, 7 and 8
positions) of the 210 compounds (‘congeners’) being considered
toxic. The congener with the greatest toxic potency is 2,3,7,8-TetraCDD
94. To permit the characterisation of risk associated with
possible exposure to mixtures of PCDD/F congeners of different toxicities
(and in the absence of full toxicity data for many congeners), the 17 toxic
congeners have been assigned internationally accepted Toxic Equivalent
Factors (TEFs).557 On this basis,
2,3,7,8-TetraCDD has been assigned a value of 1, two other congeners a
value of 0.5, eight a value of 0.1, one of 0.05, three of 0.01 and two of
0.001. Such factors can then convert analytical data for the individual
PCDDs and PCDFs in a sample containing several congeners into a single
parameter, the toxic equivalent (TEQ) amount of 2,3,7,8-TetraCDD.While the effects of acute exposure to high levels of certain members of
the series are unpleasant and the consequences of long term exposure to
ambient levels need to be understood, nevertheless, some of the complex
physiological effects arising from exposure to other members may be
counter-intuitive in that there may be potentially beneficial as well as
potentially harmful consequences (though, of course, this would be no
justification for failing to control exposure).558–562 The assessment of the
totality of relevant and reliable toxicological, metabolic, physiological
and epidemiological data required to give a balanced appreciation of the
risks (particularly the cancer risks in humans) associated with exposure to
PCDD/Fs has not been without its difficulties. (See, for example, refs. 563
and 564.)PCDDs and PCDFs are formed as unwanted (and unintentional) by-products
in a variety of chemical processes, such as in the production chlorinated
phenols and in pulp-bleaching. However, chemicals production is a
relatively unimportant source of dioxins emitted to the environment (see
Table 3, taken from ref. 565).
Interestingly, analysis of virgin PVC resin from suspension polymerisation
shows it to contain no PCDD/Fs at or above the detection limit of 1 part in
1012 (ppt).566 Incineration and
combustion of chlorinated organics, or even of chlorine-free organics in
the presence of chloride ion,567–569 may lead to low levels of PCDDs and PCDFs.
For example, in a recent study,570
increased levels of PCDD/Fs have been detected in the environment in the UK
in the period following the 5th November, traditionally a date on which the
Gunpowder Plot of 1605 is commemorated by bonfires and fireworks. Recent
work has centred on the study of the fireworks themselves.571 Natural combustion processes, and some
biological processes discussed further below, are also believed to be
important historical sources of these products, accounting for their
ubiquitous presence in the environment.572
Recent work has shown a PCDD/F background concentration in the remote
marine atmosphere of ca. 20 fg m−3.573 Studies at a semi-rural site in the UK of the
seasonal variation of the atmospheric content of PCDD/Fs in air masses of
known origin suggest574 that diffuse
combustion-related sources are important in influencing PCDD/F
concentrations in ambient air. Attempts to distinguish what might be
thought to be ‘natural’ sources from
‘anthropogenic’ sources are fraught with difficulty (for
additional discussion on this point, see Section 7). In considering
combustion sources, is it, for instance, always possible to distinguish
between a natural fire and a man-made one? Fires started by lightning fall
into the former category while the burning of biomass as a consequence of
traditional ‘slash and burn’ agricultural techniques should be
classified as the result of man’s activities, though these are to be
further distinguished from industrial operations, such as modern
incineration. To establish the origin of PCDD/Fs in combustion products
from these different processes we would also need to show whether or not
the material had simply been present in the fuel and released as a
consequence of its volatilisation. Was this PCDD/F present in the fuel of
natural or man-made origin or a mixture of them both? Furthermore, the
immediate precursors of PCDD/Fs are thought to be chlorinated phenols,
which themselves may have natural or synthetic sources. If some proportion
of the dioxins is formed in de novo processes from inorganic
chloride ion and organic material, what are the origins of these
components? Are they entirely ‘natural’ or not? Such questions
concerning, for instance, the contribution to PCDD/F burdens from the
combustion of wood575 might include: how
much PCDD/F has been deposited on the wood from the atmosphere? Has the
wood been treated with chlorine-containing pesticides? What is the chloride
content of wood?
Table 3 Estimates of PCDD/F emissions in the UK (g TEQ per year)565

Process 19931997 Low1997 HighCoke production222Coal combustion (industrial)5–675 67Coal combustion (power generation)Waste oil combustion0.8–2.40.82.4Wood combustion1.4–1.91.41.9Straw combustion3.4–103.4 10Tyre combustion1.71.71.7Landfill gas combustion1.65.55.5Sinter plants (4 sites) 29–54 25 30Iron and steeel3–413 41Non-ferrous metals (1 site)5–35 29.8 29.8Cement manufacture (5 sites)0.2–110.29 10.4Lime manufacture0.04–2.20.042.2Glass manufacture0.005–0.010.0050.01Ceramic production0.02–0.060.020.06Halogenated chemicals0.020.020.02Pesticide production0.1–0.30.10.3MSW combustion (14 sites)460–580122199Chemical waste (10 sites)1.5–8.70.028.7Clinical waste (5 sites) 18–880.99 18.3Sewage sludge (5 sites)0.7–60.0010.37Carbon regeneration0.0060.0060.006Asphalt mixing1.61.61.6Pentachlorophenol in timber processes0.80.80.8Animal carcass incineration0.0010.18Crematoria1–351 35Domestic wood combustion (clean)2–182 18Domestic wood combustion (treated)15Domestic coal combustion 20–34 20 34Traffic1–451 45Natural fires (wood)0.4–120.4 12Fires (accidents) 10 81TOTAL560–1100219663In a study undertaken for the US EPA,576,577 estimates have been made of inorganic, organic and
particulate materials emitted during the burning of domestic waste in
modified 55 gallon drums or barrels, a practice widespread in the USA. From
a public health point of view, probably the most significant observation
from this study was the large quantity of benzene emitted (ca. 1
g/kg of waste combusted). Some chlorinated organics, including PCDDs and
PCDFs, were also detected. Significantly, when the results were compared
with the amounts emitted by a typical 200 tons/day municipal solid waste
incinerator (MSWI), a single typical back-yard barrel fire
produced PCDD and PCDF well in excess of that from the MSWI each day.While it is possible to effect the complete destruction to HCl,
CO2 and H2O of chlorine-containing organic compounds
by thermal oxidation through the proper control of process conditions,
PCDDs and PCDFs may reform during the cooling of the exit gases from the
reactor, unless the temperature quench rates are sufficiently high and
particulates, on the surfaces of which occur the heterogeneous processes of
oxychlorination believed to be responsible for reformation, are removed.
Recent work578,579 has concluded
that PCDD/F formation occurring in the lower-temperature regime
(200–650°C) proceeds via chlorination of
(non-chlorinated) dibenzofuran and dibenzo-p-dioxin formed at
temperatures >650°C. Careful study of technical data for many
incinerator operations has failed to establish a link between the chlorine
content of the feed and PCDD/F formation.580–582 Laboratory studies also confirm that dioxins
are combustion products even from fuels devoid of chlorinated
organics.567,569 Thus, for PCDD/Fs
potentially to be formed in combustion processes, a source of inorganic
chloride, a suitable surface, oxygen and a redox catalyst (such as copper
or iron)583,584 are all that are
needed. Indeed, attempts to reduce particulate emissions from diesel
engines by the addition of organocopper compounds have been associated with
increased PCDD/F emissions.585 Even the
use of copper wire in the classical Beilstein test for testing the presence
of halide in organic compounds leads to PCDD/F formation.586There is no doubt that industrial and anthropogenic activity of many
kinds has contributed significantly to the burden of PCDD/Fs in the modern
environment. Because of their lipophilic nature and persistence, PCDD/F
bioaccumulation occurs leading to bioconcentration along the food chain.
Much work on the extent and suggested consequences of these processes has
been published, though is not reviewed here. However, it is noteworthy
that, along with chlorinated organics generally,29–32 concentrations of PCDD/Fs in various
environmental compartments and biota (including the dietary intakes of
humans587) appear to have peaked in the
1950s, ’60s and ’70s and are now generally on a downward
trend.588–595 Recent analytical studies on breast
milk596 and human blood597 also show declining trends. Freeze-dried
samples of human blood plasma, archived since 1944, have recently been
found598 to contain 55 ppt PCDD/F, a level
significantly greater than found today in the USA and Europe. The PCDD
congener profile of the blood sample is similar to that of an archived
sewage sludge sample from 1933.599 An
interesting recent report600 suggests,
from mass-balance studies of the human dietary PCDD/F intake (mean daily
intake 49 pg TEQ per day (range 23–96)) and fecal excretion (mean
daily excretion 98 pg TEQ per day (range 40–200)) on 7 male and 7
female adults (aged 24–64 years), that the human body is currently a
net emitter of PCDD/Fs. If confirmed, this may arise from the reduction in
body burden, consistent with a decreasing intake associated with the
observed declining environmental trends.601 Alternatively, de novo formation of
PCDD/Fs or biochemical formation from a precursor in the body may be
occurring, no longer a proposition without precedent 602,603 (see also Section 5.3). However, an overall
picture of sources and sinks for the global burden of PCDD/Fs is still a
matter of debate,604–610 with atmospheric transport and
deposition611–614 of these semi-volatile and hydrophobic
materials, particularly in remote non-industrialised areas being of
concern.The PCDD/F content of pre-industrial samples of soil and herbage589,590 and the associated congener profile
(which provide a fingerprint which may be characteristic of the
source615–617) show
that sources were present (albeit at low levels) in the environment before
widespread industrial development and the advent of the chlorine-based
industry had occurred. In fact, the chlorine industry is only a minor
emitter of such products.608,610 It
is also perhaps ironic that the very chlorinated solvents whose elimination
is being sought are particularly effective in the removal of PCDD/Fs from
clothing during dry-cleaning.618That PCDD/Fs existed in the environment prior to the widespread
development of the chloroaromatics and chlorine industry was confirmed by
the analysis of a previously unopened bottle of soil collected in 1881 from
a controlled long-term agricultural experiment at Rothamsted Experimental
Station.589 The 1881 soil sample contained
0.7 ng of Σ TEQ kg−1 soil. Modern soil sampled from
the same field plot now contains 1.4 ng of Σ TEQ
kg−1, an increase resulting from cumulative atmospheric
deposition of PCDD/Fs retained in the surface layers of the soil.
Interestingly, the Σ TEQ concentration589 of archived herbage samples collected
year-on-year from Rothamsted between 1980 and 1995 have trended downward by
a factor of 3–4, implying a recent decline in the atmospheric
deposition of PCDD/Fs and supporting a previously reported590 longer term decline. (The validity of the
experimental procedures employed in these studies has been
challenged604 and defended).605Similar trends have been seen in the temporal record of PCDD/Fs in lake
sediments (‘paleolimnology’ or
‘chronostratigraphy’) from a remote lake in north-west
Scotland.615 The contribution of different
homologues (congeners containing the same number of chlorine atoms) to
overall PCDD/F concentrations has remained broadly similar since the 1800s,
dominated by OctaCDD. The relatively minor changes in the homologue profile
over time suggest that atmospheric transport and deposition processes may
have mixed the inputs from different sources, producing a more uniform
profile in the lake sediments. A similar study on dated lake sediments from
the Black Forest592 reveals significant
PCDD/F content in sediment layers believed to pre-date the large-scale
industrial production of chlorinated organics. Studies on sediment layers
from Lake Stechlin in Germany suggest PCDD/F levels increased by a factor
of about 100 since the 19th century though have halved since their peak in
the 1970s.593 From measurements in
sediments from Großler Arbersee, Germany, Bruckmeier et
al.594 show that the sum of TCDD-OCDD
and TCDF-OCDF concentrations increase from 996 ng kg−1 dry
weight (from sediment deposited between 1963–1968) to 1435
(1968–1972), 2049 (1972–1977) and peaking at 2298
(1977–1981) followed by a decline to 1865 (1981–1985) and to
1670 ng kg−1 dry weight in the most recent sediment.
However, the PCDD temporal pattern differed from that of the PCDFs
suggesting possibly different origins. Japanese workers619 have suggested that PCDDs are present in
marine sediments 1–10 million years old. 27 sediment samples from 15
lakes in southern Mississippi are dominated by the presence of OctaCDD and
HeptaCDDs.617,620 These are thought
to be of natural origin because the lakes have not been impacted by
industrial activity and because the congener profile does not resemble
known or likely anthropogenic or technical sources. In particular, a
Σ PCDD/Σ PCDF ratio of >100 does not correspond to
expectations of a technical source.Kjeller and Rappe595 also found PCDDs
and PCDFs in a 110 year old core from the Baltic Sea. A sediment core from
the northwestern part of the Baltic Proper was sliced into nine dated discs
(average age: 1882, 1906, 1922, 1938, 1954, 1962, 1970, 1978 and 1985).
Both PCDD/Fs and PCBs were detected in small but significant levels during
the period 1882–1962 (total PCDD/F 92–234 pg
g−1). The proposed sources are combustion of various
natural materials such as coal, wood and peat. Higher PCDD/F and PCB
concentrations were found during the period 1970–1985 (total PCDD/Fs
520–1800 pg g−1), this coinciding with a change in
PCDD/F congener profiles and isomeric patterns consistent with an
anthropogenic origin of the additional material.While it is reasonable to expect that sewage sludge arising from the
treatment of human waste will contain PCDD/Fs (and this topic has been
reviewed by Jones and Sewart621), it is
unexpected to find reports that PCDDs and PCDFs may be formed (or released)
during semi-anaerobic treatment of sewage sludge.599,622–625Evidence has also recently begun to emerge, confirmed from a number of
independent studies,625–628 that processes such as composting of organic
material may lead to increased concentrations of PCDD/Fs (though another
study was inconclusive629). A biogenic
origin has been proposed630 for at least
some of the PCDD/Fs detected in peat bogs (in New Brunswick, Canada). This
has begun to focus attention on possible microbiological and enzymatic
processes which might result in the generation of PCDD/Fs. Enzyme mediation
of PCDD/F formation has been reported by Rappe et al.,631–633 with evidence for the
formation of even the most toxic of congeners, 2,3,7,8-TetraCDD. Carlsen
et al.634 have also reported that
chlorinated dioxins and furans are formed in the enzymatically mediated
chlorination of humic acids, with the highly chlorinated homologues,
HeptaCDD, HeptaCDF and OctaCDD, being most abundant. Hemming et
al.635 have reported similar
findings. In more recent work636
pentachlorophenol has been found to yield OctaCDD in the presence of
horseradish peroxidase though the amounts were reduced in the presence of
aromatic carboxylic acids added as surrogates for humic acids.
Sediment-associated PCDD/Fs are now believed not to be inert,386 with OCDD being peri-dechlorinated to
TCDD and further laterally dechlorinated to 2-MCDD. In studies on a HpCDD,
dechlorination was found637 to be mediated
by humic acid, and the humic acid surrogates, catechol and resorcinol.Perhaps the most convincing evidence that PCDD/Fs may be produced
naturally comes from very recent work by Hoekstra et al. who have
detected the presence of significantly enhanced levels of 37Cl
in chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans isolated from
the soil of a Douglas fir forest (Speulerbos, The Netherlands) one year
after the soil had been treated in situ with a solution of sodium
chloride-37.638 The PCDD/Fs are thought to
arise from naturally formed chlorophenolic precursors.5. Biochemical chlorination and
biodechlorinationThe diversity of types and ubiquity of sources of halo- (particularly
chloro-) metabolites underlines the biochemical significance of these
materials and raises questions regarding the mechanisms, chemical and
biochemical, by which they are produced, transformed and degraded. While
there have been extensive studies of biological dechlorination, driven by
concerns regarding the environmental fate of chlorine-containing
pollutants, the related study of biological chlorination (or halogenation)
is, relatively, still in its infancy. While this is so, the capabilility to
effect biologically mediated chloroorganic formation is likely to be
ancient. For instance, ‘molecular fossils’ of biological lipids
characteristic of cyanobacteria, the source of many halometabolites, have
recently been isolated from shales estimated to be 2.7 ×
109 years old.639 Very few
biochemical pathways leading to chlorinated or halogenated metabolites have
been fully characterised.However, these topics have recently
received a stimulus from the recognition of the potential of
haloperoxidases as less-polluting oxidation and halogenating
catalysts.506,640,6415.1 BiochlorinationEvidence that many chlorinated organic compounds arise biogenically has
arisen from studies of isotopically labelled compounds, such as the use of
37Cl-enriched chloride in the growth medium as well as more
detailed studies of biochemical pathways using 14C,
13C and 36Cl-labelling techniques, such as the
formation of chlorinated anthraquinones, e.g. 7-chloroemodin
95 by the lichen, Nephroma laevigatum.642 However, in general, the understanding of the
biochemical mechanisms and the role of chlorinating enzymes leading to them
is limited. Early work on biochlorination has been surveyed by
Petty,643 Doonan,254 Fenical644
and Neidleman.506 More recent monographs
or reviews have appeared from Neidleman and Geigert,507 Kirk645,646 and Geckeler and Eberhardt.647 The proceedings have also recently been
published648 of the first ever meeting,
held in 1996, designed to bring together those studying biohalogenation and
those studying dehalogenation.  In their monograph, Neidleman and Geigert507 identify only one type of halogenating enzyme,
the haloperoxidases, which are involved in the general reactions of eqns. (19)–(21), where X− = chloride, bromide
and iodide, with products typical of those involving electrophilic halogen
(‘X+’) with aromatic or olefinic
substrates. H2O2 +
X− + H+ = HOX +
H2O(19) HOX + H+ =
H2OX+ = H2O +
‘X+’(20) substrate + ‘X+’ =
halogenated substrate(21)
Chloro-, bromo- or iodoperoxidases were discovered only relatively
recently649 and are related to the
peroxidases, a class of redox enzymes known since the 19th century. Both
groups are ubiquitous,419,650 being
found in bacteria, fungi, lichen, algae and other marine, fresh-water and
terrestrial organisms, and are now known to play a central role in the
natural formation of organohalogen compounds.While polyhalogenated methanes and higher alkanes may also be formed by
reactions of haloperoxidases,651
monohalomethanes are believed to be formed microbiologically by a different
type of process, involving a net nucleophilic displacement by halide
ion,222,329–331
X−, exemplified by eqn.
(22), where LG = a leaving group, such as OH, Br, I, OC(O)R,
SR2. CH3-LG +
X− = CH3X +
LG−(22)
As the biochemical processes leading to specific organochlorine compounds
are studied in detail, it is likely that more subtly differentiated
variants of these basic reaction types will become evident and possibly
even new classes of halogenating enzymes will be discovered. For instance,
in a recent preliminary report by Gerwick et al.299 of a study of the biosynthesis of the
molluscicidal metabolite, barbamide 51, the trichloromethyl group
appears to arise specifically from the unactivated pro-S methyl
group of a leucine precursor and not from the pro-R-methyl. A
novel, as yet undefined, process of regiospecific polychlorination appears
necessary to explain this299,300
with the authors of the original report suggesting a radical mechanism. Of
possible relevance may be the observation by Heinecke and others that
hypochlorous acid generated by neutrophils may, in the presence of excess
chloride ion, generate molecular chlorine [eqn.
(23)]. HOCl + Cl− +
H+ = Cl2 + H2O(23)
Some of the chlorinated products associated with neutrophil action are
consistent with molecular chlorine addition to a double bond. It is
conceivable that molecular chlorine formed in a similar process may also
effect radical processes with saturated C–H groups (with multiple
chlorinations associated with known solvent cage effects) proposed by
Gerwick et al.299.Neidleman and Geigert652 have suggested
that marine organisms purposefully synthesize chlorinated metabolites,
investing energy in chlorination and chlorinating enzymes to achieve key
transformations in their biosynthesis because of the usefulness of such
products to the organism. (Halometabolites and their function have been
discussed in Sections 3.4 and 4.3.) While most work has been devoted to the
detection, isolation and characterisation of halometabolites released by
organisms, much less is known about the biochemical routes by which such
materials may be synthesised. Even less is known about the existence of
halometabolites produced but not emitted by organisms. Harper, for example,
has reported on the utilisation of chloromethane by species of fungi known
not to emit such a compound, suggesting that chloromethane may have a
metabolic role in species hitherto not suspected of emitting chlorinated
compounds. In addition, mammalian halogenating enzymes, such as
myeloperoxidase, are directly involved in defence against invading
organisms, such as bacteria, fungi, and parasites and may also produce
chlorinated metabolites, though whether as inadvertent by-products of
defence or as purposefully produced materials playing particular roles is
not yet known.Kirk has reviewed in detail the mechanism of haloperoxidase
catalysis646 and the nature of individual
haloperoxidases. The chemistry effected or mediated by chloroperoxidases
(CPOs) is reminiscent of that of hypochlorous acid653–659 with much
mechanistic study and debate having focused on the nature of the intimate
process and the degree to which the actual chlorinating species becomes
free of its catalytic precursor.In the absence of an organic substrate CPO catalyzes oxidation of
chloride to molecular chlorine, though at a rate very much lower than the
rate of enzymatic chlorination. This suggests that molecular chlorine is
not a critical intermediate in such processes (and differences in substrate
specificities confirm the view).660
Wagenknecht and Woggon659 suggest that
chlorination catalyzed by CPO proceeds via Cl+ transfer
from a HOCl adduct to the substrate bound to the distal pocket of the
enzyme. Libby et al.656,661 believe that less than 2% of halogenation proceeds
via free positive halogen, preferring a process involving direct
chlorine transfer to a substrate bound to a CPO intermediate. They suggest
that, with the kinetic data produced by Marquez and Dunford,657 the assumption that hypochlorite is an
obligatory intermediate in myeloperoxidase reactions should be questioned,
the N-chloramine of taurine being a preferred reservoir for
positive chlorine over HOCl and a much less discriminating an oxidant in
neutrophils.662Chlorinations involving CPO from C. fumago have been well
studied. The first step involves reaction with hydrogen peroxide to give
the hydroperoxide of the enzyme, so-called compound I. This reacts with
chloride to give the enzyme intermediate, EOX. Discussion continues as to
whether this is the actual chlorinating agent or whether it decomposes to
give a Cl+-carrier. The lack of substrate- and regio-specificity
suggests that most substrates are chlorinated outside the active
site.658Much of the early work in the search for halogenating enzymes used
monochlorodimedone 96 as substrate,663 a compound that is not a natural substrate for
such reactions. It is perhaps not surprising therefore that the types of
haloperoxidases detected using this probe were all similar in having a
protoporphyrin IX as the prosthetic group. However, bromoperoxidases
isolated from bacteria were unable to effect chlorination to
monochlorodimedone, suggesting other classes of haloperoxidases may exist.
In bacteria,664,665nonheme haloperoxidases have been isolated that can effect
catalyzed chlorination; for instance, that from Pseudomonas
pyrrocinia is able to chlorinate monodechloroaminopyrrolnitrin
97 to aminopyrrolnitrin 98.666 These enzymes contain neither a co-factor
(such as vanadium) nor prosthetic group (such as heme). Detailed studies on
this type of enzyme reveal that a triad of amino acids, aspartic, histidine
and serine, are necessary for halogenating activity,667 a triad also associated with the hydrolysis of
esters and amides. The first step in halogenation catalyzed by these
enzymes is the formation of an acetate ester at the Ser residue, which is
hydrolyzed by hydrogen peroxide to form peracetic acid which is the
oxidizing species for halide, (information contained in a patent668) supported by recent structural669 and mechanistic670 studies. The authors suggest that a specific
halide-binding site is absent from the enzymes but hydrophobic substrates
may fit into the active-site pocket for selective halogenation, with the
actual halogenation itself being uncatalyzed by these enzymes. Kirk and
Conrad,671 however, have suggested that
the reported activity may be a common property of hydrolase enzymes, such
as esterases and lipases.The lack of substrate specificity suggests that these enzymes are
unlikely to be involved in the biosynthesis of halometabolites which are
the result of apparently regio- or stereospecific halogenation, such as
pyrrolnitrin 99, chloramphenicol 62 or barbamide
51, a suggestion supported by other data.672 The search for the enzyme which effects these
regiospecific halogenations can only come from studies which involve
natural substrates.673 Chlorination of
L-tryptophan 100 to 7-chlorotryptophan 101 is
the first step in pyrrolnitrin biosynthesis by Pseuodomonas
fluorescens (chlorination using a haloperoxidase giving only the
oxidised rather than the halogenated product). A second chlorination occurs
later in the process, with monodechloroaminopyrrolnitrin 97 giving
aminopyrrolnitrin 98.674,675 Both processes were found to require NADH,
explained by the involvement of oxygen and the intermediacy of an epoxide,
followed by halohydrin formation and dehydration. These processes have also
been considered theoretically.676
Halogenation catalyzed by perhydrolases and by the newly detected
NADH/FAD-dependent halogenases has recently been reviewed.677A different type of bromoperoxidase was isolated from the brown alga
Ascophyllum nodosum678 with a
vanadium chloroperoxidase being characterised in 1995.679 An X-ray structure was reported in
1996.680 Another vanadium
chloroperoxidase, isolated from the fungus, Embellisia
didymospora, has been characterised and found to share 68% identity in
its primary amino-acid structure with the enzyme isolated from
Curvularia inaequalis, with conservation of all active-site
residues.681 These vanadium
haloperoxidases are believed to effect unspecific electrophilic
halogenations,682,683 though
recently Butler has reported that the nature of the oxidized halogen
intermediate depends on the nature of the organic substrate. In the
presence of indoles, vanadium bromoperoxidase does not release freely
diffusible HOBr.684The first halometabolite isolated from bacteria was the antibiotic
chloramphenicol 62 produced by Streptomyces
venezuelae.685 Despite having been
known since 1936, surprisingly little is known about its biosynthetic
pathways. However, it is believed from studies of pathways leading to
chloramphenicol and 7-chlorotetracycline, that the introduction of chlorine
does not occur late in a biosynthetic process.253 A series of intermediates formed in
7-chlorotetracycline 102 biosynthesis have been characterised,
with the actual substrate for the chlorinating enzyme being
4-ketoanhydrotetracycline 103,686
though very little is known about the chlorinating enzyme which mediates
this process.Biogenic formation of monohalomethanes appears to proceed via a
metabolic pathway not involving the haloperoxidases. Urhahn and
Ballschmiter have reviewed three different pathways of biogenic formation
of halomethanes.453Wood-rotting fungi have long been known to produce chloromethane,502,503 with, in the case of MeCl produced
by Phellinus pomaceus, methionine suggested from isotope-labelling
studies to be the source of the methyl group.505 This has been confirmed by Harper and
colleagues402,406,407,
504 who proposed the direct incorporation of halide into a C1
compound probably catalyzed by a membrane-bound enzyme. Later work by
Harper404,405 indicated that
chloromethane release and utilisation were widespread among wood-rotting
fungi, with 61% of fungi studied from the genera Phellinus and
Inonotus being able to biosynthesise chloromethane. Chloromethane
acts as a methyl donor in the biosynthesis of veratryl alcohol, a secondary
metabolite involved in lignin degradation in wood-rotting fungi. Watling
and Harper,410 in a recent review,
provisionally estimate an annual source strength of 0.16 ×
106 t from fungal emissions of chloromethane, 75% of which is
released from tropical and sub-tropical forests. Wuosmaa and Hager have
suggested687 that an
S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) methyl transferase is
responsible for halomethane biosynthesis both in wood-rotting fungi and in
the marine red alga, Endocladia muricata. More recently, Ni and
Hager320,321 have isolated and
investigated an enzyme from the common halophyte, Batis maritima,
which catalyzes the formation of chloromethane from chloride and SAM.
Harper found strong evidence that SAM was not an intermediate in the
biosynthesis of chloromethane from L-methionine in the fungus
Phanerochaete chrysosporum.409 In
a recent survey of 118 higher plants, Saini et al.390 detected halide methyl transferase activity in
87 of these, with the highest activity in cabbages. The enzyme appears also
to be involved in sulfur metabolism. The authors, noting that chloride
sensitive species do not appear to have this activity, suggest that the
activity may provide a mechanism for the elimination of halide ion and
hydrosulfide, both of which are known to be phytotoxic to plants. More
detailed studies on Brassica oleracea,688 in which rate and inhibition parameters for a
purified enzyme were obtained, suggest that the enzyme is more likely to be
important for sulfur rather than halide metabolism.In very recent studies on Phellinus pomaceus, Saxena et
al. have demonstrated that the biosynthesis of MeCl is catalyzed by a
membrane-bound S-adenosylmethionine, halide ion methyl
transferase.689 Manley690 has also proposed that methylcobalamin may be
linked with iodomethane formation in the marine environment. Interestingly,
in a very recent study222 Coulter and
colleagues have isolated, from a soil-living micro-organism which uses
chloromethane as the sole source of carbon, an enzyme which is able to
effect rapid transfer of methyl from MeX, X = Cl, Br, I, to a series of
anions including Cl−, Br− and
SH−. The enzyme contains cobalt in the form of
cob(II)alamin, which may be reduced to cob(I)alamin
prior to methylation to give methyl cob(III)alamin. Subsequent
demethylation regenerated the CoI state (see also ref. 691).
Were the organism to be widespread in the environment, this very rapid
transmethylation would have extremely important implications for estimates
of the fluxes and burdens of the halomethanes, as well as wider
environmental significance.5.2 BiodechlorinationIt has been known from the time of Paracelsus that, depending on the
dose, exposure route and length of exposure, any compound (including those
containing chlorine) will have physiological effects that may be
beneficial, damaging or a combination of the two. In fact, the
environmental recalcitrance of a compound may be the result of a toxic
effect, preventing the growth of organisms capable of degrading them. This
section explores this topic, referring briefly to progress being made in
developing a fuller understanding of biodehalogenation from advances in
biochemistry, physiology, genetics and molecular biology.There has been a long-held belief that the carbon–chlorine bond is
intrinsically environmentally recalcitrant, that is, organochlorines cannot
be degraded in the environment. However, evidence that certain
organobromine compounds (e.g. bromopropionate) can be used as the
sole carbon and energy source by some bacteria has been known692 for over 70 years. This recalcitrance has been
associated with a presumed absence of metabolic routes associated with the
xenobiotic nature of some of these materials.693 However, not all chlorinated organics are
recalcitrant: for instance, chloromethane, chloroethane, dichloromethane
and 1,2-dichloroethane can serve as carbon sources to support
growth.222,694–697 A study of the mechanisms of
dehalogenation is important, not least because it may provide an
understanding of the evolutionary processes which have led to adaptation
(including adaptation that weakens substrate specificity and which thereby
broadens the substrates capable of being degraded).The wealth of reliable and unambiguous evidence that chlororganics may
arise through natural processes, are ubiquitous and are formed in large
quantities focuses attention on the means by which such compounds
containing carbon–chlorine bonds are broken down in the environment.
Bearing in mind that production of organochlorine compounds is probably an
ancient characteristic of the natural world, the concentrations now present
require the existence of natural processes for effecting their breakdown
and ultimate mineralization. Understanding of these processes will be
relevant in the search for effective technologies to bring about the
purposeful degradation of persistent man-made chlorinated pollutants and
the purposeful remediation of contaminated media or their removal from
waste streams (see for example refs. 698 and 699).Degradability700 will be related to the
chemical characteristics of the organochlorine compound, its physical
properties, particularly volatility and hydrophobicity, (discussed earlier
in Section 3.4), where in the environment it is generated, how it is
transported and migrates, where it accumulates, and the opportunities that
thereby arise for its transformation chemically and biologically and
ultimately its complete mineralisation to chloride ion, water and carbon
dioxide. A full characterisation of the various chemical and metabolic
pathways (and their rates and susceptibility to variations in factors such
as temperature, pH and other important system variables) leading to
complete mineralisation will be necessary, to assess the potential for the
accumulation of intermediates more toxic than the materials being degraded
or for incorporation of organochlorine residues into cellular biomass
without complete mineralisation.This section provides an illustrative survey of developments in the
understanding of the processes of biological dechlorination and some of its
implications and controversies. This is an extensive topic and is not
reviewed comprehensively (see refs. 701–705).First, it is now known that halogens may be cleaved enzymatically from
haloalkanes, haloalkenes, haloaromatics, halogen-containing alcohols and
acids and a variety of more complex chemical types by mono- and
dioxygenases, halohydrolases, haloalkane halidohydrolases,
dehydrohalogenases, halohydrin dehalogenases, haloacetate
halidohyodrolases, glutathione transferases, laccases, tyrosinases,
peroxidases, hydratases, and others. Microbiological dechlorination of
poly- and perchlorinated compounds presents particular challenges arising
from the hydrophobic character of many of these compounds. Reductive
dehalogenations may be co-metabolic (that is, not coupled to energy
conservation) or respiratory (involving the halocarbon as electron
acceptor).706,707 Isolation of pure
cultures of bacteria demonstrating the latter type of behaviour has proved
difficult. A bacterium has been isolated very recently708–710 which can achieve the
complete dechlorination of perchloroethylene and trichloroethylene to
ethylene (requiring hydrogen as an electron donor). Significantly, other
reducing co-factors (methanol, lactate, formate, pyruvate) support neither
the growth of the organisms nor the dechlorination. Perchloroethylene and
trichloroethylene are thus the electron acceptors in the process of
anaerobic respiration. Genetic engineering is also providing modified
organisms able, for example,711 to effect
degradation of pentachloroethane to glyoxylate and formate.Enzymatic dehalogenations can be classified in a number of ways,
including those involving reduction, oxidation, substitution and
elimination.701,703,704 A
systematic classification of the enzymes responsible for such
transformations has yet to appear, but one based on the mechanistic type of
the transformation is currently believed704 to be more useful than one based on substrate
type:reduction712,713:
e.g. reductive dehalogenation in which C–Cl is replaced by
C–H, eqn. (24): CCl2=CCl2 + H+ + 2
e− = CHCl=CCl2 +
Cl−(24)
oxidation: e.g. oxidative dehalogenation in which C–Cl is
replaced by C–OH, involving reaction with O2, eqn. (25): 1,2-C6H4Cl(CO2H) +
O2 + NADH + H+=
1,2-C6H4(OH)2 + NAD+ +
CO2 + HCl(25)
substitution: e.g. hydrolytic dehalogenation714,715 in which C–Cl is replaced by C–OH on
reaction involving H2O, eqn.
(26): RCH2Cl +
H2O = RCH2OH + H+ +
Cl−(26)
substitution: e.g. thiolytic dehalogenation in which
>CCl2 is converted to >CO via involvement
of glutathione (GSH), eqns.
(27)–(29): CH2Cl2 + GSH = GSCH2Cl
+ H+ + Cl−(27) GSCH2Cl + H2O =
GSCH2OH + H+ +
Cl−(28) GSCH2OH = GSH +
H2CO(29)
elimination: e.g. hydration by catalyzed addition of
H2O followed by chemical decomposition, eqns. (30)–(31): HO2CCHCHCl + H2O =
HO2CCH2CH(OH)Cl(30) HO2CCH2CH(OH)Cl =
HO2CCH2CH(O)+ H+ +
Cl−(31)
elimination: e.g. dehydrohalogenation, eqn.
(32): c-C6H6Cl6 =
c-C6H5Cl5 + H+ +
Cl−(32)
substitution/elimination: e.g. intramolecular dehydrohalogenation,
eqn. (33): HOCH2CH(OH)CH2Cl=
HOCH2CHCH2O + H+ +
Cl−(33)
transmethylation: e.g. enzyme-mediated222,691 formation of chloromethane from bromomethane,
eqn. (16): MeBr (aq) + Cl− (aq) = MeCl (aq) +
Br− (aq)(16)Mention must be made of the exemplary studies of Janssen, Dijkstra,
Verschueren and co-workers in the investigation of the intimate mechanism
of dechlorination of 1,2-dichloroethane716–724 which is
contributing significantly to the understanding of biodegradation. The work
also reveals some of the limitations of directed mutation in efforts to
modify enzymic processes to make them more (or less) selective and more
robust, for biotechnological applications. 1,2-Dichloroethane is a major
industrial product believed to be entirely anthropogenic (though its
formation by chloride-ion exchange from the naturally formed
1,2-dibromoethane cannot be entirely excluded (see Section 4.1)). The
bacterium, Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10, can use
1,2-dichloroethane as the sole source of carbon, and from it a haloalkane
dehalogenase capable of converting 1,2-dichloroethane to 2-chloroethanol
has been isolated, purified and the gene encoding the enzyme sequenced.
Crystallographic studies716 show that
substrate is converted to product via a two stage process. At pH 5
and 4 °C, the substrate sits in the active site; after the temperature
has been raised to ambient, a C–Cl bond is broken, giving
Cl− (stabilized by hydrogen bonding to Trp125 and Trp175)
and –CH2CH2Cl bound at Asp124 (i.e.,
aspartate at position 124 in the protein amino acid sequence for the
enzyme). At pH 6, the ester group is hydrolysed by a water activated by
His289-Asp260. Replacement of Asp260 in the catalytic triad by asparagine
by site-directed mutagenesis results in a catalytically inactive
mutant.717 Debrominating activity of
1,2-dibromoethane could be restored to the latter by replacing Asn148 by
aspartic or glutamic acid, though with a ten-fold reduction in the
catalytic rate constant compared with the wild-type enzyme, caused by a
220-fold reduction in the rate of C–Br cleavage, a 10-fold reduction
in rate of hydrolysis of the alkyl-enzyme intermediate.
Br− release was 12-fold faster though via a
different pathway.Interest has recently centred on how the processes and pathways for
biodechlorination might have evolved and whether (and, if so, how) the
organisms responsible may be genetically linked
(‘phylogenetics’). In principle, this capability may be the
result of recent adaptive pressure693,719,725–730
associated with the release of anthropogenic chlorinated products into the
environment (by processes analogous to the development of drug resistance
in pathogenic bacteria) for which recent evidence from the microbiological
degradation of 1,3-dichloropropene (presumed to be wholly anthropogenic)
has been adduced.731 Alternatively, the
capability may have long existed as a consequence of the presence of
chlorinated organics over biological time.693,725 This has provided a further stimulation for the
mapping the amino acid sequences of the active sites of enzymes performing
identical functions but from different and geographically widely separated
organisms.7325.3 Chlorinated compounds in the human
bodyWhile inorganic chlorine, as chloride, is well known to be vital for
human metabolism49 being necessary for a
range of physiological processes, such as digestion and renal function, the
role of hypochlorous acid (and possibly molecular chlorine itself) in the
functioning of our bodily defences is perhaps less well known. Hurst and
Lymar733 have recently reviewed the
general topic of cellularly-produced inorganic oxidants.On the other hand, the presence of persistent organochlorines in the
body, for example, from chlorinated pesticide residues, PCBs and PCDD/Fs,
gives cause for concern because they may be bioconcentrated through various
trophic levels in the food chain and, because of their lipophilic
character, can be accumulated in the fatty reservoirs in the body. While
the amounts are generally small and suggested long-term health effects
difficult to ascribe unequivocally to their presence, the consequences of
such long-term presence in the body requires better understanding. However,
it is reassuring from a public and environmental health point of view that
in most cases, the concentrations of these materials have been on a
downward trend in the human body (as well as in the tissue of fish, birds
and animals, and also in the environment generally) from the peak
concentrations of the ’60s and ’70s. More volatile chlorinated
products are not accumulated (though, of course, long-term continuous
exposure may result in metabolite formation) and may be detected in exhaled
breath.734It is only quite recently that the possibility has been explored that
the human body may itself be a producer of organochlorines. Showing whether
or not organochlorines may be synthesised in the human body will be
necessary properly to assess the risks associated with exposure to
industrially produced organochlorines present in the environment (for their
formation by metabolic processes would suggest that the body may have
developed some tolerance towards them and some means of breaking them
down). It has long been known (though not widely so) that organobromine
compounds can be detected in the human body.1-Methylheptyl-γ-bromoacetate 71, isolated from human
cerebrospinal fluid, is found to have anti-cholinesterase activity.393,394 The further study of such compounds
and of their physiological role is long overdue. The physiological role of
the iodine-containing hormone, thyroxine 11, has been extensively
studied, with its metabolic effects in humans mediated via a
5′-deiodinated thyroxine 104.735  Work recently summarised736 has focussed on neutrophils, the white blood
cells which combat invading infectious agents by the process of
phagocytosis (and which are also associated with certain inflammatory
diseases). Myeloperoxidase (MPO), a key enzyme in phagocytosis,737 produces hydrogen peroxide, which in the
presence of chloride ion, forms hypochlorous acid.738–740 Zgliczyński et al.
suggested in the 1970s741,742 that
HOCl from the MPO/H2O2/Cl− system
can form chloramines (and even dichloroamines, which may effect ring
chlorination of tyrosine743) from amino
acids. In 1982, Weiss and co-workers showed that neutrophils effected the
formation of chloramines, such as N-chlorotaurine, from amino
acids, such as taurine, and hypochlorous acid,744 work extended recently by Winterbourn,745 Heinecke746
and others. Winterbourn and co-workers were also first to present evidence
that these processes could lead to products containing
carbon–chlorine bonds,747 reporting
the formation of two 9,10-chlorohydrins 105 and 106 from
oleic acid and MPO, chloride and hydrogen peroxide. Arnhold et al.
have published similar observations.748
More recently, Heinecke749 and
Winterbourn750 independently have shown
that cholesterol chlorohydrins 107 and 108 could be
formed. In in vitro studies which mimic physiological conditions,
the formation of cholesterol dichloride 109751 and the direct detection of dichlorine752 itself both suggest that elemental chlorine,
Cl2, may have a physiological role in the human body, associated
with a well known753 equilibrium [eqn. (23)].Kettle, Winterbourn and co-workers have also shown that the tyrosine in
human serum albumin exposed to MPO and stimulated neutrophils may be
converted to 3-chlorotyrosine 110.754,755 Hazen and Heinecke have finally provided direct
evidence15 for chlorination in the human
body by establishing that elevated levels of 3-chlorotyrosine may be found
in low density lipoprotein isolated from human atherosclerotic lesions.
Haas756 has estimated the production of
organochlorines in the body to be ca. 6–28 μg per day.
Such estimates are bound to be crude. Further work is needed to refine such
calculations, particularly in the light of a report600 which raises the possibility, from mass
balance studies of daily human dietary PCDD/F intake, that the human body
is a net emitter of that group of most demonised of all organochlorines,
the dioxins (PCDD/Fs: see Section 4.5). While such net emissions may simply
be the result of the reduced burden of PCDD/Fs in the environment and hence
in food, nevertheless, part of these emissions may be the result of de
novo formation in the human body. Confirmation of the reported
observations and investigation of the possible precursors for these
materials is thus urgently needed.6. Distribution and physical transportTo assess the nature and degree of any risk associated with the presence
in the environment of a particular component requires the availability of
concentration data, their geographical variation and temporal trends (as
well as the identification of routes to exposure and an understanding of
the consequences of such exposure). The available data are often of limited
value in assessing potential risk because they may have been collected from
a single medium (sediment, river, atmosphere) at a small number of
geographical locations over a limited period of time. Extrapolation to take
account of geographical, compartmental, seasonal or other temporal
variations requires the use of simplified models based upon a set of
assumptions. Difficulty may arise when the output from modelling is used to
drive regulatory activity without the uncertainties arising from the
assumptions made being accepted or understood (see, for example, ref. 757
and earlier papers.) The study and development of models is thus a critical
area of research. Confidence in the quality and relevance of model
prediction requires the continuing collection of appropriate data,
including data relating to the origins, natural and anthropogenic, of the
materials of concern.Any compound produced in or emitted to the environment (whether natural
or man-made) will be transported and transformed as a consequence of its
physicochemical properties, the physical, chemical, biochemical and
biological characteristics of the environmental compartments and
subcompartments (including the biota which inhabit them) in which such
compounds are found and the time to which the compound is exposed to these
conditions (see ref. 758 for a recent discussion of some of the relevant
issues). An understanding, qualitatively and quantitatively, of these
processes will be needed to establish the sources, sinks, reservoirs,
fluxes and lifetimes (and hence impact on the environment) for materials
involved in an elementary geochemical/geobiochemical cycle. A natural cycle
involving emitted compounds, including those containing chlorine, would
need to define (at least) a qualitative description of processes of
transport and transformation, at the local, national, regional, continental
and global levels (which will be governed by the characteristics of the
source, which may be highly localised (a ‘point’ source, such
as a chimney or from an individual plant) or diffuse (such as from an
industrial site, a centre of human population, a forest, a country)). The
earth, with its various geological compartments, media and associated
ecosystems, can thus be seen as a chemical and biochemical reactor of
considerable heterogeneity and complexity, varying dynamically with the
periodicity of natural geochemical phenomena on various timescales. It is
beyond the scope of this article to give other than a brief overview of
this topic. Further information may be obtained from recent texts and
reviews.17,759–763Such understanding of the transport and fate of emitted compounds is
predicated on the identification of the sources of these materials and
their source strengths (see, for example, refs. 55–62). From this may
be gauged the impact of man-made products on the environment (including the
remote environment) which will include the identification (against the
background of other potentially confounding natural processes) of those
that represent serious risk to man and the environment,764 the assessment of the need for control or
remediation measures to be applied, judgements concerning control and
remediation procedures that are likely to be most effective and
cost-effective and the measurement of the effectiveness of such
procedures.Transport will take place in the hydrosphere (oceans, lakes, rivers,
groundwater), in the atmosphere (troposphere, stratosphere, between the
northern and southern hemispheres), the lithosphere and in the biosphere
(via ingestion and excretion, migration, bioconcentration and
bioaccumulation). There will be continual exchange between these various
compartments as a result of volatilisation, dissolution and partitioning
associated with deposition, precipitation, sedimentation and the lifecycles
of biota.Physical transport or mobility will be dependent on the physical
properties of the material (see refs. 765 and 766 for recent studies on
PCDD/Fs) and its propensity to suffer chemical change during the time spent
subject to a particular set of conditions, physical (such as temperature,
light flux) chemical (pH, presence of a putative reagent, such as water) or
biological (presence of an organism capable of using the compound as a
carbon or energy source). Intrinsic properties which will govern the
tendency of a compound to migrate or be transported will include its
molecular weight, chemical structure, vapour pressure, boiling and melting
points, solubility in water, Henry’s constant, partition coefficient
and optical characteristics (such as UV light cross-section). The tendency
to migrate will also be governed by the characteristics and location of the
medium in which the compound is found. If in air, its fate will be
determined by its reactivity with aerial components, particularly
initiators of oxidative degradation processes, such as hydroxide radicals
(and possibly chlorine atoms: see Section 2.5) or the adsorption of photons
of energy sufficient to effect photolytic breakdown with significant
quantum yield. In addition, it may be partitioned between the air and other
phases, such as gas–liquid exchange at the surface of water bodies,
with the fluxes depending on the concentration in the liquid phase,
Henry’s Law constant, temperature and wind speed. Similar processes
are possible involving cloud or fog droplets or precipitation, such as rain
or snow. Further chemical change, particularly hydrolysis, may follow such
phase exchange. Hydrophobic material of low volatility may be
preferentially adsorbed onto the surfaces of various atmospheric
particulates, such as soot (primarily from biomass burning and from fossil
fuel combustion), dust (ejected from volcanoes, from dust storms and soil
erosion) as well as sea-salt aerosol and water droplets, or on to the
surfaces of vegetation. Materials present as vapour in the atmosphere or as
adsorbates hitching a ride on particulates suspended in the air will be
subject to vertical and horizontal transport of short (local) medium
(regional) and long (intercontinental, interhemispheric) range associated
with processes of the circulation of air masses. They will be deposited or
redeposited on land or water by processes of dry and wet deposition.
Seasonal effects, such as precipitation as snow and the coverage of water
bodies by ice, will occur.In the aquatic environment, transport may occur as a consequence of
processes of global ocean circulation, by bioaccumulation and
bioconcentration in the various stages of the marine food chain, and by
slow transfer into sediments on the ocean floor. Biosurfactants formed by
marine organisms are known to accumulate at the ocean surface, producing a
so-called ‘surface microlayer’ (see, for example, refs. 176 and
358), into which other marine organic products and pollutants may
accumulate and be subsequently transported. Related processes in lakes,
rivers and estuaries will occur in the freshwater aquatic environment.
Precipitation and deposition of organic compounds onto soil (and their
formation and transformation in the soil) may result in leaching of these
materials into water percolating through the soil and accumulating as
groundwater in underground reservoirs (‘aquifers’).
Water-insoluble liquids with specific gravities greater than that of water,
such as polychlorinated organic solvents, may percolate under gravity and
accumulate in geological formations or in aquifers as separate phases. The
lifetime of organic compounds in these media will be a function of
intrinsic hydrolytic and oxidative stability and susceptibility to change,
reductive and oxidative, as a result of biotic processes.To be transported through the troposphere to enter the stratosphere in
significant amounts, the atmospheric lifetime of an aerial component must
be greater than about a year. Chloromethane fulfils this criterion and,
consequently, insofar as its origins are natural, is seen as making a
natural contribution to ozone depletion. The nature of global atmospheric
circulation is such as to divide the atmosphere of the northern hemisphere
from that of the southern by a so-called intertropical convergence zone,
which effectively limits processes of exchange of air masses (and organic
components contained therein) between the hemispheres. Because of the
preponderance of industrial sources and population centres in the northern
hemisphere, the relative concentrations in the two hemispheres of an
atmospheric component with atmospheric decomposition rates less than the
rate of interhemispheric exchange can be an indicator of a possible
anthropogenic or natural source.486In addition to such transport associated with global circulation,
transport of so-called ‘semi-volatile’ materials may occur as a
consequence of variations in mean temperature with season, altitude and
latitude, resulting in a phenomenon variously known as cold condensation or
global distillation (with transport occurring along a net negative
temperature gradient) or global fractionation or chromatography (with air
being the mobilising medium and the earth’s surface, including soil
and vegetation, being the stationary phase). Aspects of these phenomena
have been discussed in more detail by Schreitmüller and
Ballschmiter,18 Simonich and Hites,19 Wania and colleagues,767–770 Cousins et
al.,771 Ockenden and Jones760 and others.772 Recently, Canadian workers773 have established a 10- to 100-fold increase of
the deposition of a series of semi-volatile organochlorine compounds
between 770 and 3100 m altitude. For the less volatile materials the
10-fold increase is thought to be due to a 10-fold increase in snowfall
over this change of altitude. However, a cold-condensation effect is
thought to be responsible for the additional concentrations of more
volatile compounds.Simplified models are being developed to represent approximately the
major factors which govern the global dispersion and distribution of
persistent organic compounds, with compounds chosen for model development,
testing and exemplification including hexachlorobenzene,
4-monochlorobiphenyl, γ-hexachlorocyclohexane and DDT,768 PCDD/Fs,774,775 PCBs,775 and
reactive volatile organic compounds, such as isoprene, α-pinene and
methanol.776 The global model developed by
Wania and Mackay768 represents the global
environment in terms of six individual compartments (atmosphere, surface
ocean, two soil compartments, fresh water, fresh-water sediment) in nine
climatic zones (Northern and Southern tropic, N and S sub-tropic, N and S
temperate, N and S polar and Northern boreal). Transport processes,
diffusive or advective, can occur between the various compartments and the
atmospheric and ocean compartments of adjacent zones.Such models serve to highlight the absence of the physical and other
data of the requisite accuracy that would be necessary for a reliable
simulation of the global fate of a persistent organic compound. The need
remains for continuing reliable and representative monitoring data on
particular aspects of transport and distribution of especially long-lived
chlorine-containing compounds, such as recently reported for PCBs,757,777–780
γ-hexachlorocyclohexane,772,780,781 C1 and C2
chlorohydrocarbons782,783 and
hexachlorobenzene.7807. Anthropogenic or natural?An acceptance of the proposition that organochlorine compounds found in
the environment cannot automatically be assumed to be anthropogenic and
that some anthropogenic pollutants may also have natural sources raises a
critical question: is there a way to establish whether or not a chlorinated
organic detected in the environment is present naturally or has been
introduced as a pollutant? (Such a question may also focus on the origins
of any organic environmental component of concern, including those
not containing chlorine.) The answer becomes relevant when a chlorinated
environmental component, assumed to be anthropogenic (or assumed to arise
from an anthropogenic precursor) is associated with environmental damage or
potentially unacceptable health effects. Such might be the case for
chloroform (a water disinfection by-product), trichloroacetic acid
(resulting from the atmospheric degradation of chlorinated solvents),
chlorinated phenols, and even polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and
dibenzofurans. However, these compounds are now known to have well
established and widespread natural sources: for example, chloroform,
trichloroacetic acids and chlorinated phenols are produced in natural
processes in the soil. The point may be further illustrated by
consideration of the diphenyl ether, Ambigol B,
2,6-bis(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)-3,5-dichlorophenol 111, isolated as a
secondary metabolite from a strain of the terrestrial blue-green alga,
Fischerella ambigua.784 It has
marked anti-bacterial activity, just like the structurally very similar
synthetic material, 3-chloro-2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)phenol 112
claimed by Colgate-Palmolive in a US patent, published at about the same
time, for use in packaged anti-plaque oral formulations.785How might it be possible unequivocally to distinguish between a sample
of chloroform from a natural source and one produced synthetically? One
approach that has been used extensively in geochemistry is stable isotope
analysis,86,87 particularly of
14/13/12C, 15/14N, 18/16O,
34/32S and 37/35Cl. These techniques are increasingly
being used to study geobiochemical and other environmental
processes,786 particularly to characterise
sources and associated physical and chemical phenomena. For example, carbon
isotopic analysis has been used to differentiate sources of
inorganic787,788 and organic
carbon, such as methane789–791 formic and acetic acids792 and VOCs.793
Environmental processes have been probed using both δ13C
(= 103
× (13C/12Csample
−
13C/12Cstandard/13C/12
Cstandard)) and Δ14C to characterise the
materials present in ground water,794 to
study physical795 and biochemical796 processes in the sea and to monitor in
situ biodegradation of hydrocarbons and chlorinated solvents.797–799 Carbon isotope
compositions for chloromethane are reported800 to be different for samples from urban and
marine atmospheres, though the origins of this effect are unclear. In
principle, the use of Δ14C should enable the required
distinction to be made, since anthropogenic products derived from fossil
sources will have negligible 14C content whereas those from
natural sources are expected to be equilibrated with atmospheric
carbon-containing proportions of 14C resulting from both natural
γ-ray bombardment and from the atmospheric nuclear explosions of the
1950s and 1960s. However, the quantities of material required for reliable
analysis have not yet allowed the measurement of Δ14C for
organochlorines isolated from the environment, even for the most abundant
material, chloromethane.801 On the other
hand, δ13C has been measured for chloromethane, present in
the atmosphere at ppt levels.802 It has
recently been suggested803 from
δ13C measurements that industrially produced MeBr maybe
isotopically distinct. Large carbon-isotope fractionation has recently been
observed from both bacterial oxidation804
and abiotic transformation805 of
chloromethane and bromomethane, highlighting the importance of identifying
the critical processes in environmental transformation and transport and
the measurement of associated isotope fractionation. Furthermore, as the
halogen is found to be labile in some of the transformations of these
compounds,222,806
δ37Cl approaches (see below) may not be applicable.Stable chlorine isotope analysis807 of
inorganic chloride has been used to study the origin of brines,808 salt deposits and pore water from
sediments.809 Its use in the study of
environmental processes has until recently been limited because of the
small range of the parameter used, δ37Cl (= 103
× (37Cl/35Clsample
−
37Cl/35Clseawater/37Cl/35
Clseawater)), with most variation being within 1.0
‰ (per mil) of ocean water chlorine. However, a very recent
report810 describes changes in
δ37Cl for chloride ion and for trichloroethylene in
groundwater from a contaminated site. These observations suggest that
natural attenuation processes are at work. However, it has also been shown
that chlorine isotope fractionation can be affected by temperature and
pressure, with fractionation occurring during organochlorine synthesis (and
presumably, breakdown). The interpretation of data from isotope
measurements thus requires a degree of caution until more of the physical,
chemical and biochemical effects are better understood. Nevertheless, the
possibility that anthropogenic chlorinated compounds might have a
distinctive isotopic signature or ‘fingerprint’, has led to the
suggestion that such fingerprints might enable the sources of pollution
events to be identified. As a first step, van Warmerdam and
colleagues811 have used stable isotope
measurements for carbon and chlorine to fingerprint the chlorinated
solvents, perchloroethylene, trichloroethylene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane,
from four manufacturers, finding δ37Cl to vary between
−3.5 and +6.0‰ and δ13C between −37.2
and −23.3‰. It should be noted that these were bulk unused
products and not used materials isolated from the environment. Samples
isolated from the environment are likely to have been subjected to a range
of physical, chemical and biochemical fractionation processes that may
confound clear conclusions. The methodology used has been criticised812 and further developed813 to provide data on both carbon and chlorine
isotopes from a single 1–2 μL sample of chlorinated solvent. It is
thus likely that this technique will develop and be applied, though whether
it will have the reliability and resolution to identify a pollutant as
arising from a particular supplier (when taking into account such issues as
variations in raw materials, processing conditions, swap and
purchase-for-resale deals) remains to be seen.More recently, variations in 37Cl content of size segregated
sea-salt aerosol (material produced by the action of wind and wave at the
ocean surface (see Section 2.3)) from the marine boundary layer, as
measured by δ37Cl, are believed to be consistent with
processes of acid displacement of HCl814
for mid-size aerosols and chlorine loss by a different mechanism for larger
size aerosols,815 possibly release of
so-called ‘reactive’ forms of chlorine, such as HOCl,
Cl2, ClBr or ClNO2.8. Future researchThe foregoing brings together the results of work from a variety of
sources and disciplines, much of it done in isolation. There is now
sufficient evidence for the role of chlorine in a range of natural
processes to suggest the need to study explicitly natural cycles involving
chlorine and to approach this from a range of inter- and multidisciplinary
perspectives.Many different lines of research will present themselves to individual
analytical chemists, geochemists, biologists, atmospheric and marine
scientists, human physiologists, ecologists and environmental scientists.
Some of these topics will already be active on-going areas or work and will
have provided the basis of this survey. What is needed is a wider
dissemination of the results, and an assessment of their implications
leading to the identification and prioritisation of the outstanding
challenges that remain.My personal selection of research targets, governed by major areas of
uncertaintly and relevance to providing the basis of a natural chlorine
cycle, would include:
An improved mass balance for chloride inputs to and outputs from the oceans.Further studies of the
terrestrial geochemistry and biogeochemistry of chloride
ion.Further investigations of the heterogeneous atmospheric
chemistry of chlorine, particularly the formation of positive or reactive
inorganic chlorine species and its consequences.Better
estimates of atmospheric atomic chlorine concentrations and their temporal
and spatial variation.Detection of ‘sentinel’
compounds for reaction with chlorine atoms (such as 10) in the
atmosphere.Better understanding of the role of chloride ion in
photosynthesis.Better understanding of the role of chlorine in
the human body, with better estimates of the amounts of chloroorganics (and
bromoorganics) formed de novo in the body and the role and fate of
de novo generated chlorinated organics.The further use
of natural abundance isotope ratio techniques to examine the possible
origins of chlorinated organics isolated from the
environment.Measurement of long-term historical trends of
chloromethane concentrations in the atmosphere from the study of ice
cores.Further studies on the physiological and biochemical
function of organochlorines and the metabolic pathways for their production
in the organisms know known to emit, produce or utilise
them.The development of new techniques for the characterisation
of soil AOX and for the study of the biogeochemistry of soil chloride and
mobilisation and sequestration of organchlorines in soil and
sediments.Further study of the identity, origin and
concentrations of organochlorines in precipitation.Examination
of the fate of PCDD/Fs in the body and establishment of whether or not the
body produces them.Further examination of the chemical and
biochemical mechanisms of biochlorination.Studies of the
paleogenetics of microbial chlorination and dechlorination to establish its
recent or historic origin.Development of environmental models
with the on-going collection of environmental monitoring data to test their
validity.It is encouraging that over 75% of the papers cited have appeared since
1990 (55% since 1995), suggesting that, amongst some researchers at least,
the view that organochlorine compounds are somehow ‘unnatural’
is no longer accepted and the natural chemistry of chlorine is a topic
worthy of more detailed investigation. It is hoped that this review may
both stimulate a wider appreciation of this conclusion as well as the study
of these and other topics concerned with natural processes involving
chlorine.9. EndpieceThe wealth of information and knowledge brought together from widely
dispersed sources, taken together, should provide convincing evidence for
the existence of a range of geological, chemical and biochemical cycles
involving chlorine in both inorganic and organic forms and provide a basis
for further work to explore, define and understand their key components. In
widening an appreciation of the natural world, and the impact that mankind
is having on it, it is to be hoped that the benefits associated with the
use of all synthetic chemicals, including those of chlorine, can be
maximised and the (inevitable) deleterious consequences of their
production, use and disposal can be minimized to provide for a more
sustainable long-term future. More immediately, whether or not we can bring
quickly wider access to safe drinking water to millions of people who
currently do not have it (25000 of whom die every day because this is so)
or provide countries where malaria is a killer disease with DDT as the most
effective means currently available to control the mosquito that transmits
it, depends on a rational and objective assessment of all the evidence for
and against the various possible options. I hope this review may play a
small part in allowing this to happen.10. AddendumSince the submission of the manuscript a number of relevant and
important publications have appeared. These are noted briefly below
according to the section of the review to which they are most relevant.
They serve to highlight the on-going interest in the topics surveyed and
the need constantly to take account of new work in forming judgements on
complex and critical matters.1. Two general texts have appeared. The first reviews the
technological and industrial signficance of chlorine and its
compounds;816 the second sets out the
arguments for a phase-out of the chlorine industry and proposes a new
approach to pollution prevention.817 Ref.
817 includes a section on proposed natural sources of organochlorine
compounds that, unfortunately, does not take account of the wealth of
recent (post-1997) work which has been brought together in this review. The
author challenges some of the evidence for the natural formation of
organochlorine compounds and argues for the irrelevance of much of the
rest. 2.1 A third text describes the evolution and economic
importance of evaporites.8182.2
Laboratory studies of hydrothermal processes occurring at high temperatures
and pressures (such as occur in geothermal vents at the sea floor) have
been reviewed,819 including the
decarboxylation of halogen-containing carboxylic acids in the temperature
range 383–533 K. 2.4 Atmospheric vertical profile
measurements820 (below 21 km) of HCl as a
proportion of total inorganic chlorine
(HCl/Cly) reveal a 31 ± 9%
increase from 1993 to 1997 following the Mount Pinatubo eruption. 2.5
Finlayson-Pittsand co-workers report821 that the distribution of ions in an aqueous
aerosol particle, such as sea-salt aerosol, is not uniform. Chloride ions
appear to concentrate at the air–water interface, an observation that
has implications for the production of volatile halogen-containing
compounds from sea-salt aerosol and current attempts to model such
processes. The stoichiometry (see eqn. (3))
of the reaction between Cl− and mixtures of aqueous nitric
and sulfuric acids and associated second-order kinetics have been
confirmed.822 Dibromine is formed823 during heterogeneous interactions of
Cl2, HCl and BrCl with the surfaces of bromide-containing ice.
4-Chlorocrotonaldehyde 113 has been proposed824 as a further ‘sentinel’ compound
for the role of chlorine atoms in tropospheric chemistry. 28 ± 8%
113 is formed as the sole chlorine-containing organic product from
the reaction of Cl with 1,3-butadiene 114 (emitted from motor
vehicles) at room temperature in air. The proportions of HCl (from H
abstraction) and C5H8Cl (from Cl addition) have been
measured in studies825 of the reaction of
isoprene with chlorine atoms. The branching ratio for HCl formation is 17.4
± 4%. Two modelling studies have appeared, one concerned with
halogen chemistry in the Arctic boundary layer during polar sunrise,826 the other with the atmospheric chemistry of
iodine in the marine boundary layer.8273.2 Unusual and complex chlorine-containing compounds, such as
115, continue to be isolated828
from natural sources (with appropriate control studies establishing their
non-artefactual origin). The isolation of herbacic acid 116, a
trichloroleucine metabolite similar to 39, has been
reported.8293.3.2 Harper has
reviewed recent developments in the study of the global chloromethane
cycle,830 particularly those which
indicate that the greater part of annual chloromethane flux arises not from
the oceans but from terrestrial sources. Khalil and Rasmussen show831 that soils (representative of a series of
ecosystems) are net emitters of chloroform and net sinks for chloromethane.
The latter observation magnifies the discrepancy between known sources of
chloromethane and global flux estimates based on measured tropospheric
concentrations and losses via reaction with hydroxyl radical,
HO•. Global burdens and distribution of HO•
have been updated.832–834 Errors which might arise from experimental
methods used to study surface–atmosphere trace gas exchange have been
evaluated.835 Lee-Taylor and Holland have
estimated836 that soil litter
decomposition may give rise to annual fluxes of (0.5 – 5.2) ×
103 t per year of bromomethane. Less bromomethane than previous
estimated is emitted from vehicles powered by lead-containing
gasoline.837 A series of short papers has
presented updates on bromomethane fluxes, sources and sinks.838–8403.4  The
potential for the development of non-opioid analgesics has been reviewed
briefly,841 following the isolation of
epibatidine 40 from frog skin. The synthesis of geodin 17
is under study842 as 17 is the
spirocoumaranone subunit of 117 a candidate for treating certain
feeding disorders. 4.2 Data on the concentrations and fluxes of
chloroacetic acids in rain and natural waters in Switzerland have
appeared.8434.5 Further
discussion has appeared of the global distribution of PCDD/Fs,844 the distribution of PCDD/Fs in the atmosphere,
soil, sediment and water,845 time trends
in local PCDD/F deposition,846 the
importance of combustion847–849 as sources of PCDD/Fs and of processes which
might lead to PCDD/F formation in incineration.850–852 Measured and estimated partitioning
between air and particles of PCDD/Fs has been examined as a function of
chlorine content.853 Rats fed
nonachloro-2-phenoxyphenol convert it to OCDD.8545.1 Van Peé and Ligon have
reviewed855 the bacterial biosynthesis of
pyrrolnitrin 99 and other phenylpyrrole derivatives. A novel
halogenase which chlorinates tryptophan 100 to 7-chlorotryptophan
101 has been isolated.8565.2 Recent studies857 conclude
that29–37% of the annual losses of hexachlorocyclohexanes
(HCHs) from the Arctic Ocean arise from microbial degradation. Rapid
anaerobic degradation of toxaphene has been observed in sewage
sludge.858 Poeleraends et al.
have concluded859 that a series of gram
positive haloalkane-utilizing bacteria isolated from geographically widely
separated sites have recently arisen from a common ancestor. 5.3
Vitamin C (at physiological levels) is reported to protect low-density
lipoprotein against hypochlorous acid-induced oxidative damage.860 Molecular chlorine generated by the
myeloperoxide–hydrogen peroxide–chloride system (in
vitro) effects chlorination of cytosine in bacterial RNA to give
118.861 8-Chloroadenine
119 has also been identified in independent related
studies.862 Further studies of protein
modification by hypochlorous acid863–866 and related bromine-containing
oxidants867,868 have been reported.
6. A recent reinvestigation869 of
the decline in concentrations of the components of toxaphene (a complex
mixture of hexa- to decachlorinated bornanes and bornenes) in Lake Superior
and Lake Ontario suggests that the rates of decrease are slower in large
and cold lakes compared with relatively small and warm lakes. The temporal
trends in the decline of persistent pollutants such as polychlorinated
biphenyls in biological material such as herring gull eggs may not simply
be indicative of overall decline in the wider environment but can be
affected by alterations in diet arising from changes in the structure of
the food-web.870 A new global multimedia
model seeks to simulate transport, partitioning and degradation of
persistent organic pollutants, such as HCH.871 Cortes and Hites872 have discussed some of the sampling and
analytical requirements that are necessary to permit statistically
significant temporal trends in atmospheric concentrations of semi-volatile
compounds to be observed. 7. More work has appeared on the
fractionation of 12C and 13C in the biodegradation of
trichloroethene and related compounds.873
Compound specific 12C∶13C ratios for
chloromethanes and chloroethanes have been determined for aqueous
samples.874 9. The issues posed
by DDT house spraying for the eradication of re-emerging malaria have been
discussed.875,876  12. References11.  AcknowledgementsI am grateful to my colleagues, James Franklin, Gordon Gribble, David
Harper, Kevin Jones, Bob Kalin, Bill Keene, Mike Larkin and Archie
McCulloch for their helpful comments on drafts of this review, for copies
of manuscripts prior to publication and for drawing my attention to
relevant publications.References‘Money’, R. Curtis and B. Elton, Blackadder II,
6 February 1986; see
http://www.xmission.com/~tchansen/blackadder/scripts/ba2-4-sc.htm.Greenspeak: a Study of Environmental Discourse, R.
Harré, J. Brockmeier and P. Mühlhäusler, SAGE
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA,
 1999. Search PubMed .The Life Millenium: The 100 Most Important Events and People of the
Past 1000 Years, ed. R. Friedman, Time-Life Books,
New York,  1998. Search PubMed .‘A review of recent epidemiological studies reporting
associations between drinking water disinfection and
cancer’,  P. A. Murphy and G. F. Craun, Water Chlorination, 1990, 6, 361 Search PubMed .‘Cholera epidemic traced to risk
miscalculation’,  C. Anderson, Nature, 1991, 354, 255 Search PubMed .Dimensions of Managing Chlorine in the Environment: Report of
the MIT/Norwegian Chlorine Policy Study, MIT Center for Technology,
Policy and Industrial Development, Cambridge, MA 02139, 1993..‘Chlorine in the Netherlands: Part I, An
Overview’,  R. Kleijn, A. Tukker and E. van der Voet, J. Ind. Ecol., 1997, 1, 95 Search PubMed .‘Michigan panel rebuts chlorine ban proposal’, E.
Kirschner, C&E News, 11 July 1994, p. 5..‘Total Chlorine Ban Not Supported by
Evidence’,  Water Eng. Manag.,  1995,
142, 26. Search PubMed .‘SETAC Issues Statement on Chlorine Workshop’,
Perspectives, 1994, 8, (2), setac, from
http://www/geog.buffalo.edu/GLP/Perspectives/v8n2/setac.html.‘Dutch environmentalists agree to chlorine sustainability
studies’, Spotlight, (56), May 1999, CEFIC,
Brussels..Handbook of Chlorination and Alternative Disinfectants, G.
C. White, Wiley-Interscience, John-Wiley and Sons Inc.,
NY, 4th edn.,  1999. Search PubMed .The Natural Chemistry of Chlorine in the Environment,
World Chlorine Council, Brussels, 2nd edn., 1999..‘Unexpectedly high concentrations of molecular chlorine in
coastal air’,  C. W. Spicer, E. G. Chapman, B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, R. A. Plastridge, J. M. Hubbe, J. D. Fast and C. M. Berkowitz, Nature, 1998, 394, 353 Search PubMed .‘3-Chlorotyrosine, a Specific Marker of
Myeloperoxidase-catalyzed Oxidation is Markedly Elevated in Low Density
Lipoprotein Isolated from Human Atherosclerotic Intima’,  S. L. Hazen and J. W. Heinecke, J. Clin. Invest., 1997, 99, 2075 Search PubMed .G. W. Gribble, Department of Chemistry, Dartmouth College, Hanover,
NH, USA, personal communication..‘Transport and Fate of Organic Compounds in the Global
Environment’,  K. Ballschmiter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1992, 31, 487 Search PubMed .‘The Equilibrium Distribution of Semivolatile Organochloro
Compounds between Atmosphere and Surface Water in the Atlantic
Ocean’,  J. Schreitmüller and K. Ballschmiter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 646 Search PubMed .‘Global Distribution of Persistent Organochlorine
Compounds’, S. L. Simonich and R. A. Hites, Science, 1995,
269, 1851..‘Dioxins in the Environment: A Review of Trend Data’,
R. E. Alcock and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996,
30, 3133..‘Interpretive Review of the Potential Adverse-Effects of
Chlorinated Organic-Chemicals on Human Health and the
Environment’,  I. C. Munro,
Regulat. Toxicol. Pharmacol.,  1994,
20, S1-S1026. Search PubMed .‘Toxicity of Chlorinated Organic Compounds: Effects of the
Introduction of Chlorine in Organic Molecules’,  D. Henschler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 1920 Search PubMed .‘Science, Occupational Exposure Limits and Regulations: A
Case Study on Organochlorine Solvents’,  D. Henschler, Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc., 1990, 51, 523 Search PubMed .‘Forum: Organochlorine Contaminants in the Great
Lakes’,   S. R. Carpenter, Ecol. Appl., 1995, 5, 291 Search PubMed .‘Risks of Organochlorine Contaminants to Great Lakes
Ecosystems are Overstated’,  W. E. Cooper, Ecol. Appl., 1995, 5, 293 Search PubMed .‘Organochlorine Contaminants in the Great Lakes: the Risks
are Real and Demand Action’,  T. Eder and W. Schmidt, Ecol. Appl., 1995, 5, 298 Search PubMed .‘Organochlorines in the Great Lakes Ecosystem: Sources,
Partitioning and Control’,  D. Mackay and A. Di Guardo, Ecol. Appl., 1995, 5, 301 Search PubMed .‘Toxic Contaminants in the Great Lakes: A Polythetic View of
the Issues and Evidence’,   J. F. Kitchell, Ecol. Appl., 1995, 5, 304 Search PubMed .‘Persistent Chlorinated Compounds in Fishes: Trends in
North America and Europe’, PTI Environmental Services, Bellevue,
Washington, DC for the Chemical Manufacturers Association, Arlington, VA,
USA, June 1996..‘Temporal Trends of PCC in Guillemot Eggs from the
Baltic’, U. Wideqvist, L. Reutergardh, M. Olsson, T. Odsjo and U. B.
Uvemo, Chemosphere, 1993, 27, 1987..‘Spatial Differences and Temporal Trends of Bioaccumulating
Halogenated Hydrocarbons in Livers of Atlantic Cod (Gadus morhua)
from the North Sea, 1977–1992’, J. de Boer, Proceedings of
the Scientific Symposium on the North Sea: Quality Status Report 1993,
18–21 April 1994, Ebeltoft, Denmark, 110–114..‘Recent Trends in Coastal Environmental Quality: Results from
the Mussel Watch Project’, NOAA, June 1995, cited in Water Env.
Technol., June, 1997, pp. 20–22..‘The Need for Adequate Biological Sampling in
Ecotoxicological Investigations—a Retrospective Study of 20
Years’ Pollution Monitoring’,  A. Bignert, A. Gothberg, S. Jensen, K. Litzen, T. Odsjo, M. Olsson and L. Reutergardh, Sci. Total Environ., 1993, 128, 121 Search PubMed .‘Biological Variation: an Important Factor to Consider in
Ecotoxicological Studies Based on Environmental Samples’,  A. Bignert, M. Olsson, C. Dewit, K. Litzen, C. Rappe and L. Reutergardh, Fres. J. Anal. Chem., 1994, 348, 76 Search PubMed .‘Synthesis of Tritium-labelled
5-Chloro-2′,3′-dideoxy-3′-fluorouridine (935U83)—a
Selective Anti-HIV Agent’,  J. A. Hill and D. D. Bankston, J. Label. Compd. Radiopharm., 1995, XXXVI, 713 Search PubMed .‘Practical Asymmetric Synthesis of Efavirenz (DMP 266), an
HIV-1 Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor’,  M. E. Pierce, R. L. Parsons, Jr., L. A. Radesca, Y. S. Lo, S. Silverman, J. R. Moore, Q. Islam, A. Choudhury, J. M. D. Fortunak, D. Nguyen, C. Luo, S. J. Morgan, W. P. Davis, P. N. Confalone, C. Chen, R. D. Tillyer, L. Frey, L. Tan, F. Xu, D. Zhao, A. S. Thompson, E. G. Corley, E. J. J. Grabowski, R. Reamer and P. J. Reider, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 8536 Search PubMed .‘Efavirenz. Antiviral for AIDS reverse transcriptase
inhibitor’,  A. Graul, X. Rabasseda and J. Castaner, Drugs Future, 1998, 23, 133 Search PubMed .‘Maracin and Maracen: New Types of Ethynyl Vinyl Ether and
α-Chloro Divinyl Ether Antibiotics from Sorangium cellulosum
with Specific Activity Against Mycobacteria’,  M. Herrmann, B. Böhlendorf, H. Irschik, H. Reichenbach and G. Höfle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1253 Search PubMed .‘Total Synthesis of (±)-Halomon by a
Johnson–Claisen Rearrangement’,  T. Schlama, R. Baati, V. Gouverneur, A. Valleix, J. R. Falck and C. Mioskowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 2085 Search PubMed .‘Structure Determination, Conformational Analysis, Chemical
Stability Studies and Antitumor Evaluation of the Cryptophycins. Isolation
of 18 New Analogs from Nostoc sp. Strains GSV 224’,  T. Golakoti, J. Ogino, C. E. Heltzel, T. L. Husabo, C. M. Jensen, L. K. Larsen, G. M. L. Patterson, R. E. Moore, S. L. Mooberry, T. H. Corbett and F. A. Valeriote, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12030 Search PubMed .‘In vitro pharmacology of cryptophycin 52 (LY355703)
in human tumor cell lines’,  M. M. Wagner, D. C. Paul, C. Shih, M. A. Jordan, L. Wilson and D. C. Williams, Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol., 1999, 43, 115 Search PubMed .‘Sampling and analysis of PCDDs and PCDFs in surface water
and drinking water at 0.001 ppq levels’,  C. Rappe, L. O. Kjeller and S. E. Kulp, Organohalogen Compd., 1990, 2, 207 Search PubMed .‘Quantitative determination of ppq-ppt levels of
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans in sediments
from the Arctic (Barents Sea) and the North Sea’,  M. Oehme, J. Klungsoyr, A. Biseth and M. Schlabach, Anal. Methods Instrum., 1993, 1, 153 Search PubMed .Use of the Semipermeable Membrane Device as an in situ
Sampler of Waterborne Bioavailable PCDD and PCDF Residues as Sub-Parts-per
Quadrillion Concentrations’,  J. A. Lebo, R. W. Gale, J. D. Petty, D. E. Tillitt, J. N. Huckins, J. C. Meadows, C. E. Orazio, K. R. Echols, D. J. Schroeder and L. E. Inmon, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995,  29, 2886 Search PubMed .‘Dynamics of organohalogen production by the ecologically
important fungus, Hypholoma fasciculare’,  F. J. M. Verhagen, F. B. J. Van Assema, B. K. H. L. Boekema, H. J. Swarts, J. B. P. A. Wijnberg and J. A. Field, FEMS Microbiol Lett., 1998, 158, 167 Search PubMed .‘Natural organohalogen production by
basidiomycetes’,  J. A. Field, J. M. Verhagen and E. de Jong, Tibtech, 1995, 13, 451 Search PubMed .‘The (Political) Science of Salt’,  G. Taubes, Science, 1997, 281, 898 Search PubMed .Photosynthesis, D. O. Hall and K. K. Rao, Cambridge
University Press, 6th edn.,  1999. Search PubMed .K. L. Kirk,
‘Biochemistry of the Elemental Halogens and Inorganic
Halides’: ‘Biochemistry of the Elements’, ed. E.
Frieden, volume 9A, Plenum Press, New
York,  1991, 96. Search PubMed .An Introduction to the Chemistry of the Sea, M. E. Q.
Pilson, Prentice-Hall Inc., Upper Saddle River,
New Jersey,  1998. Search PubMed .‘The budget and cycle of Earth’s natural
chlorine’,  T. E. Graedel and W. C. Keene, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1689 Search PubMed .‘Natural halocarbons in the air and in the
sea’,  J. E. Lovelock, Nature, 1975, 256, 193 Search PubMed .Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth, J. E. Lovelock,
Oxford University Press, Oxford,
 1995, p. 98. Search PubMed .‘A Role for Methyl Chloride in Evolution?’,  N. Winterton, Mutat. Res., 1996, 372, 147 Search PubMed .‘Preface: Reactive Chlorine Emissions
Inventory’,  T. E. Graedel and W. C. Keene, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8331 Search PubMed .‘Composite global emissions of reactive chlorine from
anthropogenic and natural sources: Reactive Chlorine Emissions
Inventory’,  W. C. Keene, M. A. K. Khalil, D.J. Erickson III, A. McCulloch, T. E. Graedel, J. M. Lobert, M. L. Aucott, S. L. Gong, D B. Harper, G. Kleiman, P. Midgley, R. M. Moore, C. Seuzaret, W. T. Sturges, C. M. Benkovitz, V. Koropalov, L. A. Barrie and Y.-F. Li, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8429 Search PubMed .‘Anthropogenic emissions of trichloromethane (chloroform,
CHCl3) and chlorodifluoromethane (HCFC-22): Reactive Chlorine
Emissions Inventory‘,  M. L. Aucott, A. McCulloch, T. E. Graedel, G. Kleiman, P.  Midgley and Y.-F. Li, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8405 Search PubMed .‘A general circulation model based calculation of HCl and
ClNO2 production from sea-salt dechlorination: Reactive Chlorine
Emissions Inventory’,  D. J. Erickson III, C. Seuzaret, W. C. Keene and S. L. Gong, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8347 Search PubMed .‘Natural emissions of chlorine-containing gases: Reactive
Chlorine Emissions Inventory’,  M. A. K. Khalil, R. M. Moore, D. B. Harper, J. M. Lobert, D. J. Erickson, V. Koropalov, W. T. Sturges and W. C. Keene, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8333 Search PubMed .‘Global emissions of hydrogen chloride and chloromethane from
coal combustion, incineration and industrial activities: Reactive Chlorine
Emissions Inventory’,  A. McCulloch, M. L. Aucott, C. M. Benkovitz, T. E. Graedel, G. Kleiman, P. M. Midgley and Y.-F. Li, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8391 Search PubMed .‘Industrial emissions of trichloroethene, tetrachloroethene
and dichloromethane: Reactive Chlorine Emissions Inventory’,  A. McCulloch, M. L. Aucott, T. E. Graedel, G. Kleiman, P. M. Midgley and Y.-F. Li, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8417 Search PubMed .‘Global chlorine emissions from biomass burning: Reactive
Chlorine Emissions Inventory’,  J. M. Lobert, W. C. Keene, J. A. Logan and R. Yevich, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8373 Search PubMed .The Principles and Applications of Inorganic Geochemistry,
G. Faure,
Macmillan Publishing, New York,
 1991, ch. 23, pp.
500–525. .Global Biogeochemical Cycles, ed. S. S. Butcher, R. J.
Charlson, G. H. Orians and G. V. Wolfe, Academic Press,
London,  1992. Search PubMed .Global Geochemical Cycles and Their Alteration by Man, ed.
W. Stumm, Heyden and Son Inc.,
Philadelphia,  1977. Search PubMed .‘The Oxygen Cycle’  J. C. G. Walker, in
the Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, ed. O. Hutzinger,
volume 1A: Search PubMed ; ‘The Natural Environment and the Biogeochemical
Cycles’, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin,  1980, pp.
87–104. Search PubMed .‘The Sulfur Cycle’, A. J. B. Zehnder and S. H. Zinder,
ibid, pp. 105–145..‘A geophysiologist’s thoughts on the natural sulphur
cycle’,  J. Lovelock, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Ser. B, Biol. Sci. London, 1997, 352, 143 Search PubMed .‘The Phosphorus Cycle’  J. Emsley, in
Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, ed O. Hutzinger,
volume 1A: ; ‘The Natural Environment and the Biogeochemical
Cycles’, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin,  1980, pp.
147–167. Search PubMed .‘The Nitrogen Cycles’,  R. Söderlund and
T. Rosswall, in
Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, ed O. Hutzinger,
volume 1B:  Search PubMed ; ‘The Natural Environment and the Biogeochemical
Cycles’, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin,  1982, pp.
61–81. Search PubMed .‘The Carbon Cycle’, A. J. B. Zehnder, ibid,
pp. 83–110..Chemical Elements in the Environment, C. Reimann and P. de
Caritat, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
 1998, pp. 88–91. Search PubMed .‘Tropospheric budget of reactive chlorine’,  T. E. Graedel and W. C. Keene, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 1995,  9, 47 Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric methyl chloride’,  M. A. K. Khalil and R. A. Rasmussen, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 1305 Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric chloroform’,  M. A. K. Khalil and R. A. Rasmussen, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 1151 Search PubMed .The Natural Selection of the Chemical Elements, R. J. P.
William and J. J. R. Fraústo da Silva, Clarendon
Press, Oxford,  1996,
p. 222 et seq.; 291, et seq. Search PubMed .‘The Natural Selection of the Elements’,  R. J. P. Williams, Chem. Brit., 1996, 42 Search PubMed .‘A new table of abundances of the elements in the solar
system’,  A. G. W. Cameron, in
Origins and Distribution of the Elements, ed. L. H. Ahrens,
Pergamon Press, London,
 1968, p. 125. Search PubMed .‘Solar-system abundances of the elements’,  E. Anders and M. Ebihara, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1982, 46, 2363 Search PubMed .Earth, F. Press and R.Siever, W. H. Freeman &
Co., San Francisco, 2nd edn.,
 1978. Search PubMed .An Introduction to Marine Biogeochemistry, S. M. Libes,
John Wiley & Sons, New York,
 1992. Search PubMed .Environmental Chemistry, S. E. Manahan, Lewis
Publishers, Boca Raton, 6th edn.,
 1994, p. 37. Search PubMed .Environmental Chemistry, P. O’Neill, Blackie
Academic and Professional, 3rd edn.,  1998. Search PubMed .Understanding our Environment: An Introduction to Environmental
Chemistry and Pollution, ed. R. M. Harrison, The Royal
Society of Chemistry, London,
 1992. Search PubMed .‘Chloride and organic chlorine in soil’  G. Öberg, Acta Hydrochim. Hydrobiol., 1998, 26, 137 Search PubMed .Principles of Isotope Geology, G. Faure,
Wiley,New York, 2nd edn,
 1982. Search PubMed .Stable Isotope Geochemistry, J. Hoefs,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 3rd edn.,
 1987. Search PubMed .‘36Cl in modern atmospheric
precipitation’,  C. Scheffel, A. Blinov, S. Massonet, H. Sachsenhauser, C. Stan-Sion, J. Beer, H. A. Synal, P. W. Kubik, M. Kaba and E. Nolte, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 1401 Search PubMed .Chemistry of the Elements, N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw,
Pergamon Press, Oxford,
 1984, Appendix 4, p. 1496. Search PubMed .The Global Water Cycle: Geochemistry and Environment, E. K.
Berner and R. A. Berner, Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ,  1987. Search PubMed .‘Why the sea is salt’,  F. MacIntyre, Sci. Am., 1970, 223, 104 Search PubMed .‘The steady state of the earth’s crust, atmosphere and
oceans’  R. Siever, Sci. Am., 1974, 230, 72 Search PubMed .The Chemical Evolution of the Atmosphere and Ocean, H. D.
Holland, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ,  1984. Search PubMed .Marine Geochemistry, R. Chester, Blackwell
Science, Oxford, 2nd edn.,
 2000. Search PubMed .‘Concentrations des eaux fluviales en éléments
majeurs et apport en solution aux océans’  M. Meybeck, Rev. Geol. Dyn. Geograph. Phys., 1979, 2, 215 Search PubMed .‘Salinity history of the Earth’s early
ocean’,  L. P. Knauth, Nature, 1998, 395, 554 Search PubMed .‘Geologic history of sea water: an attempt to state the
problem’  W. W. Rubey, Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., 1951, 62, 1111 Search PubMed .J. I. Drever,
Y.-H. Li and
J. B. Maynard, in
Chemical Cycles in the Evolution of the Earth, ed. C. B.
Gregor, R. M. Garrels, F. T. Mackenzie and J. B. Maynard,
Wiley, New York,  1988,
pp. 17–53. Search PubMed .‘Origin of chlorine and bromine in the
oceans’,  J.-G. Schilling, C. K. Unni and M. L. Bender, Nature, 1978, 273, 631 Search PubMed .‘Alteration of oceanic crust and geologic cycling of chlorine
and water’,   E. Ito, D. M. Harris and A. T. Anderson, Jr, Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta, 1983, 47, 1613 Search PubMed .‘Detection of Low-Temperature Hydrothermal Fluxes by Seawater
Mg and Ca Anomalies’,   S. de Villiers and B. K. Nelson, Science, 1999, 285, 721 Search PubMed .‘A Cooler Way to Balance The Sea’s Salt
Budget’,   R. A. Kerr, Science, 1999, 285, 657 Search PubMed .‘The Oceanic Production of Atmospheric Sea
Salt’,  D. C. Blanchard, J. Geophys. Res., 1985, 90, 961 Search PubMed .Air and Rain: The Beginnings of a Chemical Climatology, R.
A. Smith, Longmans, Green and Co.,
London,  1872. Search PubMed .‘The Yearly Circulation of Chloride and Sulfur in Nature:
Meteorological, Geochemical and Pedological Implications: Part
I’  E. Eriksson, Tellus, 1959, 11, 375 Search PubMed .‘The Yearly Circulation of Chloride and Sulfur in Nature:
Meteorological, Geochemical and Pedological Implications: Part
II’,  E. Eriksson, ibid., 1960, 12, 63 Search PubMed .‘Biogeochemical cycles and the air–sea exchange of
aerosols’,  R. A. Duce,
SCOPE,  1983, 21,
(Major Biogeochem. Cycles Interact.),
427. Search PubMed .‘Natural Sources of Gaseous Pollutants in the
Atmosphere’,   A. P. Altshuller, Tellus, 1958, 10, 479 Search PubMed .‘The conversion of sodium chloride to hydrogen chloride in
the atmosphere’,  R. C. Robbins, R. D. Cadle and D. L. Eckhardt, J. Meteorol., 1959, 16, 53 Search PubMed .‘The pH of deliquesced sea-salt aerosol in polluted marine
air’,  W. C. Keene and D. L. Savoie, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 2181 Search PubMed  correction, 1999, 26, 1315..‘Mechanism and kinetics of reactions between water soluble
salts and gaseous substances in the presence of water
vapor’,  N. Nikonova and D. A. Epshtein, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1952, 86, 353 Search PubMed .‘Kinetics of Atmospheric Chemical Reactions Involving
Aerosols’,  R. D. Cadle and R. C. Robbins, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1960, 30, 155 Search PubMed .‘The origin of the gaseous form of natural atmospheric
chlorine’,  R. Valach, Tellus, 1967, 19, 509 Search PubMed .‘On the source of gaseous chlorine in the marine
atmosphere’,   R. A. Duce, J. Geophys. Res., 1969, 74, 4597 Search PubMed .‘Einiges über den Einfluß des Meeres auf den
Chemismus der Luft’,  H. Cauer, Der Balneologie, 1938, 5, 409 (Chem. Abstr., 1941, 35, 3494) Search PubMed .‘Some problems of atmospheric chemistry’,  H. Cauer,
Compendium of Meteorology, ed. T. F. Malone,
American Meteorological Society,
Boston,  1951, pp.
1126–1136(Chem. Abstr.1952465953b.
 Search PubMed .‘The Kinetics of the Reaction of Ozone and Chloride Ion in
Acid Aqueous Solution’,  L. R. B. Yeatts, Jr. and H. Taube, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1949, 71, 4100 Search PubMed .‘Recent investigations in air chemistry’,  H. Junge, Tellus, 1956, 8, 127 Search PubMed .Personal communication from J.S. Levine, 1998 to authors of ref.
62..‘Magmatic gas source for the stratospheric SO2
cloud from the June 15 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo’,  H. R. Westrich and T. M. Gerlach, Geology, 1992, 20, 867 Search PubMed .‘Stratospheric Chlorine Injection by Volcanic Eruptions: HCl
Scavenging and Implications for Ozone’,  A. Tabazadeh and R. P. Turco, Science, 1993, 260, 1082 Search PubMed .‘Evolution of HCl concentrations in the lower stratosphere
from 1991 to 1996 following the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo’,  C. R. Webster, R. D. May, H. A. Michelsen, D. C. Scott, J. C. Wilson, H. H. Jonsson, C. A. Brock, J. E. Dye, D. Baumgardner, R. M. Stimpfle, J. P. Koplow, J. J. Margitan, M. H. Proffitt, L. Jaegle, R. L. Herman, H. Hu, G.J. Flesch and M. Loewenstein, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 995 Search PubMed .‘Increased chlorine dioxide over Antarctica caused by
volcanic aerosols from Mount Pinatubo’,  S. Solomon, R. W. Sanders, R. R. Garcia and J. G. Keys, Nature, 1993, 363, 245 Search PubMed .‘The geochemical cycling of reactive chlorine through the
marine troposphere’,  W. C. Keene, A. A. P. Pszenny, D. J. Jacob, R. A. Duce, J. N. Galloway, J. J. Schultz-Tokos, H. Sievering and J. F. Boatman, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 1990, 4, 407 Search PubMed .‘X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopic studies of the
heterogeneous reaction of gaseous nitric acid with sodium chloride:
kinetics and contribution to the chemistry of the marine
troposphere’,  J. M. Laux, J. C. Hemminger and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1994, 21, 1623 Search PubMed .‘Direct Observation of Heterogeneous Chemistry in the
Atmosphere’,  E. E. Gard, M. J. Kleeman, D. S. Gross, L. S. Hughes, J. O. Allen, B. D. Morrical, D. P. Fergenson, T. Dienes, M. E. Gälli, R. J. Johnson, G. R. Cass and K. A. Prather, Science, 1998, 279, 1184 Search PubMed .‘Halogens in the Atmosphere’,  R. J. Cicerone, Rev. Geophys. Space. Phys., 1981, 19, 123 Search PubMed .‘Sources of Stratospheric Gaseous Chlorine’,  J. A. Ryan and N. R. Mukherjee, Rev. Geophys. Space Phys., 1975, 13, 650 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous chlorine chemistry in the tropopause
region’,  S. Solomon, S. Borrmann, R. R. Garcia, R. Portmann, L. Thomason, L. R. Poole, D. Winkler and M. P. McCormick, J. Geophys. Res., 1997, 102, 21411 Search PubMed .‘Halogen oxides-radicals, sources and reservoirs in the
laboratory and in the atmosphere’  R. P. Wayne, G. Poulet, P. Biggs, J. P. Burrows, R. A. Cox, P. J. Crutzen, G. D. Hayman, M. E. Jenkin, G. Lebras, G. K. Moortgat, U. Platt and R. N. Schindler, Atmos. Environ., 1995, 29, 2677 Search PubMed .‘HOX, NOX and ClOX–their role in atmospheric
photochemistry’,  S. C. Wofsy and M. B. McElroy, Can. J. Chem., 1974, 52, 1582 Search PubMed .‘An examination of the inorganic chlorine budget in the lower
stratosphere’,   G. P. Bonne, R. M. Stimpfle, R. C. Cohen, P. B. Voss, K. K. Perkins, J. G. Anderson, R. J. Salawitch, J. W. Elkins, G. S. Dutton, K. W. Jucks and G. C. Toon, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 1957 Search PubMed .‘Progress toward a quantitative understanding of Antarctic
ozone depletion’,  S. Solomon, Nature, 1990, 347, 347 Search PubMed .‘Rethinking reactive halogen budgets in the mid-latitude
lower stratosphere’,   V. L. Dvortsov, M. A. Geller, S. Solomon, S. M. Schauffler, E. L. Atlas and D. R. Blake, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 1699 Search PubMed .‘Decline in the Tropospheric Abundance of Halogen from
Halocarbons: Implications for Stratospheric Ozone
Depletion’,  S. A. Montzka, J. H. Butler, R. C. Myers, T. M. Thompson, T. H. Swanson, A. D. Clarke, L. T. Lock and J. W. Elkins, Science, 1996, 272, 1318 Search PubMed .‘Stratospheric ozone depletion and future levels of
atmospheric chlorine and bromine’,  M. J. Prather and R. T. Watson, Nature, 1990, 344, 729 Search PubMed .‘Inorganic Cl cycling in the marine boundary layer: a
review’,  W. C.  Keene, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers.,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  1995,
pp. 363–373. Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous chemistry in the troposphere: experimental
approaches and applications to the chemistry of sea salt
particles’,  D. O. DeHaan, T. Brauers, K. Oum, J. Stutz, T. Nordmeyer and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1999, 18, 343 Search PubMed .‘Evidence of inorganic chlorine gases other than hydrogen
chloride in marine surface air’,  A. A. P. Pszenny, W. C. Keene, D. J. Jacob, S. Fan, J. R. Maben, M. P. Zetwo, M. Springer-Young and J. N. Galloway, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1993, 20, 699 Search PubMed .‘Measurement technique for the determination of photolyzable
chlorine and bromine in the atmosphere’,  G. A. Impey, P. B. Shepson, D. R. Hastie and L. A. Barrie,  J. Geophys. Res., 1997, 102, 15999 Search PubMed .‘Measurements of photolyzable chlorine and bromine during the
polar sunrise experiment,  G. A. Impey, P. B. Shepson, D. R. Hastie, L. A. Barrie and K. G. Anlauf, J. Geophys. Res., 1997, 102, 16005 Search PubMed .‘Ozone destruction and photochemical reactions at polar
sunrise in the lower Arctic atmosphere’,  L. A. Barrie, J. W. Bottenheim, R. C. Schnell, P. J. Crutzen and R. A. Rasmussen, Nature, 1988, 334, 138 Search PubMed .‘The role of BrNO3 in marine tropospheric
chemistry: a model study’,   R. Sander, Y. Rudich, R. von Glasow and P. J. Crutzen, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999,  26, 2857 Search PubMed .‘Activation of Br2 and BrCl via uptake of
HOBr onto aqueous salt solutions’,  S. Fickert, J. W. Adams and J. N. Crowley, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 23719 Search PubMed .‘A mechanism for halogen release from sea-salt aerosol in the
remote marine boundary layer’,  R. Vogt, P. J. Crutzen and R. Sander, Nature, 1996, 383, 327 Search PubMed .‘Surface ozone depletion in Arctic spring sustained by
bromide reactions on aerosols’,  S.-M. Fan and D. J. Jacob, Nature, 1992, 359, 522 Search PubMed .‘DOAS Measurements of Tropospheric Bromine Oxide in
Mid-Latitudes’,   K. Hebestreit, J. Stutz, D. Rosen, V. Matveiv, M. Peleg, M. Luria and U. Platt, Science, 1999, 283, 55 Search PubMed .‘Ozone in the remote boundary layer: A possible role for
halogens’,  R. R. Dickerson, K. P. Rhoads, T. P. Carsey, S. J. Oltmans, J. P. Burrows and P. J. Crutzen, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 21385 Search PubMed .‘Measurements of photolyzable halogen compounds and bromine
radicals during the Polar Sunrise Experiment 1997’,  G. A. Impey, C. M. Mihele, K. G. Anlauf, L. A. Barrie, D. R. Hastie and P. B. Shepson, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 34, 21 Search PubMed .‘Iodine: its possible role in tropospheric
photochemistry’,   W. L. Chameides and D. D. Davies, J. Geophys. Res., 1980, 85, 7383 Search PubMed .‘Iodine chemistry and its role in halogen activation and
ozone loss in the marine boundary layer: a model study’,  R. Vogt, R. Sander, R. Von Glasow and P. J. Crutzen, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 32, 375 Search PubMed .‘Chemistry of halogen oxides in the troposphere: Comparison
of model calculations with recent field data’,  J. Stutz, K. Hebestreit, B. Alicke and U. Platt, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 34, 65 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous Kinetics of Uptake of HOBr on Solid Alkali
Metal Halides at Ambient Temperature’,  M. Mochida, H. Akimoto, H. van den Bergh and M. J. Rossi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 4819 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous chemistry in the troposphere: a modern surface
chemistry approach to the study of fundamental processes’,  J. C. Hemminger, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1999, 18, 387 Search PubMed .‘The mechanism of reactive NO3 uptake on dry NaX
(X = Cl, Br)’,   M. Yu. Gershenzon, S. Il’in, N. G. Fedotov, Y. M. Gershenzon, E. V. Aparina and V. V. Zelenov, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 34, 119 Search PubMed .‘Kinetics of the Heterogeneous Reaction of HNO3
with NaCl: Effect of Water Vapor’,  J. A. Davies and R. A. Cox, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7631 Search PubMed .‘A molecular diffusion tube study of
N2O5 and HONO2 interacting with NaCl and
KBr at ambient temperature’,  T. G. Koch, H. van den Bergh and M. J. Rossi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 2687 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous reactivity of the nitrate radical: reactions
on halogen salt at ambient temperature and on ice in the presence of HX (X
= Cl, Br, I) at 190 K’,  S. Seisel, B. Flückiger, F. Caloz and M. J. Rossi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 2257 Search PubMed .‘Effect of Water on the HNO3 Pressure Dependence
of the Reaction between Gas-Phase HNO3 and NaCl
Surfaces’,  S. Ghosal and J. C. Hemminger, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 4777 Search PubMed .‘Reactivity of BrNO2 and ClNO2 with
Solid Alkali Salt Substrates’,   F. Caloz, S. Seisel, F. F. Fenter and M. J. Rossi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7470 Search PubMed .‘Low temperature of chlorine nitrate with water ice:
formation of molecular nitric acid’,  A. B. Horn, J. R. Sodeau, T. B. Roddis and N. A. Williams, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 1721 Search PubMed .‘Mechanism of the Heterogeneous Reaction of Hydrogen Chloride
with Chlorine Nitrate and Hypochlorous Acid on Water Ice’,  A. B. Horn, J. R. Sodeau, T. B. Roddis and N. A. Williams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 6107 Search PubMed .‘Ab Initio Model Study of the Mechanisms of Chlorine
Nitrate Hydrolysis on Ice’,  R. Bianco and J. T. Hynes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 309 Search PubMed .‘Proton transfer reactions on the surface of ice:
heterogeneous reactions involved in stratospheric ozone
depletion’,  R. Bianco, B. J. Gertner and J. T. Hynes, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 518 Search PubMed .‘A Theoretical Study of the Reaction of ClONO2
with HCl on Ice’,  R. Bianco and J. T. Hynes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 3797 Search PubMed .‘Condensed-Phase Products in Heterogeneous Reactions:
N2O5, ClONO2 and HNO3 Reacting
on Ice Films at 185 K’,  M. A. Zondlo, S. B. Barone and M. A. Tolbert, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 5735 Search PubMed .‘The heterogeneous reaction of N2O5
with HBr on ice: comparison with N2O5 +
HCl’,  S. Seisel, B. Flückiger and M. J. Rossi, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 811 Search PubMed .‘Multiphase Chemistry of N2O5,
ClNO2 and BrNO2’,  F. Schweitzer, P. Mirabel and C. George, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 3942 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous chemistry of nitryl halides in relation to
tropospheric halogen activation’,  F. Schweitzer, Ph. Mirabel and Ch. George, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 34, 101 Search PubMed .‘The hydrolysis of ClONO2 on sub-micron liquid
sulfuric acid aerosol’,  S. M. Ball, A. Fried, B. E. Henry and M. Mozurkevich, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 3339 Search PubMed .‘HONO Solubility and Heterogeneous Reactivity on Sulfuric
Acid Surfaces’,  C. A. Longfellow, T. Imamura, A. R. Ravishankara and D. R. Hanson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 3323 Search PubMed .‘Reaction of ClONO2 with H2O and HCl in
Sulfuric Acid and
HNO3/H2SO4/H2O
Mixtures’,  D. R. Hanson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 4794 Search PubMed .‘HOBr in Sulfuric Acid Solutions; Solubility and Reaction
with HCl as a Function of Temperature and Concentration’,  G. C. G. Waschewsky and J. P. D. Abbatt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 5312 Search PubMed .‘Equilibrium Partial Pressures, Thermodynamic Properties of
Aqueous and Solid Phases, and Cl2 Production from Aqueous HCl
and HNO3 and Their Mixtures’,  M. Massucci, S. L. Clegg and P. Brimblecombe, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 4209 Search PubMed .‘Temperature dependencies of the Henry’s Law constant
and the aqueous phase dissociation constant of bromine
chloride’,  W. P. Bartlett and D. W. Margerum, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 3410 Search PubMed .Ref. 94, ch. 4..‘Formation of chemically active chlorine compounds by
reactions of atmospheric NaCl particles with gaseous
N2O5 and ClONO2’,  B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, M. J. Ezell and J. N. Pitts, Jr., Nature, 1989, 337, 241 Search PubMed .‘The reaction of gaseous N2O5 with
solid NaCl at 298 K: estimated lower limit to the reaction probability and
its potential role in tropospheric and stratospheric
chemistry’,  F. E. Livingston and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1991, 18, 17 Search PubMed .‘Chlorine atoms as a potential tropospheric oxidant in the
marine boundary layer’,  B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1993, 19, 235 Search PubMed .‘Formation of Molecular Chlorine from the Photolysis of Ozone
and Aqueous Sea-Salt Particles’,  K. W. Oum, M. J. Lakin, D. O. DeHaan, T. Brauers and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Science, 1998, 279, 74 Search PubMed .‘Reaction of NO2 with NaCl and implications of
NOCl formation’,  B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Nature, 1983, 306, 676 Search PubMed .‘Bromine activation in the troposphere by the dark reaction
of O3 with seawater ice’,  K. W. Oum, M. J. Lakin and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 3923 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous photochemical sources of atomic Cl in the
troposphere’,  C. Zetzsch and W. Behnke, Bericht. Bunsen Ges. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 488 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous formation of chlorine atoms from various
aerosols in the presence of ozone and HCl’,  W. Behnke and C. Zetzsch, J. Aerosol Sci., 1989, 20, 1167 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous photochemical formation of chlorine atoms from
NaCl aerosol, NOx and ozone’,  W. Behnke and C. Zetzsch, J. Aerosol Sci., 1990, 21, S229 Search PubMed .‘Production of a photolytic precursor of atomic Cl from
aerosols and Cl− in the presence of
O3’,  W. Behnke,
V. Scheer and
C. Zetzsch, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  1995,
pp. 375–384. Search PubMed .‘Formation of atomic chlorine from sea spray via photolysis
of nitryl chloride—determination of the sticking coefficient of
N2O5 on NaCl aerosol’,  W. Behnke, H.-U. Kruger, V. Scheer and C. Zetzsch, J. Aerosol Sci., 1991, 22, S609 Search PubMed .‘Production and decay of ClNO2 from the reaction
of gaseous N2O5 with NaCl solution: bulk and aerosol
experiments’,  W. Behnke, C. George, V. Scheer and C. Zetzsch, J. Geophys. Res., 1997, 102, 3795 Search PubMed .‘The influence of NaBr/NaCl ratio on the
Br−-catalysed production of halogenated
radicals’,  W. Behnke, M. Elend, U. Krüger and C. Zetzsch, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 34, 87 Search PubMed .‘Model study indicating halogen activation and ozone
destruction in polluted air masses transported to the sea’,  R. Sander and P. J. Crutzen, J. Geophys. Res., 1996, 101, 9121 Search PubMed .‘Mechanisms for the release of halogens from sea-salt
particles by free radical reactions’,  M. Mozurkewich, J. Geophys. Res., 1995, 100, 14199 Search PubMed .‘Formation of Nitrosyl Chloride from Salt Particles in
Air’,  W. H. Schroeder and P. Urone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1974, 8, 756 Search PubMed .‘The Reaction of Nitrogen Dioxide with Sea Salt
Aerosol’,  D. D. Weis and G. E. Ewing, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 4865 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous processes involving sodium halide particles
and ozone: molecular bromine release in the marine boundary layer in the
absence of nitrogen oxides’,  J. Hirokawa, K. Onaka, Y. Kajii and H. Akimoto, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 2449 Search PubMed .‘BrCl production in NaBr/NaCl/HNO3/O3
solutions representative of sea-salt aerosols in the marine boundary
layer’,  R. S. Disselkamp, E. G. Chapman, W. R. Barchet, S. D. Colson and C. D. Howd, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 2183 Search PubMed .‘DOAS-observation of halogen radical catalysed arctic
boundary layer ozone destruction during the ARCTOC-campaigns 1995 and 1996
in Ny-Ålesund, Spitsbergen’,  M. Tuckermann, R. Ackermann, C. Gölz, H. Lorenzen-Schmidt, T. Senne, J. Stutz, B. Trost, W. Unold and U. Platt, Tellus Ser. B, 1997, 49, 533 Search PubMed .‘The role of bromine and chlorine chemistry for Arctic ozone
depletion events in Ny-Ålesund and comparison with model
calculations’,  M. Martinez, T. Arnold and D. Perner, Ann. Geophys., 1999, 17, 941 Search PubMed .‘Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for Use in
Stratospheric Modeling, Evaluation No. 10’, W. B. deMore, S. P.
Sander, D. M. Golden, R. F. Hampson, M. J. Kurylo, C. J. Howard, A. R.
Ravishankara, C. E. Kolb and M. J. Molina, 1992, JPL Publ., 92-20,
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Santa Monica, CA..‘Arctic tropospheric chemistry: an overview’,  L. Barrie and U. Platt, Tellus Ser. B, 1997, 49, 450 Search PubMed .‘Reply’,  D. D. Parrish, C. J. Hahn, E. J. Williams, R. B. Norton, F. C. Fehsenfeld, H. B. Singh, J. D. Shetter, B. W. Gandrud and B. A. Ridley, J. Geophys. Res., 1993, 98, 14995 Search PubMed .‘Low ozone in the marine boundary layer of the tropical
Pacific Ocean: Photochemical loss, chlorine atoms, and
entrainment’,  H. B. Singh, G. L. Gregory, B. Anderson, E. Browell, G. W. Sachse, D. D. Davis, J. Crawford, J. D. Bradshaw, R. Talbot, D. R. Blake, D. Thornton, R. Newell and J. Merrill, J. Geophys. Res., 1996, 101, 1907–1917 Search PubMed .‘The indirect determination of chlorine atom concentration in
the troposphere from changes in the patterns of non-methane
hydrocarbons’,  J. Rudolph, B. Ramacher, C. Plass-Dülmer, K. P. Müller and R. Koppmann, Tellus, Ser. B, 1997, 49, 592 Search PubMed .‘Measurements of C2-C6 hydrocarbons
during the Polar Sunrise 1992 Experiment: Evidence for Cl atom and Br atom
chemistry’,  B. T. Jobson, H. Niki, Y. Yokouchi, J. Bottenheim, F. Hopper and R. Leaitch, J. Geophys. Res., 1994, 99, 25355 Search PubMed .‘Measurements of C2-C7 hydrocarbons
during the Polar Sunrise Experiment 1994: further evidence for halogen
chemistry in the troposphere’,  P. A. Ariya, B. T. Jobson, R. Sander, H. Niki, G. W. Harris, J. F. Hopper and K. G. Anlauf, J. Geophys. Res., 1998, 103, 13169 Search PubMed .‘Polar sunrise experiment 1995: hydrocarbon measurements and
tropospheric Cl- and Br-atoms chemistry’,  P. A. Ariya, H. Niki, G. W. Harris, K. G. Anlauf and D. E. J. Worthy, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 931 Search PubMed .‘Tropospheric hydroxyl and atomic chlorine concentrations,
and mixing timescales determined from hydrocarbon and halocarbon
measurements made over the Southern Ocean’,  O. W. Wingenter, D. R. Blake, N. J. Blake, B. C. Sive, F. S. Rowland, E. Atlas and F. Flocke, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 21819 Search PubMed .‘The budgets for ethane and tetrachloroethene: is there
evidence for an impact of reactions with chlorine atoms in the
atmosphere?’,  J. Rudolph, R. Koppmann and C. Plass-Dülmer, Atmos. Environ., 1996, 30, 1887 Search PubMed .‘Trichloroethene and tetrachloroethene: tropospheric probes
for Cl- and Br-atom reactions during the polar sunrise’,  P. A. Ariya, V. Catoire, R. Sander, H. Niki and G. W. Harris, Tellus, Ser. B, 1997, 49, 583 Search PubMed .‘Hydrocarbon measurements during tropospheric ozone depletion
events: evidence for halogen atom chemistry’,  B. Ramacher, J. Rudolph and R. Koppmann, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 3633 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous and Homogeneous Chemistry of Reactive Halogen
Compounds in the Lower Troposphere’,  U. Platt and G. K. Moortgat, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 34, 1 Search PubMed .‘Sunrise ozone destruction found in the sub-tropical marine
boundary layer’,  I. Nagao, K. Matsumoto and H. Tanaka, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 3377 Search PubMed .‘Halogen atom concentrations in the Arctic troposphere
derived from hydrocarbon measurements: Impact on the budget of
formaldehyde’,  J. Rudolph, B. R. Fu, A. Thompson, K. Anlauf and J. Bottenheim, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 2941 Search PubMed .‘Short term variations in the C-13/C-12 ratio of CO as a
measure of Cl activation during tropospheric ozone depletion events in the
Arctic’,  T. Rockmann, C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer, P. J. Crutzen and U. Platt, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 1691 Search PubMed .‘Kinetics and mechanism of the reaction of chlorine atoms
with 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene (isoprene) at 298 K’,  M. L. Ragains and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 1509 Search PubMed .‘Laboratory kinetic studies on the reaction of chlorine atoms
with species of biogenic origin: Δ3-carene, isoprene,
methacrolein and methyl vinyl ketone’,  C. E. Canosa-Mas, H. R. Hutton-Squire, M. D. King, D. J. Stewart, K. C. Thompson and R. P. Wayne, J. Atmos. Chem., 1999, 34, 163 Search PubMed .‘Isoprene over the Amazon basin’,  R. A. Rasmussen and M. A. K. Khalil, J. Geophys. Res., 1988, 93, 1417 Search PubMed .‘Unique products of the reaction of isoprene with atomic
chlorine: Potential markers of chlorine atom chemistry’,  T. Nordmeyer, W. Wang, M. L. Ragains, B. Finlayson-Pitts, C. W. Spicer and R. A. Plastridge, Geophy. Res. Lett., 1997, 24, 1615 Search PubMed .‘Organic Nitrates of Isoprene as Atmospheric Trace
Compounds’,  G. Werner, J. Kastler, R. Looser and K. Ballschmiter, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1634 Search PubMed .‘Rate and mechanism of the reactions of OH and Cl with
2-methy-3-buten-2-ol’,  C. Ferronato, J. J. Orlando and G. S. Tyndall, J. Geophys. Res., 1998, 103, 25579 Search PubMed .‘Reactive chlorine: a potential sink for dimethylsulfide and
hydrocarbons in the marine boundary layer’,  W. C. Keene, D. J. Jacob and S.-M. Fan, Atmos. Environ., 1996, 30, i–iii Search PubMed .‘Flux estimation of oceanic dimethyl sulfide around North
America’,  S. Sharma, L. A. Barrie, D. Plummer, J. C. McConnell, P. C. Brickell, M. Levasseur, M. Gosselin and T. S. Bates, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 21327 Search PubMed .‘Halomethane:bisulfide/halide ion methyltransferase, an
unusual corrinoid enzyme of environmental significance isolated from an
aerobic methylotroph using chloromethane as the sole carbon
source’,  C. Coulter, J. T. G. Hamilton, W. C. McRoberts, L. Kulakov, M. J. Larkin and D. B. Harper, Appl. Environ. Mbl., 1999, 65, 4301 Search PubMed .‘Heterogeneous reactions of Cl2 with sea salts at
ambient temperature: Implications for halogen exchange in the
atmosphere’,  M. Mochida, J. Hirokawa, Y. Kajii and H. Akimoto, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 3927 Search PubMed .‘Methyl chloride formation by gas phase thermal chlorine atom
reaction with methyl iodide and methyl bromide’,  W. S. Golliff and F. S. Rowland, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1997, 24, 3029 Search PubMed .Biochemistry, L. Stryer, W. H. Freeman and Co., 1995, 4th
edn., pp. 653–682..‘The metal centers of the photosynthetic oxygen-evolving
complex’,  G. C. Dismukes, Photochem. Photobiol., 1986, 43, 99 Search PubMed .‘Manganese cluster in photosynthesis: where plants oxidise
water to oxygen’,  V. K. Yachandra, K. Sauer and M. P. Klein, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 2927 Search PubMed .‘Role of chloride in photosynthesis: 1 Chloride requirement
of electron transport’,  G. Hind, H. Y. Nakatani and S. Izawa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1969, 172, 277 Search PubMed .‘Role of chloride-ion in Photosystem-II 1. Effect of chloride
ion on Photosystem-II electron-transport and on hydroxylamine
inhibition’,  P. M. Kelley and S. Izawa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1978, 502, 198 Search PubMed .‘Studies on the mechanism of chloride action on
photosynthetic water oxidation’,  S. M. Theg, P. A. Jursinic and P. H. Homann, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1984, 766, 636 Search PubMed .‘The relations between chloride, calcium and polypeptide
requirements of photosynthetic water oxidation’,  P. H. Homann, J. Bioenerg. Biomembr., 1987, 19, 105 Search PubMed .‘The Oxygen-Evolving Complex Requires Chloride To Prevent
Hydrogen Peroxide Formation’,  P. L. Fine and W. D. Frasch, Biochemistry, 1992, 31, 12204 Search PubMed .‘The photosynthetic oxygen-evolving complex requires chloride
for its redox state S2-S3 and
S3-S0 transitions but not for
S0-S1 and S1-S2
transitions’,  H. Wincencjusz, H. J. van Gorkom and and C. F. Yocum, Biochemistry, 1997, 36, 3663 Search PubMed .‘Modelling the Photosynthetic Water Oxidation Center:
Chloride/Bromide Incorporation and Reversible Redox Processes in the
Complexes Mn4O3X(OAc)3(dbm)3 (X
= Cl, Br) and
(pyH)3[Mn4O3Cl7(OAc)3
]’,  S. Y. Wang, H.-L. Tsai, E. Libby, K. Folting, W. E. Streib, D. N. Hendrickson and G. Christou, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 7578 Search PubMed .‘Beiträge zur Chemie einiger Seethiere (Contribution to
the chemistry of a sea animal)’,  E. Dreschel, Z. Biol., 1896, 33, 85 Search PubMed .‘The iodine compound of the naturally occurring iodine
proteins. The constitution of the iodogorgoic acid’,  M. Henze, Z. Physiol. Chem., 1907, 51, 64 Search PubMed .‘The history of iodogorgoic acid’,  M. Henze, Z. Physiol. Chem., 1911, 72, 505 Search PubMed .‘Isolation of the crystalline form of the compound containing
iodine which occurs in the thyroid’,  E. C. Kendall, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 1915, 64, 2042 Search PubMed .‘Tyrian Purple: An Ancient Dye, A Modern
Problem’,  J. T. Baker, Endeavour, 1974, 33, 11 Search PubMed .‘Royal Purple Dye: The Chemical Reconstruction of the Ancient
Mediterranean Industry’,  P. E. McGovern and R. H. Michel, Acc. Chem. Res., 1990, 23, 152 Search PubMed .‘The Elder Pliny’s Chapters on Historia
Naturalis discussing Chemical Subjects’, Book 9, Sect.
60–65, ch. XXXVI–XLI cited in ref. 239..‘Über den Farbstoff des antiken Purpurs aus Murex
brandaris’,  P. Friedländer, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1909, 42, 765 Search PubMed .‘Zur Kenntnis der Flechtenstoffe’,  W. Zopf, Ann., 1904, 336, 46 Search PubMed .‘A lichen substance containing chlorine’,  T. J. Nolan, Chem. Ind., 1934, 512 Search PubMed .‘The chemical constitution of lichens found in Ireland,
Buellia canescens, Part 3’,  T. J. Nolan, J. Algar, E. P. McCann, W. A. Manahan and N. Nolan, Sci. Proc. R. Dublin Soc., 1948, 24, 319 Search PubMed .W. Zopf, Die Flechtenstoffe, 1907, S. 226..Nature, May 26, 1934, p. 808..‘Uber einen chlorhaltigen Flechtenstoff I’,  G. Koller and K. Pöpl, Monatsh., 1934, 64, 106 Search PubMed .‘Zur Kenntnis der Flechtenbestandteile. IV Über
Chloratranorin’,  A. St. Pfau, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1934, 17, 1319 Search PubMed .‘Studies in the biochemistry of microorganisms LI: The
metabolic products of Aspergillus terreus Thom., Part II: Two new
chlorine-containing mould metabolic products, Geodin and
Erdin’,  H. Raistrick and G. Smith, Biochem. J., 1936, 30, 1315 Search PubMed .‘Studies in the biochemistry of microorganisms LX:
Griseofulvin, C17H17O6Cl, a Metabolic
Product of Penicillium griseo-fulvum Dierckx’,  A. E. Oxford, H. Raistrick and P. Simonart, Biochem. J., 1939, 33, 240 Search PubMed .‘Studies in the biochemistry of microorganisms 65A: A survey
of chlorine metabolism by moulds: B: Caldariomycin,
C5H8O2Cl2, a metabolic product
of Caldariomyces fumago Woronichin’,  P. W. Clutterbuck, S. L. Mukhopadhyay, A. E. Oxford and H. Raistrick, Biochem. J., 1940, 34, 664 Search PubMed .‘The Occurrence and Metabolism of Carbon–Halogen
Compounds’,  L. Fowden, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1968, 171, 5 Search PubMed .‘The Biochemistry of Carbon-Halogen Bonds’,  S. Doonan, in
The Chemistry of the Carbon-Halogen Bond, ed. S. Patai,
 1972, vol. 2, pp.
865–916. Search PubMed .Naturally-Produced Organohalogens: Proceedings of the First
Conference on Naturally Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall
and E. W. B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995. Search PubMed .‘Chlorinated compounds in the biosphere: natural
production’,  G. W. Gribble,
Encyclopaedia of Environmental Analysis and Remediation, ed.
R. A. Meyers, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York,  1998, pp.
972–1035. Search PubMed .‘Naturally Occurring Organohalogen Compounds—A
Comprehensive Survey’,  G. W. Gribble, Prog. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod., 1996, 68, 1 Search PubMed .‘The diversity of natural organochlorines in living
organisms’,  G. W. Gribble, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1699 Search PubMed .‘Naturally Occurring Organohalogen Compounds’,  G. W. Gribble, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 141 Search PubMed .‘The diversity of naturally ocurring organobromine
compounds’,  G. W. Gribble, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1999, 28, 335 Search PubMed .‘The Natural Production of Organobromine
Compounds’,  G. W. Gribble, Environ. Sci.& Polllut. Res., 2000, 7, 37 Search PubMed .‘Clean Production Strategies’, ed. T. Jackson,
Lewis Publishers, London,
 1993, ch. 8. Search PubMed .‘Drinking water disinfection by-products’,  S. D. Richardson, in
Encyclopaedia of Environmental Analysis and Remediation, ed.
R. A. Meyers, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York,  1998, pp.
1398–1421. Search PubMed .‘Chondrocole A and B, two halogenated
dimethylhexahydrobenzofurans from the red alga, Chondroccus
Hornemanni (Mertens) Schmitz’,  B. J. Burreson, F. X. Woolard and R. E. Moore, Tetrahedron Lett., 1975, 2155 Search PubMed .‘Neocarzilins A and B, novel polyenones from Streptomyces
carzinostaticus’,  S. Nozoe, N. Ishii, G. Kusano, K. Kikuchi and T. Ohta, Tetrahedron Lett., 1992, 33, 7547 Search PubMed .‘Chlorinated acetylenes from the nudibranch Diaulula
sandiegensis’,  R. P. Walker and D. J. Faulkner, J. Org. Chem., 1981, 46, 1475 Search PubMed .‘Kedarcidin, a new chromoprotein antitumor antibiotic:
structure elucidation of Kedarcidin chromophore’,  J. E. Leet, D. R. Schroeder, S. J. Hofstead, J. Golik, K. L. Colson, S. Huang, S. E. Klohr, T. W. Doyle and J. A. Matson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 7946 Search PubMed .‘KS-504 compounds, novel inhibitors of Ca2+ and
calmodulin-dependent cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase from Mollisia
ventosa’,  S. Nakanishi, K. Ando, I. Kawamoto, T. Yasuzawa, H. Sano and H. Kase, J. Antibiot., 1989, XLII, 1775 Search PubMed .‘Structures of Novel Calmodulin Inhibitors KS: 504a, KS:
504b, and KS: 504c’,  N. Hirayama and E. Shimizu, Acta. Crystallogr., Sect. C, 1990, C46, 1515 Search PubMed .‘Cartilagineal, an Unusual Monoterpene Aldehyde from Marine
Alga’,  P. Crews and E. Kho, J. Org. Chem., 1974, 39, 3303 Search PubMed .‘Halogenated monoterpenes of the red alga Shottera
nicaensis’,  P. Rivera, L. Astudillo, J. Rovirosa and A. San-Martín, Biochem. Sys. Ecol., 1987, 15, 3 Search PubMed .‘Insecticide and acaricide activities of polyhalogenated
monoterpenes from Chilean Plocamium cartilagineum’,  R. San-Martín, R. Negrete and J. Rovirosa, Phytochem., 1991, 30, 2165 Search PubMed .‘New Jaeschkeanadiol derivatives from Ferula
jaeschkeana’,  S. N. Garg, S. K. Agarwal, K. Fidelis, M. B. Hossain and D. Van der Helm, J. Nat. Prod., 1993, 56, 539 Search PubMed .‘Structure and synthesis of Pyrrolomycin A, a chlorinated
nitropyrrole antibiotic’,  M. Koyama, Y. Kodama, T. Tsuruoka, N. Ezaki, T. Niwa and S. Inouye, J. Antibiot., 1981, 34, 1569 Search PubMed .‘Occurrence of Castasterone, Brassinolide and Methyl
4-Chloroindole-3-acetate in Immature Vicia faba
Seeds’,  K.-H. Park, T. Yokota, A. Sakurai and N. Takahashi, Agri. Biol. Chem., 1987, 51, 3081 Search PubMed .‘Isolement de l’ester méthylique d’un
acide chloro-3-indolylacétique à partir de graines immatures
de pois, Pisum sativum L.’,  J. C. Gandar and C. Nitsch, C. R. Acad. Sci. D., 1967, 265, 1795 Search PubMed .‘Isolation of 4-chloroindolyl-3-acetic Acid from Immature
Seeds of Pisum sativum’,  S. Marumo, H. Hattori, H. Abe and K. Munakata, Nature, 1968, 219, 959 Search PubMed .‘Chlorine-containing natural compounds in higher
plants’,  K. C. Engvild, Phytochemistry, 1986, 25, 78 Search PubMed .‘The natural chlorinated plant hormone of pea,
4-chloroindole-3-acetic acid, an endogenous herbicide?’,  K. C. Engvild, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B.de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  1995,
pp. 227–234. Search PubMed .‘Isolation and identification of “diazepam-like”
compounds from bovine urine’,  K.-C. Luk, L. Stern, M. Weigele, R. A. O’Brien and N. Spirt, J. Nat. Prod., 1983, 46, 852 Search PubMed .‘Occurrence of “Natural”
Benzodiazepines”,  U. Klotz, Life Sci., 1991, 48, 209 Search PubMed .‘Esteroides de Withanias III, Lactonas Esteroidales de la
Withania frutescens Pauq.’,  A. G. González, J. L. Bréton and J. M. Trujillo, An Quim., 1974, 70, 69 Search PubMed .‘Structure of Malhamensilipin A, an inhibitor of protein
tyrosine kinase from the cultured chrysophyte Poterioochromonas
malhamensis’,  J. L. Chen, P. J. Proteau, M. A. Roberts, W. H. Gerwick, D. L. Slate and R. H. Lee, J. Nat. Prod., 1994, 57, 524 Search PubMed .‘Egregiachlorides A—C. New chlorinated oxylipins from
the marine brown alga Egregia menziesii’,  J. S. Todd, P. J. Proteau and W. H. Gerwick, Tetrahedron Lett., 1993, 34, 7689 Search PubMed .‘A novel hexachlorometabolite from the sponge Dysidea
herbacea’,  R. Kazlauskas, R. O. Lidgard, R. J. Wells and W. Vetter, Tetrahedron Lett., 1977, 3183 Search PubMed .‘Epibatidine: a novel (chloropyridyl)azabicycloheptane with
potent analgesic activity from an Ecuadoran poison frog’,  T. F. Spande, H. M. Garraffo, M. W. Edwards, H. J. C. Yeh, L. Pannell and J. W. Daly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 3475 Search PubMed .‘New antibiotics, Clazamycins A and B’,  Y. Horiuchi, S. Kondo, T. Ikeda, D. Ikeda, K. Miura, M. Hamada, T. Takeuchi and H. Umezawa, J. Antibiot., 1979, 32, 762 Search PubMed .‘Naphthoquinones from Dionaea
muscipula’,  B. Kreher, A. Neszmélyi and H. Wagner, Phytochemistry, 1990, 29, 605 Search PubMed .‘2,6-Dichlorophenol: sex pheromone of the Lone Star
Tick’,  R. S. Berger, Science, 1972, 177, 704 Search PubMed .‘Occurrence of 2,6-dichlorophenol in Dermacentor
albipictus and Haemaphysalis leporispalustris (Acari:
Ixodidae)’,  R. S. Berger, J. Med. Entomol., 1983, 20, 103 Search PubMed .‘Incorporation of chloride from Na36Cl into
2,6-dichlorophenol in Lone Star and Gulf Coast Ticks’,  R. S. Berger, Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am., 1974, 67, 961 Search PubMed .‘Identification of Drosophilin A as
p-methoxytetrachlorophenol’,  M. Anchel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 2943 Search PubMed .‘Halogenated tyrosines from the cuticle of Limulus
polyphemus (L.)’,  B. S. Welinder, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1972, 279, 491 Search PubMed .‘Carbonimidic dichlorides from the marine sponge
Pseudaxinyssa pitys’,  S. J. Wratten and D. J. Faulkner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 7367 Search PubMed .‘Structure of host specific toxins produced by the fungal
pathogen Periconia circinata’,  V. Macko, M. B. Stimmel, T. J. Wolpert, L. D. Dunkle, W. Acklin, R. Bänteli, B. Jaun and D. Arigoni, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1992, 89, 9574 Search PubMed .‘Chemical constituents of Armillaria mella mycelium
I Isolation and characterisation of Armillarin and
Armillaridin’,  J. Yang, Y. Chen, X. Feng, D. Yu and X. Liang, Planta Med., 1984, 50, 288 Search PubMed .‘Antibiotic MSD-819. II: Isolation and chemical
characterisation as 3-chloro-2-quinoxalinecarboxylic acid
1,4-dioxide’,  T. W. Miller, R. W. Walker, N. R. Trenner, B. A. Arison and F. J. Wolf, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 1968, 255 Search PubMed .‘Hapalindoles, antibacterial and antimycotic alkaloids from
the cyanophyte Hapalosiphon fontinalis’,  R. E. Moore, C. Cheuk, X.-Q. G. Yang, G. M. L. Patterson, R. Bonjouklian, T. A. Smitka, J. S. Mynderse, R. S. Foster, N. D. Jones, J. K. Swarztendruber and J. B. Deeter, J. Org. Chem., 1987, 52, 1036 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of the Marine Cyanobacterial Metabolite
Barbamide. 1. Origin of the Trichloromethyl Group’,  N. Sitachitta, J. Rossi, M. A. Roberts, W. H. Gerwick, M. D. Fletcher and C. L. Willis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 7131 Search PubMed .‘The Biosynthesis of Barbamide—A Radical Pathway for
“Biohalogenation”?’,  J. Hartung, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1209 Search PubMed .‘Identification of a Novel
C10H6N2Br4Cl2
Heterocyclic Compound in Seabird Eggs. A Bioaccumulating Marine Natural
Product?’,  S. A. Tittlemier, M. Simon, W. M. Jarman and J. E. Elliott and R. J. Norstrom, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 26 Search PubMed .‘Synthesis and identification of two halogenated bipyrroles
present in seabird eggs’,  G. W. Gribble, D. H. Blank and J. P. Jasinski, Chem. Commun., 1999, 2195 Search PubMed .‘Autotoxic antibiotic production by a marine
Chromobacterium’,  R. J. Andersen, M. S. Wolfe and D. J. Faulkner, Mar. Biol., 1974, 27, 281 Search PubMed .‘Organochlorine Compounds from a Terrestrial Higher Plant:
Structures and Origin of Chlorinated Orcinol Derivatives from Diseased
Bulbs of Lilium maximowiczii’,  K. Monde, H. Satoh, M. Nakamura, M. Tamura and M. Takasugi, J. Nat. Prod., 1998, 61, 913 Search PubMed .‘The properties and theory of genesis of the carbonaceous
complex within the cold bokevelt meteorite’,  G. Müller, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1953, 4, 1 Search PubMed .‘Organic Compounds in Carbonaceous
Chondrites’,  M. H. Studier, R. Hayatsu and E. Anders, Science, 1965, 149, 1455 Search PubMed .‘Evidence for the extraterrestrial origin of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons in the Martian meteorite ALH84001’,  S. J. Clemett, M. T. Dulay, J. S. Gillette, X. D. F. Chillier, T. B. Mahajan and R. N. Zare, Faraday Discuss., 1998, 109, 417 Search PubMed .‘Extraterrestrial organic matter: A review’,  W. M. Irvine, Origins Life Evolut. Biosphere, 1998, 28, 365 Search PubMed .‘Organic Chemistry of the Earth’s
Atmosphere’,  V. A. Isidorov,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
 1990. .‘Nucleophilic substitution rates and solubilities for methyl
halides in seawater’,  S. Elliott and F. S. Rowland, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1993, 20, 1043 Search PubMed .‘Methyl halide hydrolysis rates in natural
waters’,  S. Elliott and F. S. Rowland, J. Atmos. Chem., 1995, 20, 229 Search PubMed .‘On the degradation of methyl bromide in sea
water’,  P. M. Jeffers and N. L. Wolfe, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1996, 23, 1773 Search PubMed .‘Reactions of methyl halides with sea water and marine
aerosols’,  O. C. Zafiriou, J. Mar. Res., 1975, 33, 75 Search PubMed .‘The hydrolysis of the methyl halides’,  E. A. Moelwyn-Hughes, Proc. R. Soc., London. Ser. A, 1938, 164, 295 Search PubMed .‘Halocarbons produced by natural oxidation processes during
degradation of organic matter’,  F. Keppler, R. Eiden, V. Niedan, J. Pracht and H. F. Schöler, Nature, 2000, 403, 298 Search PubMed .‘Chemistry of organic traces in air VIII. Sources and
distribution of bromo- and bromochloromethanes in marine air and surface
seawater of the Atlantic Ocean’,  T. H. Class and K. Ballschmiter, J. Atmos. Chem., 1988, 6, 35 Search PubMed .‘Biogenic Brominated and Iodinated Organic Compounds in Ponds
on the McMurdo Ice Shelf, Antarctica’,  C. Schall, K. G. Heumann, S. deMora and P. A. Lee, Antarctic Sci., 1996, 8, 45 Search PubMed .‘Volcanogenic Halocarbons’,  A. Jordan, J. Harnisch, B. Borchers, F. Le Guern and H. Shinohara, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 1122 Search PubMed .‘The solubility of a suite of low molecular weight
organochlorine compounds in seawater and implications for estimating the
marine source of methyl chloride to the atmosphere’,  R. M. Moore, Chemosphere: Global Change Sci., 2000, 2, 95 Search PubMed .‘cDNA cloning of Batis maritima methyl chloride
transferase and purification of the enzyme’,  X. Ni and L. P. Hager, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1998, 95, 12866 Search PubMed .‘Expression of Batis maritima methyl chloride
transferase in Escherichia coli’,  X. Ni and L.P. Hager, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1999, 96, 3611 Search PubMed .‘Natural methyl bromide and methyl chloride emissions from
coastal salt marshes’,  R. C. Rhew, B. R. Miller and R. F. Weiss, Nature, 2000, 403, 292 Search PubMed .‘A strong source of methyl chloride to the atmosphere from
tropical coastal land’,  Y. Yokouchi, Y. Noijiri, L. A. Barrie, D. Toon-Sauntry, T. Machida, Y. Inuzuka, H. Akimoto, H.-J. Li, Y. Fujinuma and S. Aoki, Nature, 2000, 403, 295 Search PubMed .‘Measurements of methyl halides in the marine
atmosphere’,  H.-J. Li, Y. Yokouchi and H. Akimoto, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 1881 Search PubMed .‘Wetlands: a potentially signficant source of atmospheric
methyl bromide and methyl chloride’,  R. K. Varner, P. M. Crill and R. W. Talbot, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 2433 Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric methyl halides and dimethyl sulfide from
cattle’,  J. Williams, N.-Y. Wang, R. J. Cicerone, K. Yagi, M. Kurihara and F. Terada, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 1999, 13, 485 Search PubMed .‘Formation of Halogenated Gases by Natural
Sources’,  R. Wever, in
Microbial Production and Consumption of Greenhouse Gases: Methane,
Nitrogen Oxides and Halomethanes, ed. J. E. Rogers and W. B.
Whitman, American Society for Microbiology,
Washington, DC,  1991, ch. 15,
pp. 277–285. Search PubMed .‘Sources and Sinks of Halogenated Methanes in
Nature’,  R. Wever, in
Microbial Growth on C1 Compounds, ed. J. C. Murrell and D.
P. Kelley, Intercept Ltd, Andover,
UK,  1993, ch. 3, pp.
35–45. Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of Halogenated Methanes’,  D. B. Harper, Biochem. Soc. Trans., 1994, 22, 1007 Search PubMed .‘Biogenesis and Metabolic Role of Halomethanes in Fungi and
Plants’,  D. B. Harper, Metal Ions in Biological Systems, 1993, 29, 345 Search PubMed .‘The contribution of natural halogenation processes to the
atmospheric halomethane burden’,  D. B. Harper, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B.de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publs., Dordrecht,
The Netherlands,  1995, pp.
21–33. Search PubMed .‘Production of methyl bromide by terrestrial higher
plants’,  J. Gan, S. R. Yates, H. D. Ohr and J. J. Sims, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 3595 Search PubMed .‘Green plants: A terrestrial sink for atmospheric
CH3Br’,  P. M. Jeffers, N. L. Wolfe and V. Nzengung, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 43 Search PubMed .‘Biomass burning as a source of atmospheric gases CO,
H2, N2O, NO, CH3Cl and
COS’,  P. J. Crutzen, L. E. Heidt, J. P. Krasnec, W. H. Pollock and W. Seiler, Nature, 1979, 282, 253 Search PubMed .‘Field Study of the Emissions of Methyl Chloride and Other
Halocarbons from Biomass Burning in Western Africa’,  J. Rudolph, A. Khedim, R. Koppmann and B. Bonsang, J. Atmos. Chem., 1995, 22, 67 Search PubMed .‘Factors Affecting Methyl Chloride Emissions from Forest
Biomass Combustion’,  T. E. Reinhardt and D. E. Ward, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 825 Search PubMed .‘Methyl halide emissions from savanna fires in southern
Africa’,  M. O. Andreae, E. Atlas, G. W. Harris, A. de Kock, R. Koppmann, W. Maenhaut, S. Manoe, W. H. Pollack, J. Rudolph, D. Scharffe, G. Schebeske and M. Welling, J. Geophy. Res., 1996, 101, 23603 Search PubMed .‘Emission factors of hydrocarbons, halocarbons, trace gases
and particles from biomass burning in Brazil’,  R. J. Ferek, J. S. Reid, P. V. Hobbs, D. R. Blake and C. Liousse, J. Geophy. Res., 1998, 103, 32 Search PubMed .‘Halomethane from halide ion—a highly efficient fungal
conversion of environmental significance’,  D. B. Harper, Nature, 1985, 315, 55 Search PubMed .‘Experimental evaluation of biomass burning emissions:
nitrogen and carbon-containing compounds’,  J. M. Lobert,
D. H. Scharffe,
W.-M. Hao,
T. A. Kuhlbusch,
R. Seuwen,
P. Warneck and
P. Crutzen, in
Global Biomass Burning: Atmospheric, Climatic and Biospheric
Implications, ed. J. S. Levine, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA,  1991, pp.
289–304. Search PubMed .‘The Release of Methyl Chloride from Potato
Tubers’,  J. L. Varns, Am. Potato J., 1982, 59, 593 Search PubMed .‘Emissions, biogenesis and metabolic utilization of
chloromethanes by tubers of the potato (Solanum
tuberosum)’,  D. B. Harper, B. M. R. Harvey, M. R. Jeffers and J. T. Kennedy, New. Phytol., 1999, 142, 5 Search PubMed .‘Volatile Organic Compounds in Solfataric
Gases’,  V. A. Isidorov, I. G. Zenkevich and B. V. Ioffe, J. Atmos. Chem., 1990, 10, 329 Search PubMed .‘Geological sources of volatile organic components in regions
of seismic and volcanic activity’,  V. A. Isidorov, V. G. Povarov and E. B. Prilepsky, J. Ecol. Chem., 1993, 19 Search PubMed .‘Volatile Organic Compounds in Steam-gas Outflows of Several
Volcanoes and Hydrothermal Systems in Kamchatka’,  V. A. Isidorov, I. G. Zenkevich and G. A. Karpov, Volc. Seis., 1992, 13, 287 Search PubMed .‘Natural production of chloroform by fungi’,  E. J. Hoekstra, F. J. M. Verhagen, J. A. Field, E. W. B. de Leer and U. A. Th. Brinkman, Phytochem., 1998, 49, 91 Search PubMed .‘The influence of termites on atmospheric trace gases-
CH4, CO2, CHCl3, N2O, CO,
H2 and light hydrocarbons’,  M. A. K. Khalil, R. A. Rasmussen, J. R. J. French and J. A. Holt, J. Geophys. Res., 1990, 95, 3619 Search PubMed .‘Occurrence and formation of chloroform at Danish forest
sites’,  K. F. Haselmann, R. A. Ketola, F. Laturnus, F. R. Lauritsen and C. Grøn, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 187 Search PubMed .‘Formation and distribution of halogenated volatile organics
in sea water’  K. Abrahamsson,
A. Ekdahl,
J. Collén and
 M. Pedersén,
in Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W. B.
de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
317–326. .‘Marine algae—a source of trichloroethylene and
perchloroethylene’,  K. Abrahamsson, A. Ekdahl, J. Collén and M. Pedersén, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1995, 40, 1321 Search PubMed .‘Evidence of the natural production of trichloroethylene
(Reply to the comment by Marshall et al.)’,  K. Abrahamsson and M. Pedersén, Limnol. Oceanogr., 2000, 45, 520 Search PubMed .‘Production of chlorinated hydrocarbons and methyl iodide by
the red microalga Porphyridium purpureum’,  M. G. Scarratt and R. M. Moore, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1999, 44, 703 Search PubMed .‘The red alga Asparagopsis
taxiformis/Falkenbergia hillebrandii–a possible source
of trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene?,  R. A. Marshall, J. T. G. Hamilton, M. J. Dring and D. B. Harper, Limnol. Oceanogr., 2000, 45, 516 Search PubMed .‘Volatile halogenated hydrocarbons over the western Pacific
between 43° and 4° N’,  B. Quack and E. Suess, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 1663 Search PubMed .‘Global atmospheric distributions and source strengths of
light hydrocarbons and tetrachloroethene’,  M. L. Gupta, R. J. Cicerone, D. R. Blake, F. S. Rowland and I. S. A. Isaken, J. Geophys. Res., 1998, 103, 28219 Search PubMed .‘A record of atmospheric halocarbons during the twentieth
century from polar firn air’,  J. H. Butler, M. Battle, M. L. Bender, S. A. Montzka, A. D. Clarke, E. S. Saltzman, C. M. Sucher, J. P. Severinghaus and J. W. Elkins, Nature, 1999, 399, 749 Search PubMed .‘Exploring the Ocean–Stating the Case for
Chemistry’,  P. J. Scheuer, J. Chem. Educ., 1999, 76, 1075 Search PubMed .‘Bubble Scavenging and the Water-to-Air Transfer of Organic
Material in the Sea’,  D. C. Blanchard,
Adv. Chem. Ser.,  1975,
145, (Applied Chemistry at Protein
Interfaces), 360. Search PubMed .‘Distribution of halogenated organic compounds
(AOX)–Swedish transport to surrounding sea areas and mass balance
studies in 5 drainage systems’,  M. Enell and L. Wennberg, Water Sci. Technol., 1991, 24, 385 Search PubMed .‘The deep-sea as a final global sink of semivolatile
persistent organic pollutants? Part I: PCBs in surface and deep-sea
dwelling fish of the North and South Atlantic and the Monterey Bay Canyon
(California)’,  O. Froescheis, R. Looser, G. M. Cailliet, W. M. Jarman and K. Ballschmiter, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 651 Search PubMed .‘The deep-sea as a final global sink of semivolatile
persistent organic pollutants? Part II: Organochlorine pesticides in
surface and deep-sea dwelling fish of the North and South Atlantic and the
Monterey Bay Canyon (California)’,  R. Looser, O. Froescheis, G. M. Cailliet, W. M. Jarman and K. Ballschmiter, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 661 Search PubMed .‘Organic halogen compounds, EOX, in mussels from a clean lake
and a pulp mill recipient’,  J. Pellinen, M. Ruokolainen, P. Mäkelä and J. Taskinen, Chemosphere, 1994, 29, 1515 Search PubMed .‘Halogenated fatty acids: I. formation and occurrence in
lipids”,  H. Mu, C. Wesén and P. Sundin, Trends Anal. Chem., 1997, 16, 266 Search PubMed .‘Occurrence of halogenated fatty acids in bivalve
lipids’,  C.  Wesén,
H. Mu,
P. Sundin,
O. Ringstad and
G. Odham, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and Ed W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
307–316. Search PubMed .‘Dichloromyristic Acid, a Major Component of Organochlorine
Load in Lobster Digestive Gland’,  J. E. Milley, R. K. Boyd, J. M. Curtis, C. Musial and J. F. Uthe, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 535 Search PubMed .‘Long-chain haloalkanes are incorporated into fatty acids by
Rhodococcus rhodochrous NCIMB 13064’,  J. T. G. Hamilton, W. C. McRoberts, M. J. Larkin and D. B. Harper, Microbiology, 1995, 141, 2611 Search PubMed .‘Incorporation of haloalkanes into long chain fatty acids by
the chloroalkane-degrading bacterium Rhodococcus rhodochrous NCIMB
13064’  J. T. G. Hamilton,
O. Flynn,
M. J. Larkin and
D. B.  Harper, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and
Ed W. B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
213–220. Search PubMed .‘AOX Levels in the River Rhine—50% of Natural
Origin?!’,  E .J. Hoekstra and E. W. B. de Leer, Water Sci. Technol., 1994, 29, 133 Search PubMed .‘Natural AOX in the river Rhine: modelling and trace
analysis’,  W. M. G. M. van Loon,
J. J. Boon,
B. de Groot and
A.-J. Bulterman, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
83–94. Search PubMed .‘Organohalogens: the natural alternatives’,  E. J. Hoekstra and E. W. B. de Leer, Chem. Br., 1995, 31, 127 Search PubMed .‘Formation Mechanisms of Complex Organic Structures in Soil
Habitats’,  J.-M. Bollag, J. Dec and P. M. Huang, Adv. Agron., 1998, 63, 237 Search PubMed .‘Rapid consumption of low concentrations of methyl bromide by
soil bacteria’,  M. E. Hines, P. M. Crill, R. K. Varner, R. W. Talbot, J. H. Shorter, C. E. Kolb and R. C. Harriss, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1998, 64, 1864 Search PubMed .‘An estimate of the uptake of atmospheric methyl bromide by
agricultural soils’,  R. K. Varner, P. M. Crill, R. W. Talbot and J. H. Shorter, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 727 Search PubMed .‘The biosynthetic origins of rebeccamycin’,  C. J. Pearce, T. W. Doyle, S. Forenza, K. S. Lam and D. R. Schroeder, J. Nat. Prod., 1988, 51, 937 Search PubMed .‘Production and biological activity of rebeccamycin, a novel
antitumor agent’,  J. A. Bush, B. H. Long, J. J. Catino, W. T. Bradner and K. Tomita, J. Antibiot., 1987, 40, 668 Search PubMed .‘A chloroperoxidase-like catalyst in soil: detection and
characterization of some properties’,  G. Asplund, J. V. Christiansen and A. Grimvall, Soil Biol. Biochem., 1993, 25, 41 Search PubMed .‘Naturally produced organic chlorine in the Finnish aquatic
environment’,  P. K. G. Manninen and
M. Lauren, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer, Academic Publishers.,
Dorderecht,  1995, pp.
131–137. Search PubMed .‘Enzymatic coupling of 2,4-dichlorophenol to stream fulvic
acid in the presence of oxidoreductases’,  J. M. Sarkar, R. L. Malcolm and J.-M. Bollag, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 1988, 52, 688 Search PubMed .‘Enzyme-Mediated Coupling of 3,4-Dichloroaniline and Ferulic
acid: A Model for Pollutant Binding to Humic Materials’,  K. Tatsumi, A. Freyer, R. D. Minard and J.-M. Bollag, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1994, 28, 210 Search PubMed .‘Binding of pentachlorophenol to humic substances in soil by
the action of white rot fungi’,  C. Ruttimann-Johnson and R. T. Lamar, Soil Biol. Biochem., 1997, 29, 1143 Search PubMed .‘Microbial release of 2,4-dichlorophenol bound to humic acid
or incorporated during humification’,  J. Dec, K. L. Shuttleworth and J. M. Bollag, J. Environ. Qual., 1990, 19, 546 Search PubMed .‘Enzymatically mediated incorporation of 2-chlorophenol and
4-chlorophenol into humic acids’,  P. Lassen, A. Randall, O. Jørgensen, P. Warwick and L. Carlsen, Chemosphere, 1994, 28, 703 Search PubMed .‘On the possible role of humic materials in the environmental
organohalogen budget: the enzymatically mediated incorporation of
4-chlorophenol into humic acids’,  P. Lassen,
A. Randall,
O.  Jørgensen,
P. Warwick and
L. Carlsen, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
183–191. Search PubMed .‘Incorporation of halogenated substances into humic
material’,  J.-M.  Bollag and
J. Dec, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and
E.W.B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publs.,Dordrecht 1995, pp.
161–169. Search PubMed .‘Reductive Dechlorination of Trichloroethene Mediated by
Humic-Metal Complexes’,   E. J. O’Loughlin, D. R. Burris and C. A. Delcomyn, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 1145 Search PubMed .‘Production and dechlorination of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in historically-contaminated estuarine
sediments’,  I. D. Albrecht, A. L. Barkovskii and P. Adriaens, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 737 Search PubMed .‘Naturally Occurring Chlorine-containing Organic
Substances’,  A. Bracken, Manuf. Chem., 1954, 533 Search PubMed .‘Influence of chlorine substituents on biological activity of
chemicals’,  K. Naumann, J. Prakt. Chem., 1999, 341, 417 Search PubMed .‘The Role of Chlorine Substituents in the Antibiotic
Vancomycin: Preparation and Characterization of Mono- and
Didechlorovancomycin’,  C. M. Harris, R. Kannan, H. Kopecka and T. M. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 6652 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of halomethanes and methanethiol by higher
plants via a novel methyltransferase reaction’,  H. S. Saini, J. M. Attieh and A. D. Hanson, Plan Cell Environ., 1995, 18, 1027 Search PubMed .‘Isolation of a new naturally occurring halogenated amine
acid: monochloromonobromotyrosine’,  S. Hunt and S. W. Breuer, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1971, 252, 401 Search PubMed .‘The Crustacean Cuticle, IV: Isolation and identification of
cross-links from Cancer pagurus cuticle’,  B. S. Welinder, P. Roepstorff and S. O. Andersen, Comp. Biochem. Biophys., 1976, 53B, 529 Search PubMed .‘A bromine compound isolated from human cerebrospinal
fluid’,  I. Yanagisawa and H. Yoshikawa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1973, 329, 283 Search PubMed .‘Anticholinesterase Action of a Bromine Compound Isolated
from Human Cerebrospinal Fluid’,  M. Yamane, A. Abe and I. Yanagisawa, J. Neurochem., 1984, 42, 1650 Search PubMed .‘Kumepaloxane. A Rearranged Trisnor Sesquiterpene from the
Bubble Shell Haminoea cymbalum’,  A. Poiner, V. J. Paul and P. J. Scheuer, Tetrahedron, 1989, 45, 617 Search PubMed .‘New asymmetric transformation of optically active
allene-1,3-dicarboxylate and its application to the formal asymmetric
synthesis of (−)-epibatidine’,  M. Node, K. Nishide, T. Fujiwara and S. Ichihashi, Chem.Commun., 1998, 2363 Search PubMed .‘Total Synthesis of (−)-Epibatidine Using an Asymmetric
Diels-Alder Reaction with a Chiral N-Acylnitroso
Dienophile’,  S. Aoyagi, R. Tanaka, M. Naruse and C. Kibayashi, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 8397 Search PubMed .‘Broad Spectrum Non-Opioid Analgesic Activity by Selective
Modulation of Neuronal Nicotonic Acetylcholine Receptors’,  A. W. Bannon, M. W. Decker, M. W. Holladay, P. Curzon, D. Donnelly-Roberts, P. S. Puttfarcken, R. S. Bitner, A. Diaz, A. H. Dickenson, R. D. Porsolt, M. Williams and S. P. Arneric, Science, 1998, 279, 77 Search PubMed .‘Novel steroid glycosides as aggregation pheromone of the
German Cockroach’,  M. Sakuma and H. Fukami, Tetrahedron Lett., 1993, 34, 6059 Search PubMed .‘The biosynthesis of differentiation-inducing factor, a
chlorinated signal molecule regulating Dictyostelium
development’,  R. R. Kay, J. Biol Chem., 1998, 273, 2669 Search PubMed .‘Chemical structure of morphogen differentiation inducing
factor from Dictyostelium discoideum’,  H. R. Morris, G. W. Taylor, M. S. Masento, K. A. Jermyn and R. R. Kay, Nature, 1987, 328, 811 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of Chloromethane in Phellinus
pomaceus’,   D. B. Harper and J. T. G. Hamilton, J. Gen. Microbiol., 1988, 134, 2831 Search PubMed .‘Chloromethane biosynthesis in poroid fungi’,  D. B. Harper, J. T. Kennedy and J. T. G. Hamilton, Phytochem., 1988, 27, 3147 Search PubMed .‘Chloromethane, a Novel Methyl Donor for Biosynthesis of
Esters and Anisoles in Phellinus pomaceus’,  D. B. Harper, J. T. G. Hamilton, J. T. Kennedy and K. J. McNally, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1989, 55, 1981 Search PubMed .‘Chloromethane, methyl donor in veratryl alcohol biosynthesis
in Phanerochaete chrysosporium and other lignin-degrading
fungi’,  D. B. Harper, J. A. Buswell, J. T. Kennedy and J. T. G. Hamilton, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1990, 56, 3450 Search PubMed .‘Methylation of benzoic and n-butyric acids by chloromethane
in Phellinus pomaceus’,  K. J. McNally, J. T. G. Hamilton and D. B. Harper, J. Gen. Microbiol., 1990, 136, 1509 Search PubMed .‘The methylation of phenol by chloromethane in the fungus
Phellinus pomaceus’,  K. J. McNally and D. B. Harper, J. Gen. Microbiol., 1991, 137, 1029 Search PubMed .‘Evidence for the existence of independent chloromethane- and
S-adenosylmethionine-utilizing systems for methylation in
Phanerochaete chrysosporium’,  C. Coulter, J. T. G. Hamilton and D. B. Harper, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1993, 59, 1461 Search PubMed .‘Comparison of the efficacies of chloromethane, methionine,
and S-adenosylmethionine as methyl precursors in the biosynthesis of
veratryl alcohol and related compounds in Phanerochaete
Chrysosporium’,  D. B. Harper, W. C. McRoberts and J. T. Kennedy, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1996, 62, 3366 Search PubMed .‘Chloromethane production by wood-rotting fungi and an
estimate of the global flux to the atmosphere’,  R. Watling and D. B. Harper, Mycol. Res., 1998, 102, 769 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis and metabolic role of chloromethane in
fungi’,   D. B. Harper, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
235–244. Search PubMed .‘Significant fungal biogenesis of physiologically important
chlorinated aromatics in natural environments’,  E. de Jong,
J. A.  Field,
H.-E. Spinnler,
A. E. Cazemier and
J. A. M. de Bont, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W. B. de
Leer, Kluwer Academic Publs.,Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, 1995,pp.
251–259. .‘Physiological role of chlorinated alcohols biosynthesized de
novo by the white-rot fungus Bjerkandera sp.
BOS55’,  E. De Jong, A. E. Cazemier, J. A. Field and J. A. M. de Bont, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1994, 60, 271 Search PubMed .‘Carbon tetrachloride, tetrachloroethylene,
1,1,1-trichloroethane and bromoform in Arctic seawater’,  E. Fogelqvist, J. Geophys. Res., 1985, 90, 9181 Search PubMed .‘Halogenated Hydrocarbons in the Atmosphere’,  P Fabian, in
Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, ed. O. Hutzinger,
Volume 4A:  Search PubMed ; The Natural Environment and the Biogeochemical Cycles,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
 1986, pp. 23–51. Search PubMed .‘Apparent removal of the transient tracer carbon
tetrachloride from anoxic seawater’,  M. Krysell, E. Fogelqvist and T. Tanhua, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1994, 21, 2511 Search PubMed .‘Volatile Halogenated Organic Compounds Released to Seawater
from Temperate Marine Algae’,  P. M. Gschwend, J. K. MacFarlane and K. A. Newman, Science, 1985, 227, 1033 Search PubMed .Halocarbons in the Arctic and Antarctic Atmosphere, W. T.
Sturges, NATO ASI Ser., vol. I 7 (Tropospheric Chemistry of Ozone
in the Polar Regions), 1993, 117–130; (Chem. Abstr., 1995,
123, 91496p.).‘Halohydrocarbon Synthesis by
Bromoperoxidase’,  R. Theiler, J. C. Cook, L. P. Hager and J. F. Siuda, Science, 1978, 202, 1094 Search PubMed .‘Bromoform emission from Arctic ice algae’,  W. T. Sturges, G. F. Cota and P. T. Buckley, Nature, 1992, 358, 660 Search PubMed .‘Bromoalkane production by Antarctic ice
algae’,  W. T. Sturges, C. W. Sullivan, R. C. Schnell, L. E. Heidt and W. H. Pollock, Tellus, 1993, 45B, 120 Search PubMed .‘Halogenated hydrocarbons in and over the
Atlantic’,  J. E. Lovelock, R. J. Maggs and R. J. Wade, Nature, 1973, 241, 194 Search PubMed .‘Natural halocarbons in air and sea’,  F. S. Rowland, M. J. Molina and C. C. Chou, Nature, 1975, 258, 775 Search PubMed .‘Natural halocarbons in air and sea’,  J. E. Lovelock, Nature, 1975, 258, 776 Search PubMed .‘Methyl halide (CH3X) production from the
giant kelp, Macrocystis, and estimates of global
CH3X production by kelp’,  S. L. Manley and M. N. Dastoor, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1987, 32, 709 Search PubMed .‘Release of volatile halogenated organic compounds by
unialgal cultures of polar macroalgae’,  F. Laturnus, Chemosphere, 1995, 31, 3387 Search PubMed .‘Volatile halocarbons released from Arctic
macroalgae’,  F. Laturnus, Mar. Chem., 1996, 55, 359 Search PubMed .‘Halogenating activity in an Arctic population of brown
macroalga Laminaria saccharina (L) Lamour’,  G. Mehrtens and F. Laturnus, Polar Res., 1997, 16, 19 Search PubMed .‘Methyl halides from Antarctic macroalgae’,  F. Laturnus, F. C. Adams and C. Wiencke, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 773 Search PubMed .‘Influence of light conditions on the release of volatile
halocarbons by Antarctic macroalgae’  F. Laturnus, C. Wiencke and F. C. Adams, Mar. Environ. Res., 1998, 45, 285 Search PubMed .‘Antarctic Macroalgae—Sources of Volatile Halogenated
Organic Compounds’,  F. Laturnus, C. Wiencke and H. Klöser, Mar. Environ. Res., 1996, 41, 169 Search PubMed .‘Halogenating activities detected in Antarctic
macroalgae’,  F. Laturnus, F. C. Adams, I. Gomez and G. Mehrtens, Polar Biol., 1997, 17, 281 Search PubMed .‘Production of halocarbons from seaweeds: an oxidative stress
reaction?’,  M. Pedersén, J. Collén, K. Abrahamsson and A. Ekhdahl, Sci. Mar., 1996, 60((Suppl. 1)), 257 Search PubMed .‘Production of volatile organohalogens by phytoplankton
cultures’,  R. Tokarczyk and R. M. Moore, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1994, 21, 285 Search PubMed .‘Methyl chloride (CH3Cl) production in
phytoplankton cultures’,  V. K. Tait and R. M. Moore, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1995, 40, 189 Search PubMed .‘Production of methyl bromide and methyl chloride in
laboratory cultures of marine phytoplankton’,  M. G. Scarratt and R. M. Moore, Mar. Chem., 1996, 54, 263 Search PubMed .‘Production of methyl bromide and methyl chloride in
laboratory cultures of marine phytoplankton II’,  M. G. Scarratt and R. M. Moore, Mar. Chem., 1998, 59, 311 Search PubMed .‘Measurements of methyl chloride in the northwest
Atlantic’,  V. K. Tait, R. M. Moore and R. Tokarczyk, J. Geophys. Res., 1994, 99, 7821 Search PubMed .‘Methyl iodide production from marine phytoplankton
cultures’,  S. L. Manley and J. L. de la Cuesta, Limnol. Oceanog., 1997, 42, 142 Search PubMed .‘Ocean-atmosphere exchange of methyl chloride: results from
NW Atlantic and Pacific Ocean studies’,  R. M. Moore, W. Groszko and S. J. Niven, J. Geophys. Res., 1996, 101, 28529 Search PubMed .‘Photosynthetic pigments in the surface layer of the Atlantic
Ocean between 50° N and 60° S related to the bioproduction of
organohalogens and to the increase in UV radiation’,  D. Drexler and K. Ballschmiter, Chemosphere, 1994, 29, 1527 Search PubMed .‘The relationship between methyl bromide and chlorophyll-a in
high-latitude ocean waters’,  R. M. Moore and M. Webb, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1996, 23, 2951 Search PubMed .‘Undersaturation of CH3Br in the Southern
Ocean’,  J. M. Lobert, S. A. Yvon-Lewis, J. H. Butler, S. A. Montzka and R. C. Myers, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1997, 24, 171 Search PubMed .‘Latitudinal distribution of atmospheric methyl bromide:
Measurements and modeling’,  Y. Yokouchi, T. Machida, L. A. Barrie, D. Toom-Sauntry, Y. Nojiri, Y. Fujinuma, Y. Inuzuka, H.-J. Li, H. Akimoto and S. Aoki, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2000, 27, 697 Search PubMed .‘Methyl iodide in the Greenland/Norwegian Seas and the
tropical Atlantic Ocean: evidence for photochemical
production’,  J. D. Happell and D. W. R. Wallace, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1996, 23, 2105 Search PubMed .‘Biogenic bromine production in the Arctic’,  G. F. Cota and W. T. Sturges, Mar. Chem., 1997, 56, 181 Search PubMed .‘Production of bromoform and dibromomethane by Giant Kelp:
Factors affecting release and comparison to anthropogenic bromine
sources’,  K. D. Goodwin, W. J. North and M. E. Lidstrom, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1997, 42, 1725 Search PubMed .‘Season variations of biogenic and anthropogenic halocarbons
in seawater from a coastal site’,  S. Klick, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1992, 37, 1579 Search PubMed .‘Production of chloroform and other low-molecular-weight
halocarbons by some species of macroalgae’,  P. D. Nightingale, G. Malin and P. S. Liss, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1995, 40, 680 Search PubMed .‘Volatile Halocarbon Production from the Chlorination of
Marine Algal Byproducts, including D-mannitol’,  A. M. Crane, P. Kovacic and E. D. Kovacic, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1980, 14, 1371 Search PubMed .‘Formation of
C1/C2-bromo-/chlorohydrocarbons by haloperoxidase
reactions’,  B. Walter and K. Ballschmiter, Fres. J. Anal. Chem., 1992, 342, 827 Search PubMed .‘Elucidation of biochemical formation of
C1/C2-(bromo-/chloro-)- hydrocarbons’,  B. Walter and K. Ballschmiter, Fres. J. Anal. Chem., 1991, 341, 564 Search PubMed .‘Chemistry of the biosynthesis of halogenated methanes:
C1-organohalogens as pre-industrial chemical stressors in the
environment?’,  T. Urhahn and K. Ballschmiter, Chemosphere, 1998, 37, 1017 Search PubMed .‘Identification of new drinking water disinfection byproducts
formed in the presence of bromide’,  S. D. Richardson, A. D. Thruston, T. V. Caughran, P. H. Chen, T. W. Collette and T. L. Floyd, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 3378 Search PubMed .C. R. Worthing and
S. B. Walker,
The Pesticide Manual: A World Compendium, 8th edn.,
 1987, British Crop Protection Council, Lavenham
Press, p. 765. Search PubMed .‘The Henry’s law constants of the haloacetic
acids’,  D. J. Bowden, S. L. Clegg and P. Brimblecombe, J. Atmos. Chem., 1998, 29, 85 Search PubMed .‘Mass balance of trichloroacetic acid in the soil top
layer’,  E. J. Hoekstra, E. W. B. de Leer and U. A. Th. Brinkman, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 551 Search PubMed .‘Chlorophyll-bleaching by atmospheric pollutants and
sunlight: a probable cause of tree damage observed in recent
years’,  H. Frank and W. Frank, Naturwiss., 1985, 72, 139 Search PubMed .‘Photochemical activation of chloroethenes leading to
destruction of photosynthetic pigments’,  H. Frank and W. Frank, Experienta, 1986, 42, 1267 Search PubMed .‘Airborne chlorocarbons, photoxidants and forest
decline’,  H. Frank, Ambio, 1991, 20, 13 Search PubMed .‘Haloacetic acids, phytotoxic secondary air
pollutants’,  H. Frank, H. Scholl, D. Renschen, B. Rether, A. Laouedj and Y. Norokorpi, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 1994, 1, 4 Search PubMed .‘Airborne trichloroacetic acid and its deposition in the
catchment area of the Caspian Sea’,  L. Weissflog, M. Manz, P. Popp, N. Elansky, A. Arabov, E. Putz and G. Schüürman, Environ. Pollut., 1999, 104, 359 Search PubMed .‘Endangering of forest trees by organic
air-pollutants’,  T. Smidt, J. Plant Diseases Protect., 1994, 101, 423 Search PubMed .‘The uptake of and structural changes induced by
trichloroacetic acid in the needles of Scots pine
seedlings’,  S. Sutinen, S. Juuti, L. Koivisto, M. Turunen and J. Ruuskanen, J. Exper. Bot., 1995, 46, 1223 Search PubMed .‘Trichloroacetic acid in conifer needles and arboreal lichens
in forest environments’,  S. Juuti, Y. Norokorpi, T. Helle and J. Ruuskanen, Sci. Total Environ., 1996, 180, 117 Search PubMed .‘Long-term exposure of Scots pine seedlings to
monochloroacetic and trichloroacetic acid: Effects on needles and
growth’,  S. Sutinen, S. Juuti and A. Ryyppo, Ann. Bot. Fennici, 1997, 34, 265 Search PubMed .‘Exposure to Chlorinated Acetic acids: Responses of
Peroxidase and Glutathione S-Transferase Activity in Pine
Needles’,  P. Schröder, S. Juuti, S. Roy, H. W. Sandermann and S. A. Sutinen, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 1997, 4, 163 Search PubMed .‘The origins and occurrence of trichloroacetic acid’,
S. Juuti and E. J. Hoekstra, Atmos. Environ., 1998, 32,
3059..‘The atmospheric fate and impact of hydrochlorofluorocarbons
and chlorinated solvents’,  H. Sidebottom and J. Franklin, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1757 Search PubMed .‘Exchange of comments on “The origins and occurrence of
trichloroacetic acid”’,  A. Jordan and H. Frank, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 4525 Search PubMed  and  E. J. Hoekstra and S. Juuti, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 4526 CrossRef CAS .‘Numerical modelling of haloacetic acid production’, G.
D. Hayman, World Chlorine Council Workshop: ‘Chloroacetic Acids in
the Environment- Anthropogenic or Natural?’, 29–30 March 1996,
Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany..‘The formation of trichloroacetic acid in the
atmosphere’, J. Franklin and H. Sidebottom, Proceedings of the
First International Symposium on Atmospheric Substances, Bayreuth,
14–16 April, 1999, in press..‘Chemistry of OH in remote clouds and its role in the
production of formic acid and peroxymonosulfate’,  D. L. Jacob, J. Geophys. Res., 1986, 91, 9807 Search PubMed .‘Seasonal variations in the atmospheric distribution of a
reactive chlorine compound, tetrachloroethene
(CCl2=CCl2)’,  C. J.-L. Wang, D. R. Blake and F. S. Rowland, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1995, 22, 1097 Search PubMed .‘The fate of atmospheric phosgene and the stratospheric
chlorine loadings of its parent compounds: CCl4,
C2Cl4, C2HCl3,
CH3CCl3 and CHCl3’,  T. P. Kindler, W. L. Chameides, P. H. Wine, D. M. Cunnold, F. N. Alyea and J. A. Franklin, J. Geophys. Res., 1995, 100, 1235 Search PubMed .‘The atmospheric degradation and impact of
perchloroethylene’,  J. Franklin, Toxicol. Environ. Chem., 1994, 46, 169 Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric reactions of chloroethenes with the OH
radical’,  E. C. Tuazon, R. Atkinson, S. M. Aschmann, M. A. Goodman and A. M. Winer, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 1988, 20, 241 Search PubMed .H. W. Sidebottom, World Chlorine Council Workshop:
‘Chloroacetic Acids in the Environment—Anthropogenic or
Natural?’, 29–30 March 1996, Garmisch-Partenkirchen,
Germany..‘A product study of the OH radical initiated oxidation of
perchloroethylene and trichloroethylene’,  N. Itoh, S. Kutsuna and T. Ibusuki, Chemosphere, 1994, 28, 2029 Search PubMed .‘Distribution of methyl chloride, dichloromethane,
trichloroethene and tetrachloroethene over the North and South
Atlantic’,  R. Koppmann, F. J. Johnen, C. Plass-Dülmer and J. Rudolph, J. Geophys. Res., 1993, 98, 20517 Search PubMed .A. Grimvall, World Chlorine Council Workshop: ‘Chloroacetic
Acids in the Environment—Anthropogenic or Natural?’,
29–30 March 1996, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany..‘Chloro- and Bromoacetates in Natural Archives of Firn from
Antarctica’,  L. M. von Sydow, A. T. Nielsen, A. B. Grimvall and H. B. Borén, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 239 Search PubMed .‘Chloroacetates in snow, firn and glacier
ice’,  L. von Sydow, H. Borén and A. Grimvall, Chemosphere, 1999, 39, 2479 Search PubMed .‘Haloacetates in precipitation’,.‘Global Distribution of Tetrachloroethene in the Troposphere:
Measurements and Modeling’,  T. O. Wiedmann, B. Güthner, T. J. Class and K. Ballschmiter, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1994, 28, 2321 Search PubMed .‘The production and global distribution of emissions of
trichloroethene, tetrachloroethene and dichloromethane over the period
1988–1992’,  A. McCulloch and P. M. Midgley, Atmos. Environ., 1996, 30, 601 Search PubMed .‘Emissions of volatile organic compounds by coal-fired power
stations’,  J. P. Garcia, S. Beyne-Masclet, G. Mouvier and P. Masclet, Atmos. Environ., 1992, 26A, 1589 Search PubMed .‘Fractionation of halogenated organic matter present in rain
and snow’,  K. Laniewski, H. Borén and A. Grimvall, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 393 Search PubMed .‘Identification of Volatile and Extractable Chloroorganics in
Rain and Snow’, K. Laniewski, H. Borén and A. Grimvall,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 3935..‘Formation of organic chlorine compounds of low molecular
weight in the chloroperoxidase-mediated reaction between chloride and humic
material’,  E. J. Hoekstra,
P. Lassen,
J. G. E. van Leeuwen,
E. W. B. de Leer and
L. Carlsen, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer, Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
149–158. Search PubMed .‘Natural production of chlorinated organic compounds in
soil’,  E. J. Hoekstra and
E. W. B. de Leer, in
Contaminated Soil ’93, ed. F. Arendt, G. J.
Annokkée, R. Bosman and W. J. van den Brink, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht,  1993,
pp 215-224. Search PubMed .‘Findings supporting the natural formation of trichloroacetic
acid in soil’  E. J. Hoekstra, E. W. B. de Leer and U. A. Th. Brinkman, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 2875 Search PubMed .‘The occurence of trichloroacetic acid–indications of a
natural production?’  G. Haiber, G. Jacob, V. Niedan, G. Nkusi and H. F. Schöler, Chemosphere, 1996, 33, 839 Search PubMed .‘Trichloroacetic acid in rainwater—results and
comparison of two analytical methods’  J. Fillibeck, B. Raffius, R. Schleyer and J. Hammer, Vom Wasser, 1995, 84, 181 Search PubMed .‘Chloroacetic Acids in Rainwater’  S. Reimann, K. Grob and H. Frank, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 2340 Search PubMed .‘Natural formation of chlorobenzoic acids (CBA) and
distinction between PCB-degraded CBA’  V. Niedan and H. F. Schöler, Chemosphere, 1997, 35, 1233 Search PubMed .‘Sulfur Tuft and Turkey Tail: Biosynthesis and Biodegradation
of Organohalogens by Basidiomycetes’  E. de Jong and J. A. Field, Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 1997, 51, 375 Search PubMed .‘Bromochloromethoxybenzenes in the Marine Troposphere of the
Atlantic Ocean: A Group of Organohalogens with Mixed Biogenic and
Anthropogenic Origin’  U. Führer and K. Ballschmiter, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 2208 Search PubMed .‘Biohalogenation as a source of halogenated anisoles in
air’  B. Walter and K. Ballschmiter, Chemosphere, 1991, 22, 557 Search PubMed .‘The de novo production of drosophilin A
(tetrachloro-4-methoxyphenol) and drosophilin A methyl ether
(tetrachloro-1,4-dimethoxybenzene) by lignolytic
basidomycetes’  P. J. M. Teunissen, H. J. Swarts and J. A. Field, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1997, 47, 695 Search PubMed .‘Novel monochlorinated metabolites with a 1-benzoxepin
skeleton from Mycena galopus’  J. B. P. A Wijnberg, A. van Veldhuizen, H. J. Swarts, J. C. Frankland and J. A. Field, Tetrahedron Lett., 1999, 40, 5767 Search PubMed .‘Biological activity of volatile fungal
metabolites’  S. A. Hutchinson, Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc., 1971, 57, 185 Search PubMed .‘Production of volatile metabolites by species of
Fomes’  M. I. Cowan, A. T. Glen, S. A. Hutchinson, M. E. MacCartney, J. M. Mackintosh and A. M. Moss, Trans. Br.. Mycol. Soc., 1973, 60, 347 Search PubMed .‘Effect of Growth Conditions on Halomethane Production by
Phellinus Species: Biological and Environmental
Implications’  D. B. Harper and J. T. Kennedy, J. Gen. Microbiol., 1986, 132, 1231 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of methyl chloride in the fungus Phellinus
pomaceus’  R. H. White, Arch. Microbiol., 1982, 132, 100 Search PubMed .‘Microbial halogenation’  S. L. Neidleman, CRC Crit. Rev. Microbiol., 1975, 5, 333 Search PubMed .‘Biohalogenation: Principles, Basic Roles and
Applications’, S. L. Neidleman and J. Geigert, Ellis
Horwood Ltd (John Wiley & Sons),
Chichester,  1986. Search PubMed .‘The ubiquity of natural adsorbable organic halogen
production among basidiomycetes’,  F. J. M. Verhagen, H. J. Swarts, T. W. Kuyper, J. B. P. A. Wijnberg and J. A. Field, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1996, 45, 710 Search PubMed .‘Organohalogen production is a ubiquitous capacity among
basidiomycetes’,  F. J. M. Verhagen, H. J. Swarts, J. B. P. A. Wijnberg and J. A. Field, Chemosphere, 1998, 37, 2091 Search PubMed .‘Significant Biogenesis of Chlorinated Aromatics by Fungi in
Natural Environments’,  E. de Jong, J. A. Field, H.-E. Spinnler, J. B. P. A. Wijnberg and J. A. M. de Bont, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1994, 60, 264 Search PubMed .‘Trichlorinated phenols from Hypholoma
Elongatum’  H. J. Swarts, F. J. M. Verhagen, J. A. Field and J. B. P. A. Wijnberg, Phytochem., 1998, 49, 203 Search PubMed .‘Natural Acetylenes XXXV. Polyacetylenic acid and Benzenoid
Metabolites from Cultures of the Fungus Lepista diemii
Singer’  V. Thaller and J. L. Turner, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1972, 2032 Search PubMed .‘The formation of veratryl chloride by Bjerkandera
sp. strain BOS55’  H. J. Swarts, T. Mester, F. J. M. Verhagen, J. A. Field and J. B. P. A. Wijnberg, Phytochem., 1997, 46, 1011 Search PubMed .‘Chlorinated anisyl metabolites produced by
basidiomycetes’  H. J. Swarts, P. J. M. Teunissen, F. J. M. Verhagen, J. A. Field and J. B. P. A. Wijnberg, Mycol. Res., 1997, 101, 372 Search PubMed .‘2-chloro-1,4-dimethoxybenzene as a mediator of lignin
peroxidase catalyzed oxidations’  P. J. M. Teunissen and J. A. Field, FEBS Lett., 1998, 439, 219 Search PubMed .‘Mutagenic compounds from chlorination of humic
substances’  B. Holmbom, in
Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences, ed. S. Bhattacharji, G. M.
Friedman, H. J. Neugebauer and A. Seilacher, vol.
33,  Search PubMed ; (Humic Substances in the Aquatic and Terrestrial
Environment, ed. B. Allard, H. Borén and A. Grimvall),
pp. 439–448, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin,  1991. Search PubMed .‘Formation of
3-chloro-4-(dichloromethyl)-5-hydroxy-2(5H)-furanone (MX) and
mutagenic activity by chlorination of phenolic compounds’,  V.-A. Långvik,
O. Hormi,
L. Kronberg,
L. Tikkanen and
B. Holbom, in
Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences, ed. S. Bhattacharji, G. M.
Friedman, H. J. Neugebauer and A. Seilacher, vol.
33, Search PubMed ; (Humic Substances in the Aquatic and Terrestrial
Environment, ed. B. Allard, H. Borén and A. Grimvall),
pp. 459–465, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin,  1991. Search PubMed .‘Natural Formation of Chloroform and Brominated
Trihalomethanes in Soil’,  E. J. Hoekstra, E. W. B. de Leer and U. A. Th. Brinkman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 3724 Search PubMed .‘Trihalomethanes Produced in Humic Acid
Reactions’,  R. C. Brush and G. W. Rice, J. Chem. Educ., 1994, 71, A293 Search PubMed .‘Chlorination of Humic Materials: Byproduct Formation and
Chemical Interpretations’,  D. A. Reckhow, P. C. Singer and R. L. Malcolm, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1990, 24, 1655 Search PubMed .‘Natural formation of chlorobenzoic acids (CBA) and
distinction between PCB-degraded CBA’,  V. Niedan and H. F. Schöler, Chemosphere, 1997, 35, 1233 Search PubMed .‘Chlorine in water disinfection’,  H. Galal-Gorchev, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1731 Search PubMed .‘Brominated-trihalomethane formation from phenolic
derivatives as model of humic materials by the reaction with hypochlorite
and hypobromite ions’,  K. Ichihashi, K. Teranishi and A. Ichimura, Chem. Lett., 1999, 957 Search PubMed .Introducing Groundwater, M. Price, Chapman &
Hall Ltd., London, 2nd edn.,
1996. Search PubMed .‘Evidence of naturally produced and man-made organohalogens
in water and sediments’,  A. Grimvall, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
3–20. Search PubMed .‘Origin and occurrence of halogenated organic matter in
soil’,  G. Asplund, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogens, ed. A. Grimvall and E. W.
B. de Leer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
35-48. Search PubMed .‘Organohalogens in Nature’,  G. Asplund and A. Grimvall, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1992, 25, 1346 Search PubMed .‘AOX in Groundwater’,  C. Grøn, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogen Compounds, ed. A. Grimvall
and E. W. B. de Leer, Kluwer Academci Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
49–64. Search PubMed .‘Organic halogens in Danish groundwaters’,  C. Grøn, in
Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences, ed. S. Bhattacharji, G. M.
Friedman, H. J. Neugebauer and A. Seilacher, vol.
33,  Search PubMed ; 
(Humic Substances in the Aquatic and Terrestrial Environment, ed.
B. Allard, H. Borén and A. Grimvall),
Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
 1991, pp. 495–506. .‘Organohalogens of natural or unknown origin in surface water
and precipitation’,  A. Grimvall, K. Laniewski, H. Borén, S. Jonsson and S. Kaugare, Toxicol. Environ. Chem., 1994, 46, 183 Search PubMed .‘Naturally produced adsorbable organic halogens (AOX) in
humic substances from soil and water’,  G. Asplund, A. Grimvall and C. Pettersson, Sci. Total Environ., 1989, 81/82, 239 Search PubMed .‘Determination of group parameters for organically bound
chlorine, bromine and iodine in precipitation’,  K. Laniewski, J. Dahlén, H. Borén and A. Grimvall, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 771 Search PubMed .‘Isolation of haloorganic groundwater humic
substances’,  M. Krog and C. Grøn, Sci. Total Environ., 1995, 172, 159 Search PubMed .‘Natural organohalogens in sediments’,  G. Müller, G. Nkusi and H. F. Schöler, J. Prakt. Chem.-Chem. Ztg., 1996, 338, 23 Search PubMed .‘Historical Trends in Organochlorine Compounds in River
Basins Identified Using Sediment Cores from Reservoirs’,  P. C. van Metre, E. Callender and C. C. Fuller, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 2339 Search PubMed .‘Organic chlorine compounds in lake sediments and the role of
chlorobleaching effluents’,  J. Paasivirta, J. Knuutinen, P. Maatela, R. Paukku, J. Soikkeli and J. Särkkä, Chemosphere, 1988, 17, 137 Search PubMed .‘Distribution of Halogenated Organic Material in Sediments
from Anthropogenic and Natural Sources in the Gulf of Finland Catchment
Area’,  H. T. Kankaanpää, M. A. Laurén, R. J. Saares, L. V. Heitto and Ü. K. Suursaar, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 96 Search PubMed .‘Isolation and characterisation of a haloorganic soil humic
acid’,  C. Grøn and B. Rabenlange, Sci. Total Environ., 1992, 113, 281 Search PubMed .‘Organically-bound Halogens in Coniferous Forest Soil:
Distribution Pattern and Evidence of in situ
Production’,  O. Hjelm, M.-B. Johansson and G. Öberg-Asplund, Chemosphere, 1995, 30, 2353 Search PubMed .‘Sources of Organic Halogens in Spruce Forest
Soil’,  G. Öberg and C. Grøn, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 1573 Search PubMed .‘Organic Halogens in Spruce Forest
Throughfall’,  G. Öberg, C. Johansen and C. Grøn, Chemosphere, 1998, 36, 1689 Search PubMed .‘In situ formation of organically bound halogens
during decomposition of Norway spruce needles: effects of
fertilization’,  G. Oberg, E. Nordlund and B. Berg, Can. J. For. Res., 1996, 26, 1040 Search PubMed .‘Natural Organochlorine in Humic Soils. GC and GC/MS Studies
of Soil Pyrolysates’,  H. J. P. de Lijser,
C. Erkelens,
A. Knol,
W. Pool and
E. W. B. de Leer, in
Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences ed. S. Bhattacharji, G. M.
Friedman, H. J. Neugebauer and A. Seilacher, vol.
33, (Humic Substances in the Aquatic and Terrestrial
Environment, ed. B. Allard, H. Borén and A. Grimvall),
Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
 1991, pp. 485-494. Search PubMed .‘Characterization of chlorinated aromatic structures in high
molecular weight BKME-materials and in fulvic acids from industrially
unpolluted waters’,  O. Dahlman, A. Reimann, P. Ljungquist, R. Mörck, C. Johansson, H. Bóren and A. Grimvall, Water Sci. Technol., 1994, 29, 81 Search PubMed .‘Chlorinated Structural Elements in High Molecular Weight
Organic Matter from Unpolluted Waters and Bleached-Kraft Mill
Effluents’,  O. Dahlman, R. Mörck, P. Ljunguist, A. Reimann, C. Johansson, H. Bóren and A. Grimvall, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1993, 27, 1616 Search PubMed .‘Chlorinated Structures in High Molecular Weight Organic
Matter Isolated from Fresh and Decaying Plant Material and
Soil’,  C. Flodin, E. Johansson, H. Bóren, A. Grimvall, O. Dahlman and R. Mörck, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 2464 Search PubMed .‘Preparation and properties of chlorinated syringic acids,
acetosyringones, acetoguaiacones and methoxy-p-hydroquinones: components of
pulp bleach effluents’,  T. J. Smith, R. H. Wearne and A. F. A. Wallis, Chemosphere, 1995, 30, 69 Search PubMed .‘Complexity of remediation’,  P. C. M. van Noort, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 526A Search PubMed .‘Soil Peroxidase-Mediated Chlorination of Fulvic
Acid’,  G. Asplund,
H. Borén,
U. Carlsson and
A. Grimvall, in
Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences, ed. S. Bhattacharji, G. M.
Friedman, H. J. Neugebauer and A. Seilacher, vol.
33,  Search PubMed ; (Humic Substances in the Aquatic and Terrestrial
Environment, ed. B. Allard, H. Borén and A. Grimvall),
Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
 1991, pp. 475-483. Search PubMed .‘Haloperoxidase-like activity in Spruce forest soil—A
source of volatile halogenated organic compounds?’,  F. Laturnus, G. Mehrtens and C. Grøn, Chemosphere, 1995, 31, 3709 Search PubMed .‘Structure of aquatic humic substances responsible for the
reaction with chlorine’,  J. Hejzlar,
H. Borén and
A. Grimvall, in
Naturally-Produced Organohalogen Compounds, ed. A. Grimvall
and E. W. B. de Leer, Kluwer Pubishers,
Dordrecht,  1995, pp.
201–212. Search PubMed .‘Reaction Pathways of Trihalomethane Formation from the
Halogenation of Dihydroxyaromatic Model Compounds for Humic
Acid’,  S. D. Boyce and J. F. Hornig, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1983, 17, 202 Search PubMed .‘Enzymatically mediated formation of chlorinated humic
acids’,  L. Carlsen and P. Lassen, Org. Geochem., 1992, 18, 477 Search PubMed .‘Sources and environmental concentrations of dioxins and
related compounds’,  C. Rappe, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1781 Search PubMed .‘Dioxins at Large’,  S. Harrad and K. Jones, Chem. Br., 1992, 1110 Search PubMed .‘Environmental Behaviour of Chlorinated Dioxins and
Furans’,  R. A. Hites, Acc. Chem. Res., 1990, 23, 194 Search PubMed .‘Development, validation and limitations of toxic equivalency
factors’,  S. Safe, Chemosphere, 1992, 25, 61 Search PubMed .‘Dioxin is a Promoter Blocker, a Promoter and a Net
Anti-Carcinogen’,  G. Kayajanian, Regulat. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 1997, 26, 134 Search PubMed .‘Dioxin effects challenged’,  G. Kayajanian, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 527A Search PubMed .‘Polyhalodibenzo-p-dioxins as anti-tumour-promoting
agents’,  S. Ueda, A. Fujiwara, T. Umemura and H. Tokuda, Organohalogen Compd., 1994, 21, 209 Search PubMed .‘Chlorinated hydrocarbons: estrogens and
antiestrogens’,  S. Safe and V. Krishnan, Toxicol. Lett., 1995, 82-3, 731 Search PubMed .‘Synthesis and application of 1,3,6,8-, 2,4,6,8-substituted
dibenzofurans and dibenzo-p-dioxins as anti-tumorigenic
agents’, S. H. Safe, WO 90/08142, 26 July 1990..‘Scientists challenge EPA methods for assessing dioxin cancer
risk’,  P. Phibbs, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 130A Search PubMed .‘EPA Dioxin Reassessment’,  Science,  1994, 266,
1628. Search PubMed .‘Improvements to the UK PCDD/F and PCB atmospheric emission
inventory following an emissions measurement programme’,  R. E. Alcock, R. Gemmill and K. C. Jones, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 759 Search PubMed .‘Analysis of PCDDs and PCDFs in virgin suspension PVC
resin’,  H. Wagenaar, K. Langeland, R. Hardman, Y. Sergeant, K. Brenner, P. Sandra, C. Rappe, A. Fernandes and T. Tiernan, Chemosphere, 1998, 36, 1 Search PubMed .‘Role of Inorganic Chlorine in the Formation of
Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-dioxins/Dibenzofurans from Residual
Carbon on Incinerator Fly Ash’,  R. Addink,
F. Espourteille and
E. R. Altwicker,
Environ. Sci. Technol.,  1998,
32, 3356 and papers cited
therein. Search PubMed .‘Formation of PCDDs and PCDFs in municipal waste incineration
and its inhibition mechanisms: A review’,  K. Tuppurainen, I. Halonen, P. Ruokojarvi, J. Tarhanen and J. Ruuskanen, Chemosphere, 1998, 36, 1493 Search PubMed .‘De novo synthesis of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans. Proposal of a mechanistic
scheme’,  H. Huang and A. Buekens, Sci. Total Environ., 1996, 193, 121 Search PubMed .‘Dioxins in Ambient Air, Bonfire Night 1994’,  P. Dyke, P. Coleman and R. James, Chemosphere, 1997, 34, 1191 Search PubMed .‘Release of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans by setting off fireworks’,  O. Fleischer, H. Wichmann and W. Lorenz, Chemosphere, 1999, 39, 925 Search PubMed .’Trace Chemistries of Fire: A Source of Chlorinated
Dioxins’,  R. R. Bumb, W. B. Crummett, S. S. Cutie, J. R. Gledhill, R. H. Hummel, R. O. Kagel, L. L. Lamparski, E. V. Luoma, D. L. Miller, T. J. Nestrick, L. A. Shadoff, R. H. Stehl and J. S. Woods, Science, 1980, 210, 385 Search PubMed .‘Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans
in the remote North Atlantic marine atmosphere’,  J. I. Baker and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 14 Search PubMed .‘Seasonal, anthropogenic, air-mass and meteorological
influences on the atmospheric concentration of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs): Evidence for the
importance of diffuse combustion sources’,  R. G. M. Lee, N. J. L. Green, R. Lohhmann and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2864 Search PubMed .‘Dioxin Emissions from Wood Combustion’,  B. Schatowitz, G. Brandt, F. Gafner, E. Schlumpf, R. Bühler, P. Hasler and T. Nussbaumer, Chemosphere, 1994, 29, 2005 Search PubMed .Evaluation of Emissions from the Open Burning of Household
Waste in Barrels. Vol 1. Technical Report, P. M. Lemieux, November
1997, EPA-600/R-97-134a..‘Emissions of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
polychlorinated dibenzofurans from the open burning of household waste in
barrels’,  P. M. Lemieux, C. C. Lutes, J. A. Abbott and K. M. Aldous, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 377 Search PubMed .‘Influence of Variation in Combustion Conditions on the
Primary Formation of Chlorinated Organic Micropollutants during Municipal
Solid Waste Combustion’,  E. Wikström, M. Tysklind and S. Marklund, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 4263 Search PubMed .‘Secondary Formation of Chlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins, Dibenzofurans, Biphenyls, Benzenes and Phenols
during MSW Combustion’,  E. Wikström and S. Marklund, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 604 Search PubMed .‘Is there a strong dioxin:chlorine link in commercial scale
systems?’  H. G. Rigo and A. J. Chandler, Chemosphere, 1998, 37, 2031 Search PubMed .‘The relationship between chlorine in waste streams and
dioxin emissions from waste combustor stacks’, H. G. Rigo, A. J.
Chandler and W. S. Lanier, 1995, ASME-CRTD-Vol 36, American Society of
Mechanical Engineers (ISBN 0-7918-1222-7)..‘Chlorine in equals dioxins out? Its not that
simple’,  W. M. Shaub, Res. Conser. Recycl., 1995, 14, 157 Search PubMed .‘Thermochemistry of the Deacon Process’,  M. W. M. Hisham and S. W. Benson, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 6194 Search PubMed .‘The role of copper in the de novo synthesis of
PCDD/Fs’,  R. Addink and E. R. Altwicker, Environ. Eng. Sci., 1998, 15, 19 Search PubMed .‘Dioxins in diesel exhaust’,  C. Clunies-Ross, B. R. Stanmore and G. J. Millar, Nature, 1996, 381, 379 Search PubMed .‘The Beilstein Test: An Unintentional Dioxin Source in
Analytical and Research Laboratories’,  B. M. Scholz-Böttcher, M. Bahadir and H. Hopf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1992, 31, 443 Search PubMed .‘Time Trends in Human Dietary Exposure to PCDDs, PCDFs and
PCBs in the UK’,  N. Harrison, S. Wearne, M. G. de M. Gem, A. Gleadle, J. Startin, S. Thorpe, C. Wright, M. Kelly, C. Robinson, S. White, D. Hardy and V. Edinburgh, Chemosphere, 1998, 37, 1657 Search PubMed .‘Dioxins in the Environment—A Review of Trend
Data’,  R. E. Alcock and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 3133 Search PubMed .‘Evidence for the Presence of PCDD/Fs in the Environment
Prior to 1900 and Further Studies on Their Temporal Trends’,  R. E. Alcock, M. S. McLachlan, A. E. Johnston and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 1580 Search PubMed .‘Evidence for a Decline in Atmospheric Emissions of PCDD/Fs
in the UK’,  L. O. Kjeller, K. C. Jones, A. E. Johnston and C. Rappe, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 1398 Search PubMed .‘Historical Record of Polychlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins and Dibenzofurans in Swiss Lake
Sediments’,  J. M. Czuczwa, F. Niessen and R. A. Hites, Chemosphere, 1985, 14, 1175 Search PubMed .‘Occurrence of PCDD/F in Dated Lake Sediments of the Black
Forest, Southwestern Germany’,  I. Jüttner, B. Henkelmann, K.-W. Schramm, C. E. W. Steinberg, R. Winkler and A. Kettrup, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 806 Search PubMed .‘PCDD/F in Recent and Historical Sediment Layers of Lake
Stechlin, Germany’,  K.-W. Schramm, R. Winkler, P. Casper and A. Kettrup, Water. Res., 1997, 31, 1525 Search PubMed .‘PCBs and PCDD/Fs in Lake Sediments of Großer Arbersee,
Bavarian Forest, South Germany’,  B. F. A. Bruckmeier, I. Jüttner, K.-W. Schramm, R. Winkler, C. E. W. Steinberg and A. Kettrup, Environ. Pollut., 1997, 95, 19 Search PubMed .‘Time trends in levels, patterns, and profiles for
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and biphenyls in
a sediment core from the Baltic Proper’,  L.-O. Kjeller and C. Rappe, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 346 Search PubMed .‘Certain organochlorine and organobromine contaminants in
Swedish human milk in perspective of past 20–30
years’,  K. Noren and D. Meironyte, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 1111 Search PubMed .‘Decrease of PCDD/F levels in human blood from Germany over
the past ten years (1989–1998)’,  J. Wittsiepe, P. Schrey, U. Ewers, F. Selenka and M. Wilheim, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 1103 Search PubMed .‘Dioxin archaeology—revealing of potential human
exposures to polychlorinated dioxins and furans in the early
“40s”’,  G. Lindström, B. van Bavel, H. Wingfors, L. Hardell, G. Sundström and A. Widell, Organohalogen Cmpds., 1999, 44, 9 Search PubMed .‘Presence of chlorodibenzodioxins in a sealed 1933 sample of
dried municipal sewage’,  L. L. Lamparski, T. J. Nestrick and V. A. Stenger, Chemosphere, 1984, 13, 361 Search PubMed .‘Human Fecal PCDD/F Excretion Exceeds the Dietary
Intake’,  P. Schrey, J. Wittsiepe, P. Mackrodt and F. Selenka, Chemosphere, 1998, 37, 1825 Search PubMed .‘Clearance of PCDD/Fs via the Gastrointestinal Tract
in Occupationally Exposed Persons’,  S. Rohde, G. A. Moser, O. Päpke and M. S. McLachlan, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 3397 Search PubMed .‘Myeloperoxidase-catalyzed formation of PCDD/F from
chlorophenols’,  J. Wittsiepe, Y. Kullmann, P. Schrey, F. Selenka and M. Wilheim, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 963 Search PubMed .‘An investigation of the in vivo formation of
octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin’,  J. K. Huwe, V. J. Feil, R. G. Zaylskie and T. O. Tiernan, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 957 Search PubMed .‘Comment on “Evidence for the Presence of PCDD/Fs in
the Environment Prior to 1900 and Further Studies on Their Temporal
Trends”’,  J. I. Baker and R. A. Hites, Env. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 205 Search PubMed .‘Response to Comment on “Evidence for the Presence of
PCDD/Fs in the Environment Prior to 1900 and Further Studies on Their
Temporal Trends”’,  R. E. Alcock, K. C. Jones, M. S. McLachlan and A. E. Johnston, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 206 Search PubMed .‘Global Mass Balance for Polychlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins and Dibenzofurans’,  L. P. Brzuzy and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 1797 Search PubMed .‘Comment on Global Mass Balance for Polychlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins and Dibenzofurans’,  D. J. Shanefield, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 3646 Search PubMed  ‘Response to Comment on Global Mass Balance for
Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-dioxins and
Dibenzofurans’,  L. P.Brzuzy and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 3647 CrossRef CAS .‘A Review of Dioxin Emissions in the UK’, HMIP
Research Report No. DOE/HMIP/RR/95/004, October 1995..‘Exploring the Balance between Sources, Deposition and the
Environmental Burden of PCDD/Fs in the UK Terrestrial Environment: An Aid
to Identifying Uncertainties and Research Needs’,  R. Duarte-Davidson, A. Sewart, R. E. Alcock, I. T. Cousins and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 1 Search PubMed .‘The US Dioxin Inventory: Are There Missing
Sources?’,  V. M. Thomas and T. G. Spiro, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 82A Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric Transport and Deposition of Polychlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins and Dibenzofurans’,  B. D. Eltzer and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1989, 23, 1396 Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric deposition of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins/dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) in two UK cities’,  C. J. Halsall, P. J. Coleman and K. C. Jones, Chemosphere, 1997, 35, 1919 Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric transport of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) in air masses across
the United Kingdom and Ireland: Evidence of emission and
depletion’,  R. Lohmann, N. J. L. Green and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2872 Search PubMed .‘Detailed studies of the factors controlling atmospheric
PCDD/F concentrations’,  R. Lohmann, N. J. L. Green and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 4440 Search PubMed .‘An historical record of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxin (PCDD) and polychlorinated dibenzofuran (PCDF)
deposition to a remote lake site in north-west Scotland,
UK’,  C. L. Rose, N. L. Rose, S. Harlock and A. Fernandes, Sci. Total Environ., 1997, 198, 161 Search PubMed .‘PCDDs and PCDFs in Lake Sediment Cores from Southern
Mississippi, USA’,  C. Rappe, R. Andersson, K. Cooper, H. Fiedler, C. Lau, M. Bonner and F. Howell, Organohalogen Cpds., 1997, 32, 18 Search PubMed .‘PCDDs and PCDFs in Lake Sediment from a Rural Area in the
USA’,  C. Rappe, R. Andersson, M. Bonner, K. Cooper, H. Fiedler, C. Lau and F. Howell, Organohalogen Cpds., 1997, 32, 88 Search PubMed .‘Dioxins And Furanes In The Residues Left Behind After
Dry-Cleaning Clothing’,  O. Hutzinger, J. Towara, G. Umlauf and H. Fiedler, Tekstil, 1995, 44, 241 Search PubMed .‘Possible Natural Formation of Polychlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins as Evidenced by Sediment Analysis from the
Yellow Sea, the East China Sea and the Pacific Ocean’,  S. Hashimoto, T. Wakimoto and R. Tatsukawa, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 1995, 30, 341 Search PubMed .‘PCDDs in naturally-formed lake sediment cores from southern
Mississippi, USA’,  C. Rappe, S. Bergek, R. Andersson, K. Cooper, H. Fiedler, R. Bopp, F. Howell and M. Bonner, Organohalogen Cpds., 1999, 43, 111 Search PubMed .‘Dioxins and Furans in Sewage Sludges: A Review of Their
Occurrence and Sources in Sludge and of Their Environmental Fate, Behavior
and Significance in Sludge-Amended Agricultural Systems’,  K. C. Jones and A. P. Sewart, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 27, 1 Search PubMed .‘De novo formation of heptachloro- and
octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins from pentachlorophenol in municipal
sewage sludge’,  L. G. Öberg, R. Andersson and C. Rappe, Organohalogen Cpds., 1992, 9, 351 Search PubMed .‘Formation of octa- and heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins
during semi anaerobic digestion of sewage sludge’,  C. Klimm, K.-W. Schramm, B. Henkelmann, D. Martens and A. Kettrup, Chemosphere, 1998, 37, 2003 Search PubMed .‘Natural formation—a neglected source of
polychlorinated dioxins and dibenzofurans’,  C. Rappe, L. Öberg and R. Andersson, Organohalogen Cpds., 1999, 43, 249 Search PubMed .‘De novo Formation of PCDD/F in Compost and Sewage
Sludge—a Status Report’,  L. G. Öberg, N. Wågman, R. Andersson and C. Rappe, Organohalogen Cpds., 1992, 11, 297 Search PubMed .‘Formation Of PCDD/PCDF During Composting’,   T. Krauss, P. Krauss and H. Hagenmaier, Chemosphere, 1994, 28, 155 Search PubMed .‘Formation and degradation of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans and biphenyls in
compost’,  L. G. Oberg, N. Wagman, R. Andersson and C. Rappe, Ergeb. Workshops Neubildung Dioxinen Waehrend
Kompostierungsprozesses, 1994, 8 (Chem. Abstr., 1996, 124, 126031h) Search PubMed .‘Studies on dioxin formation in composting processes under
real conditions’,  S. Sievers and U. Schacht, Ergeb. Workshops Neubildung Dioxinen Waehrend
Kompostierungsprozesses, 1994, 48 (Chem. Abstr., 1996, 124, 126032j) Search PubMed .‘Formation of dioxins during composting
processes—results of studies at Bayreuth University and calculation
of PCDD/F inputs by different exposure paths’,  H. Fiedler, Ergeb. Workshops Neubildung Dioxinen Waehrend
Kompostierungsprozesses, 1994, 93 (Chem. Abstr., 1996, 124, 126033k) Search PubMed .‘Evidence of Natural Organochlorine Formation in Peat
Bogs’,  P. J. Silk, G. C. Lonergan, T. L. Arsenault and C. D. Boyle, Chemosphere, 1997, 35, 2865 Search PubMed .‘Enzyme-Mediated Formation of 2,3,7,8-Tetrasubstituted
Chlorinated Dibenzodioxins and Dibenzofurans’,  A. Svenson, L.-O. Kjeller and C. Rappe, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1989, 23, 900 Search PubMed .‘Biochemical formation of PCDD/Fs from
chlorophenols’,  L. G. Öberg and C. Rappe, Chemosphere, 1992, 25, 49 Search PubMed .‘Enzymatic Chlorophenol Oxidation as a Means of Chlorinated
Dioxin and Dibenzofuran Formation’,  A. Svenson, L. O. Kjeller and C. Rappe, Chemosphere, 1989, 19, 585 Search PubMed .‘Formation of PCDD/PCDFs via an
Enzymatically-Mediated Chlorination of Humic Acids’,  J. Vikelsøe, P. Lassen, E. Johansen and L. Carlsen, Organohalogen Cpds., 1994, 20, 351 Search PubMed .‘Formation of chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans during chlorination of aquatic humic
substances’,  J. Hemming, B. Holmbom and B. Larsson, Org. Micropollut. Aquatic Environ., 1991, 21, 523 Search PubMed .‘Effect of humic substances on the enzymatic formation of
OCDD from PCP’,   K. Morimoto and K. Tatsumi, Chemosphere, 1997, 34, 1277 Search PubMed .‘Reductive transformation of dioxins: An assessment of the
contribution of dissolved organic matter to dechlorination
reactions’,  Q. S. Fu, A. L. Barkovskii and P. Adriaens, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 3837 Search PubMed .‘Natural formation of chlorinated phenols,
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans in soil of a Douglas fir
forest’,  E. J. Hoekstra, H. De Weerd, E. W. B De Leer and U. A. Th. Brinkman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2543 Search PubMed .‘Archaean Molecular Fossils and the Early Rise of
Eukaryotes’,  J. J. Brocks, G. A. Logan, R. Buick and R. E. Summons, Science, 1999, 285, 1033 Search PubMed .‘Halogenation and oxidation reactions with
haloperoxidases’,  M. C. R. Franssen, Biocatalysis, 1994, 10, 87 Search PubMed .‘Haloperoxidases—their properties and their use in
organic synthesis’,  M. C. R. Franssen and H. C. van der Plas, Adv. Appl. Microbiol., 1992, 37, 41 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthetic studies on chlorinated anthraquinones in the
lichen Nephroma laevigatum’,  P. A. Cohen and G. H. N. Towers, Phytochem., 1996, 42, 1325 Search PubMed .‘An introduction to the origin and biochemistry of microbial
halometabolites’,  M.A. Petty, Bacteriol. Rev., 1961, 25, 111–130 Search PubMed .‘Molecular aspects of halogen-based biosynthesis of marine
natural products’,  W. Fenical, Recent Adv. Phytochem., 1979, 13, 219 Search PubMed .‘Biochemistry of Halogenated Organic
Compounds’  K. L.  Kirk,
Biochemistry of the Elements, ed. E. Frieden, Plenum
Press, London,  1991,
vol. 9B, ch. 7, pp. 155–189. Search PubMed .Ref. 645, ch. 9, pp. 239–285..‘Biogenic organochlorine compounds–findings, function,
environmental relevance’,  K. E. Geckeler and W. Eberhardt, Naturwiss., 1995, 82, 2 Search PubMed .Mechanisms of Biohalogenation and Dehalogenation, ed. D. B.
Janssen, K. Soda and R. Wever, North-Holland,
Amsterdam,  1997. Search PubMed .‘Chloroperoxidase I. Isolation and properties of the
crystalline glycoprotein’,  D. R. Morris and L. P. Hager, J. Biol. Chem., 1966, 241, 1763 Search PubMed .‘Bromoperoxidases and halogenated lipids in marine
algae’,   W. D. Hewson and L. P. Hager, J. Phycol., 1980, 16, 340 Search PubMed .‘Bromoperoxidase and iodoperoxidase enzymes and production of
halogenated methanes in marine diatom cultures’,  R. M. Moore, M. Webb, R. Tokarczyk and R. Wever, J. Geophys. Res., 1996, 101, 20899 Search PubMed .Ref. 507, p. 118..‘Chloroperoxidase IV: Evidence for an Ionic Electrophilic
Substitution Mechanism’,  F. S. Brown and L. P. Hager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 719 Search PubMed .‘Chemistry of peroxidase intermediates’,  L. P. Hager, P. F. Hollenberg, T. Rand-Meir, R. Chiang and D. Doubek, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 1975, 244, 80 Search PubMed .‘On the mechanism of chlorination by
chloroperoxidase’,   H. B. Dunford, A. M. Lambeir, M. A. Kashem and M. Pickard, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1987, 252, 292 Search PubMed .‘Defining the involvement of HOCl or Cl2 as
enzyme-generated intermediates in chloroperoxidase-catalyzed
reactions’,  R. D. Libby, A. L. Shedd, A. K. Phipps, T. M. Beachy and S. M. Gerstberger, J. Biol. Chem., 1992, 267, 1769 Search PubMed .‘Chlorination of taurine by myeloperoxidase: kinetic evidence
for an enzyme-bound intermediate’,  L. A. Marquez and H. B. Dunford, J. Biol. Chem., 1994, 269, 7950 Search PubMed .“Thermodynamic” mechanism of catalysis by
haloperoxidases’,  A. N. Shevelkova, Y. I. Sal’nikov, N. L. Kuz’mina and A. D. Ryabov, FEBS Lett., 1996, 383, 259 Search PubMed .‘Identification of intermediates in the catalytic cycles of
chloroperoxidase’,  H. A. Wagenknecht and W. D. Woggon, Chem. Biol., 1997, 4, 367 Search PubMed .‘Chloroperoxidase halogenating reactions. Chemical versus
enzymic halogenating intermediates’,  R. D. Libby, J. A. Thomas, L. W. Kaiser and L. P. Hager, J. Biol. Chem., 1982, 257, 5030 Search PubMed .‘Quantitating Direct Chlorine Transfer from Enzyme to
Substrate in Chloroperoxidase-catalyzed Reactions’,   R. D. Libby, T. M. Beachy and A. K. Phipps, J. Biol. Chem., 1996, 271, 21820 Search PubMed .‘A kinetic model of the myeloperoxidase–hydrogen
peroxide–chloride ion system in phagolysosomes’,  W. D. Stanbro, J. Theoret. Biol., 1998, 193, 59 Search PubMed .‘Chloroperoxidase II. Utilization of halogen
anions’,  L. P. Hager, D. R. Morris, F. S. Brown and H. Eberwein, J. Biol. Chem., 1966, 241, 1769 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of halogenated metabolites by
bacteria’,  K.-H. van Pée, Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 1996, 50, 375 Search PubMed .‘A Metal-ion- and Cofactor-independent Enzymatic Redox
Reaction: Halogenation by Bacterial Nonheme
Haloperoxidases’,  T. Haag, F. Lingens and K.-H. van Pée, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1991, 30, 1487 Search PubMed .‘Purification and characterization of a novel bacterial
non-heme chloroperoxidase from Pseudomonas
pyrrocinia’,  W. Wiesner, K.-H. van Pée and F. Lingens, J. Biol. Chem., 1988, 263, 13725 Search PubMed .‘A catalytic triad is required by the non-heme
haloperoxidases to perform halogenation’,  I. Pelletier, J. Altenbuchner and R. Mattes, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1995, 1250, 149 Search PubMed .‘Enzymatic, active oxygen-releasing mixture and peracid
production’, K.-H. van Pée, H. J. Hecht, A. Berkessel, T.
Schrapel, and H. Laatsch, PCT Patent, WO 96/06909, 7 Mar 1996..‘Structural Investigation of the Cofactor-free
Chloroperoxidases’,  B. Hofmann, S. Tölzer, I. Pelletier, J. Altenbuchner, K. H. van Pée and H. J. Hecht, J. Mol. Biol., 1998, 279, 889 Search PubMed .‘Metal-Free Bacterial Haloperoxidases as Unusual Hydrolases:
Activation of H2O2 by the Formation of Peracetic
Acid’,  M. Picard, J. Gross, E. Lübbert, S. Tölzer, S. Krauss, K.-H. van Pée and A. Berkessel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1196 Search PubMed .‘Metal-free Haloperoxidases: Fact or
Artifact?’,  O. Kirk and L. S. Conrad, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 977 Search PubMed .‘The non-haem chloroperoxidase from Pseudomonas
fluorescens and its relationship to pyrrolnitrin
biosynthesis’,  S. Kirner, S. Krauss, G. Sury, S. T. Lam, J. M. Ligon and K.-H. van Pée, Microbiology, 1996, 142, 2129 Search PubMed .‘Enzymatic chlorination using bacterial nonheme
haloperoxidases’,  G. Bongs and K.-H. van Pée, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1994, 16, 53 Search PubMed .‘NADH-Dependent Halogenases Are More Likely To Be Involved in
Halometabolite Biosynthesis Than Haloperoxidases’,  K. Hohaus, A. Altmann, W. Burd, I. Fischer, P. E. Hammer, D. S. Hill, J. M. Ligon and K.-H. van Pée, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 2012 Search PubMed .‘Novel specific halogenating enzymes from bacteria’,
K.-H. van Pée, K. Hohaus, A. Altmann, W. Burd, S. Lam, D. S. Hill,
P. Hammer and J. Ligon, Verh.-K. Ned. Akad. Wet., Afd. Natuurkd.,
Tweede Reeks (1997), (Mechanisms of Biohalogenation and
Dehalogenation), 1998, 43..‘Halogenation of aromatic compounds: thermodynamic,
mechanistic, and ecological aspects’,  J. Dolfing, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1998, 167, 271 Search PubMed .‘Enzymatic halogenation catalyzed via a catalytic triad and
by oxidoreductases’,  K.-H. van Pée, S. Keller, T. Wage, I. Wynands, H. Schnerr and S. Zehner, Biol. Chem., 2000, 381, 1 Search PubMed .‘Peroxidases from Phaeophyceae: a
vanadium(V)-dependent peroxidase from Ascophyllum
nodosum’,  H. Vilter, Phytochem., 1994, 23, 1387 Search PubMed .‘Primary structure and characterisation of the vanadium
chloroperoxidase from the fungus Curvularia
inaequalis’,  B. H. Simons, P. Barnett, E. G. M. Vollenbroek, H. L. Dekker, A. O. Muijsers, A. Messerschmidt and R. Wever, Eur. J. Biochem., 1995, 229, 566 Search PubMed .‘X-Ray structure of a vanadium-containing
enzyme-chloroperoxidase from the fungus Curvularia
inaequalis’,  A. Messerschmidt and R. Wever, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1996,  93, 392 Search PubMed .‘Isolation, characterization and primary structure of
vanadium chloroperoxidase from the fungus, Embellisia
didymospora’,  P. Barnett, W. Hemrika, H. L. Dekker, A. O. Muijsers, R. Renirie and R. Wever, J. Biol. Chem., 1998, 273, 23381 Search PubMed .R. Wever and
B. E. Krenn, in
Vanadium in Biological Systems, ed. N. D. Chasteen,
Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1990, pp.
81–97. Search PubMed .‘Marine Haloperoxidases’,  A. Butler and J. V. Walker, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 1937 Search PubMed .‘Vanadium haloperoxidases’,  A. Butler, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 1998, 2, 279 Search PubMed .‘Chloromycetin, a new antibiotic from a soil
actinomycete’,   J. Ehrlich, Q. R. Bartz, R. M. Smith, D. A. Joslyn and P. R. Burkholder, Science, 1947, 106, 417 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of the tetracyclines. VII
4-Hydroxy-6-methylpretetramid, an intermediate accumulated by a blocked
mutant of Streptomyces aureofaciens,  J. R. D. McCormick, U. H. Joachim, E. R. Jensen, S. Johnson and N. O. Sjolander, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1965, 87, 1793 Search PubMed .‘Methyl Chloride Transferase: A Carbocation Route for
Biosynthesis of Halometabolites’,  A. M. Wuosmaa and L. P. Hager, Science, 1990, 249, 160 Search PubMed .‘Purification and Characterisation of a Novel
Methyltransferase Responsible for Biosynthesis of Halomethanes and
Methanethiol in Brassica oleracea’,  J. M. Attieh, A. D. Hanson and H. S. Saini, J. Biol. Chem., 1995, 270, 9250 Search PubMed .‘Biochemical characterisation of chloromethane emission from
wood-rotting fungus Phellinus pomaceus’,  D. Saxena, S. Aouad, J. Attieh and H. S. Saini, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1998, 64, 2831 Search PubMed .‘The possible involvement of methylcobalamin in the
production of methyl iodide in the marine environment’,  S. L. Manley, Mar. Chem., 1994, 46, 361 Search PubMed .‘A corrinoid-dependent catabolic pathway for growth of a
Methylobacterium strain with chloromethane’,  T. Vannelli, M. Messmer, A. Studer, S. Vuilleumier and T. Leisinger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1999, 96, 4615 Search PubMed .‘Bijdrage tot de kennis van het mineralisatieprocess’,
Thesis, Technical High School, Delft, L. E. Den Dooren de Jong, 1926, cited
in ref. 704 (Biol. Abstr., 1927, 1, 12696)..‘Degradation of halogenated aliphatic compounds: the role of
adaptation’,  F. Pries, J. R. van der Ploeg, J. Dolfing and D. B. Janssen, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 1994, 15, 279 Search PubMed .‘Methyl chloride: naturally occurring toxicant and C1-growth
substrate’,  S. Hartmans, A. Schmuckle, A. M. Cook and T. Leisinger, J. Gen. Microbiol., 1986, 132, 1139 Search PubMed .‘Dehalogenation of dichloromethane by cell extracts of
Hyphomicrobium DM2’,  G. Stucki, R. Galli, H. R. Ebersold and T. Leisinger, Arch. Microbiol., 1981, 130, 366 Search PubMed .‘Degradation of halogenated aliphatic compounds by
Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10’  D. B. Janssen, A. Scheper, L. Dijkhuizen and B. Witholt, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1985, 49, 673 Search PubMed .‘Isolation and characterisation of Dehalobacterium
formicoaceticum gen. nov. sp. nov., a strictly anaerobic
bacterium uitilizing dichloromethane as source of carbon and
energy’  A. Mägli, M. Wendt and T. Leisinger, Arch. Microbiol., 1996, 166, 101 Search PubMed .Bioremediation of Chlorinated Solvents, Bioremediation
(Third International in situ and On-Site Bioreclamation Symposium,
San Diego, CA, 1995) ed. R. E. Hinchlee, A. Leason and L. Semprini,
Battelle Press,  1995. Search PubMed .‘Microbiological aspects of the removal of chlorinated
hydrocarbons from air’,  J. Dolfing, A. J. van den Wijngaard and D. B. Janssen, Biodegradation, 1993, 4, 261 Search PubMed .Environmental Organic Chemistry, R. P. Schwarzenbach, P. M.
Gschwend and D. M. Imboden, John Wiley & Sons,
New York,  1993. Search PubMed .‘Bacterial dehalogenases: biochemistry, genetics and
biotechnological applications’,  S. Fetzner and F. Lingens, Microbiol. Rev., 1994, 58, 641 Search PubMed .‘Progress Toward the Biological Treatment of C1
and C2 Halogenated Hydrocarbons’,  W. D. Murray and M. Richardson, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1993, 23, 195 Search PubMed .‘Dehalogenation in environmental
biotechnology’,  L. P. Wackett, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 1994, 5, 260 Search PubMed .‘Microbial dehalogenation’,  J. H. Slater, A. T. Bull and D. J. Hardman, Biodegradation, 1995, 6, 181 Search PubMed .‘Biodegradation of chlorinated aliphatic
compounds’,  T. Leisinger, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 1996, 7, 295 Search PubMed .‘Reductive dehalogenation as a respiratory
process’,  C. Holliger and W. Schumacher, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, 1994, 66, 239 Search PubMed .‘Reduktive dechlorierung als respiratorischer Prozeß in
anaeroben Bakterien’,  G. Diekert, Schrift. Biol. Abwass., 1996, Sfb 193, 149 Search PubMed .‘Isolation of a Bacterium that Reductively Dechlorinates
Tetrachloroethene to Ethene’,  X. Maymó-Gatell, Y. Chien, J. M. Gossett and S. H. Zinder, Science, 1997, 276, 1568 Search PubMed .‘Reductive dechlorination of tetrachloroethene to ethene by
two-component enzyme pathway’,  J. K. Magnuson, R. V. Stern, J. M. Gossett, S. H. Zinder and D. R. Burris, Appl. Env. Microbiol., 1998, 64, 1270 Search PubMed .‘Breathing with Chlorinated Solvents’,  P. L. McCarty, Science, 1997, 276, 1521 Search PubMed .‘Metabolism of polyhalogenated compounds by a genetically
engineered bacterium’,  L. P. Wackett, M. J. Sadowsky, L. M. Newman, H.-G. Hur and S. Li, Nature, 1994, 368, 627 Search PubMed .‘The Microbial Logic and Environmental Signficance of
Reductive Halogenation’,  J. Dolfing and J. E. M. Beurskens, Adv. Microb. Ecol., 1995, 14, 143 Search PubMed .‘Microbial reductive dehalogenation’,  W. W. Mohn and J. M. Tiedje, Microbiol. Rev., 1992, 56, 482 Search PubMed .‘Genetics and Biochemistry of Dehalogenating
Enzymes’,  D. B. Janssen, F. Pries and J. R. Van der Ploeg, Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 1994, 48, 163 Search PubMed .‘Computer modelling of microbial hydrolytic
dehalogenation’,  J. Damborský, Pure Appl. Chem., 1998, 70, 1375 Search PubMed .‘Crystallographic analysis of the catalytic mechanism of
haloalkane dehalogenase’,  K. H. G. Verschueren, F. Seljée, H. J. Rozeboom, K. H. Kalk and B. W. Dijkstra, Nature, 1993, 363, 693 Search PubMed .‘Repositioning the catalytic triad aspartic acid of
haloalkane dehalogenase: effects on stability, kinetics and
structure’,  G. H. Krooshof, E. M. Kwant, J. Damborský, J. Koča and D. B. Janssen, Biochemistry, 1997, 36, 9571 Search PubMed .‘Crystallographic and Fluorescence Studies of the Interaction
of Haloalkane Dehalogenase with Halide Ions. Studies with Halide Compounds
Reveal a Halide Binding Site in the Active Site’,  K. H. G. Verschueren, J. Kingma, H. J. Rozeboom, K. H. Kalk, D. B. Janssen and B. W. Dijkstra, Biochemistry, 1993, 32, 9031 Search PubMed .‘Genetics and biochemistry of 1,2-dichloroethane
degradation’,  D. B. Janssen, J. R. van der Ploeg and F. Pries, Biodegradation, 1994, 5, 249 Search PubMed .‘Kinetics of Halide Release of Haloalkane Dehalogenase:
Evidence for a Slow Conformational Change’,  J. P. Schanstra and D. B. Janssen, Biochemistry, 1996, 35, 5624 Search PubMed .‘Specificity and Kinetics of Haloalkane
Dehalogenase’,  J. P. Schanstra, J. Kingma and D. B. Janssen, J. Biol. Chem., 1996, 271, 14747 Search PubMed .‘Activation of an Asp-124→Asn mutant of haloalkane
dehalogenase by hydrolytic deamidation of asparagine’,  F. Pries, J. Kingma and D. B. Janssen, FEBS Lett., 1995, 358, 171 Search PubMed .‘Kinetic Characterisation and X-Ray Structure of a Mutant of
Haloalkane Dehalogenase with Higher Catalytic Activity and Modified
Substrate Range’,  J. P. Schanstra, I. S. Ridder, G. J. Heimeriks, R. Rink, G. J. Poelarends, K. H. Kalk, B. W. Dijkstra and D. B. Janssen, Biochemistry, 1996, 35, 13186 Search PubMed .‘Kinetic analysis and X-ray structure of haloalkane
dehalogenase with a modified halide-binding site’,  G. H. Krooshof, I. S. Ridder, A. W. J. W Tepper, G. J. Vos, H. J. Rozeboom, K. H. Kalk, B. W. Dijkstra and D. B. Janssen, Biochemistry, 1998, 37, 15013 Search PubMed .‘Molecular mechanisms of genetic adaptation to xenobiotic
compounds’,  J. R. Van der Meer, W. M. De Vos, S. Harayama and A. J. B. Zehnder, Microbiol. Rev., 1992, 56, 677 Search PubMed .‘Genetic adaptation of bacteria to chlorinated aromatic
compounds’,  J. R. van der Meer, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 1994, 15, 239 Search PubMed .‘Genetic adaptation to 1,2-dichloroethane and related
compounds’,  G. J. Poelarends and D. B. Janssen, Schrift. Biol. Abwass., 1996, Sfb 193, 159 Search PubMed .‘Evolutionary aspects of catalysis by haloalkane
dehalogenase’, B. W. Dijkstra and K. H. G. Verschueren, Biochem.
Eng. 3rd Int. Symp., 1995, Proc., pp. 83–87..Evolution of dichloromethane utilization’,  T. Leisinger,
A. Mägli,
M. Schmid-Appert,
K. Zoller and
S. Vuilleumier, in
Microbial Growth on C1 Compounds, ed. M. E. Lidstrom and F.
R. Tabita, Kluwer, Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht,  1996, pp.
261-268. Search PubMed .‘Microbial dehalogenases: enzymes recruited to convert
xenobiotic substrates’,  S. D. Copley, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 1998, 2, 613 Search PubMed .‘Degradation of 1,3-dichloropropene by Pseudomonas
cichorii 170’,  G. J. Poelarends, M. Wilkens, M. J. Larkin, J. D. van Elsas and D. B. Janssen, Appl. Env. Microbiol., 1998, 64, 2931 Search PubMed .‘Homology modelling of haloalkane dehalogenase of
Sfingomonas paucimobilis UT26’,  J. Damborský, A. T. Bull and D. J. Hardman, Biologia, 1995, 50, 523 Search PubMed .‘Cellularly generated inorganic oxidants as natural
microbiocidal agents’,  J. K. Hurst and S. V. Lymar, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 520 Search PubMed .‘Exhaled human breath measurement method for assessing
exposure to halogenated volatile organic compounds’,  J. D. Pleil and A. B. Lindstrom, Clin. Chem., 1997, 43, 723 Search PubMed .‘Type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase is a
selenocysteine-containing enzyme’,  M. J. Berry, L. Banu and P. R. Larsen, Nature, 1991, 349, 438 Search PubMed .‘Are organochlorine compounds created in the human
body?’,  N. Winterton, Mutat. Res., 1997, 373, 293 Search PubMed .‘The Respiratory Burst of Phagocytes’,  B. M. Bablor, J. Clin. Invest., 1984, 73, 599 Search PubMed .‘Myeloperoxidase–halide–hydrogen peroxide
antibacterial system’,  S. J. Klebanoff, J. Bacteriol., 1968, 95, 2131 Search PubMed .‘Studies on the chlorinating activity of
myeloperoxidase’,  J. E. Harrison and J. Schultz, J. Biol. Chem., 1976, 251, 1371 Search PubMed .‘Assessment of chlorination by human
neutrophils’,  C. S. Foote, T. E. Goyne and R. I. Lehrer, Nature, 1983, 301, 715 Search PubMed .‘Chloramine as intermediates of oxidation reaction of amino
acids by myeloperoxidase’,  J. M. Zgliczyński, T. Stelmaszyńska, J. Domański and W. Ostrowski, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1971, 235, 419 Search PubMed .‘Myeloperoxidase of human neutrophilic granulocytes as
chlorinating enzyme’,  T. Stelmaszyńska and J.M. Zgliczyński, Eur. J. Biochem., 1975, 45, 305 Search PubMed .‘Chlorination of an active site tyrosyl residue in
D-amino acid oxidase by
N-chloro-D-leucine’,  N. G. Rudie, D. J. T. Porter and H. J. Bright, J. Biol. Chem., 1980, 255, 498 Search PubMed .‘Chlorination of Taurine by Human Neutrophils: evidence for
hypochlorous acid generation’,  S. J. Weiss, R. Klein, A. Slivka and M. Wei, J. Clin. Invest., 1982, 70, 598 Search PubMed .‘Differential reactivities of hypochlorous and hypobromous
acids with purified Escherichia coli phospholipid: formation of
haloamines and halohydrins’  A. C. Carr, J. J. M. van den Berg and C. C. Winterbourn, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1998, 1392, 254 Search PubMed .‘Human Neutrophils Employ the Myeloperoxidase-Hydrogen
Peroxidase-Chloride System to Oxidize α-Amino Acids to a Family of
Reactive Aldehydes: mechanistic studies identifying labile intermediates
along the reaction pathway’  S. L. Hazen, A. d’Avignon, M. M. Anderson, F. F. Hsu and J. W. Heinecke, J. Biol. Chem., 1998, 273, 4997 Search PubMed .‘Chlorohydrin Formation from Unsaturated Fatty Acids Reacted
with Hypochlorous Acid’  C. C. Winterbourn, J. J. M. van den Berg, E. Roitman and F. A. Kuypers, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1992, 296, 547 Search PubMed .‘The action of hypochlorous acid on phosphatidylcholine
liposomes in dependence on the content of double bonds. Stoichiometry and
NMR analysis’  J. Arnhold, O. M. Panasenko, J. Schiller, Yu. A. Vladimirov and K. Arnold, Chem. Phys. Lipids, 1995, 78, 55 Search PubMed .‘Cholesterol Chlorohydrin Synthesis by the
Myeloperoxidase–Hydrogen Peroxide–Chloride System: Potential
Markers for Lipoproteins Oxidatively Damaged by Phagocytes’  J. W. Heinecke, W. Li, D. M. Mueller, A. Bohrer and J. Turk, Biochemistry, 1994, 33, 10127 Search PubMed .‘Chlorination of Cholesterol in Cell Membranes by
Hypochlorous Acid’  A. C. Carr, J. J. M. van den Berg and C. C. Winterbourn, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1996, 332, 63 Search PubMed .‘Molecular Chlorine Generated by the
Myeloperoxidase–Hydrogen Peroxide–Chloride System of Phagocytes
Converts Low Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol into a Family of Chlorinated
Sterols’  S. L. Hazen, F. F. Hsu, K. Duffin and J. W. Heinecke, J. Biol. Sci., 1996, 271, 23080 Search PubMed .‘Human Neutrophils Employ Chlorine Gas as an Oxidant During
Phagocytosis’  S. L. Hazen, F. F. Hsu, D. M. Mueller, J. R. Crowley and J. W. Heinecke, J. Clin. Invest., 1996, 98, 1283 Search PubMed .‘Chlorine, Bromine, Iodine and Astatine’  A. J. Downs and
C. J. Adams, in
Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry, ed. J. C. Bailar, Jr., H.
J. Emeleus, R. S. Nyholm and A. F. Trotman-Dickenson, Pergamon
Press, Oxford,  1973,
vol. 2, pp. 1118 et seq. Search PubMed .‘Chlorination of Tyrosyl Residues in Peptides by
Myeloperoxidase and Human Neutrophils’  N. M. Domigan, T. S. Charlton, M. W. Duncan, C. C. Winterbourn and A. J. Kettle, J. Biol. Chem., 1995, 270, 16542 Search PubMed .‘Neutrophils convert tyrosyl residues in albumin to
chlorotyrosine’  A. J. Kettle, FEBS Lett., 1996, 379, 103 Search PubMed .‘The Possibility for “Natural” Generation of
Chlorinated Organic Compounds’  C. N. Haas, Risk Analysis, 1994, 14, 143 Search PubMed .‘Are PCBs in the Great Lakes Approaching a “New
Equilibrium”?’  D. W. Smith, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 42A Search PubMed .‘Persistent organic pollutants (POPs): state of the
science’  K. C. Jones and P. de Voogt, Environ. Pollut., 1999, 100, 209 Search PubMed .Chemical Fate and Transport in the Environment, H. F. Hemond
and E. J. Fechner, Academic Press, San
Diego,  1999., 2nd edn. Search PubMed .‘Global fractionation’  W. A. Ockenden and K. C. Jones, Prog. Environ. Sci., 1999, 1, 119 Search PubMed .‘Persistent, ecotoxic and bioaccumulative compounds and their
possible environmental effects’  K. Ballschmiter, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1771 Search PubMed .The Long-Range Atmospheric Transport of Natural and Contaminant
Substances, ed. A. H. Knap, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dorderecht,
 1990. Search PubMed .Organic Contaminants in the Environment: Environmental Pathways and
Effects, ed. K. C. Jones, Elsevier Applied
Science, London,
 1991. Search PubMed .‘Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA): Equilibrium Fugacity
Calculations and Worst Case Approach’  K.-W. Schramm, Chemosphere, 1994, 28, 2151 Search PubMed .‘Gas–particle partitioning of atmospheric PCDD/Fs:
measurements and observations on modeling’  R. G. M. Lee and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 3596 Search PubMed .‘Distribution of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins
and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
within the full size range of atmospheric particles’  H. Kaupp and M. S. McLachlan, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 73 Search PubMed .‘Temperature Dependence of Atmospheric Concentrations of
Semivolatile Organic Compounds’  F. Wania, J.-E. Haugen, Y. D. Lei and D. Mackay, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 1013 Search PubMed .‘A global distribution model for persistent organic
chemicals’  F. Wania and D. Mackay, Sci. Total Environ., 1995, 160/161, 211 Search PubMed .‘Modelling the fate of non-polar organic chemicals in an
ageing snow pack’  F. Wania, Chemosphere, 1997, 35, 2345 Search PubMed .‘Assessing Long-Range Transport Potential of Persistent
Organic Pollutants’  A. Beyer, D. Mackay, M. Matthies, F. Wania and E. Webster, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 699 Search PubMed .‘Measuring and modelling the vertical distribution of
semi-volatile organic compounds in soils: II Model
development’  I. T. Cousins, D. Mackay and K. C. Jones, Chemosphere, 1999, 39, 2519 Search PubMed .‘Air–water gas exchange of hexachlorocyclohexanes
(HCHs) and the enantiomers of α-HCH in arctic regions’  L. M. Jantunen and T. Bidleman, J. Geophys. Res., 1996, 101, 28837 Search PubMed .‘Accumulation of persistent organochlorine compounds in
mountains of western Canada’  J. M. Blais, D. W. Schindler, D. C. G. Muir, L. E. Kimpe, D. B. Donald and B. Rosenberg, Nature, 1998, 395, 585 Search PubMed .‘Simulation of long-term environmental dynamics of
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and polychlorinated
dibenzofurans using the dynamic multimedia environmental fate model and its
implication to the time-trend analysis of dioxins’  N. Suzuki, M. Yasuda, T. Sakurai and J. Nakanishi, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 969 Search PubMed .‘Degradation half-life times of PCDDs, PCDFs and PCBs for
environmental fate modeling’  S. Sinkkonen and J. Paasivirta, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 943 Search PubMed .‘A global model of natural volatile organic compound
emissions’  A. Guenther, C. N. Hewitt, D. Erickson, R. Fall, C. Geron, T. Graedel, P. Harley, L. Klinger, M. Lerdau, W. A. Mackay, T. Pierce, B. Scholes, R. Steinbrecher, R. Tallamraju, J. Taylor and P. Zimmerman, J. Geophys. Res., 1995, 100, 8873 Search PubMed .‘Polychlorinated Biphenyls in the Atmosphere of Southern
Norway’  J.-E. Haugen, F. Wania and Y. D. Lei, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2340 Search PubMed .‘Temporal trends of semivolatile organic contaminants in
Great Lakes precipitation’  M. F. Simcik, R. M. Hoff, W. M. J. Strachan, C. W. Street, I. Basu and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 361 Search PubMed .‘Declining PCB concentrations in the UK atmosphere: Evidence
and possible causes’  A. J. Sweetman and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 863 Search PubMed .‘Seasonality in Bioaccumulation of Organochlorines in Lower
Trophic Level Arctic Marine Biota’  B. T. Hargrave, G. A. Phillips, W. P. Vass, P. Bruecker, H. E. Welch and T. D. Siferd, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 980 Search PubMed .‘Global gridded technical hexachlorocyclohexane usage
inventories using a global cropland as a surrogate’  Y. F. Li, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 23785 Search PubMed .‘Air/Water Exchange Dynamics of 13 Volatile Chlorinated C1-
and C2-Hydrocarbons and Monocyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in the Southern
North Sea and the Scheldt Estuary’  J. P. Dewulf, H. R. van Langenhove and L. F. van der Auwera, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 903 Search PubMed .‘Chlorinated C1- and C2-hydrocarbons and monocyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in marine waters: An overview on fate processes, sampling,
analysis and measurements’  J. Dewulf and H. van Langenhove, Water Res., 1997, 31, 1825 Search PubMed .‘Ambigol A and B: New Biologically Active Polychlorinated
Aromatic Compounds from the Terrestrial Blue–Green Alga,
Fischerella ambigua’  B. S. Falch, G. M. König, A. D. Wright, O. Sticher, H. Rüegger and G. Bernardinelli, J. Org. Chem., 1993, 58, 6570 Search PubMed .‘Packaged anti-plaque oral compounds’, US
Patent 5273741, 28 December 1993, to Colgate Palmolive..‘Geochemical markers’, New Scientist Inside
Science, No. 123, 18 Sept. 1999..‘Radiocarbon and δ13C Values
Related to Ground-Water Recharge and Mixing’,  J. E. Landmeyer and P. A. Stone, Ground-Water, 1995, 33, 227 Search PubMed .‘Carbon 13 exchanges between the atmosphere and
biosphere’,  I. Fung, C. B. Field, J. A. Berry, M. V. Thompson, J. T. Randerson, C. M. Malström, P. M. Vitousek, G. J. Collatz, P. J. Sellers, D. A. Randall, A. S. Denning, F. Badeck and J. John, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 1997, 11, 507 Search PubMed .‘Atmospheric Methane and its Carbon Isotopes in the Southern
Hemisphere: Their Time Series and an Instructive Model’,  K. R. Lassey, D. C. Lowe, C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer and A. J. Gomez, Chemosphere, 1993, 26, 95 Search PubMed .‘Concentration and 13C records of atmospheric
methane in New Zealand and Antarctica: Evidence for changes in methane
sources’,  D. C. Lowe, C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer, G. W. Brailsford, K. R. Lassey, A. J. Gomez and E. G. Nisbet, J. Geophys. Res., 1994, 99, 16913 Search PubMed .‘Carbon isotope analysis of atmospheric methane by
isotope-ratio-monitoring gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry’,  D. A. Merritt, J. M. Hayes and D. J. Des Marais, J. Geophys. Res., 1995, 100, 1317 Search PubMed .‘Stable carbon isotope measurements of atmospheric organic
acids in Los Angeles, California’,  H. Sakugawa and I. R. Kaplan, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1995, 22, 1509 Search PubMed .‘Radiocarbon Measurements of Atmospheric Volatile Organic
Compounds: Quantifying the Biogenic Contribution’,  G. A. Klouda, C. W. Lewis, R. A. Rasmussen, G. C. Rhoderick, R. L. Sams, R. K. Stevens, L. A. Currie, D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Jull and R. L. Seila, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 1098 Search PubMed .‘Use of Environmental Isotopes in Organic Contaminants
Research in Ground Water Systems’,  R. Aravena, S. K. Frape, E. M. van Warmerdam, R. J. Drimmie and B. J. Moore, Water Res. Manag. Symp. Proc., 1995, 1, 31 Search PubMed .‘The influence of air–sea exchange on the istopoic
composition of oceanic carbon: Observations and modeling’,  J. Lynch-Stieglitz, T. F. Stocker, W. S. Broecker and R. G. Fairbanks, Global Geochem. Cycles, 1995, 9, 653 Search PubMed .‘Carbon-isotope fractionation by a marine diatom: The
influence of irradiance, daylength, pH and nitrogen source’,  P. A. Thompson and S. E. Calvert, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1994, 39, 1835 Search PubMed .‘Production and Transport of Carbon Dioxide in a Contaminated
Vadose Zone: A Stable and Radioactive Carbon Isotope Study’,  K. H. Suchomel, D. K. Kreamer and A. Long, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1990, 24, 1824 Search PubMed .‘Monitoring in situ biodegradation of hydrocarbons
by using stable carbon isotopes’,  P. K. Aggarwal and R. E. Hinchee, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1991, 25, 1173 Search PubMed .‘Monitoring microbial dechlorination of tetrachloroethene
(PCE) in groundwater using compound-specific stable carbon isotope ratios:
microcosm and field studies’,  D. Hunkeler, R. Aravena and B. J. Butler, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2733 Search PubMed .‘Carbon isotopic compositions of
C2–C5 hydrocarbons and methyl chloride in
urban, coastal and maritime atmospheres over the western North
Pacific’,  U. Tsunogai, N. Yoshida and T. Gamo, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 16033 Search PubMed .‘Chlorine in the stratosphere’,  N. Tanaka and D. M. Rye, Nature, 1991, 323, 707 Search PubMed .‘A novel method for compound specific determination of
δ13C in volatile organic compounds at ppt levels
in ambient air’,  J. Rudolph, D. C. Lowe, R. J. Martin and T. S. Clarkson, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1997, 24, 659 Search PubMed .‘An isotopic approach for understanding the CH3Br
budget of the atmosphere’,  S. E. McCauley, A. H. Goldstein and D. J. DePaolo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1999, 96, 10006 Search PubMed .‘Large carbon isotope fractionation associated with bacterial
and abiotic degradation of methyl halides’,  L. G. Miller,
R. M. Kalin,
S. E. McCauley,
J. T. G. Hamilton,
D. B. Harper,
D. B. MilletR. S. Oremland, and
A. H. Goldstein,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, accepted for
publication .R. H. Kalin, personal communication..‘Microbial transhalogenation: a complicating factor in
determination of atmospheric chloro- and bromomethane
budgets’,  D. B. Harper, R. M. Kalin, M. J. Larkin, J. T. G. Hamilton and C. Coulter, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2525 Search PubMed .‘High-precision measurement of chlorine stable isotope
ratios’,  A. Long, C. J. Eastoe, R. S. Kaufmann, J. G. Martin, L. Wirt and J. B. Finley, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1993, 57, 2907 Search PubMed .‘Natural chlorine isotope variations’,  R. Kaufmann, A. Long, H. Bentley and S. Davis, Nature, 1984, 309, 338 Search PubMed .‘37Cl–35Cl transport modeling in
accumulating sediments of a former brackish lagoonal
environment’,  H. E. Beekman, C. A. J. Appelo, H. G. M. Eggenkamp and R. Kreulen, Water–Rock Interaction, Proc. Int. Symp. 7th., 1992, 1, 209 Search PubMed .‘Chlorine Isotope Investigation of Natural Attenuation of
Trichloroethene in an Aerobic Aquifer’,  N. C. Sturchio, J. L. Clausen, L. J. Heraty, L. Huang, B. D. Holt and T. A. Abrajano, Jr., Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 3037 Search PubMed .‘Stable chlorine and carbon isotope measurements of selected
chlorinated organic solvents’,  E. M. van Warmerdam, S. K. Frape, R. Aravena, R. J. Drimmie, H. Flatt and J. A. Cherry, Appl. Geochem., 1995, 10, 547 Search PubMed .‘Conversion of Chlorinated Volatile Organic Compounds to
Carbon Dioxide and Methyl Chloride for Isotopic Analysis of Carbon and
Chlorine’,  B. D. Holt, N. C. Sturchio, T. A. Abrajano and L. J. Heraty, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 2727 Search PubMed .‘Sequential Determination of Chlorine and Carbon Isotopic
Composition in Single Microliter Samples of Chlorinated
Solvent’,  N. Jendrzejewski, H. G. M. Eggenkamp and M. L. Coleman, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 4259 Search PubMed .‘Stable chlorine isotopic composition of marine aerosol
particles in the western Atlantic ocean’,  C. Volpe and A. J. Spivack, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1994, 21, 1161 Search PubMed .‘Chlorine isotopic composition of marine aerosols:
Implications for the release of reactive chlorine and HCl cycling
rates’,  C. Volpe, M. Wahlen, A. A. P. Pszenny and A. J. Spivack, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25, 3831 Search PubMed .Chlorine: Principles and Industrial Practice, ed. P.
Schmittinger, Wiley–VCH,
Weinheim,  2000. Search PubMed .Pandora’s Poison: Chlorine, Health and a New Environmental
Strategy, J. Thornton, MIT Press,
London,  2000. Search PubMed .Evaporites: Their Evolution and Economics, J. Warren,
Blackwell Science, London,
 2000. Search PubMed .‘Geothermal Vents and Chemical Processing: The Infrared
Spectroscopy of Hydrothermal Reactions,  T. B. Brill, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4343 Search PubMed .‘Response of lower stratosphere HCl/Cly
to volcanic aerosol: Observations from aircraft, balloon, space shuttle and
satellite instruments’,  C. R. Webster, H. A. Michelsen, M. R. Gunson, J. J. Margitan, J. M. Russell III, G.C. Toon and W.A. Traub, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 11711 Search PubMed .‘Experiments and simulations of ion-enhanced interfacial
chemistry on aqueous NaCl aerosols’,  E. M. Knipping, M. J. Lakin, K. L. Foster, P. Jungwirth, D. J. Tobias, R. B. Gerber, D. Dabdub and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Science, 2000, 288, 301 Search PubMed .‘Product Identification and Kinetics of Reactions of HCl with
HNO3/H2SO4/H2O
solutions’,  C. D. Cappa, S. E. Kuipers, J. M. Roberts, A. S. Gilbert and M. J. Elrod, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4449 Search PubMed .Gas-phase Br2 production in heterogeneous reactions of
Cl2, HOCl and BrCl with halide-ice surfaces’,  A. K. Huff and J. P. D. Abbatt, J. Phys. Chem., A, 2000, 104, 7284 Search PubMed .‘4-Chlorocrotonaldehyde as a unique chlorine-containing
compound from the reaction of atomic chlorine with 1,3-butadiene in air at
room temperature,  W. H. Wang and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2000, 27, 947 Search PubMed .‘Kinetic studies of isoprene reactions initiated by chlorine
atom’,  I. Suh and R. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem., A, 2000, 104, 6590 Search PubMed .‘A computer model study of multiphase chemistry in the Arctic
boundary layer during polar sunrise’,  B. A. Michalowski, J. S. Francisco, S.-M. Li, L. A. Barrie, J. W. Bottenheim and P. B. Shepson, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 15131 Search PubMed .‘A modeling study of iodine chemistry in the marine boundary
layer’,  G. McFiggans, J. M. C. Plane, B. J. Allan, L. J. Carpenter, H. Coe and C. O’Dowd, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 14371 Search PubMed .‘New Chlorinated Cyclic Bis(bibenzyls) from the Liverworts
Herbertus sakuraii and Mastigophora
diclados’,  T. Hashimoto, H. Irita, S. Takaoka, M. Tanaka and Y. Asakawa, Tetrahedron, 2000, 56, 3153 Search PubMed .‘Herbacic acid, a simple prototype of 5,5,5-trichloroleucine
metabolites from the sponge Dysidea herbacea’,  J .B. MacMillan and T. F. Molinski, J. Nat. Prod., 2000, 63, 155 Search PubMed .‘The global chloromethane cycle: biosynthesis, degradation
and metabolic role’,  D. B. Harper, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2000, 17, 337 Search PubMed .‘Soil–Atmosphere Exchange of Radiatively and Chemically
Active Gases’,  M. A. K. Khalil and R. A. Rasmussen, Environ. Sci. Polllut. Res., 2000, 7, 79 Search PubMed .‘New observational constraints for atmospheric hydroxyl on
global and hemispheric scales’,  S. A. Montzka, C. M. Spivakovsky, J. H. Butler, J. W. Elkins, L. T. Lock and D. J. Mondeel, Science, 2000, 288, 500 Search PubMed .‘Three-dimensional climatological distribution of
tropospheric OH: update and evaluation’,  C. M. Spivakovsky, J. A. Logan, S. A. Montzka, Y. J. Balkanski, M. Foreman-Fowler, D. B. A. Jones, L. W. Horowitz, A. C. Fusco, C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer, M. J. Prather, S. C. Wofsy and M. B. McElroy, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 8931 Search PubMed .‘Influence of updated gas-phase rate constants on modeled
tropospheric OH concentrations’,  J. P. Kohlmann, H. Bluhm and D. Poppe, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 2451 Search PubMed .‘Chamber measurement of surface–atmosphere trace gas
exchange: numerical evaluation of dependence on soil, interfacial layer and
source/sink properties’,  G. L. Hutchinson, G. P. Livingston, R. W. Healy and R. G. Striegl, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 8865 Search PubMed .‘Litter decomposition as a potential natural source of methyl
bromide’,  J. M. Lee-Taylor and E. A. Holland, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 8857 Search PubMed .‘A study of methyl bromide emissions from automobiles burning
leaded gasoline using standardized vehicle testing
procedures’,  F. J. Bertram and J. B. Kolowich, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2000, 27, 1423 Search PubMed .‘Methyl bromide: An introduction to its use, impacts and its
future’,  J. H. Butler, IGACtivities, 2000, 8–9, 21–22 Search PubMed .‘Methyl bromide in the atmosphere and ocean’,  S. Yvon-Lewis, IGACtivities, 2000, 9–12, 21–22 Search PubMed .‘Natural terrestrial sources and sinks of tropospheric methyl
bromide’,  P. Crill,  IGACtivities, 2000, 13–15, 21–22 Search PubMed .‘Alkaloids from frog skin: the discovery of epibatidine and
the potential for developing novel non-opioid analgesics’,  J. W. Daly, H. M. Garraffo, T. F. Spande, M. W. Decker, J. P. Sullivan and M. Williams, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2000, 17, 131 Search PubMed .‘Studies toward the total synthesis of Sch 202596, an
antagonist of the galanin receptor subtype GalR1: synthesis of geodin, the
spirocoumaranone subunit of Sch 202596’  T. Katoh and O. Ohmori, Tetrahedron Lett., 2000, 41, 465 Search PubMed .‘Concentration and Mass Fluxes of Chloroacetic Acids and
Trifluoracetic Acid in Rain and Natural Waters in
Switzerland’  M. Berg, S. R. Müller, J. Mühlemann, A. Wiedmer and R. P. Schwarzenbach, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2675 Search PubMed .‘Insights into the Global Distribution of Polychlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins and Dibenzofurans’  D. M. Wagrowski and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2952 Search PubMed .‘Polychlorinated dioxins and dibenzofurans in different
environmental matrices: atmosphere, soil, sediment and
water’  C. Rappe, Ann. Chim., 2000, 90, 1 Search PubMed .‘Siskiwit Lake Revisited – Time Trends of
Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-dioxin and Dibenzofuran Deposition at
Isle Royale, Michigan’  J. I. Baker and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2887 Search PubMed .‘Assessing the Contribution of Diffuse Domestic Burning as a
Source of PCDD/Fs to the UK Atmosphere’  R. Lohmann, G. L. Northcott and K. C. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2892 Search PubMed .‘Is Combustion the Major Source of Polychlorinated
Dibenzo-p-dioxins and Dibenzofurans to the Environment? – A
Mass Balance Investigation’  J. I. Baker and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2879 Search PubMed .‘Toxic chlorinated and polyaromatic hydrocarbons in simulated
house fires’  P. Ruokojarvi, M. Aatamila and J. Ruuskanen, Chemosphere, 2000, 41, 825 Search PubMed .‘The relationship between flue gas/fly ash compositions and
dioxin level in fluidized-bed incinerators’  R. Ishikawa, A.G. Buekens, H. Huang and K. Watanabe, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2000, 23, 313 Search PubMed .‘Fingerprints of dioxin from thermal industrial
processes’  A. Buekens, E. Cornelis, H. Huang and T. Dewettinck, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 1021 Search PubMed .‘Chemical kinetic modelling of PCDD formation from
chlorophenol catalyzed by incinerator fly ash’  H. Huang and A. Buekens, Chemosphere, 2000, 41, 943 Search PubMed .‘Gas–particle partitioning of PCDD/Fs in daily air
samples’  R. Lohmann, R. G. M. Lee, N. J. L. Green and K. C. Jones, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 2529 Search PubMed .‘An investigation of the in vivo formation of
octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin’  J. K. Huwe, V. J. Feil, R. G. Zaylskie and T. O. Tiernan, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 957 Search PubMed .‘Biosynthesis of pyrrolnitrin and other phenylpyrrole
derivatives by bacteria’  K. H. van Peé and J. M. Ligon, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2000, 17, 157 Search PubMed .‘Purification and partial characterization of tryptophan
7-halogenase (PrnA) from Pseudomonas fluorescens’  S. Keller, T. Wage, K. Hohaus, M. Hölzer, E. Eichorn and K.-H. van Peé, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2000, 39, 2300 Search PubMed .‘Microbial degradation is a key elimination pathway of
hexachlorocyclohexanes from the Arctic Ocean’  T. Harner, L. M. M. Jantunen, T. F. Bidleman, L. A. Barrie, H. Kylin, W. M. J. Strachan and R. W. Macdonald, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2000, 27, 1155 Search PubMed .‘Rapid anaerobic degradation of toxaphene in sewage
sludge’  H. R. Buser, P. Haglund, M. D. Muller, T. Poiger and C. Rappe, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 1213 Search PubMed .‘Haloalkane-utilizing Rhodococcus strains isolated
from geographically distinct locations possess a highly conserved gene
cluster encoding haloalkane catabolism’  G. J. Poelarends, M. Zandstra, T. Bosma, L. A. Kulakov, M. J. Larkin, J. R. Marchesi, A. J. Weightman and D. B. Janssen, J. Bacteriol., 2000, 182, 2725 Search PubMed .‘Vitamin C protects against and reverses specific
hypochlorous acid- and chloramine-dependent modifications of low-density
protein’  A. C. Carr, T. Tijerina and B. Frei, Biochem. J., 2000, 346, 491 Search PubMed .‘Molecular Chlorine Generated by the Myeloperoxidase-Hydrogen
Peroxide-Chloride System of Phagocytes Produces 5-Chlorotyrosine in
Bacterial RNA’  J.P. Henderson, J. Byun and J. W. Heinecke, J. Biol. Chem., 1999, 274, 33440 Search PubMed .‘8-Chloroadenine: a novel product formed from hypochlorous
acid-induced damage to calf thymus DNA’  M. Whiteman, A. Jenner and B. Halliwell, Biomarkers, 1999, 4, 303 Search PubMed .‘Comparison of Mono- and Dichlorinated Tyrosines with
Carbonyls for Detection of Hypochlorous Acid Modified
Proteins’  A. L. P. Chapman, R. Senthilmohan, C. C. Winterbourn and A. J. Kettle, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2000, 377, 95 Search PubMed .‘Reactions of Hypochlorous Acid with Tyrosine and
Peptidyl-tyrosyl Residues Give Dichlorinated and Aldehydic Products in
Addition to 3-Chlorotyrosine’  S. Fu, H. Wang, M. Davies and R. Dean, J. Biol. Chem., 2000, 275, 10851 Search PubMed .‘Modification of Protein and Lipids by
Myeloperoxidase’  S. L. Hazen, F. F. Hsu, J. P. Gaut, J. R. Crowley and J. W. Heinecke, Methods Enzymol., 1999, 300, 88 Search PubMed .‘Detection of 3-Chlorotyrosine in Proteins Exposed to
Neutrophil Oxidants’  A. J. Kettle, Methods Enzymol., 1999, 300, 111 Search PubMed .‘Eosinophils generate brominating oxidants in
allergen-induced asthma’  W. Wu, M. K. Samoszuk, S. A. A. Comhair, M. J. Thomassen, C. F. Farver, R. A. Dweik, M. S. Kavuru, S. C. Erzurum and S. L. Hazen, J. Clin. Invest., 2000, 105, 1455 Search PubMed .‘Eosinophil-dependent bromination in the pathogenesis of
asthma’  J. W. Heinecke, J. Clin. Invest., 2000, 105, 1331 Search PubMed .‘Rates at Which Toxaphene Concentrations Decrease in Lake
Trout from the Great Lakes’  S. T. Glassmeyer, D. S. De Vault and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 1851 Search PubMed .‘Changes in Food Web Structure Affect Rate of PCB Decline in
Herring Gull (Larus argentatus) Eggs’  C. E. Hebert, K. A. Hobson and J. L. Shutt, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 1609 Search PubMed .‘Investigation of the Cold Condensation of Persistent Organic
Pollutants with a Global Multimedia Fate Model’  M. Scheringer, F. Wegmann, K. Fenner and K. Hungerbuhler, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 1842 Search PubMed .‘Detection of statistically significant trends in atmospheric
concentrations of semivolatile compounds’  D. R. Cortes and R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2826 Search PubMed .‘Carbon Isotope Fractionation During Microbial Dechlorination
of Trichloroethene, cis-1,2-Dichloroethene and Vinyl Chloride
– Implications for Assessment of Natural Attenuation’  Y. Bloom, R. Aravena, D. Hinkeler, E. Edwards and S. K. Frape, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2768 Search PubMed .‘Determination of Compound-Specific Carbon Isotope Ratios of
Chlorinated Methanes, Ethanes and Ethenes in Aqueous
Samples’  D. Hunkeler and R. Aravena, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2839 Search PubMed .‘DDT house spraying and re-emerging malaria’  D.R. Roberts, Lancet, 2000, 356, 330 Search PubMed .‘How toxic is DDT’  A. G. Smith, Lancet, 2000, 356, 267 Search PubMed .Footnote† The term
‘chlorine’ will be generally used to refer to the 17th element
of the periodic table in all its forms, organic and inorganic. Except where
the context makes this unnecessary, dichlorine itself will be described as
molecular or elemental chlorine. Chloride will be confined to inorganic
chlorine in its −1 oxidation state. Compounds of organic carbon
containing covalently bound chlorine will be referred to generally as
organochlorine compounds.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
Table Content:
Neil Winterton	
Neil Winterton joined ICI’s Corporate Laboratory in 1973 after 8
years’ research in inorganic reaction mechanisms, organometallic and
coordination chemistry at University College, London, the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the University of Warwick. He moved to
ICI’s Mond Division (later ICI Chlorchemicals) in 1977 where he
worked on product R&D on a range of halogenated materials, for which he
was appointed a Research Associate in 1985. His interests at ICI developed
to include C60 chemistry, applications of ionic liquids, cleaner
technology and the natural chlorine cycle. He was a founding member
(subsequently Deputy Chairman) of the Industrial Advisory Board of the
Questor Centre, the Queen’s University of Belfast (1988–1998),
Visiting Industrial Professor at Queen’s (1993–1994) and a
member (later Chairman) of the Natural Chlorine Cycle Working Group of Euro
Chlor (1995–1999). He joined the Leverhulme Centre for Innovative
Catalysis in the Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool, in 1999,
to pursue his interests in industrial and catalytic applications of ionic
liquids, cleaner technology and high-throughput testing.
Green ContextThe area of chlorine and its compounds has become a very contentious
issue in the last few years, with conflicting claims and counterclaims.
This review represents a thorough and comprehensive study of the subject
area from many points of view, and is a carefully thought out and
dispassionate piece of work. The article makes clear the issues which must
be addressed in evaluating the fate of chlorine and its compounds, by
putting all the evidence in context.DJM

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Endogenic cycles connecting the principal reservoirs in the
earth’s interior. After Faure,63
reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 2  The main exogenic cycles and associated reservoirs at the earth’s
surface. After Faure,63 reproduced with
permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transport, transformation and storage of chloride and chloroorganic
compounds in soil. After Oberg,85
reproduced with permission.	 

Mantle	 22 × 1012
Crust	 60 × 109
Oceans	 26 × 109
Pedosphere	 24 × 103
Freshwater	320 × 103
Cryosphere	0.5 × 10−3
Troposphere	5.3
Stratosphere	0.4

Mantle to troposphere	 2
Pedosphere to troposphere	Mineral aerosol	15
Biomass burning	 3
Bioproduced	 0.5
Crust to freshwater	 175
Pedosphere to freshwater	Precipitation passthrough	34
Evaporite beds	11
Freshwater to oceans	 220
Oceans to troposphere	Seasalt injection	6000
HCl from seasalt (a proportion of
seasalt injection flux)	25
Magma intrusion	 4
Bioproduced	 2
Troposphere to surface	Oceans	5990
Pedosphere	34
Cryosphere	 6
Troposphere to stratosphere	 0.03
Stratosphere to troposphere	 0.03
Oceans to crust	17

 	Fig. 4  The earth’s major reservoirs of chlorine and natural processes
which transfer chlorine between reservoirs (see Table 1 for reservoir sizes and Table 2 for fluxes). After Graedel and
Keene,51 reproduced with permission.	 
HNO3 (g) + NaCl (s) = HCl
(g) + NaNO3 (s)	(1)
H2SO4 (g) + 2 NaCl (s) =
2 HCl (g) + Na2SO4 (s)	(2)
4 H+ (aq) + NO3−
(aq) + 3 Cl− (aq) = NOCl (aq)+ Cl2 (aq) + 2
H2O (l)	
        (3)
      
N2O5 (g) + NaCl (s) =
ClNO2 (g) + NaNO3 (s)	(4a)
N2O5 (g) +
Cl− (aq) = ClNO2 (g) +
NO3− (aq)	(4b)
2 NO2 (g) + NaCl (s) = NOCl (g) +
NaNO3 (s)	(5)
O3 + 2 NaCl(s) + H2O =
Cl2 (g) + 2 NaOH (s) + O2 (g)	(6)
ClNO2 + H2O = HOCl +
HNO2	(7)
HOBr + Cl− + H+ =
BrCl + H2O	(8)
O3 + H+ +
Br− = O2 + HOBr	(6a)
BrCl +
hν = Br• + Cl•	(9)
HOI +
Cl− + H+ = ICl +
H2O	(8a)
HOI + Br− + H+ =
IBr + H2O	(8b)
Cl2 +
hν = 2 Cl•	(10)
ClNO2 + hν =
Cl• + NO2	(11)
HOCl + hν = HO• +
Cl•	(12)
Cl• + R-H = HCl +
R•	(13)
HCl + OH• = H2O +
Cl•	(14)
OH• +
R-H = H2O + R•	(15)

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
MeBr (aq) + Cl− (aq) = MeCl (aq) +
Br− (aq)	(16)

 		 

 		 
CCl2CCl2 +
Cl•
→
CCl3CCl2•	(17)
CCl2CCl2 +
OH•
→
HOCCl2CCl2•	(18)

 		 

Coke production	2	2	2
Coal combustion (industrial)	5–67	5	 67
Coal combustion (power generation)
Waste oil combustion	0.8–2.4	0.8	2.4
Wood combustion	1.4–1.9	1.4	1.9
Straw combustion	3.4–10	3.4	 10
Tyre combustion	1.7	1.7	1.7
Landfill gas combustion	1.6	5.5	5.5
Sinter plants (4 sites)	 29–54	 25	 30
Iron and steeel	3–41	3	 41
Non-ferrous metals (1 site)	5–35	 29.8	 29.8
Cement manufacture (5 sites)	0.2–11	0.29	 10.4
Lime manufacture	0.04–2.2	0.04	2.2
Glass manufacture	0.005–0.01	0.005	0.01
Ceramic production	0.02–0.06	0.02	0.06
Halogenated chemicals	0.02	0.02	0.02
Pesticide production	0.1–0.3	0.1	0.3
MSW combustion (14 sites)	460–580	122	199
Chemical waste (10 sites)	1.5–8.7	0.02	8.7
Clinical waste (5 sites)	 18–88	0.99	 18.3
Sewage sludge (5 sites)	0.7–6	0.001	0.37
Carbon regeneration	0.006	0.006	0.006
Asphalt mixing	1.6	1.6	1.6
Pentachlorophenol in timber processes	0.8	0.8	0.8
Animal carcass incineration	0.001	0.18
Crematoria	1–35	1	 35
Domestic wood combustion (clean)	2–18	2	 18
Domestic wood combustion (treated)	1	5
Domestic coal combustion	 20–34	 20	 34
Traffic	1–45	1	 45
Natural fires (wood)	0.4–12	0.4	 12
Fires (accidents)	 10	 81
TOTAL	560–1100	219	663

 		 
H2O2 +
X− + H+ = HOX +
H2O	(19)
HOX + H+ =
H2OX+ = H2O +
‘X+’	(20)
substrate + ‘X+’ =
halogenated substrate	(21)
CH3-LG +
X− = CH3X +
LG−	(22)
HOCl + Cl− +
H+ = Cl2 + H2O	(23)
CCl2=CCl2 + H+ + 2
e− = CHCl=CCl2 +
Cl−	(24)
1,2-C6H4Cl(CO2H) +
O2 + NADH + H+=
1,2-C6H4(OH)2 + NAD+ +
CO2 + HCl	(25)
RCH2Cl +
H2O = RCH2OH + H+ +
Cl−	(26)
CH2Cl2 + GSH = GSCH2Cl
+ H+ + Cl−	(27)
GSCH2Cl + H2O =
GSCH2OH + H+ +
Cl−	(28)
GSCH2OH = GSH +
H2CO	(29)
HO2CCHCHCl + H2O =
HO2CCH2CH(OH)Cl	(30)
HO2CCH2CH(OH)Cl =
HO2CCH2CH(O)+ H+ +
Cl−	(31)
c-C6H6Cl6 =
c-C6H5Cl5 + H+ +
Cl−	(32)
HOCH2CH(OH)CH2Cl=
HOCH2CHCH2O + H+ +
Cl−	(33)
MeBr (aq) + Cl− (aq) = MeCl (aq) +
Br− (aq)	(16)

 		 

 		 
Footnote
† The term
‘chlorine’ will be generally used to refer to the 17th element
of the periodic table in all its forms, organic and inorganic. Except where
the context makes this unnecessary, dichlorine itself will be described as
molecular or elemental chlorine. Chloride will be confined to inorganic
chlorine in its −1 oxidation state. Compounds of organic carbon
containing covalently bound chlorine will be referred to generally as
organochlorine compounds.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
