Self-assembly of metal/semiconductor heterostructures via ligand engineering: unravelling the synergistic dual roles of metal nanocrystals toward plas ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR04802E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR04802E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16922-16936Self-assembly of metal/semiconductor heterostructures via ligand engineering: unravelling the synergistic dual roles of metal nanocrystals toward plasmonic photoredox catalysis†

        
          
            Ke-Yi 
            Jiang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ya-Li 
            Weng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Si-Yi 
            Guo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Yu
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Fang-Xing 
            Xiao
          
        
      *
      College of Materials Science and Engineering, Fuzhou University, New Campus, Minhou, Fujian Province 350108, China. E-mail: yuyan@fzu.edu.cn; fxxiao@fzu.edu.cn
Received 
      3rd July 2017
    , Accepted 10th October 2017First published on 11th October 2017AbstractMetal nanocrystals (NCs) have been recognized as an important class of nanomaterials by virtue of their unique surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect and pivotal roles as electron traps in photocatalysis. Nevertheless, it is still challenging to unambiguously unravel and simultaneously harness the dual synergistic roles of metal NCs in a single photocatalytic system for solar-to-chemical energy conversion. Herein, an efficient ligand-triggered electrostatic self-assembly strategy was developed to achieve the spontaneous and monodispersed attachment of Au NCs onto 1D WO3 nanorods (NRs) via pronounced electrostatic attractive interaction, in which tailor-made positively charged Au NCs were closely integrated with negatively charged WO3 NRs. The intimate integration of Au NCs with WO3 NRs at the nanoscale could significantly benefit the extraction, separation, and migration of plasmon-induced energetic hot carriers over Au NCs and promote the separation of photogenerated charge carriers over the WO3 substrate. Such a cooperative synergy stemming from SPR and the electron-withdrawal effects of the Au NCs resulted in distinctly enhanced photoredox catalytic performances for plasmonic photocatalysis under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation. Our study highlights the significance of utilizing a rational interface design between metal NCs and semiconductors for excavating the multifarious roles of metal NCs in substantial solar energy conversion.
1. Introduction
In recent years, semiconductor-based photocatalysis has been attracting tremendous interest in a myriad of fields, e.g., solar energy conversion,1–3 environmental remediation,4,5 and selective organic transformation to fine chemicals.6,7 Despite intense research endeavors, two core issues, specifically prolonging the lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers and extending the light absorption of wide bandgap semiconductors to the visible spectrum region, still constitute the main challenges.8 To surmount these obstacles and to boost the photocatalytic performances, a number of strategies have been developed, such as metal or non-metal elements doping,9,10 precious metal deposition,11,12 and hybridizing with second semiconductors for constructing composite heterostructures or heterojunctions.
Of note, metal nanostructures have been deemed to be a new class of efficient media for photocatalysis,13–15 predominantly due to their unique surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect without the bandgap restriction of traditional semiconductors.8,16–18 Different mechanisms have been proposed for the SPR effect in metal–semiconductor nanoheterostructures, which include (i) direct hot-electron transfer (DET), (ii) local enhancement of the electromagnetic field (LEF), (iii) plasmon resonance energy transfer (PRT), (iv) plasmon-heating effect, (v) far-field light scattering, and (vi) dipole–dipole coupling reactions.8 Plasmonic metal nanostructures can serve as antennas for UV-vis and even near-infrared (NIR) light absorption to trigger the generation of plasmon-induced hot carriers, which subsequently induce various photocatalytic reactions.19–21 Thus far, a large variety of plasmonic metal-semiconductors nanomaterials have been explored;13,22,23 nonetheless, most of these are principally focused on TiO2-based nanocomposite systems for visible- or NIR-driven photocatalysis.13 Noteworthily, the metal nanocrystal (NC) components in these hybrid plasmonic systems could merely play a role as an SPR photosensitizer for the production of plasmon-excited hot charge carriers, which are involved in the photocatalytic reactions.13,19 Therefore, taking full advantage of the dual roles of metal NCs as electron traps and SPR photosensitizers and simultaneously, judiciously maneuvering their synergistic interactions in a single photocatalytic reaction system are of great significance for enhancing the photocatalytic performances of plasmonic metal/semiconductor heterostructures.
Tungsten oxide (WO3) nanostructures, as a quintessential n-type semiconductor, have garnered enormous attention due to their relatively narrow bandgap (2.4–2.8 eV),24,25 nontoxicity,12,26 stable physicochemical properties,27,28 resistance to photocorrosion,16 and high oxidation power of valence band (VB) holes, making them prime candidates for a wide range of photocatalytic applications. In particular, one-dimensional (1D) WO3 demonstrated intrinsic advantageous merits over it bulk counterpart, including fast electron transport, large specific surface area, orthogonalized light absorption, and minority carrier diffusion.15,29,30 Nevertheless, the slow charge-transfer rate, sluggish kinetics of the holes, and the rapid recombination of photoinduced charge carriers markedly hinder their widespread applications.31–35 Most notably, the substantially low reduction potential of photoelectrons on the conduction band (CB) of WO3 makes a spontaneous trigger of target photoreduction reactions rather difficult. On the other hand, it has been well established that rationally coupling semiconductors with metal NCs in an appropriate fashion for forming suitable Schottky barriers can be adopted to efficaciously trap photogenerated electrons from the CB of a semiconductor to the metal NCs and moreover, the Schottky barriers can also be utilized to extract SPR-excited energetic hot electrons from metal NCs to the CB of a semiconductor, as long as the energy of the incident light surpasses the energy difference between the flat-band (Efb) CB potential and Fermi level (Ef) of the semiconductor and metal NCs (i.e., hν ≥ Efb − Ef), respectively. Inspired by this, the judicious integration of metal nanostructures with 1D WO3 for rationally constructing well-defined plasmonic metal/1D WO3 heterostructured systems affords a feasible avenue for simultaneously unraveling and utilizing the synergistic dual roles of metal NCs for plasmonic photocatalysis.
Thus far, considerable attention has been devoted to fabricating diverse metal/semiconductor nanocomposites;36 however, most of the synthetic strategies are principally centered on conventional approaches, such as hydrothermal reactions,37 sol–gel,38,39 photodeposition,40 and deposition–precipitation,41 which normally involve relatively complicated or delicate procedures and require high energy consumption. Moreover, under some conditions, achieving a true intimate interfacial contact between the components at the nanoscale level still pose a great challenge, which leads to currently unfavorable photocatalytic performances. As a result, it is highly desirable to develop a facile, green, and efficacious strategy to construct well-defined plasmonic metal/semiconductor heterostructures via interfacial engineering and a cooperative cascade synergy for individual components with a view to simultaneously exploiting the synergistic roles of metal NCs in photocatalysis for solar energy conversion.
With these motivations, herein, we report a design for rationally constructing plasmonic Au NCs-decorated WO3 nanorods (NRs) heterostructures via an efficient surface ligand-triggered electrostatic self-assembly strategy, by which tailor-made positively charged Au NCs were spontaneously and uniformly assembled on the negatively charged WO3 NRs framework under pronounced electrostatic interaction, giving rise to plasmonic composite heterostructures. We predominantly show that a fine rational control of the interfacial integration in such plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures can result in distinctly boosted and versatile photoredox catalytic performances under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation. More significantly, the simultaneous and cooperative dual roles of Au NCs as electron reservoirs for capturing photogenerated electrons from a bandgap-photoexcited WO3 substrate and as SPR photosensitizers for producing energetic hot electrons in such a plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs system are unambiguously unveiled. It is these two sources of electrons arising from the cooperative dual roles of Au NCs that synergistically promote the production of active species (e.g., H2O2 and hydroxyl radicals), which contribute to markedly improving the photoredox and photoelectrochemical performances of the plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures. We anticipate that this study could inspire a conceptual avenue to rationally construct highly efficient plasmonic metal–semiconductor-based composite systems via surface ligand engineering and, more importantly, promote an in-depth understanding of the multifarious roles of Au NCs in plasmonic photocatalysis for solar energy conversion.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Materials
The following materials and reagents were used: sodium tungstate dihydrate (Na2WO4·2H2O), sodium chloride (NaCl), hydrochloric acid (HCl), gold chloride solution (HAuCl4, 23.5%–23.8%, Aladdin), tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB), toluene, sodium borohydride (NaBH4), sulfuric acid (H2SO4), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), sodium sulfate anhydrous (Na2SO4), 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), potassium ferricyanide (K3[Fe(CN)6]), p-benzoquinone (C6H4O2), ammonium formate (CH5NO2), potassium peroxydisulfate (K2S2O8), diammonium oxalate monohydrate ((NH4)2C2O4·H2O), tert-butanol (C4H10O), peroxidase from horseradish, N,N-diethyl-1,4-phenylenediamine (C10H12N2), potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7), and deionized water (DI H2O, 18.2 Ω, Millipore). All the materials were used as received without further treatment.
2.2. Synthesis of Au@DMAP nanoparticles
The synthesis of the Au@DMAP was performed according to a previously published method.42 Prior to the experiments, all the glassware were cleaned thoroughly with aqua (3:1 in terms of volume of HCl and HNO3) for 12 h and then thoroughly washed with DI H2O. A 30 mM aqueous chloroauric acid solution (HAuCl4, 30 mL) was added to a 25 mM TOAB solution in toluene (80 mL). The transfer of the gold salt to the toluene phase could be seen within a few seconds. A freshly prepared 0.4 M NaBH4 (25 mL) aqueous solution was added to the above mixture under vigorous stirring, which caused an immediate color change from light yellow to dark red. After 30 min, the two phases were separated and the toluene phase was subsequently washed with 0.1 M H2SO4, 0.1 M NaOH, and DI H2O three times, and then dried with anhydrous Na2SO4. Afterwards, an aqueous 0.1 M 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) solution (80 mL) was added to aliquots (80 mL) of the as-prepared nanoparticle mixtures. Direct phase transfer across the organic/aqueous interface was completed within 2 h with no stirring or agitation required. Finally, the Au-dissolved water phase was separated by a separatory funnel to obtain the Au@DMAP aqueous solution (2.22 mg mL−1).
2.3. Preparation of WO3 nanorods (NRs)
WO3 NRs were synthesized by a one-step hydrothermal treatment.43 Typically, 1.056 g of Na2WO4·2H2O and 0.935 g of NaCl were dissolved in 30 mL of DI H2O and kept stirring for 20 min. The pH value of the mixed solution was adjusted to ca. 2 using HCl (3.0 M) aqueous solution, and then the solution was vigorously stirred for 2 h. After that, the solution was transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave (100 mL) and maintained at 180 °C for 24 h. Afterwards, the products were cooled to room temperature, separated by centrifugation, and washed with DI H2O. Eventually, the sediment was dried at 60 °C.
2.4. Self-assembly of the plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs nanocomposites
Au@DMAP–WO3 NRs nanocomposites were fabricated by an electrostatic self-assembly method, as illustrated in Scheme 1. Specifically, the as-prepared Au@DMAP aqueous solution (2.22 mg mL−1) was diluted to 0.05 mg mL−1, after which the given volume of positively charged Au@DMAP aqueous suspension (0.05 mg mL−1, pH = 10) was added dropwise to the negatively charged WO3 NRs aqueous dispersion (0.5 mg mL−1, 200 mL, pH = 10). The weight percentages of Au@DMAP in the nanocomposites were controlled to be 3%, 5%, 7%, 9%, 11%, and 15% by adding the corresponding volumes of 60, 100, 140, 180, 220 and 300 mL, respectively. The deposition amount of Au NPs on the WO3 scaffold was defined based on the hypothesis that the Au NPs were completely self-assembled on the WO3 substrate without any mass loss. The designated volume of diluted Au@DMAP aqueous solution (0.05 mg mL−1, pH = 10) was drop by drop added into the WO3 NRs aqueous solution (0.5 mg mL−1, 200 mL, pH = 10) in conjunction with vigorous stirring (2500 rpm) for 2 h. The mixture was stirred for 2 h and the precipitation was centrifuged, washed with DI H2O, and dried in an oven at 60 °C. Finally, the samples were calcinated at 300 °C in air for 1 h giving rise to Au/WO3 NRs nanocomposites. For comparison, Au NPs–WO3 NRs nanocomposites were also synthesized via an analogous synthetic method but using negatively charged Au NPs capped with citrate ions as the assembly unit.
 Scheme 1  Flowchart for the ligand-triggered electrostatic self-assembly of plasmonic Au–WO3 NR heterostructures. 
2.5. Characterizations
Zeta potential (ξ) measurements were performed by dynamic light scattering analysis (ZetasizerNano ZS-90). The crystal structure was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD, X'Pert Pro MPD, Philips, Holland) using Cu Kα as the radiation source under 40 kV and 40 mA. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution (HR) TEM images and energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDX) were collected on a JEOL-2010 transmission electron microscope with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a TJ270-30A infrared spectrophotometer (Tianjin, China). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were recorded on a photoelectron spectrometer (Escalab 250, Thermo Scientific, America), where the binding energy (BE) of the elements was calibrated based on the BE of carbon (284.60 eV). UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) (Varian Cary 500 UV-vis spectrophotometer, Varian, America) were obtained using BaSO4 as the reflectance background ranging from 300 to 600 nm. The morphologies were probed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Philips XL-30, Philips, Holland). Electron paramagnetic resonance spectra (EPR) were recorded on a Bruker A-300-EPR X-band spectrometer. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface areas were determined using a Quantachrome Autosorb-1-C-TCD automated gas sorption analyzer. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were collected on a Varian Cary Eclipse spectrometer. The generation of hydroxyl radicals in solution was detected by a photoluminescence (PL) technique with terephthalic acid (TA) as a probe molecule. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was determined by a photometric method in which N,N-diethyl-p-phenylenediamine (DPD) was oxidized by a peroxidase (POD)-catalyzed reaction.
2.6. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) performances
PEC measurements were performed on an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, CHI Shanghai, Inc.) and an electrochemical workstation (IM6, Zahner Germany). The electrochemical setup was composed of the conventional three electrodes, a quartz cell containing 40 mL Na2SO4 (0.1 M) aqueous solution, and a potentiostat. A platinum wire electrode was used as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl/KCl as the reference electrode. The sample films (5 mm × 5 mm) were vertically dipped into the electrolyte and irradiated with simulated solar or visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm).
2.7. Photoredox catalytic performances

(a) Photocatalytic oxidation performances. 
The photocatalytic oxidation performances were evaluated through the degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB), which is frequently used as a model organic dye pollutant under ambient conditions. Specifically, 20 mg of catalyst was dispersed in 40 mL of RhB aqueous solution (5 ppm). Prior to irradiation, the reaction system was stirred in the dark for 0.5 h to achieve an adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the catalyst and the reactant. Then, the suspension was irradiated with simulated solar (300 W Xe lamp with wavelengths ranging from 200 to 800 nm) or visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm). During the photocatalytic reaction, 5 mL of the sample solution was withdrawn at every 30 min interval and centrifuged to remove the catalyst. The residual RhB solution was analyzed by monitoring the variation of its characteristic light absorption at 554 nm using a UV-vis/NIR spectrophotometer (UV-3600, Shimadzu).


(b) Photocatalytic reduction performances. 
The photoreduction performances were evaluated through the reduction of Cr(VI) under ambient conditions. In a typical reaction, 20 mg of the sample was dispersed in 40 mL of Cr(VI) aqueous solution (K2Cr2O7, 5 ppm). The mixed suspensions were magnetically stirred in the dark for 0.5 h to ensure the adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the photocatalysts and reactant. The mixed suspension was irradiated with simulated solar (300 W Xe lamp with wavelengths ranging from 200 to 800 nm) or visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm). During the process of the reaction, 5 mL of the sample solution was withdrawn at every 30 min interval and centrifuged to remove the catalyst. The filtrates were analyzed by recording the UV-vis spectra of Cr(VI) using a UV-vis/NIR spectrophotometer (UV-3600, Shimadzu). Conversion of the photoreduction reaction was determined according to the formula:  where C0 is the original concentration of the reactant and C is the concentration of the reactant at every 30 min interval after the photocatalytic reaction.

3. Results and discussion
The detailed self-assembly process for constructing plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures is vividly depicted in Scheme 1 with 1D WO3 NRs and Au NPs utilized as the assembly units for their favorable band alignment and oppositely charged surfaces. More specifically, the surface charges of the WO3 NRs and Au@DMAP were first carefully tuned to afford pronounced charged surfaces, which laid a solid foundation for the subsequent electrostatic self-assembly buildup. It should be emphasized that the WO3 NRs and Au@DMAP building blocks used herein were substantially negatively and positively charged; in this regard, Au@DMAP could be spontaneously and uniformly self-assembled on the whole WO3 NRs framework under pronounced electrostatic attractive interaction. In addition, with a view to further reinforcing the interfacial interaction between the assembly units for boosting the charge-transfer efficiency, pristine Au@DMAP–WO3 NRs assemblies were calcined at low temperature, resulting in well-defined Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures. Notably, the surface ligand of Au NCs plays an essential role in directing the spontaneous and monodispersed attachment of Au NCs onto the WO3 substrate without involving any complicated or delicate procedures; thereby, indicating this was a facile and green synthetic process. Alternately, the Au NCs and WO3 NRs components in this rationally designed composited heterostructure were intimately integrated, which could favor extracting the SPR-excited hot electrons from Au NCs, effectively modulating the directional transfer of charge carriers, and thus contributing to the promising photocatalytic performances.
3.1 Characterizations of the assembly units and nanocomposites
Our initial experiments began with the synthesis of the Au@DMAP and WO3 NRs building blocks and the subsequent self-assembly of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures. As shown in Fig. S1b,† the zeta potentials (ζ) of the WO3 NRs aqueous solution under varying pH conditions (pH = 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12) were determined to be ca. −29.02, −42.24, −24.54, −22.6, −18.66, −65.16, and −24.04 mV, respectively. These results indicated that the WO3 NRs surface is negatively charged in aqueous phase, which is in line with the stable aqueous solution of WO3 NRs and due to the substantial electrostatic repulsion among NRs under ambient conditions. The Au NCs capped with the hierarchically branched DMAP ligand were selected as the assembly unit (Fig. S2†). Noteworthily, Au@DMAP is characteristic of a positively charged surface over a large pH (2–12) profile, which is reflected by the zeta potential results (Fig. S1a†). This agrees well with the experiment phenomenon that Au@DMAP can be well re-dispersed in water and can remain stable for several months due to the substantial electrostatic repulsion among Au@DMAP in the nanocomposites. The positively charged surface of Au@DMAP originates from the electron rearrangement across the pyridine aromatic ring to form an adsorbing charged species when exposed to water,42 as mirrored by the molecular structure of DMAP (Fig. S2f†). More specifically, the DMAP molecules were able to form a labile donor–acceptor complex with the surface Au atoms via the endocyclic nitrogen atoms, where the surface charge then arises from partial protonation of the exocyclic nitrogen atom, thereby giving rise to an intrinsically positively charged surface. Moreover, as shown in Fig. S2(a & d),† Au@DMAP exhibited a mean diameter of 6.0 nm with a typical surface plasmon resonance (SPR) peak located at 542 nm. Based on the zeta potential results, Au@DMAP and WO3 NRs aqueous solutions with the same pH value of 10 were utilized as the building blocks due to their optimal surface charge intensity and electrostatic interaction for efficacious self-assembly.
The crystal structures of different samples were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD).43 As shown in Fig. 1a, the characteristic peaks at 2θ values of 14.0°, 22.7°, 24.3°, 26.8°, 28.2°, 36.6°, 50.0°, and 55.3° correspond to the (100), (001), (110), (101), (200), (201), (220), and (202) crystal planes of hexagonal-phase WO3 (a = b = 7.298 Å and c = 3.899 Å, JCPDS card no. 75-2187.), respectively. The strong and sharp diffraction peaks suggested a high crystallinity for the WO3 NRs. With regard to the XRD patterns of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures with varying loading percentages of Au (Fig. 1b–g), besides the typical diffraction peaks of WO3, additional peaks at 38.2°, 44.4°, 64.6°, and 77.5°, corresponding to the (111), (200), (220), and (311) crystallographic planes of Au, were clearly observed, and furthermore, the peak intensities increased with boosting the loading percentage of Au in the nanocomposites. These results indicated the successful self-assembly of Au@DMAP on the WO3 NRs framework and that the assembly buildup did not alter the crystal structure of the WO3 substrate.44
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns of: (a) WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NR heterostructures with different Au percentages (b) 3 wt%, (c) 5 wt%, (d) 7 wt%, (e) 9 wt%, (f) 11 wt%, and (g) 15 wt% (W: WO3, A: Au). 
The optical properties of the samples were explored by UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS). It can be clearly seen from Fig. 2a that the WO3 and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures demonstrated intense absorption in the UV region ranging from 200 to 400 nm, which is attributed to the bandgap photoexcitation of WO3. Apparently, Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures showed remarkably enhanced light absorption in the visible region (450–800 nm) as compared with WO3 NRs, accompanied with the appearance of a conspicuous absorbance peak at 550 nm, which was attributable to the SPR peak of the Au component (Fig. S2a†), thus verifying deposition of the Au NPs on the WO3 NRs. Moreover, note that an apparent red-shift of the absorption band edge and an enhanced light absorption intensity were observed for the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures in comparison with WO3, suggesting a uniform deposition of Au NPs on the WO3 NRs through electrostatic interaction was beneficial for boosting the light absorption of WO3, probably due to the SPR-induced photosensitization effect of Au NPs. The optical bandgap energies (Eg) of the WO3 and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures can be roughly identified by the following formula.45(αhμ)n = A(hν − Eg)where α is the absorbance coefficient, hν represents the incident light intensity, A is a constant, and n is equivalent to 2 and ½, which correspond to direct and indirect semiconductors, respectively. Based on the above formula, the bandgaps of the WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures were determined to be 2.850 (0 wt%), 2.700 (3 wt%), 2.668 (5 wt%), 2.660 (7 wt%), 2.652 (9 wt%), 2.656 (11 wt%), and 2.657 eV (15 wt%). Clearly, the bandgaps of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures were generally smaller than that of WO3 NRs, corroborating the SPR-induced photosensitization effect of the Au NPs. Furthermore, it was remarkable to find that 9 wt% Au–WO3 NR heterostructures demonstrated the most pronounced light harvesting capability, which is beneficial for improving the photocatalytic performances of the nanocomposites.
 Fig. 2  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures with the corresponding (b) plots of the transformed Kubelka–Munk function vs. energy of the light. The photographs of these two samples are provided in the inset of b. 
The morphologies of the different samples were probed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). The FESEM images of the WO3 NRs in Fig. 3(a & b) show that the WO3 NRs possessed a mean diameter of ca. 100 nm and length of ca. 5 μm. Fig. 3(c & d) manifest that a large amount of Au NPs with a mean diameter of ca. 6 nm were evenly distributed on the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure surface. Note that diameter of Au NPs in the nanocomposite was not changed relative to the pristine size of the Au@DMAP NPs (Fig. S2e†), implying that low temperature calcination treatment is not detrimental to the monodispersivity of Au but rather removes the ligand (i.e., DMAP) to expose more active sites on the Au NPs surface, thus achieving a more intimate interfacial integration between the assembly units. Also, no agglomeration and growth of Au NPs were observed in the final self-assembled nanocomposite, which once again reflects the strong interaction between Au and WO3 NRs afforded by electrostatic interaction. To verify this speculation, negatively charged Au NPs capped by citrate ions (Au@citrate) were utilized for the similar assembly buildup, and the result indicated that the Au@citrate NPs could hardly be deposited onto the WO3 NRs surface due to the strong electrostatic repulsion interaction between the negatively charged Au@citrate and WO3 NRs ingredients, as shown in Fig. S3 & S4.† The control experiments strongly suggested that the electrostatic interaction indeed dictated the assembly buildup between Au@DMAP and WO3 NRs.
 Fig. 3  Panoramic low- and high-magnified FESEM images of: (a & b) WO3 NRs and (c & d) 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was further utilized to probe the microscopic structures of the samples. Fig. 4a shows that the WO3 NRs feature a smooth surface with a length of several micrometers and size of ca. 100 nm, which is in accordance with the FESEM results (Fig. 3a & b). As displayed in Fig. 4d, clearly the Au NPs were uniformly distributed on the WO3 NRs substrate with an intimate interfacial contact, which was additionally disclosed by the high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image (Fig. 4e).27 Such a good interfacial integration between the Au and WO3 NRs can expedite the charge-transfer rate, leading to boosted photocatalytic performances. The HRTEM image of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure exhibited lattice spacings of 0.385 and 0.236 nm, which correspond to the (001) and (111) crystal planes of hexagonal WO3 (Fig. 4b) and Au (Fig. 4e), respectively. EDX element linear scanning analysis on a single Au–WO3 NRs (Fig. 4c & S5†) manifested the presence of W, O, and Au signals, corroborating the successful assembly of Au NPs on the WO3 NRs. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 4f) of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure could be accurately indexed to the (111) crystal plane of Au and the [010] zone axis of hexagonal WO3 with a preferred growth direction along the (001) crystal facet. Alternatively, the integration of Au and WO3 in the nanocomposites could also be evidenced by the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) results (Fig. S6†).
 Fig. 4  Low-magnified TEM and HRTEM images of: (a & b) WO3 NRs and (d & e) 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure, respectively. (c) STEM and (f) SAED pattern of 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure with a low-magnified TEM image of a single NR in the inset. 
The surface element composition and elemental chemical valence states of the samples were explored by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).46 The survey spectrum of the Au–WO3 NRs nanocomposite (Fig. 5a) confirmed the co-existence of Ti, O, and Au elements, corroborating the self-assembly of Au on the WO3 NRs. The high-resolution O 1s spectrum (Fig. 5b) of Au–WO3 NRs was the same as that of WO3 NRs, where for both, the peak at 530.09 eV was associated with the lattice oxygen in WO3 and the other at 531.58 eV was attributable to hydroxyl groups arising from adsorbed oxygen.4 Similarly, the high-resolution W 4f spectrum (Fig. 5c) of Au–WO3 NRs was also analogous to WO3 NRs, for which the two peaks at 35.36 and 37.5 eV corresponding to W 4f7/2 and W 4f5/2 signified that the W element was in the +6 oxidation state.15,36 The analogous high-resolution O 1s and W 4f spectra of WO3 and Au–WO3 NRs suggested that the structure and elemental chemical states of the WO3 NRs were retained during the self-assembly buildup. Fig. 5d shows the high-resolution Au 4f spectrum of the Au–WO3 NRs, in which two pronounced peaks at 83.9 and 87.6 eV, corresponding to Au 4f7/2 and Au 4f5/2, could be accurately ascribed to metallic Au0, resulting from Au's attachment via electrostatic interaction.
 Fig. 5  (a) Survey and high-resolution spectra of (b) O 1s and (c) W 4f for (I) WO3 and (II) 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure and (d) high-resolution spectrum of Au 4f for 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure. 
3.2 Photocatalytic oxidation performances
The photocatalytic performances of the WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NR heterostructures were assessed by their degradation of a typical organic dye pollutant, i.e., Rhodamine B (RhB), under ambient conditions.43Fig. 6a illustrates the photocatalytic activities of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures with different weight percentages of Au NPs and WO3 NRs for the degradation of RhB under simulated solar light irradiation. No degradation of the dye pollutant was observed in the dark and without a catalyst when the adsorption–desorption equilibrium was achieved, indicating the reaction was truly driven by a photocatalytic process. It was clear to see that the photocatalytic performance of the WO3 NRs was markedly enhanced by the incorporation of an appropriate amount of Au NPs via self-assembly buildup, and the results highlight the crucial role of the Au NPs in boosting the photocatalytic performances of the Au–WO3 NRs nanocomposites. Moreover, it was revealed that the photocatalytic performances of the Au–WO3 NRs gradually increased with increasing the loading percentage of Au NPs, among which 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs exhibited the optimal photocatalytic activity, with 88% RhB degraded within 1 h under simulated solar light irradiation. Notably, further increasing the Au NPs percentage decreased the photoactivities of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure, which may be ascribed to the agglomeration of Au NPs, thereby seriously shielding the active sites on the surfaces of Au NPs and WO3 NRs. Apart from simulated solar light irradiation, consistently, the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure also exhibited conspicuously improved photocatalytic performances in comparison with WO3 NRs under visible light irradiation, as shown in Fig. 6d. The remarkably advantageous photoactivities of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures over WO3 NRs under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation arose predominantly from two reasons: the pivotal role of Au NPs as electron reservoirs for capturing photoelectrons and the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) photosensitizer, and, probably, their synergistic effects, which will be elucidated in the following part. The stability is an important sector of photocatalysts for future practical applications. As displayed in Fig. 6b & c, the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure demonstrated good photostability with a negligible decay of photoactivity, even for successive five cyclic reactions under simulated solar light irradiation, strongly implying the favorable photostability of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure. An analogous result was also observed under visible light irradiation (Fig. 6e & f). Furthermore, the XRD (Fig. S7a†) and XPS results (Fig. S7b–e†) of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure before and after cyclic photocatalytic reactions manifested that the crystal structure and elemental chemical states of the sample were the same as those of the freshly prepared sample, thereby substantiating that the Au–WO3 NRs photocatalyst was stable and could be reused. Besides, the influence of the interface configuration between assembly units on the photocatalytic performances of Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures was further probed. As revealed in Fig. S8 & S9,† a calcined Au–WO3 NRs composite sample demonstrated significantly enhanced photocatlytic performance relative to the pristine one, which might be ascribed to the fact that the ligands capped on the Au NPs surface were gradually removed when the annealing temperature was increased, and thus the interfacial interaction between Au and WO3 NRs was greatly enhanced. In this regard, intimate interfacial contact in the calcined sample afforded more efficient charge transport efficiency in comparison with the pristine one, resulting in remarkably enhanced photocatalytic performance. Therefore, it is highly desirable to remove the organic layer in-between the building blocks to expose more active sites for boosting the photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photocatalytic performances of the WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures with different weight percentages of Au NPs for the degradation of RhB under simulated solar light irradiation, (d) Photocatalytic performances of WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NR heterostructure for the degradation of RhB under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm), cyclic photocatalytic performances of 9 wt% Au–WO3 NR heterostructure toward the degradation of RhB under (b & c) simulated solar and (e & f) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm), respectively. 
To dig out the underlying reasons accounting for the significantly enhanced photocatalytic performance of the Au–WO3 NR heterostructure, the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area and porosity of the samples were explored. As unearthed in Fig. S10,† both the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs nanocomposite showed a type IV adsorption–desorption isotherm with a typical H3 hysteresis loop according to the IUPAC classification.47 The specific surface area and pore volume of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure were determined to be 23.15 m2 g−1 and 0.097 cm3 g−1, respectively, which are larger than the values for the WO3 NRs (18.86 m2 g−1 and 0.067 cm3 g−1), as listed in Table S1.† The larger specific surface area and pore volume of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure in comparison with WO3 NRs endow the nanocomposite with a higher adsorption capacity toward reactant molecules, which guaranteed a higher accumulating concentration of reactants on the surface and contributed to the substantial photoactivity enhancement. Noteworthily, although the specific surface area of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure was larger than that of the WO3 NRs, the incremental value was rather limited, i.e., 23.15 m2 g−1vs. 18.86 m2 g−1 (ΔS = 4.29 m2 g−1). Therefore, we believe that the significantly enhanced photocatalytic performance of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure relative to the WO3 NRs under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation cannot be ascribed to the increased specific surface area but rather to the remarkably improved separation and prolonged lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole charge carriers, which could be corroborated by the PEC and PL results.
It has been recognized that active species such as hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and superoxide radicals (˙O2−), in situ formed during photocatalytic reactions play crucial roles in dictating the photocatlytic performances of photocatalysts. Consequently, a collection of control experiments with adding different scavengers was carried out to disclose the specific contributing roles of active species and the underlying photocatalytic mechanism.31 As shown in Fig. 7(a & d), the photocatalytic performances of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure substantially decreased when tert-butyl alcohol (TBA) and ammonium oxalate (AO), acting as scavengers for ˙OH radicals and holes (h+), were added into the reaction system under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation,48 suggesting that the photogenerated holes and ˙OH radicals, especially the latter, played important roles in boosting the photoactivity of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure. It should be stressed that holes generally play dual roles in photocatalytic reactions, namely the direct mineralization of organic dye pollutants and the oxidation of water/or –OH groups to ˙OH radicals, both of which contribute to the promising photoactivity. The presence of ˙OH radicals in the current reaction system could be additionally evidenced by a photoluminescence (PL) technique using terephthalic acid (TA) as a probe molecule. The principle of this technique was based on the fact that the TA molecule is able to react with ˙OH radicals which rapidly transform to a highly fluorescent 2-hydroxyterephthalic acid product whose PL peak intensity can be in situ probed.15 Normally, the PL intensity of the product is proportional to the amount of ˙OH radicals produced in the reaction system. As reflected in Fig. 7b, an obvious peak at 435 nm was clearly observed in the PL results of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation and its peak intensity is proportional to the irradiation time (inset, Fig. 7b), which is indicative of the generation of ˙OH radicals in the reaction system. Noteworthily, the produced amount of ˙OH radicals over the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure was always larger than that produced over the WO3 NRs (Fig. S11b†) under simulated solar light irradiation (inset, Fig. 7b), which suggested that the self-assembly of Au NPs on the WO3 NRs facilitated the formation of more ˙OH radicals. Analogous PL results were also observed for the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure (Fig. 7e) and WO3 NRs (Fig. S11e†) under visible light irradiation, albeit the peak intensity was remarkably lowered, owing to the relatively weak light intensity of visible light.
 Fig. 7  Control experiments with the addition of AO as a hole scavenger and TBA as a scavenger for hydroxyl radicals under: (a) simulated solar and (d) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). PL spectra of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure with an excitation wavelength of 350 nm under: (b) simulated solar and (e) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) using TA as a probe molecule, with corresponding plots depicting the peak intensity vs. irradiation time in the insets. Detection of H2O2 in a 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs nanocomposite aqueous dispersion under: (c) simulated solar and (f) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) using a DPD–POD method. 
Besides the holes and ˙OH radicals, H2O2 has also been deemed to be an important intermediate active species that directly contributes to the degradation of organic dye pollutants.43 The formation of H2O2 can be detected by a DPD–POD method.49 As shown in Fig. 7c, there are two absorption maxima that emerge at ca. 510 nm and 551 nm in the UV-absorption spectra of a Au–WO3 NRs composite aqueous dispersion under simulated solar light irradiation, and their peak intensity gradually increases with prolonging the irradiation time, indicating the production of H2O2 in the reaction system. Similar results were also observed for the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under visible light irradiation, as shown in Fig. 7f. It is worth noting that the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure once again exhibited a much more enhanced H2O2 peak intensity as compared with the WO3 NRs (Fig. S11c & f†) under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation (inset, Fig. 7c & f), and these observations implied that the incorporation of Au on the WO3 NRs matrix remarkably promoted the generation of H2O2via a two-electron reduction of O2. On the other hand, as reflected in Fig. S12,† no ˙O2− signal was detected over both the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under simulated solar (Fig. S12a†) and visible light (Fig. S12b†) irradiation, indicating no ˙O2− radicals were produced in the current reaction system under light irradiation. This result is reasonable in terms of the lower CB of WO3 (0.57 V vs. NHE) compared to the reduction potential of O2 to ˙O2− [i.e., E°(O2/˙O2−) = −0.284 V vs. NHE]. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. S13,† the photocatalytic performances of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure in different atmospheres (N2 and O2) were explored, and the results manifested that the photocatalytic performance of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure was obviously decreased in the N2 atmosphere compared to in O2, strongly suggesting that the O2 molecule is indispensable for contributing to the significantly enhanced photocatalytic performance of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure, such as its involvement in the production of ˙OH radicals and H2O2.
3.3 Photoelectrochemical performances
Apart from the in situ formed active species, the fate of photogenerated electron–hole charge carriers is another core factor affecting the significantly enhanced photocatalytic performances of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure.13 To uncover the separation of photogenerated charge carriers, photoelectrochemical (PEC) measurements of different samples were systematically performed. Fig. 8(a & d) display the photocurrent densities of the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure with applied bias voltage under simulated solar and visible light irradiation, from which it can be clearly seen that the photocurrent density increases with the forward bias voltage, which is indicative of a typical n-type semiconductor behavior.50 Apparently, the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure demonstrated a remarkably enhanced photocurrent in comparison with the WO3 NRs across the entire potential range under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation, while a negligible photocurrent was observed in the dark. Consistently, Fig. 8(b & e) exhibit the much more pronounced on–off transient photocurrent responses of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure compared to the WO3 NRs under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation. These results evidenced that the spontaneous deposition of Au NPs on the WO3 substrate via a electrostatic self-assembly strategy is conducive to distinctly enhancing the photocurrent of WO3 under simulated solar and visible light irradiation. The improved photocurrent response indicated a more effective separation and longer lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs over the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure as compared with the WO3 NRs. Additionally, it was found that the photocurrent of Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure were retained under continuous simulated solar (Fig. S14a†) and visible light irradiation (Fig. S14c†), indicating the favorable photostability of the nanocomposite. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was applied to further evaluate the separation efficiency of photogenerated charge carriers in the interfacial domain, where it is generally accepted that a smaller the semi-circular arc radius is more effective for the separation of photoexcited electrons and holes.51,52 As displayed in Fig. 8(c & f), the EIS Nyquist plots of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure in the high frequency region exhibited a substantially smaller semicircle arc radius than WO3 NRs under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation, and the results imply that the intimate integration of Au NPs with WO3 NRs reduces the interfacial charge transport resistance and gives rise to a more enhanced electron transfer efficiency.
 Fig. 8  (a & d) Linear-sweep voltammograms (LSV, scan rate: 2 mV s−1), (b & e) transient photocurrent responses and (c & f) EIS Nyquist plots of WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under simulated solar and visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm) irradiation, respectively. PEC measurements were performed in an aqueous Na2SO4 solution (0.5 M, pH = 7). 
The electron lifetimes of different samples were estimated via the decay of an open circuit photovoltage by turning off the irradiation at a steady state and subsequently by monitoring the photovoltage decay with time.53,54 As shown in Fig. S14(b & d),† the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure exhibited a much more prolonged electron lifetime and larger photovoltage compared with WO3 NRs under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation, which corroborated the more efficient separation of photogenerated electrons–holes pairs over the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure, hence leading to significantly enhanced PEC performances. Fig. 9a shows the Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure, from which it can be clearly seen that the slopes of the linear parts of the curves in the M–S plots are positive, thus revealing a typical n-type semiconductor behavior.53 Moreover, the flat-band potentials of WO3 and Au–WO3 were determined to be 0.537 V and −0.455 V vs. Ag/AgCl, respectively. It is worth noting that the slope of the M–S plot for the Au–WO3 NRs is smaller than that for WO3 NRs (Fig. S15†), which suggests that the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure showed a faster charge-transfer rate than the WO3 NRs. The charge carrier density (ND) can be determined from Fig. 9a by the following formula:53,55,56  where e = 1.6 × 10−19 C, ε0 = 8.86 × 10−12 F m−1, ε = 300 for hexagonal WO3,56 and C is the capacitance. The ND values of the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure were calculated to be 2.55 × 1019 and 3.80 × 1019 cm−3, respectively. Obviously, the ND of the Au–WO3 NRs was almost 1.5 times that of the WO3 NRs, which signifies a faster charge carrier transfer rate of the Au–WO3 NRs compared to the WO3 NRs. This was verified by the EIS results of the WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NRs in the dark (Fig. S14e†). Based on the above systematic investigations on the PEC performances, it probably can be concluded that the electrostatic self-assembly of Au NPs on the WO3 NRs is beneficial for promoting the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes, in which Au NPs play a pivotal role as “electron reservoirs” for efficiently capturing photoelectrons from the conduction band (CB) of WO3 and reducing the recombination rate of photogenerated electrons and holes, thereby giving rise to a prolonged lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers. This speculation can be corroborated by the photoluminescence (PL) results.
 Fig. 9  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure and (b) PL results of the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure with an excitation wavelength of 380 nm. 
PL has been deemed to be a powerful tool to probe the surface charge-transfer processes involving the fate of charge carriers photoexcited from semiconductors.57 As shown in Fig. 9b, the PL intensity of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure is markedly lower than that of the WO3 NRs, which probably connotes that the photoexcited electrons from the CB of WO3 were captured by the Au NPs, resulting in an efficient inhibition of photogenerated electrons and holes recombination over the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure. Combined with the PEC results, it can be undoubtedly ascertained that Au NPs in the nanocomposite served as efficacious “electron traps” to capture the photoelectrons. Based on this, the lifespan of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs produced over Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure were substantially prolonged, thereby contributing to the significantly enhanced photocatalytic and PEC performances. Noteworthily, the PL results were in faithful agreement with the PEC results.
3.4 Photoreduction performances
Besides the photocatlytic oxidation reaction toward the removal of an organic dye pollutant, the photoreduction of heavy metal ions (e.g., Cr2O72−) over the WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure was also performed. As displayed in Fig. 10, the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure exhibited markedly improved photoreduction performances relative to the WO3 NRs toward the reduction of Cr2O72− to Cr(III) oxo species under both simulated solar (Fig. 10a) and visible light irradiation (Fig. 10b). Moreover, control experiments using K2S2O8 as an electron scavenger (Fig. S16†) showed that the photoreduction performances of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under simulated solar and visible light irradiation were remarkably reduced, strongly affirming the crucial role of photogenerated electrons in triggering the photoreduction reaction. In this regard, the results manifested that the density of electrons photoexcited from the Au–WO3 NRs was higher than that from the WO3 NRs in the same reaction system. The result can be ascribed to two main reasons: one is due to the trapping effect of Au NPs for capturing more photoelectrons on the CB of the WO3 NRs and the other is ascribed to the production of plasmon-induced hot electrons stemming from the SPR effect of Au NPs. The contributing role of SPR-excited hot electrons in boosting the photocatalytic performances of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure was evidenced by the action spectra collected under different monochromatic light irradiation. As shown in Fig. 11a, a substantial peak ranging from 450 to 600 nm was clearly seen in the action spectrum of Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure toward the degradation of RhB, and this result was in faithful agreement with the DRS result. More significantly, as shown in Fig. 11b, the action spectrum of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure demonstrated an analogous result toward the reduction of Cr2O72− to Cr(III) oxo species and was also in line with the DRS result. Based on the action spectra, the plasmonic effect of Au NPs for yielding hot electrons in photoredox reactions has been unambiguously ascertained. Consequently, electrons bandgap-photoexcited from WO3 captured by Au NPs and SPR-excited hot electrons from Au NPs concurrently contribute to the significantly enhanced photoredox catalytic performances of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure.
 Fig. 10  Photoreduction of Cr2O72− over the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under: (a) simulated solar and (b) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). 
 Fig. 11  (a) Action spectra of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure toward the photocatalytic degradation of RhB and (b) the photoreduction of Cr2O72− to Cr(III) oxo species with the corresponding DRS results integrated in the data. 
3.5 Photocatalytic mechanism
To elucidate the charge-transfer mechanism of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure, a schematic illustration of the energy-band diagram of the Au–WO3 nanocomposite is presented based on the CB and VB potentials of WO3 determined, as shown in Fig. S17a.† The work function (ΦA) of Au has been determined to be 5.1 V (vs. Vac) according to previous studies.59 On the other hand, the electron affinity (χ) of semiconductor is defined as the potential difference between Evac and ECB and it equals ca. 3.50 V (vs. Vac) for WO3.60–62 As a result, when Au is intimately integrated with WO3, the electrons in WO3 will be transferred to Au NPs, resulting in negatively charged Au NPs, while in the region of WO3 near the surface of WO3, a positive charge space layer is formed, thereby generating a built-in electric field directed from inside to the interfacial of WO3, and where band bending occurs with the formation of a Schottky junction in the interfacial region. Moreover, the Femi level (EF) of WO3 was gradually flattened by Au and finally they became the same. Base on this and considering the χ of WO3 and the work function of Au, the Schottky barrier height (Φb) between WO3 and Au was roughly calculated to be 1.599 V (vs. Vac). The work function (i.e., potential difference between Evac and Ef) of WO3 was found to be smaller than that of Au (ΦA = 5.1 V), i.e., ΦW < ΦA, which was apparently reflected in Fig. S17a.† Consequently, electron transfer from WO3 to Au occurs spontaneously, as unraveled in Fig. S17b.† Besides, the specific band structures of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure were determined based on an experimental method, The CB level and VB level of the Au–WO3 heterostructure were determined to be −0.455 V vs. Ag/AgCl (−0.255 V vs. NHE) and 2.305 V vs. Ag/AgCl (2.505 V vs. NHE). Specific band structures of the pristine semiconductor were also determined using a theoretical method (S3). Therefore, electrons on the CB of WO3 could reduce O2 to H2O2 [E°(O2/H2O2) = +0.682 V vs. NHE] and reduce Cr6+ to Cr3+ [E°(Cr2O72−/Cr(III) oxo species) = +1.33 V vs. NHE], while they were not negative enough to reduce O2 to ˙O2− [E°(O2/˙O2−) = −0.284 V vs. NHE],44 whereas the holes on the VB of WO3 were positive enough to oxide H2O/or –OH to ˙OH [E°(˙OH/H2O) = +2.38 V vs. NHE].15 Therefore, it was no surprise to see the detection of ˙OH radicals and H2O2 and no detection of ˙O2− radicals in the current reaction system. For clarification, the detailed energy levels for producing different active species are marked in Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  Schematic illustration depicting the photoredox mechanisms of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under light irradiation. 
Photocatalytic mechanisms of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure are vividly depicted in Scheme 2. Specifically, when the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures are irradiated by simulated solar or visible light, electrons are bandgap-photoexcited from the VB of WO3 to its CB, leaving holes on the VB, thus creating photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Subsequently, the photoexcited electrons from the CB of WO3 can be rapidly captured by Au NPs, which serve as electron traps to expedite the separation and prolong the lifetime of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs over the WO3 NRs. Simultaneously, apart from the bandgap-photoexcited electrons from the WO3 NRs, SPR-excited hot electrons stemming from the plasmonic effect of Au NPs are also produced. Hereafter, hot electrons flow to the CB of WO3 and are further captured by neighboring Au NPs, which significantly increases the photoelectron density in the current reaction system. Noteworthily, the low Schottky barrier existing between Au and WO3 is beneficial for a faster electron injection from Au to WO3.58 As a result, it is these two sources of in situ formed electrons that enable the efficient reduction of Cr2O72− to Cr(III) oxo species and O2 to H2O2. Meanwhile, the holes on the VB of WO3 directly oxidize the dye pollutant or oxidize the water or –OH groups to ˙OH radicals, which concurrently contribute to the complete mineralization of dye pollutants to CO2 and H2O, thereby resulting in a significantly enhanced photoredox performance of the plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we developed a facile and green self-assembly strategy to rationally construct well-defined plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures via surface ligand engineering based on pronounced electrostatic attractive interactions, by which positively charged Au@DMAP NPs were spontaneously and uniformly tethered onto a negatively charged WO3 NRs matrix. The use of a DMAP linker as an efficacious stabilizing and directing medium prevented the Au NPs from agglomeration and helped retain the monodispersivity of Au NPs on the WO3 NRs framework. It was remarkably found that the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure exhibited a significantly enhanced and versatile photoredox performance toward the photocatalytic oxidation of an organic dye pollutant and toward the reduction of Cr2O72− in comparison with WO3 NRs under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation. The synergistic dual roles of Au NPs as electron traps for capturing photoelectrons and as an SPR photosensitizer for producing plasmon-induced hot electrons during photoredox catalysis were undoubtedly unraveled. The simultaneous and cooperative synergy of these two roles of Au NCs remarkably increased the electron density of the reaction system and thus promoted the generation of more active species for enhancing the photoredox performance of the plasmonic Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure. It is anticipated that our study could open a general strategy for fabricating diverse plasmonic metal/semiconductor heterostructure and more importantly, could promote ongoing interest in understanding the multifarious roles of Au NCs in photocatalysis for solar energy conversion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The support by the award Program for Minjiang scholar professorship (0180-510485) is greatly acknowledged. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51472050, 51402295, and 51672046), and Fujian Provincial of Science and Technology (2017H6101).
References
M. Law, J. Goldberger and P. Yang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 83 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, N. P. Dasgupta and P. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 415 CrossRef CAS .
B.-A. Chen, J.-T. Lin, N.-T. Suen, C.-W. Tsao, T.-C. Chu, Y.-Y. Hsu, T.-S. Chan, Y.-T. Chan, J.-S. Yang, C.-W. Chiu and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 342 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Dozzi, S. Marzorati, M. Longhi, M. Coduri, L. Artiglia and E. Selli, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 157 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Seifollahi Bazarjani, M. Hojamberdiev, K. Morita, G. Zhu, G. Cherkashinin, C. Fasel, T. Herrmann, H. Breitzke, A. Gurlo and R. Riedel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi, J. Ye, Q. Ma, N. Su, H. Bai and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217 CAS .
Y. H. Ng, S. Ikeda, M. Matsumura and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9307 CAS .
H.-Y. Wang, J. Chen, F.-X. Xiao, J. Zheng and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6926 CAS .
Z. Ren, J. Zhang, F.-X. Xiao and G. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5330 CAS .
S. Vallejos, T. Stoycheva, P. Umek, C. Navio, R. Snyders, C. Bittencourt, E. Llobet, C. Blackman, S. Moniz and X. Correig, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 565 RSC .
F. X. Xiao, Z. Zeng and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. X. Xiao, G. Xiao and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11293 RSC ; S. C. Lin, C. S. Hsu, S. Y. Chiu, T. Y. Liao and H. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, H. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2111 CAS .
S. S. K. Ma, K. Maeda, R. Abe and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8390 CAS .
Y. X. Pan, Y. You, S. Xin, Y. Li, G. Fu, Z. Cui, Y. L. Men, F. F. Cao, S. H. Yu and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, L. Cai, Y. Wang, F. Zhou, K. Xu, X. Tao and Y. Chai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-F. Hung, F.-X. Xiao, Y.-Y. Hsu, N.-T. Suen, H.-B. Yang, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501339 CrossRef .
Q. Xiang, G. F. Meng, H. B. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Li, W. J. Ma and J. Q. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2049 CAS .
S. Liu and Y. J. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16487 CAS .
F. Xiao, F. Wang, X. Fu and Y. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2868 RSC .
X. Q. An, J. C. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. M. Hu, X. L. Yu and G. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8525 RSC .
S. Vallejos, P. Umek, T. Stoycheva, F. Annanouch, E. Llobet, X. Correig, P. De Marco, C. Bittencourt and C. Blackman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1313 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Baeck, K. S. Choi, T. F. Jaramillo, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
R. Solarska, K. Bienkowski, S. Zoladek, A. Majcher, T. Stefaniuk, P. J. Kulesza and J. Augustynski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. DePuccio, P. Botella, B. O'Rourke and C. C. Landry, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1987 CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, J. Miao, H. B. Tao, S.-F. Hung, H.-Y. Wang, H. B. Yang, J. Chen, R. Chen and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 2115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Hu, S. Meng and X. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 12, 053 Search PubMed .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781 CAS .
D. J. Late, Y.-K. Huang, B. Liu, J. Acharya, S. N. Shirodkar, J. Luo, A. Yan, D. Charles, U. V. Waghmare, V. P. Dravid and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Lu, T. Zhai, X. H. Zhang, Y. Q. Shen, L. Y. Yuan, B. Hu, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. H. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. X. Tong and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, H. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6180 CAS .
F. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7819 RSC .
J. Wang, E. Khoo, P. S. Lee and J. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14306 CAS .
B. B. Lakshmi, C. J. Patrissi and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2544 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Sun, Y.-K. Wang, R.-X. Sun and S.-Y. Dong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 115, 303 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wenderich and G. Mul, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, B. Luo, H. Lin and S. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 190, 700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Gittins and F. Caruso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 3001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weng, J. Wu, N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Zhang, S. Li, B. K. Liu, D. J. Wang and T. F. Xie, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3724 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Liu and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9684 CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, J. Miao, H.-Y. Wang and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12229 CAS .
B. Han, S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2015, 24, 145 CrossRef .
S. Liu, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 430 CAS .
H. Bader, V. Sturzenegger and J. Hoigne, Water Res., 1988, 22, 1109 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Xiao, S. F. Hung, J. Miao, H. Y. Wang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dai, X. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Liang and K. Liu, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2015, 62, 170 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, Z. Xue, L. Wang, Y. Cheng and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1709 CAS .
Z. H. Zhang and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9948 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Wang, H. Y. Chen, Y. Y. Hsu, U. Stimming, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29186 CAS .
B. Liu, H. M. Chen, C. Liu, S. C. Andrews, C. Hahn and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, Y. Yao, D. Bai, R. Xu, J. Mei, D. Wu, Z. Gao and K. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60339 RSC .
J. Yu and J. Ran, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1364 CAS .
Y. Shi, J. Wang, C. Wang, T. T. Zhai, W. J. Bao, J. J. Xu, X. H. Xia and H. Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Walter, C. F. Hertzler, P. Devynck, G. P. Smith and J. R. Peterson, J, Chem. Phys., 1991, 95, 824 CAS .
H. Yoshimura, Y. Tsuchiya, H. Mizuta and N. Koshida, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 10, 1318 Search PubMed .
R. A. Kadir, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Z. Ou, W. Wlodarski, A. P. O'Mullane, G. Bryant, M. Taylor and K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7994 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr04802eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Flowchart for the ligand-triggered electrostatic self-assembly of plasmonic Au–WO3 NR heterostructures.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns of: (a) WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NR heterostructures with different Au percentages (b) 3 wt%, (c) 5 wt%, (d) 7 wt%, (e) 9 wt%, (f) 11 wt%, and (g) 15 wt% (W: WO3, A: Au).	 
(αhμ)n = A(hν − Eg)

 	Fig. 2  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures with the corresponding (b) plots of the transformed Kubelka–Munk function vs. energy of the light. The photographs of these two samples are provided in the inset of b.	 

 	Fig. 3  Panoramic low- and high-magnified FESEM images of: (a & b) WO3 NRs and (c & d) 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 4  Low-magnified TEM and HRTEM images of: (a & b) WO3 NRs and (d & e) 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure, respectively. (c) STEM and (f) SAED pattern of 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure with a low-magnified TEM image of a single NR in the inset.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Survey and high-resolution spectra of (b) O 1s and (c) W 4f for (I) WO3 and (II) 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure and (d) high-resolution spectrum of Au 4f for 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photocatalytic performances of the WO3 NRs and Au–WO3 NRs heterostructures with different weight percentages of Au NPs for the degradation of RhB under simulated solar light irradiation, (d) Photocatalytic performances of WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NR heterostructure for the degradation of RhB under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm), cyclic photocatalytic performances of 9 wt% Au–WO3 NR heterostructure toward the degradation of RhB under (b & c) simulated solar and (e & f) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  Control experiments with the addition of AO as a hole scavenger and TBA as a scavenger for hydroxyl radicals under: (a) simulated solar and (d) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). PL spectra of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure with an excitation wavelength of 350 nm under: (b) simulated solar and (e) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) using TA as a probe molecule, with corresponding plots depicting the peak intensity vs. irradiation time in the insets. Detection of H2O2 in a 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs nanocomposite aqueous dispersion under: (c) simulated solar and (f) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) using a DPD–POD method.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a & d) Linear-sweep voltammograms (LSV, scan rate: 2 mV s−1), (b & e) transient photocurrent responses and (c & f) EIS Nyquist plots of WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under simulated solar and visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm) irradiation, respectively. PEC measurements were performed in an aqueous Na2SO4 solution (0.5 M, pH = 7).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure and (b) PL results of the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure with an excitation wavelength of 380 nm.	 

 	Fig. 10  Photoreduction of Cr2O72− over the WO3 NRs and 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under: (a) simulated solar and (b) visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Action spectra of the 9 wt% Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure toward the photocatalytic degradation of RhB and (b) the photoreduction of Cr2O72− to Cr(III) oxo species with the corresponding DRS results integrated in the data.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic illustration depicting the photoredox mechanisms of the Au–WO3 NRs heterostructure under light irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr04802e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
