General Discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C005545J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C005545J
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2010, 147, 527-552General DiscussionFirst published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      13th November 2010
    

Dr Sittler opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Lunine with a number of questions:
Question 1: You mention that an M-dwarf star may be just as active as our Sun, with flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs), so I assume also have a solar wind?
Question 2: You mention an Earth-type planet with water based hydrological systems, would reside at 0.1 AU and could lose its entire atmosphere if it had a weak magnetic field (i.e., solar wind scavenging of its upper atmosphere). You state, in the case of a Titan-type planet residing at 1 AU from the M-dwarf star, it would have a better chance of retaining its atmosphere where the solar wind is more benign. You then state, in order for it to be visible like an Earth-type planet, a Titan-type planet would need to be 3 times the size of the Earth and 5 times its mass. This would reduce the scale height of the atmosphere and make it more likely to retain its atmosphere. But, would the solar wind, flares and CMEs be greater for M-dwarf stars than our Sun, and thus increase atmospheric loss for a Titan-type planet at 1 AU?
Question 3: Since it is larger than the Earth, and Ganymede also has a magnetic field, would a Titan-type planet have a sufficiently large internal magnetic field to protect its atmosphere? Venus and Mars are examples of rocky planets larger and smaller than the Earth, respectively, that do not have magnetic fields. The former retains its atmosphere, while the latter has not. You say the UV would be less for M-dwarfs, but can one expect the same photochemistry at the top of a Titan-type planet as described above, like we have at Titan with rich organic and nitrile chemistry and formation of large positive and negative ions? As shown by Coates et al. (this volume) heavy negative ions are more prevalent in shadow than sunlight, which means photoemission less important. So, would one expect to see large negative ions at Titan-like planets where the solar UV is less intense (i.e., photoemission less important and condensation to larger molecules increases)? Finally, since the Titan-type planet would not be gravitationally locked, like Titan is with Saturn (which has an effective rotation rate of 16 days relative to the Sun, due to its orbit around Saturn), what effect would a faster rotating Titan have on its upper atmosphere chemistry (i.e., time in sunlight and darkness would be shorter)?

Professor Lunine replied: Most of the questions you ask require rather involved answers. I would strongly recommend two special issues of Astrobiology: the one on M dwarf habitability (2007, vol. 7, issue 1) and the more recent “Habitability Primer” (2010, vol. 10, issue 1). Beyond that, here are some brief and, therefore, perhaps inadequate answers to your questions:
Response to question 1: Yes, M dwarfs have winds.
Response to question 2: M dwarfs are active flare stars with XUV radiation up to 100 times greater than that of the present Sun, but variable, so that it is not easy to say for sure what the typical atmospheric loss would be for a planet at 1 AU from am M dwarf.
Response to question 3: This is difficult to predict in a general way without a detailed model, but let me point out that rotation periods of 16 days (like Titan) would still represent “fast rotation” relative to the orbital period at 1 AU from an M dwarf. There is nothing special about 24 h as a rotation period—it could be days or (like Venus) months and still not represent a tidally-locked configuration.

Professor Mitchell commented: What do you mean when you refer to acetylene as a “solid”?

Professor Lunine responded: The freezing point of acetylene is −82 °C. The surface temperature of Titan is, at the equator, −179 °C and at the poles about −182 °C. Therefore, condensed acetylene will be a solid on Titan's surface. There will also be some dissolved acetylene (~1%; Cordier et al., Astrophys. J., 2009, 707, L128) in the methane–ethane lakes and seas.

Dr Moses commented: In the first talk of this meeting, Sushil Atreya showed mass spectrometer data that indicate that C2H2 evaporated or was otherwise released from the surface during the landing of the Huygens probe, yet you mention that spectral signatures for acetylene at Titan's surface are not present in other Cassini remote-sensing data. Why do you think this is? Could the acetylene be coated by other materials that hide the spectral signatures? Do you have other ideas?

Professor Lunine responded: Indeed, the Huygens GCMS data have been reanalyzed in detail and in contrast to the original GCMS report (Niemann et al., Nature, 2005, 438, 779), in which CH4, C2H6, CO2, C2N2 (cyanogen) and C6H6 were reported in post-landing spectra, a new paper has been submitted reporting the presence of C2H2 in post-landing spectra. (The benzene detection is now labelled as tentative because of a large background in that mass range.) The introduction of all of these species into the GCMS was through an electrically heated inlet1 in the base of the probe, and so it is generally thought that the species were resident in the “soil” but not necessarily exposed at the surface. For example, the surface is evidently solid from the Huygens DISR images and so the methane and ethane must be in the immediate subsurface and not exposed. Therefore, one can imagine that a near-IR spectrometer like Cassini VIMS, sampling only the exposed surface of Titan, might miss acetylene that is just underneath, or coated/buried by other materials.
1. R. Lorenz et al., Meteor. Planet. Sci., 2006, 41, 1704.

Dr Sittler remarked: Yes, VIMS data1 show an overabundance of benzene relative to acetylene on the surface. But in the earlier talk by Professor Atreya, the Huygens GCMS observed acetylene down near the surface, but that the mass 78 channel of the GCMS had high background, so detection of benzene could not be confirmed. Therefore, can one say that the Huygens GCMS data is still consistent with the VIMS observations, which must remove atmospheric effects from its observations of the surface?
1. Clark et al., J. Geophys. Res., 2010, in press.

Professor Atreya replied: The Huygens GCMS data detect acetylene only from surface evaporation, not in the air, not even near the surface. This is because acetylene lies in a very busy part of the mass spectrum where its presence cannot be distinguished from that of other competing or dominating molecules. Acetylene must be in fairly large concentration for it to be detected from the surface (CIRS gives on the order of ppm levels in the atmosphere). On the other hand, benzene, if present in the surface, must be at so low in concentration that it cannot be separated from the instrument background. Remember, also, concentration builds up tremendously in the surface deposits, which is the reason why acetylene and some other molecules could be detected from surface evaporation even though they were not seen during the descent. I cannot comment on the VIMS data without going through it carefully myself, for analysis of it has yet to be published. If everyone (VIMS and GCMS) turns out to be right, it might signal that not all locations on Titan are alike!

Professor Atreya then commented: The Huygens GCMS data from evaporation of the material at Titan’s surface after landing cannot unambiguously confirm presence of benzene in the surface. If present, it’s too low to distinguish from the benzene that was permanently present as background in the instrument throughout the probe’s descent through the atmosphere.

Dr Bézard remarked: You mention the formation of benzene from acetylene ice as a possible explanation for the possible lack of acetylene and overabundance of benzene at the surface of Titan. Are there any laboratory measurements of the kinetics of this reaction in conditions prevailing at the surface of Titan? Is it possible to quantify the loss of C2H2 on Titan's surface from this process vs. its photochemical production?

Professor Lunine replied: During the meeting Professor Kaiser commented that his group has done some work on the cosmic ray mediated conversion of acetylene to benzene at the surface of Titan, using an energy deposition rate for cosmic rays calculated by Molina-Cuberosa et al., Planet. Space Sci., 1999, 47, 1347.

Professor Kaiser asked: In your presentation you commented on the formation of the benzene molecule and that the formation of benzene via surface chemistry on Titan at 95 K is not feasible since there is a significant ‘activation energy’ involved.
It should be stressed that this is certainly true for thermal chemistry at a thermal equilibrium. Here, acetylene cannot form benzene. However, our recent study on the interaction of ionizing radiation with acetylene–carbon monoxide ices1 and with pure acetylene ices in particular2 showed that the ionizing radiation can lead no non-equilibrium chemistry involving metastable triplet reactants such as triplet carbon monoxide and/or triplet acetylene in the solid state. These reactions have—at most—only minor entrance barriers, which could be overcome if the triplet species are vibrationally exited. In the end, this can lead to the formation of benzene molecules as demonstrated recently in our group under conditions simulating Titan.
So the ultimate goal of chemical models would be to objectively address the key question to what extend galactic cosmic ray processing of Titan’s aerosol particles and/or Titan’s surface can lead to the formation of complex organics. Laboratory data on the processing of Titan’s main hydrocarbon constituents such as methane, ethane, and acetylene2 are well documented, but an incorporation of these data into Titan’s chemical models has not been fully accomplished yet. This objective approach is crucial to judge what fraction of organics can be formed in the gas phase (via ion–molecule and/or neutral–neutral reaction) and also in the solid state (aerosol particles, surface).
1. L. Zhou, R. I. Kaiser, L. G. Gao, A. H. H. Chang, M. C. Liang, Y. Y. Yung, Pathways to oxygen-bearing molecules in the interstellar medium and in planetary atmospheres: cylopropenone (c-C3H2O) and propynal (HCCCHO), Astrophys. J., 2008, 686, 1493–1502.
2. L. Zhou, W. Zheng, R. I. Kaiser, A. Landera, A. M. Mebel, M. C. Liang, Y. L. Yung, Cosmic-ray mediated formation of benzene on the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan, Astrophys. J., 2010, 710, 1243–1251.
3. C. J. Bennett, C. S. Jamieson, Y. Osamura, R. I. Kaiser, Laboratory studies on the irradiation of methane in interstellar, cometary, and solar system ices, Astrophys. J., 2006, 653, 792–811.
4. Y. S. Kim, C. J. Bennett, L. Sheng, K. O’Brian, R. I. Kaiser, Mechanistical studies on the radiation processing of crystalline and amorphous ethane ices and their implications to the chemistry of Titan and KBOs, Astrophys. J., 2010, 711, 744–756.

Professor Lunine responded: Indeed, having heard your discussion and read the Zhou et al. paper, I now agree that the surface conversion of acetylene to benzene is more favorable than I had originally thought. I can only echo the point of view that conferences, especially the Faraday Discussions (given their unique format), are crucial to giving all of us the opportunity to learn new things.

Professor Lunine addressed Professor Mebel: The work you cited on the facile cosmic-ray conversion of triplet acetylene to benzene is interesting and might help to explain the preponderance of benzene on the surface as seen in Cassini VIMS data. It is important, however, to put it in the context of potential sources of mechanical disturbance such as fluvial and aeolian transport, impacts, and (more speculatively) cryovolcanism. These may also act to convert acetylene into benzene, as well as do other chemistry on Titan's surface.

Professor Mebel responded: I agree with this comment and only would like to add that the calculated barrier for the C2H2 + C2H2 reaction in the ground electronic state is about 39 kcal mol−1 (to form cyclobutadiene), whereas a barrier of ~48 kcal mol−1 needs to be overcome to produce vinylacetelene.1 On the other hand, the computed energy gap between the ground singlet and the first excited triplet electronic states of acetylene is 3.82 eV (103.9 kcal mol−1).2
1. A. M. Mebel, V. V. Kislov and R. I. Kaiser, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 133113 (2006).
2. J. K. Lundberg, R. W. Field, C. D. Sherrill, E. T. Seidl, Y. Xie, H. F. Schaefer III, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 8384; Y. Yamaguchi, G. Vacek, H.F. Schaefer III, Theor. Chim. Acta, 1993, 86, 97.

Professor Suits asked: Given that acetylene polymerization might proceed rapidly once it has begun, are there means of initiating this with lightning, static discharge or cosmic rays?

Professor Lunine responded: Initiation of acetylene polymerization with cosmic rays has been discussed by Ralf Kaiser and his group (at this meeting and in Zhou et al., Astrophys. J., 2010, DOI:10.1088/0004-637X/715/1/1). There is no detection of lightning on Titan, consistent not with the absence of storms necessarily but rather with nonpolar methane as the working meteorological fluid. Static discharge associated with dunes and smaller particles blown around by the winds is an intriguing additional possibility which has not been quantitatively investigated.

Professor Schram remarked: A question from my side is: how large could the electric fieldstrengths be?

Professor Lunine responded: Electric field measurements were made by the Huygens probe during descent and are described in Beghin et al., Planet. Space Sci., 2009, 57, 1872. The field seems to peak at about 80–90 km at a value just above 5 mV m−1 Hz−1/2. As to how large fields could be, one can only note that the air is mostly molecular nitrogen, with methane present, and very little in the way of polar species. Hence, it ought to be a good insulator, but there has been no detection of lightning.

Professor Plane asked: The “missing ethane” problem on Titan remains an unsolved problem. Would you care to comment on current theories to explain the absence of an ethane ocean covering the satellite?

Professor Lunine replied: If methane has been photolyzed without major interruptions over the age of the solar system, hundreds of meters of equivalent depth of ethane should have been produced during this time. Disposal of the ethane during volcanic and impact events might explain its relative absence on the surface. It is possible that less ethane actually survives to the surface from the stratosphere than is predicted by photochemical models, or it is incorporated somehow into other organic aerosols, or both. One must also not exclude the possibility that methane photochemistry is episodic, and a model to reconcile this with Cassini data is in preparation. The citations for the other possibilities may be found in J. I. Lunine and R. D. Lorenz, Rivers, lakes, dunes and rain: Crustal processes in Titan's methane cycle, Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 2009, 37, 299–320.

Professor Atreya opened the discussion of the paper by Dr Tinetti: Do you find any evidence of PH3 (or its products, P2 and P4)? I suspect PH3 and its product could be present in the sensible atmosphere of hot Jupiters. In Jupiter’s atmosphere, PH3 is thermochemically stable at high temperature (1000–2000 K) in the planet’s interior. Convection does pump certain quantities of PH3 to the stratosphere where PH3 is expected to form P2 and P4. Oxides of phosphorus could form also as the gas convects through the water cloud. I think these are the type of temperatures of the region of the EGP spectroscopic data.

Dr Tinetti replied: There is the suspicion that PH3 is present in one of the hot-Jupiters' atmospheres (Bouwman et al., in preparation), but the spectral resolution and S/N of the observations are not good enough to be conclusive.

Mr Hargreaves asked: It is outlined in the paper that there is an urgent need for laboratory studies to determine high temperature molecular opacities of species relevant to exoplanet atmospheres. We would like to report that we are recording high resolution (0.01 cm−1) Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of NH3 and CH4 at 100 °C intervals from 300–1400 °C. We will then produce detailed infrared line lists of these molecules to be used in the atmospheric modelling of exoplanets and brown dwarfs. In response to our work, which molecules are considered to have a large contribution to the opacity of exoplanet spectra but have little or no ‘hot’ data, thus hindering the accurate production of atmospheric models?

Dr Tinetti replied: We have currently good data for hot water and ammonia, CO and CO2. The data for hot methane, hydrocarbons and H2S are missing or incomplete.

Dr Manzanares commented: Considering the possibility of detection in the near infrared and visible regions, it is well known that between 5000 cm−1 and 14000 cm−1, the number of absorption bands decreases, reducing the superposition of the bands. The C–H, N–H, and O–H bonds have larger anharmonicities than other bonds allowing them to show stronger absorption bands in the near-IR and visible regions. These vibrational overtones are well separated in these two spectral regions. The only problem is that the bands are weak. They will only show at high pressures and/or with long optical paths.

Professor Miller noted: One reason for choosing the (near) infrared for observing exoplanets is that you get a better contrast between the parent star, which tends to emit most in the visible and the planet which, even at 1000 K, will have its maximum emission at 3 microns (and longer wavelengths if cooler).

Dr Tinetti replied: I agree with Professor Miller's response; the contrast in the optical is less favorable for emission spectroscopy (secondary transit technique). For transmission spectroscopy (primary transit), it is not necessarily the case though.

Dr Bézard asked: Photochemical models of hot Jupiters predict that CO is more abundant than CO2; CO2 being produced by H2O photolysis followed by reaction of OH with CO. On the other hand, you mentioned that CO2 has been detected but that spectroscopic evidence for CO is not so clear. Why is this? I would suppose that, if abundant enough, CO could be relatively easily detected through its strong (1–0) band at 4.7 μm.

Dr Tinetti replied: The problem is that the 4.7 μm absorption cannot be captured conclusively with Spitzer-IRAC photometric observations, and the low resolution observations with Hubble cover the 1.2–2.5 μm range, where CO absorption may overlap with one of methane or CO2. The final, conclusive, evidence of CO in one of the hot-Jupiters (HD 209458b) was most recently provided by VLT-CRIRES measurements (Snellen et al., Nature, 2010).

Dr Moses asked: What are your views on the 3-micron emission observed by Swain et al. (2010) for HD 189733b? Do you think it is an observational artifact, or is it real? If real, do you agree with the interpretation of fluorescence in the ν3 methane band? Can you rule out thermospheric emission itself? For example, the parent star is likely variable, and one can imagine that the location of the base of the thermosphere might fluctuate in response to either variations of the star or from atmospheric dynamics of the planet (e.g., waves). One can imagine scenarios in which the upper part of the molecular region becomes heated to over 2000 K, and the radiative cooling may not instantaneously drive the atmosphere back to pre-perturbation temperatures. Is that scenario possible?

Dr Tinetti replied: We have had additional observations since the publication of Swain et al. (2010). The five nights confirm the signature at 3 μm, and allow an improvement in the spectral resolution. The spectral signature at 3 μm now really looks like methane in emission. New papers are in preparation (Deroo et al., Waldmann et al.). Pierre Drossard has proposed at DPS an interesting explanation of the spectral features observed; they could be due to non LTE methane emission.

Professor Miller commented:
Auroral methane emission is known from Jupiter. Normally, mesospheric emission absorbs radiation coming from the planet’s interior and incident solar infrared radiation, but in the case of energetic auroral events, precipitating particles will penetrate sufficiently deep in the atmosphere to get below the homopause and excite CH4 lines to show up in emission.

Dr Tinetti agreed with Professor Miller’s comments.

Professor Mason concluded: I would like to draw delegates attention to the ESF Cost Action the Chemical Cosmos (CM0805). The Action supports collaborative visits within Europe (and non EU labs may join). All the research in this meeting would be covered by this Action so delegates may chose to look at and ask to join one or more of the Working groups, attend its meetings (the next one is in Grenoble, October 5–8) and use short visits to develop links established at this meeting. For details see http://cost.astrochemistry.eu/impressum

Ms Horst opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Raulin: Have you looked for amino acids in your tholins without hydrolyzing them? As we've shown in Horst et al., 2010 (submitted), tholin samples produced in the PAMPRE experiment contain amino acids and nucleotide bases without any hydrolysis. The oxygen comes from contamination and also from oxygen that we put into the samples intentionally through the introduction of CO. Of course hydrolysis clearly increases the yield of the amino acids, but I think their presence in tholins without hydrolysis is potentially more interesting.

Professor Raulin answered: Although the gas mixture we used to produce Titan tholins (N2:CH4 98:2) was free of oxygen, we did see oxygen contamination in our tholins and in their non-hydrolysed samples. Indeed, performing a direct derivatization of tholins, we did see some amino acids, but their yield was smaller than that observed after derivatization of hydrolysed tholins samples. For example the quantity of glycine is multiplied by more than a factor of three in tholins on which a 10-week cold-hydrolysis was performed, compared to our non-hydrolysed tholins. Urea is also present in non-hydrolysed tholins as well as in hydrolysed tholins.
The oxygen contamination may occur during the synthesis, the recovery and/or the storage of the tholins samples and also during the derivatization process.
Possible explanations for this production of urea and amino acids may be the presence of traces of dioxygen (O2) in the reactor during the synthesis, and/or the reaction of highly reactive fresh synthesised tholins with water vapour from the air of the laboratory, performing a partial hydrolysis of the samples. It could be at least partly—but still not totally—avoided using a glove box filled with dinitrogen (N2), as done in previous studies in our group (cf. Ramirez et al., Icarus, 2002, 156, 515–530, and references therein). Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that in these studies when using a glove box the oxygen contamination was very low, with C/O ~ 1500.
Another possibility could be the presence of water during the derivatization process. We have detected, in parallel experiments, a peak corresponding to the derivatization product of water which can be attributed to the hydroscopic character of our tholins, they adsorb atmospheric water as soon as in contact with the air.

Professor Coates remarked: I wondered if you saw charged particles in you experiments? We see positive and negative ions, as well as neutrals, in Titan's upper atmosphere.

Professor Raulin answered: Our experiment was essentially dedicated on the behaviour of Titan tholins upon ammonia aqueous solution hydrolysis. Thus we did not study the nature of the species formed in the reactor, such as charged species, in the present work.

Professor Schram remarked: Can emission of neutrals and neutral fragments not be caused by dissociative recombination? If so, do give intensity and ro-vibrational distribution of the emission information about process? Can that then be compared with observations in laboratory plasmas?

Professor Raulin replied: In previous works, we did use spectroscopy in the visible range to identify radicals produced in a plasma similar to the one produced for these experiments (J.-M. Bernard, PhD Thesis, University Paris 7, September 2004, Experimental simulation of Titan’s stratosphere chemistry: monitoring of the produced species and comparison with a kinetic model). We were thus able to identify several radical species, and to interpret the chemical mechanism involved in the dissociation of methane and nitrogen. It clearly involves radical reaction, but probably also ion reactions.

Professor Atreya commented: How did you decide on the range of NH3 in your lab experiments? I suggest trying to include H2S also in future experiments, as it could be a component of cryovolcanic outgassing. Its vapor pressure even at Titan’s 94 K surface temperature is appreciable. I realize it’s challenging to work with H2S.

Professor Raulin replied: Models of the internal structure of Titan suggest the presence of an ocean with up to about 25–30% NH3. We thus used a maximum concentration of NH3 in that range.
Besides using the maximum NH3 concentration, we also tested lower concentrations having in mind that once these putative internal fluids emerge to the surface, they might be affected by dilution phenomena, caused for example by their contact with hydrocarbons fluids.
Concerning the comment on H2S, we can make 2 main remarks: (1) it should be a priori much more efficient to hydrolyse tholins with concentrated solution of ammonia, instead of using slightly acidic solutions of low concentrations of H2S (which has a low solubility in water, specially at low temperatures – and consequently does not provide a pH low enough for a good acid hydrolysis); (2) It is indeed more difficult to work with H2S, particularly for safety reasons, but this is an idea to look at in the future.

Professor Mason remarked: Are you keeping any aerosol samples you make for longer than 10 weeks? Could you look at the heating effect, e.g. chemical changes when T is raised from 96 K? Do you think the chemistry is set early in the process or really changes steadily over time? Could you not analyse after 2, 5, 10 weeks and compare?

Professor Raulin responded: For the sets of experiments reported in this paper, we have chosen two variable parameters: ammonia concentration and temperature of hydrolysis, and have fixed the hydrolysis time, in order to be able to compare the results. This already required the use of an important amount of tholins and all the tholins synthesized under the described conditions were used for the reported experiment. However in a new series of experiments, more tholins are being synthesized and we are planning to look now at the influence of hydrolysis time, keeping samples at constant temperatures for different durations of hydrolysis.
Concerning the question about the heating effect, there was no specific monitoring of the effect of increasing temperature from 96 K to room temperature. However, as mentioned in the last version of the manuscript, for the samples that were kept at 96 K, the phase change from ice to liquid was in fact very short, less than 30 s were enough. Thus we think that this step is too short to have a noticeable effect on the hydrolysis.
Finally, concerning the question whether the chemistry is set early in the process or really changes steadily over time, with the present information and results it is hard to provide an answer. A comparison at different exposure times was not performed, as the goal of our experiments was to demonstrate that our tholins were sensitive to any chemical modification when placed in aqueous ammonia solution at low temperature. Now that we have a positive result we can plan more detailed studies aimed to better understand the hydrolysis process in the frame of Titan environment. As mentioned before, a new set of experiments are being conducted and we will be able to study specific aspects.

Professor Casavecchia (speaking on behalf of also N. Balucani, F. Leonori, R. Petrucci, K. M. Hickson, S. D. Le Picard and P. Foggi) opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Kaiser1: I would like to make some comments on the role of the internal state population of C2 in the reaction C2 + C2H2.
In a recent work, we have also reported on crossed molecular beam (CMB) experiments on the reaction C2(X1Σ+g, a3Πu) with acetylene at two different collision energies (Ec) of 37.4 kJ mol¬1 and 13.6 kJ mol¬1.2 In our experiments we have produced supersonic beams of the C2 transient species via a high-pressure, high-power radio-frequency (RF) discharge source for the production of supersonic beams of atomic and molecular radicals,3 starting from dilute mixtures of CO and O2 in He or Ne (we have used He and Ne as carrier gases to change the beam velocity and the experimental Ec). The mechanism of formation of C2 in the plasma formed by the RF discharge is unknown, but presumably it involves the recombination of carbon atoms, which are, indeed, present in the beam in a large percentage.4 Because of the small energy difference between the ground, C2(X1Σ+g), and first excited, C2(a3Πu), electronic states (the electronically excited triplet state, a3Πu, lies only 7.3 kJ mol¬1 above the ground state, X1Σ+g) when compared to the temperature of the plasma (1200–1500 K), both states are formed in a significant amount. As a matter of fact, if we assume that the two electronic states are populated according to a Boltzmann distribution and if we consider the plasma temperature in the RF discharge (which is ~1200 K when the carrier gas is He and ~1500 K when the carrier gas is Ne), the population ratio P(a3Πu)/P(X1Σ+g) is 2.9 and 3.3 in the cases of He and Ne, respectively, that is roughly the same. This means that at the two Ecs of our experiments, the triplet-to-singlet ratio is practically constant. In addition to that, as C2 is a diatomic species, the characterisation of the internal rovibrational levels of both electronic states becomes crucial for a correct interpretation of the scattering results. The limited number of relaxing collisions during the supersonic expansion,4 in fact, does not allow the rovibrational distributions to be efficiently relaxed. Since the outcome of the reactive scattering experiments can be affected by the rovibrational populations of C2, we have characterized the C2(X1Σ+g, a3Πu) internal populations by using a new experimental apparatus consisting of a RF discharge source identical to that employed in CMB experiments and a vacuum chamber with a pulsed tunable laser (a frequency tripled Nd YAG laser at 355 nm and a dye laser) coupled to an optical detection system for radical detection by LIF (see ref. 2 and 5 for more details). We have first looked at the rovibrational spectra of the triplet state via the (0,0), (1,1) and (2,2) bands of the d3Πg–a3Πu Swan system at ~516.5, 512.9 and 509.8 nm respectively.2 The rotational temperatures were found to be ~250 K and 200 K for all bands of C2(a3Πu) with He and Ne as the carrier gases, respectively, while the vibrational temperature was determined to be 3500 K. Then, a similar characterization has been performed for the internal states of C2(X1Σ+g) with He and Ne as carrier gases.5 In this case we have looked at the (0,0), (1,1), (2,2) and higher transitions of the Mulliken (D1Σ+u-X1Σ+g) bands at approximately 231 nm. The rovibrational populations of C2(X1Σ+g) are comparable to those obtained for the triplet state, but higher vibrational states (v ≥ 3) are also partially populated. It should be noted that, even though a direct evaluation of the triplet-to-singlet density ratio in not possible by using LIF, we had a comparable loss of signal intensity of both singlet and triplet states in moving from He to Ne as the beam carrier gas. This observation is very important, because it implies that the singlet/triplet state ratio remains constant, thus confirming the reliability of the estimate based on the plasma temperatures.
If we try to use the information on the C2 internal states in the interpretation of the observed scattering distributions, several interesting considerations can be made.2,5 First of all, there was no need to consider the extra amount of energy supplied by the vibrational energy of C2, even though the energy content of the vibrationally excited C2 levels is quite sizable (for instance, for the a3Πu state Δv1–0 =19.36 kJ mol¬1, Δv2–0 = 38.43 kJ mol¬1, Δv3–0 = 57.23 kJ mol¬1). This is not surprising, as the vibrational excitation is expected to affect a reaction mostly when it involves a breaking bond. According to the ab initio calculations of the relevant triplet and singlet potential energy surfaces (PESs),6 the C2 moiety is actually incorporated in the C4H product. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that the vibrational excitation of the reactant will be retained as vibrational excitation of the molecular product and the extra amount of energy available to the system when the reaction involves C2 in one of the excited vibrational levels is not converted into product translational energy (the reaction is vibrationally adiabatic).2,5 The possible effect of the C2 rotational excitation is more difficult to predict and quantify. Only detailed quantum dynamical calculations or state-to-state differential cross section measurements could fully elucidate this issue if and when they become amenable for a system of this complexity. We limit ourselves to saying that we have practically the same rotational distributions in both the He and Ne beams used for the two experiments, so that we expect a similar behaviour for the experiments at the two Ecs.
Since the two electronic states of C2 are nearly isoenergetic, the difference in the energetics of the triplet and singlet reactions is not large enough to allow an easy disentanglement of the two contributions in the data analysis (as done for other systems, see for instance ref. 7), unless one of the states is not able to react (this appears to be the case for the reaction C2 + HCN at low Ec investigated by Kaiser and coworkers1). In the cases of the C2 reactions with unsaturated hydrocarbons, neither in ours2 nor in Kaiser’s experiments6,8 has it been possible to discriminate without ambiguity the contributions of the two reactions to the observed signal. In fact, not are only the energetics of the processes very close, but also the mechanisms followed by the two reactions are of the same kind, that is, electrophilic addition of C2 to the π bonds of unsaturated hydrocarbons with the formation of bound intermediates. Our laboratory data at the lower Ec were fit by using a backward–forward symmetric isotropic CM angular distribution and a product translational energy distribution with an average fraction of energy released into product translational energy, fT = ET/ETOT, of about 0.4 (where ETOT is the one associated to the more exoergic reaction of C2(a3Πu) in its ground ro-vibrational level). At the higher Ec of 37.4 kJ mol¬1 the CM angular distribution became forward peaked, with an intensity ratio T(0°)/T(180°) = 2.
Our experimental findings have been interpreted in the light of ab initio calculations of the triplet and singlet state C4H2 PESs,6 but in a different way with respect to the interpretation of Kaiser et al.1 The favoured reaction approach in the singlet PES is C2 addition to the π system of acetylene and leads to two different cyclic intermediates that easily rearrange to a very stable singlet HCCCCH(diacetylene) intermediate, lying about 580 kJ mol−1 below the reagent asymptote and about 550 kJ mol−1 below the product asymptote. Since HCCCCH resides in a very deep well with respect to both reactants and products, it is reasonable to expect that, at the low Ec of 13.6 kJ mol¬1, the singlet C4H2 intermediate would survive for several rotational periods before fragmenting into products. The formation of a long-lived complex is fully consistent with our finding of an isotropic CM angular distribution at this Ec. A similar reaction mechanism is also plausible for the reaction of C2(a3Πu); in this case, the C2(a3Πu) addition to the π system of acetylene can occur in three different ways leading to three different isomers that easily interconvert. Remarkably, the triplet C4H2 intermediates are much less stable than the singlet one, being about 180 kJ mol¬1 below the reagent asymptote and 140 kJ mol¬1 below the product asymptote. Our results indicate that at low Ec of 13.6 kJ mol¬1 the triplet reaction also proceeds through the formation of a long-lived complex (i.e., the triplet complex lifetime is at least 4–5 times longer than its rotational period) or, alternatively, an efficient inter-system crossing (ISC) between the triplet and singlet C4H2 PESs takes place. At the higher collision energy of 37.4 kJ mol¬1, the global CM angular distribution becomes forward peaked (with respect to the C2 beam direction). This can be readily rationalized in terms of the osculating complex model for chemical reactions for the triplet reaction: the lifetime of the triplet complexes is expected to become significantly shorter than that at the lower Ec (because the wells associated with the triplet intermediates are much more shallow than the one associated with the very stable singlet C4H2). Alternatively, a less efficient ISC from the triplet to the singlet PES can still explain the forward bias. In any case, the forward scattering preference has been attributed to the triplet C2 reaction.2
In summary, an important achievement of the spectroscopic characterization of our C2 beams is that the C2(a3Πu) and C2(X1Σ+g) internal populations in the beams used in our experiments are similar: the rovibrational distributions of the two electronic states are substantially the same in both Ne and He beams while the singlet/triplet state signal ratio remains approximately constant for experiments conducted with the two carrier gases. In this view, the change observed in our experimental distributions can be attributed exclusively to the change in the reaction mechanism of one or both the reactions of the two electronic states and not to a change in the beam composition or C2 internal populations. In this scenario, the most plausible explanation is that the triplet reaction can be described by the osculating model of chemical reaction at the higher Ec investigated, or that at both Ecs the triplet complex lifetime is short, but at the lower Ec there is an efficient triplet-to-singlet ISC.
1. R. I. Kaiser, P. Maksyutenko, C. Ennis, F. Zhang, X. Gu, S. P. Krishtal, A. M. Mebel, O. Kostko and M. Ahmed, Faraday Discuss., 2010, 147, DOI: 10.1039/c003599h
2. F. Leonori, R. Petrucci, K. M. Hickson, E. Segoloni, N. Balucani, S.D. Le Picard, P. Foggi and P. Casavecchia, Planet. Space Sci., 2008, 56, 1658.
3. M. Alagia, V. Aquilanti, D. Ascenzi, N. Balucani, D. Cappelletti, L. Cartechini, P. Casavecchia, F. Pirani, G. Sanchini and G. G. Volpi, Isr. J. Chem., 1997, 37, 329.
4. F. Leonori, K. M. Hickson, S. D. Le Picard, X. Wang, R. Petrucci, P. Foggi, N. Balucani and P. Casavecchia, Mol. Phys., 2010, 108, 1097.
5. M. Costes, N. Daugey, C. Naulin, A. Bergeat, F. Leonori, E. Segoloni, R. Petrucci, N. Balucani and P. Casavecchia, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 133, 157; F. Leonori, R. Petrucci, E. Segoloni, A. Bergeat, K. M. Hickson, N. Balucani and P. Casavecchia, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 1363.
6. R.I. Kaiser, N. Balucani, D. O. Charkin, and A. M. Mebel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 382, 112; X. B. Gu, Y. Guo, A. M. Mebel and R. I. Kaiser, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110 1089.
7. N. Balucani, D. Stranges, P. Casavecchia and G. G. Volpi, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 9571.
8. N. Balucani, A. M. Mebel, Y. T. Lee and R. I. Kaiser, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 9813; R .I. Kaiser, T. N. Le, T. L. Nguyen, A. M. Mebel, N. Balucani, Y. T. Lee, F. Stahl, P. V. Schleyer and H. F. Schaefer, Faraday Discuss., 2001, 119, 51; Y. Guo, X. B. Gu, N. Balucani and R. I. Kaiser, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 6245; Y. Guo, X. B. Gu, F. T. Zhang, A. M. Mebel and R. I. Kaiser, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 10699.

Professor Suits commented: I would just like to emphasize that Professors Kaiser and Casavecchia have different sources of dicarbon, with differing internal energy and different distributions of triplet and singlet. We can't directly compare the experiments at this stage.

Dr Moses asked: Can you do atomic H with cross-beam studies? For photochemical models of the giant planets, we have a particular need for quantitative information on the rate coefficients and products of atomic H with hydrocarbons, and especially for reactions of H with C3Hx species.

Professor Kaiser responded: Yes, crossed beam experiments of H atom reactions can be done. It is important to note that in planetary atmospheres, reactions of suprathermal hydrogen atoms holding kinetic energies of a few eV are of particular importance (R. J. Morton, R. I. Kaiser, Kinetics of suprathermal hydrogen atom reactions with saturated hydrides in planetary and satellite atmospheres, Planet. Space Sci., 2003, 51, 365–373). Here, a treatment of thermal kinetic data via the inverse Laplace transformation shows an increase of rate constants of hydrogen abstraction reactions from simple hydrides of up to 40 orders of magnitude.

Professor Casavecchia added: Yes, we may be able, at least in principle, to do crossed-beam studies of atomic H reactions. This because we have very recently developed a continuous supersonic beam of H atoms. However, H atom reactions with hydrocarbons in the thermal energy range are most difficult to study with the crossed-beam technique, because they have usually (small) entrance energy barriers, which may be difficult to overcome because of the low relative translational energies that can be attained when working with light H atoms. Furthermore, reactions of H atoms have unfavourable kinematics, being the center of mass of the system, located very close to the heavy molecular reagent. Finally, reactions of H atoms with C3Hx species are particularly challenging, because these are reactions between two radicals, and in addition to the above difficulties you face also intensity problems (radical beams are typically one or two order of magnitude less intense than molecular beams).

Professor Casavecchia opened the discussion of the paper by Proffessor Mebel: In your theoretical study of the mechanisms of formation of nitrogen-containing polycyclic aromatic compounds in low-temperature environments of planetary atmospheres, such as that of Titan, you did not consider any reaction of excited nitrogen atoms, N(2D), with aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzene. Is there a reason? Do you think that these reactions maybe be relevant? Are you planning to include N(2D) reactions in the future in your theoretical studies?

Professor Mebel responded: We have not considered the reactions of N(2D) so far. However, I agree that such reactions may be relevant to the formation of NPACs in Titan's atmosphere, especially if they proceed without or with a very low entrance barrier. The reaction of N(2D) with benzene seems to be the first plausible candidate to consider and we plan to investigate the corresponding potential energy surface in the near future. I should also note that the reaction of the C6H4(C2H) radical with molecular nitrogen in its first excited triplet electronic state has been studied in our paper and has been shown to easily produce 1,2-diaza-3,4-didehydronaphthalene under single-collision conditions.

Professor Coates asked: Do you see heavy charged particles as well as neutrals in your work? Is there any process to produce those?

Professor Mebel answered: As our work is theoretical, we can compute potential energy surfaces for ions as well as for neutrals. Indeed, in some of our works we compute dissociation mechanisms of large cations in order to predict their fragmentation pattern. We can also investigate mechanisms of ion–molecular reactions through similar PES calculations and compute their product branching ratios under various conditions.

Dr Klippenstein said: At low temperatures the probability for stabilizing a chemically activated species is a strong function of the molecular size of the system. At some large-enough size one might find that essentially all complexes are stabilized, even when there are significant exothermic product channels. This increase in stabilization probability might have some affect on the applicability of your scheme to larger and larger PAH growth. Can you comment on this?
Also, in a number of places you discuss the branching ratios between various channels for zero-collision energy. It would be helpful if you also presented the absolute decomposition rate coefficients that entered into these branching ratio determinations. These absolute rate coefficients are of some use in making zeroth order estimates of the stabilization probabilities.

Professor Mebel answered: To address the first part of the question, we computed radiative stabilization rate constants krad for several NPAC intermediates, which can be produced in the reactions considered in our paper, including 2-aza-4-ethynyl-1-naphthyl i2, 2-aza-1-ethynyl-4-naphthyl i6, and 1,4-diethynyl-phthalazine i11. These calculations were carried out using the approach described by Klippenstein et al.1 and utilizing B3LYP/6-311G** vibrational frequencies and IR intensities. The rate constants were computed for average temperatures corresponding to available internal energies of these intermediates, if they were produced in bimolecular reactions C6H4(CN)(C2H) + C2H (for i2 and i6, see Fig. 2 and 3 in the manuscript, respectively) or i7 + C2H (for i11, Fig. 4) at zero collision energy, assuming that all the energy of chemical activation is transformed into vibrational energy. The following krad values were obtained: 31, 24, and 57 s¬1 for i2, i6, and i11, respectively. To judge on the importance of the radiative stabilization process, its rate constants need to be compared with those for unimolecular dissociation processes. Indeed, as the stabilization rates increase with the molecular size, the radiative processes are expected to become more important, and may eventually overtake dissociation. This would increase the probability of PAH and NPAC molecules to be produced via the mechanism suggested in our paper, because their stabilization would then be faster than dissociation.
To respond to the second part of the question, we choose the C6H4(CN)(C2H) + C2H reaction as an example; the RRKM calculated rate constants for unimolecular dissociation and isomerization reaction steps for all intermediates involved are collected in Table 1. Using these individual rate constants, we also computed overall decomposition rate constants for the i2 and i6 complexes within the steady-state approximation. These rate constants, kdiss(–C4H2) for i2 → C6H4CN + C4H2, kdiss(–H) for i2 → C6H4(CN)(C4H) + H, and kdiss for i6 → C6H4(C2H) + HCCCN, are also shown in Table 1. One can see that at zero collision energy, kdiss(–H) ≈ 150 s¬1, is a factor of 5 higher than the rate of radiative stabilization of this molecule. Therefore, the C6H4(CN)(C4H) + H decomposition channel is favored over stabilization of 2-aza-4-ethynyl-1-naphthyl i2 produced in the C6H4(CN)(C2H) + C2H reaction. Alternatively, the decomposition rate constant for 2-aza-1-ethynyl-4-naphthyl i6, 4.1 × 10¬4 s¬1, is significantly lower than its stabilization rate constant, 24 s¬1, indicating that this NPAC radical can be formed through the mechanism of C2H addition to the CN group in C6H4(CN)(C2H) shown in Fig. 3 in our paper. This is also true for the formation of 1,4-diethynyl-phthalazine i11 in the i7 + C2H reaction, as the radiative stabilization rate constant of i11 appears to be much higher than that for its decomposition. Thus, radiative stabilization appears to be a rather important process for larger molecules and should not be neglected.
1. S. J. Klippenstein, Y.-C. Yang, V. Ryzhov and R. C. Dunbar, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 104, 4502.
Table 1 RRKM calculated rate constants (in s¬1) for individual unimolecular reaction steps of isomerization and dissociation of various intermediates in the C6H4(CN)(C2H) + C2H reaction (Fig. 2 and 3 in our paper) corresponding to different collision energies.




Collision energy/kcal mol¬1
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0


 
Fig. 2





i1 → i3
6.5 × 109
7.3 × 109
8.1 × 109
9.0 × 109
9.9 × 109
1.1 × 1010



i3 → i1
4.7 × 1011
5.1 × 1011
5.4 × 1011
5.7 × 1011
6.1 × 1011
6.4 × 1011



i1 → i2
1.9 × 109
2.1 × 109
2.2 × 109
2.4 × 109
2.6 × 109
2.8 × 109



i2 → i1
9.2 × 103
1.3 × 104
1.8 × 104
2.4 × 104
3.2 × 104
4.3 × 104



i1 → C6H4CN + C4H2
4.2 × 105
6.5 × 105
9.8 × 105
1.4 × 106
2.1 × 106
3.0 × 106



i3 → i4
1.1 × 1012
1.1 × 1012
1.2 × 1012
1.3 × 1012
1.4 × 1012
1.4 × 1012



i4 → i3
9.2 × 106
1.1 × 107
1.3 × 107
1.6 × 107
1.9 × 107
2.2 × 107



i4 → C6H4(CN)(C4H) + H
2.0 × 104
2.9 × 104
4.0 × 104
5.5 × 104
7.5 × 104
1.0 × 105



k
diss(–C4H2)
2.0 × 100
3.9 × 100
7.5 × 100
1.4 × 101
2.5 × 101
4.4 × 101



k
diss(–H)
1.5 × 102
2.5 × 102
4.1 × 102
6.7 × 102
1.1 × 103
1.6 × 103






 
Fig. 3





i5 → i6
1.6 × 109
1.8 × 109
2.0 × 109
2.2 × 109
2.4 × 109
2.7 × 109



i6 → i5
2.9 × 105
3.9 × 105
5.2 × 105
6.9 × 105
9.0 × 105
1.2 × 106



i5 → C6H4(C2H) + HCCCN
2.3 × 100
1.1 × 101
3.8 × 101
1.2 × 102
3.2 × 102
7.7 × 102



k
diss

4.1 × 10¬4
2.3 × 10¬3
1.0 × 10¬2
3.7 × 10¬2
1.2 × 10¬1
3.3 × 10¬1





Professor Suits commented: For experiments involving these large systems, it is helpful to know the lifetimes. The traditional crossed-beam approach is sensitive to lifetime: for intermediates that live dozens of microseconds or more, they may not decompose before arriving at the detector. In this case, they would only be seen at the center-of-mass angle. For systems that decompose on a timescale of less than a microseond, there is no issue. In between these timescales, the distribution one detects could be in error, as the intermediate could dissociate on the way to the detector.

Professor Zwier asked: Did you consider isocyano isomers of your cyano compounds? Do they compete with their cyano analogs and/or do they produce unusual end products worth considering further?

Professor Mebel answered: We have considered some isocyano isomers of our cyano compounds. Normally, the isocyano isomers are significantly higher in energy than the corresponding cyano compounds and therefore their formation is expected to be less competitive. However, the question whether the isocyano isomers can produce some unusual end products is important and merits further detailed calculations.

Professor Zwier noted: As a follow-up comment, I think it is interesting to note that mass 128, which we all tend to associate with naphthalene, is also the mass of dicyanobenzene. So one needs to be careful in associating a peak at m/z 128 in a mass spectrum with naphthalene, and perhaps even in associating it with a pure hydrocarbon.

Professor Raulin commented: You've studied the case of ortho dicyano benzene isomer. Did you look at other isomers (meta, para)? It would be interesting to check if the ortho is favored (or not) compared to the two others, since the ortho is more likely to induce a second ring formation.

Professor Mebel responded: At the moment, we have not looked at meta and para isomers of dicyano benzenes. We expect that the meta and para dicyano benzenes can be easily formed in the reactions of the CN radical with cyano benzene, just as is the ortho dicyano benzene. Most probably, the energy difference between the ortho, meta, and para isomers of dicyano benzene will be rather small, but this question indeed deserves further investigation. In the present paper, we focused at the ortho isomer because this isomer would be the most likely precursor for the closure of the second ring and the formation of an N-containing polycyclic aromatic molecule.

Dr Lavvas asked: Would other nitrogen containing radicals, such as C3N or HCCN behave in a similar way as CN? Once a nitrogen containing aromatic is formed, does the presence of N in the ring structure affect its further growth to larger aromatic structures on reaction with C2H or CN?

Professor Mebel answered: The answer to the first question depends on the existence of a barrier for the addition of these radicals to unsaturated molecules and on the height of the barrier if it exists. For instance, the C3N radical is expected to be analogous to CN and is likely to add to double and triple bonds without a barrier. On the other hand, HCCN is a carbene similar to CH2 and is likely to react with closed-shell molecules via a distinct barrier. Hence, we would expect C3N, but not HCCN, to behave similar to CN. For the second question, since the presence of N in the ring reduces its aromaticity and destabilizes the ring, it should reduce the probability of further growth of larger aromatic structures. However, if C2H or CN add to the rings in an N-PAC not containing the nitrogen atom, the further growth likely would not be affected.

Professor Ashfold concluded: The overview of previous studies of CH4 photochemistry in the introduction to paper 211 may leave the audience with the impression that our understanding of the primary photochemistry of this important species is even less secure than it actually is. As noted in the Introduction of paper 7,2 however, we are still missing precise, wavelength dependent, product branching ratios. The early quantum yield estimates (listed under (1)–(4) in paper 21) were from analysis of a collection of indirect measurements. Subsequent direct experimental studies of CH4 photolysis at 121.6 nm,3–6 and, recently, in the wavelength range 128–133 nm,7 aided by ab initio calculations of the potential energy surfaces (PESs) of the ground (S0) and first excited (S1) singlet states,8,9 have advanced our knowledge considerably. C–H bond fission (yielding highly internally (rotationally) excited CH3 fragments) is one major primary process following excitation to the S1 state. H2 elimination (yielding CH2(a1A1) co-fragments) is the other. Part of the difficulty in defining the product quantum yields is that some of the CH3 fragments formed by photolysis at 121.6 nm have sufficient internal energy to decay further—by loss of an H atom, or by eliminating molecular H2. The relative efficiencies of these two processes may well be a sensitive function of the detailed energy content in the primary CH3 products and thus of the photo-excitation wavelength.
Kaiser et al.1 also comment that C2 radicals can be formed in Titan’s atmosphere by the UV photolysis of C2H(X) radicals that are themselves formed by UV photolysis of C2H2 at wavelengths ≤217 nm. For completeness, it should be noted that the best estimate of the threshold energy for the latter process, D0(HCC–H) = 46074 ± 8 cm−1, was provided by an early H (Rydberg) tagging study by the Bristol group10 and that the dominant fragmentation pathway when C2H2 is photo-excited at shorter wavelengths yields electronically excited C2H fragments in the low-lying A2Π state.11,12
1. R. I. Kaiser et al., this volume.
2. K. L. Gannon et al., this volume.
3. D. H. Mordaunt, I. R. Lambert, G. P. Morley, M. N. R. Ashfold, R. N. Dixon, L. Schnieder, K. H. Welge, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 93, 2054.
4. J.-H. Wang and K. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 7105.
5. J.-H. Wang, K. P. Liu, Z. Y. Min, H. M. Su, R. Bersohn, J. Preses and J. Z. Larese, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 4146.
6. P. A. Cook, M. N. R. Ashfold, Y.-J. Lee, K.-H. Jung, S. Harich and X. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 1848.
7. Y. Zhang, K. Yuan, S. Yu and X. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 475.
8. A. M. Mebel, S.-H. Lin and C.-H. Chang, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 2612.
9. R. van Harrevelt, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 124302.
10. D. H. Mordaunt and M. N. R. Ashfold, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 2630.
11. P. Löffler, E. Wrede, L. Schnieder, J. B. Halpern, W. M. Jackson and K. H. Welge, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 5231.
12. M. N. R. Ashfold, G. A. King, D. Murdock, M. G. D. Nix, T. A. A. Oliver and A. G. Sage, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 12, 1218.

Professor Gauyacq commented: As pointed out by Professor Ashfold, the branching ratios for the methane photolysis at Lyman-α 121.6 nm−1 given in eqn (1)–(4) of paper 21 should be corrected: the figures quoted in eqn (1)–(4) of this paper do not correspond to the results of the cited references of paper 21. An experimental effort has been devoted to this important issue as reviewed for instance by Romanzin et al. [Adv. Space Res., 2005, 36, 258] or by M. D. Lodriguito et al. [J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 224320. The photolysis of methane has such an important impact on the gas phase chemistry of Titan atmosphere that the branching ratios should be considered with great care since the published data are still controversial.
In this context we would like to mention a related unpublished experimental work which we presented at the 4th NSF Workshop on Titan “Photolysis of methane at 121.6 nm and 118.2 nm in the laboratory: new input for Titan atmosphere photochemistry” by S. Boyé-Péronne and collaborators. In this work, we have performed a well-controlled experiment based on methane photolysis at 121.6 nm and at 118.2 nm (pure VUV beams) and on the direct measurement of the radical fragments (CH3, triplet CH2, singlet CH2) by mass spectrometry following VUV photoionisation. This two-VUV colour experiment enabled us to discriminate among singlet and triplet CH2 products by selective ionisation at both photolysis wavelengths. The most striking result is that the photolysis of methane at these two close wavelengths produces different 1,3-CH2/CH3 ratios. Therefore one should be very careful when comparing results from experiments performed at different photolysis wavelengths. This wavelength-dependent branching ratio should be taken into account in the modeling of the Titan atmosphere. A final remark following the comment by M. Ashfold is that the CH3 radical should be formed with very high internal energy and could further dissociate into CH2 + H or CH + H2 (as measured by Mordaunt et al., J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 2054. Our experiment probes radical fragments in a typical timescale of 10–100 ns after photodissociation. We could rationalise our present results as follows: either the hot CH3 dissociation kinetics is too slow so that the observed products are nascent products, or it is faster than 1 nanosecond so that the observed products are final products after subsequent dissociation. A paper on this work is currently under progress.

Dr Knox (on behalf of E. Kathrin Lang, Chia C. Wang and Ruth Signorell) opened the first general discussion of the papers: I would like to share with delegates some of the work that is underway in the group of Professor Ruth Signorell at the University of British Columbia. We are carrying out laboratory studies of aerosol particles relevant to the lower atmosphere of Titan. Professor Zwier highlighted the connection between this work and the spectroscopic studies being carried out by Professor Meuwly and co-workers during the discussion of papers 8–11. During the discussion of papers 18 and 19 Professor Lunine mentioned the phase transitions of ethane aerosols as they descend through the atmosphere of Titan. In our laboratory we are able to study the phase behavior of various hydrocarbon aerosols.1–7
We carry out measurements of aerosols in a collisional cooling cell, illustrated in Fig. 1, the temperature and pressure within which can be tuned to match a wide range of planetary atmospheres.8 In the case of Titan we can simulate the conditions present in the lowest 60 km of the atmosphere, i.e. the troposphere and lower stratosphere. This corresponds to a temperature range of 71–94 K and a total pressure of 42–1466 mbar.9,10 The cooling cell is connected to a gas-injection system which is used to introduce warm gas into the cold cell, leading to particle condensation. The gas-injection system is equipped with two valves which allows combinations of pure or mixed gases to be introduced into the cell simultaneously or sequentially. The cooling cell is coupled to a rapid-scan Fourier transform infrared spectrometer which is used to collect infrared absorption spectra from the suspended aerosols.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the collisional cooling cell setup.8 
The Signorell group has previously demonstrated that infrared spectroscopy can be used to characterize a wide range of properties of aerosol particles by comparing the shape of the observed infrared absorption bands with those predicted from vibrational exciton modeling.11 For example, the shape of carbon dioxide aerosol particles can be determined in this way by comparing the observed shape of the ν3 band of carbon dioxide with the prediction of the shape from theory, as illustrated in Fig. 2.11 The particle architecture can also be determined, for example in the case of mixed composition acetylene/carbon dioxide particles. Under certain conditions the shape of the observed band is consistent with an acetylene core and carbon dioxide shell, as shown in Fig. 3.3 The crystal structure present in the particle can also be determined. It can be seen in Fig. 4 that under the prevailing conditions acetylene exists as a partially amorphous structure in the aerosol particles sampled, determined by examining the shape of the ν5 band of acetylene.6 Finally, the particle phase can be determined. This has been the subject of recent measurements, which have sought in particular to characterize the freezing kinetics of supercooled ethane droplets under a range of conditions, a topic of interest for understanding cloud processes and the formation of hydrocarbon lakes on Titan. When ethane is first introduced to the cooling cell (t = 0 seconds) supercooled liquid droplets are formed, which give rise to broad, featureless absorption bands, as shown in Fig. 5 for the ethane ν5 band. As ethane freezes, structure emerges in the shape of the absorption band; by following the time evolution of the shape of the absorption bands the progress of the phase transition of the ethane particles can be determined.2
 Fig. 2  The influence of particle shape on the ν312CO2 band for carbon dioxide particles.11 
 Fig. 3  The determination of particle structure from the shape of the ν312CO2 band for mixed composition acetylene/carbon dioxide particles.3 
 Fig. 4  The determination of particle crystal structure by comparing the observed shape of the ν5 C2H2 band with predictions from vibrational exciton modeling.6 
 Fig. 5  The evolution of the infrared absorption spectrum of ethane during particle freezing.2 
I will describe one example of the type of measurement which can be performed using this approach. It has been determined that gas-phase methane can significantly stabilize supercooled ethane droplets.5,7 Panel (a) of Fig. 6 shows the evolution of the ν8 band of ethane as ethane droplets freeze in an atmosphere of nitrogen gas. It can be seen that freezing takes around 2000 seconds. As an increasing amount of gas-phase methane is introduced to the cell atmosphere freezing takes considerably longer. In panel (c) the partial pressure of methane in the cell is representative of that in the troposphere of Titan. It can be seen that crystallization is significantly delayed, and it is estimated that in this case it would take several days for freezing to be completed. This indicates that supercooled ethane droplets may exist for much longer periods in the lower atmosphere of Titan than previously thought. They may therefore play an important role in cloud processes and the formation of lakes.
 Fig. 6  Evolution of the ν8 C2H6 band during the freezing of supercooled ethane droplets formed in (a) nitrogen gas, (b) a mixture of nitrogen/methane gas with a methane mole fraction of 0.007 and (c) a mixture of nitrogen/methane gas with a methane mole fraction of 0.011–0.026.5,7 
I would like to acknowledge Professor Ruth Signorell, the principal investigator for these studies, Dr Chia Wang, who is now an assistant professor at National Sun-Yat Sen University in Taiwan, Kathrin Lang, a graduate student involved with the cooling cell measurements, and Thomas Preston, a graduate student and Dr. George Firanescu, a postdoctoral fellow, who are responsible for the computational work. Financial support from NSERC, the Canada Foundation for Innovation and the A. P. Sloan Foundation (Ruth Signorell) is gratefully acknowledged.
1. R. Signorell and M. Jetzki, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 013401.
2. Ó. F. Sigurbjörnsson and R. Signorell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6211.
3. C. C. Wang, P. Zielke, Ó. F. Sigurbjörnsson, C. R. Viteri and R. Signorell, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11129.
4. C. C. Wang, S. K. Atreya and R. Signorell, Icarus, 2010, 206, 787.
5. C. C. Wang, E. K. Lang and R. Signorell, Astrophys. J. Lett., 2010, 712, 40.
6. T. C. Preston, G. Firanescu and R. Signorell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7924.
7. E. K. Lang, K. J. Knox, C. C. Wang and R. Signorell, 2010, submitted.
8. G. Firanescu, D. Hermsdorf, R. Ueberschaer and R. Signorell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4149.
9. A. Coustenis, A. Salama, B. Schulz, S. Ott, E. Lellouch, T. Encrenaz, D. Gautier and H. Feuchtgruber, Icarus, 2003, 161, 383.
10. R. de Kok, P. G. J. Irwin, N. A. Teanby, C. A. Nixon, D. E. Jennings, L. Fletcher, C. Howett, S. B. Calcutt, N. E. Bowles, F. M. Flasar and F. W. Taylor, Icarus, 2007, 191, 223.
11. Ó. F. Sigurbjörnsson, G. Firanescu and R. Signorell, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 127.

Professor Lunine asked: Your experimental apparatus would seem suitable for the investigation of the hypothesis of D. M. Hunten (Nature, 2006, 443, 669), that the bulk of the ethane produced photochemically over Titan's history is sequestered in sedimented aerosol particles on Titan's surface. The hypothesis, which I consider speculative, requires a large adsorption capacity (or “wettibility”?) of ethane on the photochemically produced aerosols. It is important to remember that the aerosols we are talking about are not the so-called “tholins”—the highest molecular weight products—but rather all of the products of Titan atmospheric chemistry that are solid under Titan surface conditions. Hence I am including here acetylene and its products such as benzene. A proper investigation to test Don's hypothesis would be of great value in understanding why there seems to be so little ethane on Titan's surface today.

Dr Knox replied: We have observed that ethane condenses from the gas-phase onto solid particles such as acetylene and carbon dioxide under the conditions relevant to the atmosphere of Titan.1,2 Sequestration of ethane in sedimented aerosols, however, is something that we cannot observe with our current experimental setup. We also consider the hypothesis about sequestration in sedimented aerosols to be speculative and it seems highly unlikely to us (see also Professor Atreya’s comment, below).
1. C. C. Wang, E. K. Lang and R. Signorell, Astrophys. J. Lett., 2010, 712, 40.
2. E. K. Lang, K. J. Knox, C. C. Wang and R. Signorell, 2010, submitted.

Professor Atreya commented: The Galileo probe mass spectrometer does not show evidence of SMUST aerosols in Jupiter. For example, the ethane mixing ratio does not increase with depth, whereas SMUST are supposed to vaporize and release it at increasing temperatures, hence depth.

Professor Mitchell asked: In the apparatus that you have shown, are the measurements of the droplets made in air or in vacuum ? Have you considered using small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) to measure the size of the droplets. This would also give you the number density and the form of the droplets (smooth, aggregated etc.). The advantage of SAXS is that one does not need to know the index of refraction for the material as in laser scattering studies. Measurements can be done in air or in vacuum using thin mica windows to allow the X-rays to pass through.

Dr Knox responded: The pressure within our experimental chamber can be varied from around 10–1500 mbar, and the gas-phase composition can also be controlled, for example measurements can be carried out in nitrogen, helium or a mixture of these gases with hydrocarbons such as methane and ethane. Currently the cell is not configured to allow small angle X-ray scattering measurements, but this could form the basis of future work.

Professor Raulin asked: Can you look at the effect of small solid particles, other than frozen CO2, on the processes of condensation and on the shape of the observed particles obtained after condensation?

Dr Knox answered: The process of aerosol particle formation via condensation from the gas-phase proceeds too rapidly to study using our method. However, the time evolution of the shape and phase of aerosol particles can readily be studied for a wide range of particles. For example, besides frozen carbon dioxide, aerosols of methane, acetylene, ethane, ethylene, propane, ammonia and sulfur dioxide, and various mixtures of the above, have been generated in the cell.1–6
1. R. Signorell and M. Jetzki, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 013401.
2. R. Signorell and M. Jetzki, Faraday Discuss., 2008, 137, 51.
3. C. C. Wang, P. Zielke, Ó. F. Sigurbjörnsson, C. R. Viteri and R. Signorell, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11129.
4. C. C. Wang, S. K. Atreya and R. Signorell, Icarus, 2010, 206, 787.
5. T. C. Preston, G. Firanescu and R. Signorell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7924.
6. E. K. Lang, K. J. Knox, C. C. Wang and R. Signorell, 2010, submitted.

Professor Atreya asked: I suggest looking also into the thermodynamics of coexistence of methane ice particles with ethane droplets. As the solid ethane ice particles descend from their stratospheric region of origin, they change phase to liquid droplets in the middle troposphere, but can encounter substantial methane ice particles from approximately 25 km to 15 km or even lower. It is important to know whether the methane ice plays a role, in addition to methane gas that you are studying.

Dr Knox answered: Such measurements would be very interesting but somewhat challenging. In order to isolate the influence of solid methane particles from that of gas-phase methane, it is likely that it would be necessary to perform the measurements at temperatures lower than those found in the lower atmosphere of Titan; such measurements may still offer worthwhile insight however.

Mr Sebree asked: Are there cases in which the aerosols in your chamber show more homogeneous mixing rather than shell like structure? Are there time scales during which the different mixing structures interchange?

Dr Knox responded: Yes, both are the case, and both depend on the substances involved and the conditions. To give but one example: if carbon dioxide and acetylene gas are premixed and the mixture injected into the cell, homogeneously mixed particles condense and freeze with a metastable mixed crystal phase.1 Over a timescale of tens of minutes the mixed phase decomposes into domains of the more stable pure crystal phases. If, however, carbon dioxide and acetylene gases are sequentially introduced to the cell, core–shell particles are formed, with the gas which is introduced first forming the core of the particle, and the gas which is introduced second coating the core and forming the shell.1 Such particles are structurally stable on the timescale of the measurements.
1. C. C. Wang, P. Zielke, Ó. F. Sigurbjörnsson, C. R. Viteri and R. Signorell, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11129.

Professor Miller Dr Mousis: As I understand the scenario you proposed in Mousis et al. (Astrophys. J., 2009, 691, 1780–1786), you proposed that xenon and krypton would be preferentially complexed with H3+ in comparison with argon. This would mean that Xe and Kr would be depleted in the ices from which Titan formed and in which Ar would be clathrated, but still available for the gas mixture from which Saturn’s atmosphere forms.
You used that scenario to explain the relative depletion of Xe and Kr with respect to Ar in Titan, yet being in jovian/solar proportions in Saturn. Two questions follow: (1) Could you clarify how the explanation in Mousis et al. (2009) fits in with the explanation contained in this paper? (2) Could you say something on the relative importance of thermodynamic stability as a driver, as you have used in both this paper and Mousis et al. (2009), and kinetic issues, which involve not how stable products might be but rather how quickly they might form?

Dr Mousis answered: The H3+ scenario requires that the abundance of this ion must be high enough at 10 AU to trap Xe and Kr in the solar nebula gas phase and impede these two noble gases to be incorporated in Titan's building blocks. The explanation contained in the paper works if the abundance of H3+ is not sufficiently high to allow a substantial trapping of Xe and Kr.
The results presented in the paper are based on equilibrium calculations and do not consider the kinetics of clathration. The reason is that, unfortunately, there is no laboratory experiment that investigates the kinetics of clathrate formation at thermodynamic conditions corresponding to those of the solar nebula.

Dr Bézard asked: Your calculations assume a 100% efficiency of the clathration process in the solar nebula, i.e. that all the cages of the clathrate hydrates are occupied by guest molecules. This looks to me as a very optimistic assumption. Under which conditions do you expect that this can happen?

Dr Mousis replied: A full efficiency for the clathration process in the solar nebula requires that guest molecules had the time to diffuse through porous water-ice planetesimals in the solar nebula. This remains plausible only if collisions between planetesimals have exposed essentially all the ice to the gas over timescales shorter or equal to the planetesimals’ lifetimes in the nebula. However, we agree that the efficiency of collisions between planetesimals to expose all the “fresh” ice over such a timescale still remains unknown.

Dr Plattner said: For your simulations you have chosen to use the spherically averaged Kihara potential instead of an atomistic model and argue that atomistic models, similar to Kihara potentials, require the choice of parameters which are somewhat arbitrary. However, there is one important issue which cannot be addressed by Kihara potentials, namely the distortion of shape and size of the clathrate cages upon exchange of guest molecules. This issue could be captured at least qualitatively with an atomistic model, e.g. an atomistic force field. Do you have an estimate to what extent your results are affected by neglecting guest-dependent distortion of the clathrate cages?

Dr Mousis replied: Unfortunately, we have only investigated the influence of the clathrate cage distortion due to temperature variations and not due to the size of the guest molecule. However, we agree that the atom–atom description of the intermolecular guest–clathrate interactions is more accurate than the spherically averaged approach. We have already started to work on the atomistic approach and the influence of the guest-dependent distortion of the clathrate cages will be investigated in the near future.

Professor Suits opened the discussion of the paper by Dr Vuitton: I wonder if you can gain any additional information by using some of the approaches in proteomics, such as electron transfer dissociation or operation in negative ion mode?

Dr Vuitton answered: Electron-transfer dissociation, an effective technique for stimulating extensive fragmentation of multicharged ions, could be performed in our apparatus. However, we do not observe any multicharged ions in either the tholins’ or HCN polymers’ spectra. As a consequence, this technique is not appropriate to gain further insight on our samples.
We did perform some studies in the negative ion mode. They revealed the presence in the samples of new classes of molecules that are not present in the positive mode. Because of the lower ionization efficiency, the results were not as conclusive as in the positive ion mode but were consistent with the fact that tholins contain at best a small fraction of HCN polymers.

Dr Ellinger asked: Titan is often considered as an interesting laboratory for prebiotic chemistry. Did you find any trace of (HNC)5, i.e. adenine ?

Dr Vuitton responded: Orbitrap measurements indicate that C5H5N5 is present in both our Titan's tholins and our HCN polymers. Moreover, GC-MS shows unambiguously that the tholins do contain adenine. However, we have not determined yet if the C5H5N5 detected in the HCN polymers is adenine or another isomer.

Professor Coates remarked: In the mass spectra you see, is there any tendency for the negative ions to be higher mass? I was wondering how relevant the results are to what we see in Titan's upper atmosphere.

Dr Vuitton responded: The ions generally extend to lower m/z in the negative ion mode than in the positive ion mode. However, this is related to the ionization efficiency of the electrospray and cannot be extrapolated to the detection of heavier negative than positive ions in Titan's upper atmosphere.

Dr Carrasco communicated: It was asked of Dr Vuitton how far the soluble part of the tholin extracted in methanol and analysed by ESI-MS was representative of the bulk tholin.
We studied this important validation issue in a previous paper [Carrasco et al., Chemical characterization of tholins: solubility, morphology and molecular structure revisited, J. Phys. Chem A, 2009 113(42), 11195–11203. The solubility properties of the PAMPRE tholin in methanol were first quantified, showing that the analysed soluble part actually counted for ~30% of the bulk sample.
A comparison of the IR spectra of the primary tholin, its soluble part and its insoluble part confirmed that the IR chemical signature of the soluble part was in good agreement with IR spectrum of the the bulk tholin, despite a slight over-estimation of the 3 μm absorption band, typical of the CH2/CH3 functions.

Professor Raulin returned to the discussion of the paper by Dr Mousis: Can two species be trapped in the same water cage? If yes, is such trapping included in models of the formation of planetary bodies in the outer solar system?

Dr Mousis replied: Some small molecules such as H2 can indeed complete the stabilization of the structure when they share the same cage with a larger molecule. To the best of our knowledge, this has not been yet included in formation models of planetary bodies of the solar system.

Professor Suits said: Concerning the missing argon: Can it simply remain trapped in the clathrates?

Dr Mousis answered: This possibility has been investigated by Thomas et al. (Astron. Astrophys., 2007, 474, L17–L20). It appears that argon is a poor clathrate former compared to xenon and krypton.

Dr Thissen asked: It was said in paper 17 by Professor Lunine that, when considering a permanent presence of methane in the atmosphere of Titan, the C2H6 is missing on Titan. Some hypothetical cataclysmic release of methane by cryovolcanism has been considered in ref. 1; this would lead to a description of Titan as a transient methane reactor, due to episodic clathrate destruction. My question to you is: “As you describe, in terms of rare gases, the average composition of the Titan clathrates, would the present composition of the atmosphere be in agreement with the release of material from a recent (100000 to 10000000 year) cataclysmic event?”
1. M. Choukroun, O. Grasset, G. Tobie, C. Sotin, Icarus, 2010, 205, 2581–2593.

Professor Lunine responded: I do not know the answer to the question (it would require more detailed modeling to assess this), but the amount of solid hydrocarbon accumulated in the form of dunes would suggest that methane photolysis has been going on for a significant part of geologic time and is not a novel, recently-started event.

Dr Mousis replied: These are several mechanisms that can explain the noble gas deficiency of Titan's atmosphere, irrespective of the release epoch of the methane (noble gas trapping into clathrates located on the surface of the satellite, trapping by H3+ ion in the nebula, partial devolatilization of planetesimals…). There is then apparently no conflict between the measured noble gas impoverishment in the atmosphere and a recent methane outgassing episode.

Professor Lunine asked: In considering whether noble gases are still sequestered today in clathrate hydrate in Titan's interior, it is important to remember that while the outer Ice I crust of Titan might contain large amounts of methane-bearing clathrate hydrate, this crust is almost certainly not primordial. Rather, it was probably formed early in Titan's history, as the initially warm and perhaps liquid water (or water–ammonia) outer layers solidified and accommodated methane from the interior. The original composition of the planetesimals which were incorporated in Titan, including any noble gas bearing clathrate hydrates, would have been significantly altered. A useful reference to this is Tobie et al.Nature, 2006, 440, 61.

Dr Pernot opened the second general discussion: As a follow-up of the discussions about the chemical composition of tholins, I would like to present the main results from a paper published earlier this year about the systematic analysis of high-resolution mass spectra of the soluble fraction of tholins produced in the PAMPRE setup [Szopa et al., Planet. Space Sci., 2006, 54, 394–404]. The paper is entitled “Tholinomics—chemical analysis of nitrogen-rich polymers” [P. Pernot et al., Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1371–1380]. As it has been published in Analytical Chemistry, it might have escaped the attention of this community. The paper introduces an original development of the methods used in petroleomics, that has been applied to some of the same tholin samples as presented by V. Vuitton in paper 23.
Our aim was to search for a systematic representation of the chemical composition of the thousands of peaks in a high resolution mass spectrum of tholin. Using Kendrick mass defect analysis and van Krevelen (H/C, N/C) composition diagrams, we have shown that not only is a CH2 motif involved (in agreement with earlier studies by Sarker et al. [Astrobiology, 2003, 3, 719–726]), but also a N-bearing motif. However, the van Krevelen diagram is too congested to enable clear conclusions on the nature of the latter. The use of an augmented 3D van Krevelen diagram (N/C, H/C, log m/z) reveals a stratification of the sample into less than a dozen families of general formula X–(CH2)m(HCN)n , where the balanced “copolymer” (m = n) plays a central role. Within each family, the polymer lengths n and m present Poisson-type distributions. The stoichiometry of the families differ by the carbon content of the root X. The “pure family” (CH2)m(HCN)n is the cornerstone of the samples. Other families can be formally derived from it by adding or subtracting sequentially one C atom. Please note that this formula provides a systematic, convenient and compact representation of most (non-oxygenated) species in the samples, but it should not be taken literally with regard to the copolymeric nature of tholins.
From the mass spectra, we finally identified the lightest species within each family. For the “carbon poor” families, these species present only a few plausible isomers and can be determined as linear and cyclic amino nitrile compounds of great astrobiological interest: biguanide, guanidin, acetamidine, aminoacetonitrile and methylimidazole.
I hope that this work will help to bridge the gap evoked in a previous discussion between reaction dynamics in crossed beams experiments and laboratory simulations of complex reactive media. At least, it provides the former with reasonably sized targets as fundamental species in molecular complexation. Of course, this stoichiometric study should not be directly extrapolated to mechanistic conclusions, but we hope that it might help us to get some clues about the formation and growth of tholins, whether in the lab or in Titan's atmosphere.

Professor Suits said: These are interesting trends you observe in the mass spectra. We must be careful, though, not to ascribe any direct mechanistic significance to these.

Dr Pernot replied: I agree. However, interpreting the regular statistical distributions of CH2 and HCN “units” within each family might require mechanistic hypotheses.

Professor Lunine opened the discussion of the concluding paper by Professor Strobel: A key input to your conclusion that there is a downward flux of hydrogen in the lower atmosphere of Titan is the measurement of hydrogen in the upper atmosphere by the INMS instrument aboard Cassini. Could you elaborate on the accuracy of that determination and hence on the strength of your conclusion regarding a possible sink of hydrogen at Titan's surface?

Professor Strobel replied: With the lower boundary condition constrained by Cassini CIRS, Huygens GCMS, and Voyager IRIS mole fractions at 0.001 (with error bars of ±25%) and negligible H2 flux at the surface and currently accepted photochemistry, one predicts the H2 mole fraction profile to be about a factor of 2 lower than measured by INMS. To quote from one of my recent papers [D. F. Strobel, Molecular hydrogen in Titan's atmosphere: implications of the measured tropospheric and thermospheric mole fractions, Icarus, 2010, DOI:10.1016/j.icarus.2010.03.003, in press]: “While the absolute measured values of densities by INMS are apparently a factor of ~2.6 lower than densities measured by HASI and inferred from torques by the Cassini AACS, it is not expected that the ratios of densities, in particular, the H2/N2 ratio, is uncertain by more than approximately 20% and certainly not a factor of 2 [J. Cui, R. V. Yelle, V. Vuitton, J. H. Waite Jr. et al., Analysis of Titan's neutral upper atmosphere from Cassini ion neutral mass spectrometer measurements, Icarus, 2009, DOI:10.1016/j.icarus.2008.12).” Without any adjustment in either or both the CIRS and INMS H2 mole fractions, they jointly require a downward flux of H2 into Titan's surface at a rate on the order of 1028 H2 s−1, comparable to the H2 escape rate from the top of the atmosphere.

Dr Carrasco asked: Professor Strobel mentioned an issue with the calibration of the INMS instrument on-board with Cassini. It seems that there is an underestimation by a factor 2.5 to 3 of the absolute measurements given by this instrument for the neutral mass spectra.
My question is : does this factor also affect the absolute measurement of the INMS ion mass spectra ?

Professor Strobel replied: The INMS has not officially revised their absolute measurements by a factor of 2.5 to 3. On the Cassini orbiter there are a number of ways to measure low energy plasma densities: Langmuir Probe—electrons; INMS—positive ions; CAPS—negative ions in the ram direction; RWPS—electrons via the upper hydrid frequency. I have heard a talk by an INMS team member who argued that by increasing the positive ion densities by the above factor, one would obtain better agreement among all measurements with the constraint of charge neutrality. which should hold rigorously beyond the Debye length.

Dr Vuitton commented: The total positive ion density measured by INMS is in good agreement with the electron density measured by RPWS/LP (Wahlund et al., 2009), indicating that the ion densities are robust. It is conceivable that even if the neutral densities measured by INMS are off, the ion densities are accurate depending on what the problem with the instrument (or data analysis) actually is.

Professor Strobel responded: Please note my reply immediately above; I would like to state that, at lower altitudes, negative ions also contribute to the total negative charge. A paper with an intercomparison of plasma densities measured by the various orbiter instruments on selected Titan flybys would be very helpful to address this question.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:



i1 → i3	6.5 × 109	7.3 × 109	8.1 × 109	9.0 × 109	9.9 × 109	1.1 × 1010

i3 → i1	4.7 × 1011	5.1 × 1011	5.4 × 1011	5.7 × 1011	6.1 × 1011	6.4 × 1011

i1 → i2	1.9 × 109	2.1 × 109	2.2 × 109	2.4 × 109	2.6 × 109	2.8 × 109

i2 → i1	9.2 × 103	1.3 × 104	1.8 × 104	2.4 × 104	3.2 × 104	4.3 × 104

i1 → C6H4CN + C4H2	4.2 × 105	6.5 × 105	9.8 × 105	1.4 × 106	2.1 × 106	3.0 × 106

i3 → i4	1.1 × 1012	1.1 × 1012	1.2 × 1012	1.3 × 1012	1.4 × 1012	1.4 × 1012

i4 → i3	9.2 × 106	1.1 × 107	1.3 × 107	1.6 × 107	1.9 × 107	2.2 × 107

i4 → C6H4(CN)(C4H) + H	2.0 × 104	2.9 × 104	4.0 × 104	5.5 × 104	7.5 × 104	1.0 × 105

k
diss(–C4H2)	2.0 × 100	3.9 × 100	7.5 × 100	1.4 × 101	2.5 × 101	4.4 × 101

k
diss(–H)	1.5 × 102	2.5 × 102	4.1 × 102	6.7 × 102	1.1 × 103	1.6 × 103


i5 → i6	1.6 × 109	1.8 × 109	2.0 × 109	2.2 × 109	2.4 × 109	2.7 × 109

i6 → i5	2.9 × 105	3.9 × 105	5.2 × 105	6.9 × 105	9.0 × 105	1.2 × 106

i5 → C6H4(C2H) + HCCCN	2.3 × 100	1.1 × 101	3.8 × 101	1.2 × 102	3.2 × 102	7.7 × 102

k
diss
	4.1 × 10¬4	2.3 × 10¬3	1.0 × 10¬2	3.7 × 10¬2	1.2 × 10¬1	3.3 × 10¬1

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the collisional cooling cell setup.8	 

 	Fig. 2  The influence of particle shape on the ν312CO2 band for carbon dioxide particles.11	 

 	Fig. 3  The determination of particle structure from the shape of the ν312CO2 band for mixed composition acetylene/carbon dioxide particles.3	 

 	Fig. 4  The determination of particle crystal structure by comparing the observed shape of the ν5 C2H2 band with predictions from vibrational exciton modeling.6	 

 	Fig. 5  The evolution of the infrared absorption spectrum of ethane during particle freezing.2	 

 	Fig. 6  Evolution of the ν8 C2H6 band during the freezing of supercooled ethane droplets formed in (a) nitrogen gas, (b) a mixture of nitrogen/methane gas with a methane mole fraction of 0.007 and (c) a mixture of nitrogen/methane gas with a methane mole fraction of 0.011–0.026.5,7	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
