Retracted Article: Utility of plasma: a new road from physics to chemistry  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA41277F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA41277F
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12540-12567Retracted Article: Utility of plasma: a new road from physics to chemistryPankaj Attri*a, Bharti Arorab and Eun Ha Choi*aaPlasma Bioscience Research Center / Department of Electrical and Biological Physics, Kwangwoon University, Seoul, Korea. E-mail: ehchoi@kw.ac.kr; chem.pankaj@gmail.com;  Fax: +82-2-913-6187;   Tel: +82-2-940-5236bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007, IndiaReceived 18th March 2013, Accepted 10th April 2013First published on 11th April 2013AbstractIn recent years, plasma has proved to have great promise in the fields of chemistry, biology, physics, biotechnological and medical sciences. In this review, we discuss plasma versatility and applicability in various areas, such as interactions with biomolecules, biomedical treatments, chemical synthesis, removal of volatile organic compounds, electrochemical reactions, nanoscience, surface modifications, food engineering and water purification applications. Specially, we discuss how we can increase the utility of plasma in various phases of chemistry and biochemistry. We also shed light on the aspect that plasma can be a new source of green chemistry.IntroductionNumerous efforts have been made by the scientific and technological community to generate, sustain and utilize plasma because of its several applications in scientific and industrial areas. It combines a number of fields including chemistry, physics, engineering, biology, microbiology and medicine into a multidisciplinary research. The plasma state is often referred to as the fourth state of matter as illustrated in Fig. 1. In this state, there are ionized gases that consist of positive (and negative) ions and electrons, as well as neutral species. It is obtained when gases are excited into energetic states by radio-frequency (RF), MW or electrons from a hot filament discharge. Plasmas can be categorized into two main groups, i.e. the high temperature and the low temperatures or gas discharge plasmas. High temperature plasma implies that all the species (electrons, ions and neutral species) are in a thermal equilibrium state. While, low temperature plasma has been further subdivided into thermal plasma, also called quasi-equilibrium plasma, which is in a local thermal equilibrium (LTE) state, and non-thermal plasma (NTP), also called non-equilibrium plasma or cold plasma.1 The drawback for the use of thermal plasmas in industrial applications is the high gas temperature, limited energy efficiency, and high quenching effect of chemical reactions. So, one of the recent trends focuses on developing new plasma sources, which operate at atmospheric pressure, that led to the development of a variety of atmospheric plasma sources for several scientific and industrial applications.2–6 Atmospheric non-thermal plasma (NTP) has attracted more attention due to its significant industrial advantages over low-pressure discharge. This is due to some attractive features for generating unique chemistries. These features include: (1) certain components in the plasma offer a higher energy density than those by conventional chemistry techniques, (2) the plasma is highly concentrated with charged and chemical species such as electrons, ions, radicals, metastables and photons of different wavelengths that can be used to lower the activation energy for chemical reactions, and (3) NTPs are by definition far from equilibrium which results in an environment with high concentrations of active species and gas temperatures at or near room temperature. These features result in a new chemical environment that is often impossible to duplicate by conventional chemical techniques.7 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram illustrating different states of matter. Various applications of the non-thermal atmospheric plasma in chemistry or biochemistry aspects may be obtained by a diversity of electrical discharges such as corona discharge, micro hollow cathode discharge, atmospheric pressure plasma jet, dielectric barrier discharge, etc. Glow discharge is formed when a sufficiently high potential difference is applied between two electrodes placed in a gas, the latter will break down into positive ions and electrons giving rise to a gas discharge. When the ions and fast atoms from the plasma bombard the cathode, they not only release secondary electrons, but also atoms of the cathode material, which is called sputtering. The sputtered atoms can become ionized and/or excited in the plasma. Alternatively, the sputtered atoms can also diffuse through the plasma and they can be deposited on a substrate (often placed on the anode); this technique is used in materials technology, e.g. for the deposition of thin films.8 A schematic representation of the elementary glow discharge processes described above is presented in Fig. 2. Fig. 2  Schematic overview of the basic plasma processes in a glow discharge. Corona discharge is another widely used discharge. Beside a glow discharge with two electrodes, there also exists another type of pulsed d.c. discharge, with the cathode in the form of a wire.9 A high negative voltage (in the case of a negative corona discharge) is applied to the wire cathode, and the discharge operates at atmospheric pressure. The name ‘corona discharge’ arises from the fact that the discharge appears as a lighting crown around the wire. Fig. 3 shows a schematic corona discharge. The positive ions are accelerated towards the wire and cause a secondary electron emission. The electrons are accelerated into the plasma. The high-energy electrons give rise to inelastic collisions with the heavy particles, e.g. ionization, excitation and dissociation.8 Hence, radicals can be formed, which can crack larger molecules in collisions. Like the negative corona discharge, there also exists a positive corona discharge where the wire has a positive voltage, hence acting as anode.10 Applications of the corona discharge include the destruction of volatile compounds that escape from paints, water purification, etc. Fig. 3  Schematic representation of a corona discharge. On the other hand, the widely used atmospheric pressure plasma jet (APPJ) is another kind of important discharge capable of generating non-thermal plasmas at atmospheric pressure.11,12 A schematic of the APPJ is shown in Fig. 4. The key operational features of the APPJ are as follows: (1) it produces a stable, homogenous and uniform discharge at atmospheric pressure; (2) the ionized gas from the plasma jet exits through the nozzle where it is directed onto the substrate and hence utilized in the downstream processing; (3) it operates without a dielectric cover over the electrode yet is free from filaments, streamers and arcing; (4) the gas temperature of the discharge is low, allowing it to treat delicate surfaces without damage. This technology shows promise for material applications that are now limited to a vacuum. These features give the APPJ the potential to be utilized in a large number of applications. It has major utilizations in material processing, for example, applications ranging from etching polyamide, tungsten, tantalum and silicon dioxide as well as depositing silicondioxide film by plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition. The fast flowing effluent of reactive species in the APPJ technology has also been utilized in applications such as the decontamination of materials having chemical and biological warfare agents, sterilization of surgical and dental equipments, textile industry and biological applications such as the structure and activity of biomolecules (proteins and DNA).1 Fig. 4  Representation of the atmospheric pressure plasma jet (APPJ). However, dielectric barrier discharges (DBDs), also referred to as barrier discharges or silent discharges, are a specific type of AC discharge, which provides a strong thermodynamic, non-equilibrium plasma at atmospheric pressure and at a moderate gas temperature. It is produced in an arrangement consisting of two electrodes, at least one of which is covered with a dielectric layer placed in their current path between the metal electrodes, as shown in Fig. 5. An AC voltage with an amplitude of 1–100 kV and a frequency from line frequency to several megahertz is applied to DBD configurations. DBD cold plasma can be produced in various working mediums through ionization by high frequency and high voltage electric discharges.1,13–15 The applicability of DBD plasma includes biological applications such as the structure and activity of biomolecules and biomedical applications. This review is quite different from other published reviews because in this review we have tried to illustrate the vast applications of plasma in almost all of the areas, such as biological applications, biomedical applications, chemical synthesis and the removal of volatile organic compounds, electrochemical reactions, nanoscience, surface modifications, food engineering and water purification applications, as shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) in two different configurations. (a) The volume discharge (VD) consists of two parallel plates: the microdischarge takes place in thin channels, which are generally randomly distributed over the electrode surface. (b) The surface discharge (SD) consists of a number of surface electrodes on a dielectric layer, and a counter-electrode on its reverse side.  Fig. 6  Illustration of the applications of plasma in different fields. Plasma influence on biomoleculesThe interaction of plasma with DNA, proteins, cell membranes, eukaryotic (mammalian) cells and prokaryotic (bacteria), viruses, fungi, living human, plant and animal tissues have been known so far. Here we will briefly discuss the effect of plasma on living cells, the structure and activity of biomolecules for the treatment of diseases and for bio-decontamination.Structure and activity of biomolecules (protein and DNA) in the presence of plasma. Nowadays, the influence of plasma on the structure and activity of biomolecules has been explored, as it helps to modify protein conformations and hence the catalytic activities. The cold atmospheric pressure plasma jet (APPJ) has been used to study the conformational changes of enzymes in the presence of co-solvents. DNA molecules were observed to be very susceptible to short term exposures to an atmospheric pressure plasma jet and DNA damage can be induced by non-thermal atmospheric pressure plasma jet as well.16 The interaction of APPJ with DNA has shown that APPJ damages DNA. The formation of single- and double- strand breaks in an extra-chromosomal plasmid DNA (pBR322, 4361 base pair) extracted from E. coli bacteria, induced by an APPJ have been investigated. The complexity of plasma-generated species, i.e. excited atoms and molecules, charged particles, electrons and UV light gives a variety of possible pathways by which DNA can be damaged. The effect of particular components of a plasma jet on DNA samples, the percentage contributions are presented in Table 1.8 It has been estimated that most (more than 60%) of the damage to DNA during plasma irradiation is related to the interaction of excited or/and reactive species.17
Table 1 The percentage damage of a DNA molecule via charged, excited species and UV light during 1 min of plasma exposure8

 UV lightPositive ionsElectrons (and negative ions)Excited and reactive speciesTotal damage10%8%20%62%The tertiary structure of DNA in an aqueous solution gets destructed by APPJ.18,19 Since plasma does not produce sufficiently energetic particles or photons to penetrate cells, it had been assumed that cellular genetic material would not be affected; however, the formation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) is the major mechanism by which ionizing radiation produces DNA damage.20 DNA damage resulting from ROS includes small or bulky modifications to bases, interstrand and intrastrand cross-links, as well as single-strand and double-strand breaks (DSB).21 DNA damage induces a cascade of signals through the activation of cellular kinases, including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinases (PIKK), specifically ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), DNA dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) and ATM and Rad3-related (ATR), which phosphorylate the histone variant H2AX in the vicinity of the damage.22 γ-H2AX has been used to detect DNA damage induced by non-thermal plasma and it has been found that it is initiated by the production of active neutral species that most likely induce the formation of organic peroxides in the cell medium. Phosphorylation of H2AX following non-thermal plasma treatment has been found to be ATR dependent and ATM independent, suggesting that plasma treatment may lead to replication arrest or formation of single-stranded DNA breaks; however, plasma does not lead to formation of bulky adducts/thymine dimmers.23The protection of DNA by amino acids has been studied as a model for the role of proteins in DNA damage. Highly purified plasmid DNA extracted from Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria both with and without amino acids (glycine and arginine) has been irradiated using cold plasma under ambient conditions. Damage to plasmid DNA in the form of single- and double-strand breaks has been determined by gel electrophoresis. This study showed the influence of amino acids on DNA strand break formation. Since, the interaction between DNA and proteins depends on the type of amino acids involved, irradiations have been made for different molar ratios and for two different amino acids, glycine and arginine. For both glycine and arginine, a decrease in the number of strand break yields has been observed. The addition of a small amount of amino acid, i.e. for Arg/Gly a nucleotide ratio of 0.5:1, has been found to be sufficient to quench the formation of double-strand breaks. While the single-strand break event remains at the same level up to the ratios of about 4:1. This indicates that the presence of amino acids is not only determined by the physical shielding of DNA, but the reactions of the secondary amino acid radicals are also significant. These two processes may compete during irradiation and are most likely to depend upon the type of compounds surrounding DNA.24Similar effects of plasma on enzyme structure have also been observed by various research groups.25–29 The activity of a model protein (glucose oxidase, GOx) strongly decreases after exposure to plasma. Treating enzymes with plasma technology sometimes modifies the surface structure of the enzyme and improves its solubility and functionality. The effect of APPJ on α-chymotrypsin (CT) has also been studied in presence and absence of co-solvents,26 which shows that TMAO and sorbitol protect CT against the deleterious action of the APPJ. Further, spectroscopic studies have been carried out on plasma modified proteins to probe the structural modifications during plasma actions and to study their functional properties. There are reports on the degradation effect of the APPJ on proteins in aqueous solution. For example, the APPJ inactivates infectious prion proteins,27 activates lipases in solution after treatment within one minute28 and inactivates recombinant green fluorescent protein (GFP) in Escherichia coli cells.29 The chemical effects of the APPJ on proteins in aqueous solutions using lysozyme revealed that the plasma treatment decreased the enzymatic activity and changed the secondary structure that resulted from the increased molecular weight of lysozyme with the chemical modification. These effects were not produced via UV light or plasma heat, suggesting that the reactive species generated by the plasma affect the lysozyme.30 A fraction of protein powder was found to be destroyed during plasma exposure, a fraction remained unaltered and third fraction suffered structural modifications. Treating enzymes with plasma technology modifies the surface structure of ovalbumin and improves its solubility and functionality.31 These experimental results from various research groups30,32 emphasise that the structural modification of biomolecules following treatment with plasma may vary from biomolecule to biomolecule. In addition, researchers have also studied the effect of plasma on cells.Effect of plasma on cells. Plasma interactions with living cells do not necessarily cause cell death as in the case of malignant cells. Studies on the effects of low-temperature atmospheric pressure plasmas on mammalian cells have been conducted by several research groups.33–37 Two major types of plasmas used in this research are the low-temperature atmospheric pressure helium plasmas, generated by plasma jet or needle devices, and air plasmas, produced by the dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) device. In vitro experiments with fibroblasts, endothelial and smooth muscle cells demonstrated that plasma affects cells in a dosage-dependent manner. The disruption of cell to-cell adhesion and cell detachment from substrates have been observed after cell exposure to low-intensity helium plasmas.35,37,38 The cells, detached due to the plasma treatment, remain viable, reattach to the plate surface and proliferate after a short incubation time. Besides the alteration of cell adhesion, a short-term exposure to helium plasma causes a temporary cell membrane permeabilization39 and inhibition of cell migration.35 Longer exposure times or treatments with higher intensity plasmas induced either cell apoptosis or necrosis.35,38 It has been found that the mode of helium plasma-induced cell death depends on the plasma dose and irradiation conditions.Kalghatgi et al.,34 observed similar cellular responses to plasmas generated using a DBD plasma device. Depending on its intensity and exposure time, the DBD plasma treatment induced either apoptosis or caused necrosis in endothelial cells. In addition, authors have reported an induction of cell proliferation five days after treatment with low-intensity plasmas. The observed stimulation of cell proliferation presumably results from the release of growth factors (e.g. fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2)) by the plasma-damaged cells. Identification of plasma agents that induce the cellular responses described above is crucial for understanding the mechanisms of plasma–cell interactions. Experiments performed by Stoffels' group37 have shown that different plasma agents are involved in such processes as cell apoptosis induction and the alteration of cell adhesion. The fact that the addition of antioxidants to the culture media did not prevent the detachment of plasma-treated cells provides evidence against the role of plasma-generated reactive oxygen species in this process.38 Recent results presented in Stoffels et al.,37 give additional support to this conclusion. In this study, plasma was applied to endothelial and smooth muscle cells through a porous cell culture membrane. The membrane allowed for the penetration of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and their direct contact with cells grown on the opposite side of this membrane, while blocking charged particles and UV photons. No cell detachment has been observed under these experimental conditions. However, the membrane did not prevent plasma-induced cell apoptosis. Based on these results, the authors hypothesized that the cell detachment observed in their previous experiments40 should be ascribed to electrostatic plasma–cell interactions. It has been hypothesized that plasma-generated reactive oxygen and nitrogen species are most probably the cause of plasma-induced cell apoptosis. Further, plasma effects have also been studied in various diseases.Treatment of diseases through plasma. Cold atmospheric micro plasmas have been found to be effective in the treatment of various diseases (like melanoma cancer and corneal infections). The treatment of lung or colorectal tumor with NTP appears to be very promising. Micronucleus formation induced by dielectric barrier discharge plasma exposure on brain cells has been studied resulting in cell death. Non atmospheric plasma has also been developed as a novel clinical tool for anticancer therapy and has been tested for its ability to effectively treat melanoma, a cancer of the skin, by selectively killing cancer cells while leaving normal skin tissue unharmed. Melanoma cells, treated by plasma at doses significantly below those required for cell destruction survive the plasma treatment but develop apoptosis many hours post-treatment and die (disintegrate) by themselves gracefully. This could potentially be an intriguing approach for cancer treatment, especially if by the manipulation of plasma parameters the treatment could be made selective to cancerous cells over healthy cells, as demonstrated before for bacteria versus healthy cells. Floating electrode dielectric barrier discharge (FE-DBD) plasma can kill melanoma skin cancer cells through necrosis at higher treatment doses (15 s and over at 1.4 W-cm−2), which are still significantly below the threshold of damaging healthy tissue.41,42 Very low doses of FE-DBD (5 s at 0.8 W-cm−2 of plasma treatment) where no cell necrosis has been observed initiate apoptotic behavior or programmed cell death in melanoma cancer cells.In another study, Vandamme et al.43 have demonstrated a marked antitumor effect of the plasma treatment of human U87 malignant glioma xenografts in mice. They have reported a tumor volume decrease of 56% for treated mice and have also shown that the tumor volume reduction translated into an increase of the mouse lifespan of 60%.43 Kirson et al.44 have applied AC fields to inhibit the proliferation of various cancer cells (malignant melanoma, glioma, breast carnicoma and lung carnicoma). Clinical tests indicate a halving of the rate of progression of recurrent glioblastoma. Hardly any side effects have been detected >70 months after treatment. Nuccitelli et al.45 have applied nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEF) of >20 kV cm−1 and 30 ns rise time. They have found that tumour cell nuclei rapidly shrink and tumour blood flow stops. Melanomas have been observed to shrink by 90% within two weeks following the treatment. Also, a special microplasma system has been developed for the local medical treatment of skin diseases, and especially for the treatment of corneal infections.46 On the other hand, plasmas have frequently been used for bacterial inactivation for the control of various diseases.Bacterial inactivation (bio-decontamination). Non-thermal atmospheric plasmas (plasma needles) have been known to have lethal effects on bacteria and can be used for bio-decontamination. But, yeast and fungi have been found to be more resistant to plasma treatment than bacteria. Various types of “cold” plasma jets have therefore been developed by several investigators47 and their potential use to inactivate bacteria on surfaces including skin/tissue was tested.48–50 Laroussi et al.48,49 reported that the plasma pencil, a pulsed device that emits a plume several centimetres long, has been capable of destroying bacteria (E. coli, Vibrio cholera, Staphepidermis, etc.) in a targeted and localized manner. Lu et al.51 showed similar efficacy results on inactivating Staphylococcus aureus with their plasma jet. They have also shown that with a He/O2 mixture the charged particles in the plasma plume/jet play a significant role in the inactivation process. Staphylococcus cultures in liquid media (∼2 × 106 cfu mL−1) have been treated by an air plasma plume of 3 mm in diameter, incubated for 24 h and counted (Table 2).50 A 6-log reduction in viable bacteria has been achieved in 25 s of treatment; however the sterilization efficiency drops off with an increase in volume of liquid which inhibits the UV penetration and diffusion of active species generated in the plasma. Weltmann et al.52 reported the antimicrobial effects of miniaturized atmospheric pressure plasma jets. They have also shown that their jets are capable of inactivating E. coli, Bacillus atrophaeus and S. aureus at exposure times of several minutes. Montie et al.53 proposed three killing mechanisms in the case of high-pressure cold plasmas: (1) lipid peroxidation resulting from the susceptibility of unsaturated fatty acids that attacks by hydroxyl radicals; (2) protein oxidation resulting from the susceptibility of amino acids to oxidation; and (3) DNA oxidation resulting from the formation of base adducts, which are generated through reactions with oxygen radicals. The previously mentioned mechanisms assume the presence of oxygen and moisture in the gas mixture. Montie et al.53 and Laroussi et al.54 reported that for E. coli, a gram negative bacterium, the outer membrane ruptures after short exposures (10–30 s) to plasma, followed by leakage of their cytoplasm. In addition, for longer exposure times, total cell fragmentation was observed. Montie et al.53 claim that the rapid rupture of the membrane of gram-negative bacteria is due to alterations to the membrane lipids caused by the fatty acid peroxide formation. As discussed earlier, Mendis et al.55 suggested that the membrane rupture of gram-negative bacteria is caused by charge accumulation on the outer surface of the membrane. Gram-positive bacteria do not undergo visible morphological changes.56 However, reduction in cell viability has been achieved on various types of such bacteria. One possible explanation is that some reactive species generated by the plasma can diffuse through an otherwise chemically and physically robust outer membrane, and directly react with the biomaterials inside the cell. These reactions could either compromise the integrity of the whole cell, leading to its death, or could simply render the cell unculturable but not necessarily dead.
Table 2 Results of Staphylococcus inactivation by air plasma

Culture volume (ml) Plasma exposure time (s)0 (control)255010012 × 106 cfu0 cfu0 cfu0 cfu24 × 106 cfu25 cfu0 cfu0 cfu36 × 106 cfu1 × 106 cfu680 cfu460 cfuAnother interesting recent development is the destruction of proteins by atmospheric pressure plasma jets. This is important for the sterilization of medical tools, which are frequently contaminated by both microorganisms and proteinaceous matter. By using a plasma jet operated with a helium–oxygen gas mixture Deng et al.57,58 achieved a substantial destruction of proteins deposited on stainless steel. A protein reduction of 4.5 logs was achieved, which corresponded to a minimum surface protein of 0.36 fmol mm−2. He attributed this result to protein degradation by excited atomic oxygen and excited nitride oxide. We have seen that plasma have a vast impact on biomolecules; the main causes of the effectiveness of these plasmas are as follows and are also illustrated in Fig. 7: Fig. 7  Inactivating agents for bio-decontamination. (a) UV radiation: UV radiation has been known to be germicidal for quite a long time. Low pressure mercury lamps are an example of such UV sources. UV radiation in the 200–300 nm wavelength range with doses of several milliwatt seconds per square centimeter is known to cause lethal damage to cells. Among the UV effects on cells of bacteria is the dimerization of thymine bases in their DNA strands. This inhibits the ability of the bacteria to replicate properly.Depending on the operating gas, plasmas generate UV radiation in several wavelength ranges including vacuum UV up to 380 nm. Although they produce energetic photons, wavelengths below 200 nm will not propagate at atmospheric pressures. Therefore, if such a wavelength range is to be used, the target sample has to be located in a low-pressure vessel. Low-pressure plasmas using a N2/O2 gas mixture or argon have been shown to produce large enough UV doses to inactivate bacterial cells.59,60 Most of the UV radiation in air plasma is emitted from N2 and NO bands but with insufficient power densities below 50 μW cm−2.(b) Reactive species: in high-pressure non-equilibrium plasma discharges, reactive species are generated through various collisional pathways, such as electron impact excitation and dissociation. Reactive species play an important role in all plasma–surface interactions. Air plasmas, for example, are excellent sources of reactive oxygen-based and nitrogen-based species, such as O, O2*, O3, OH, NO, NO2, etc. Herrmann et al., Richardson et al., and Kuzmichev et al. experimentally61–63 showed that discharges containing oxygen have a strong germicidal effect. This is due to the presence, in such discharges, of oxygen-based active species such as atomic oxygen, the metastable singlet state of oxygen and ozone. Richardson et al.62 showed that the RBD discharge became more effective at killing B. subtilis (vegetative and sporulated) when oxygen was mixed with helium. A mixture containing 3% oxygen was found to produce the best results. After experimenting with various gas mixtures, Kuzmichev et al.63 concluded that in the presence of moisture the hydroxyl-radical, OH, is also expected to play a significant role by chemically attacking the outer structures of bacterial cells. In the case of air, production of NO and NO2 adds to the lethalness of the process. And, of course, the presence of O2 in air plasmas or in discharges containing a mixture of oxygen leads to the generation of ozone (O3). Ozone, which interferes with cellular respiration, has been known to have a strong bactericidal effect.Cellular responses to different types of RS depend on their concentration. For instance, depending on the concentration hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) either stimulates or inhibits cell proliferation or induces cell apoptosis.64 Nitric oxide (NO˙) at low concentrations acts as an anti-inflammatory agent that inhibits lipid peroxidation and protein oxidation by reactive oxygen species, diminishes membrane permeability and limits cell apoptosis.65–67 However, when it is formed at high rates, NO˙ contributes to cell and tissue injury.68,69 The interplay between diverse RS adds to the complexity of cell regulation. The regulation of blood coagulation by superoxide (O−2) and NO˙ is probably the best-studied example of such an interplay.70 NO˙, which is known as an anticoagulative factor, prevents platelet aggregation under physiological conditions. O−2 released by activated or dysfunctional endothelial cells indirectly affects platelet activity by scavenging NO˙ and by virtue of this induces blood coagulation. Another remarkable example of the RS synergy is the regulation of cell apoptosis by NO˙ and H2O2. In a concentration-dependent manner, NO˙ can either inhibit or enhance the hydrogen peroxide-mediated apoptosis in different cell types.71,72 Interestingly, the toxic effect of H2O2 on bacteria is induced even by low-concentration NO˙. It has been proposed that one of the mechanisms of the antimicrobial macrophage defence relies on different effects of NO˙ and H2O2 synergy.73(c) Charged particles: bombardment of bacterial cells by charged particles might play a significant role in the rupture of the outer membrane of bacterial cells. Mendis et al.55 suggested that charged particles can play a very significant role in the rupture of the outer membrane of bacterial cells. They showed that the electrostatic force caused by charge accumulation on the outer surface of the cell membrane could overcome the tensile strength of the membrane and cause its rupture.Effect of plasma on biomedical applicationsBiomedical applications of APPs are attractive due to their non-equilibrium property by which the energetic electrons generate more reactive radicals and ions through collisions with the background neutral gas, while the gas temperature remains near room temperature. As a result, APPs do not cause thermal damage to heat-sensitive biological systems such as cells and living tissue, leading to unique interactions with them.74 These interactions manifest themselves as biomedical phenomena such as sterilization, blood coagulation, wound healing and tooth bleaching.75 Moreover, ions can be accelerated across a thin sheath layer and can impact surfaces with energies ranging up to tens or hundreds of electron volts, leading to unique surface interactions with heat-sensitive materials. A brief of some biomedical applications are discussed below and also illustrated in Fig. 8. Fig. 8  Representation of the biomedical applications of plasma. Sterilization of medical equipment. The removal of protein residues from surgical instruments is quite difficult and commonly used sterilization and decontamination techniques can cause major damage to the objects treated. Non-thermal plasma has attracted interest in the field of sterilization research since it requires only a small space for inherent miniaturized systems and uses an inexpensive and simple process. Many plasma based devices have been constructed to sterilize medical equipments. The cold atmospheric destruction of solid proteins on a stainless-steel surface and on real surgical instruments is also known. Plasma sterilization methods function near room temperature, in much less time than with autoclaving and ethylene oxide exposure. They are used to sterilize work pieces in volumes of a few tens of liters near room temperature and require from 1 to 2 h to complete a cycle.76 A combination of working gases is effective in removing and killing microorganisms by generating oxygen, hydroxyl free radicals, presumably other reactive species, and UV photons. It has been reported by Ohkawa et al.77 that an RF-driven DBD can sterilize various kinds of bacteria including spore-forming bacteria: Bacillus atrophaeus, G. stearothermophilus, and mould and yeast-like fungi: Salmonella enteritidis, S. aureus, C. albicans and Aspergillusniger. Studies to understand the RF plasma sterilization mechanism at atmospheric pressure have been reported by several groups.78,79 Sharma et al.78 reported that UV plays a primary role in the inactivation process, whereas plasma radicals play a secondary role when using 60 MHz slot plasma. However, Brandenburg et al.79 demonstrated that the direct interaction of plasma with microorganisms is key to the lethal effect when using an RF-driven argon plasma jet.Blood coagulation. Blood coagulation occurs via a complex cascade of events that starts with platelet activation, the formation of a plug and the triggering of a clotting factor (a protein in the blood plasma) to form fibrin. Historically, excessive blood loss from a cut or a wound was stopped by applying pressure or by “cauterization.” Cauterization involves the use of heat to “burn” the wounded area so as to coagulate the blood and stop further bleeding. This technique was used since ancient times and was first described in medical/scientific terms by the Andalusian scientist Abu Al-Qasim Al-Zahrawi about a millennium ago (10th Century) in his medical encyclopedia entitled Kitab al-Tasrif.80 In modern times, cauterization is achieved by electrical means and is referred to as electrocautery or electrosurgery. Electrosurgery is used to cut soft tissues and/or to arrest blood flow out of a wound/cut. Because of its elevated temperature, thermal plasma has also been used successfully as an electrosurgical method to help coagulate blood.81 An argon beam coagulator is an example of a plasma device used for cauterization. However, cauterization, in general, is accompanied by damage to the surrounding tissues and may further complicate or delay the healing process. Therefore, investigations into low-temperature plasma have recently been conducted. Since the thermal tissue damage needed to be minimized or eliminated, non-thermal APPs were applied to accelerate blood coagulation. However, the results of recent studies by Fridman et al.74 and Kalghatgi et al.82 indicate that high temperature is not a prerequisite for plasma-induced blood coagulation. The authors have shown that plasmas can trigger natural, rather than thermally induced, blood coagulation processes. They performed in vitro experiments in which they exposed blood samples to low-temperature plasmas generated by the FE-DBD device. The rates of blood coagulation in the plasma-treated samples were 15 times higher than in the non-treated control samples. A non-thermal air plasma torch83,84 was shown to be effective in clotting blood and a microwave-excited argon plasma jet85 demonstrated through an in vivo mouse experiment that blood coagulation was achieved within 1 min by applying the plasma jet to the bleeding tail of a mouse. To specify the mechanism responsible for the plasma-assisted blood coagulation, authors performed additional experiments which allowed the exclusion of factors such as the electric field, light, temperature, plasma-induced change of blood pH and the increase in the concentration of calcium ions due to their release from the calcium-bound proteins.86 They found that the plasma treatment activates the coagulation cascade by inducing the aggregation of the coagulation protein fibrinogen into fibrin. In turn, fibrin catalyses the blood coagulation factors; this ultimately leads to the clot formation. The fact that the albumin structure was not altered by the plasma treatment suggests that plasma agents selectively trigger the polymerization of coagulation proteins. Low-temperature plasmas do not cause any pain or the unpleasant smells usually associated with the thermal tissue treatment.Wound healing. Wound healing follows a complex and highly orchestrated series of events. A clinical study conducted by Stolz et al.87 showed that a low-temperature argon plasma treatment of chronic wounds was well tolerated by patients without side effects. By using MTT assays (measuring mitochondrial activity), Stoffels showed that the proliferation of fibroblasts does occur when exposed to a low-power density plasma.88 As described earlier, fibroblast proliferation is an important step in the cascade of events necessary for wound healing. A prior work done by Shekhter et al.89,90 claimed that fibroblast proliferation is induced by the exogenic NO generated by the plasma. NO is also known to help in the regulation of immune deficiencies, induction of phagocytosis, proliferation of keratinocytes, regulation of collagen synthesis, etc., all of these being processes that play important roles in wound healing. In addition, plasma plays a role in greatly lowering wound infection by inactivating a large number of bacteria inhabiting the wound. So, low temperature plasma not only reduces infection by inactivating bacteria but also, at the same time, seems to enhance key events necessary for proper wound healing, such as the proliferation of fibroblasts. Cold plasma treatment of wounds is thus gaining interest as it offers a noncontact, painless, and harmless therapy to manage large-area lesions (burn wounds and chronic ulcerations).91Drug delivery. Plasma surface modifications provide sufficient adherence to metallic and polymeric materials for the binding of drug molecules. The bio-absorbable materials can act as drug carriers by controlling the release rate of the drug initially loaded in an application for drug delivery systems. Fig. 9 shows the schematic illustration of a drug molecule grafting on an O2 plasma treated substrate. Nanoporous membranes have attracted considerable interest for applications in drug delivery. The deposition of heptylamine plasma polymer coatings onto porous alumina (PA) membranes has been investigated with the aim of adjusting the surface chemistry and the pore size of the membranes. The structural (pore size) properties of PA membranes can be altered systematically by adjusting the deposition time during the polymerization process. The resultant PA membranes with active amino groups and controlled pore size are applicable for molecular separation and drug delivery.92 The polylactic acid ultrasound contrast agent has significant importance in ultrasound imaging and eventually in the drug treatment of cancer. It has an additional advantage because ultrasound in drug delivery may induce cavitations, increase cell membrane permeability and facilitate drug release. Plasma surface modifications improve drug loading for ultrasound-triggered drug delivery. Fig. 9  Incorporation of drug molecules to plasma treated substrates for drug delivery. The macroporous structure of polystyrene-divinylbenzene (PS-DVB) solid foam materials with high pore volume makes them interesting for the design of new drug delivery systems. The wettability of the highly hydrophobic PS-DVB films was improved by a short post discharge plasma treatment with different gases with a view to opening new possibilities for the absorption of hydrophilic compounds.93 The surface functionalization of TiO2 nanotubes by plasma polymerization generates a thin and chemically reactive polymer film rich in amine groups on top of the substrate surface. The tailoring of surface functionalities on nanotube surfaces has potential for significantly improving the properties of this attractive biomaterial and promoting the development of new biomedical devices such as drug eluting medical implants with multiple functions (orthopedic implants, dental and coronary stents). This will provide an elegant route to the prevention of infection, clotting control or to a decrease in inflammation as a result of these implants.94Cosmetics. Plasma treatment for cosmetic re-structuring of tissue has also been known as well as skin regeneration using nitrogen plasmas. Tooth bleaching is also enhanced by plasmas. Lee et al.95 suggested the application of APP jets to tooth bleaching instead of light sources to be used with hydrogen peroxide in dental clinics. It was demonstrated that a tooth exposed to an APP helium jet with hydrogen peroxide became brighter compared with a tooth treated by hydrogen peroxide alone. Acceleration of tooth bleaching by the APPJ resulted from the enhancement of OH radical production from hydrogen peroxide exposed to the APPJ. They showed that the APPJ was effective in bleaching teeth stained by wine or coffee.96 Sun et al.97 reported that a direct current APP air jet was also effective in enhancing the tooth whitening process with hydrogen peroxide, and that the tooth surface temperature did not exceed 37 °C for a treatment of 20 min. A tooth bleaching effect using an APP air jet was observed even with saline solutions (0.9%) instead of hydrogen peroxide.98 Park et al.99 demonstrated that an APPJ was effective in intracoronal tooth bleaching in blood-stained human teeth with the exposure of the APPJ into a hole inside a tooth.RF plasma applications for tissue removal and coagulation during surgery have an advantage as safe energy sources in human or animal bodies, since nerve and muscle stimulation by current through the body ceases at 100000 cycles s−1 (100 kHz). Traditional electrosurgeries used this RF to cut and coagulate tissues with minimal heat damage. Plasmas had significantly faster incision times and less incisional blood loss than a scalpel or laser, with no significant difference in subjective or objective patient pain.100 RF ablation procedures can be performed in open surgery, percutaneously or laparoscopically at the physician's discretion.Dentistry. Also, plasmas have been used in the field of dentistry. The application of cold plasma involves the sterilization of the root canal of the tooth. Plasmas, with their ability to penetrate into microscopic openings between tooth and gum, seem ideal candidates for prophylactic treatment in addition to normal dental care. A number of methods, such as mechanical drilling, laser techniques and chemical reagents have been employed for the cleaning and disinfection of the tissue in dental cavities or in root canals. However, most of these methods have disadvantages such as heating, the destruction of healthy tissues, and undesirable side effects including a disagreeable taste and staining by chemotherapeutic agents such as chlorhexidine.101 Plasma bacterial inactivation of tissues in a dental cavity or in a root canal is of importance and a tissue saving method in dentistry. The exposure of enamel to plasma is painless and the heating of the pulp is tolerable. Furthermore, plasma is non-toxic and it does not cause damage to the mineralized matrix of the tooth. Several types of non-thermal atmospheric plasma devices have been used for dental treatment.102 A low power, millimeter sized, atmospheric pressure glow discharge plasma needle was developed to kill Streptococcus mutans (S. mutans) which is the main microorganism causing dental caries. This plasma can effectively kill the bacteria with a treatment time of ten seconds within a solid circle of 5 mm in diameter, demonstrating its site specific treatment capabilities.101 Atmospheric pressure DBD plasma needles with a funnel shaped nozzle were used for the inactivation of S. mutans. Oxygen was injected downstream in the plasma afterglow region through a powered steel tube.103 Jiang et al.104 introduced a safe and novel technique for endodontic disinfection with a hollow electrode based 100 ns pulsed plasma dental probe. It generates a room temperature, tapered cylindrical plasma plume in ambient atmosphere. The plasma plume causes a minimal heating of the biological materials and is safe to touch with bare hands without causing a burning sensation or pain. A greater sterilization depth and surface coverage were achieved by optimizing the width and length of the plasma plume. Lu et al.105 constructed a cold plasma jet device which can generate plasma inside the root canal and which efficiently kills Enterococcus faecalis (one of the main types of bacteria causing failure of the root canal) within several minutes.Plasma induced chemical synthesisLow-temperature plasmas, including thermal and non-thermal plasmas, are extremely important for the syntheses and processing of matters. Thermal plasma is plasma in which almost all its components are at a thermal equilibrium. The application of thermal plasma has created a huge business of syntheses and processing of inorganic materials, including materials for catalyst applications.106,107 Non-thermal plasma has been extensively employed for processing organic materials and also been considered very promising for catalyst modifications or treatments108,109 because of its non-equilibrium properties, low power requirement and its capacity to induce physical and chemical reactions at relatively low temperatures.106 The electrons in a non-thermal plasma can reach temperatures of 10000–100000 K (1–10 eV), while the gas temperature can remain as low as room temperature. It is the high electron temperature that determines the unusual chemistry of non-thermal plasmas.Catalysts are of the utmost importance in chemical reactions. Conventional catalytic technology, essentially in the case of small- and moderate-scale portable applications has certain problems because of the relatively low specific productivity, high metal capacity and equipment size. The advantages of plasma chemical methods are the extremely high specific productivity of the apparatus, low investment and operation costs. However, relatively high electric energy consumption applies certain restrictions on the possible applications of the thermal plasma approach. Non-thermal plasma can accelerate chemical reactions at the low temperature as well owing to active species generation by fast electrons. If active species, generated by non-thermal plasma, are capable of promoting many cycles of chemical transformation, then the high specific productivity of plasma can be combined with the low energy consumption of traditional catalysts. That is why this so-called plasma catalysis approach has generated permanent, strong interest in recent decades. Methane decomposition into hydrogen and carbon black, are endothermic reactions, and to cover process enthalpy and to shift chemical equilibrium to hydrogen and carbon reagents should be heated in any case. Nevertheless, the temperature level required to shift the hemical equilibrium is relatively low (600–1000 K) and one can use for the process a relatively low potential heat while plasma will be applied only as a catalytic agent for active species generation.110Catalyst preparation has been performed using cold plasmas which include the deposition of catalytically active compounds on different carriers using plasma and plasma modified catalysts. The chemical processes occurring in nitrogen–benzene plasmas at atmospheric pressure have been investigated. Non-thermal plasma modifications have been applied to MnOx catalysts for the catalytic oxidation of nitrogen oxide (NO) at low temperatures (50–250 °C), and a much higher NO conversion was obtained over the NTP-treated catalysts.111 The decomposition of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) to hydrogen and sulfur with Al2O3, MoOx/Al2O3, CoOx/Al2O3 and NiO/Al2O3 packed non-thermal plasma dielectric barrier discharge reactor has been studied. The reaction was carried out with a 5 mm discharge gap during the decomposition of 5 vol.% H2S at a 150 ml min−1 flow rate.112 The direct decomposition of the hydrogen sulfide into hydrogen and sulfur has been studied in a dielectric barrier discharge plasma reactor with an inner electrode made of a stainless steel rod that was later replaced with modified sintered metal fibers to introduce catalyst inside the plasma zone.113 Matsumoto et al. have reported the plasma catalytic reaction in ammonia synthesis in a microwave discharge.114 Ammonia synthesis from H2–N2 mixed gas has been studied at room temperature in glow-discharge plasma in the presence of metals or metal oxides. Magnesia (MgO) and calcia (CaO), which are oxides with solid basicity, revealed a catalytic activity in the plasma synthesis of ammonia, although they were catalytically inactive in industrial ammonia synthesis.115 The synthesis of bicyclo-[2.2.1]-heptane and bicyclo-[7.2.0]-undec-4-ene derivatives under cold plasma conditions have been reported. The reaction systems involved gaseous mixtures at an interface with ice surfaces.116 Thus, catalyst preparation with non-thermal plasma treatment leads to a formation of a highly dispersed special nano-structured metal cluster, which could lead to a better low-temperature activity, an enhanced stability and a better anti-carbon deposition performance. The improvement in the catalyst properties with non-thermal plasma-treated catalyst can reduce or avoid the use of chemicals. The metal ions applied can be effectively reduced at room temperature during the non-thermal plasma treatment, which has induced a development of the non-thermal plasma reduction of catalysts. The reduction using hydrogen at high temperatures or using hazardous liquid chemicals can be replaced by the developed plasma reduction process.117 Heterogeneous catalyst can be combined with NTP in two ways: by introducing the catalyst in the discharge zone (in-plasma catalysis, IPC) or by placing the catalyst after the discharge zone (post plasma catalysis, PPC). Table 3 shows some of the illustrative plasma catalyses summarizing the work carried out by various groups.118–134
Table 3 Overview of recently published papers on plasma catalysis for VOC removal

Plasma typeVOCFlow rate (mL min−1)Conc. range (ppm)CatalystPositionMaximum removal efficiency (%)Energy cost (g kW−1)Ref.DBDToluene315240MnO2/Al2O3IPC5511119MnO/ACIPCFe2O3/MnO2IPCCoronan-Heptane  TiO2IPC50.4 120DBDToluene, Ammonia667 × 10310–50CuO/MnO2PPC50 121DBDToluene100–50050MnO2/Al/NiIPC>951122DBDBenzene250300–380TiO2IPC163123MnO2IPC4Corona (pulsed)Toluene100300AlO2IPC>95156124BenzeneSilica gelIPC75Hexane25Methane5DBDSF6600300CuO/ZnO/MgO/Al2O3IPC>99 125NF3IPC>99CF4IPC66C2F6IPC83DBDBenzene400075–110Ag/TiO2IPC9611126TolueneIPCo, m, p-XyleneIPCFormic acidIPCDBDToluene500250MnOx/CoOxIPC>992127DBDFormaldehyde605140Ag/CeO2IPC926128DC positive coronaTCE1500100TiO2IPC853129DC positive coronaToluene100000.5CuOMnO2/Al2O3PPC>99 130TiO2IPC>99DBDIsopropanol500250MnOx/CoOxIPC>1009131DBDTrichloroethylene510430Au/SBA-15PPC>99 132DBDTrichloroethylene500250MnO2PPC97 133DBDDichloromethane1000500γ-Al2O3IPC/PPC51/43 134α-Al2O3PPC34TiO2PPC39HZSM-5PPC41NaZSM-5PPC38NaAPPC37NaXPPC40In another case the liquid-phase non-thermal plasma technology has been used for N-doping TiO2 as well as to separate/recover the N-dope TiO2 particles in presence of the ceramic ultra-filtration membrane process. Plasma assisted heterogeneous catalysis was found to enhance the NOx reduction. The plasma-catalytic selective reduction of NO with C2H4 at 250 °C in the presence of excess oxygen by using a one-stage plasma-over-catalyst (POC) reactor has been carried out. With the reactant gas mixture of 530 ppm NO, 650 ppm C2H4, 5.8% O2 in N2 and GHSV = 12000 h−1, the pure catalytic, pure plasma-induced (discharges over fused silica pellets) and plasma catalytic (in the POC reactor) NOx conversions were found to be 39%, 1.5% and 79%, respectively.135 Hydrogen production via methane reforming in the atmospheric pressure microwave plasma with CO2 swirl. The energetic parameters of the hydrogen production, i.e. the hydrogen mass yield rate (950 g[H2] h−1) and the energetic hydrogen mass yield (940 g[H2] kW−1 h−1), via methane reforming in the atmospheric pressure microwave plasma, is found to be very effective.136The generation of non-thermal plasmas has also been studied under supercritical conditions. The generated plasma in supercritical CO2 and subcritical water has been applied to several chemical reactions. The alpha conversion of tocopherols and transesterification of soybean oil with methanol have been already investigated. It has been found that the decomposition of phenol was accelerated by plasma in subcritical water in comparison with the reaction in subcritical water.137 The use of plasma technologies in the processes of methanol and methane production from carbon dioxide has also been prepared.138Removal of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) using plasmaThe emission of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from various industrial processes represents a major source of air pollution, and therefore VOC removal is an issue of great environmental importance. Toluene and benzene are two of the typical VOCs. The effluents in some industries, such as paints, paint thinners, fingernail polish, lacquers, adhesives, rubber and some printing and leather tanning processes, have attracted more and more the attention of researchers. The traditional methods of VOC removal, such as absorption, adsorption, incineration and so on, which are referred to the new environmental condition, have many technical and economic disadvantages. NTPs represent an alternative technology for gas phase de-pollution. Non-thermal plasma offers great potential for the initiation of chemical reactions in the gas phase; due to the high-energy electrons generated in the plasma a highly reactive environment is created without heating the entire gas stream.139–142 The major routes for the decomposition of VOCs within NTPs are of radical character. In non-thermal plasmas, the most important reactive radical is the hydroxyl radical HO, formed from H2O, which is always present through residual humidity, even in “dry” air. Other reactive radicals are O, and species derived from organic pollutants, such as Cl and ClO in the case of chlorine-containing VOCs.The ionic reactivity in the air non-thermal plasma of a number of widely used chlorinated VOCs, including saturated, unsaturated and aromatic chlorides, has been studied with an instrument in which the atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) source was coupled to a triple quadrupole mass analyzer (APCI-TQ).143 Since water is a major component of atmospheric air, numerous investigations have examined its effect on non-thermal plasma based treatment processes in air.144 Depending on the specific VOC and the experimental conditions used, humidity was found to either promote145,146 or depress147 the efficiency of VOC removal. The role of water, either beneficial or detrimental, in the removal of VOCs in plasma treatments has been generally attributed to the reactions of OH radicals. OH radicals can either initiate radical decomposition reactions via H-abstraction or addition to CC double bonds and thus promote VOC decomposition145,146 or inhibit it via interception of reactive intermediates.147In order to improve the energy efficiency of VOC removal decomposition, several metal oxides catalysts for the decomposition of VOC have been investigated in combination with a plasma reactor.148–151 The synergistic effect of atmospheric non-thermal plasma generated by a dielectric barrier discharge and nano-titania photocatalyst for benzene decomposition has been used.152 A highly active Ag–MnOx ozone decomposition catalyst has been introduced into the NTP system for the oxidation of toluene as a model VOC.153 The decomposition of trichloroethylene (TCE) by NTP utilised Pd (0.05 wt%)/γ-Al2O3 as the catalyst in a plasma reactor.154 A wire-cylinder type plasma reactor using a pulsed power supply has been used and several kinds of catalysts such as Pt/Al2O3, V2O5–MnO2/Al2O3, MnO2–NiO/Al2O3, NiO/Al2O3 and MnO2–CuO–NiO-cement have been used.155 The plasma treatment significantly increases the removal effect of the catalysts. The deposition of thin polymeric films from radio-frequency induced plasmas of VOCs (i.e. plasma polymerisation) is getting much attention these days for the removal of VOCs. Further, pervaporation membranes were used for the removal of various volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that are prepared by the plasma polymerization of tetrafluoroethylene (TFE) or TFE-perfluoropropane (PFP). The decomposition of toluene using a combination of adsorption and non-thermal plasma has also been investigated by Oishi et al.156 For some VOCs abatement studies, a high synergy effect between catalysts and NTP has been evidenced leading to a complete elimination of the pollutant molecules. Hence, plasma technology may be the future green technology for chemical industries.Electrochemical applications in the presence of plasmaElectrochemical reactions are typically initiated at the interface of a solid metal electrode and an ionic electrolyte. Although the great majority of electrochemical reactions are carried out using liquid electrolytes, such as aqueous solutions, non-aqueous solutions or molten salts, solid electrolytes have also recently gained increasing importance. Because of the presence of ions and electrons, plasma has been used as a conductive fluid in an electrochemical system. Plasma-assisted electrochemical reactions have been studied in the past. It has been known that atmospheric pressure micro plasma can act as a gaseous, metal-free electrode to carry out electron-transfer reactions in aqueous solutions.157 Recently a new microplasma source has been developed that allows a non-thermal, atmospheric pressure plasma to be stably formed at the surface of aqueous ionic electrolytes and thin polymeric films. Using the well-known ferri–ferrocyanide redox couple, we have confirmed that a plasma can indeed induce electron transfer reactions in solution and plasma ionization sources have played an increasing role in mass spectrometry.Plasma electrochemical surface ceramic coatings (PECC) are an enhanced electrochemistry technique accomplished by means of plasma arc discharge in an electrolyte medium that obtain coating structures on valve-metal surfaces.158 The electrochemically controlled growth of thin silver chloride films in chlorine RF plasmas has been analysed. The vapor-phase electrolytic deposition (electrolytic deposition using glow-discharge plasma) has already been proposed and applied to prepare uniform yttria- stabilized zirconia (YSZ) thin films (Fig. 10) and it has attracted extensive interest for a variety of potential applications, (e.g. solid oxide fuel cells, sensors and water electrolysers).159,160 The cold plasma technology is also tested for the preparation of anion-exchange membranes, which are presently becoming significant materials for applications in alkaline fuel cells, where hydroxyl ions OH− are the ion charge carriers. Fig. 10  The principle of yttria-stabilized zirconia layer deposition by vapour phase electrolytic deposition. Applications of plasma in nanoscienceStudies in nanoscience and nanotechnology have received considerable importance due to their potential applications in sensors, robotics, image processing, biomaterials, conducting polymers, photonics, surface engineering, microelectronics, metrology, etc. Low-temperature plasmas have been applied to materials synthesis, structuring and processing for decades for most important classes of nanostructures and materials systems, namely carbon nanotubes, nanofibres, graphene, graphene nanoribbons, graphene nanoflakes, nanodiamond and related carbon-based nanostructures; metal, silicon and other inorganic nanoparticles and nanostructures; soft organic nanomaterials and nano-biomaterials are illustrated in Fig. 11. Fig. 11  Illustration of the applications of plasma in different areas of nanoscience. Carbon nanotubes. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), the most common basic building blocks of present-day nanotechnology, can be synthesized using a large variety of approaches, specific techniques, precursors and process environments. The formation of CNTs in most cases requires catalyst nanoparticles to support nanotube nucleation and growth. The energy required to produce carbon atoms (by the dissociation of carbon-based precursors in the gas phase or on the surface), to allow them to diffuse through the catalyst and then to incorporate into the nanostructures largely determines the process temperatures.161–164 In plasma-based processes, these temperatures are remarkably lower (by up to several hundred degrees) than in the equivalent neutral gas-based processes.165 In addition, growth rates can be much higher and the nanotube quality can be markedly better if appropriate plasmas are used. Iijima's discovery of CNTs, which was made using arc-discharge plasmas,166 gave nanoscience and nanotechnology a major boost.A large variety of plasma-based CNT growth approaches and techniques is available; they range from more traditional thermal plasmas of arc discharges and low-pressure, non-equilibrium plasmas to the more recent non-equilibrium plasmas operated at atmospheric pressures. The production and post-processing of CNTs using plasma is one of the most established and widely used nanoscale processes. Plasmas are also commonly used for selective doping and functionalization (e.g. to allow selective attachment of specific objects including biomolecules, DNA and proteins). Plasma produced species may stick better to the CNT surface (which has no dangling bonds) compared with those produced using many other treatment techniques.167Graphene, graphene nanoribbons/nanoflakes/nanosheets and related structures. Graphene, a single sheet of graphitic carbon, is the nanostructure that has generated the most excitement in recent years. These structures also have many unique properties, mostly related to the very high reactivity of the sharp edges of multiple graphene sheets and the pronounced electron confinement when the number of graphene sheets is small. Plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) on metal catalysts is one plasma-related method to produce graphene and graphene nanoflakes (e.g. Pt, Pd and Cu). Plasma assisted thermal CVD (e.g. using dc or RF plasma discharges placed along the direction of the precursor gas flow) has allowed a substantial reduction in the process temperatures required for graphene growth by as much as 200 K.168 The plasma-based post-processing of graphene (and also graphene-derived materials such as graphene oxide) has proved very effective in modifying graphene's surface energy, which in turn resulted in dramatic changes in the structural and electronic properties. Indeed, plasma-assisted surface hydrogenation led to the formation of hydrogen-terminated bent graphene sheets that is now termed grapheme.169,170 Plasmas have also been used for the effective atomic-layer-precision thickening of films that contain only a few graphene layers.The non-equilibrium nature of plasma (electron energy is typically 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than that of the heavy species) contributes strongly to the very high dissociation rates of molecular gases (such as hydrogen in this example) and the creation of a large number of reactive atomic and radical species. This is also critical in enabling the effective oxygenation of graphene surfaces in a plasma,171 which in turn results in the change in the type of electrical conductivity, from semi-metallic in conventional graphene to semiconducting in plasma-oxygenated graphene.Plasmas have also been instrumental in the production of graphene nanoribbons. One possibility that has been demonstrated relies on the plasma-assisted unzipping of multiwalled carbon nanotubes partially buried in a polymer matrix.172,173 These structures are usually surface-supported and excellent prospects for applications in chemical and environmental sensors owing to the reactivity of their edges, and in nanofluidics174 because of the presence of conducting channels with nanoscale dimensions.Carbon nanowalls contain a relatively large number of vertically aligned grapheme sheets and are usually attached to a surface by their edges.175 They can be grown directly on silicon surfaces without any catalyst, in striking contrast to nanotubes. Interestingly, this has only been possible when the surface is exposed to plasma. Despite a large number of proposed models, there is currently still no clear understanding of these striking experimental observations. Plasmas offer the possibility of a large-scale graphene production.Other carbon-based nanomaterials. In addition to CNTs, some examples of graphitic nanocarbons include carbon nanofibres,176–178 carbon nanopipettes,179 single-crystalline nanotips,180 carbon nanocones,181,182 carbon nanowires,183 single- and multiwalled fullerenes,184 carbon nanocages,185,186 and carbon nanospheres.187 These carbon-based nanomaterials have been produced and/or post-processed using plasma-based techniques.An interesting recent trend has been the production of carbon nanostructures under non-equilibrium conditions including the synthesis of nanodiamond and exotic carbon nanostructures such as nanoshells and nanocages. Synthesis of diamond-like nanomaterials usually requires very high pressures and temperatures. These non-equilibrium process conditions prevent the re-arrangement of diamond-like carbon to graphite during the relatively fast synthesis. In a plasma environment, the synthesis of nanodiamond crystals and ultra-nanocrystalline diamond films can be implemented under relatively low (well under atmospheric) pressures and moderate process temperatures. However, to mitigate the higher energy cost of the synthesis of the more non-equilibrium nanodiamond structures, plasmas of relatively high energy densities and species concentrations (e.g. microwave plasmas) are commonly used. The plasma-assisted synthesis of nanodiamonds is a relatively well established and advanced process developed over the last couple of decades.188,189 Diamond nanocones and nanorods are other examples of plasma-produced sp3 carbon nanostructures.190,191Metal nanoparticles. Most of the earlier methods for the production of nanoparticles fall into three categories, viz. milling, vapor condensation and chemical synthesis. A wide variety of NTP processes find applications in nanoscience for the synthesis of nanoparticles. It is shown that cold plasma techniques are very effective methods for designing nanocatalysts with distinct and tunable chemical activities, specificity and selectivity. Arrays or patterns of metal nanoparticles provide the essential catalytic support for the growth of CNTs and other nanostructures. This also applies to a very large number of other materials systems (e.g. silicon, germanium and other semiconductors, oxides, nitrides, oxynitrides, etc). Metal nanoparticle arrays are also used as nanoresistors in nanoelectronic applications. Nanoparticle sizes and interparticle spacing can be adjusted to enable specific electric charge transport and resistivity mechanisms.192 Metal nanoparticle arrays are produced using a large variety of ionized gas-based techniques, including the PECVD of metal organic precursors and the effective manipulation of metallic vapours (ionized physical vapour deposition, iPVD).193 Exposure to low-temperature plasmas has proved useful to improve the nucleation density, size and position uniformity of the self-organized metal nanoarrays; these possibilities have been predicted numerically and demonstrated experimentally.194 Gold nanoparticles using non-thermal plasma have been prepared by Furushoet et al.195 NTPs have emerged as capable synthetic approaches for the covalently bonded semiconductor nanocrystals as well as for the synthesis of faceted germanium nanocrystals. There are many more nanoparticles prepared using NTPs.196 The synthesis of faceted germanium nanocrystals in a non-thermal plasma approach has also been demonstrated.197 A morphology evolution with particle size was observed for germanium crystals. Small particles were mainly of cubic shape with (100) facets, intermediate particles were cuboctahedrons, and large particles were spheres.Silicon and other inorganic nanoparticles and nanostructures. Silicon nanoparticles and nanostructures represent a very important class of plasma-produced nanomaterials. Due to the natural abundance of silicon compounds, the present dominance of silicon-based micro manufacturing platforms, as well as silicon's very useful electronic and optical properties, these nanomaterials hold outstanding promise for applications in microelectronics and photovoltaic solar cells.Silicon-based nanomaterials can be produced and processed both in the ionized gas phase and on the surface. There are several options for their fabrication. The most common option heavily relies on PECVD using the highly toxic and flammable silane (SiH4) precursor, although some other and less toxic precursors such as tetra-ethyl-orthosilicate (TEOS) are also widely used. In this way, one can produce a variety of silicon nanoparticles in the gas phase, on the surface, or embedded in an amorphous silicon matrix.198,199 A significant success was achieved in the synthesis, processing and nano-device integration of plasma-produced hydrogenated silicon and some other semiconducting nanocrystals.200 More importantly, plasma-based processes enabled very effective shape and size control of such nanocrystals. In particular, the formation of silicon nanocrystals of nearly perfect cubic shapes has been demonstrated in hydrogen-containing gas mixtures.201 Another possibility is to use catalytic PECVD to develop quasi-one-dimensional silicon nanostructures (e.g. nanorods or nanowires) on the surface. Plasma-based processes result in the nucleation and growth of such nanostructures (of the same thickness) at temperatures (by as much as a couple of hundred degrees) and gas pressures remarkably lower than in thermal CVD.202,203Nanoscale plasma processing has been successfully applied to several classes of inorganic materials. The ability of non-equilibrium plasmas to produce atomic oxygen and nitrogen species (which otherwise is a non-trivial task because of the very high dissociation energy barriers) in a variety of radical, excited and ionic states, has led to the possibility of a very effective synthesis of oxide and nitride nanostructures using both low- and atmospheric pressure plasma discharges.204–206 Nano-oxides of some semiconducting elements (e.g. silicon and germanium) and of a large number of light and heavy metals have been successfully produced. The variety of reported morphologies is also huge, spanning all three dimensionalities from tiny quantum dots to complex three-dimensional nanoarchitectures. Currently, there is a very strong thrust towards using atmospheric pressure plasma systems (both thermal and non-equilibrium plasma systems-from large-scale arc-discharge plasma reactors to tiny microplasmas) to produce a large variety of metal oxide nanostructures and nanoarchitectures.207 These approaches benefit from the natural presence of oxygen in the air; however, care has to be taken to avoid large amounts of nitrogen being incorporated into the developing nanostructures. This is an example for which the tailoring of the electron energy distribution functions (EEDFs) in the plasma to enable the selective dissociation of oxygen molecules leaving nitrogen molecules intact (the dissociation threshold of N2 is higher than that of O2 by several eV) is a very promising approach. This approach can also be used to produce carbon nitride-based nanomaterials with tailored carbon and nitrogen contents. Since the dissociation energies of CH4 and N2 are very different (4.55 eV and 9.74 eV, respectively), the EEDFs can be tailored (e.g. by adding Ar to a CH4+N2 gas mixture) to maximize the dissociation rates in any desired range of energies.208 Despite the many widespread uses of reactive oxygen plasmas for nanoscale synthesis and processing of a large variety of inorganic nanomaterials (as well as soft organic matter of the following section) this area is expected to significantly mature and expand in the future, eventually leading to the plasmoxy-nanotech of the future.Nano-biomaterials. Low-temperature plasma-assisted processes have been used to fabricate and process a range of nano-biomaterials. These materials are used as bioimplants and scaffolds in reconstructive surgery or dentistry, in drug, gene and protein delivery systems, as implanted biosensors and other medical devices, and in many more applications. Relevant examples include various nanoparticles for applications including biomedical imaging (e.g. luminescent semiconducting nanocrystals for tracing intravascular drug delivery capsules or nanodiamonds for MRI imaging), drug, gene and protein delivery, and the targeting and aggressive treatment of tumour cells.209,210 Hard diamond-like carbon (DLC) coatings with specific microstructures have been used (e.g. in combination with biocompatible polymers and suitable metal alloys) to improve the biocompatibility and durability of cardiac and vascular stents. Nickel–titanium shape memory alloys and more recently DLC-coated poly-acryl-ether-etherketone (PEEK) have been used to construct automatic scoliosis correction devices.211–213 Nano-structured hydroxyapatite bio-ceramics and silica bio-glass fabricated using plasma assisted techniques have been used to coat biomedical implants for use as artificial hip, knee joints and teeth.214–216 Furthermore, arrays of nanodiamond crystals show excellent biocompatibility and are currently used as the main functional element in bionic eye research that is set to revolutionize ophtalmologic technologies.217 Optometry and vision science and applications also substantially benefit from plasma-coated/processed contact lenses that offer excellent anti-microbial properties, safety, flexibility and durability when worn on the eye.218In addition to hard carbon-based nanomaterials, low temperature plasmas have been successfully used for the synthesis, micro- and nano structuring and functionalization of soft and temperature-sensitive (e.g. polymeric) materials. The unique features of non-thermal plasma have made possible substantial breakthroughs in many growth areas of modern technology and newer applications are continuously emerging, more recently in the vastly growing areas of nanotechnology, which indicate that non-thermal plasma has become an important player in several up-coming technologies. One of these up-coming technologies is surface modification using plasma.Surface modification using plasmaPolymer surface modification is an elegant method for generating functional polymer surfaces combined with the desirable attributes of bulk polymers. It can play a very important role in many industrial end-use applications: electronics, packing, industrial, automotive and aerospace, storage and medical devices. NTP provides a new methodology for the surface modification of polymers and biomaterials as represented in Fig. 12. The use of plasmas for the treatment of solid surfaces has several advantages over conventional solution phase chemistry. Some of these advantages are given below:• Plasma polymer film thickness can be easily controlled. Typical thicknesses range from 50 nm to 1 micron.• Films produced by plasmas are often highly coherent and adhere to a variety of substrates. These include conventional polymers, glass and metal surfaces.• The films deposited are pinhole-free and highly cross-linked.• Multilayer films or films with grading of chemical and physical properties are easily made.• The monomers used can be solid (e.g. maleic anhydride), liquid (e.g. allyl amine) or gas (e.g. hexafluoropropylene oxide).• Altering the process parameters can vary the chemical composition of the plasma polymer.• Substrate geometry is not a limiting factor, which means that substrates with complex shapes can be treated in the plasma.• Very small amounts of precursor are required for plasma formation.• Plasma processes are solvent free and energy efficient, rendering them an environmentally friendly and cost effective alternative to traditional methods. Fig. 12  Schematic representation of different surface modification techniques using plasma. Deposition of thin films using plasma. The plasma deposition process can be subdivided in two groups: sputter-deposition and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PE-VCD).1) Sputter-deposition comprises physical sputtering and reactive sputtering.219 In physical sputtering, ions and atoms from the plasma bombard the target, and release atoms or molecules of the target material. In reactive sputtering, use is made of a molecular gas. Besides the positive ions from the plasma that sputtering bombard the target, the dissociation products from the reactive gas will also react with the target. Consequently, the film deposited on the substrate will be a combination of sputtered target material and the reactive gas. When the sputtered atoms arrive at the substrate they can be temporarily adsorbed, they can, however, also migrate through the surface or become re-evaporated. When a second atom arrives at the substrate, it can form a doublet with the first atom, which is more stable than a single atom, and has more chance to remain ‘stuck’. New atoms arrive at the substrate and can form triplets, etc. This initial stage is called ‘nucleation’. Little atomic islands are formed that coalesce together until a continuous film is formed.2) Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) takes place in a reactive gas.220,221 By chemical reactions in the plasma, different kinds of ions and radicals are formed which diffuse toward the substrate and are deposited by chemical surface reactions. The major advantage compared to simple chemical vapor deposition is that plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition is found to operate at a much lower temperature. Various kinds of plasma sources have been used for this application, ranging from d.c., cc-RF and pulsed discharges, to microwave discharges, ECRs, ICPs and expanding plasma jets. The two well-known applications of PECVD are the deposition of amorphous hydrogenated silicon222 and carbon layers.223 Amorphous hydrogenated silicon layers have been used for the fabrication of solar cells.224 An advantage of amorphous silicon deposited by PE-CVD over crystalline produced by a conventional technique is the low cost of production.Amorphous hydrogenated carbon layers also called ‘diamond-like carbon layers’ (DLC) have been commonly used as protective hard coatings on various kinds of industrial components (metals, glass, ceramics and plastics). They have some very interesting characteristics, e.g. high hardness (in the range 1000–3000 kg mm2), extremely low friction coefficients (between 0.01 and 0.28), a good adhesion on most materials, chemical inertness against most solvents and acids, thermal stability (above 300 °C) and interesting optical properties (i.e. transparent in the VIS and IR ranges).Plasma etching. Plasma etching is essentially used to remove material from a surface.225 It can be conducted with a variety of discharge sources, such as direct current glow discharges, capacitively current RF discharge, and so on. Table 4 presents some of the results of work done by different groups226–229 for surface etching by atmospheric plasma. The three important parameters for etching are the etched rate uniformity, anisotropy and selectivity.230 Anisotropic etching means that the material is removed in the vertical direction only, whereas the horizontal etch rate is zero and opposed to that is isotropic etching as shown in Fig. 13, which is characterized by equal vertical and horizontal etch rates. In fact, selectivity and anisotropy often compete in the design of a plasma etch process. Fig. 13  Schematic representation of (a) anisotropic etching, in which the material is removed in the vertical direction only, and (b) isotropic etching, which is characterized by equal vertical and horizontal etch rates, leading to ‘undercutting’. 
Table 4 Surface etching by atmospheric plasma

ExcitationSourcePlasmaSubstrateEtching rateObservationsRef.Low frequencyDBDHe/O2Organic materials0.2 μm min−1Non uniform etching234Radio frequencyAPPJHe/O2Kapton8 μm min−1Chemical process: influence of oxygen235  He/O2/CF4SiO21.2 μm min−1Metastable species and atoms W1 μm min−1Ta2 μm min−1 Cold plasma torchHe/CF4Si0.3 μm min−1Emission intensity (OES) of F* is related to the etching rate of Si.236There are basically for different low-pressure plasma etched mechanisms, i.e. sputter etching, chemical etching, ion enhanced energy etching and ion-enhanced inhibitor etching as represented in Fig. 14. The mechanism of sputter-etching is identical to sputter-deposition, but the discharge parameters are now optimized for the efficient removal of material from the target instead of the deposition of the sputtered atoms on a substrate. Sputtering is a more or less non selective process. The second mechanism is pure chemical etching. Atoms or radicals from the discharge plasma can chemically react with the target surface to form projectiles in the gas phase, e.g. Si (s) + 4F0 → SiF4 (g). Chemical etching is essentially isotropic, because the etching atoms arrive at the target surface with a nearly uniform angular distribution. Anisotropic etching is only possible when the reaction takes place between etching atoms and a crystal, where the etching rate depends on the crystallographic orientation. The third mechanism is ion-enhanced energetic etching.231 The discharge provides etching particles and energetic ions for the etch process. This etching method can also be very anisotropic, but the selectivity is generally lower than with chemical etching. The last etching mechanism is ion-enhanced inhibitor etching. The discharge provides not only etching atoms and energetic ions, but also so-called inhibitor precursor molecules. The latter are deposited on the target material, to form a protective layer. The etching atoms are chosen in order to obtain a high chemical etch rate in the absence of ion bombardment and the inhibitor. The bombarding ion flux prevents the formation of an inhibitor layer and it removes this layer so that the target surface can be exposed to the etching atoms. Fig. 14  Schematic representation of the four basic etch mechanisms: (a) sputter-etching, (b) chemical etching (i.e. by chemical reactions between plasma species and the target surface, to form projectiles in the gas phase), (c) ion-enhanced energetic etching (i.e. chemical etching, enhanced by energetic ion bombardment) and (d) ion-enhanced inhibitor etching. The degree of anisotropy and selectivity depends on the etch mechanism used. An example of ion-enhanced inhibitor etching is the anisotropic etching of aluminum trenches with CCl4/Cl2 or CHCl3/Cl2 discharges. Both Cl and Cl2 can efficiently chemically etch aluminum, but it results in an isotropic pattern. By adding carbon to the mixture, a protective carbon–chlorine polymer film is formed at the surface. Ion bombardment removes the film at the bottom of the trench, enabling etching at the bottom. Because the protective film is also formed at the walls of the trench, whereas the ions bombard only the bottom, steep walls can be formed. Possible problems of ion-enhanced inhibitor etching are, however, the contamination of the surface, and the removal of the protective film after the etching step.232Plasma induced surface activation and functionalization of polymers. When a plasma is brought into contact with polymers, this will induce chemical and physical modifications of the surface, e.g. producing more reactive sites, or changes in cross-linking or molecular weight.233 In this way, materials with desired properties can be obtained, such as wettability, adhesion, barrier protection, material selectivity and even biocompatibility plasma surface treatments allow the modification of the surface characteristics of polymers to obtain improved binding, without affecting the bulk properties.Surface activation of polymers is carried out by exposure to non-polymer forming plasma, such as O2, N2, NH3 and inert gases.234 Bombardment by energetic particles breaks the covalent bonds at the surface, leading to the formation of surface radicals. The latter can react with the active plasma species to form different chemically active functional groups at the surface. Surface contaminants and weakly bound polymer layers can dissociate into volatile side products, which can be pumped away. Oxygen and nitrogen plasma exposures for several minutes make the surfaces of most polymers. The active plasma species attack the polymer surfaces and cause the incorporation of hydrophilic groups, such as carbonyl, carboxyl, hydroxyl and amino groups. It has been reported that radical species, rather than ions and electrons, play an important role in hydrophilic modifications.235Additionally, polymer surfaces can also be functionalized by plasma induced grafting, which is a combination of plasma activation and conventional chemistry.232 An inert gas (typically argon or helium) is used to activate the polymer surface by forming radicals. After this plasma activation, the polymer surface is exposed to unsaturated monomers, ‘grafting’ a polymer layer on the activated surface, as illustrated in Fig. 15. Fig. 15  Schematic representation of polymer surface activation with plasma treatment and functionalization using monomer (AA) by plasma induced grafting. Plasma polymerization. Besides the surface activation of polymers, thin polymer films can also be deposited by so-called plasma polymerization, which is essentially a plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition process. It refers to the deposition of polymer films due to the excitation of an organic monomer gas with subsequent deposition and polymerization of the excited species on the surface of a substrate. The deposited films are called plasma polymers, and are generally chemically and physically different from conventional polymers.232 Polymers formed by plasma polymerization are, in most cases, highly branched and highly cross-linked. Plasma polymerization is characterized by several features:2331. Plasma polymers are not characterized by repeating units.2. The properties of the plasma polymer are not only determined by the monomer being used, but also by the plasma parameters.3. The monomer used for plasma polymerization does not have to contain a functional group, such as a double bond.Plasma polymerization takes place through several reaction steps.236 In the initiation stage free radicals and atoms are produced by collisions of electrons and ions with monomer molecules, or by dissociation of monomers adsorbed on the surface of the sample. The next step, i.e. the propagation of the reaction, is the actual formation of the polymeric chain. This can take place both in the gas phase (by adding radical atoms to other radicals or molecules) and on the deposited polymer film (by interactions of surface free radicals with either gas phase or adsorbed monomers). Finally, termination can also take place in the gas phase or at the polymer surface, by similar processes as in the propagation step, but ending either with the final product or with a closed polymer chain as shown in Fig. 16. Application of plasma polymerized films is associated with biomedical uses, e.g. immobilized enzymes,237 organelles,238 cells239 and sterilization.240 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of plasma polymerization process. Plasma utility in food engineeringFood safety is a major concern for food industries, regulatory agencies and consumers. Food-borne pathogens and spoilage microorganisms are problematic microbes in food industry due to their significant negative impact on public health and economy.241 Despite the application of good hygienic practice and good manufacturing practice during the post-harvest period, occurrence of high initial loads of pathogenic bacteria increases the risk of outbreaks of food-borne diseases. Some of these methods rely on lethal heat treatments such as steam pasteurization, autoclaving, ohmic heating, etc. Thermal technologies have side-effects on the nutritional, sensory and functional properties of treated foods, so alternative non-thermal pasteurization methods such as high hydrostatic pressure, pulsed electric field, oscillating magnetic field, ionizing irradiation and high power ultrasound have been developed and studied in recent years. These processes retain the quality of food better than conventional methods, however, they have their own drawbacks. They are costly and require specialized equipment and trained personnel.242 A brief is outlined in Fig. 17. Fig. 17  Illustration of the applications of plasma in food engineering. Treatment of raw and dried produce by plasma. Cold gas plasmas have definite potential for the treatment of fresh foods. NTP has a myriad of potential applications for the food industry including the dry disinfection of food surfaces (like meat, poultry, fish and freshly harvested horticultural produce), granular and particulate foods (dried milk, herbs and spices) and sprouted seeds.243 Selcuket et al.244 successfully decontaminated the seeds of tomato, wheat (Triticumdurum), bean, chickpea, soybean, barley, oat, rye, lentil (Lens culinaris) and corn, contaminated with Aspergillusparasiticus798 and Penicillium sp. to less than 1% of the initial count (depending on treatment times) by employing a custom designed batch type low pressure cold plasma (LPCP) prototype unit operating under vacuum, using air and SF6 gases. Similarly, Niemira and Sites245 significantly reduced the viable populations of Salmonella and E. coli 0157:H7 inoculated on apple surfaces using cold plasma generated in a gliding arc. A 2.9 to 3.7 log CFU ml−1 and 3.4 to 3.6 log CFU ml−1 reduction of Salmonella stanley and E. coli, respectively, was observed. The authors reported the highest flow rate of the air (discharge medium), i.e. 40 litres min−1, to be the most effective.Control of biofilms and decontamination of processing surfaces. Biofilms are problematic in particular food industry sectors such as brewing, dairy processing, fresh produce, poultry processing and red meat processing.246–249 Vleugels and co-workers250 successfully inactivated biofilms forming Pantoea agglomerans (commonly associated with plant tissues) grown on synthetic membranes by two orders of log reduction in 10 min and reported insignificant colour changes of the substrates, viz. red, green and yellow bell pepper samples, on exposure to glow discharge plasma. An almost 100% kill of Chromobacterium violaceum cells embedded in a four day old biofilms using a 100 W RF high-pressure cold plasma jet has been reported.251Control of surface decontamination of eggs using plasma. Salmonella spp. has been largely reported as a potential hazard for egg consumers and the need for alternative methods of decontamination has been highlighted by Davies and Breslin.252 The scientific literature has already evidenced several non thermal approaches for the superficial decontamination of egg shells, including advanced oxidation procedures (AOP's) such as pulsed light technology,253 ozone,254 UV radiation255 and slightly acidic electrolyzed water.256 Ragni and co-workers241 investigated the efficacy of resistive barrier discharge (RBD) plasma for the decontamination of shell egg surfaces. Their work revealed a maximum reduction of 2.2–2.5 log CFU per eggshell in Salmonella enteritidis levels following a 60–90 min treatment at 35% RH. Further, the effectiveness of the treatments enhanced at a higher RH level of 65%, where maximum declines of 3.8 and 4.5 log CFU per eggshell were achieved after 90 min of exposure. Similar observations were made for Salmonella typhimurium, with an overall reduction of 3.5 log CFU per eggshell after a 90 min treatment. The enhanced effects of increased RH on the efficiency of the treatments were explained in this study on the basis of the presence of oxygen species as detected in the discharge emission spectra. These results are at a par with the UV and ozone treatments of eggs reported earlier.254Sterilization of packaging materials in the presence of plasma. Food packaging materials are aimed at serving the functions of both preserving food and protecting it from deterioration, outside contamination or damage during distribution and storage. When not stored in proper conditions, packaging materials can get contaminated with microorganisms. These contaminants are transferred to food via packages, and their growth on food can result in economic losses because of spoilage.257 Current food-related applications of plasma are mostly limited to packaging industry including sterilization of anti-fouling and printable surfaces and permeability reduction of polymers for carbon dioxide and oxygen.258,259 Low temperature gas plasma sterilization allows fast and safe sterilization of packaging materials such as plastic bottles, lids and films without adversely affecting the properties of the material or leaving any residues. A method for cold non-germicidal gas based plasma treatment of plastic bottles has been patented by Rostaing260 which has the added advantage of a simultaneous deposition of diffusion barrier layer, thereby allowing the integration of the sterilization and optionally impermeabilisation operations in the bottling line which extend from the moulding of the bottles till filling. Muranyi et al.261 have used polyethylene terpthalate (PET) as the treatment medium and reported the inactivation of several micro-organisms. Plasma deposition of heat sensitive materials such as antioxidants and antimicrobials into the packaging material may prove as another alternative in the field of antimicrobial and active packaging. Fernandez-Gutierrez et al.262 have achieved partial success in depositing a plasma-processed vanillin film over red apples.Water purification using plasmaWater is an indispensable requirement of life as well as industries. Water is a resource that is becoming increasingly scarce and needs to be sustained, globally and locally. Water pollution added to the scarcity of water has become an acute problem in recent times. Groundwater, river and lakes are polluted by human activities and industrial wastes. One of the most serious problems faced by billions of people today is the availability of fresh water. It has been estimated that 1.2 billion people have no water within 400 m of their dwelling.263 Purifying and reusing the waste water has been thought as a solution due to the adverse effects of the discharge pollutants on human and aquatic life. For the treatment of waste water, traditional methods such as flocculation, carbon adsorption, reverse osmosis and activated sludge process have been used. But these methods cannot be successfully employed in the complete destruction of pollutants264 and have the further disadvantage of potential secondary pollution.265 Water treatment processes have been developed using chemical oxidation processes (COPs). The most commonly used oxidants are chlorine, chlorine dioxide, chloramines, ozone and potassium permanganate, which have high oxidation potentials and hence prove to be effective oxidants for water treatment. However, their use for the destructive treatment of wastes has been limited because such reagents have been usually expensive and the addition of large quantities of oxidizing agents to a waste solution may result in a new waste treatment problem involving the reduced products of the oxidizing agents. For example, halogenated organics byproducts can be formed when chlorine or ozone (in the presence bromide ion) are used, which can cause possible health effects.266,267There has been a continuing need for the development of effective, cheap and environmentally friendly processes for the disinfection and degradation of organic pollutants from water. Great attention has been focused on the so called advanced oxidation processes (AOP) that have been based on a generation of highly reactive species, especially hydroxyl radicals. This is because the hydroxyl radical is a very powerful, non-selective oxidant that has the oxidation potential to completely oxidize organics to carbon dioxide and water.267 There are a number of methods for generating hydroxyl radicals that may be applied in AOP, such as photochemical and electrochemical oxidation, photolysis of hydrogen peroxide and ozone, Fenton-type reactions, TiO2 photocatalysis, wet oxidation, sonolysis and irradiation of water by high energy electron beams or γ-rays. Further, the work with the combination of other catalysts including alumina268 and zeolites269 has also been conducted. However, a common feature of AOP is that the radical production involves a significant expense of the energy (either chemical, electrical or radiative). The need of an energy efficient method for the production of highly reactive transient species has motivated research on the application of high voltage electrical discharges for water purification. In general, strong electric fields applied to water initiate both chemical and physical processes as ultraviolet radiation, overpressure shock waves and, especially, the formation of various reactive chemical species such as radicals (OH·, H·, O·, HO2·) and molecular species (H2O2, H2, O2).Plasma itself serves as an independent remediation for water purification. Plasma treatment of contaminated water appears to be a promising alternative method in this direction. It has a characteristic feature that all kinds of organic materials including recalcitrant matter are decomposed due to active species produced by plasma. Dyes have been one of the major pollutants in water. Due to their high solubility in water they can be transported over large distances once they are discharged in streams and rivers. Most of the dyes have been found to be resistant to normal wastewater treatment processes. Bio-treatment of effluents containing organic dyes has not been effective due to their resistance to aerobic degradation, while by anaerobic degradation carcinogenic aromatic amines have been formed as by-products.270 AOP based on the generation of plasma at the gas–water interface has been studied for the degradation of water-bound pollutants like dyes.271 In a dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) reactor, the electrical discharges take place between electrodes, where at least one of the electrodes is covered with a thin layer of dielectric material, such as glass or quartz.272 DBD has been an effective way to produce low-temperature plasma. Media can cover the electrode surface or place between the two electrodes, two electrodes with a high enough voltage, electrode gap of air generated by the breakdown discharge. Dielectric also plays a role in energy storage during the discharge process so that delay discharge stability and produce very short pulses, while it can inhibit the production of spark discharge. In the case of the water treatment application of DBD reactors, a layer of water around one of the electrodes acts as a dielectric.273 The decomposition of the azo dye methyl red in aqueous solution has been performed using a pulsed dielectric barrier discharge in a coaxial configuration. The solution has been made to flow as a thin layer on the surface of the inner electrode of the DBD reactor, so that the oxidizing species formed in the discharge can easily penetrate the solution, react with the dye molecules and decompose them. After plasma treatment for 10 min, 93% removal of the dye has been found for a 50 mg L−1 initial concentration of methyl red in solution and the corresponding removal yield has been found to be 52.5 g kW−1 h−1. Lower concentrations of the dye could be removed faster, however the efficiency has been found to be lower in those cases.274 The DBD reactor has also been designed and tested for the degradation of a model aqueous pollutant crystal violet (CV). It has been observed that the major reactive species involved in the degradation process include hydroxyl radical, hydrogen peroxide and ultraviolet, which might cause strong oxidizing effects in the degradation of CV. The effect of various parameters like applied voltage, gas flow rates, concentrations of dye, addition of Fe2+ or H2O2 and a change in pH has been studied to the synergistic effect during degradation. Mineralization of the dye has been confirmed by the total organic carbon (TOC) analyzer and infrared gas analyzer. It has been observed that both the degradation efficiency and TOC removal increases by increasing the input energy; however, the energy yield decreased. Formation of H2O2 has been confirmed, and it increases with treatment time. The degradation process of the model dye, CV, has been found to obey first-order kinetics, and the rate of degradation strongly increases with the addition of Fe2+ due to the catalytic formation of hydroxyl radicals via Fenton-type reactions. The specific advantage of the present process is found to be the mineralization of CV, the highest energy yield up to 86.3 g kW−1 h−1.275Another method for the removal of dye is contact glow discharge electrolysis (CGDE). CGDE has been a novel type of electrochemical process in which plasma is sustained by d.c. glow discharges between an electrode and the surface of the electrolyte. In CGDE, a continuous d.c. voltage of around 0.5 kV has been applied to a thin wire anode in contact with the water surface while the cathode has been dipped in water and isolated from the anode through porous glass.276,277 Also, H2 has been formed in the gas phase and H2O2 in the aqueous phase.119 A sheath of vapour forms around the anode through which current flows as a glow discharge. Charged species in the plasma (present in the discharge gap or sheath of vapour around the anode) have been accelerated due to the steep potential gradient and enter the liquid phase with an energy that may be as high as 100 eV. In the case of contact glow discharges, almost all the species in the discharge zone, i.e. anions, cations and neutrals, heat up so the plasma generated in the reactors can be called a hot plasma.278 In both cases of CGDE and DBD reactors, the electrical discharges take place in the gas phase in close proximity to the water surface. They require an intense electric field of the order of 1 MV cm−1 for the electrical discharge to take place in water. Such a high electric field has been possible by applying high-voltage pulses of 15–100 kV, usually of positive polarity, with a sharp rise time (a few nanoseconds) and short duration (nano to microseconds) in a pulsed corona discharge reactor.279Oxidative degradation of eight kinds of dyes induced by plasma in aqueous solution has been investigated with contact glow discharge electrolysis (CGDE). It has been demonstrated that these eight dyes (Acridine Orange (AO), Methyl Blue (MB), Rhodamine B (RhB), weak Acid Flavine G (FG), Weak Acid brilliant Red B (RB), Cationic Red (GTL), Chrome Azurol S (CAS), Methyl Orange (MO)) underwent degradation in CGDE, where Fe+2 could be utilised to raise the efficiency of degradation of dyes. The concentration of Fe+2 has been taken as 1 μM and the value of pH has been controlled to 2.14. The decolorization rates of the single dyes after degradation are listed in Table 5.280
Table 5 Decolorization rates of the different dyes after different discharge times

Dyes solutionMBFGRBMOAOCASRhBGTLDecolorization 2 min97.4992.8493.6399.1197.9993.8695.1394.93Rate (%) 5 min99.4694.4194.1199.3498.4793.9497.2096.55Further, the waste water from a paracetamol factory has been another important waste to be purified. Atmospheric pressure plasma in gaseous media has been utilised to decompose organic materials in environmental water and kill bacteria in waste water. Non-thermal plasma combined with activated carbon has been developed to purify wastewater from a paracetamol factory. The effect of discharge time, discharge voltage, initial pH value of wastewater, velocity of the air flow and whether adding activated carbon on the chemical oxygen demand (COD) degradation and decolorization ratio have been investigated. It has been seen that as the discharge time was prolonged, the decolorization ratio decreased but the COD degradation ratio increased at first and then reached a constant value. The ratios of COD degradation and decolorization decreased when the initial pH value increased. With the increase of inputting air flow, it was found that the COD degradation ratio went up and had an optimal peak value and then the decolorization ratio declined. The ratio of decolorization and the COD degradation could be improved significantly with the addition of activated carbon.281 Non-thermal plasma generated in a pulsed dielectric barrier discharge in a coaxial configuration has been investigated for the removal of three β-lactam antibiotics (amoxicillin, oxacillin and ampicillin) from water. The discharge has been generated at the gas–liquid interface at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, in oxygen. Solutions with a concentration of 100 mg L−1 have been made to flow as a film over the surface of the inner electrode of the plasma reactor, so the discharge has been generated at the gas–liquid interface. The electrical discharge has been operated in a pulsed regime, at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, in oxygen. Amoxicillin has been found to degrade after a 10 min plasma treatment, while the other two antibiotics required about 30 min for decomposition. The evolution of the degradation process has been continuously followed using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS), total organic carbon (TOC) and COD analysis.282All of these methods have been successfully employed for the complete decomposition of pollutants with the potential to stop further secondary pollution but plasma has a characteristic feature that all kinds of organic materials, including recalcitrant matter, can be decomposed due to the active species produced by plasma. Compared to its fellow AOP approaches, non-thermal plasma can achieve greater output and more efficiency. However, applying non-thermal plasma technology into organic wastewater cleaning remains an interesting research area. To enhance the efficiency of bacteria inactivation in wastewater various methods have been used, such as electrochemical and photocatalytic disinfections, chlorination, ozonation, the Fenton reaction, UV irradiation and electrohydraulic. The use of plasma in water purification attracts attention because of the possibility of obtaining gas jets with a high oxidizing power in compact devices at reasonably low energy inputs. New applications of plasma in the field of water purification systems have emerged as a promising future approach.ConclusionPlasmas finds well-established usage in industrial applications (e.g. surface modifications, lasers, etc.), but they are also gaining more interest in the field of the chemical sciences related to environmental issues and various other applications. Plasma interaction with enzymes has shown that it can modify its surface, improve its solubility and functionality. Further, plasma (plasma jet and dielectric barrier discharge (DBD)) affects fibroblasts, endothelial and smooth muscle cells in a dosage-dependent manner. The cells, detached due to the plasma treatment, remain viable, reattach to the plate surface and proliferate after a short incubation time. While for longer exposure times or treatments with higher plasma intensities induced either cell apoptosis or necrosis. This shows the effect of plasma on cells. Moreover, floating electrode dielectric barrier discharge (FE-DBD) plasma can kill melanoma skin cancer cells through necrosis and prevent damage to the healthy tissue. Additionally, plasma jets are capable of inactivating E. coli, Bacillus atrophaeus and S. aureus at exposure times of several minutes. Plasma is also used for various biomedical applications such as sterilization, blood coagulation, wound healing and tooth bleaching. Besides this, plasma can accelerate chemical reactions at low temperatures. In addition to this, it is widely used for the removal of volatile organic compounds, which shows its potential to act as a green alternative for the chemist. Moreover, the various application of plasma in surface modifications and nanoscience provides a new look into these areas. Last but not least, plasma has the most important role in water purification. AOP based on the generation of plasma at the gas–water interface has been used for the degradation of water bound pollutants like dyes. The major advantages of plasma technology compared to conventional technologies include the moderate operation conditions (normal temperature and atmospheric pressure), moderate capital cost, compact system, easy operations and short residence times, etc. While there is still more to go in the development and utilization of these plasma sources, there is no doubt that low temperature atmospheric pressure gas discharge plasma is a promising technology, not only for the future, but also for today's processes and applications. So, we hope that plasma will surely be available in the near future to an increasing extent for industrial growth and in other areas of science.AcknowledgementsWe gratefully acknowledge the SRC program of National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded by the Korean Government (MEST) (No. 20100029418) and in part by the research grant of Kwangwoon University in 2013.ReferencesV. Nehra, A. Kumar and H. K. Dwivedi, International Journal of Engineering, 2008, 2, 53–68 Search PubMed .G. Fridman, G. Friedman, A. Gutsol, A. B. Shekhter, V. N. Vasilets and A. Fridman, Plasma Processes Polym., 2008, 5, 503–533 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Choi, C. G. Son, Y. J. Hong, B. Park, H. S. Uhm and E. H. Choi, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 1, 045014–045019 CrossRef .H. S. Uhm, G. C. Kwon and E. H. Choi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 261502–261505 CrossRef .H. S. Uhm, J. H. Choi, H. J. Yoo, G. C. Kwon and E. H. Choi, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 053302–053309 CrossRef .M. G. Kong, G. Kroesen, G. Morfill, T. Nosenko, T. Shimizu, J. van Dijk and J. L. Zimmermann, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 115012–115047 CrossRef .A. Fridman, A. Chirokov and A. Gutsol, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, R1–R24 CrossRef CAS .A. Bogaerts, E. Neyts, R. Gijbels and J. van der Mullen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57, 609–658 CrossRef .L. B. Loeb, Electrical Coronas: Their Basic Physical Mechanism, University of California Press, Berkeley, CA,  1965 Search PubMed .R. Morrow, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1997, 30, 3099–3114 CrossRef CAS .A. Schutze, J. Y. Jeong, S. E. Babayan, J. Park, G. S. Selwyn and R. F. Hicks, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 1998, 26, 1685–1694 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Babayan, J. Y. Jeong, A. Schutze, V. J. Tu, M. Moravej and G. S. Selwyn, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2001, 10, 573–578 CrossRef CAS .U. Kogelschatz, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2002, 30, 1401–1407 CrossRef .T. Nozaki, Y. Unno, Y. Miyazaki and K. Okazaki, presented to 15th International Symposium on Plasma Chemistry, Orleans, France,  2001 Search PubMed .V. I. Gibalov and G. J. Pietsch, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2000, 33, 2618–2636 CrossRef CAS .S. Ptasinska, B. Bahnev, A. Stypczynska, M. Bowden, N. J. Mason and N. S. Braithwaite, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 28, 7779–7781 RSC .S. Ptasinska, B. Bahnev, A. Stypczynska, M. Bowden, N. St. J. Braithwaite and N. J. Mason, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2009, 194, 152029 CrossRef .G. Li, H.-P. Li, L.-Y. Wang, S. Wang, H.-X. Zhao, W.-T. Sun, X.-H. Xing and C.-Y. Bao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 221504–221507 CrossRef .X. T. Deng, J. J. Shi and M. G. Kong, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 074701–074710 CrossRef .B. A. Olofsson, C. M. Kelly, J. Kim, S. M. Hornsby and J. Azizkhan-Clifford, Mol. Cancer Res., 2007, 5, 1319–1330 CrossRef CAS .B. E. Lehnert and R. Iyer, Hum. Exp. Toxicol., 2002, 21, 65–69 CAS .E. Rogakou, C. Boon, C. Redon and W. Bonner, J. Cell Biol., 1999, 146, 905–916 CrossRef CAS .S. Kalghatgi, C. M. Kelly, E. Cerchar, B. Torabi, O. Alekseev, A. Fridman, G. Friedman and J. Azizkhan-Clifford, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e16270–e16270 CAS .A. Stypczynska, S. Ptasinska, B. Bahnev, M. Bowden, N. St. J. Braithwaite and N. J. Mason, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 500, 313–317 CrossRef CAS .P. Attri, P. Venkatesu, K. S. Kim, N. Kaushik, Y. G. Han, C. J. Nam and E. H. Choi, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2012, 60, 959–964 CrossRef CAS .P. Attri, P. Venkatesu, N. Kaushik and E. H. Choi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7146–7155 RSC .J. Julak, O. Janouskova, V. Scholtz and K. Holada, Plasma Processes Polym., 2011, 8, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .H.-P. Li, L.-Y. Wang, G. Li, L.-H. Jin, P.-S. Le, H.-X. Zhao, X.-H. Xing and C.-Y. Bao, Plasma Processes Polym., 2011, 8, 224–229 CrossRef CAS .H. Yasuda, M. Hashimoto, M. M. Rahman, K. Takashima and A. Mizuno, Plasma Processes Polym., 2008, 5, 615–621 CrossRef CAS .E. Takai, K. Kitano, J. Kuwabara and K. Shiraki, Plasma Processes Polym., 2012, 9, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Gao, T. J. Herald and P. L. Miuno, J. Food Sci., 2001, 66, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .D. O'Connell, L. J. Cox, W. B. Hyland, S. J. McMahon, S. Reuter, W. G. Graham, T. Gans and F. J. Currell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 043701–043703 CrossRef .E. Stoffels, Y. Sakiyama and D. B. Graves, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2008, 36, 1441–1457 CrossRef CAS .S. U. Kalghatgi, G. Fridman, A. Fridman, G. Friedman and A. M. Clyne, Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, 3578–3581 Search PubMed .A. Shashurin, M. Keidar, S. Bronnikov, R. A. Jurjus and M. A. Stepp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 181501–181504 CrossRef .E. Stoffels, I. E. Kieft and R. E. J. Sladek, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, 2908–2913 CrossRef CAS .E. Stoffels, A. J. M. Roks and L. E. Deelmm, Plasma Processes Polym., 2008, 5, 599–605 CrossRef CAS .I. E. Kieft, M. Kurdi and E. Stoffels, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2006, 34, 1331–1336 CrossRef CAS .S. Yonson, S. Coulombe, V. Leveille and R. L. Leask, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 3508–3513 CrossRef CAS .I. E. Kieft, D. Darios, A. J. M. Roks and E. Stoffels, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2005, 33, 771–775 CrossRef .G. Fridman, M. Peddinghaus, H. Ayan, A. Fridman, M. Balasubramanian, A. Gutsol, A. Brooks and G. Friedman, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2006, 26, 425–442 CrossRef CAS .G. Fridman, A. Shereshevsky, M. Peddinghaus, A. Gutsol, V. Vasilets, A. Brooks, M. Balasubramanian, G. Friedman and A. Fridman, in: 37th AIAA Plasma dynamics and Lasers Conference, San Francisco, California,  2006 Search PubMed .M. Vandamme, E. Robert, S. Dozias, S. Sobilo, S. Lerondel, A. Le Pape and J.-M. Pouvesle, Plasma Med., 2011, 1, 27–43 CrossRef .E. D. Kirson, V. Dbaly, F. Tovarys, J. Vymazal, J. F. Soustiel, A. Itzhaki, D. Mordechovich, S. Steinberg-Shapira, Z. Gurvich, R. Schneiderman, Y. Wasserman, M. Salzberg, B. Ryffel, D. Goldsher, E. Dekel and Y. Palti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10152–10157 CrossRef CAS .R. Nuccitelli, U. Pliquett, X. Chen, W. Ford, R. J. Swanson, S. J. Beebe, J. F. Kolk and K. H. Schoenbach, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2006, 343, 351–360 CrossRef CAS .V. Gostev and D. Dobrynin, in: 3rd International Workshop on Microplasmas (IWM-2006), Greifswald, Germany,  2006 Search PubMed .M. Moreau, N. Orange and M. G. J. Feuilloley, Biotechnol. Adv., 2008, 26, 610–617 CrossRef CAS .M. Laroussi and X. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 113902–113905 CrossRef .M. Laroussi, C. Tendero, X. Lu, S. Alla and W. L. Hynes, Plasma Processes Polym., 2006, 3, 470–473 CrossRef CAS .J. Goree, B. Liu, D. Drake and E. Stoffels, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2006, 34, 1317–1324 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, T. Ye, Y. G. Cao, Z. Y. Sun, Q. Xiong, Z. Y. Tang, Z. Xiong, J. Hu, Z. H. Jiang and Y. Pan, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 053309–053314 CrossRef .K.-D. Weltmann, R. Brandenburg, T. von Woedtke, J. Ehlbeck, R. Foest, M. Stieber and E. Kindel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 194008–19414 CrossRef .T. C. Montie, K. Kelly-Wintenberg and J. R. Roth, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2000, 28, 41–50 CrossRef .M. Laroussi, G. Sayler, B. Galscock, B. McCurdy, M. Pearce, N. Bright and C. Malott, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 1999, 27, 34–35 CrossRef .D. A. Mendis, M. Rosenberg and F. Azam, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2000, 28, 1304–1306 CrossRef .M. Laroussi, J. P. Richardson and F. C. Dobbs, in Proc. Electromed., Portsmouth, VA,  2001, pp. 33–34 Search PubMed .X. T. Deng, J. J. Shi and M. G. Kong, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 074701–074711 CrossRef .X. T. Deng, J. J. Shi, H. L. Chen and M. G. Kong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 013903–013906 CrossRef .M. Moisan, J. Barbeau, S. Moreau, J. Pelletier, M. Tabrizian and L. H. Yahia, Int. J. Pharm., 2001, 226, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .N. Philip, B. Saoudi, M. C. Crevier, M. Moisan, J. Barbeau and J. Pelletier, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2002, 30, 1429–1436 CrossRef CAS .H. W. Herrmann, I. Henins, J. Park and G. S. Selwyn, Phys. Plasmas, 1999, 6, 2284–2289 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Richardson, F. F. Dyer, F. C. Dobbs, I. Alexeff and M. Laroussi, Proc. IEEE Int Conf. Plasma Science, 2000, 109 Search PubMed .A. I. Kuzmichev, I. A. Soloshenko, V. V. Tsiolko, V. I. Kryzhanovsky, V. Yu. Bazhenov, I. L. Mikhno and V. A. Khomich, Proc. Int. Symp. High Pressure Low Temperature Plasma Chemistry, Greifswald, Germany,  2001, pp. 402–406 Search PubMed .V. J. Thannickal and B. L. Fanburg, Am. J. Physiol.-Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol., 2000, 279, L1005–L1028 CAS .J. A. Cook, D. Gius, D. A. Wink, M. C. Krishna, A. Russo and J. B. Mitchell, Semin. Radiat. Oncol., 2004, 14, 259–266 CrossRef .P. K. Mander, A. Jekabsone and G. C. Brown, J. Immunol., 2006, 176, 1046–1052 CAS .C. Polytarchou, M. Hatziapostolou and E. Papadimitriou, J. Biol. Chem., 2005, 280, 40428–40435 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Brown and V. Borutaite, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2002, 33, 1440–1450 CrossRef CAS .K. Kroncke, K. Fehsel and V. Kolb-Bachofen, Nitric Oxide, 1997, 1, 107–120 CrossRef CAS .F. Krotz, H. Y. Sohn and U. Pohl, Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol., 2004, 24, 1988–1996 CrossRef .U. Rauen, T. Li, I. Ioannidis and H. de Groot, Am. J. Physiol.: Cell Physiol., 2007, 292, C1440–C1449 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Chae, H. R. Kim, Y. G. Kwak, J. K. Ko, C. U. Joo and S. W. Chae, Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol., 2001, 23, 187–204 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Dawe, Br. J. Dermatol., 2003, 149, 669–672 CrossRef CAS .G. Y. Park, S. J. Park, M. Y. Choi, I. G. Koo, J. H. Byun, J. W. Hong, J. Y. Sim, G. J. Collins and J. K. Lee, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2012, 21, 043001–043022 CrossRef .G. Fridman, G. Friedman, A. Gutsol, A. B. Shekhter, V. N. Vasilets and A. Fridman, Plasma Processes Polym., 2008, 5, 503–533 CrossRef CAS .W. A. Rutala, M. F. Gergen and D. J. Weber, Am. J. Infect. Control, 1998, 26, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .H. Ohkawa, T. Akitsu, M. Tsuji, H. Kimura, M. Kogoma and K. Fukushima, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 5829–5835 CrossRef CAS .A. Sharma, A. Pruden, O. Stan and G. J. Collins, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2006, 34, 1290–1296 CrossRef .R. Brandenburg, J. Ehlbeck and M. Stieber, Contrib. Plasma Phys., 2007, 47, 72–79 CrossRef CAS .F. Ramen, Albucasis (Abu Al-Qasim Al-Zahrawi): Renowned Muslim Surgeon of the Tenth Century. New York: Rosen Publishing Group,  2006 Search PubMed .K. R. Stalder, Proc. Gaseous Electron. Conf., San Francisco, CA,  2003, p. 16 Search PubMed .S. U. Kalghatgi, G. Fridman, M. Cooper, G. Nagaraj, M. Peddinghaus, M. Balasubramanian, V. N. Vasilets, A. F. Gutsol, A. Fridman and G. Friedman, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2007, 35, 1559–66 CrossRef CAS .S. Kuo, O. Tarasenko, J. Chang, S. Popovic, C. Chen, H. Fan, A. Scott, M. Lahiani, P. Alusta and J. Drake, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 115016–115033 CrossRef .S. P. Kuo, C. Y. Chen, C. S. Lin and S. H. Chiang, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2010, 38, 1908–1914 CrossRef .J. Choi, A. A. H. Mohamed, S. K. Kang, K. C. Woo, K. T. Kim and J. K. Lee, Plasma Processes Polym., 2010, 7, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Walsh and M. G. Kong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 251504–251507 CrossRef .W. Stolz, M. Georgi, H.-U. Schmidt, K. Ramrath, R. Pompl, T. Shimizu, B. Steffes, W. Bunk, B. Peters, F. Jamitzky and G. Morfill, Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Plasma Med., Corpus Christi, TX,  2007, p. 15 Search PubMed .E. Stoffels, Proc. Int. Conf. Plasma Med., Corpus Christi, TX,  2007, p. 14 Search PubMed .A. B. Shekhter, R. K. Kabisov, A. V. Pekshev, N. P. Kozlov and Y. L. Perov, Bull. Exp. Biol. Med., 1998, 126, 829–834 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Shekhter, V. A. Serezhenkov, T. G. Rudenko, A. V. Pekshev and A. F. Vanin, Nitric Oxide, 2005, 12, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Tipa and G. M. W. Kroesen, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2011, 39, 2978–2979 CrossRef .D. Losic, M. A. Cole, B. Dollmann, K. Vasilev and H. J. Griesser, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 245704–245705 CrossRef .C. Canal, F. Gaboriau, A. Vilchez, P. Erra, M. G. Celma and J. Esquena, Plasma Processes Polym., 2009, 6, 686–692 CrossRef CAS .K. Vasilev, Z. Poh, K. Kant, J. Chan, A. Michelmore and D. Losic, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 532–540 CrossRef CAS .H. W. Lee, G. J. Kim, J. M. Kim, J. K. Park, J. K. Lee and G. C. Kim, J. Endod., 2009, 35, 587–591 CrossRef .H. W. Lee, S. H. Nam, A. A. H. Mohamed, G. C. Kim and J. K. Lee, Plasma Processes Polym., 2010, 7, 274–280 CrossRef CAS .P. Sun, J. Pan, Y. Tian, N. Bai, H. Wu, L. Wang, C. Yu, J. Zhang, W. Zhu and K. H. Becker, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2010, 38, 1892–1896 CrossRef CAS .J. Pan, P. Sun, Y. Tian, H. Zhou, H. Wu, N. Bai, F. Liu, W. Zhu, J. Zhang and K. H. Becker, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2010, 38, 3143–3151 CrossRef CAS .J. Park, S. Nam, H. Kwon, A. Mohamed, J. Lee and G. Kim, Int. Endod. J., 2011, 44, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .N. Pearlman, G. Stiegmann, V. Vance, L. Norton, R. Bell, R. Staerkel, C. W. Van Way and E. Bartle, Arch. Surg., 1991, 126, 1018–1020 CrossRef CAS .S. Cheruthazhekatt, M. Černák, P. Slavíček and J. Havel, Journal of Applied Biomedicine, 2010, 8, 55–66 CrossRef CAS .R. E. J. Sladek, E. Stoffels, R. Walraven, P. J. A. Tielbeek and R. A. Koolhoven, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2004, 32, 1540–1543 CrossRef .X. Zhang, J. Huang, X. Liu, L. Peng, L. Guo, G. Lv, W. Chen, K. Feng and S. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 063302–063308 CrossRef .C. Jiang, M. T. Chen, A. Gorur, C. Schaudinn, D. E. Jaramillo, J. W. Costerton, P. P. Sedghizadeh, P. T. Vernier and M. A. Gundersen, Plasma Processes Polym., 2009, 6, 479–483 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, Y. Cao, P. Yang, Q. Xiong, Z. Xiong, Y. Xian and Y. Pan, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2009, 37, 668–673 CrossRef CAS .C.-J. Liu, G. P. Vissokov and B. Jang, Catal. Today, 2002, 72, 173–184 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Wang, J.-G. Li, H. Kamiyama, M. Katada, N. Ohashi, Y. Moriyoshi and T. Ishigaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10982–10990 CrossRef CAS .R. Sharma, R. D. Rimmer, J. Gunamgari, R. S. Shekhawat, B. J. Davis, M. K. Mazumder and D. A. Lindquist, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2005, 41, 1373–1376 CrossRef CAS .I. G. Koo, M. S. Lee, J. H. Shim, J. H. Ahn and W. M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4125–4128 RSC .M. Deminsky, V. Jivotov, B. Potapkin and V. Rusanov, Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 74, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .X. Tang, K. Li, H. Yi, P. Ning, Y. Xiang, Y. Wang and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10017–10028 CAS .E. L. Reddy, J. Karuppiah, V. M. Biju and Ch. Subrahmanyam, Int. J. Energy Res., 2012 DOI:10.1002/er.2924 .E. Lingareddy, V. M. Biju and Ch. Subrahmanyam, International Journal of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, 2011, 2, 87–90 CAS .O. Matsumoto, 3rd International Workshop Microwave Discharges: Fundamentals and Applications J. Phys. IV France, 1998, 08, Pr7-411–Pr7-420 Search PubMed .K. Sugiyama, K. Akazawa, M. Oshima, H. Miura, T. Matsuda and O. Nomura, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 1986, 6, 179–193 CrossRef CAS .S. Manolache, C. Romanescu, G. Cobileac and C. I. Simionescu, Molecules, 1997, 2, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .C.-J. Liu, J. Zou, K. Yu, D. Cheng, Y. Han, J. Zhan, C. Ratanatawanate and B. W.-L. Jang, Pure Appl. Chem., 2006, 78, 1227–1238 CrossRef CAS .J. Van Durme, J. Dewulf, C. Leys and H. Van Langenhove, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 78, 324–333 CrossRef CAS .S. Delagrange, L. Pinard and J. M. Tatibouet, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 68, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .S. Pekarek, M. Pospisil and J. Krysa, Plasma Processes Polym., 2006, 3, 308–315 CrossRef CAS .J. O. Chae, V. Demidiouk, M. Yeulash, I. C. Choi and T. G. Jung, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2004, 32, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Guo, D. Q. Ye, K. F. Chen, J. C. He and W. L. Chen, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 245, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .B. Lu, X. Zhang, X. Yu, T. Feng and S. Yao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 137, 633–637 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Malik, Y. Minamitani and K. H. Schoenbach, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2005, 33, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Chang and H. M. Lee, Plasma Technol. Catal., 2004, 89, 109–115 CAS .H. H. Kim, A. Ogata and S. Futamura, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 1292–1300 CrossRef CAS .C. Subrahmanyam, M. Magureanu, A. Renken and L. Minsker-Kiwi, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 65, 150–156 CrossRef CAS .H. X. Ding, A. M. Zhu, F. G. Lu, Y. Xu, J. Zhang and X. F. Yang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 3603–3608 CrossRef CAS .R. Morent, J. Dewulf, N. Steenhaut, C. Leys and H. Van Langenhove, J. Adv. Oxid. Technol., 2006, 9, 53–58 CAS .J. Van Durme, J. Dewulf, W. Sysmans, C. Leys and H. Van Langenhove, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .C. Subrahmanyam, A. Renken and L. Kiwi-Minsker, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2007, 27, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .M. Magureanu, N. B. Mandache, J. Hu, R. Richards, M. Florea and V. I. Parvulescu, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 76, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .S. B. Han and T. Oda, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2007, 16, 413–421 CrossRef CAS .L. Intriago, E. Diaz, S. Ordonez and A. Vega, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 91, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .Q. Sun, A. M. Zhu, X. F. Yang, J. H. Niu, Y. Xu, Z. M. Song and J. Liu, Chinese Chemical Letters, 2005, 16, 839–842 CAS .M. Jasinski, M. Dors and J. Mizeraczyk, ISNTPT-6, 2008, 134–139 Search PubMed .M. Goto, M. Sasaki, T. Fang, T. Saito, T. Kiyan, T. Namihira, H. Akiyama and M. Hara, 11th European Meeting on Supercritical Fluids at Barcelona, Spain, 2008, 12–14 Search PubMed .Ph. G. Rutberg, V. A. Kuznetsov, A. N. Bratsev, V. E. Popov, S. V. Shtengel' and A. A. Ufimtsev, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2011, 19, 012003–012007 CrossRef .U. Roland, F. Holzer and F. D. Kopinke, Catal. Today, 2002, 73, 315–323 CrossRef CAS .D. Evans, L. Rosocha, G. Anderson, J. Coogan and M. Kushner, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 5378–5387 CrossRef CAS .M. Magureanu, N. Mandache and V. Parvulescu, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2007, 27, 679–690 CrossRef CAS .M. Magureanu, N. B. Mandache, V. I. Parvulescu, Ch. Subrahmanyam, A. Renken and L. Kiwi-Minsker, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 270–277 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Yost and D. D. Fetterolf, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 1983, 2, 1–45 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Rosocha and R. A. Korzekwa, in: “Electrical Discharges for Environmental Purposes, Fundamentals and Applications”, E. M. van Veldhuizen, Ed., Nova Science Publishers, Inc., New York 2000, Chapter 10, pp. 244–278 .H. Maetzing, W. Baumann and H.-R. Paur, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1089–1092 CrossRef .R. Rudolph, K.-P. Francke and H. Miessner, Plasmas Polym., 2003, 8, 153–161 CrossRef .D. Evans, L. A. Rosocha, G. K. Anderson, J. J. Coogan and M. J. Kushner, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 5378–5487 CrossRef CAS .H. Einaga, T. Lbusuki and S. Futamura, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2001, 37, 858–863 CrossRef .Y. F. Guo, D. Q. Ye and K. F. Chen, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 245, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .H. H. Kim, A. Ogata and S. Futamura, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2006, 34, 984–995 CrossRef CAS .H. H. Kim, A. Ogata and S. Futamura, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 79, 356–367 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhu, J. Li, Y. Q. Jin, Y. H. Liang and G. D. Ma, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Tech., 2009, 6, 141–148 CAS .X. Tang, M. Wang, W. Feng, F. Feng and K. Yan, ISPC 20, Philadelphia, USA, 2011, 52 CAS .A. Vandenbroucke, R. Morent, N. De Geyter, M. T. Nguyen Dinh, J.-M. Giraudon, J.-F. Lamonier and C. Leys, International Journal of Plasma Environmental Science & Technology, 2010, 4, 135–138 Search PubMed .V. Demidiouk, S. Moon, J. O. Chae and D. Y. Lee, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2003, 42, S966–S970 CAS .Y. Oishi, Y. Ehara and T. Yamamoto, Electrostatic Precipitation, 2009, 690–693 CrossRef .C. Richmonds, M. Witzke, B. Bartling, S. W. Lee, J. Wainright, C. C. Liu and R. M. Sankaran, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17582–17585 CrossRef CAS .K. Nan, Y. Wang, X. Chen, C. Ning, L. Wang and N. Zhao, J. Biomed Mater Res B Appl. Biomater., 2005, 75, 328–33 CrossRef .Z. Ogumi, Y. Uchimoto, Y. Tsuji and Z. Takehara, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 1577–1582 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ogumi, Y. Uchimoto, Y. Tsuji and Z. Takehara, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 58, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .E. Tam and K. Ostrikov, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 375603–375612 CrossRef .F. Banhart, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 201–213 RSC .W. H. Chiang and R. M. Sankaran, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 882–886 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Chiang, M. Sakr, X. P. A. Gao and R. M. Sankaran, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4023–4032 CrossRef CAS .J. Robertson, G. Zhong, H. Telg, C. Thomsen, J. H. Warner, G. A. D. Briggs, U. Dettlaff-Weglikowska and S. Roth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 163111–163114 CrossRef .S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .K. Ostrikov, U. Cvelbar and A. B. Murphy, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 174001–174030 CrossRef .G. Nandamuri, S. Roumimov and R. Solanki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 154101–154104 CrossRef .D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. M. G. Mohiuddin, S. V. Morozov, P. Blake, M. P. Halsall, A. C. Ferrari, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2009, 323, 610–613 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, X. F. Xu, J. Lu, M. Lin, Q. L. Bao, B. Ozyilmaz and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6146–6152 CrossRef CAS .A. Nourbakhsh, M. Cantoro, T. Vosch, G. Pourtois, F. Clemente, M. H. van der Veen, J. Hofkens, M. M. Heyns, S. De Gendt and B. F. Sels, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 435203–435212 CrossRef .J. Bai, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2083–2087 CrossRef CAS .L. Y. Jiao, L. Zhang, L. Ding, J. E. Liu and H. J. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .H. Hwang and J. K. Park, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 33–47 RSC .M. Hiramatsu, K. Shiji, H. Amano and M. Hori, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4708–4711 CrossRef CAS .K. B. K. Teo, M. Chhowalla, G. A. J. Amaratunga, W. I. Milne, G. Pirio, P. Legagneux, F. Wyczisk, D. Pribat and D. G. Hasko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2011–2014 CrossRef CAS .I. Denysenko and K. Ostrikov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 251501–251504 CrossRef .S. H. Tsai, C. W. Chao, C. L. Lee, X. W. Liu, I. N. Lin and H. C. Shih, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .S. Dumpala, A. Safir, D. Mudd, R. W. Cohn, M. K. Sunkara and G. U. Sumanasekera, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2009, 18, 1262–1266 CrossRef CAS .I. Levchenko, K. Ostrikov, J. D. Long and S. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 113115–113118 CrossRef .Z. L. Tsakadze, K. Ostrikov and S. Xu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 191, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .Z. L. Tsakadze, I. Levchenko, K. Ostrikov and S. Xu, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2022–2030 CrossRef CAS .I. Levchenko, K. Ostrikov and D. Mariotti, Carbon, 2009, 47, 344–347 CrossRef CAS .D. T. Colbert, J. Zhang, S. M. McClure, P. Nikolaev, Z. Chen, J. H. Hafner, D. W. Owens, P. G. Kotula, C. B. Carter, J. H. Weaver, A. G. Rinzler and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1994, 266, 1218–1222 CAS .A. Vinu, T. Mori and K. Ariga, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2006, 7, 753–771 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Byeon, J. H. Park, K. Y. Yoon and J. Hwang, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 339–343 RSC .L. T. Qu, H. Zhang, J. Zhu and L. M. Dai, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 305602–305610 CrossRef .L. Vandenbulcke, T. Gries and J. N. Rouzaud, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 044106–044109 CrossRef .S. Jiao, A. Sumant, M. A. Kirk, D. M. Gruen, A. R. Krauss and O. Auciello, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 118–123 CrossRef CAS .N. G. Shang, P. Papakonstantinou, P. Wang, A. Zakharov, U. Palnitkar, I. N. Lin, M. Chu and A. Stamboulis, ACSNano, 2009, 3, 1032–1038 CrossRef CAS .Q. Q. Yang, C. J. Xiao and A. Hirose, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2005, 7, 2660–2664 CrossRef CAS .M. M. A. Yajadda, I. Levchenko, Z. J. Han and K. Ostrikov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 163109–163112 CrossRef .A. Anders, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 2272–2284 CrossRef CAS .I. Levchenko, K. Ostrikov, K. Winkler, K. Diwan and D. Mariotti, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 183102–183105 CrossRef .H. Furusho, K. Kitano, S. Hamaguchi and Y. Nagasaki, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3526–3535 CrossRef CAS .W. Yan, Z. J. Han, B. T. Phung and K. Ostrikov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2637–2642 CAS .P. Cernetti, R. Gresback, S. A. Campbell and U. Kortshagen, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2007, 13, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .M. Shiratani, K. Koga, S. Ando, T. Inoue, Y. Watanabe, S. Nunomura and M. Kondo, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 201, 5468–5471 CrossRef CAS .Q. J. Cheng, K. Ostrikov and S. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5853–5859 RSC .U. Kortshagen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 113001–113022 CrossRef .T. Hawa and M. R. Zachariah, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 112, 14796–14800 CAS .F. Iacopi, P. M. Vereecken, M. Schaekers, M. Caymax, N. Moelans, B. Blanpain, O. Richard, C. Detavernier and H. Griffiths, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 505307–505314 CrossRef .S. Hofmann, C. Ducati, R. J. Neill, S. Piscanec, A. C. Ferrari, J. Geng, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski and J. Robertson, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6005–6013 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Huang, Q. J. Cheng, S. Xu and K. Ostrikov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 213103–213106 CrossRef .J. Zheng, Y. Yang, B. Yu, X. Song and X. Li, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .D. Mariotti and K. Ostrikov, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 092002–092006 CrossRef .J. Zheng, R. Yang, L. Xie, J. Qu, Y. Liu and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1451–1473 CrossRef CAS .E. L. Tsakadze, K. N. Ostrikov, Z. L. Tsakadze, N. Jiang, R. Ahmad and S. Xu, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 2002, 16, 1143–1147 CrossRef CAS .S. T. Selvan, T. T. Y. Tan, D. K. Yi and N. R. Jana, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11631–11641 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Wang, Y. Yan, J. W. Cui, L. Hosta-Rigau, J. K. Heath, E. C. Nice and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4293–4297 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Stan, D. A. Marcov, A. C. Popa and M. A. Husanu, Digest J. Nanometer. Biostruct., 2010, 5, 705–718 Search PubMed .H. S. Shin, K. Park, J. H. Kim, J. J. Kim, D. K. Han, M. W. Moon, K. R. Lee and J. H. Shin, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 2009, 24, 316–328 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. Wang, M. Xu, W. Zhang, D. T. K. Kwok, J. A. Jiang, Z. W. Wu and P. K. Chu, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 8181–8187 CrossRef CAS .V. Uskokovic and D. P. Uskokovic, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2011, 96, 152–191 CrossRef .S. Xu, J. D. Long, L. Sim, C. H. Diong and K. Ostrikov, Plasma Processes Polym., 2005, 2, 373–390 CrossRef CAS .V. Cannillo and A. Sola, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 30, 2031–2039 CrossRef CAS .J. Dowling, Eye, 2009, 23, 1999–2005 CrossRef CAS .K. Vasilev, J. Cook and H. J. Griesser, Expert Rev. Med. Devices, 2009, 6, 553–567 CrossRef .V. N. Tsaneva, T. K. Popov, F. M. Dias, E. J. Tarte, M. G. Blamire, J. E. Evetts and Z. H. Barber, Vacuum, 2002, 69, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .L. H. Teng and W. A. Anderson, Solid-State Electron., 2004, 48, 309–314 CrossRef CAS .P. Saha, S. Kundoo, A. N. Banerjee and K. K. Chattopadhyay,  200372pp. 129–134.G. Bruno, P. Capezutto and A. Madan(ed.), Plasma Deposition of Amorphous Silicon-Based Materials, Academic Press, San Diego,  1995 Search PubMed .R. Wilhelm, Deposition properties and applications of carbon-based coatings, in: H. Schluter, A. Shivarova (ed.), Advanced Technologies Based on Wave and Beam Generated Plasmas, NATO Sci. Series, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1999, vol. 67, pp. 123–135 Search PubMed .J. Yang, A. Banerjee and S. Uha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 2975–2978 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Manos and D. L. Flamm, Plasma Etching: An Introduction, Academic Press, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .A. Ohsawa, R. Morrow and A. B. Murphy, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2000, 33, 1487–1492 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Jeong, S. E. Babayan, V. J. Tu, J. Park, I. Henins, R. F. Hicks and G. S. Selwyn, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 1998, 7, 282–285 CrossRef CAS .J. Janca, M. Klima, P. Slavicek and L. Zajickova, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1999, 116, 547–551 CrossRef .C. Tendero, C. Tixier, P. Tristant, J. Desmaison and P. Leprince, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61, 2–30 CrossRef .S. Samukawa and T. Mieno, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 1996, 5, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Coburn and H. F. Winters, J. Appl. Phys., 1979, 50, 3189–3195 CrossRef CAS .A. Grill, Cold Plasma in Materials Fabrication: from Fundamentals to Applications, IEEE Press, New York,  1994 Search PubMed .H. K. Yasuda, Plasma polymerization, Academic Press, New York,  1985 Search PubMed .O. Goossens, E. Dekempeneer, D. Vangeneugden, R. Van de Leest and C. Leys, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2001, 474, 142–144 Search PubMed .H. K. Yasuda (Ed.), Plasma Polymerization and Plasma Interactions with Polymeric Materials, Wiley, New York,  1990 Search PubMed .S. Veprek and M. Venugopalan (ed.), Topics in Current Chemistry, Plasma Chemistry III, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1980 Search PubMed .I. Gancarz, J. Bryjak, G. Pozniak and W. Tylus, Eur. Polym. J., 2003, 39, 2217–2224 CrossRef CAS .T. Ichiki, Y. Sugiyama, R. Taura, T. Koidesawa and Y. Horiike, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 435, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ding, J. Chen, Sh. Gao, J. Chang, J. Zhang and E. T. Kang, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 1059–1067 CrossRef CAS .K. Kim, C. Kim and Y. Byun, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .L. Ragni, A. Berardinelli, L. Vannini, C. Montanari, F. Sirri, M. E. Guerzoni and A. Guarnieri, J. Food Eng., 2010, 100, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .H. Yun, B. Kim, S. Jung, Z. A. Kruk, D. B. Kim, W. Choe and C. Jo, Food Control, 2010, 21, 1182–1186 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Misra, B. K. Tiwari, K. S. M. S. Rahavarao and P. Cullen, Food Eng. Rev., 2011, 3, 159–170 CrossRef .M. Selcuk, L. Oksuz and P. Basaran, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 5104–5109 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Niemira and J. Sites, Journal of Food Protection, 2008, 71, 1357–1365 Search PubMed .M. Simoes, L. C. Simoes and M. J. Vieira, LWT–Food Sci. Technol., 2010, 43, 573–583 CrossRef CAS .J. Chen, M. L. Rossman and D. M. Pawar, LWT–Food Sci. Technol., 2007, 40, 249–254 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Frank, J. Ehlers and L. Wicker, Food Protection Trends, 2003, 23, 654–663 Search PubMed .B. Jessen and L. Lammert, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2003, 51, 265–269 CrossRef CAS .M. Vleugels, G. Shama, X. T. Deng, E. Greenacre, T. Brocklehurst and M. G. Kong, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2005, 33, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .N. Abramzon, J. C. Joaquin, J. Bray and G. Brelles-Marino, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2006, 34, 1304–1309 CrossRef CAS .R. Davies and M. Breslin, J. Vet. Med., Ser. B, 2003, 50, 38–41 CrossRef CAS .E. Hierro, S. Manzano, J. A. Ordonez, L. de la Hoz and M. Fernandez, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2009, 135, 125–130 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Rodriguez-Romoand and A. E. Yousef, Journal of Food Protection, 2005, 68, 711–717 Search PubMed .H. Fuhrmann, N. Rupp, A. Buchner and P. Braun, Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 2010, 90, 593–598 CAS .W. Cao, Z. W. Zhu, Z. X. Shi, C. Y. Wang and B. M. Li, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2009, 130, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .M. Turtoi and A. Nicolau, J. Food Eng., 2007, 83, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .J. Schneider, K. Baumgartner, J. Feichtinger, J. Kruger, P. Muranyi, A. Schulz, M. Walker, J. Wunderlich and U. Schumacher, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 200, 962–966 CrossRef CAS .P. Basaran, N. Basaran-Akgul and L. Oksuz, Food Microbiol., 2008, 25, 626–632 CrossRef CAS .J. Rostaing, US Patent App.,  2007, vol. 20, 090/304,950 Search PubMed .P. Muranyi, J. Wunderlich and M. Heise, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2007, 103, 1535–1544 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Fernandez-Gutierrez, P. D. Pedrow, M. J. Pitts and J. Powers, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2010, 38, 957–965 CrossRef CAS .J. Gould and E. Nissen-Petersen, Rainwater Catchement Systems for domestic Supply, IT Publications Ltd.,  1995 Search PubMed .F. Herrera, P. Albers and J. Kiwi, Water Res., 2001, 35, 750–760 CrossRef CAS .P. Cooper, J. Soc. Dyers Colour., 1993, 109, 97–100 CrossRef CAS .Alternative Disinfectants and Oxidants. EPA Guidance Manual, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC,  1999 Search PubMed .J. H. Carey, Water Pollut. Res. J. Can., 1992, 27, 1–21 Search PubMed .M. A. Malik, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2003, 12, S26–S32 CrossRef CAS .H. Kusic, N. Koprivanac, I. Peternel and B. R. Locke, J. Adv. Oxid. Technol., 2005, 8, 172–181 CAS .Y. Badr, M. G. Abd El-Wahed and M. A. Mahmoud, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 154, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .B. Eliasson and U. Kogelschatz, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 1991, 19, 309–322 CrossRef .B. Eliasson, M. Hirth and U. Kogelschatz, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1987, 20, 1421–1437 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Robinson, M. A. Bergougnou, W. L. Cairns, G. S. P. Castle and I. I. Inculet, IEEE IAS Ann. Meeting (New Orleans, LA),  1997, vol. 3, pp. 1797–1802 Search PubMed .M. M. Piroi, N. B. Mandache and V. I. Parvulescu, International Symposium on Plasma Chemistry (ISPC 19), Bochum, Germania,  2009 Search PubMed .P. M. K. Reddy and Ch. Subrahmanyam, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 11097–11103 CrossRef CAS .A. Hickling and M. D. Ingram, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1964, 60, 783–793 RSC .M. Tezuka, Denki Kagaku, 1993, 61, 794–796 CAS .K. Kobayashi, Y. Tomita and M. Sanmyo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 1049, 6318–6326 CrossRef .J. S. Clements, M. Sato and R. H. Davis, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 1987, 1A-23, 224–235 CrossRef .H. Zhong-ai, W. Xiao-yan, G. Jin-zhang, D. Hua-ling, H. Jing-guo, L. Xiao-quan and K. Jing-wan, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2001, 3, 927–932 CrossRef .C. Ming-gong, Z. Fang, C. Can, L. Xia, C. Jing, R. Jun-feng and Y. Dong-xu, International Conference on Materials for Renewable Energy & Environment (ICMREE), 2011, 2, 1506–1510 Search PubMed .M. Magureanu, D. Piroi, N. B. Mandache, V. David, A. Medvedovici, C. Bradu and V. I. Parvulescu, Water Res., 2011, 45, 3407–3416 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram illustrating different states of matter.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic overview of the basic plasma processes in a glow discharge.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of a corona discharge.	 

 	Fig. 4  Representation of the atmospheric pressure plasma jet (APPJ).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) in two different configurations. (a) The volume discharge (VD) consists of two parallel plates: the microdischarge takes place in thin channels, which are generally randomly distributed over the electrode surface. (b) The surface discharge (SD) consists of a number of surface electrodes on a dielectric layer, and a counter-electrode on its reverse side.	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustration of the applications of plasma in different fields.	 

Total damage	10%	8%	20%	62%


1	2 × 106 cfu	0 cfu	0 cfu	0 cfu
2	4 × 106 cfu	25 cfu	0 cfu	0 cfu
3	6 × 106 cfu	1 × 106 cfu	680 cfu	460 cfu

 	Fig. 7  Inactivating agents for bio-decontamination.	 

 	Fig. 8  Representation of the biomedical applications of plasma.	 

 	Fig. 9  Incorporation of drug molecules to plasma treated substrates for drug delivery.	 

DBD	Toluene	315	240	MnO2/Al2O3	IPC	55	11	119
MnO/AC	IPC
Fe2O3/MnO2	IPC
Corona	n-Heptane	 	 	TiO2	IPC	50.4	 	120
DBD	Toluene, Ammonia	667 × 103	10–50	CuO/MnO2	PPC	50	 	121
DBD	Toluene	100–500	50	MnO2/Al/Ni	IPC	>95	1	122
DBD	Benzene	250	300–380	TiO2	IPC	16	3	123
MnO2	IPC	4
Corona (pulsed)	Toluene	100	300	AlO2	IPC	>95	156	124
Benzene	Silica gel	IPC	75
Hexane	25
Methane	5
DBD	SF6	600	300	CuO/ZnO/MgO/Al2O3	IPC	>99	 	125
NF3	IPC	>99
CF4	IPC	66
C2F6	IPC	83
DBD	Benzene	4000	75–110	Ag/TiO2	IPC	96	11	126
Toluene	IPC
o, m, p-Xylene	IPC
Formic acid	IPC
DBD	Toluene	500	250	MnOx/CoOx	IPC	>99	2	127
DBD	Formaldehyde	605	140	Ag/CeO2	IPC	92	6	128
DC positive corona	TCE	1500	100	TiO2	IPC	85	3	129
DC positive corona	Toluene	10000	0.5	CuOMnO2/Al2O3	PPC	>99	 	130
TiO2	IPC	>99
DBD	Isopropanol	500	250	MnOx/CoOx	IPC	>100	9	131
DBD	Trichloroethylene	510	430	Au/SBA-15	PPC	>99	 	132
DBD	Trichloroethylene	500	250	MnO2	PPC	97	 	133
DBD	Dichloromethane	1000	500	γ-Al2O3	IPC/PPC	51/43	 	134
α-Al2O3	PPC	34
TiO2	PPC	39
HZSM-5	PPC	41
NaZSM-5	PPC	38
NaA	PPC	37
NaX	PPC	40

 	Fig. 10  The principle of yttria-stabilized zirconia layer deposition by vapour phase electrolytic deposition.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of the applications of plasma in different areas of nanoscience.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of different surface modification techniques using plasma.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of (a) anisotropic etching, in which the material is removed in the vertical direction only, and (b) isotropic etching, which is characterized by equal vertical and horizontal etch rates, leading to ‘undercutting’.	 

Low frequency	DBD	He/O2	Organic materials	0.2 μm min−1	Non uniform etching	234
Radio frequency	APPJ	He/O2	Kapton	8 μm min−1	Chemical process: influence of oxygen	235
 	 	He/O2/CF4	SiO2	1.2 μm min−1	Metastable species and atoms	 
W	1 μm min−1
Ta	2 μm min−1
 	Cold plasma torch	He/CF4	Si	0.3 μm min−1	Emission intensity (OES) of F* is related to the etching rate of Si.	236

 	Fig. 14  Schematic representation of the four basic etch mechanisms: (a) sputter-etching, (b) chemical etching (i.e. by chemical reactions between plasma species and the target surface, to form projectiles in the gas phase), (c) ion-enhanced energetic etching (i.e. chemical etching, enhanced by energetic ion bombardment) and (d) ion-enhanced inhibitor etching.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of polymer surface activation with plasma treatment and functionalization using monomer (AA) by plasma induced grafting.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of plasma polymerization process.	 

 	Fig. 17  Illustration of the applications of plasma in food engineering.	 

Decolorization 2 min	97.49	92.84	93.63	99.11	97.99	93.86	95.13	94.93
Rate (%) 5 min	99.46	94.41	94.11	99.34	98.47	93.94	97.20	96.55

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
