Facet engineering of ultrathin two-dimensional materials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00067A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00067A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 7327-7343Facet engineering of ultrathin two-dimensional materials

        
          
            Linyang 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yabei 
            Xia†
a, 
      
        
          
            Mengqi 
            Zeng
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Fu
          
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: leifu@whu.edu.cn; zengmq_lan@whu.edu.cn
bThe Institute for Advanced Studies (IAS), Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: leifu@whu.edu.cn
Received 
      1st April 2022
    First published on 4th August 2022AbstractUltrathin two-dimensional (2D) materials exhibit broad application prospects in many fields due to the enhanced specific surface area to volume ratio and quantum confinement effect. Because of the atomic thickness and various orientations, ultrathin 2D materials exposing specific facets have drawn great attention for various applications in catalysis, batteries, optoelectronics, magnetism, epitaxial template for material growth, etc. Though maintaining the atomic thickness of 2D materials while controlling crystal facets is an enormous challenge, breakthroughs are being made. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the recent advances in the facet engineering of 2D materials, ranging from a basic understanding of facets and the corresponding approaches and the significance of facet engineering. We also propose current challenges and forecast future development directions including the establishment of a facet database, the fabrication of new 2D materials, the design of specific substrates, and the introduction of theoretical calculations and in situ characterization techniques. This review can guide researchers to design ultrathin 2D materials with unique and distinct facets and provide an insight into the applications of energy, magnetism, optics, biomedicine, and other fields.
Linyang Li
Linyang Li received her BS degree from Northwest University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Lei Fu at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences at Wuhan University. Her current research is focused on the controllable synthesis of 2D rare-earth materials and the exploration of related properties and applications.
Yabei Xia
Yabei Xia received her BS degree from Central China Normal University in 2020, and she is currently pursuing an MS degree under the supervision of Professor Lei Fu at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Science, Wuhan University. Her current research interest is focused on the precise synthesis and property exploration of 2D luminescent materials.
Mengqi Zeng
Mengqi Zeng received her BS degree from Wuhan University in 2013. She then received her PhD degree from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences at Wuhan University. Now she works as a full professor at Wuhan University. Her current research is focused on the controllable synthesis and self-assembly of 2D materials on liquid metals.
Lei Fu
Lei Fu received his BS degree in chemistry from Wuhan University in 2001. He obtained his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. After obtaining his PhD, he worked as a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM (2006–2007). Thereafter, he became an associate professor at Peking University. In 2012, he joined Wuhan University as a full professor. His current interests of research relate to the controlled growth and novel property exploration of 2D atomic layer thin crystals.

Key learning points
(1) Guidelines for understanding the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials.
(2) Principles of key points for controlling facets of ultrathin 2D materials based on thermokinetics.
(3) Design strategies utilized for facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials.
(4) Promising applications regarding ultrathin 2D materials with specific facets.
(5) Challenges and future development directions in this promising field.

1. Introduction
Ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) materials are a promising class of nanomaterials with a typical atomic thickness of less than 5 nm and a lateral size greater than 100 nm, or up to several micrometers or even wafer-scale, which are considered one of the best candidates for extending Moore's law.1,2 Since the successful exfoliation of graphene in 2004,3 ultrathin 2D materials such as graphene,4–6 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),7,8 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),9–12 III–V group semiconductors,13–15 black phosphorus,16 MXenes,17–20 as well as some materials like layered double hydroxides (LDH),21,22 metal oxides,23–25 transition metal phosphides (TMPs)26,27 and elemental materials28–31 have attracted tremendous interest. Ultrathin 2D materials are generally divided into layered materials and non-layered materials. The former has strong in-plane chemical bonds and weak out-of-plane van der Waals bonds; while the latter has strong chemical bonds in three-dimensional (3D) directions.32 Due to the atomic thickness, large specific surface area, and quantum-confined effect, ultrathin 2D materials exhibit many excellent properties, such as high catalytic activity,33,34 high mobility,3,35 quantum Hall effect,36 superconductivity,37etc., making them hot candidates in energy,38,39 optoelectronics,13,40 magnetism,41 quantum communication,42 and other applications.43
It is noticed that when the dimension of the material is reduced to two dimensions, it exhibits plentiful and excellent properties and is widely used in various fields. At the same time, because of the atomic thickness, its surface is very sensitive to the environment, and the surface atomic arrangement has a non-negligible impact on the properties in terms of catalysis, batteries, optoelectronics, magnetism, epitaxy of other 2D materials, etc. For example, the reactivity of 2D catalysts is closely related to the surface atomic structure, because the arrangement and coordination of surface atoms change with the orientation of the crystal facet, which affects the adsorption of reactant molecules, the desorption of product molecules, the transfer of electrons on the reactant surface, and the recombination of electrons and holes.44–46 Likewise, the different crystal facets of 2D materials can also affect the ion transport and dendrite formation in batteries.47,48 In addition, facet engineering also plays an important role in tuning the optical and electrical properties of semiconductors and optimizing reactivity and selectivity. In particular, 2D semiconductor materials with controllable facet orientation can greatly influence the charge transfer/separation process, as well as the electronic structure and bandgap.29,49,50 The effect of crystal facet engineering on magnetism is mainly reflected in the different atomic numbers in the magnetic center of different facets, which will affect their coordination environment and interaction with other substances.51–53 Besides, facet-customized epitaxial growth of other 2D materials can be obtained by introducing 2D materials with specific facets as seeds.54,55 Therefore, precise tailoring of surface atomic arrangements is imperative for tuning the properties, which naturally leads to the synthesis of facet-controlled 2D materials and the exploration of facet-dependent properties and applications. Simultaneously, this will also stimulate the development of advanced characterization equipment and techniques, so as to achieve the in-depth and accurate exploration of material structure, growth mechanism, and structure-property relationship.
However, different from traditional materials, the 2D anisotropic growth of the materials and the thermodynamic factors affecting the facets need to be taken into account when synthesizing ultrathin 2D materials that expose different facets. From a thermodynamic point of view, the facets of the materials exposed with the lowest surface energy will eventually be retained. Dynamically, the slowest growing facets will eventually be reserved.56 In particular, high-index facets are thermodynamically metastable, leading to great challenges in the controlled synthesis of materials with high-index facets.57 Nevertheless, tremendous efforts have been made in the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials, and a series of synthetic strategies have been developed to meet the application of materials in various fields.24,44,50,55,58–60 To date, a thorough overview of the topic about the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials is lacking and urgently needed.
Herein, the main purpose of this study is to comprehend the overall knowledge of the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials and give guidance to researchers, including the basic theory of facets, the developed strategies, and also the promising applications of ultrathin 2D materials exposing distinct facets. To achieve this goal, this review will first introduce the foundation of the facet based on the Wulff structure and explain the characteristics and advantages of high-index facets briefly. Then, we highlight the current advancements in regulating the facets of ultrathin 2D materials, specifically, the additive-assisted method, template method, and other methods. In addition, applications based on ultrathin 2D materials with specific facets ranging from catalysis, batteries, and optoelectronics to magnetism are discussed. Finally, we present the challenges, opportunities, and development directions of this emerging and promising field.
2. Principles for tailoring the facets of ultrathin 2D materials
From bulk to low-dimensional materials, faceting is one of the most striking features of the final crystal.61 In particular, the large surface-to-volume ratio and the atomic thickness of 2D materials make it extremely influential to material properties and applications. Generally, faceting can be attributed to two aspects: thermodynamic and kinetic driving forces. The former forms the equilibrium crystal shape (ECS), exposing the stable facet with the minimum surface energy eventually. The latter forms the kinetic crystal shape (KCS), exposing the facets with the slowest growth rate, which ultimately depends on the actual growth technique and parameters. By considering the orientation dependence of surface energy and growth rate, the Wulff structure was proposed to study ECS and KCS.62,63
In 1901, G. Wulff proposed a famous geometric structure based on the principle of surface energy minimization for predicting the ECS.62 It took decades for this geometric to be formally demonstrated and proven, as illustrated in Fig. 1.56 When the surface energy density (γ) is a function of the local surface orientation (), its polar plot can be tracked and a plane perpendicular to  can be drawn along each point of it. The inner envelopes of these facets correspond well to the ECS which can be considered as a balance between exposing the facet with minimal energy and minimizing the total surface area. When growth is considered, external conditions break the ECS and change the shape of the crystal facet. At this time, KCS is proposed, which can describe the crystal facet shape during growth more conveniently, based on considering that each facet grows at a specified rate ν = ν(). Substituting γ with ν, the Wulff method can still be used to determine the shape of growing crystals (Fig. 1).63 However, since growth typically does not begin with seeds possessing the same KCS, the first transient can be expected to vary with the relative expansion of the crystal facets. In general, the facet with the slowest growth rate expands in size and retains finally. In addition, for 2D materials, the developed strategy must be able to control the crystal facets based on thermokinetics, while suppressing the growth in the 3D direction. The mature concepts of ECS determined by minimization of surface energy and KCS determined by orientation-related growth rates provide an effective foundation for the facet regulation of 2D materials.
 Fig. 1  The Wulff construction for the ECS, starting from a γ-plot, and the KCS, starting from a ν-plot. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
Except for the low-index facets, it is reported that high-index faceted nanocatalysts not only exhibit clear superiorities in catalytic activity but also provide superior performance in terms of selectivity and stability.57 To date, the research on high-index has mainly focused on nanocrystals, and the successful preparation of high-index faceted 2D materials is still in its infancy. High-index facets, typically represented by a set of Miller index (hkl) with at least one index greater than 1, possess a high density of low coordination atoms, steps, edges, and junctions in these structures, which are conducive to providing more active catalytic sites.64 However, due to the high surface energy, high-index facets will eventually disappear during the crystal growth process, making it a challenge to obtain high-index faceted materials.65 It would be erroneous to conclude that high-index facets are unstable, for example, Pt(210) and (211) are chemically and thermally stable under both reducing and oxidizing conditions.66 Besides, the basis for determining the surface energy of the high and low-index facets of metals and metal oxides is also different. For pure metals, the surface energy depends on the coordination number and density of surface atoms. For metal oxides, the surface energy increases with the density of dangling bonds.65 For instance, the surface energy of Rh(830) is higher than that of Rh(100).67 But for the anatase TiO2(110) facet with abundant dangling bonds, it exhibits a higher surface energy.68 Therefore, the study of high-index facets remains a complex but valuable field. In the following sections, we will introduce the strategies for tailoring the facets of 2D materials and related applications of faceted materials.
3. Approaches for regulating the facets of ultrathin 2D materials
Due to the atomic thin characteristics of 2D materials, the physical and chemical properties are strongly dependent on their unique surface structures. Therefore, there has been great interest in customizing the crystal facets of ultrathin 2D materials to regulate their properties and expand their applications. At present, there are few reports on the facet engineering of typical ultrathin 2D materials such as graphene, BN, TMDs, etc. Because of their larger interlayer distance than the in-plane distance,69–72 it is easier for them to grow along the in-plane direction and eventually only expose specific crystal facets perpendicular to the c-axis. The studies on facet control in ultrathin 2D materials we mentioned here mainly focus on the non-layered materials, but also some layered materials like Sb2Se3, LDH, and BiOX (X = Cl, Br, and I) with special structures.21,73–75 To realize the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials, maintaining the atomic thickness of 2D materials while controlling crystal facets is very essential and many approaches have emerged mainly including the additive-assisted method and template approach. In this section, we will introduce the strategies mentioned above in detail and compare their strengths as well as weaknesses (Table 1). Other methods via simply regulating the reaction conditions are also discussed.
Table 1 Comparison of different methods for the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials




Method
Principles
Additives/templates/precursors
Products
Size
Thickness
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




3.1 Additive-assisted method
3.1.1 Molecules
Tunable surface energy, controllable crystal growth rate
Oleylamine
CoO(100)
∼150 nm2
0.6–1.1 nm
Organic molecule additives: high expansibility; conventional method. Small molecule additives: easy to remove
Organic molecule additives: residues; environmentally unfriendly; complex removal processing; products with poor quality; blocking active site. Small molecule additives: small size distributions

77



H2
Si(111)
—
1–100 nm

78



CO
Pd(111)
20–160 nm
1.8 nm

58



CO2
MOF(20)
100 nm
10 nm

83



3.1.2 Ions
F−
TiO2(001)
130 nm
8 nm
Simple, highly controllable products with high quality
Additive residue; dangerous HF acid used; uncomplete removal

84



Cl−
Ge(111)
12 μm
8.5 nm

50



Cl−
REO(111)
∼4.8 μm (CeO2)
4 nm

24





REO(100)
∼5 μm (CeO2)
5.1 nm




Na+
Sb2Se3(010)
24 μm
1.3 nm

73



3.1.3 Atoms
Ga
Ge(110)
1.8 μm
2.3 nm

29



3.2 Template method
3.2.1 Hard-template
Lattice matching
CuO
α-Fe2O3(110)
1 μm
0.55–0.59 nm
Highly crystalline products, insensitive to reaction conditions. Salt template: scalable production; large size; low cost; easy to remove
Constrained by templates

51



Graphene
MOF(001)
23 μm
5–45 nm

59



KCl
MnO(001)
>400 μm2
<2 nm

96



KCl
Co2P(30)
>50 μm2
4 nm

95



NaCl
MoP2(010)
—
2.5 nm






WP2(001)
—
2.3 nm




3.2.2 Soft-template
Orientation attachment
Oleic acid, 1,2-dichloroethane
PbS(100)
>500 nm
2.2 nm
General method and mild reaction
Small size; difficult for device manufacturing

99



PbCl2
PbSe(100)
—
4 nm

100



Sodium oleylsulfate
ZnO(0001)
Tens of μm
2.28 nm
General synthesis; large size; mild reaction
Organic molecules residue; low crystalline products

60



Pluronic P123, ethylene glycol
TiO2(010)
200 nm
0.62 nm

102



ZnO(001)
1–10 μm
3.35 nm




Co3O4(001)
1–10 μm
1.65 nm




WO3(100)
1–10 μm
2.1–5.2 nm




3.2.3 Precursor-template
Similar crystal structures
Oct-Si crystals
Si(111)
200 nm
13 nm
Simple, precise control; high quality; high crystallinity
Sensitive to reaction conditions

43



ZIF-8(111)
LDH(001)
480 nm
2.5 nm

21



Mg(OH)2(0001)
MgO(111)
—
—

103





3.1 Additive-assisted method
During crystal growth, thermodynamics usually guarantees that the crystal facets evolve to those with the lowest surface energy. However, the final exposed facets of the crystals are associated with not only the thermodynamics but also the kinetics. The additive-assisted method is a conventional strategy that can efficiently tailor the surface energy as well as the thermostability of the crystal facets or manipulate the growth kinetics by preventing further deposition of atoms in specific directions.57,76 Additives acting as capping agents can interact with specific facets on the surface of crystals through selective physical or chemical adsorption and play a vital role in directing the growth of crystals. To date, three main types of additives including neutral molecules (organic molecules and inorganic small molecules), ions (halogen ions and cations), and atoms are employed to regulate the facets of ultrathin 2D materials.

3.1.1 Molecules. 
In general, many organic additives have been used to control the growth of ultrathin 2D materials because they can selectively absorb on certain facets and influence the growth along these directions. For instance, the thickness of 2D MSe2 (M = Mo, W) nanosheets can be modulated by oleylamine, dodecylamine, and oleyl alcohol, due to the different binding energies to (100) and (110) edge facets.79 Using oleylamine to regulate the surface energy of the nanosheets, Yang et al. proposed a method to gain 2D CoO nanosheets evolved from nanoparticles.77Fig. 2a shows the spread of nanoparticles with certain sizes and the subsequent spontaneous transformation into 2D CoO(100) nanosheets. The alkylamine ligands of oleylamine can coordinate with metal oxides and then have an impact on different facets. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations confirmed that the surface energy of (100) and (110) facets can be reduced by the coordination interaction and the (100) facets are more energetically favourable than (110) facets, driving the exposure of (100) facets.
 Fig. 2  Molecular-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the growth mechanism of a 2D CoO nanosheet, including the growth pathway of nanoparticles and subsequent nanoparticles-to-nanosheets transformation. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2019. (b) Illustration of the growth mechanism of the Si nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (c) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the Pd nanosheets. Inset: Photograph of an ethanol dispersion of the as-prepared Pd nanosheets in a curvette. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2011. 
However, some organic capping agents, such as oleic acid and oleylamine, are unfriendly toward the environment.80 Besides, the residues left on the surface of the material will cover the active sites and affect the concomitant performance for further applications, such as conductivity and catalysis.57,81 Furthermore, the post-processing process is complex, which increases the requirements for operating techniques and energy costs.
Compared with organic molecules, small molecules can simplify the post-treatment of the as-synthesized materials and satisfy the requirements of “Green Chemistry”. As Kim et al. reported, H2 becomes a natural small molecule capping agent in the growth process of Si nanosheets via the chemical vapor deposition method.78 H2 can reduce the surface energy and inhibit the growth of Si along the [111] direction (Fig. 2b). Finally, it is preferred to expose Si(111) facets due to the minimum surface energy. In addition to affecting the surface energy of the crystal facet, surfactants can also prevent the deposition of metal atoms on the surface.82 Huang and co-workers obtained Pd(111) nanosheets (Fig. 2c) via a CO-confined growth approach.58 CO molecules exhibit strong adsorption with the (111) facet of Pd in a bridge configuration and can ultimately guide the formation of nanosheets. In the absence of CO, nanoparticles will be obtained. Polyvinylpyrrolidone and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide were also introduced to assist the CO in stabilizing the Pd nanosheets away from agglomeration and forming uniform morphology respectively.80 Here, small molecules absorbed on the crystals can be removed from the surface simply. For example, after restraining the oriented growth of the metal–organic framework (MOF) along the [20] direction by interacting with the Cu2+, CO2 can be removed simply via depressurization operation.83


3.1.2 Ions. 
Ions have smaller sizes and can adsorb more precisely on the surface of crystals. Similarly, they can realize facet engineering by changing the surface energy. Thereinto, halogen ions including F−, Cl−, Br−, and I− are the most extensively studied ionic additives with high electronegativities and can form close-packed adsorbed layers.76 For instance, Han et al. reported the synthesis of anatase nanosheets with (001) facets.84 The (001) facets with a higher surface energy and chemical activities are not easy to obtain, but the surface energy can be markedly reduced by introducing F−, which has a specific stabilization effect on the facets. Unfortunately, the sources of F−, such as hydrofluoric acid are highly corrosive and toxic, greatly limiting the widespread use of F− as capping agents. Cl− ions have also been used to bond with the unsaturated dangling bonds and lower the surface energy of the Ge(111) surface, resulting in the 2D anisotropic growth and exposure of specific facets.50
The interaction between halide ions and atoms on the crystal surfaces may be different according to the differences in concentration and species. Our group has amply proved and developed an accessible hard-soft-acid-base principle to tailor the facets of ultrathin 2D rare earth oxides (REO), making full use of the distinction in halide ions (Cl−, Br−, and I−).24 In this case, halide ions (base) can donate electrons to the empty orbitals of RE ions (hard acid). When halides were introduced, not only was the 2D nucleation of the specific facets controlled, it also led to a change in the relative surface energy of each facet. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, the surface energy of (111) is lower than that of (100), leading to the formation of triangular CeO2 flakes initially. As the concentration of Cl− increases, the surface energy would reverse and result in the exposure of (100) facets with a square shape. HAADF-STEM and SAED images (Fig. 3b–g) further confirmed the structural difference of the CeO2 nanosheets. In addition, owing to the disparity of the electron-donating ability of halide ions, higher concentrations of halide ions are required to accomplish the facets transformation as the alkalinity decreases.
 Fig. 3  An ion-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the growth process of 2D REO single crystals with tailorable facets. (b and e) High-angle annular dark field–scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF–STEM) images of 2D CeO2(111) and CeO2(100) single crystals, respectively. (c and f) The magnified STEM images from the yellow box regions in (b and e), respectively. (d and g) Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of 2D CeO2(111) and CeO2(100) single crystals, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Oxford University Press on behalf of China Science Publishing & Media Ltd, Copyright 2021. 
Except for halide ions, cations can also act as a medium and make a difference in controlling the epitaxy of ultrathin 2D materials, which was confirmed by the successful synthesis of 2D Sb2Se3 flakes with an intrinsic chain-like crystal structure.73 With the assistance of Na+, 2D flakes exposing the (010) facet would be observed, otherwise, only nanowires along the [001] direction formed. DFT calculation interpreted that the formation energy of Na ions adsorbed on (010) facets is the lowest, resulting in the exposure of (010) facets.


3.1.3 Atoms. 
Although atom-based adjuvants are not common, it has been reported that they can also regulate the crystal facets of ultrathin 2D materials. Nowadays, liquid metal reaction systems demonstrate fascinating superiority in fabricating ultrathin 2D materials due to excellent chemical activity, high solubility, and surface tension.25,85,86 Our group found that Ga atoms can passivate the unsaturated bonds of the Ge crystal surface, and result in the formation of Ge(110) nanosheets, as displayed in Fig. 4a.29 This is because the adsorption energy of Ga atoms on the Ge(110) facet is larger than that of Ge atoms, preventing further deposition of Ge atoms and thus inhibiting the growth along the [110] orientation (Fig. 4b and c). This effective reaction of the Ga-confined process improves the thermodynamic stability of Ge(110) crystals and reverses the growth facet reported before.
 Fig. 4  An atom-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) The schematic of gallium-associated self-limiting (GASL) growth of ultrathin Ge(110) single crystal. (b and c) The adsorption energy calculations of Ge/Ge(110) and Ga/Ge(110) systems. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
In summary, additive-assisted is an appropriate method to control the crystal facets precisely by introducing molecules, ions, or atoms to interact with the surface and regulate the orientation of growth. They can change the surface energy or regulate the growth rate of different facets, resulting in the exposure of specific facets. In addition, it is very important to select the appropriate additives, because the interaction strength and adsorption mode between different additives and crystal surfaces are distinct, which will affect the exposure of the final crystal facet.82 However, many additives can easily remain on the surface, which will affect the properties and applications. On one hand, the additives absorbed on the surface may block the active sites, affect the catalytic performance or cause performance degradation of devices.87 On the other hand, removing the additives can create many active sites on the surface of the obtained 2D materials and improve the catalytic performance.83 Consequently, suitable removal strategies such as thermal treatments,88 plasma treatments,89 acid treatment, microwave irradiation, or coprecipitation method90 are necessary to remove the adsorbed additives and the exploration of the intrinsic properties.

3.2 Template method
The template method is one of the most effective strategies to construct target materials based on pre-existing nanostructures.91 In addition to inducing the growth of materials without any chemical transformation, templates can also take part in the reaction directly as precursors.32 In this section, we will discuss various template methods, including a hard template, soft template, as well as precursor template, and illustrate the principles of the corresponding approaches to get 2D materials with certain facets.

3.2.1 Hard template. 
For the hard template method, the precursor is usually attached to the hard template, which is subsequently removed to obtain the target products. Most research proved that due to the coincidence site lattice mismatch theory, the orientations of epitaxial crystals are determined by the substrate.92 With the assistance of CuO nanoplates, ultrathin α-Fe2O3 nanosheets exposing (110) facets were synthesized.51 During the growth process, CuO acts as a hard template and Fe2+ is nucleated on the surface (Fig. 5a). Under low temperatures, the hydrolysis of Fe2+ and etch of CuO were slow enough to make the nanosheets tightly attached. Consequently, the FeOOH nanosheets grew directionally based on the epitaxial template, and then Fe2O3 nanosheets formed. Moreover, carbon materials have also become important templates because of their unique nanostructure and chemical inertness.93 Graphene with abundant nucleation sites and alveolate lattice orientation can limit the chemical reaction at the atomic scale and guide the synthesis of ultrathin 2D materials.94 Hu and co-workers provided an example of the assistance of graphene to prepare 2D MOF crystals with the (001) facets exposed (Fig. 5b).59 Driven by van der Waals interactions, the precursors will be absorbed on the surface of the graphene and then MOF epitaxially grows according to the lattice structure of graphene. Thus, the orientation of MOF is in accordance with the basal facet of graphene.
 Fig. 5  Hard template-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the synthesis strategy of α-Fe2O3 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (b) Schematic of the epitaxial growth of pristine-graphene-templated MOFs. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic representation of the synthesis of 2D metal phosphides with certain facets on the salt temple. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. 
In addition to the crystal structure, another factor that cannot be ignored is the complexity of template removal when choosing the appropriate template. Compared with graphene, which needs to be treated with a high temperature or strong acid and base, water-soluble salts reveal a new perspective to act as the hard template and fabricate ultrathin 2D materials because of the large sizes, various crystal structures, and high adjustability. Due to the lattice matching mechanism, the as-produced ultrathin 2D materials exhibited a specific facet associated with the salts. Xiao et al. obtained ultrathin 2D MnO exposing (001) facets on the (001) facet of KCl,96 due to their similar cubic structure. Surprisingly, this efficient strategy can also be used to prepare 2D TMPs exposing high-index facets. Li et al. obtained ultrathin 2D Co2P(30) nanosheets on the surface of the KCl template.95 As shown in Fig. 5c, the precursors were coated uniformly on the salt surface. After hydrogenation reaction and further washing in water, 2D TMPs were formed. Owing to the fact that the lattice mismatch between [310] vectorin Co2P and cubic KCl is small, 2D Co2P nanosheets with high-index facets are obtained. However, using NaCl with a large lattice mismatch as a template only obtained Co2P particles. In addition, ultrathin 2D MoP2(010) and WP2(010) nanosheets can also be fabricated on the surface of NaCl, respectively. Thus, facet engineering can be realized by the usage of different salt templates.81 Noteworthily, ionic salts with a high melting point and boiling point are more suitable to act as hard templates because of the high reaction temperature.


3.2.2 Soft template. 
Different from hard templates, soft templates have no solid structure, but they can guide and control the self-assembly of nanostructures based on oriented attachment.93 Through strong interaction or self-generation, particles with consistent orientation or suitable facets can combine with each other at a flat interface.97,98 Schliehe et al. found that oleic acid can cover the surface of PbS(100) and Cl-containing solvents can drive the oriented attachment of nanoparticles to obtain ultrathin 2D PbS nanosheets (Fig. 6a).99 The as-grown PbS nanoparticles exposed several different crystal facets. In path A in Fig. 6b, large particles with (100) facets formed to minimize the system energy without chloride addition. However, in path B, chloride as the lead complexing agents can adjust the growth and attach directionally along the [110] direction to minimize high-energy facets, resulting in the formation of ultrathin 2D PbS nanosheets. Additionally, highly orientated oleic acid also plays an important role in driving the 2D attachment. Later, it is found that halide ions acting as the soft template can establish a Pb–Cl–Pb bridging network and promote the attachment of the PbSe quantum dot as well as the formation of PdSe(100) nanoplatelets.100
 Fig. 6  Soft template-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) A TEM image of stacked PbS nanosheets using 1,1,2-trichloroethane. (b) Schematic of large-particle (A) and sheet formation (B and C) from small PbS quantum dots. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2010. (c) Illustration of the formation of ZnO nanosheets directed by a surfactant monolayer. (d) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a typical nanosheet with an equiangular triangle shape. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2016. 
Apart from halide ions, self-assembled organic molecules can also act as soft templates to guide the growth of ultrathin 2D materials due to the strong interaction between ligands and metal ions.82 Wang and co-workers constructed a soft template with sodium oleylsulfate and obtained ZnO(0001) nanosheets.60 Driven by strong interaction between ordered and tightly stacked oleylsulfate ions and Zn2+, ZnO(0001) nanosheets can be formed at the water-air surface (Fig. 6c and d), where the 2D space was offered by the two incompatible solvents.101 Based on a similar principle, Sun et al. even gained ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets with unusual (010) facets with high energy.102
Unlike conventional epitaxial growth of materials on a hard template, this approach does not emphasize lattice matching but depends on the strong interactions between precursors and organic ligands. Here, organic molecules acting as soft templates can even fit the lattice of target materials via spontaneous self-regulation, which provides more ideas for the synthesis of more ultrathin 2D materials with specific crystal facets. Unfortunately, this method still suffers from some limitations, such as the high temperature will destroy the ordered stacking of soft templates, and the residual surfactants will affect further applications.


3.2.3 Precursor template. 
In addition to the approaches mentioned above, the template mentioned here can directly act as a precursor to fabricate ultrathin 2D materials. Ingeniously selecting or designing the structure of precursors can be a promising strategy to realize the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials. For instance, Cheng and co-workers first synthesized octahedron silicon (oct-Si) crystals with (111) facets (Fig. 7a).43 Owing to the lowest cleavage energy of (111) facets, the oct-Si crystals are chosen to act as the precursors for the preparation of Si nanosheets. After the ultrasonic operation, Si(111) crystals can be cleaved and Si(111) nanosheets are obtained.
 Fig. 7  Precursor template-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the preparation process of 2D Si nanosheets, including morphological transformation and ultrasonic exfoliation. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (b) Illustration of the SCSC transformation from ZIF-8 crystals to LDH nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
For the fabrication of some materials, it might be difficult to remove the template or ensure the high quality of crystals. The templates introduced here can participate directly in the chemical reaction, and obtain ultrathin 2D materials with specific facets through topological transformation. Our group reported a single-crystal-to-single-crystal (SCSC) transformation from zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) crystals with (111) facets to ultrathin 2D LDH exposing (001) facets.21 The transformation process on liquid metal Ga in Fig. 7b shows that the similarity of the metal atomic arrangement between ZIF-8 and LDH provides an important basis for SCSC transformation, further confirmed by in situ synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction (XRD). Liu et al. also reported an efficient conversion to obtain MgO nanosheets exposing (111) facets through a topotactic conversion by using ultrathin Mg(OH)2 exposing (0001) facets as the template.103 The parallel orientation relationship between Mg(OH)2(0001) and MgO(111) plays a vital role in the transformation. This method demonstrates effectiveness and practicality in the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials. However, the target product is limited by the precursor due to the requisition for a similar crystal lattice.

3.3 Other methods
Except for the above methods, changing the reaction conditions such as temperature, pH, and the ratio of precursors can also modulate the facet of ultrathin 2D materials efficiently. For example, Chai's group found that the predominant facet of MoC flakes will change from (111) to (100) as the temperature increases because high temperature can provide energy for atom diffusion and the facet conversion.104,105 DFT calculation further elucidated that (100) facets have a lower surface energy and higher stability than (111) facets, promoting the facet transformation. What's more, BiOCl nanosheets exposing (001) and (010) were obtained in different pH conditions.74 pH is a direct expression of the difference in H+ and OH− contents. BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I) are composed of [Bi2O2]2− slabs interleaved with double slabs of halogen X atoms and exhibit an anisotropic structure because of the strong intra-layer bonding in [Bi2O2]2− slabs and weak inter-layer van-der-Waals interaction. H+ can protect the (001) facets by interacting with the terminated O on the surface, while OH− would weaken the interaction between H+ and terminated O, and drive the growth of (010) facets.106 In addition, by regulating the molar ratio of 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid (H2BDC)/Ni2+/NaOH precursors, Yang et al. reported the synthesis of Ni-MOF nanosheets with (010) and (100) facets.107 Under this circumstance, the coordination environment and condition of Ni2+ are influenced, resulting in the change of facets.
4. The significance of facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials
Owing to the enhanced specific surface area to volume ratio and quantum confinement effect, ultrathin 2D materials exhibit excellent physical and chemical properties, which have drawn lots of attention on extensive application fields, including catalysis, batteries, optoelectronics, magnetism, and material construction. Meanwhile, ultrathin 2D materials exposing different facets exhibit varied atomic arrangements and electronic structures, which results in discrepant properties. To date, the novel phenomena caused by crystal facet differences have driven researchers to further explore the mechanism. In this section, we will show the unique properties of ultrathin 2D materials with different crystal facets in a wide field and how they influence the corresponding applications, which would provide an inspiration for performance improvement and further industrial production.
4.1 Catalysis
Catalysis has greatly improved production and human life by converting raw materials into target products in an efficient way. Ultrathin 2D materials are considered as new stars in the field of catalysis due to their high specific surface area and high catalytic activity. Recently, researchers have found that ultrathin 2D materials exposing different facets can exhibit unique and unexpected properties, which makes regulating the crystal facets of ultrathin 2D materials a new strategy to modulate the catalytic performance.
On the one hand, ultrathin 2D materials with different facets possess diverse atomic arrangements and active sites. Thus, they would determine the adsorption and desorption of reactant molecules on the surface. For example, InVO4 nanosheets with (110) facets have a higher catalytic reduction activity of CO2 compared with InVO4 nanocubes with (100) facets,45 as the comparison of product yield shown in Fig. 8a and b. Combined with DFT calculation, it can be found that (100) and (110) facets have dissimilar rate-determining steps in the catalytic process, and the free-energy barrier of (100) facets is higher than (110) facets, which means that InVO4(110) nanosheets have a higher catalytic activity. In the meantime, CO2 interacts with the surface atoms of (100) facets via strong chemisorption, thus the major product CO is more difficult to release from the surface of (100) facets which further restrains the catalytic process (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets for catalysis. (a) CO and (b) CH4 evolution amounts as a function of light irradiation times of InVO4(110) nanosheet, InVO4(100) nanocube, and bulk InVO4 (SSR). (c) Calculated Gibbs free energy profile of CO2 into CO catalyzed by InVO4(110) for the black line and InVO4(100) for the orange line, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (d) XRD patterns of BiOI nanosheets and BiOI nanoplates. (e) Vacancy associates and position vacancy concentration in BiOI nanoplates and nanosheets. (f) The photodegradation efficiencies of tetracycline as a function of irradiation time under simulated solar light irradiation in the presence of two kinds of BiOI. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. 
On the other hand, ultrathin 2D materials exposing different facets have a distinct band structure and degree of band bending, which can affect the charge transfer process and the efficiency of electron–hole separation.108,109 BiOX (X = Cl, Br, and I) with a unique layer structure can efficiently promote the charge transfer process, thus becoming an effective photocatalyst.111 In order to investigate the differences in properties caused by crystal facets, Bai et al. synthesized 2D BiOI nanosheets and nanoplates.110 The enhanced XRD intensity indicated that the number of (110) and (111) facets in BiOI nanosheets was more than that of nanoplates (Fig. 8d). (110) facets have a higher activity than (111) and (102) facets, owing to the higher surface energy. Thus, the activity of BiOI nanosheets with more highly active facets is higher than that of nanoplates. What's more, nanosheets have more defects (Fig. 8e), which can act as the trapping sites and hinder the recombination of holes and electrons. As shown in Fig. 8f, the nanosheets have a higher photocatalytic performance for the degradation of tetracycline than nanoplates. Lin et al. compared the hole diffusion length and hole mobility of WO3(001) nanosheets and WO3(110) nanowires.112 The results indicated that different facets had distinct carrier dynamics, and the (110) facets exhibited better hole transport behavior as well as higher photocatalytic efficiency.
4.2 Batteries
Batteries are important tools for energy storage and power supply. Ultrathin 2D materials acting as electrode materials advocate ultrafast ion conductivity and high current densities,113,114 which afford the potential for higher battery capabilities. Since ultrathin 2D materials have an anisotropic lattice, the effect of crystal facets on the properties will be further amplified. Xu's group demonstrated that the Na+ storage properties are associated with different facets exposed in SnS2 nanosheets (Fig. 9a).47 DFT calculation was used to investigate the diffusion process of Na+ in the (001) and (100) lattice. As the comparison of energy shown in Fig. 9b and c, it is more desirable for Na to store and diffuse on the surface of (001) facets. Thus, SF-SnS2@NPC with more exposed (001) facets shows a higher rate of Na+ diffusion and energy storage.
 Fig. 9  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets in batteries for energy storage and power supply. (a) The third galvanostatic charge–discharge voltage profiles of the three kinds of SnS2@NPC nanosheets at 0.1 A g−1. (D-SnS2, F-SnS2, and SF-SnS2 have an increasing number of exposed (100) as well as (001) facets, and NPC is porous carbon with co-doped nitrogen and phosphorous.) (b) Theoretical simulations of the binding energy of the four Na-SnS2 patterns. (c) Theoretical simulations of Na diffusion energy profiles through the different trajectories. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (d) Calculated binding energies of the Zn atom with different facets. (e) Peak areas of Zn stripping/plating reactions and (f) corresponding Coulombic efficiency of the prepared Zn anodes in Zn–Zn symmetric cells (F-TiO2 is the nanosheets with exposed (101) and (001) facets and C-TiO2 is the commercial TiO2). Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2020. 
In addition to acting as an electrode to improve battery performance, ultrathin 2D materials can also be used as a protective layer to prevent electrode damage. In aqueous zinc-ion batteries, it is urgent to restrain the growth of dendrites on zinc anodes. Zhang et al. proposed that the Zn adsorption can be reduced by precisely controlling the crystal facets of the protective layer.48 As the DFT calculation demonstrated in Fig. 9d, the Zn affinity is low on TiO2(001) and TiO2(101) and will decrease as the number of low coordinated Ti atoms on the surface increases, which can be according to the dissimilar atom arrangement of different facets. Consequently, by utilizing TiO2 nanosheets with dominant (001) facets, the activity of the zinc-ion battery is enhanced and the anode is well protected (Fig. 9e and f).
4.3 Optoelectronics
To date, various ultrathin 2D materials have been developed for next-generation optoelectronic devices, such as field-effect transistors, photodetectors, and so on. The electronic structure and surface atomic arrangements are facet-dependent and hence make a difference in properties. The third-order nonlinear optical (NLO) performance of BiOCl is closely associated with facets.115 By changing the pH value in the reaction, BiOCl with dissimilar facets was synthesized. The electronic structure and optical bandgaps of BiOCl exposing different facets exhibit obvious discrepancies as the band structure alignments displayed in Fig. 10a. The nonlinear absorption and reverse saturable absorption behaviour of (010) facets are stronger than that of (001) facets (Fig. 10b). However, from the photoluminescence (PL) spectra in Fig. 10c, the lower PL intensity means that (001) facets exhibit better charge separation efficiency. It can be further explained that the enhanced NLO performance of (010) facets comes from the defects on the surface, confirming the importance of crystal facets on the properties.
 Fig. 10  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets in optoelectronics. (a) Band structure alignments of BiOCl(001) and BiOCl(010). (b) Typical open aperture Z-scan measurements of BiOCl(001) and BiOCl(010). (c) PL spectra of the BiOCl(001) and BiOCl(010). Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (d) Bias-dependent photocurrent on (001) and (010) facets of the (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals. (e) Current–voltage (I–V) curves of the devices made on the (001) facets and (010) facets under the same light illumination. (f) Statistics of the measured photocurrent for 20 devices based on (001) and (010) facets of the (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier Inc., Copyright 2019). 
Liu et al. also obtained 2D (PEA)2PBI4 with (001) and (010) facets.116 To compare the photoresponse, they fabricated photodetector devices on corresponding materials with different crystal facets. From the photocurrent curves and current–voltage curves (Fig. 10d–f), the material exposing (001) facets exhibit a higher response than that of the (010) facets, which is caused by the distinct crystal structure of different facets. This comes from the reason that dielectric mismatch and weak hybridization of atomic orbitals would occur in the (010) facets of (PEA)2PBI4, which will restrain the distribution of charge, resulting in a low photoresponse.
4.4 Magnetism
Magnetic materials are of great significance to spintronics, magnetic resonance (MRI), integrated circuit, and other fields. In the meantime, ultrathin 2D materials with various facets have exhibited novel magnetic properties and attracted research interest in many potential applications. Chen and co-workers found that different from the antiferromagnetic bulks, α-Fe2O3 nanosheets exhibit ferromagnetic properties owing to the surface structure distortion and the change of Fe ion coordination environments.51 It can be concluded that the surface microenvironment of the ultrathin 2D material will affect magnetism. Zhou et al. further reported that Fe3O4(111) facets possessing more efficient and ordered magnetic metal centers (Feoct2-tet1-terminated and Fetet1-terminated) can influence the relaxation in magnetic resonance imaging (Fig. 11a). r1 and r2 values are accepted to measure the relaxivity in the longitudinal and transverse direction respectively in MRI. r1 is associated with the interaction between metal centers and protons and is facet-dependent, while r2 is affected by the magnetic moment and depends on thickness. As shown in Fig. 11b, Fe3O4 nanosheets (IOP) with more (111) facets have a higher r1 value and proton exchange capacity, owing to the exposure of more magnetic metal centers. However, caused by the spin-disorder, the effective metal centers are reduced, which also leads to an unexpectedly decrease of r1 in IOP-2.8.52
 Fig. 11  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets in magnetism. (a) Perspective view of the Feoct2–tet1-terminated (111) facets of the Fe3O4 structure. (b) MRI relaxivity of the r1 and r2 values of the three nanoplates (the material with different thicknesses were denoted as IOP-8.8, IOP-4.8, and IOP-2.8 respectively which have increasing ratios of (111) surface area to volume). Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (c and d) Water coordinating behaviours on Gd2O3(111) and Gd2O3(100) facets according to DFT calculations. (e and f) MR phantom study of the two nanoplates at 0.5, 1.5, and 3.0 T. The concentrations correspond to Gd3+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. 
Due to the strong correlation with the number of atoms on the surface, relaxivity can be effectively regulated by the different water exchange rates on distinct crystal facets. For example, Gd2O3(100) facets have rich metal centers, while Gd2O3(111) facets are O-terminated.53 As displayed in Fig. 11c and d, water can coordinate with more Gd3+ ions on the (100) facets and the adsorption energy of water on (100) facets is lower than that on (111) facets, which is beneficial for water exchange. In the meantime, the low energy barriers of water migration also contribute to the enhancement of relaxivity. Consequently, the MR phantom study shown in Fig. 11e and f reveals that the signals of Gd2O3(100) are brighter than that of (111) facets, indicating excellent relaxivity under the same conditions.
4.5 Epitaxy of other materials
The significance and importance of the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials go beyond what has been mentioned above. Ultrathin 2D materials with specific facets can also act as epitaxial substrates to control the growth of other materials or construct heterojunctions and improve performance. As mentioned earlier, epitaxial growth of ultrathin 2D materials needs to satisfy the principle of lattice matching. Based on a similar principle, Zhang and co-workers realized the facet-dependent growth of PCN-222 nanorods by choosing different kinds of nanoplates as substrates.54 According to the parallel orientation between (010)PCN-134 and (010)Zr–BTB, Zr–BTB will selectively grow on the edges with minimized lattice mismatch rather than the basal facets of PCN-134 nanoplates, resulting in the formation of hierarchical heterostructures (Fig. 12a). Fig. 12b and c display the morphology of the heterojunction and the HAADF-STEM in Fig. 12d also confirms the exposure of (010) facets.
 Fig. 12  (a) Scheme of the synthesis of the 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructure by selective epitaxial growth of Zr–BTB nanosheets on PCN-134 nanoplates. (b) SEM image of 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructures. (c) STEM image of a typical 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructure. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the interface of the 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (e) Schematic diagram of seed-induced epitaxial growth. The seed has an intrinsically high (00L) orientation. (f) XRD patterns of perovskite films with varied concentrations of 2D seed. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier Inc., Copyright 2021. 
Ultrathin 2D materials with specific facets can also act as a seed to tailor the growth of 3D materials. The perovskite films with more pure and single-crystal facet orientation have a higher crystal quality and better photoelectric performance. Luo et al. obtained a 3D perovskite with optimized crystal orientation and improved quality by introducing 2D seeds exposing specific facets as a template (Fig. 12e).55 Owing to the high and pure (00L) orientated 2D perovskite seeds, 3D perovskites grown by seed induction epitaxy also exhibit high and pure (001) and (002) orientations. As verified in Fig. 12f, when the seed concentration is optimized to 1.9%, the undesired (111) oriented perovskite disappears, while the (001) and (002) peaks of the perovskite are significantly enhanced, thereby realizing the control of the crystal facet orientation. Ultimately, the as-grown 3D perovskites show high-quality and preferred orientation leading to improved photovoltaic properties as well as stability.
5. Summary and outlook
Facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials is an important prerequisite for the realization of structural engineering and performance modulation, which has attracted extensive attention. Enormous efforts have been made to obtain ultrathin 2D materials with special atomic arrangements for various promising applications. This review starts with a brief introduction of the relevant basics of crystal facets based on the Wulff construction. Subsequently, in order to give a clear guideline for facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials, we systematically summarize the corresponding approaches such as the additive-assisted method, template method, and other methods like regulating the temperature and pH. Then we discuss the significance of facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials. Ultrathin 2D materials exposing different facets show outstanding prospects in various applications like catalysis, batteries, optoelectronics, magnetism, and the epitaxy of other materials because the atomic arrangements of different facets will influence the active sites, coordination environment, and electronic structure.
In addition, some challenges and future development directions in this field are also proposed and forecasted in Fig. 13: (1) There is still a lack of systematic and effective methods to control the facets of ultrathin 2D materials. Systematic and reliable theoretical models and data for designing and synthesizing ultrathin 2D materials with tailorable facets and understanding the transition processes are also lacking. The establishment of the facet database including some approaches and theoretical data will lay a solid foundation for guiding the synthesis of related materials. (2) At present, facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials is still in its infancy, and the system needs to be expanded and more new materials need to be discovered. It is urgent to explore novel strategies to enrich the system of related materials, especially for the controllable fabrication of nanostructures exposing high-index facets because of the reported excellent chemical activity compared with that of low-index facets.117 (3) In addition to considering whether the activity can be improved when designing the catalyst, the selectivity and stability of the catalyst also need to be improved. To this end, surface modification and construction of new active sites of ultrathin 2D materials with specific facets may bring enlightenment in designing new catalysts and enhancing the chemical activities for catalysis.118,119 (4) The design of the oriented substrate plays a crucial role in the epitaxial growth of ultrathin 2D materials. It is reported that the growth of 2D materials can be realized only if the symmetry group of the substrate belongs to that of the 2D material.120 Besides, substrate exposing specific facets especially high-index facets with a large step density can be introduced to grow low-symmetry 2D single crystals, resulting in the achievement of large-size ultrathin 2D materials.121,122 Large-size single crystals without defects and grain boundaries are conducive to improving device performance, which is the prerequisite for the broad-scale applications of highly integrated 2D devices. (5) In situ microstructure-characterization techniques, such as TEM, XRD, and Raman spectroscopy, are effective tools for uncovering the transition mechanism of the facets and exploring the origin of the excellent performance of devices. Besides, in situ synchrotron techniques with higher spatial, energy, and time resolutions can further improve the sensitivity and the speed of spectral acquisition which will bring unexpected discoveries to understand the facet formation mechanism, the reaction processes in a real circumstance, and the structure-property relationships. (6) Combining in situ characterization with theoretical calculations will provide a new hitting-point to reveal the growth mechanism and activity and selectivity of materials. In addition, theoretical investigations can also be employed to predict new materials with exceptional properties, which can help scientists to design and synthesize target materials. (7) Facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials shows potential to promote the development of more applications in biosensing, biomedical imaging, and delivery of therapeutic agents, etc. It has been reported that highly active Pd(100) nanosheets can accelerate the decomposition of H2O2 and promote the supply of O2, which can improve the efficiency of photodynamic therapy. Thus, owing to the difference in the atomic arrangement, facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials is also expected to become a new strategy to control the drug release process and maximize the therapeutic effect.119
 Fig. 13  Challenges and perspective in the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials. 
While facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials presents many challenges, it also brings some fascinating opportunities. It is obvious that facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials not only provides a new direction for selective synthesis of materials but also provides potential to explore the structure and properties of materials and related applications. We hope this review will provide useful guidance or inspiration for researchers who are currently focusing on 2D faceted materials to design and synthesize novel structures to overcome practical problems in various applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 22025303 and 21905210) and the Sino-German Center for Research Promotion (Grant No. 1400).
Notes and references
C. L. Tan, X. H. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. Y. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Z. Chen, W. Zhao, S. K. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Li, S. K. Su, H. S. P. Wong and L. J. Li, Nature, 2019, 567, 169–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Zeng, L. X. Wang, J. X. Liu, T. Zhang, H. F. Xue, Y. Xiao, Z. H. Qin and L. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7812–7815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2839–2847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Li, M. G. Chen, A. Samad, H. C. Dong, A. Ray, J. W. Zhang, X. C. Jiang, U. Schwingenschlögl, J. Domke, C. L. Chen, Y. Han, T. Fritz, R. S. Ruoff, B. Tian and X. X. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2022, 21, 740–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Wang, J. L. Zuo, L. F. Tan, M. Q. Zeng, Q. Q. Zhang, H. N. Xia, W. H. Zhang, Y. S. Fu and L. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13997–14000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-A. Chen, C.-P. Chuu, C.-C. Tseng, C.-K. Wen, H. S. P. Wong, S. Pan, R. Li, T.-A. Chao, W.-C. Chueh, Y. Zhang, Q. Fu, B. I. Yakobson, W.-H. Chang and L.-J. Li, Nature, 2020, 579, 219–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, B. Jiang, Z. Xu, R. G. Mendes, Y. Xiao, L. F. Chen, L. W. Fang, T. Gemming, S. Chen, M. H. Rümmeli and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13911–13917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Zeng, J. X. Liu, L. Zhou, R. G. Mendes, Y. Q. Dong, M.-Y. Zhang, Z.-H. Cui, Z. H. Cai, Z. Zhang, D. M. Zhu, T. Y. Yang, X. L. Li, J. Q. Wang, L. Zhao, G. X. Chen, H. Jiang, M. H. Rümmeli, H. Zhou and L. Fu, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 528–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Ding, M. Q. Zeng, Q. J. Zheng, J. Q. Zhang, D. Xu, W. Y. Chen, C. Y. Wang, S. L. Chen, Y. Y. Xie, Y. Ding, S. T. Zheng, J. Zhao, P. Gao and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5886–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Wang, X. Z. Xu, T. Cheng, L. H. Gu, R. X. Qiao, Z. H. Liang, D. D. Ding, H. Hong, P. M. Zheng, Z. B. Zhang, Z. H. Zhang, S. Zhang, G. L. Cui, C. Chang, C. Huang, J. J. Qi, J. Liang, C. Liu, Y. G. Zuo, G. D. Xue, X. J. Fang, J. P. Tian, M. H. Wu, Y. Guo, Z. X. Yao, Q. Z. Jiao, L. Liu, P. Gao, Q. Y. Li, R. Yang, G. Y. Zhang, Z. L. Tang, D. P. Yu, E. Wang, J. M. Lu, Y. Zhao, S. W. Wu, F. Ding and K. H. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Chen, K. L. Liu, J. X. Liu, T. R. Lv, B. Wei, T. Zhang, M. Q. Zeng, Z. C. Wang and L. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16392–16395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Chen, J. X. Liu, M. Q. Zeng, F. Y. Lu, T. R. Lv, Y. Chang, H. H. Lan, B. Wei, R. Sun, J. F. Gao, Z. C. Wang and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3979–3985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Lu, H. L. Wang, M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, iScience, 2022, 25, 103835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Wu, Y. X. Lyu, Y. Zhang, R. Ding, B. N. Zheng, Z. B. Yang, S. P. Lau, X. H. Chen and J. H. Hao, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1203–1209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Zeng, Y. X. Chen, E. Z. Zhang, J. X. Li, R. G. Mendes, X. H. Sang, S. L. Luo, W. M. Ming, Y. H. Fu, M.-H. Du, L. J. Zhang, D. S. Parker, R. R. Unocic, K. Xiao, C. L. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Xiao, M. H. Rümmeli, F. X. Xiu and L. Fu, CCS Chem., 2019, 1, 117–127 CAS .
S. J. Wan, X. Li, Y. Chen, N. N. Liu, Y. Du, S. X. Dou, L. Jiang and Q. F. Cheng, Science, 2021, 374, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ihsanullah, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124340 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rasheed, Mater. Today Chem., 2022, 24, 100859 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Z. He, X. Z. Wang, Z. Shen, X. C. Han, A. Bachmatiuk, W. Wen, M. H. Rümmeli, P. Liu, M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zubair, H. A. Aziz, M. A. Ahmad, I. Ihsanullah and M. A. Al-Harthi, J. Water Process. Eng., 2021, 42, 102060 CrossRef .
K. N. Yang, T. Zhang, B. Wei, Y. J. Bai, S. F. Jia, G. H. Cao, R. H. Jiang, C. B. Zhang, E. L. Gao, X. J. Chang, J. T. Li, S. M. Li, D. M. Zhu, R. Z. Tai, H. Zhou, J. B. Wang, M. Q. Zeng, Z. C. Wang and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2502–2507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Li, F. Y. Lu, W. Q. Xiong, Y. Ding, Y. Y. Lu, Y. Xiao, X. Tong, Y. Wang, S. F. Jia, J. B. Wang, R. G. Mendes, M. H. Rümmeli, S. J. Yuan, M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2022, 9, nwab153 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Zhao, J. Q. Zhang and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. f Cao, S. t Zheng, J. j Liang, Z. Li, B. Wei, Y. r Ding, Z. c Wang, M. q Zeng, N. Xu and L. Fu, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 1182–1188 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, S. S. Zhao, A. Bachmatiuk, M. H. Rümmeli, S. Gorantla, M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, Small, 2020, 16, 2001484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Liu, Q. C. Li, Q. Y. Ruan, M. S. Rahn, B. I. Yakobson and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Mater., 2022, 21, 35–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Lan, Y. L. Li, J. L. Liu, W. C. Hu, X. H. Zhu, Y. X. Ma, L. X. Niu, Z. H. Zhang, S. F. Jia, L. Y. Li, Y. X. Chen, J. B. Wang, M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, Small, 2022, 18, 2106341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Si, J. Q. Yu, Y. Shen, M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000101 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Si, M. Q. Zeng, H. Q. Ta, S. T. Zheng, J. H. Liao, X. B. Yang, M. H. Rümmeli and L. Fu, Small, 2020, 16, 2001325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Dou, L. Zhang, X. Xu, Z. Q. Sun, T. Liao and S. X. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7338–7373 RSC .
T. Kosmala, A. Baby, M. Lunardon, D. Perilli, H. Liu, C. Durante, C. Di Valentin, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 850–859 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rasheed, F. Kausar, K. Rizwan, M. Adeel, F. Sher, N. Alwadai and F. H. Alshammari, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 132319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, D. Reis, X. S. Hu and J. Appenzeller, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Chang, J. S. Zhang, X. Feng, J. Shen, Z. C. Zhang, M. H. Guo, K. Li, Y. B. Ou, P. Wei, L.-L. Wang, Z.-Q. Ji, Y. Feng, S. H. Ji, X. Chen, J. F. Jia, X. Dai, Z. Fang, S.-C. Zhang, K. He, Y. Y. Wang, L. Lu, X.-C. Ma and Q.-K. Xue, Science, 2013, 340, 167–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Devarakonda, H. Inoue, S. Fang, C. Ozsoy-Keskinbora, T. Suzuki, M. Kriener, L. Fu, E. Kaxiras, D. C. Bell and J. G. Checkelsky, Science, 2020, 370, 231–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, C. H. Jiang, J. C. Fan, S. S. Hong, P. Mei, R. X. Yao, Y. L. Liu, S. Zhang, H. Li, H. Q. Zhang, C. Sun, Z. B. Guo, P. P. Shao, Y. H. Zhu, J. W. Zhang, L. S. Guo, Y. H. Ma, J. Q. Zhang, X. Feng, F. C. Wang, H. G. Wu and B. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1551–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rasheed, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4558–4584 RSC .
S. Feng, C. Liu, Q. B. Zhu, X. Su, W. W. Qian, Y. Sun, C. X. Wang, B. Li, M. L. Chen, L. Chen, W. Chen, L. L. Zhang, C. Zhen, F. J. Wang, W. C. Ren, L. C. Yin, X. M. Wang, H.-M. Cheng and D.-M. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4094–4101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Z. Wan, C. Wang, P. Chen, B. Huang, X. Cheng, Q. Qian, J. Li, Z. W. Zhang, G. Z. Sun, B. Zhao, H. F. Ma, R. X. Wu, Z. M. Wei, Y. Liu, L. Liao, Y. Ye, Y. Huang, X. D. Xu, X. D. Duan, W. Ji and X. F. Duan, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 818–825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Lee, J. J. Lee, Y. S. Kim, Y. H. Kim, J. C. Kim, W. Huh, J. Lee, S. Park, H. Y. Jeong, Y. D. Kim and C.-H. Lee, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Cheng, H. D. Cui, Q. L. Xiao, H. Huang, Y. H. Kang, Q. Liu, J. H. Wang, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Small, 2020, 16, 2003594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, K.-Y. Tseng, R. Kato, T.-S. Wu, A. Large, Y.-K. Peng, W. K. Xiang, H. H. Fang, J. Y. Mo, I. Wilkinson, Y.-L. Soo, G. Held, K. Suenaga, T. Li, H.-Y. T. Chen and S. C. E. Tsang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 9105–9112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. T. Han, X. W. Bai, Z. Q. Man, H. C. He, L. Li, J. Q. Hu, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, Z. Yu, W. H. Zhang, J. L. Wang, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4209–4213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Wang, G. Liu and L. Z. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5192–5247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, R. S. Zhao, B. Chen, L. S. Wu, C. J. Zou, W. Ai, H. Zhang, W. Huang and T. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900526 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Y. Luan, X. B. Huang, Q. Wang, D. Sun, Y. G. Tang, X. B. Ji and H. Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3961–3967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Q. Yang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9559–9612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Hu, P. Huang, B. Jin, X. W. Zhang, H. Q. Li, X. Zhou and T. Y. Zhai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12909–12914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Cheng, J. F. He, T. Yao, Z. H. Sun, Y. Jiang, Q. H. Liu, S. Jiang, F. C. Hu, Z. Xie, B. He, W. S. Yan and S. Q. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10393–10398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Zhou, Z. H. Zhao, H. Zhang, Z. Y. Wang, X. Y. Chen, R. F. Wang, Z. Chen and J. H. Gao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7976–7985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Zhou, R. Hu, L. R. Wang, C. J. Sun, G. Fu and J. H. Gao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17887–17894 RSC .
M. T. Zhao, J. Z. Chen, B. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Y. Shi, Z. Q. Liu, Q. L. Ma, Y. W. Peng, C. L. Tan, X.-J. Wu and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8953–8961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, G. Zheng, F. Gao, X. J. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Y. Gao and Q. Zhao, Joule, 2022, 6, 240–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Albani, R. Bergamaschini, M. Salvalaglio, A. Voigt, L. Miglio and F. Montalenti, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2019, 256, 1800518 CrossRef .
C. Xiao, B.-A. Lu, P. Xue, N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, X. Lin, W.-F. Lin and S.-G. Sun, Joule, 2020, 4, 2562–2598 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Huang, S. H. Tang, X. L. Mu, Y. Dai, G. X. Chen, Z. Y. Zhou, F. X. Ruan, Z. L. Yang and N. F. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Q. Hu, Q. Q. Pang, C. Tang, J. X. Bao, H. Q. Liu, K. Ba, S. H. Xie, J. Chen, J. H. Chen, Y. W. Yue, Y. Tang, Q. W. Li and Z. Z. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11322–11327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, J.-H. Seo, G. F. Luo, M. B. Starr, Z. D. Li, D. L. Geng, X. Yin, S. Y. Wang, D. G. Fraser, D. Morgan, Z. Q. Ma and X. D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10444–10450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Marks, L. Peng, L. D. Marks and L. Peng, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 053001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wulff, Z. Kristallogr. - Cryst. Mater., 1901, 34, 449–530 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Cahn and W. C. Carter, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 1996, 27, 1431–1440 CrossRef .
Z. W. Quan, Y. X. Wang and J. Y. Fang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 191–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Zhou, N. Tian, J.-T. Li, I. Broadwell and S.-G. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4167–4185 RSC .
D.
W. Blakely and G. A. Somorjai, Surf. Sci., 1977, 65, 419–442 CrossRef CAS .
N.-F. Yu, N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, L. Huang, J. Xiao, Y.-H. Wen and S.-G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5097–5101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Wu, C. Y. Guo, N. F. Zheng, Z. X. Xie and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17563–17567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. McCann and M. Koshino, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 056503 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Ribeiro and N. M. R. Peres, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 235312 CrossRef .
O. Hod, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2012, 8, 1360–1369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. He, K. Hummer and C. Franchini, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 075409 CrossRef .
M. Zhao, J. W. Su, Y. Zhao, P. Luo, F. K. Wang, W. Han, Y. Li, X. T. Zu, L. Qiao and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, K. Zhao, X. Y. Xiao and L. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4473–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Zhao, X. C. Zhang, C. M. Fan, Z. H. Liang and P. D. Han, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 3364–3370 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Yang, Y. F. Shi, A. Janssen and Y. N. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15378–15401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Y. Zeng, J. Kang, S. Betzler, C. Czarnik, X. W. Zhang, C. Ophus, C. Yu, K. Bustillo, M. Pan, J. S. Qiu, L.-W. Wang and H. M. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 970–976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, J. Lee, J. H. Sung, D.-J. Seo, I. Kim, M.-H. Jo, B. W. Kwon, W. K. Choi and H.-J. Choi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6556–6562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jung, S. Lee, D. Yoo, S. Jeong, P. Miró, A. Kuc, T. Heine and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7266–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Duan, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5778–5792 RSC .
L. Huang, Z. M. Hu, H. R. Jin, J. B. Wu, K. S. Liu, Z. H. Xu, J. Wan, H. Zhou, J. J. Duan, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908486 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. You, S. C. Yang, B. J. Ding and H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2880–2904 RSC .
F. Y. Zhang, J. L. Zhang, B. X. Zhang, L. R. Zheng, X. Y. Cheng, Q. Wan, B. X. Han and J. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1431–1438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Han, Q. Kuang, M. S. Jin, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152–3153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Zeng, L. Y. Li, X. H. Zhu and L. Fu, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 669–680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Ding, M. Q. Zeng and L. Fu, Matter, 2020, 3, 1477–1506 CrossRef .
L. Z. Zhuang, L. Ge, H. L. Liu, Z. R. Jiang, Y. Jia, Z. H. Li, D. J. Yang, R. K. Hocking, M. Li, L. Z. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Yao and Z. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13565–13572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, A. Banik and K. Biswas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Zhao, B. Dong, Z. L. Guo, G. Su, R. Gao, W. Wang and L. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9228–9231 RSC .
M. A. Zeb Gul Sial, M. A. Ud Din and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6175–6200 RSC .
Y. D. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. D. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
V. Kelso Meagan, K. Mahenderkar Naveen, Q. Chen, Z. Tubbesing John and A. Switzer Jay, Science, 2019, 364, 166–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Li, S. d Wu, W. Lv, J.-J. Shao, F. Y. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Small, 2016, 12, 2674–2688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, A. Avsar, J. Jung, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Natarajan, G. Eda, S. Adam, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 319–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Li, H. R. Jin, Z. Liang, L. Huang, Y. C. Lu, H. M. Yu, Z. M. Hu, J. B. Wu, B. Y. Xia, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6844–6849 RSC .
X. Xiao, H. B. Song, S. Z. Lin, Y. Zhou, X. J. Zhan, Z. M. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Y. Sun, B. Yang, T. Q. Li, L. Y. Jiao, J. Zhou, J. Tang and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 649–662 RSC .
J. X. Fang, B. J. Ding and H. Gleiter, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5347–5360 RSC .
C. Schliehe, H. Juarez Beatriz, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Science, 2010, 329, 550–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-K. Koh, N. K. Dandu, A. F. Fidler, V. I. Klimov, J. M. Pietryga and S. V. Kilina, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2152–2155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Dong, T. Zhang and X. L. Feng, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6189–6235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Sun, T. Liao, Y. H. Dou, S. M. Hwang, M.-S. Park, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3813–3821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. X. Liu, P. M. Abdala, G. Goubert, M.-G. Willinger and C. Copéret, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3254–3260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Lin, L. J. Cai, W. Lu and Y. Chai, Small, 2017, 13, 1700051 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gao, Q. Q. Meng, K. Zhao, H. J. Yin, D. W. Wang, J. Guo, S. L. Zhao, L. Chang, M. He, Q. X. Li, H. J. Zhao, X. J. Huang, Y. Gao and Z. Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6485–6490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Mi, H. P. Li, Y. F. Zhang, N. Du and W. G. Hou, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2588–2597 RSC .
W. Yang, H.-J. Wang, R.-R. Liu, J.-W. Wang, C. Zhang, C. Li, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 409–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Wu, C.-S. Tan and M. H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604635 CrossRef .
Y. T. Deng, H. P. Zhou, Y. Zhao, B. Yang, M. Shi, X. P. Tao, S. Q. Yang, R. G. Li and C. Li, Small, 2022, 18, 2103245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Bai, J. Y. Sun, X. H. Zhu, J. D. Liu, H. J. Zhang, X.-B. Yin and L. Liu, Small, 2020, 16, 1904783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. D. Wang, Z. Chu, C. W. Dong, Z. Wang, S. Y. Yao, H. Gao, Z. Y. Liu, Y. Liu, B. Yang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1981–1991 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, J. W. Wan, Y. Xiong, K. L. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, G. Zhou, D. S. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9078–9082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rojaee and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2628–2658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rasheed, A. Naveed, J. H. Chen, B. Raza and J. L. Wang, Energy Stor. Mater., 2022, 45, 1012–1039 CrossRef .
H. Li, S. C. Xu, Z. P. Huang, J. W. Huang, J. Wang, L. Zhang and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8709–8716 RSC .
Y. C. Liu, H. C. Ye, Y. X. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. B. Yuan, H. D. Wu, G. T. Zhao, Z. P. Yang, J. Tang, Z. Xu and S. Z. Liu, Matter, 2019, 1, 465–480 CrossRef .
N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-G. Sun, Y. Ding and L. Wang Zhong, Science, 2007, 316, 732–735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Tan, W. F. Yang, C. Jia, X. J. Chen, W. H. Ren, S. C. Smith and C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21493–21498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Li, K. Gu, H. Wang, B. L. Xu, H. W. Li, X. H. Shi, Z. J. Huang and H. Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5649–5656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Dong, L. N. Zhang, X. Y. Dai and F. Ding, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5862–5869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Li, W. Guo, L. Ma, W. S. Li, Z. H. Yu, Z. Han, S. Gao, L. Liu, D. X. Fan, Z. X. Wang, Y. Yang, W. Y. Lin, Z. Z. Luo, X. Q. Chen, N. X. Dai, X. C. Tu, D. F. Pan, Y. G. Yao, P. Wang, Y. F. Nie, J. L. Wang, Y. Shi and X. R. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1201–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Zhang, P. Peng and F. Ding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100503 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Linyang Li
	Linyang Li received her BS degree from Northwest University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Lei Fu at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences at Wuhan University. Her current research is focused on the controllable synthesis of 2D rare-earth materials and the exploration of related properties and applications.

Yabei Xia
	Yabei Xia received her BS degree from Central China Normal University in 2020, and she is currently pursuing an MS degree under the supervision of Professor Lei Fu at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Science, Wuhan University. Her current research interest is focused on the precise synthesis and property exploration of 2D luminescent materials.

Mengqi Zeng
	Mengqi Zeng received her BS degree from Wuhan University in 2013. She then received her PhD degree from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences at Wuhan University. Now she works as a full professor at Wuhan University. Her current research is focused on the controllable synthesis and self-assembly of 2D materials on liquid metals.

Lei Fu
	Lei Fu received his BS degree in chemistry from Wuhan University in 2001. He obtained his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. After obtaining his PhD, he worked as a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM (2006–2007). Thereafter, he became an associate professor at Peking University. In 2012, he joined Wuhan University as a full professor. His current interests of research relate to the controlled growth and novel property exploration of 2D atomic layer thin crystals.

Key learning points
(1) Guidelines for understanding the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials.
(2) Principles of key points for controlling facets of ultrathin 2D materials based on thermokinetics.
(3) Design strategies utilized for facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials.
(4) Promising applications regarding ultrathin 2D materials with specific facets.
(5) Challenges and future development directions in this promising field.


 	Fig. 1  The Wulff construction for the ECS, starting from a γ-plot, and the KCS, starting from a ν-plot. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

3.1 Additive-assisted method	3.1.1 Molecules	Tunable surface energy, controllable crystal growth rate	Oleylamine	CoO(100)	∼150 nm2	0.6–1.1 nm	Organic molecule additives: high expansibility; conventional method. Small molecule additives: easy to remove	Organic molecule additives: residues; environmentally unfriendly; complex removal processing; products with poor quality; blocking active site. Small molecule additives: small size distributions	
77

H2	Si(111)	—	1–100 nm	
78

CO	Pd(111)	20–160 nm	1.8 nm	
58

CO2	MOF(20)	100 nm	10 nm	
83

3.1.2 Ions	F−	TiO2(001)	130 nm	8 nm	Simple, highly controllable products with high quality	Additive residue; dangerous HF acid used; uncomplete removal	
84

Cl−	Ge(111)	12 μm	8.5 nm	
50

Cl−	REO(111)	∼4.8 μm (CeO2)	4 nm	
24


	REO(100)	∼5 μm (CeO2)	5.1 nm	

Na+	Sb2Se3(010)	24 μm	1.3 nm	
73

3.1.3 Atoms	Ga	Ge(110)	1.8 μm	2.3 nm	
29

3.2 Template method	3.2.1 Hard-template	Lattice matching	CuO	α-Fe2O3(110)	1 μm	0.55–0.59 nm	Highly crystalline products, insensitive to reaction conditions. Salt template: scalable production; large size; low cost; easy to remove	Constrained by templates	
51

Graphene	MOF(001)	23 μm	5–45 nm	
59

KCl	MnO(001)	>400 μm2	<2 nm	
96

KCl	Co2P(30)	>50 μm2	4 nm	
95

NaCl	MoP2(010)	—	2.5 nm	


	WP2(001)	—	2.3 nm	

3.2.2 Soft-template	Orientation attachment	Oleic acid, 1,2-dichloroethane	PbS(100)	>500 nm	2.2 nm	General method and mild reaction	Small size; difficult for device manufacturing	
99

PbCl2	PbSe(100)	—	4 nm	
100

Sodium oleylsulfate	ZnO(0001)	Tens of μm	2.28 nm	General synthesis; large size; mild reaction	Organic molecules residue; low crystalline products	
60

Pluronic P123, ethylene glycol	TiO2(010)	200 nm	0.62 nm	
102

ZnO(001)	1–10 μm	3.35 nm	

Co3O4(001)	1–10 μm	1.65 nm	

WO3(100)	1–10 μm	2.1–5.2 nm	

3.2.3 Precursor-template	Similar crystal structures	Oct-Si crystals	Si(111)	200 nm	13 nm	Simple, precise control; high quality; high crystallinity	Sensitive to reaction conditions	
43

ZIF-8(111)	LDH(001)	480 nm	2.5 nm	
21

Mg(OH)2(0001)	MgO(111)	—	—	
103


 	Fig. 2  Molecular-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the growth mechanism of a 2D CoO nanosheet, including the growth pathway of nanoparticles and subsequent nanoparticles-to-nanosheets transformation. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2019. (b) Illustration of the growth mechanism of the Si nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (c) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the Pd nanosheets. Inset: Photograph of an ethanol dispersion of the as-prepared Pd nanosheets in a curvette. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 3  An ion-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the growth process of 2D REO single crystals with tailorable facets. (b and e) High-angle annular dark field–scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF–STEM) images of 2D CeO2(111) and CeO2(100) single crystals, respectively. (c and f) The magnified STEM images from the yellow box regions in (b and e), respectively. (d and g) Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of 2D CeO2(111) and CeO2(100) single crystals, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Oxford University Press on behalf of China Science Publishing & Media Ltd, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 4  An atom-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) The schematic of gallium-associated self-limiting (GASL) growth of ultrathin Ge(110) single crystal. (b and c) The adsorption energy calculations of Ge/Ge(110) and Ga/Ge(110) systems. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 5  Hard template-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the synthesis strategy of α-Fe2O3 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (b) Schematic of the epitaxial growth of pristine-graphene-templated MOFs. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic representation of the synthesis of 2D metal phosphides with certain facets on the salt temple. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 6  Soft template-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) A TEM image of stacked PbS nanosheets using 1,1,2-trichloroethane. (b) Schematic of large-particle (A) and sheet formation (B and C) from small PbS quantum dots. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2010. (c) Illustration of the formation of ZnO nanosheets directed by a surfactant monolayer. (d) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a typical nanosheet with an equiangular triangle shape. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  Precursor template-assisted method to control the facet of ultrathin 2D materials. (a) Schematic of the preparation process of 2D Si nanosheets, including morphological transformation and ultrasonic exfoliation. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (b) Illustration of the SCSC transformation from ZIF-8 crystals to LDH nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 8  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets for catalysis. (a) CO and (b) CH4 evolution amounts as a function of light irradiation times of InVO4(110) nanosheet, InVO4(100) nanocube, and bulk InVO4 (SSR). (c) Calculated Gibbs free energy profile of CO2 into CO catalyzed by InVO4(110) for the black line and InVO4(100) for the orange line, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (d) XRD patterns of BiOI nanosheets and BiOI nanoplates. (e) Vacancy associates and position vacancy concentration in BiOI nanoplates and nanosheets. (f) The photodegradation efficiencies of tetracycline as a function of irradiation time under simulated solar light irradiation in the presence of two kinds of BiOI. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 9  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets in batteries for energy storage and power supply. (a) The third galvanostatic charge–discharge voltage profiles of the three kinds of SnS2@NPC nanosheets at 0.1 A g−1. (D-SnS2, F-SnS2, and SF-SnS2 have an increasing number of exposed (100) as well as (001) facets, and NPC is porous carbon with co-doped nitrogen and phosphorous.) (b) Theoretical simulations of the binding energy of the four Na-SnS2 patterns. (c) Theoretical simulations of Na diffusion energy profiles through the different trajectories. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (d) Calculated binding energies of the Zn atom with different facets. (e) Peak areas of Zn stripping/plating reactions and (f) corresponding Coulombic efficiency of the prepared Zn anodes in Zn–Zn symmetric cells (F-TiO2 is the nanosheets with exposed (101) and (001) facets and C-TiO2 is the commercial TiO2). Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets in optoelectronics. (a) Band structure alignments of BiOCl(001) and BiOCl(010). (b) Typical open aperture Z-scan measurements of BiOCl(001) and BiOCl(010). (c) PL spectra of the BiOCl(001) and BiOCl(010). Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (d) Bias-dependent photocurrent on (001) and (010) facets of the (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals. (e) Current–voltage (I–V) curves of the devices made on the (001) facets and (010) facets under the same light illumination. (f) Statistics of the measured photocurrent for 20 devices based on (001) and (010) facets of the (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier Inc., Copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 11  Properties and mechanisms of ultrathin 2D materials with different facets in magnetism. (a) Perspective view of the Feoct2–tet1-terminated (111) facets of the Fe3O4 structure. (b) MRI relaxivity of the r1 and r2 values of the three nanoplates (the material with different thicknesses were denoted as IOP-8.8, IOP-4.8, and IOP-2.8 respectively which have increasing ratios of (111) surface area to volume). Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (c and d) Water coordinating behaviours on Gd2O3(111) and Gd2O3(100) facets according to DFT calculations. (e and f) MR phantom study of the two nanoplates at 0.5, 1.5, and 3.0 T. The concentrations correspond to Gd3+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Scheme of the synthesis of the 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructure by selective epitaxial growth of Zr–BTB nanosheets on PCN-134 nanoplates. (b) SEM image of 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructures. (c) STEM image of a typical 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructure. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the interface of the 2D/2D Zr–BTB/PCN-134 heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (e) Schematic diagram of seed-induced epitaxial growth. The seed has an intrinsically high (00L) orientation. (f) XRD patterns of perovskite films with varied concentrations of 2D seed. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier Inc., Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 13  Challenges and perspective in the facet engineering of ultrathin 2D materials.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
