Correlating long-lived photogenerated hole populations with photocurrent densities in hematite water oxidation photoanodes    - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE02567H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02567H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304-6312Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCorrelating long-lived photogenerated hole populations with photocurrent densities in hematite water oxidation photoanodes†‡

        
          
            Stephanie R 
            Pendlebury
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alexander J 
            Cowan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Monica 
            Barroso
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kevin 
            Sivula
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jinhua 
            Ye
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            David R 
            Klug
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Junwang 
            Tang
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            James R 
            Durrant
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. E-mail: j.durrant@imperial.ac.uk
bInstitut des Sciences et Ingenierie Chimiques, Ecole Polytechnique Fédéral de Lausanne, CH-1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
cInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba, Japan
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University College London, London, WC1E 7JE, United Kingdom
Received 
      2nd September 2011
    , Accepted 17th October 2011First published on 2nd November 2011AbstractPhotogenerated charge carrier dynamics are investigated as a function of applied bias in a variety of different hematite photoanodes for solar water oxidation. Transient absorption spectroscopy is used to probe the photogenerated holes, while transient photocurrent measures electron extraction. We report a general quantitative correlation between the population of long-lived holes and the photocurrent amplitude. The yield of long-lived holes is shown to be determined by the kinetics of electron-hole recombination. These recombination kinetics are shown to be dependent upon applied bias, exhibiting decay lifetimes ranging from ca 5 μs to 3 ms (at −0.4 and +0.4 V versus Ag/AgCl, respectively). For Si-doped nanostructured hematite photoanodes, electron extraction and electron-hole recombination are complete within ∼20 ms, while water oxidation is observed to occur on a timescale of hundreds of milliseconds to seconds. The competition between electron extraction and electron-hole recombination is electron-density-dependent: the effect on recombination of applied bias and excitation intensity is discussed. The timescale of water oxidation is independent of the concentration of photogenerated holes, indicating that the mechanism of water oxidation on hematite is via a sequence of single-hole oxidation steps.

Broader context
Production of hydrogen as a renewable fuel or chemical feedstock could be achieved via solar water splitting, where a light-absorbing semiconductor electrode in a photoelectrochemical cell is used to generate electrons and holes which are able to split water, producing hydrogen and oxygen. Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is a promising photoanode material for this application, since it absorbs strongly in the visible region of the solar spectrum and is stable under water photolysis conditions. However, a strong positive applied bias is necessary for water oxidation to occur on hematite, which limits the energy conversion efficiency of hematite-based water splitting systems. In this work, we use transient absorption spectroscopy and transient photocurrent measurements to investigate the photogenerated hole and electron dynamics as a function of applied electrical bias. Using this approach we demonstrate that the bias dependence of water oxidation primarily derives from the electron density dependence of electron-hole recombination. We furthermore find that the rate constant for water oxidation is independent of hole density, and discuss our findings in terms of their implications for further enhancements of water oxidation on such hematite photoanodes.

Introduction
In recent years there has been a marked renewal of interest in solar fuel production, based upon the utilisation of charges generated within a light-absorbing semiconductor material to split water or to reduce CO2,1–3 allowing solar energy to be stored in chemical bonds. Metal oxides that absorb visible light, in particular Fe2O3, have come under scrutiny as potential water oxidation photoanode materials, due to their stability and ability to harvest a greater portion of the solar spectrum than wide band-gap materials such as TiO2.4,5 However, it is widely recognised that electron-hole recombination is a major limitation of such metal oxide photoanodes. Direct measurements of such recombination losses and correlation of these losses with the photocurrent as a function of voltage have been limited to date. Herein we report direct measurement of photogenerated hole dynamics in a range of hematite (α-Fe2O3) photoanodes as a function of applied voltage and excitation intensity using transient absorption spectroscopy. These optical measurements are complemented by transient photocurrent studies of electron collection by the external circuit. For the first time, we directly monitor the potential dependence of electron-hole recombination in addition to the dynamics of water oxidation. These transient studies enable a quantitative consideration of parameters influencing the efficiency of water oxidation by such photoelectrodes.
Hematite has several advantageous qualities as a photoanode material for solar water-splitting photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells.6 It has a band gap of 2.0–2.2 eV, corresponding to 565–620 nm, with the valence-band edge energy appropriate for water oxidation.7 It is also stable under water photolysis conditions in neutral to alkaline electrolytes, non-toxic and formed of highly abundant elements. However, several factors limit the photoelectrochemical efficiency of hematite electrodes. Hematite exhibits a somewhat long absorption depth for visible light (ca100 nm for λ = 500 nm8) coupled with a short hole diffusion length (2–20 nm9,10), which suggests that a significant proportion of photogenerated charges may recombine in the bulk before reaching the semiconductor-liquid junction (SCLJ). Hole transfer kinetics at this junction have also been reported to be relatively slow, potentially limiting water oxidation efficiency.10–13 Moreover, the conduction band edge is slightly positive of the H+/H2 redox potential, which is one of the factors necessitating the application of positive potentials to achieve water photolysis, although it has been shown that this potential can be provided by a solar cell connected in tandem to the photoelectrochemical cell.14
Many different approaches have been investigated to mitigate these limitations, including doping with various elements, commonly Si, to increase the electron conductivity of the material.6,15 Other studies have modified the photoelectrode surface, primarily with materials thought to catalyse water oxidation, resulting in significant reductions in the positive bias required to achieve water photo-oxidation.16–19 Heterostructures of thin layers of hematite on nanostructured, conductive substrates have been used to address the poor charge transport properties of hematite.20 Efficient charge separation has been reported for thin solid films of approximately the same thickness as the width of the space charge layer,11 although these photoanodes suffer from low light absorption. Thicker nanostructured porous films have been shown to exhibit enhanced photocurrent densities, attributed to enabling the photogeneration of charge carriers within a few tens of nanometres of the SCLJ whilst also achieving good light absorption.21
The highest performing hematite photoanodes reported to date (Si-doped APCVD-deposited films with IrO2 surface-treatment) achieve incident photon to current efficiencies (IPCEs) of ∼20% at 500 nm and 50% at 300 nm.6 However, such high photo-oxidative quantum efficiencies are typically only achieved under strong anodic bias conditions, typically at least 1.23 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which is equivalent to the equilibrium dark water-oxidation potential. A key challenge for enhancing the thermodynamic efficiency of water photo-oxidation by such photoelectrodes is to reduce this requirement for anodic bias. In this paper we address a key challenge in this regard, namely a quantitative analysis of the correlation between this anodic bias and the charge carrier dynamics within hematite photoelectrodes.
To date, the main tools employed to elucidate the limitations of semiconductor photoanodes have been photoelectrochemical measurements and impedance spectroscopies.7,10–12,16,22–25 Such techniques are typically based on measurements of electrons extracted from the photoanode to the external circuit (in the case of n-type semiconductor photoanodes, which normally have only poor hole conductivities). As a consequence, using such methods to monitor the hole dynamics critical for water oxidation presents a significant challenge. Transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) is an alternative technique which measures the change in concentration of photo-excited charge carriers with time by monitoring their photoinduced absorption, allowing monitoring of – at least in principle – the recombination, trapping and reaction of both photogenerated electrons and holes. It has been widely used to probe the charge carrier dynamics in semiconductor materials of interest for solar energy conversion, such as dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs)26,27 and photoelectrochemical cells.28 Titania (TiO2) is the most widely studied and well-characterised material for such DSSC and solar water splitting systems. However, the current understanding of charge carrier dynamics in hematite is lagging behind that of titania.
We have recently used transient absorption spectroscopy on microsecond-second timescales to study undoped hematite APCVD photoanodes in a complete photoelectrochemical cell. In the absence of a positive applied bias, photogenerated holes were observed to be short-lived and water oxidation did not occur. Application of a positive (anodic) electrical bias was observed to retard electron-hole recombination, thus increasing the lifetime of photogenerated holes by several orders of magnitude. Under these positive bias conditions, hole decay dynamics were observed on the seconds timescale and assigned to water oxidation.29 Similar recombination retardation effects were observed for hematite films with cobalt-based overlayers, where long-lived transients were generated in the absence of applied bias.30 Furthermore, we have employed studies as a function of temperature to demonstrate that the slow water oxidation kinetics are associated with a thermal barrier to water oxidation on hematite, consistent with water oxidation on such electrodes proceeding via a sequential series of single-hole oxidation steps.13
Herein we examine in detail the role of applied electrical bias on electron-hole recombination in Si-doped hematite photoanodes, using transient absorption spectroscopy to monitor photogenerated holes and transient photocurrent measurements to monitor photogenerated electrons. We demonstrate a strong quantitative correlation between the yield of long-lived holes and the photocurrent density. A similar correlation is observed from comparisons of different hematite photoelectrodes at a fixed anodic bias. The timescale of water oxidation is shown to be significantly slower than the timescale of electron extraction and electron-hole recombination, leading to some understanding of the processes determining the efficiency of water photo-oxidation by such photoelectrodes, and their dependence upon applied electrical bias.
Experimental
Hematite photoelectrodes
Four different types of hematite photoanode were investigated and are described briefly here, for more information including UV-vis spectra and synthetic methodologies see the ESI. Solid undoped α-Fe2O3 approximately 600 nm thick, deposited by pulsed laser deposition (PLD).31 Nanostructured undoped and Si-doped α-Fe2O3 deposited by atmospheric pressure chemical vapour deposition (APCVD, referred to as “CVD”) of thickness ca 400 nm.21 Mesoporous Nb-doped Fe2O3, ca 200 nm thick, deposited by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP).32 All films were deposited on FTO glass.
Transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS)
Charge carrier dynamics of Fe2O3 photoanodes in a complete photoelectrochemical cell were measured using microsecond-second transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS). A three-electrode configuration was used, with a Pt gauze counter electrode, Ag/AgCl/3M NaCl reference electrode, a Ministat 251 (Thompson Electrochemical) and 0.1M NaOH electrolyte (pH ∼12.8). Potentials are primarily reported versus the Ag/AgCl/3M NaCl (SSC) reference electrode; these were converted to those versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using the Nernst equation: ERHE = E°SSC + ESSC + 0.059pH, where E°SSC is the standard potential of the SSC reference (0.21 VRHE at 25 °C), and ESSC is the potential versus SSC. Electrolyte solutions were prepared from NaOH (as received from Sigma-Aldrich, reagent grade) and Milli-Q-water (Millipore Corp., 18.2 MΩ cm at 25 °C) and degassed with argon (BOC, pure shield grade) prior to measurement. Degradation of the reference electrode by the alkaline electrolyte was prevented by the use of a double junction configuration with a 0.5 M NaClO4 junction electrolyte (pH 6) and a 3 Å molecular sieve porous junction frit.
The transient absorption spectrometer has been described in detail elsewhere28 but, briefly, consists of a 75 W Xe lamp probe beam which passes though monochromators before and after the sample and is detected by a silicon PIN photodiode. The third harmonic of a Nd:YAG laser is used as the excitation source (355 nm, 6 ns pulse width). Laser intensities were adjusted for absorption by the substrate (for SE measurements), such that approximately the same number of photons was incident on the α-Fe2O3 in all measurements described. Reasonably low laser intensities were used (0.17–0.39 mJ cm−2, except for excitation intensity studies). Laser repetition rates (0.25–0.33 Hz) were chosen such that signals due to photogenerated charge carriers had decayed to zero before the next laser pulse; each trace is the result of averaging over 300–1000 laser pulses.
Transient photocurrent (TPC)
Measurements were made on a timescale of microseconds-milliseconds using the three-electrode cell and TAS apparatus as described above, but with the probe beam blocked. The voltage drop across a 47 Ω resistor in series between the working and counter electrodes was recorded using an oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS220), averaging 500–750 measurements per trace.
Photoelectrochemistry
Current/voltage curves (20 mV s−1 scan rate) were recorded using the same three-electrode set-up described above, in a home-made PTFE cell with quartz windows and using an Autolab potentiostat (PGSTAT12). A monochromated 75 W ozone-free Xe lamp was used as the light source. The lamp output was adjusted with neutral density filters such that the white light incident on the cell was equivalent to ∼1 Sun in intensity, although there are some differences between the spectral distributions of the Xe lamp and the solar spectrum.33 The illuminated area of the Fe2O3 working electrodes was ∼0.12–0.25 cm2; approximately the same part of the Fe2O3 film was illuminated as probed during TAS measurements. For EE (“front-side” illumination) measurements, a piece of blank FTO glass substrate was used as a filter to ensure that the same light intensity was incident on the Fe2O3 for both EE and SE (“back-side” illumination) measurements.
Results
Transient absorption studies of photogenerated holes
We have previously reported that the transient absorption associated with photogenerated holes in undoped hematite photoanodes at open circuit (where no photocurrent is observed) decays on the microseconds timescale. However, at a potential where significant photocurrent is observed (+0.4 V versus Ag/AgCl (SSC), equivalent to ca + 1.35 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)), the decay lifetime increases to the seconds timescale.29 This result qualitatively suggested that photocurrent generation is dependent on the generation of long-lived holes. In this paper we focus upon the factors underlying this observation, employing Si-doped hematite rather than undoped photoanodes, as these produce significantly greater photocurrent and larger transient absorption signals. Photogenerated holes in hematite photoelectrodes exhibit a broad photoinduced absorption in the visible/near infrared (see ESI, Fig. S2).13,29 Transient signals for probe wavelengths below 625 nm are complicated at early times by the presence of relatively narrow, intense optical signals from holes trapped in localised intraband states, as we report elsewhere.30 To simplify the data reported herein, we focus upon the transient absorption observed at 650 nm as a probe of photogenerated hole dynamics in such films. Similar dynamics were however observed for all probe wavelengths between 625 and 900 nm. The variation of the photo-hole transient absorption signal with applied electrical bias in CVD Si-doped hematite, probed at 650 nm, is shown in Fig. 1a. We observe qualitatively similar behaviour for all the photoanodes that we have examined, including doped, undoped, nanostructured and solid hematite.
 Fig. 1  Transient absorption and photocurrent denisty data for a Si-doped CVD Fe2O3 film as a function of applied electrical bias. a) Transient absorption signals (1 μs to 2 s, EE 355 nm excitation, probed at 650 nm) for Si-doped CVD Fe2O3 at various applied bias (in 0.1 V increments: pale grey −0.4 VSSC, brown +0.6 VSSC; the same decays normalised at 4 μs can be found in the ESI). The arrow indicates increasing number of long-lived holes with increasing positive bias at water-splitting timescales. b) Correlation of long-lived photogenerated hole signal amplitude at 100 ms (red diamonds) with photocurrent (blue line; under 355 nm EE illumination (ca 550 μW cm−2, giving ∼54 μA cm−2 photocurrent at 1.23 VRHE)). 
On the timescales of these measurements (microseconds-seconds), the transient absorption decays exhibit two phases. A fast phase is observed between 1 μs and ca 20 ms, with a bias-dependent median lifetime (t50%), assigned to electron-hole recombination, supported by evidence discussed below. This fast phase is followed by a slower phase with a lifetime on the hundreds of milliseconds to seconds timescale§ that exhibits a bias-dependent amplitude.We have previously shown that the decay time of this slow phase is accelerated in the presence of methanol29 (consistent with the relatively facile oxidation of methanol compared to water) indicating that this slow phase results from a surface oxidation reaction, specifically (for aqueous electrolytes in the absence of chemical hole scavengers) to water photo-oxidation.
Here we consider the yield of long-lived holes as a function of applied bias, before returning to examine the fast phase decay, assigned to electron-hole recombination, in more detail. The increasing amplitude of the slow phase of the transient absorption decay with applied bias is indicated by the arrow in Fig. 1a. At low applied bias (−0.4 to −0.2 VSSC) there are very few photo-holes remaining on the 100 ms timescale. As an increasingly positive bias is applied, the amplitude of this photogenerated hole signal increases until it saturates at ∼ 0.4 VSSC, after which it becomes approximately constant with bias, as illustrated in Fig. 1b (red diamonds, measured at 100 ms). Also shown in Fig. 1b is the photocurrent density/voltage curve measured for the same photoelectrode. It is apparent there is an excellent, quantitative correlation between the amplitude of the long-lived hole signal (measured at 100 ms) and the photocurrent, assigned to water oxidation.¶
The quantitative correlation between the amplitude of the long-lived hole signal at various applied bias and the photocurrent/voltage curve was observed for all the semiconductor photoanodes that we have examined, including Si-doped and undoped nanostructured CVD films, Nb-doped mesoporous films fabricated by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis and dense undoped films deposited by pulsed laser deposition. Fig. 2 plots the amplitude of this long-lived hole signal (monitored at 200 ms and 575 nm) against the photocurrent measured at +0.4 VSSC for these different Fe2O3 photoanodes. The corresponding i/V curves and transient absorption decays are shown in ESI Fig. 4. There is a clear common correlation between the amplitude of the long-lived photogenerated hole signal and the photocurrent density. This correlation provides further evidence for the importance of long-lived holes in driving water photo-oxidation, and indicates that this correlation is generic to a broad range of hematite photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 2  Correlation of long-lived photo-hole population (as measured by the amplitude of the TA decay at 200 ms) with photocurrent at +0.4VSSC, both under 355 nm illumination for various hematite photoanodes under EE (front-side) and SE (back-side) illumination. The best-fit straight line has an intercept of 0.001(4) mΔOD and gradient of 0.19(4). 
We now consider the processes associated with the faster decay phase observed in our transient absorption data (1 μs–20 ms, Fig. 1a). The median lifetime (t50%) of this fast phase is plotted versus applied bias in Fig. 3.|| It is apparent that this decay half-time increases by three orders of magnitude as the bias voltage is increased anodically, reaching a plateau at a lifetime of ∼ 3ms. This behaviour is analogous to that we have reported previously for the bias dependence of TiO2 electron/dye-cation recombination in dye sensitised titania films.34 As for these dye-sensitised titania films, we assign the increase in recombination time with increasing positive bias to a reduction in electron density in the film induced by the positive bias. Similarly the plateau observed under positive bias is assigned to the regime where the density of electrons photogenerated by the laser pulse exceeds those present in the dark under positive bias conditions, such that further reductions in dark electron density by more positive bias do not result in further retardation of the observed recombination dynamics. Further support for these assignments comes from the excitation density and photocurrent transient data reported below.
 Fig. 3  Median lifetime (t50%)|| of the fast decay phase of the transient absorption signal for photogenerated holes from Fig. 1a, versus applied bias. 
We note that our time resolution does not allow us to monitor recombination dynamics faster than ∼1 μs. There have been several reports of faster (picosecond-nanosecond) recombination dynamics in hematite photoelectrodes,35–38 although we note that such studies were typically undertaken with much higher peak laser powers (and therefore charge carrier densities) than those employed herein. Indeed it is already apparent from our transients that, at negative potentials, a significant fraction of charge recombination occurs prior to 1 μs. It is likely that picosecond timescale measurements probe, at least in part, geminate electron-hole recombination, whereas at the longer timescales (>1 μs) reported herein only non-geminate recombination occurs.
Transient photocurrent studies of photogenerated electrons
The transient absorption data we have reported above are assigned to the absorption of photogenerated holes within hematite photoanodes. We have not been able to observe a transient absorption signal in the 550–950 nm region clearly assignable to photogenerated electrons. Instead, we employ transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements to probe the behaviour of photogenerated electrons in hematite photoanodes, measured under the same transient excitation conditions used for our transient absorption measurements. We note that hematite is an n-type semiconductor, with a significantly higher electron mobility than hole mobility.39 As such, photocurrents measured through the back FTO contact primarily correspond to electron rather than hole currents. Fig. 4 shows transient absorption decays (measuring photogenerated holes) at −0.2 and +0.4 VSSC overlaid with the corresponding TPC decays (measuring extracted electrons). The TPC signals are strikingly similar to the “fast phase” of the transient absorption decay curves for both bias conditions. It is of particular note that at +0.4 VSSC, bias conditions which result in the generation of the slow transient absorption decay phase assigned to the long lived holes driving water oxidation, the TPC curve decays to zero by ca 20 ms. It is thus apparent that under bias conditions where water oxidation is observed, electron extraction occurs on a timescale much faster than the kinetics of water oxidation.
 Fig. 4  TPC decays (measuring extracted electrons) overlaid on corresponding transient absorption decays (measuring photo-holes) of a Si-doped CVD hematite photoanode, EE excitation at 355 nm, a) −0.2 VSSC and b) + 0.4 VSSC (ca 0.96 and 1.35 VRHE, respectively). The TPC axis is shifted upwards and scaled to maximise overlap with the TA decay. 
These transient photocurrent decays can be most easily understood as monitoring the recovery of electron density towards dark equilibrium following the pulsed excitation. This recovery in electron density will result from both electron-hole recombination and electron extraction by the external circuit. Given that electron-hole recombination will also be dependent upon this excess electron density, this is consistent with our observation that the TPC decays track the fast phase of our transient absorption decays. We note that an additional factor likely to impact upon the kinetics of the TPC decays may be the time taken for electrons to move through the hematite film to the back contact.
We obtained some evidence for this from TPC and transient absorption measurements collected with UV (355 nm) excitation through the front (EE) and back (SE) of the film (ESI, Fig. S4 and S5); the strong absorption at this wavelength results in an inhomogeneous charge carrier generation profile. At −0.3 to 0 VSSC, both the TPC and transient absorption kinetics were independent of the direction of excitation, consistent with these decays being dominated by electron-hole recombination in the absence of significant electron collection. However at strongly anodic biases, where considerable photocurrent occurs, both the TPC and transient absorption kinetics are dependent upon the direction of excitation, indicating that electron transport dynamics to the back contact become significant relative to electron-hole recombination.
Excitation density studies
Finally we turn to the excitation density dependence of the steady-state photocurrent and transient absorption decays, shown in Fig. 5. It should be noted that the excitation density range for the transient (laser) measurements is much greater than for the steady-state (continuous wave) measurements; only the very lowest laser intensities are likely to correspond to the charge density regime of the steady-state photocurrent measurements. Fig. 5b shows transient absorption decays measured under 0.4 VSSC anodic bias as a function of excitation density from 23 μJ cm−2 to 2.21 mJ cm−2 (other data in the paper being collected at 200 μJ cm−2). Fig. 5a shows steady state photocurrent densities measured at this bias for the same photoanode as a function of steady state light intensity. It is apparent that as the excitation density is increased, the fast transient absorption decay phase becomes faster and increasingly dominant, consistent with our assignment of this decay phase primarily to bimolecular electron-hole recombination. Of particular interest is our observation that the half time of the slow decay phase, assigned to water oxidation by photogenerated holes, is independent of excitation (and therefore hole) density, as shown in Fig. 5b. This observation is discussed further below. Finally it is apparent from Fig. 5a that the photocurrent density under these anodic bias conditions is linearly dependent upon light intensity. This again has important implications for the processes limiting photocurrent generation under these bias conditions, as we discuss further below.
 Fig. 5  Steady-state photocurrent and transient absorption data for a Si-doped CVD Fe2O3 photoanode as a function of excitation intensity at +0.4 VSSC. a) Variation of steady-state photocurrent amplitude (under 355 nm EE illumination); the red line is the best fit to the data. b) Variation of transient absorption photogenerated hole signal (probed at 650 nm, EE 355 nm excitation from 23 μJ cm−2 (dark green) to 2.21 mJ cm−2 (brown); the laser intensity used for the majority of the measurements described herein is 200 μJ cm−2). Inset: slow decay phase normalised at 125 ms - the timescale of water oxidation (2.1 s) is independent of excitation intensity. The data presented here are examined fully in the Discussion section. 
Discussion
In this paper, we have focused upon the use of transient absorption spectroscopy to monitor the yields and dynamics of photogenerated holes in hematite photoelectrodes as a function of applied bias. Before discussing in detail the results of these studies, it is important to appreciate the advantages and limitations of this experimental approach. The core advantage of this technique is that it allows us to directly monitor the presence of photogenerated holes by the observation of their optical absorption. This differs from alternative electrochemical based techniques (such as impendence spectroscopies and photocurrent measurements)7,10–12,15–19,21–24,31,32 which rely upon monitoring electrical outputs, and therefore primarily monitor electron dynamics (as hematite is an n-type semiconductor, with a relatively poor hole mobility). This ability to directly monitor photogenerated holes is particularly important for photoanodes as it is the photogenerated holes which drive the key electrode function of water oxidation. However, transient absorption spectroscopy has a significant disadvantage in that it has a limited sensitivity and therefore requires the use of relatively intense excitation pulses to generate sufficiently high hole density to be detectable. We note that the transient absorption system we employ has a particularly high sensitivity, and the excitation densities we use are significantly below those employed in other transient absorption studies of hematite photoelectrodes. Nevertheless, our 200 μJ cm−2 excitation pulses correspond to absorbed photon densities of 1019 cm−3. This charge density, while equivalent to the background electron density of undoped (and below that of Si-doped) hematite,22 is most probably greater than the charge carrier density generated under continuous solar irradiation. It is important to appreciate this limitation when considering the results reported herein.
We now turn to consideration of the data reported herein. Using transient absorption spectroscopy to monitor photogenerated holes, and transient photocurrent to monitor the extraction of photogenerated electrons, we have observed that charge carrier dynamics in hematite photoanodes are strongly dependent upon applied potential. Two phases are observed for the decay of photogenerated holes, on timescales of ca 1 μs to 20 ms and 20 ms to >2 s. The fast decay phase is assigned to electron-hole recombination. This electron-hole recombination becomes slower as the steady state electron density in the film is reduced under positive electrical bias. This dependence is very strong, with a 400 mV anodic shift in applied bias resulting in a 1000-fold retardation of the electron-hole recombination rate. The transient photocurrent measurements indicate that electron collection by the external circuit is also complete by ca 20 ms, with kinetics which track the fast transient absorption decay phase. The slow transient absorption decay phase is assigned to residual photogenerated holes which have not recombined with electrons.
There is a quantitative correlation between the amplitude of this slow decay phase (i.e. the population of long-lived holes) and the electrode photocurrent monitored as a function of applied bias. By comparing transient photocurrent and transient absorption decays of hematite photoanodes under EE and SE illumination, we observe that the photogenerated hole dynamics are dominated by rapid electron-hole recombination at negative applied biases. The onset of photocurrent generation at positive bias is attributed to the pronounced retardation in electron-hole recombination with applied positive potential, allowing electron extraction to the external circuit and leading to the generation of long-lived holes. These long-lived holes then go on to drive water oxidation on a timescale of hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.
This analysis is consistent with a recent electrochemical impedance analysis of analogous silicon doped hematite photoanodes,23 wherein a two-phase response was also reported; the low frequency element was assigned to charge transfer processes at the semiconductor-liquid junction, and the high frequency element to processes occurring within the semiconductor, including charge transport.
We previously studied the activation energies and rate constant for water oxidation on nanostructured undoped hematite.13 This rate constant and activation energy for water oxidation were observed to be independent of applied bias. A similar conclusion regarding the rate constant is also apparent for the silicon doped films employed herein from the bias independence of the slow decay phase lifetime apparent in Fig. 1a. These observations indicate that the reactivity of photogenerated long-lived holes is independent of applied bias. This conclusion is consistent with our analysis above, i.e. the photocurrent is dependent only upon the yield of long lived holes, with this yield being determined by kinetics of electron-hole recombination on faster timescales.
We have previously assigned the long-lived photogenerated hole signal observed for hematite photoelectrodes to holes localised at or near the Fe2O3 surface, prior to charge transfer to surface-bound or electrolyte species.13 This charge due to holes accumulated at/near the Fe2O3 surface after electron extraction is most probably balanced by negative ions in the electrolyte, forming the Helmholtz layer. This interpretation is consistent with recent reports of photo-hole accumulation at/near the Fe2O3 surface under water-photolysis conditions.11,12,24
A quantitative correlation between long-lived photo-hole population and photocurrent amplitude appears to be a common feature of several metal oxide photoanodes for water oxidation. A similar association between long-lived holes and water oxidation has also been observed for nanoporous TiO2 photoanodes, both in the presence of a chemical electron scavenger40 and under anodic bias,28 and for a nanoporous WO3 film.41 The results reported herein for different hematite photoanodes indicate that there is a general requirement with hematite photoanodes for long-lived holes in order for water oxidation to occur. This can be attributed to the slow timescale for the reaction of these holes with water. The reaction timescale of these holes is accelerated when oxidising chemical hole-scavengers such as methanol.29 The slow timescale of water oxidation on hematite can be explained, at least in part, by the observation of a significant (45 kJ mol−1) activation barrier for this reaction.13 The activation barrier to methanol oxidation is considerably lower, confirming that the water oxidation timescale is limited by slow kinetics at the semiconductor-liquid junction.
We note that the actual hole lifetime required for water oxidation depends on the timescale of the oxidation reaction on a given material. For instance, the hole lifetime required for water oxidation on nanoporous TiO2 is approximately two orders of magnitude shorter than for nanostructured undoped α-Fe2O3 under similar conditions.28,29 However, it is clear from our transient measurements that the timescale of water oxidation on nanostructured Si-doped hematite is ca two orders of magnitude slower than the timescale of electron extraction to the external circuit, and that significant electron-hole recombination occurs on even faster timescales. The requirement for an enhancement of the water oxidation rate by two orders of magnitude is a daunting task. Hence strategies to increase the yield of long-lived holes and therefore to optimise the performance of hematite photoanodes should focus upon decreasing the level of electron-hole recombination, either through material design to directly retard the kinetics of electron-hole recombination, or by accelerating the kinetics of electron extraction by the external circuit. Indeed, electron mobility in hematite is known to be low,42 and the short hole diffusion length9 is indicative of rapid electron-hole recombination.
It is striking that in our transient measurements, after recovery of the electron density in the film to its equilibrium value (corresponding to when the photocurrent transient has decayed to zero at ∼ 20 ms), the lifetime of the remaining long-lived holes is independent of the applied potential. Given that this applied potential is likely to modulate the average electron density in the film, this observation strongly suggests that these long lived holes are localised in a depletion region (space-charge layer) generated by band bending at the semiconductor-electrolyte interface. Although several electrochemical impedance studies of hematite in the literature have provided information about the flatband potential and donor density of various types of hematite photoanodes,7,10,17,22,23,42 the quantitative extent of the depletion region through a nanostructured photoanode is at present unclear. In semiconductor particles with one dimension greater than the width of the space-charge layer, some degree of band bending is likely to exist. The CVD hematite photoanodes studied herein have a dendritic nanostructure in which the smallest feature size is ca 10–20 nm but which consist of larger features closer to the substrate, on the order of hundreds of nanometres.21 Following a previous methodology,43 we estimate that the voltage difference between the centre of a particle and the semiconductor-liquid junction for an undoped hematite photoanode would be in the region of ca 1–20 mV for a 10 nm radius particle, or ca 25–500 mV for a 100 nm radius particle (ESI). Si-doping increases the donor density from 1017-1018 cm−3 for undoped hematite to 1020 cm−3,22 thus decreasing the width of the space-charge layer.44 Hence it is very likely that a degree of band-bending occurs in both undoped and Si-doped hematite nanoporous CVD photoanodes. The effect of applied bias on these electrodes is most likely a combination of the classic band-bending model of the semiconductor-electrode interface44 and that of a nanoparticulate film with no band-bending. In particles large enough for band-bending to occur (nearer the substrate), increasing positive applied bias increases the width of the space-charge layer so sweeps more photogenerated holes to the SCLJ, reducing the rate of recombination and increasing the population of long-lived holes. In smaller particles, charge carrier transport is by diffusion only, so positive bias lowers the Fermi level, resulting in diminished background electron density, leading to decreased recombination and longer hole lifetimes, allowing more holes to reach the SCLJ. The UV excitation light employed here is absorbed within ∼30 nm of solid hematite.8 Hence we are likely measuring a combination of the band-bending and nanoparticulate regimes in nanoporous photoanodes, particularly with EE (“front-side”) illumination.
As increasing positive bias is applied, the width of the space-charge layer increases, so more holes are photogenerated within the space charge layer. The flat-band potential (i.e. the potential at which no band-bending occurs) of hematite is reported to be ca 0.4 VRHE,22 equivalent to ca −0.6 VSSC under the conditions used in this study. Hence the lowest potential used in this study (−0.4 VSSC) is close to flat-band, where very few holes are photogenerated in the space charge layer. At this potential, the transient absorption signal of photogenerated holes decays rapidly; almost no photogenerated holes remain by ca 200 μs and most recombination occurs prior to the timescale of our transient absorption measurement (Fig. 1a). This suggests that the photogenerated holes measured on the timescale of our transient absorption studies (microseconds-seconds) are mainly those within the space charge layer and nanoparticulate regions of the photoanode.
We conclude by considering the light intensity dependence of our experimental observations. In general, water photo-oxidation by hematite photoelectrodes depends upon two processes which might be expected to behave non-linearly with charge carrier densities, and therefore light intensity: electron-hole recombination and water oxidation. The multi-electron nature of water oxidation is of particular interest, with four holes being required to drive the oxidation of two molecules of water, releasing one molecule of oxygen. There are currently extensive efforts to develop “multi-hole” catalysts for this reaction, motivated in part by recent advances in our understanding of the structure and function of the manganese-based water oxidation centre of Photosystem II in higher plants.45 In this regard, it is particularly striking that the photo-oxidation current observed under positive (anodic) bias for these films scales linearly with light intensity. There are currently few studies reported in the literature of the excitation intensity dependence of photocurrent densities for hematite.9,46
Electron-hole recombination is expected to be a bimolecular process dependent upon both electron and hole densities. This is supported by both the bias and excitation density dependence of the fast transient absorption decay phase shown herein, where the rate of recombination increases with increasing electron density. However, we note that under steady state conditions, the electron density in the film is likely to be dominated by the dark or resting electron density. In this limit, the electron density in the film becomes independent of light intensity, and electron-hole recombination can be expected to behave linearly with light intensity (effectively corresponding to pseudo-first order recombination behaviour). We note that the fast phase decay time and relative amplitude (compared to the slow decay phase amplitude) of our transient absorption data are almost identical for the two lowest excitation conditions, shown in Fig. 5 and the ESI. This behaviour suggests that we are approaching the pseudo-first-order limit in our transient measurements at the lowest excitation intensities (≤200 μJ cm−2).
Of equal, or greater, interest is the independence of the half-time of the slow decay phase upon excitation density and therefore photogenerated hole density. The population of long-lived holes is observed to increase almost ten-fold over the range of excitation densities employed, whilst the decay time of these long-lived holes remains constant. This behaviour strongly suggests that the rate determining step in the reaction of these surface trapped holes with water/surface-bound water species is first order in hole density, and is therefore a single-hole oxidation. This is consistent with our previous report on the thermal activation measurements for this reaction (and also single laser shot analysis of water oxidation on TiO2), which are indicative of water oxidation proceeding via the single-hole oxidation of, for example, surface-bound hydroxyls (OH−).13,47 The potentials for such single-hole oxidation reactions are significantly more positive than the equilibrium four-hole oxidation of water (+1.23 V versus RHE). However, it appears that the highly oxidising nature of photogenerated holes in hematite is sufficient to drive water oxidation via a series of single-hole oxidation steps, without a significant requirement for the accumulation of multiple holes to drive a concerted multi-hole oxidation reaction, in agreement with a recent theoretical study of water oxidation on Fe2O3.48
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Christopher Barnett for equipment development and maintenance and SocMan Ho Kimura for lab support. Helpful discussions with Dr Piers Barnes are gratefully acknowledged. Work at Imperial College was funded by the EPSRC.
Conclusions
Transient absorption and transient photocurrent measurements have been employed to monitor photogenerated holes and electrons, respectively, in hematite photoanodes as a function of applied bias. We have demonstrated a quantitative correlation between the yield of long-lived photogenerated holes (on the order of hundreds of milliseconds) and photocurrent density. The rate constant of water oxidation by these long-lived holes is independent of hole density, indicating that water oxidation proceeds via a rate-determining single-hole transfer step. The bias dependence of the yield of long-lived holes is caused by the strong bias dependence of electron-hole recombination on the micro- to milli-second timescale. This rapid recombination phase competes with electron collection by the external circuit. We conclude that the key factor limiting the efficiency of water photo-oxidation by these hematite photoelectrodes, and leading to the requirement of thermodynamically undesirable anodic electrical biases to enable this photo-oxidation, is not the (albeit slow) timescale of water oxidation by photogenerated holes but rather the rapid electron-hole recombination which can prevent efficient electron collection. This suggests that strategies to optimise the performance of such photoelectrodes should focus not so much upon the acceleration of water oxidation by the addition of co-catalysts, but rather upon either retarding this electron-hole recombination or accelerating the kinetics of electron extraction by the external circuit.
Notes and references
N. D. McDaniel and S. Bernhard, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10021–10030 RSC .
N. Lewis and D. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, F. Fresno, S. Suarez and J. M. Coronado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1231–1257 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese Jr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 723–726 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Marusak, R. Messier and W. B. White, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1980, 41, 981–984 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027–2041 RSC .
B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8393–8399 CAS .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 CAS .
A. J. Cowan, C. J. Barnett, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10134–10140 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, M. Cornuz, F. Le Formal, J. H. Yum, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 25, 17–24 CrossRef .
R. Shinar and J. H. Kennedy, Sol. Energy Mater., 1982, 6, 323–335 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2652–2654 RSC .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 CAS .
R. L. Spray, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3497–3506 CAS .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, S. Sheehan, S. Zhou and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/c1ee01850g .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772–782 CAS .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
K. G. U. Wijayantha, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi and L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5264–5270 RSC .
D. K. Zhong, J. W. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086–6087 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Durrant, S. A. Haque and E. Palomares, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1247–1257 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stockwell, Y. Yang, J. Huang, C. Anfuso, Z. Q. Huang and T. Q. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6560–6566 CAS .
A. J. Cowan, J. Tang, W. Leng, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4208–4214 CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. Tang, M. Gratzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .
M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14868–14871 CAS .
J. Cao, T. Kako, N. Kikugawa and J. Ye, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 325101 CrossRef .
A. Duret and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17184–17191 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Haque, Y. Tachibana, R. L. Willis, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 538–547 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Cherepy, D. B. Liston, J. A. Lovejoy, H. Deng and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 770–776 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Fu, Z. Y. Wu, X. C. Ai, J. P. Zhang, Y. X. Nie, S. S. Xie, G. Z. Yang and B. S. Zou, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 3406–3413 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Joly, J. R. Williams, S. A. Chambers, G. Xiong, W. P. Hess and D. M. Laman, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 053521 CrossRef .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iordanova, M. Dupuis and K. M. Rosso, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 144305 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Pesci, A. J. Cowan, B. D. Alexander, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1900–1903 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, K. D. Sieber and G. A. Somorjai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 252, 269–290 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan, J. Moser, M. Anderson and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8720–8726 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1975, 58, 263–274 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185 RSC .
T. Lindgren, H. L. Wang, N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, A. Hagfeldt and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 231–243 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 132, 7559–7567 CAS .
A. Hellman and R. G. S. Pala, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12901–12907 CAS .
S. A. Haque, Y. Tachibana, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1745–1749 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† This article was submitted as part of a special collection of papers from the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthetic details and characterisation. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee02567h§ There is some variation in the timescale of the slow transient absorption decay phase between individual photoanodes of the same type.¶ We note that the small increase in photocurrent between −0.3 and 0 VSSC was observed to be scan speed dependent, and most probably does not correspond to water photo-oxidation but rather to accumulation of holes at the surface/oxidation of trap states.23|| The value of t50% was approximated as the time t at which the ratio [ΔOD(t, V)/(ΔOD(1 μs, V)−ΔOD(30 ms, V))] equals 0.5.49This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
Production of hydrogen as a renewable fuel or chemical feedstock could be achieved via solar water splitting, where a light-absorbing semiconductor electrode in a photoelectrochemical cell is used to generate electrons and holes which are able to split water, producing hydrogen and oxygen. Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is a promising photoanode material for this application, since it absorbs strongly in the visible region of the solar spectrum and is stable under water photolysis conditions. However, a strong positive applied bias is necessary for water oxidation to occur on hematite, which limits the energy conversion efficiency of hematite-based water splitting systems. In this work, we use transient absorption spectroscopy and transient photocurrent measurements to investigate the photogenerated hole and electron dynamics as a function of applied electrical bias. Using this approach we demonstrate that the bias dependence of water oxidation primarily derives from the electron density dependence of electron-hole recombination. We furthermore find that the rate constant for water oxidation is independent of hole density, and discuss our findings in terms of their implications for further enhancements of water oxidation on such hematite photoanodes.


 	Fig. 1  Transient absorption and photocurrent denisty data for a Si-doped CVD Fe2O3 film as a function of applied electrical bias. a) Transient absorption signals (1 μs to 2 s, EE 355 nm excitation, probed at 650 nm) for Si-doped CVD Fe2O3 at various applied bias (in 0.1 V increments: pale grey −0.4 VSSC, brown +0.6 VSSC; the same decays normalised at 4 μs can be found in the ESI). The arrow indicates increasing number of long-lived holes with increasing positive bias at water-splitting timescales. b) Correlation of long-lived photogenerated hole signal amplitude at 100 ms (red diamonds) with photocurrent (blue line; under 355 nm EE illumination (ca 550 μW cm−2, giving ∼54 μA cm−2 photocurrent at 1.23 VRHE)).	 

 	Fig. 2  Correlation of long-lived photo-hole population (as measured by the amplitude of the TA decay at 200 ms) with photocurrent at +0.4VSSC, both under 355 nm illumination for various hematite photoanodes under EE (front-side) and SE (back-side) illumination. The best-fit straight line has an intercept of 0.001(4) mΔOD and gradient of 0.19(4).	 

 	Fig. 3  Median lifetime (t50%)|| of the fast decay phase of the transient absorption signal for photogenerated holes from Fig. 1a, versus applied bias.	 

 	Fig. 4  TPC decays (measuring extracted electrons) overlaid on corresponding transient absorption decays (measuring photo-holes) of a Si-doped CVD hematite photoanode, EE excitation at 355 nm, a) −0.2 VSSC and b) + 0.4 VSSC (ca 0.96 and 1.35 VRHE, respectively). The TPC axis is shifted upwards and scaled to maximise overlap with the TA decay.	 

 	Fig. 5  Steady-state photocurrent and transient absorption data for a Si-doped CVD Fe2O3 photoanode as a function of excitation intensity at +0.4 VSSC. a) Variation of steady-state photocurrent amplitude (under 355 nm EE illumination); the red line is the best fit to the data. b) Variation of transient absorption photogenerated hole signal (probed at 650 nm, EE 355 nm excitation from 23 μJ cm−2 (dark green) to 2.21 mJ cm−2 (brown); the laser intensity used for the majority of the measurements described herein is 200 μJ cm−2). Inset: slow decay phase normalised at 125 ms - the timescale of water oxidation (2.1 s) is independent of excitation intensity. The data presented here are examined fully in the Discussion section.	 
Footnotes
† This article was submitted as part of a special collection of papers from the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthetic details and characterisation. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee02567h
§ There is some variation in the timescale of the slow transient absorption decay phase between individual photoanodes of the same type.
¶ We note that the small increase in photocurrent between −0.3 and 0 VSSC was observed to be scan speed dependent, and most probably does not correspond to water photo-oxidation but rather to accumulation of holes at the surface/oxidation of trap states.23
|| The value of t50% was approximated as the time t at which the ratio [ΔOD(t, V)/(ΔOD(1 μs, V)−ΔOD(30 ms, V))] equals 0.5.49

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
