Linear and star-shaped π-conjugated oligoanilines: a review on molecular design in syntheses and properties  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2PY00038E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2PY00038E
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2022, 13, 2714-2756Linear and star-shaped π-conjugated oligoanilines: a review on molecular design in syntheses and properties

        
          
            N. 
            Moini
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Jahandideh
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Shahkarami
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Kabiri
          
        
      *ad and 

        
          
            F. 
            Piri
          
        
      c
aAdhesive and Resin Department, Polymer Processing Faculty, Iran Polymer and Petrochemical Institute (IPPI), P.O. Box 14975-112, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: N.Moini@ippi.ac.ir
bPharmacology Research Center, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Iran
cDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Zanjan, Zanjan, 45371-38791, Iran
dBiobased Monomers and Polymers Division (BIOBASED Division), Iran Polymer and Petrochemical Institute (IPPI), P.O. Box 14965-115, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: K.Kabiri@ippi.ac.ir
Received 
      10th January 2022
    , Accepted 20th March 2022First published on 29th April 2022AbstractAniline-based oligomers with pervasive applications exhibit a monodisperse molecular weight, with great environmental stability and unique reversible optoelectrochemical properties when subjected to various stimuli, i.e., changes in pH, voltage, and temperature. Through the decades, the oligoaniline molecular structure has been altered from a linear conformation into multi-arm (and branched) structures to enhance its functional performance. Changing the molecular design and architecture can predominantly affect properties. In this paper, we review linear and multi-arm star-shaped oligoanilines emphasizing their syntheses, doping, and feature properties; we probe how molecular design may affect the morphological and electrochemical behavior of these oligoaniline systems and how these systems can be tuned for a wide variety of applications. In this regard, the new features will be introduced and the most relevant characterization approaches will be investigated. Moreover, limitations and future perspectives, concerning the nonlinear molecular design, will be elaborated.
1. Introduction
Since the first introduction of conductive polyacetylene in 1977,1 intensive studies have been conducted on the synthesis and properties of high-performance conductive organic materials. They have been used in the manufacture of various organic optoelectronic and electrochemical devices, such as field-effect transistors (FET),2 polymer light-emitting diodes (LEDs),3 batteries,4 electromagnetic shielding,5 supercapacitors,6 and conductive/antistatic coatings.7 Organic semiconductors provide better processability along with more feasible synthesis procedures, and less harsh fabrication conditions in comparison with their traditional counterparts, inorganic semiconductors. In these systems, the difference in electrical conductivity (σRT) stems from the different electron transfer mechanism.8
The conductivity of an organic structure arises from the movement of electrons in conjugated π-bonds (and/or p-orbitals), and the delocalization of π-electrons creates a “highway” for charge mobility along the backbone of the polymer.9–13Doping is another important factor to develop a conductive organic structure; the doping process injects charge carriers into the structure which can later move freely along the π-bonded “highway”.10 The charge carrier mobility can be proceeded into three dimensions through the interchain electron transfer, whereas it can be also hindered by the structural disorder.9 Theoretically, through a sufficient doping, the conductivity of a structure evolves into that of a metal. Conductive polymers (CPs) are often classified based on structure into polyacetylene (PA), polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene (PTh), poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV), poly(p-phenylene) (PPP), polyfluorene (PF), and polyaniline (PANI).14Table 1 presents the characteristic properties of CP classes and their common applications.
Table 1 Structures, applications, and properties of conventional conducting polymers and their typical electrical conductivities (σRT) at room temperature




Conducting polymers
Structure
Application
Properties

σ
RT (S cm−1)
Ref.




Polyacetylene (PA) (C2H2)n



No commercial applications reported due to its unstable nature
High electrical conductivity (trans-PA > cis-PA), highly crystalline, poor solubility, environmental instability, high thermal stability
Undoped: 10−9–10−5; doped: 10–105; 23000–28000

11 and 14–16


Poly(carbazole) (C12H9N)n



Electrochromic display devices, batteries, sensors electroluminescence devices
Electroluminescent
Doped 10−5; 10−3–10−4; 103

17–20



Polypyrrole (PPy) (C4H2NH)n



Batteries, supercapacitors, electrochemical biosensors, conductive textiles and fabrics, mechanical actuators, drug delivery systems
Water-soluble, high electrical conductivity, convenient preparation, extremely reactive in their neutral state
Doped: 0.8–340

11, 14, 17 and 21–23


Polythiophene (PTh) (C4H2S)n



Charge dissipation coatings in electron-beam lithography, transistors, solar cells, electrochromic devices
Good environmental and thermal stability, high electrical conductivity convenient preparation solvate-chrome
Undoped 10−4; doped: 2–466 102–105

11, 14, 17 and 24–26


Poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) (C8H6)n



Electroluminescent devices: LEDs, photovoltaic devices
Low electrical conductivity, highly crystalline, environmental stable, mechanically strong electroluminescence
Undoped: 10−13–10−9; doped: 10−6

11, 14, 17, 27 and 28


Poly(p-phenylene) (PPP) (C6H4)n



Electroactive cathode and anode materials in rechargeable batteries
Highly crystalline, high electrical conductivity, reversible electrochemical doping, ionic mobility, insoluble, structural integrity, and high voltage
Undoped 10−12; doped: 102

11, 14 and 29


Polyaniline (PANI) (C6H4NH)n



Biosensors, antioxidants, drug delivery, bioactuators, food industry ammonia sensing, heavy metal removal, cardiovascular application
Controllable electrical conductivity, environmental stability, semi flexible, high electrical conductivity, thermal and radiation stability, reversible electrochemical doping
Undoped 10−10; doped: 101–102

14, 17, 26 and 30–36




When the chains are not isolated, charge transport through interchain and intrachain directions affects the macroscopical conductivity:37 the intrachain charge transport is affected by the length and the composition of the backbone (conjugation length is defined as the number of uninterrupted π-bonds in the conjugated system38); interchain charge transport (called “hopping”) is reinforced by the orientation of the molecules.37 For instance, hydrogen bonds may act as a bridge to transfer the electrons.39 The molecular architecture dictates the charge transfer mechanism. Considering a single chain in an isolated state, one-directional charge transfer is dominant in linear structures whereas, in branched structures, two- and three-dimensional charge transfers are probable.37,40 Compared to organic macromolecules, small organic molecule subdivisions offer a more ordered assembly during the process, whereas a linear polymer can increase the conjugation length by an increase in the number of repeating units.41 This is valid for a linear regime for medium-sized molecules.42,43 There are deviations from this behaviour for the saturated backbone; therefore, effective conjugation length is defined as the minimum length of the effectively saturated backbone. This can be adversely affected by constitutional or configurational defects.42,43 However, the processability of both systems is challenging. The employment of oligomers alleviates this situation to some extent. The processability becomes better by introducing branched molecular architecture, and is promoted further by employing star-shaped analogues. To design a conductive structure, several factors must be considered: durability, resilience, mechanical strength, and electrical conductivity13,14,37,44,45 are examples. To date, the poor environmental stability and high expense of conductive organic compounds has hindered their commercialization.
Aniline-based derivatives represent some unique advantages over other well-performing CPs such as thiophenes, including a lower cost and straightforward syntheses. These systems are being reversibly doped by both redox and non-redox processes (conventional CPs can be doped just through one of these mechanisms). Aniline-based systems have at least three distinct oxidation states (whereas others have just two oxidation states) and they can confer hydrogen bonding.41,46
However, poor solubility, molecular weight dispersity and microphase segregation of polyanilines are often problematic. To avoid these drawbacks, a wise solution could be the utilization of aniline oligomers. Aniline oligomers, either linear or star-shaped ones, possess well-defined structures with electroactivities similar to that of PANI.47–50 They provide an analogous skeleton with lower molecular weights, which is beneficial for various applications.48–50 The doped forms of oligoanilines possess unique properties, including high electrical conductivity, good solubility, appropriate biocompatibility, tunable chemical structures,51 and desirable electrochromic performances.52,53 These features make them suitable for various applications, i.e., electronic devices,54 supercapacitors,55 drug delivery systems,56,57 solar cells,58 or tissue engineering.59–61 Specifically, this group of materials has a great impact on biomedical applications.62 Oligoanilines possess antioxidant/antimicrobial activities, appropriate solubility in the biological environment, and even in some cases they have shown biodegradability63 which is unique in conductive systems.
In this paper, we review linear and multi-arm star-shaped oligoanilines, emphasizing the syntheses and doping approaches of multi-armed and star-shaped analogues. Herein, linear oligoaniline syntheses and doping approaches are discussed, as the most rudimentary form that can predominantly facilitate the syntheses of star-shaped oligomers (convergent approach) which have been investigated in detail. We discuss and compare different linear and nonlinear oligoanilines in three main feature behaviours, comprising self-assembly and morphological order, electrochromism and switching function, as well as electrical properties. The impact of the molecular design of oligoanilines on optochemical and electrochemical behaviours has been investigated using the most applied characterization methods. Moreover, the limitations and future perspectives of oligoaniline-based materials in design and application are discussed.
2. Linear oligoaniline syntheses
In 1907, “Azurin”, an aniline tetramer, was first introduced.64 To date, versatile members of the aniline family, such as its linear trimer, tetramer, pentamer, hexamer, octamer, and 16-mer have been synthesized.65,66 Linear tetraaniline (TANI) is the most appropriate precursor for the syntheses of polymers analogous to PANI.67,68 Concerning the end groups, fully reduced linear oligoanilines can be found in three different forms: parent phenyl/amine-capped oligoaniline (Fig. 1a), amine-capped oligoaniline (Fig. 1b), and phenyl-capped oligoaniline (Fig. 1c).63,69 The amine-capped oligomer is the most rudimentary aniline structure, which is used pervasively in other aniline derivatives such as copolymers, and grafts, for further functionalization on account of having active amine groups.
 Fig. 1  The parent linear structures of oligoaniline (TANI): (a) phenyl/amine-capped, (b) amine-capped, and (c) phenyl-capped aniline tetramers, in the Leucoemeraldine base state. 
Oligoanilines can be synthesized via oxidative coupling,65 nucleophilic aromatic substitution,70 condensation reactions,71,72 and copper-,73 or palladium-catalyzed amination syntheses74 (Fig. 2). Despite the simple synthesis mechanism and a rather fast development of the parent phenyl/amine-capped oligoanilines, the synthesis of phenyl-capped oligoaniline is a challenge. Honzl et al. prepared the first phenyl-capped oligoanilines homologues in four major steps: condensation, aromatization, hydrolysis, and decarboxylation.71 In this approach, first, the starting compounds of aromatic amines (leuco base of Willstatter's imine) were condensed with ethyl succinylosuccinate, and then, several stages were conducted to form a phenyl-capped dimer, trimer, and pentamer of oligoaniline71 (Fig. 2). This complicated procedure requires a high vacuum for sublimation, and just odd-number analogues of oligoaniline are involved. Later, Wudl and coworkers developed a “modified-Honzl route” by reducing the number of steps. They also employed a better choice of starting materials (parent tetraaniline (2 eq.) condensed with dihydroxydihydroterephthalic acid (1 eq.)) and reached a 60% yield. They obtained a phenyl-capped octaaniline which was the most similar analogue to the Brønsted acid-doped PANI with comparable optoelectrical properties.75 Moreover, different titanium alkoxides – as condensing agents (between anilines and phenols) – have been employed to alleviate the synthesis complexity by using atmospheric pressure. Consuming different types of titanium alkoxide, odd and even-number phenyl-capped oligoaniline reaction yields vary between 44 and 91%, while employing titanium tetraisoperoxide as a coupling agent yields 30–67%.76 However, the preparation of titanium-based coupling agents adds more complexity to this approach. An Ullmann coupling, such as cupper-catalyzed coupling reaction has been exploited for the synthesis of parent trimer and tetramer to circumvent the solubility problem of aniline oligomers; acetanilids and 4-iodonitrobenzene was correspondingly exploited in an iterative coupling/reduction sequence reaction (Cu catalysis in Dimethylformamide (DMF) at 130 °C); it is followed by deacetylation-step to provide parent trianiline and tetraaniline (80–90% yield), which are the starting aniline-based moieties (trimer and tetramer) for the Wudl–Honzl oligoaniline synthesis.73
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of typical examples of different employed methodologies in parent linear oligoaniline syntheses. 
The redox approach is a simple strategy for oligoaniline synthesis, employing oxidative agents such as APS at or below room temperature (Fig. 2). It can be conducted via a heterogeneous system65 or a pseudo-high-dilution technique.77 However, inorganic materials, including ammonium sulfate and sulfuric acid, are by-products of this reaction.78 MacDiarmid and coworkers have introduced a simple approach for the synthesis of parent oligomers of tetramer, octamer and 16-mer, in aqueous solutions (suspensions), by oxidative-coupling reactions from the reduced states.65 The pseudo-high dilution technique is another convenient strategy for the synthesis of monodisperse phenyl-capped trianiline and tetraaniline. It involves first the hydrolysis of the Schiff's bases, and then, the oxidative-coupling reactions of the ammonium salts with diphenylamine at pseudo-high dilution condition of the salts.77 The nature of the product – produced in the “conventional” aqueous oxidative polymerization of aniline by ammonium peroxydisulfate and HCl – is extremely sensitive to the applied pH. In fact, various observations on polymerization in a citrate/phosphate buffer solution at pH 3 were reported: controversy exists as to whether the product is polyazane chains or Michael-type adducts of benzoquinone monoimine and aniline.79–81 The latest surveys revealed that the phenazine units had been created and their presence indicates that the reaction of aniline and APS does not occur via oxidation, resulting in head-to-tail chains at pH 3.81 Instead, it takes place via nucleophilic attack of aniline to APS, leading to the formation of benzoquinone monoimine units, with different hydrolysis/oxidation degrees.81 Consequently, it can form hollow microsphere morphology, a resultant of the self-assembly process.80
Wei et al. introduced a one-step method to synthesize a new series of aniline oligomers with definite structures and end-groups, via chemical-oxidation of aniline and its analogue compounds. In this method, external oxidants, such as APS (NH4S2O4), may not be required. Instead, certain reactants, such as the amino-capped aniline trimers, in their high oxidation states, can function as the oxidizing agents.66 The synthesis of the substituted aniline may face some obstacles during the oxidative-coupling in the strong acidic condition. However, Yamamoto and Taneichi prepared an oligo(2,3-dicarboxyliac aniline), using 2,3-dicarboxyaniline in its anionic state.82 In fact, the oxidative-coupling of 2,3-dicarboxyaniline – under the strong acidic condition – is not possible owing to the steric hindrance of two carboxylic groups and hydrogen-bonding with an amine group. Therefore, they were neutralized to form carboxylate anion, and later, the oxidative oligomerization can be run using APS at 5 °C.82 Despite their simplicity, all of the above-mentioned strategies are limited by the lack of ability to cap oligoanilines by desired functional end-groups in symmetric and asymmetric aniline oligomers.82 However, none of the above syntheses are green.
Enzymatic synthesis of oligoaniline is a promising approach with a green chemistry perspective.83,84 In a notable attempt by the Walde team, enzymatic oxidation processes were performed using soft templates of AOT (sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate) anionic vesicles.83,84 The type of employed enzyme and the reaction medium, as well as the experimental conditions such as pH, concentration and monomer, are the most influential factors for a successful oligomerization; a “chemical structure-controlling template” is essential.84 The oxidation process of aniline or aniline dimer (N-phenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine) occurs using horseradish peroxidase isoenzyme C (HRPC) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) on the border of the vesicle through ionic and hydrogen bond interactions: the average size of the vesicles is 80–100 nm at pH of 4.3. The activated aniline dimer as monomer by hydrogen peroxide attached to the negatively charged vesicle and formed a dianiline radical cation. These were subsequently coupled and produced oligoaniline in electroactive emeraldine salt form. Physical interactions with surfactant as soft template in vicinity of horseradish peroxidase isoenzyme C and hydrogen peroxide based on the recommended mechanism can lead to the formation of aniline tetramer and hexamer (Fig. 3). The main drawback of this approach is its lack of control over oligomer length. At the second step undesired side products with phenazine-type units or oxygen atoms may affect the reaction performance. However, the system can be optimised: the study has shown that the aniline dimer has better performance and fewer side-products. Therefore, the mixture of the aniline and aniline dimer has minimized the phenazine or other side-products.83,84Fig. 3 schematically displays enzymatic synthesis in the vicinity of AOT vesicles, and the proposed mechanism for enzymatic synthesis of oligoanilines in emeraldine salt form.
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of enzymatic synthesis in the vicinity of AOT vesicles (left) and proposed mechanism for enzymatic synthesis of oligoanilines in emeraldine salt form (right). 
Pd-Catalysed amination methodology, introduced by Buchwald et al., is a promising approach with high efficiency, regioselectivity and flexibility in the synthesis of functional-capped, odd- and even-numbered oligomers with high control over oligomer length74 (Fig. 2). They have synthesized various lengths of oligoanilines with diverse functional end-capped groups, including H, tert-butyl, dodecyl, methoxyphenyl and cyano,74,85 and trimethyl silyl74 (Fig. 3a). In this regard, there are three routes: first, monodirectional chain growth, second, bidirectional chain growth from a symmetric core piece, and third, a divergent-convergent synthesis of nonsymmetric fragments, followed by the coupling to a symmetric core fragment.74,85 In the monodirectional growth, there is a unit-by-unit growth in the chain length for each iteration (i.e., an arylamine reacts with a protected 4-bromoaniline, followed by deprotection). Relatively slow kinetic rates, the presence of by-products, and more difficulties for product separation could be mentioned as disadvantages of this strategy.74,86 In bidirectional growth, the chain length increases by two units per iteration, i.e., using 1,4-aryldiamine and 1,4-dibromoaniline as the starting compounds.74,86 Additionally, the presence of the phenylmethylene moiety in N-(diphenylmethylene)-4-bromoaniline has displayed easy and rapid condensation reaction on a large scale with high yield and no detectable transamination. A divergent-convergent approach provides geometric growth in the chain length, using protected oligomer converted to aryl amine and aryl bromide with equal portions.74 The coupling of the oligo-aryl amine with oligo-aryl bromide produces a homologous oligomer, with a doubling in the chain length. Orthogonal protection can be used to protect the internal amine, and increase the solubility of the product.85 However, it imposes an extra step of deprotection into the former multi-step procedure. The symmetrical structures can be synthesized with yields of higher than 80%. Functional-capped asymmetrical oligomers can be synthesized with a yield of around 90%, using amine-capped oligomer, Pd-based catalyst, and bromide functional materials. Regioselective bromination and the employment of protecting agents may be the main reasons for achieving those higher yields.85 Furthermore, the Pd-catalyst reaction has been exploited for the high-spin ferromagnetic oligomer syntheses with eight benzene rings, which were substituted alternating meta–para.87
In the Buchwald–Hartwig reaction, each internal amine has been protected by a tert-butyl carbamate (BOC) group, to avoid oxidation of the product and also to improve the solubility; at the end of the reaction, the BOC groups can be removed quantitatively.74,85 However, the protection process may interrupt the rate of the reaction, and so the chain-length is increased. A bidirectional strategy can be employed to overcome this limitation. For instance, aniline-based tetramers have been synthesized in one step, using the Buchwald–Hartwig cross-coupling reaction, without a protecting agent. In fact, the protection-deprotection step has been avoided by an appropriate selection of the base molecule (N-phenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine) and the core molecules to design asymmetrical-linear oligoanilines.88 Overall, Pd-catalysed amination methodology and oxidative-coupling reaction (using APS) are the most used approaches for syntheses of oligoaniline derivatives.
2.1. Doping of oligoaniline
The doping process can be generally classified into Redox doping, non-Redox doping, and doping involving no dopant ions (photodoping and charge-injection doping has been investigated comprehensively elsewhere).89Redox doping – containing dopant ions – functions by the partial oxidation (either chemically or electrochemically) or by the reduction of the polymer or organic material.90 Redox doping reagents could be electron-accepting (p-doping) or electron-donating (n-doping) species.91 In non-redox doping – containing dopant ion – the number of electrons in the polymer backbone remains unchanged, while in the redox doping, this number is changing.10,46
Aniline-based structures can be doped by redox and non-redox doping (protonic doping) processes.92–94 In protonic doping, the number of electrons in the polymer backbone does not change, while in the oxidative doping the number of electrons decreased.46Fig. 2 schematically represents various oxidation and doping states of tetraaniline as the smallest repeating unit; this class of material can possess various oxidative forms at different pHs.17,46 The oxidation states of tetraamine – determined by the number of quinoid and benzenoid units – present different color emissions: Leucoemeraldine base (LEB) – (colorless; fully reduced state with the amine nitrogens), Emeraldine base (EB) – (blue or violet; half-reduced state), and Pernigraniline base (PNB) – (dark-brown; fully oxidized state with the imine nitrogens).94 If EB is doped with protonic acid or redox reaction, the blue EB is converted to the green conductive Emeraldine salt (ES).
The solitons, polarons (i.e., radical ions), and bipolarons (i.e., dications or dianions) as products of doping are the major positive or negative charge carriers in the conjugated backbone.11 The doping process changes the bandgap between the energy levels (Eg), and the decreased energy bandgap facilitates the delocalization of the electrons; consequently, the greater charge mobility increases the electrical conductivity in the matrix.11,95 The conductivity of oligoanilines originates from the protonation of imine nitrogen of aniline moieties with bipolaron and polaron configurations;39 they have been schematically delineated in Fig. 4. The polaron and bipolaron are local distortions of chain that store the extra positive charge; in polarons, only one nitrogen atom in the oxidized unit (dimer) is protonated, whereas in bipolarons, both imine nitrogen atoms in the oxidized unit are protonated39,96 (Fig. 4). Furthermore, respecting the spin and magnetic properties, the polaron is the configuration with the high spin state, whereas the bipolaron has a singlet state.97 These useful defects result in different magnetic behaviors: paramagnetic (polaron) and diamagnetic (bipolaron).97 Controversial claims exist on the energetically stable existence of the state which is the origin of conductivity.96–100 Based on more recent investigations, the doping concentration can actively affect the configuration preference.97 Results suggest that there is a mixture of spin isomers.97 Depending on the length of the oligomer, the full polaron structure can be a triplet, quintet, etc.96 Experimental and theoretical approaches in the solution phase have unveiled that by the increase in the acid-dopant concentration, the polaron state becomes less dominant.97
 Fig. 4  The linear tetraaniline at various oxidation and doping states. 
Various organic or inorganic acids – either weak or strong, such as HCl, sulfuric acid, CSA,101,102 naphathalene sulfonic acid derivatives,103–105 phytic acid106 and dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid – have been used as a protonic dopant for oligoanilines.107 CSA and HCl are the most common and efficient dopants in aniline-based materials. CSA can play a role as a dopant, but it can also dominantly alter the morphological behavior of the aniline-based materials.101 Stronger interactions, like hydrogen bonding, between the organic dopant and the oligoaniline can facilitate the charge mobility and increase conductivity in comparison with inorganic dopants.39 By variation in chirality of CSA, the self-assembly orientation, leading to a left-hand or a right-hand helical morphology, can be prepared.102 However, it can adversely affect the single crystal-formation of the oligoaniline, and also inhibits the long-range order.108 The dopant structure can directly affect the chain orientations and conductivity due to noncovalent interactions. Sulfonic acid-based dopant helps PANI and oligoaniline to have a better solubility and dispersion.103–105 Compared with the inorganic acid-doped oligoanilines, the ones doped with organic acids show an enhanced electrical conductivity. This is attributed to the intermolecular interactions between the organic dopants and the N atoms of the oligoaniline.39 Besides, most of the dopants discussed are toxic. Thus, their utilization in aniline-based materials is limited. However, recently some biobased acids, such as tartaric acid,109 succinic acid,110 and citric acid110 have been used both as dopants and surfactants. A nontoxic dopant, ascorbic acid, has also been employed in oligoaniline synthesis for the preparation of antibacterial oligoaniline-based drug composites.111 Another biobased dopant, L-lysine (basic amino acid) has been employed as chain-spacer and self-dopant in conductive polyurethanes.112
The incorporation of self-doped oligoaniline – covalently attached protonic acid moiety to the oligoaniline structure – has resulted in an incredible electrochemical property.47 The carboxylic acid-capped oligoaniline shows reversible electrochromic properties, even at alkaline states, owing to the self-doping effect of the carboxylic acid end-groups. However, chain length and the oligomer architecture can affect the optical contrast, coloration efficiency, response time, and the cycling stability.47 The presence of the acid group in the main chain or as the pendant group can actuate the final product to a faster response, fewer side reactions or morphological defects, and a long cycling life in electrochromic devices, because of their self-doping features.113–115 Good examples are aminobenzenesulfonic acid derivatives113,115 and 4-styrenesulfonate114 used as self-doping monomers in copolymerization with aniline. In addition, the syntheses of alkyl sulfonic acid/Ph-capped dimer, as a monomer, and at the second-state alkylsolfunic acid-capped linear pentamer unveils suitable self-doping performance by electroactivity at various pHs.69 Self-doped oligo(2,3-dicarboxyaniline) synthesized by an oxidative approach has shown redox activity, even at weak acidic conditions (3 < pH < 6).82 However, the weak acid-doped oligomer has a low conductivity, in the range of 10−10 S cm−1, because of the reduced planarity of the oligomer.82
Amphiphilic acids or surfactants are also used as a dopant, i.e., alkylsulfonic acids.116 The interaction of oligoaniline (two-, four-, and six-mer) with the dopant at the atomic level by quantum mechanical methods has also been investigated.116 It reveals that the effect of the alkyl size and length on the interaction strength is negligible (because of the anionic characteristic of the dopant), while its energy decreased with the increase in the oligoaniline length, and there are also localized effects around the binding sites.116
The effect of doping on the electrical structure of the oligoaniline has also been investigated theoretically using the bond-length and angle variances.39 Based on the density functional theory (DFT), protons prefer doping at the imine group. Stronger interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, between dopant and the oligomer can increase the charge transfer, and consequently, the conductivity of the oligoaniline. Moreover, the size of the anionic counterion is of great importance. The organic acid, as a large counter anion, can be doped in the polaron form, whereas the smaller counter anion, i.e., HCl, can be doped in both polaron and bipolaron forms. Moreover, the planarity of the oligomer increases by the doping, based on the dihedral angle decrease about 11°.39
2.2. Functional-capping of linear oligoaniline
From a synthesis perspective, the introduction of functional groups into oligoaniline chains, either as substituents on the phenyl group or as an end-capping group, would be considerable progress, even though it can provide more facile incorporation of this class of material in other applications. Examples are thiolation and silanization of oligoanilines in coating applications. In this section, the most common functional substituent groups of the individual linear oligoanilines will be discussed from a different perspective. The electronic distribution and the geometrical structure of aniline and oligoanilines deeply depend on the substituent groups, presented at the end of the oligomer or on the aniline aromatic ring. Various lengths of phenyl-capped oligoanilines have been synthesized so far with diverse functional end-capping (Fig. 5a), including H, tert-butyl, dodecyl, methoxyphenyl and cyano,74,85 and trimethyl silyl:74 the oligomers have been synthesized via palladium-catalysed amination of aryl halides, along with an orthogonal protective group. The presence of electron-donating groups or electron-withdrawing groups results in a tremendous change in the intensity of UV-vis maximums. The π-donating substituents with higher electron density reveal more intense electronic absorption by emeraldine in the low bandgap region and stabilize the electrochemical nigraniline.74
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of (a) the functionalized Ph-capped tetramer, (b) substituted tetraaniline in meta (or ortho position of phenyl), (c) dithioacetate aniline dimer, (d) COOH/NHS-capped tetraaniline, (e) cationic amphiphilic aniline oligomer, and (f) 4-methoxy phenyl substituted oligoaniline on electron-active nitrogen, (g) diphenyl enamine (and nitro)-substituted oligoaniline, (h) perfluorophenylazid-capped tetraaniline in the LEB states. 
In addition, the incorporation of various functional groups, such as amino groups and the other substituents attached to the aniline (to phenyl) (Fig. 5b) in limited chain lengths, such as cyano, methyl, methoxy, nitro, and fluorine groups, has resulted in a variety of responses and properties.117 Herein, the strongest calculated influences are briefly mentioned:117 oligoaniline end-capped with methoxy group results in the formation of a five-member ring, fused to the benzenoid under the influence of hydrogen-bonding, which causes large geometrical distortion of the benzenoid ring. Second, the cyano group, due to its electron-accepting capability –the quasi-charged benzenoid ring – increases the ionization potential which is associated with the HOMO energy, while LUMO orbitals of the benzenoid ring and the cyano group interact with each other and reduce the first optical transition.117 Moreover, the nitro group can predominantly influence oligomer behavior by both hydrogen-bonding and the raise in the ionization potential (strong perturbation of LUMOs of the nitro group and the ring). It can boost the electric properties, and decrease the first transition in UV-vis absorption to 380 nm. Oligomer substituted by nitro displays semiconducting properties, even in their reduced states.117
From a synthesis perspective, thiol-functionalized oligoanilines (Fig. 5c) are interesting: they have been synthesized based on the Buchwald–Hartwig method, for application in molecular electronic devices such as molecular junction nanowires with asymmetric Au–Pd and symmetric Pd–Pd contacts.118–120 Herein, two approaches are introduced for the synthesis of mono or dithioacetate oligoaniline, followed by the deprotection steps.119 The first approach employs p-phenylenediamine and 2-(trimethylsilyl) ethyl 4′-bromo phenyl sulfide, and results in the formation of dithioacetate dimer (bifunctional) with a yield of 35%. However, this strategy is not efficient enough for a monofunctional structure. Therefore, the second approach is proposed for the synthesis of monofunctional oligomers (thioacetate N-methyl dimer), using N-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine and p-dibromobenzene, which yields about 63%. The second approach had a higher efficiency; however, it proceeded at a temperature around −78 to −60 °C, which might not be simply applicable. Besides, the yield decreases with an increase in the number of functionality or by increasing the length of the oligomer. These yields for dithioacetate N-methyl dimer and monothioacetate N-methyl pentamer are 41% and 17%, respectively.119
In a study on electroactive chitosan-based hydrogels, the carboxylic acid/N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS)-capped aniline pentamer (Fig. 5d) was synthesized, using carboxylic acid-capped pentamer, NHS and N,N-dicyclohexyl-carbodiimide (DCC) in DMF at 30 °C. The carboxylic acid-capped dimer was prepared by the reaction of succinic anhydride and N-phenyl-P-phenylenediamine; moreover, the oxidative coupling (by APS) of phenylenediamine (as the core) with aniline dimer yielded carboxylic acid-capped pentamer.121,122 It can also be functionalized by N-hydroxysuccinimide, in order to attach to the chitosan to prepare an electroactive hydrogel.122
Oligoaniline with an NH2 end-group can be functionalized with ionic amphiphile head-groups, to create a water-soluble oligoaniline derivative. The oligoanilines, capped with anionic-head, i.e., sulfonic acid, represent long and short-range orders accompanied by self-doping behavior.69 A sulfonic acid-capped oligomer with C3 spacer was also synthesized via oxidative coupling of p-phenylenediamine and monomer. The monomer, 3-((4-(phenylamino)phenyl)amino)propane-1-sulfonic acid was synthesized using N-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine and 1,3-propanesultone.69 It has a good solubility in strong polar solvents, and can maintain its electroactivity at various pHs, ranging from acidic to alkaline.69 In order to tune the doping for further analyses, Bell et al., taking advantage of Buchwald–Hartwig amination methodology, have designed cationic amphiphilic oligomer (TANI-PTAB) containing amide-linked C5 spacers, and a quaternary trimethylammonium bromide (PTAB) doped with S- or R-CSA102 (Fig. 5e). The synthesized electroactive amphiphile has presented promising optoelectrical properties with reversible switching self-assembly under stimulation.102,123
Using a nucleophilic substitution reaction for methoxytriphenylamine (methoxy/diamine-capped) and 4-fluoronitrobenzene followed by hydrogen Pd/C-catalyzed reduction results in 4-methoxyphenyl substituent oligoanilines as triphenylamine (TPA)-based oligomers (Fig. 5f) with anodically/cathodically electrochromic characteristic.124,125 The presence of methoxy groups, as electron-donating substituents, in the para position provides a cationic stable radical during the oxidation procedure and enhances the electrochemical reversibility. This group of oligoanilines changes the planarity of the oligomer and therefore leads to unique electrochemical properties. To overcome the fluorescence-quenching problem, nonplanar moieties of diphenyl enamine have been inserted through “chain insertion pattern”. Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) oligoanilines (Fig. 5g) with various chain lengths and numbers of substituents have been synthesized in a single or multi-step process using diphenyl acetaldehyde and phenyl-capped oligoaniline (at 70 °C).126
Photoactive functional groups, namely 4-azidotetrafluorobenzoic acid (ATFB), can also facilitate oligoaniline incorporation in various structures: TANI and ATFB (Fig. 5h) were coupled under basic conditions at 25 °C in order to participate in a photoactivated surface modification procedure. Various types of materials such as polystyrene, polyethersulfone, graphite, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and reduced graphene oxide can be used; the TANI-ATFB oligomer dissolves in common organic solvents. Utilizing azide photochemistry and TANI-ATFB oligomer, TANI can be grafted on the substrate/membrane via a simple, fast, and non-destructive approach, and shows antifouling properties.127
3. Multi-arm star-shaped oligoaniline syntheses
Star-shaped architectures render colloidal stability and help the formation of virtually monodisperse particles.51 The star-shaped molecule also provides a special inhomogeneous concentration profile: at the central core, the chain segment density is higher than the outer region or the free-ends of the branches.128 Another inherent advantage of employing star-shaped oligomers is the presentation of the discotic mesogens. It may provide the formation of well-ordered liquid-crystalline phases, which is of great importance for organic electronics. Self-assembly and reorientation of star-shaped mesogens can result in thermally induced self-healing properties.129
The star-shaped conjugated oligoanilines are composed of a set of conjugated linear oligoanilines (referred to as arms), that append to various sites of a central unit (referred to as the core).40 The resulting macromolecules often show different attributes, whereas the core's geometry is the dominant factor in controlling the system properties.40 2D geometries are often achieved from flat and planar cores, whereas 3D star-shaped systems are generated from non-planar centers. Consequently, depending on the symmetry and the pointing group, the cores with C3 or C6 symmetry provide star-shaped molecules with 3 and 6 arms, respectively.40
The star-shaped systems are generally synthesized through divergent or convergent methods. The divergent method consists of the following stages: the coupling of the monomers to the core, the extension of the arms, and terminal functionalization of the arms.129,130 In the convergent method – which is the dominant one – the arms (linear oligoaniline acts as building block) are first formed; afterwards, the prepared arms are appended to the core molecule,129 and if needed, the arms are functionalized.129,130 The convergent approach is more desired and applicable for star-shaped oligoanilines.131 The nature of the core molecule, shape, number and the lengths of arms, and their functionality attributions are the most important factors which affect the synthesis, and eventually determine the properties.40,129 Based on the structure of the core molecule, star-shaped oligoaniline systems can be classified into two categories: systems with a small central unit, and systems with macromolecular central units.
3.1. Systems with small central units

Star-shaped meta–para aniline oligomers. 
The synthesis of star-shaped oligoanilines dates back to 1997, when Wienk and Janssen synthesized two different star-shaped hexaamines (N-phenyl substituted meta–para aniline oligomers) by the condensation-reaction between different cores (i.e., N,N′,N′′-triphenyl-1,3,5-benzenetriamine and 1,3,5-benzenetriol), and 4-iodo-N,N-diphenylaniline and N-phenyl-1,4-benzenediamine as arms through a convergent approach132 (see Fig. 6). The precursor meta–para aniline oligomers are accessible via a series of copper-catalysed Ullmann-type reactions. Subsequently, by the reversible chemical-oxidation or acid-doping of neutral oligomers in an acidic medium, and losing an electron from each phenylene-diamine unit, the high-spin polaronic oligo(cation radical)s were achieved.132 These compounds are chemically stable due to their unpaired electron delocalization within each p-phenylenediamine unit, and are capable of being used as polaronic structural blocks in ferromagnetic polymers.132 Hexaamine (Fig. 6 compound V) was also prepared by a less harsh approach using phloroglucinol and N-phenyl-1,4-benzenediamine at concentrated HCl, 120 °C for 4 h (ref. 133) compared to I2 (180 °C and 6 h).132 This star-shaped oligomer is coupled with Pt and Au to act as methanol oxidation catalyst.
 Fig. 6  The syntheses of linear (I, III) and star-shaped (IV, V) meta–para oligoanilines. 


Dianiline and tetraaniline oligomers. 
In 2001, Wang and coworkers prepared three-arm star-shaped oligoanilines. Dianiline and ES forms of tetraaniline – synthesized from N-phenyl-1,4 phenylenediamine (employing ferric chloride hexahydrate oxidant) as arms – were attached to a tricarballylic acid (propane-1,2,3-tricarboxylic acid) core molecule through the condensation reaction (see Fig. 7a).128 It is noteworthy that in the synthesis of the arm, the molar ratio of the oxidant to the aniline has a great impact on the length of the final oligomer and its dispersity.128
 Fig. 7  The synthesis of (a) three-arm star-shaped dianiline (n = 1) and tetraaniline (n = 3) oligomers, (b) star-shaped oligoaniline TDPB in its fully reduced state, using the Buchwald–Hartwig reaction. 


1,3,5-Tris(4-dianilinophenyl)benzene (TDPB). 
Mills and coworkers synthesized a π-conjugated oligoaniline derivative by coupling dianiline groups – as linear arms – and 1,3,5-tris(4-bromophenyl)benzene – as the central core – using the Buchwald–Hartwig reaction88 (see Fig. 7b). The length of the oligoaniline arms and the π-conjugation pattern at the triphenylbenzene core lead to the formation of radical cations in an acidic condition. The absence of a flexible spacer in TDPB prohibits the formation of mesophase; however, when TDPB is doped with organic Brønsted acids, self-assembled and weakly ordered supramolecular columnar aggregates of acid-doped TDPB is formed. The supramolecular stacking feature and the unpaired electrons of TDPB make it a potential candidate for the fabrication of the conducting nanowires, organic magnetic materials, and sensors.134


Carboxyl-capped star-shaped tetraaniline. 
Linyu Cao et al. studied the effect of the architecture of oligoanilines on the optoelectrical properties. After preparation of pristine tetraaniline by the oxidative coupling reaction in the LEB state, the authors synthesized various types of oligomers, including linear carboxyl-capped tetraaniline ((ANI)4-COOH) (see Fig. 8a), linear amino/carboxyl-capped tetraaniline (NH2-(ANI)4-COOH) (Fig. 8b), as well as a carboxyl-capped star-shaped tetraaniline (tri-(ANI)4-COOH) (Fig. 8c), in which trimesoyl chloride and LEB NH2-(ANI)4-COOH units act as the core molecule and arms, respectively.135 The authors suggested that substituents with the polar carboxyl group and the star-shaped molecular architecture have increased the electrical conductivity and electrochromic properties of the aniline oligomers, mostly by the facilitation of charge transport and ion diffusion.135
 Fig. 8  The syntheses of (a) linear carboxyl-capped tetraaniline (LEB (ANI)4-COOH), (b) linear amino/carboxyl-capped tetraaniline (LEB NH2-(ANI)4-COOH), (c) carboxyl-capped para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH, meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH and the star-shaped tetraaniline (Tri-(ANI)4-COOH) in the LEB state, and (d) synthesis of a star-shaped rod-coil block copolymer (Tri (ANI)4-b-PEG). N,N‘-Dimethyl acetamide (DMAc) 1-ethyl3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDCI). 
In a recent study, these authors have investigated the effect of number of arms attached to the core molecule on the optoelectrical properties of oligoanilines: the linear (NH2-(ANI)4-COOH), bi-(ANI)4-COOH in para and meta position, and tri-(ANI)4-COOH131 (Fig. 8). By the increase in the number of arms, the order, in the so-called “breathing” porous structure, raises. It leads to quicker response to the stimuli and better cycling stability. The star-shaped oligomer maintained its morphology during the 300 redox cycling in different oxidation environments and the mass change after 300 cycles is still negligible. The bi-(ANI)4-COOH in meta position has shown better optoelectrical properties than in para position. The study reveals that the straight architecture experiences more reduction in optical electrical behavior, which was attributed to the less-ordered structure; the linear (NH2-(ANI)4-COOH) displayed the most morphological alteration before and after the cyclic voltammetry (based on the ATM images). The proposed rod-like assembly in the oligomer with three arms can accelerate ion diffusion during analyses, and as a result, the performance in switching time, coloration efficiency, and cycling stability were enhanced.131


Star-shaped rod-coil block copolymer of (TANI-b-PEG)3. 
The effect of block copolymerization on the nanoscale morphology has also been studied. The synthesis of a star-shaped rod-coil block copolymer (TANI-b-PEG)3 (Fig. 8d) has been reported, based on a benzene central-core and a three-armed copolymer of TANI and PEG. Addition of the soft segment, i.e., PEG, to the end of the arms yielded significant electrochromic properties, and also induced self-assembly to the polymer, probably due to the simultaneous presence of the hydrophilic (PEG) and the hydrophobic (TANI) segments. This amphiphilic bifunctional star-shaped copolymer can be employed to manufacture advanced electrochromic devices.136 Later, in 2017, the group presented a convenient and “green” method to prepare a self-doped electrochromic device, using a sandwich-structure of carboxyl-capped oligoanilines with different lengths (primary layer), PEDOT-PSS (the secondary layer), and an electrolyte (i.e., an ionic liquid). When the star-shaped structure was examined, the intrinsic resistance was found to be substantially low, and the ion diffusion was very fast, which is a consequence of the facile ion transfer.47 Moreover, it was reported that by increasing the number of aniline units, better electrochromic properties were achieved.47

3.2. Bulky central units
As mentioned earlier, the employment of small core molecules in the star-shaped oligoanilines induces various electrochemical properties and long-ranged orientation, which subsequently results in a liquid crystalline behavior. The incorporation of bulky cores (macro-central units) also has a great impact on the star-shaped oligoaniline properties. To date, a handful of macro-central units has been employed for the synthesis of star-shaped oligoanilines, including fullerenes (C60 or [60]fullerene),137,138 hyperbranched poly(L-lactides),139–141 star-shaped polystyrene142,143 and poly(ε-caprolactone).144

Fullerene-based central units. 
Fullerene has great potential to be used for the synthesis of a class of oligoaniline systems: the starburst poly(oligoanilinated)-C60, containing a C60 core and six doped oligoaniline rigid-rod arms, was prepared by Anantharaj et al. through a nucleophilic substitution reaction; via a direct-nitration method, hexanitro-C60 was prepared. Chemical attaching of multiple oligoanilines (Fig. 9a) onto a highly reactive hexanitro-C60 molecule led to the preparation of a series of starburst macromolecules (see Fig. 9b).137 Due to the 3D intramolecular electron transfer between the oligoaniline donors and the fullerenic acceptor, these starburst products are electro- and photoactive due to higher tunnelling efficiency of direct bonding.137,138
 Fig. 9  Syntheses of (a) linear tetra and hexamer aniline, (b) starburst oligoaniline-C60, using a thermal approach, (c) starburst oligoaniline-(ethylated-C60), using the irradiation approach (d) bis[penta (oligoanilino)]-C60 bis(2-aminopropyl)-poly(dimethylsiloxane). 
EB derivatives were also synthesized and converted to fully reduced LEB, via phenylhydrazine reduction, by Canteenwala and coworkers138 (Fig. 9c). Through a photoexcitation pathway, two unpaired electrons of the benzenoid nitrogen atoms of oligoaniline arms are transferred to the C60 core, and produce the emeraldine derivatives (with quinoid rings) and fullerenic anion. Following the fullerenic carbanion, it reacted with ethyl iodide. Correspondingly, an ethylated C60 derivative was formed, in which the number of the ethyl groups is equal to that of intramolecular electron-transportations from the oligoanilinated-arms to C60 cage core.138 These starburst oligoaniline-C60s have also been employed in the core–shell morphology (Fig. 10a) (or palm-tree structure (Fig. 10b)) by the incorporation of poly(dimethylsiloxane) as an elastic material and a linker. This resulted in the synthesis of a nano-sized starburst triblock co-oligomer “bis[penta (oligoanilino)]-C60 bis(2-aminopropyl)-poly(dimethylsiloxane)” (Fig. 9d). High incompatibility between the polar oligoaniline and the nonpolar dimethylsiloxane moieties results in the intermolecular self-assembly of the poly(dimethylsiloxane) in polar solvents.145
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of (a) core–shell morphology, (b) palm-tree structure for fullerene derivative, and (c) starburst fullerene linked tetraaniline-terminated poly (urethane urea). 
Another star-shaped oligoaniline-C60 was designed by Wang et al.146 In that study, first the tetraaniline oligomer was linked to NCO-capped urethane prepolymer; afterwards, the obtained tetraaniline-terminated poly(urethane-urea) was employed as arms and incorporated to the fullerene core (Fig. 10c). It was reported that this conductive starburst copolymer contained approximately six polymeric arms (a narrow branching distribution). The polydispersity distribution of this conductive star-like polymer – which is soluble in most organic solvents – is narrower than that of the linear forms (i.e., 1.44 and 1.94, respectively). The employment of these unimolecular nanoparticles with a great ability for film formation and solubility can develop the structural mutability in a traditional colloidal system.146


Star-shaped polystyrene central units. 
Han and Pan synthesized star-shaped oligoaniline-based polymers via a living radical-polymerization, through an “arm-first” approach. In the authors’ work, PSt-b-tetraaniline, (a star-PSt (polystyrene)), capped with reactive NSI (N-succinimidyl) ester groups on its surface, was modified with linear amine-capped tetraaniline via a substitution-reaction (direct substitution of NSI ester group with amino group), as shown in Fig. 11. This star-shaped copolymer shows two pair redox peaks, similar to that of PANI, which correspond to the transition of LEB to EB state and EB to PB state.142,143
 Fig. 11  The synthesis of the star-shaped polystyrene-b-tetraaniline. 


Star-shaped polylactide-based central units. 
In 2010, Guo and coworkers prepared various biodegradable electroactive star-shaped copolymers, composed of hyperbranched poly (L-lactides) (PLAs) core and aniline trimer-arms. Based on their procedure, carboxyl-capped aniline trimer (CCAT) was prepared from succinic anhydride (SA) and an amine-capped aniline trimer (ACAT), which was synthesized through an oxidative coupling-reaction of p-phenylenediamine and aniline, in advance. CCAT incorporated into two, four, and six-armed PLAs (Fig. 12). Consequently, through an esterification-reaction, a copolymer with hydrophilic properties was obtained, which is desirable for biomedical applications. The incorporation of CCAT increases the hydrophilicity of the polymer, and also acts as a plasticizer for PLA. These star-shaped copolymers were processable and soluble in most organic solvents, and were good candidates to be employed in applications where cell adhesion and cell proliferation is a need.139
 Fig. 12  The syntheses of carboxyl-capped aniline trimer (CCAT), the star-shaped and hyperbranched poly(L-lactide)-based copolymers: PLA-AT, HPLA, HPLAAT, SMP, and ESMP. 
In another study, hyperbranched copolymers (HPLAAT), based on four-armed PLA core molecule and aniline tetramers, were synthesized via an esterification-reaction and grafting of aniline tetramer on the hyperbranched polylactic acid (HPLA) chains (Fig. 12). This copolymer was electroactive, ductile, thermally stable, and degradable. Moreover, HPLAAT does not show the brittle behavior of PLA and can be utilized for soft tissue engineering purposes.140
Xie and his group synthesized a six-armed star-shaped, shape-memory polymer (SMP), based on PLA and hexamethylenediisocyanate (HDI) as the crosslinker, and an electroactive shape-memory polymer (ESMP). The ESMP has been synthesized by the copolymerization of an ACAT and a six-armed star-shaped PLA with inositol as a core, using HDI cross-linker (Fig. 12). The ESMP showed promising mechanical and superb shape-memory properties, i.e., short recovery time (several seconds), high recovery ratio (over 94%), and shape fixity ratio (almost 100%). These brilliant features occurred due to the presence of the hard aniline segments and the formation of urea groups during the reaction. This unique chemistry bestows ESMP with good electroactivity, hydrophilicity, biocompatibility, and tunable degradability, which makes it a suitable candidate for use in bone tissue engineering or other biomedical applications.141


Hyperbranched poly(ε-caprolactone) central unit. 
Guo and coworkers studied the effect of architecture on the conductivity in biodegradable electroactive-copolymers. A variety of copolymers were synthesized from the carboxyl-capped aniline pentamer (CCAP) arms and the star-shaped poly(ε-caprolactone)s (PCLs) core, using coupling reactions (Fig. 13). These copolymers are hydrophilic, mostly because of the doped aniline pentamer (AP) segment. The conductivity of the hyper-branched copolymers was much lower than that of pentaaniline films (∼1:1000), which is due to the presence of a non-conjugated PCL segment in the copolymer construction. However, the conductivity of the hyperbranched copolymers (3a- and 4a-PCL-CCAPs) was 4.8 and 1.6 fold higher than the linear copolymer, respectively. This can be explained based on the microphase separation, continuous PCL phase and discontinuous domain of the oligoaniline. The conductivity can be enhanced by the tunnel-effect between two discontinuous conductive domains; these higher conductivities occur because of the existence of a higher chance to form a conductive network. Finally, these copolymers can be applied in neural or cardiovascular tissue engineering.144
 Fig. 13  The syntheses of the linear and hyperbranched copolymers of PCLs and CCAP. 

Table 2 provides the properties and the prospective applications of various star-shaped oligoaniline compartments; unfortunately, some of the studies have not examined the performance of the designed star-shaped molecules in a certain application.
Table 2 Structures, applications, electrochemical properties and other remarks of star-shaped oligoaniline derivatives




 
Structure
Application
Electrochemical properties
Remarks
Ref.




1
Copolymers of carboxyl-capped aniline pentamer and PCL
Tissue engineering

σ
RT (S cm−1): 2.42 × 10−5–8.02 × 10−6; UV-vis: (330, 530–610 nm); CV: 0.26, 0.42, and 0.65 V
Hydrophilic nature (water contact angles for doped copolymers: 30°), good biodegradability, high thermal stability (I: 200–400, II: 450–800 °C)

144



2
Copolymers of aniline tetramer and PLA
Tissue engineering
UV-vis: (320, 580 nm), (303, 436 nm) and 799 nm; CV: 0.37 and 0.6 V
Good ductility, high thermal stability (I: 250–320, II: 320–330 °C), high mechanical properties (strain: 158.9–42.7%, and modulus: 256.2–758.2 MPa), good degradability

140



3
Copolymers of carboxyl-capped aniline trimer and PLA
Tissue engineering
UV-vis: undoped ACAT (340, 520 nm), CCAT (330, 590 nm); doped copolymer: (415, 638, and 818 nm); CV: ACAT (0.54, 0.7 V); copolymer (0.42, 0.60 V)
Thermal stability (I: 320–360, II: 360–600 °C), hydrophilicity (water contact angles for doped copolymers 54–63°), biodegradable

139



4
Copolymers of amino-capped aniline trimer and six-armed PLA
Tissue engineering
CV: (0.37, 0.6 V)
Shape memory properties, mechanical properties (stress: 49.3 MPa, modulus: 2.0 GPa, strain: 3.6%), biocompatibility (water contact angles: 72°), tunable degradability

141



5
Star-shaped tetraaniline (Tri-(Ani)4-COOH)
Electrochromic devices
UV-vis: (324, 580 nm); CV: (0.2–0.4, 0.76–0.87 V)
Electrochromic properties: optical contrast (Δt): 47.4–79.2%, switching-time 2.04, 1.9 s, coloration efficiency 133 cm2 C−1

135



6
Self-doped Star-shaped tetraaniline (Tri-(Ani)4-COOH)
Electrochromic devices
UV-vis: (330, 430 nm); CV: (0.2–0.4, 0.76–0.87 V)
Optical contrast (Δtmax): 32.2% (linear oligomer 21.8%), switching time: 13.7, 5.8 s; coloration efficiency: 149.2 cm2 C−1 (linear oligomer 48.2 cm2 C−1), intrinsic resistance (RS 124.0, RCT: 2471, RP: 60.89 Ω)

47



7
Tetraaniline-co-polyethyleneglycol (TANI-b-PEG)3
Electrochromic devices
UV-vis: 317 nm; CV: 0.480 and 0.574 V
Optical contrast (Δtmax): (73.3%); switching time: 2.11, 2.14 s; coloration efficiency: 318.5 cm2 C−1

136



8
Hexa(hexadecaanilino)-[60]fullerenes
Photo-induced materials
UV-vis: (248, 289–317, 578–586 nm); fluorescence spectroscopy: (C60) 350 nm and (oligoaniline) 415 nm
Thermal stability: T50 > 500 °C

137



9
Linear and branched meta–para aniline oligomers
Ferromagnetic polymers
UV-vis-NIR: (1.44, 3.02, 3.98 eV); CV: 0.42, 0.68, 1.15, and 1.31 V
EPR:3360 G with high-spin multiplicities, good chemical stability, intramolecular ferromagnetic spin–spin interaction; EPR

132



10
1,3,5-Tris(4-dianilinophenyl)-benzene (TDPB)
Organic electronics-sensors
UV-vis-NIR: (330–340, 469 nm) undoped air oxidized-state (397, 778 nm) doped
EPR:3370 G (open shell) for doped, liquid-crystalline behavior for the doped star-shaped oligomer (0.36 nm π-stacking distance)

134



11
Triblock-co-oligomers: bis[penta(oligoanilino)]-[60]fullerene-poly(dimethylsiloxane)
Not reported
—
Core–shell geometry

145



12
Starburst fullerene-linked tetraaniline-terminated poly(urethane urea)
Not reported
—
Core–shell geometry

146



13
Hexa(tetraanilino)-[60]fullerene and hexa(hexadecaanilino)-[60]fullerene
Not reported
UV-vis: (320, 581 nm) EB (320, 517 nm) fully oxidized
Multiple electron transfer capability

138



14
PSt-b-tetraaniline
Not reported
CV: 0.42 and 0.64 V
Core–shell morphology (oligoaniline-coated spherical polystyrene)

142



15
3-Armed star oligoanilines
Not reported
—
Monodisperse molecular weight

128






4. Characterization
Different analytical approaches can be used to detect the morphological, optochemical and electrical properties of the oligoaniline-based materials:

X-ray diffraction (XRD) is one the most common techniques used to investigate crystallinity and orientation. XRD of well-organized PANI reveals crystalline domains with the d-spacing of around 3.5 Å (2θ = 25°), which can be assigned to the face-to-face interchain stacking distance between phenyl rings.147 Tetraaniline conducting nanofiber doped with HCl has displayed two peaks at 2θ ≈ 20.27° and 24.80°, which were assigned to the parallel and perpendicular orientations.148 TANI crystallization behaviour through doping can affect the placement and broadness of the peaks. The EB state of TANI shows two minor peaks at 11° and 13°, in addition to the strong absorbency at 2θ = 16–22°.99 By doping (using HCLO4) and transition from the EB state to ES state the peaks at the area between 18–20° were merged and the sharp peak at approximately 2θ = 19° was strengthened. In fact the π-stacking (π–π interaction) diffraction peak at 2θ = 23° ((020) d-spacing) disappears in fully doped TANI.99 However, for the star-shaped oligoaniline-based CPs, the inter-stack distance was just affected by the nature of the dopant (steric bulk of the dopant), while the π-stacking distance was not:134 when TDPB (1,3,5-tris(4-dianilinophenyl)benzene) was doped with CSA, the inter-stack (phenyl groups were slipped-stacked or tilted in parallel149,150) and the π-stacking (phenyl groups were perfectly stacked in parallel149,150) distances were 3.25 and 0.36 nm, respectively; when it was doped with (bis(2ethylhexyl)-sulfosuccinic acid), these values were recorded as 2.91 and 0.36 nm, respectively.134 The rigid triphenyl benzene core in TDPB in combination with doping agent, which adds flexibility to the system, can act as a discotic mesogen and create a discotic columnar liquid crystal. In other words, the core rigidity can have an influence on the inter-stack ordering and nanofiber formation.134
XRD analysis along with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) grids for selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis is a valuable combination for detecting the crystal formation (Fig. 14).108,151 A plate of graphene substrate, onto which was deposited parent phenyl-capped TANI, was laid flat on a TEM grid and its electron diffraction pattern was investigated. Vertical single crystal formation was confirmed by sharp Bragg spots ((020) d-spacing of 0.39 nm) (Fig. 14a) and XRD diffraction (2θ = 23.8°) (Fig. 14c). It was proposed that the face-on stacking of TANI molecules can lead to vertical triangular crystals. The π-stacking of TANI molecules –parallel to the graphene substrate – has oriented along the long-axis of the crystals (Fig. 14b). Based on XRD diffraction and cross-sectional selected area electron diffraction (SAED) packing model with d-spacing of 0.68, 0.78, and 2.40 nm (Fig. 14e) were proposed.151
 Fig. 14  Crystallographic characteristics of the TANI (parent phenyl-capped) plates: (a) and (b) top-view and side-view (respectively) electron diffraction patterns of the vertical plates (with corresponding images shown in inset) transferred to a TEM grid, (c) powder XRD pattern of the crystal arrays, (d) molecular structure of TANI, (e) proposed packing arrangement for the TANI crystals obtained from SAED data (the back layer of molecules along the a-axis is represented in a different shade of color for clarity), and schematic illustration of the (f) face-on stacking and (g) edge-on stacking arrangements in relation to the nature of the infiltrating solvent and the final crystal orientation. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
The surface morphology of oligoaniline derivatives including roughness, porosity, and stability can be probed by an atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique (Fig. 15). As an example, molecular architecture impact on microscopic morphology has been examined using 2D and 3D height contrast AFM images.131,135 The morphological variation of the NH2/COOH-capped TANI, para and meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH and tri-(ANI)4-COOH (Fig. 8) have been recorded before and after cyclic voltammetry cycles using electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) – EQCM functions as a means of real-time monitoring of the mass changes for characterizing the long-term cycling stability. By an increase in the number of arms (branches) the micromorphology changes drastically (Fig. 15): roughness of the surface decreases from hundreds of nm to less than 5 nm, and at the same time, the porosity increases. The star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-COOH showed porous and almost flat micromorphology which has maintained its structure during different CV cycles; in contrast, the linear NH2/COOH-capped TANI showed the most decrease in height of undulations (roughness).131 The star-shaped architecture results in a more loose surface morphology, whereas in the corresponding linear structure, it has not been observed,135 since the rigid conjugated arms cannot be packed densely135 and the order in a star-shaped structure is more than in linear oligomers.131 This order in morphology may decrease the roughness of the surface and increase the film stability.131 Microphase separation of PEG and TANI in star-shaped block copolymer (tri (ANI)4-b-PEG)3 additionally led to a nanoporous structure due to the amphiphilic nature and self-assembly.136Polarizing optical microscopy, for observing the liquid-crystalline transitions and their optical textures, and scanning electron microscopy for studying the morphology of surfaces and nanostructure formation can also be employed.151,152
 Fig. 15  2D and 3D height contrast AFM images of (a) and (b) NH2/COOH-capped TANI; (c) and (d) para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; (e) and (f) meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; and (g) and (h) star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-COOH films after CV cycles by EQCM. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
Different UV-vis-NIR absorptions of the oxidation states and the doped forms of oligoanilines (which are also readily interconverted) has made the UV–vis absorption spectroscopic technique an ideal candidate for studying the behavior of these systems.97 Talking about different oxidation states of phenyl-capped octaaniline in DMF solution (in the neutral state): fully reduced leucoemeraldine shows just one UV absorption band at ∼330 nm, which is attributed to the π–π* transition in the benzenoid unit (–NH–B–NH–B).74 EB and PNB both show a sharp peak (λ1max) at 320 nm, whereas the second broad absorptions (λ2max) are 620 nm and 520 nm for EB and PNB, which is assigned to the excitonic transition of πb–πq from the benzene to the quinoid ring (–NQN–).74,138 This large blue-shift can be attributed to the decreased charge-transfer absorption in the PNB state.74 By protonation of the emeraldine (acidified DMF solution), the λ1max becomes broader and splits equally, while the λ2max starts at 540 nm and extends to a higher wavelength. For pernigraniline, the first and second peaks are broadened, but the second peak is red-shifted, from 520 nm to 830 nm.74
With an increase in the linear parent (unsubstituted) oligomer length up to heptamer (in neutral solution form), there is an increase in maximum wavelength (∼305–320 nm), while λ1max above nonamers remains almost unchanged,65 possibly accompanied by more intensity and broadening in peak.74 The λ1max of either emeraldine or pernigraniline appears around 304–306 nm for tetramer, and 312–330 nm for the higher length, while there is no significant difference between phenyl- or amine-capped oligomers.74
Using UV-vis spectroscopy, the electrochromic behaviour of TANI at the first stages of the doping at various doping levels has been thoroughly investigated by Lin et al.Fig. 16a displays solvochromism behaviour – different blue-violet colors in different solvents: undoped phenyl-capped TANI in EB state dissolved in various solvents with different dielectric constant.99 In terms of doping level (defined as the ratio between the number of dopants added to the imine nitrogens), the TANI–ethanol solutions which are doped at a certain doping level show a gradual colour alteration from blue (EB) to green (ES) (Fig. 16b). To investigate the initial stage of doping, the UV–vis spectra (Fig. 16c and d) of the TANI solutions (0–100% doped samples in Fig. 3b) shows that the intensities of two peaks at ∼310 nm (4.01 eV) and ∼600.0 nm (2.07 eV) at fully undoped state decrease, whereas by an increase in the doping level, two new maxima appeared: ω1 at 1164.0 nm (1.09 eV) and ω2 at 434.5 nm (2.86 eV), representative of bipolaron formation. It was observed that the extent of UV-vis absorbencies is linearly related to doping level (Fig. 16e), that confirmed the proportional composition of EB and ES states in the mixture. Fig. 16f schematically represents two allowed optical transitions – the HOMO to the lower (ω1) and upper (ω2) bipolaron states – in the energy level diagram for TANI: based on UV–vis data, the band gap is ∼4.01 eV, and the energy difference between upper bipolaron state and the LUMO is almost the same as energy differences between the HOMO and lower bipolaron state, similar to most conducting polymers.99
 Fig. 16  Doping states of TANI can be distinguished visually. (a) Photo showing emeraldine base TANI dispersed in different solvents in terms of increasing dielectric constant (left to right). (b) Photo of TANI in ethanol at doping levels of 0, 12.5, 25.0, 50.0, and 100%. The absorbance versus (c) wavelength and (d) energy from (b) indicating the formation of bipolarons (up arrows) upon doping. (e) The absorbances at both 434.5 and 1164.0 nm show a linear relationship with the doping level, confirming the presence of doubly doped and undoped TANI. (f) Energy level diagram for the bipolaron state showing the allowed optical transitions responsible for the two absorption peaks, ω1 and ω2. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
The presence of electron-accepting or -donating substituents can have a pervasive influence on the spectra of the oligoaniline by creation of the left or right shoulders. In the amine-capped aniline trimer, the quinoid absorption band appeared at 590 nm.74,139 Moreover, self-doping with carboxylic acid71,139 or sulfonic acid moieties82 may alter the UV absorbency peaks, for instance, the absorbency at lower wavelength71,139 or disappearance of the polaron band at 800 nm.82 The formation of the conducting phase of the self-doped sulfonic acid-capped TANI (Fig. 3a) at various pHs displayed three absorption peaks at about 300, 450, and 610 nm, which are ascribed to π–π* transition in the benzenoid ring, polaron–π* transition, and π–polaron transition, respectively.69 Similar to the undoped aniline tetramer (AT), the hyperbranched copolymer of lactide and aniline tetramer (HPLAAT) exhibits characteristic peaks, at 320 and 580 nm. However, when doped with HCl, the benzenoid absorption band is shifted to 307 nm (blue-shift), the intensity of the quinoid signal is reduced, and two new peaks are revealed at 436 and at 799 nm, which are attributed to the formation of the ES polaron configuration.140
The molecular architecture may affect the energy band gap and subsequently, the optochemical behavior of the oligomer. By an increase in the number of arms (from zero to three) the energy band gap decreases in both liquid and gas states.131 By doping of EB cationic oligoaniline with S-CSA enantiomer in the aqueous solution, the blue color changes to bright-green. This coincides with the appearance of two peaks at 440 and 780 nm, and the disappearance of 550 nm peak attributed to the polaron species, typical of PANI absorbency.102 However, it is much shorter than that of the PANI.102 Oligoaniline in polymer structure can display the same absorbencies: polyurethane film having TANI in its structure has shown absorbencies at 380, 589, and 882 (hump) nm in the doped state, while in the undoped state, there are two absorbencies at 318 and 558 nm.153 The spin-crossover behavior observed in TANI having bipolaron and polaron as two spin isomers meets many of the desired criteria for molecular spin-state switches (magnetic–diamagnetic), reversibility, or room-temperature switching.97
The incorporation of diverse functional groups can affect the UV-absorbency behavior (Fig. 17). TPA-based polyamide (with three 4-methoxyphenyls on TANI) has shown ambipolar behaviour, in both electrochemical p-doping (anion) and n-doping (cation). The copolymer of TPA oligomer with different commercially available tetracarboxylic dianhydrides, namely 3,3′,4,4′-diphenylsulfonetetracarboxylic dianhydride (DSDA) or 3,3′,4,4′-biphenyltetracarboxylic diandydride (BPDA), was coated as a thin film on ITO-coated glass substrates.124 During p-doping (0–1.5 V) of TPA-DSDA-based polyamide film, the intensity of the band at 308 nm (for the neutral state) decreased, and at the same time, new bands at 438 nm and 1090 nm appear gradually. With further oxidation (at 1.05 V) the band intensity at 438 nm decreased while the band intensity at the NIR region increased, but with a small shift to 1070 nm. At a voltage of 1.40 V, the band at NIR decreases meaningfully and a peak at 793 nm was unveiled (Fig. 17a–e). This behaviour is directly attributed to the TPA structure (Fig. 8f), and different oxidation forms of triarylamine units owing to the intervalence charge transfer absorption and the positive charge centring at different nitrogen atoms. This copolymer film exhibits three oxidation sates (0.70 V (yellowish-green), 1.05 V (lawn-green), and 1.40 V (purple) with optical contrast of 66% at 1070 nm (for lawn-green coloring) and 77% at 793 nm for purple coloring.124 Switching between different colours with high contrast with long-term stability is a great advantage of aniline-based and specifically TPA-based compounds over the other π-conjugated polymers.124
 Fig. 17  p-Doping: the anodically electrochromic behavior at applied potentials of (a) 0.00, (b) 0.70, (c) 1.05, (d) 1.40 (V vs. Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode), (e) 3D spectroelectrochemical behavior from 0.00 to 1.40 (V vs. Ag/AgCl) of TPA-DSDA-polyimide thin film (∼200 nm in thickness) on the ITO-coated glass substrate (coated area: 1.1 cm × 0.5 cm) in 0.1 M Tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP)/CH3CN. n-Doping: the cathodically electrochromic behavior (f) Optical spectra of TPA-DSDA based and (g) TPA-BPDA-based polyimide thin films (∼260 nm in thickness) on the ITO-coated glass substrate applied potentials versus Ag/AgCl. The insets show the p-doping and n-doping electrochromic photographic images of the films at indicated applied voltages. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. 
In the n-doping state of the TPA-DSDA-based polyamide, the UV-vis absorption bands at 400–600 nm and 730 nm appear at voltages of −0.75 V and −1.35 V, respectively. The color of the film changes from pale yellow to red (Fig. 17f and g). The TPA-BPDA-based polyimide film has displayed an absorbency by n-doping (−1.8–0.0 V) resulting in radical anion (320, 564 nm; yellow) at −1.10 V and radical dianion (320, 564, 782 nm; green) at −1.8 V.124 This film sample has undergone color changes in the voltage range of (−1.8–0 V): yellow at −1.10 V and green at −1.80 V.124

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is another useful technique to study the electrochemical properties of star-shaped or linear oligoaniline-based materials on account of different oxidation states and their reversibility. It can be affected by ion diffusion, scan rate and environmental stability.140–142 Generally, oligoaniline displays two pairs of redox peaks, concerning the transitions from LEB to EB state and EB to PB state (Fig. 18a–d). However, in the case of fewer or more transition states, the number of the revealed peaks can vary: for instance, (TANI-b-PEG)3 copolymer with one pair of redox peaks (transitions from LEB to EB),136 the hyperbranched copolymers of PCL-AP with three pairs of redox peaks (oxidation transitions from LEB to EBI, EBI to EBII, and EBII to PNB),144 polyurea-oligoaniline-tripheneyl amine copolymer with two pairs of redox peaks.154 Oligomers with various lengths have also shown quite similar CV diagrams with two pairs of redox peaks. The number of removed electrons in the first and second oxidation transitions increases with an increase in oligomer length, up to 16-mer, while the first transition has more electron removal.74 At higher voltages, the even-numbered oligomers, resembling PANI, are more stable than the odd-numbered oligomers, which represents irreversible redox behavior. Possibly they generate radical cations only transiently at high potentials.74 For a better comparison, some of the CV transition peaks for different functional groups have been summarized in Table 3.
 Fig. 18  CV curves of (a) NH2/COOH-capped TANI-; (b) para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; (c) meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; and (d) star-shaped Tri-(ANI)4-COOH films on FTO glass electrode in 1.0 mol L−1 HCl solution at the scan rate of 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, and 300 mV s−1, respectively. (e) Linear relationship between peak current density and the square root of the scan rate. Schematic illustration of (f) the self-assembly structure and (g) the ion transfer process of the star-shaped Tri-(ANI)4-COOH film. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
Table 3 The optoelectrical properties of aniline based compounds (copolymers, linear and multi-arm oligomers). Cyclic voltammetry relevant peaks, coloring (tc)/bleaching (tb) switching-time by the change in the electrical potential at a certain residence time, contrast value and the coloration efficiency




Compound
CV red (V)/oxid (V)
Switching time (s)
Applied potential range (V)
Wavelength (nm)
Residence time (s)
Optical contrast value (%)
Coloration efficiency (cm2 C−1)
Ref.



t
c


t
b






a The first cycle.
b The 300th cycle.
c It looks like a low-intensity shoulder, not a separate peak.
d Represents there is a shoulder at the lower potential.
e Average value of the pair.
f Value is for disubstituted 4-methoxy phenyl on the electroactive nitrogen of tetraaniline (PTAN).





Polysiloxane-OA-carbon dots
0.50/0.37
0.7
3.6
0–0.6
700
15


65.0

156



Polysiloxane-OA cyanophenethylene
0.53/0.38, 0.18
—
—
0–0.8
700
15
52
90.0

178



Polysiloxane-OA fluorescein
0.48/0.26
8.0
11.1
0–0.6
750
15
35
80.4

179



Polysiloxane-OA-CNT
0.55/0.39
1.5
5.2


700
15
67
85.6

180



Polysiloxane-OA-sulfanilic acid-Prussian blue
0.56/0.33, 0.39/0.09
6.6
3.2
0–0.6
700
15
50
92.7

181



Polysiloxane-OA-viologen
−0.53/−0.57, −0.47/−0.50, 0.22/0.19, 0.34/0.30
2.2
2.8
−0.8–0
700
15
31
288

182



10.4
12.1
550
16
101


Polysiloxane-OA-phenothiazine
0.89/0.32, 0.62/0.11
3.7
4.6
0–0.6
700
15
53
224

182



1.7
8.8
520
25
217


Polysiloxane-OA-carbazole-POSS
0.65/0.25
7.8
10.2
0–0.8
700
15
49
80

183



Polysiloxane-OA-fluorene
0.53/0.33
9.9
9.3
0–0.8
700
30
18
79

184



Polyurea-OA-triphenylamine-
0.96/0.73, 1.36/1.11
2.8
2.2
0–1.0
1000
30
14
55.0

154



Poly (urea-urethane)-OA-tetraphenylethylene
0.51/0.25
8.2
7.8
0–1.0
768
15
50.4
503

185



9.6
9.8
489
34


Polyamic acid-OA-triphenylamine-fluorene
0.73/0.62, 1.08/0.82
6.0
1.8
0–0.8
420
30
70
20.0

186



2.4
4.2
800
81.0


Polyamic acid-OA-fluorene
0.43/0.24, 0.57/0.45
4.8
4.5
−0.2–0.8
700
∼15
85
107.0

187



Polyamic acid-OA-carbozole-POSS
0.61/0.33
4.1
2.9
0–0.8
800
30


82.9

188



Polyamic acid-tetraphenylethylene-OA
0.51/0.33
1.9
11.6
0–1.0
730
15
—
140

189



Poly urea-OA-o-toluidine
0.34/0.18, 0.52/0.43
8.1a
2.3a
−0.2–1.0
700
15
21
91.0

190



11.7b
5.7b


Poly urea-OA-PEG
∼0.34/0.18, ∼0.52/0.43
7.1a
1.0a
−0.2–1.0
700
15
20
133.0

190



10.2b
4.8b


Poly urea-OA-ethoxysilane
∼0.34/∼0.22c, ∼0.52/∼0.43
10.5a
2.7a
−0.2–1.0
700
15
25
67.0

190



11.1b
4.5b


Poly urea-OA-Congo red
∼0.34/0.18, ∼0.52/0.43
5.5a
1.2a
−0.2–1.0
700
15
26
104.0

190



13.5b
6.6b


Polyaryl ether-OA-azobenzene
0.50d/0.35
3.3
1.4
−0.2–0.8
700
30
25
107.4

191



Polyimide-MPTAN (three methoxy phenyl groups)
0.6/0.42, 0.81/0.67, 1.31/0.93; cathodic: −0.98/0.92, −1.63/−1.23
5.09, 4.41
1.17, 1.27
0.0–0.70
1070, 1090
30
66
168.0, 171.0

124



Polyamide-MPTAN (three methoxy phenyl groups)
0.45e, 0.71e, 1.04e
2.53f
4.07f
0–0.55
∼1070
60
83
167.0

125



COOH-(ANI)4-COOH
∼0.8/0.1
17.0
—
−1.5–1.5
550
—
21.8
48.2

47



COOH-(ANI)5-COOH
∼0.5/0, 0.9/0.5
7.9
4.7
−1.5–1.5
550
—
39.5
198.6

47



COOH-(ANI)6-COOH
∼0.8/0.3
7.8
1.8
−1.5–1.5
550
—
46.7
190.7

47



Star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-COOH
∼0.75/0.2
13.7
5.8
−1.5–1.5
550
—
32.2
149.2

47



Ph-(ANI)4-NH2
0.86e
11.2
2.68
−0.2–0.8
750
15
47.4
30.5

135



Ph-(ANI)4-COOH
0.86e
7.26
1.90
−0.2–0.8
750
15
79.2
97.8

135



NH2-(ANI)4-COOH
0.87e
5.52
2.28
−0.2–0.8
750
15
65.1
73.0

135



Star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-COOH
0.76e
2.04
1.90
−0.2–0.8
750
15
74.2
133.3

135



Star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-PEG
0.57/0.48
2.11
2.14
−0.2–0.8
750
30
73
318.5

136



NH2-(ANI)4-COOH


3.81
1.68
−0.2–0.6
750
10
58.2
81.1

131




p-Bi-(ANI)4-COOH


3.08
2.48
−0.2–0.6
750
10
76.6
116.9

131




m-Bi-(ANI)4-COOH


2.34
1.63
−0.2–0.6
750
10
77.8
168.3

131



Tri-(ANI)4-COOH


1.82
1.45
−0.2–0.6
750
10
73.2
190.7

131





In the CV analysis, the scan rate can affect the placement of the redox peaks136 (Fig. 18e). The slopes between the peak current density and the square root of the scan rate delineates the ion transport process using the Randles–Sevcik equation.131 The loosely packed star-shaped structures, often with a high ion diffusion, possess the lower transition peaks.135 Based on the CV studies at various scan rates, with an increase in the number of arms and the length of the oligoanilines, the ion transport through the media will be alleviated, owing to the columnar (rod-like) self-assembly orientation. This can directly reduce the switching time131 (Fig. 18f).
Practically, cycling stability plays a crucial role: it can limit the application of the organic electrochromic materials. The performance in cycling stability is attributed to the morphology, nanostructure and grafting.13,155 Multi-armed star-shaped oligoanilines have exhibited superior cycling stability owing to their well-defined self-assembled nanoporous structure. The electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance was employed to probe the cyclic voltammetry stability in a long-term duration (i.e., in 3000 cycle) and the mechanism of ion conduction. The cycling stability enhances with an increase in the number of arms, from 67.8% (for linear NH2-(ANI)4-COOH) to 96.8% (for tri-(ANI)4-COOH). The high cycling stability of the star-shaped oligomers – regardless of the substrate and the electrolyte type – is comparable with the thiophene-based compounds, and even better than that of the poly aniline.131 For the oligomer of bi-(ANI)4-COOH, the meta position presents better stability than the para position (compare 95.9% with 93.9%).131 Moreover, the incorporation of a siloxane network and the in situ formation of a siloxane network during the CV analysis has boosted the durability of the film to more than 3000 s.156 Loading oligoaniline with graphene oxide (GO) is a valuable strategy to enhance the electrochemical cycling stability of the aniline-based compounds by preventing chain breakage and the tolerable volume change.157
The four-point probe technique is a primary technique for measuring sheet resistance and electrical conductivity.144,158,159 Regarding the morphology, it is believed that the conductivity is related to the degree of crystallinity; therefore, the higher the degree of the crystallinity, the better alignment of the chains and the higher the conductivity.101,108 Dendritic structures such as microspheres160 and self-organized dispersion–polymerization of PANI are good examples that can display metal-like behaviors.147 The sample preparation has a pervasive influence on the results of measurement. Two-probe electrical measurements on well-ordered individual structures, such as single wires, ribbons, and plates, reveal that the conductivity of the tetraaniline nanostructures increases by 2 orders of magnitude from the highest previously reported values for tetraaniline, which is comparable with polyaniline.101 In fact, the resistance of the pressed-pellet sample is lower than its intrinsic conductivity.101

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a highly sensitive non-destructive analytical technique, used to study a variety of physical and electrochemical properties, including capacitance, electron transfer rate constants, diffusion coefficients, adsorption mechanisms, and charge transfer resistances.148,161 Based on EIS measurements, it has been concluded that the star-shaped morphology facilitates ion diffusion compared to the linear structure, which in turn results in a substantially lower intrinsic resistance.47,131 The resistance values are calculated using Zview software: 173.40 Ω for linear NH2-(ANI)4-COOH, 50.39 Ω for para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH, 37.74 Ω for meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH, and 33.68 Ω Tri-(ANI)4-COOH films. EIS can be used to investigate the effects of the molecular architecture on the electrochromic efficiency, and modelling can increase the ambiguity in the interpretation of the EIS results.162
5. Feature behaviors in applications
Oligoanilines with various molecular architectures have attracted special attention owing to their light weights and excellent conductivities, as well as their promising electrochemical and optochemical features. In fact, their unique electrical, magnetic, and optical properties have introduced them as promising alternatives for various hi-tech biomedical and electrochemical applications, i.e., light-emitting devices, rechargeable and lightweight batteries, photovoltaic and solar cells, electromechanical actuators, conductive scaffold, electronic (biological and chemical) and gas sensors.48 Herein, we will discuss the feature behaviors of oligoaniline with various molecular designs suitable for versatile applications.
5.1. Order: crystallization and self-assembly
In the oligomeric-form of aniline (monodispersed), the crystals are similar to small molecules and can be ordered long-range simply, which is unlike the PANI with coiled conformations.148 In fact, the bulk conductivity is governed by both inter- and intra-molecular chain transports which can be affected by the chain order at a molecular scale.163 However, the amorphous morphology of the conventionally synthesized oligoanilines in the solid-state may limit their conductivities and hinder the carrier transport mobilities.163 Oligoaniline, in some aspects, resembles the molecular semiconductors, i.e., monodispersity and self-assembly. Self-assembly – a strategy to arrange molecules into a stable and well-defined structure (mainly nano) through noncovalent interactions such as hydrogen bonds, π-stacking and ionic interaction164 – in both solid (film) and liquid (micelle) states, can induce order into the morphology, which results in stimuli-responsive opto- and electrochemical behaviors of oligoanilines. During the synthesis or deposition of oligoaniline on a substrate (as an electrode; solid-state), the assembly of oligoanilines can be tuned by hard and soft templates,151,165 surfactants,166 dopants102 and solvents.167
Graphene can act as a “hard template” and assist in forming patterned single crystals of phenyl-capped TANI with high conductivity (∼12.3 S cm−1).151 Vertically oriented single crystals of parent phenyl-capped tetraaniline (TANI) have been prepared using a selective “bottom-up” growth by Kaner's team.151Fig. 19a–c schematically presents a dropwise addition of TANI solution on to the SiO2/Si substrate coated with a single layer of chemical vapor deposited (CVD) graphene. The patterned substrate is located in the covered container which is filled and saturated by a nonsolvent of TANI (i.e. n-hexane as infiltration solvent). The supersaturation of the TANI solution, in which the saturated nonsolvent vapor infiltrates the oligoaniline solution, leads to the selective crystallization on patterned coated areas of graphene. The dark-colored TANI can be observed localized over the graphene-covered area, and not over the bare SiO2 area (Fig. 19b). Types of graphene, concentration of TANI solution, solvation and infiltrating solvents play crucial roles in aniline adsorption on the surface and nucleation of the crystallization. Atomically homogeneous and fully sp2 conjugated carbon lattice of CVD-grown graphene cause a selective nucleation and vertical crystallization. Since on the one hand graphene is a nonpolar low surface energy substrate, and on the other hand, the super-saturation phenomenon requires polar solvent for TANI, the dielectric constant of the selected solvent is very vital for the complete wetting of the surface. Therefore, solvents with equal or lower dielectric constant compared to 1-propanol can end up in selective nucleation and subsequently crystallization. The orientation of the TANI, face-on stacking or edge-on stacking also can be controlled by the infiltration solvent (Fig. 14f and g): hydrocarbon and aromatic infiltering solvents result in vertical and horizontal orientations, respectively. The face-on configuration with respect to the graphene is more probable due to the van der Waals interactions and preferred orbital, electronic density and dipole overlap in this configuration. In fact, there are the strongest overlaps of π-electron densities between TANI and graphene atoms, as well as minimized repulsive interactions (Fig. 19e). The TANI molecules were deposited and oriented in a densely packed upward triangular micromorphology, probed by SEM, on just selected areas on silicon-based substrate. They can be even patterned alphabetically or by any other desired shapes.151
 Fig. 19  (a) Vapor-infiltration setup used for the experiments, (b) a graphene-coated SiO2/Si wafer before (top panel) and after (bottom panel) the crystallization of TANI, (c) polarized optical microscope image showing the SiO2/graphene interface where crystals only grow on the graphene-covered areas, (d) SEM image showing that the plate-shaped TANI crystals are oriented vertically on graphene, (e) DFTB modeling illustrates the electron density overlap between two TANI molecules and graphene leading to the preferred face-on orientation. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
In addition to the environmental factors, properties related to the chemical structure of the oligomer, such as substituent, molecular architecture and the packing parameter, may control the final morphology. These environmental and structural factors can create well-defined 1D to 3D orders (Fig. 20) i.e., fibres, ribbons, plates, hollow spheres, porous sheets, and flower-like crystalline nanostructures.163 With an increase in the aspect ratio of the nanostructure, the device performance would be improved. An intimate relationship exists between morphology and optoelectrical performance.155 The self-assembled tetraaniline nanofibers act as an efficient anticorrosive pigment for waterborne epoxy coatings. They have appropriate processability and relatively high conductivity (0.105 S cm−1).148 Well-ordered structures can also be used in contaminant removal applications. Uniform and well-dispersed hollow microspheres of oligoaniline, using alkaline media, were synthesized template-free, which can adsorb hexavalent chromium ions.168 Additionally, this self-assembly behavior can be employed for the synthesis of chiral PANI.169 The amine-capped aniline trimer as nanofiller and curing agent in elastomer vitrirmer systems has shown liquid-crystalline photoresponsive behavior. The monodomain orientation transfer from isotropic to anisotropic at the 40–45% strain occurs with reversible thermal and photoinduced actuations.170
 Fig. 20  Extensive control over the morphology of the tetraaniline crystals can be achieved by creating distinct self-assembly environments using different combinations of the doping acids, HCl, HNO3, HClO4, and H2SO4 (as indicated at the top) with eight different organic solvents (as indicated along the left side). The SEM images of the structures formed using these different dopants and organic solvents are shown here along with an aqueous control (a1–d1) shown at the top. Inset in d7 shows the cross-section of the porous sheet. Insets in a9, c9, and d9 are the corresponding TEM images illustrating the nanostructures’ hollow nature. Scale bars = 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
The type of substituent impacts the molecular orientation due to the different physical interactions and the steric hindrance, for instance, hydrophilic substituents171 (J-aggregates (nematic liquid-crystalline) and BOC deprotection of oligoaniline).172 The dendritic triblock co-oligomer, consisting of second-generation ester dendrons with long alkyl chain and aniline tetramer, represents a revolution from micelles to vesicles, and then to nanofibrils (60–100 nm) by deprotection due to the amphiphilic interactions and the intermolecular π-stacking.172 The nano -or micro-scaled morphology of the oligoaniline has been affected by the presence of oxygen-containing molecules (i.e., phenazinic groups). The oligoanilines synthesized at the early stage of the reaction represent a well-defined leaf-like supramolecular assembly (unlike those synthesized at higher conversions having p-quinoneimine moiety173). dos Santos and Temperini have assigned this to the non-hydrolyzed iminic groups and π-stacking interactions between non-substituted phenazinic segments.174 Additionally, anionic and cationic amphiphilic substituent groups linked to oligoanilines (Fig. 3e) undergo a self-assembly process and create diverse morphologies, such as 0D micellar and vesicular morphologies.69,102 Cationic amphiphilic oligoaniline (TANI-PTAB) overcoming the water-solubility problems has presented promising optoelectrical properties, including conductivity of 2.7 S cm−1 and optical activity of the right- and left-hand twisting nanowires.102 This control over the morphology may imply control over the final function.175 For instance, oligo(aniline)-based electroactive amphiphiles exhibit redox-switchable behavior through the alteration of the assembled morphology (e.g., nanowire to vesicle) by the oxidation state.123 The TANI-PTAB electroactive amphiphile shows dopant-dependent assembly morphology. It can be changed from wires to worm-like micelles and bilayer structures and back to wires by switching between doping and dedoping. Herein, the packing parameter can change from 0.39 (for a nanowire in the undoped state) to 0.47 (for a vesicle, for doped by trifuoroacetic acid).123
An organic solvent can affect both morphologies and crystalline shapes of the linear oligoaniline.101,108 Aniline-based compounds, possessing hydrophilic substituents (amino and imino groups) in π-conjugated moieties, are prone to self-assemble into J-aggregates (nematic liquid-crystalline phase, fibrils).171 A post-synthesis solvent-based self-assembly process has regulated the nanostructure of phenyl/amine-capped TANI via “solvent templating” (solvent/nonsolvent aggregation) and extended π-stacking.101,108 Solvophobic association of aromatic ring, through increasing the nonsolvent component (i.e., aqueous solution of HCl), leads to a quasi-micellar assembling in the liquid state.108 The solvent ratio can control the aggregation and stacking of TANI molecules. Herein, the polarity of the organic solvent is of great importance: dedoped oligoaniline easily dissolves in ethanol, whereas the doped oligoaniline is insoluble in either water or ethanol.108 The solvent–oligoaniline interactions are also of interest: more interactions result in a redshift of the first maximum of UV-vis spectra. The interaction between the solvent and the molecule – during packing – can guide the orientation to diverse morphologies, which is called “solvent templating”. The solvent polarity and hydrogen-bonding ability are other critical influential factors. For example, methanol leads to 1D wire/fiber structures, regardless of the doping acid; whereas the employment of 1-propanol, DMF, or acetone, creates structures resembling stacked sheets and nanoflowers. THF can also form hollow structures (Fig. 20).108
In terms of the dopant, acid type at the fixed solvent (i.e., dopants of HCL and HNO3 and H2SO4 in ethanol), a decrease in the acid concentration results in less aggregation (i.e., individual nanowires), whereas higher acid concentration gives more aggregation (i.e., bundles of nanowires) (Fig. 20).108 However, HCLO4 does display the inverse reaction to concentration, and the formation of well-dispersed individual plates can be observed at higher concentration.108 The induction of positive charges on the oligomer chains via doping by protonic acid leads to electrostatic repulsion between the doped tetraaniline molecules. Fully protonated oligoaniline with maximum number of positive charges has a strong intermolecular repulsion. Therefore, at lower concentrations, distinct morphologies are formed: individual nanowires for HCl/ethanol, short and fiber-like ribbons for HNO3/ethanol, or micrometer-sized sheets for H2SO4/ethanol. At higher acid concentrations, the screen effect of excesses of protonic acid may shield the positively charged TANI backbone and hinder the electrostatic repulsion, and yield more aggregation such as bundles of nanofibers. If the oligoanilines were not fully protonated, there would not be enough electrostatic repulsion and more aggregation would be formed at lower concentration of the acid. This might be the reason for HCLO4's opposite reaction to acid concentration. In other words, it was supposed that the different types of electrostatic interactions were associated with the different doping acids.108
Studying the crystal morphology evolution via time-lapsed experiments suggests a two-step formation mechanism: first, nucleation and second, growth by hierarchical assembly.108 It reveals the appearance of nanofibers (∼10 nm) in the forms of aggregated rigid wires for HCl, and clusters of sheets/ribbons for HNO3 as the nucleation sites.108 The crystalline nanowires with a high aspect ratio, diameters of ∼100–400 nm, and lengths of hundreds of micrometres, were formed after 3 days throughout the HCl-doped sample.108 Keep in mind that this self-assembly and solvent templating orientation were detected for oligomers smaller than aniline octamer. Octaaniline has not presented these sorts of micro -and nano structures owing to the more polymer-like behavior in the orientation.101
The type of solvent induces also a new function in the oligoaniline-based systems via hydrogen-bonding and π–π interaction: Solvent-induced supramolecular chirality. Various chiral organized oligoaniline derivatives (i.e., L/D-alanine central/terminal group) through hydrogen-bonding, displaying a broad absorbency around 450 nm, have shown mirror-like behavior (showing opposite Cotton effect) for their L and D enantiomers.176 Even without any chiral molecule insertion, the chirality of the twisted nanoribbons, prepared from the achiral conjugated oligoaniline derivatives, has been changed from left-hand to right-hand via variation in the alcohol percentages in the alcohol/water mixture (%) – considered as a poor solvent (Fig. 21).167 The left-hand twisted ribbons are formed in 35% i-propanol, while at 45% propanol, it turns to right-handed ribbons. Circular dichroism analysis of the solution for phenyl-capped TANI derivative (C24H20O3N4) in DMF and water revealed that there is a solvent-dependent chirality; the sample in DMF is free of chiral centers, at the molecular scale. However, when twisted nanoribbons were dispersed in water, chiral activity can be detected. Solvent-induced supramolecular chirality originating from hydrogen-bonding and π-stacking may describe this phenomenon.167
 Fig. 21  (a, b, f, g, h) FESEM and (I, j, k) TEM images of the twisted nanoribbons synthesized at 40% i-propanol of the mixed solvent. (c, d, e) Schematic diagrams show the torsional directions of twisted nanoribbons. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
The type of dopant contributes to controlling the morphology and dimensionality of the oligoaniline-nanostructure by its size and acidity.101 The pH of the suspension can control the size of the nanostructure, through dictating the degree of aggregation.108 Nanofibers as nucleation sites for HCl- and HNO3-doped oligoanilines aggregate to the rigid wires and clusters of sheets/ribbons by hierarchical assembly (Fig. 20).108 Based on this concept, the fabrication of the oligoaniline-based single-crystals has become possible,108 which was a big challenge (i.e., the single crystals’ formation perpendicular to the surface of the deposition using inorganic templates151). This control over the morphology may imply control over the functionality.175 For instance, oligo(aniline)-based electroactive amphiphiles exhibit redox-switchable behavior through the alteration of the assembly morphology (e.g., nanowire to vesicle) by the oxidation state.123 The external ionic driving force i.e., surfactants, can also control the oligoaniline nanostructure and its order–disorder transition behavior. Systems of TANI-surfactant (di(n-alkyl) phosphate surfactants) show liquid-crystalline properties with large reversible conductivity by temperature on account of the conductive lamella of oligoanilines and insulating layers of the surfactants.166
The architecture of the oligomer also has a great impact on its properties, mainly via alteration of the packing parameter. By changing the molecular geometry, i.e., from the linear to nonlinear architectures, the deficiencies associated with the linear structures (i.e., long-range order) can be overcome.49 In benzene derivatives as mesogens (i.e., oligophenylenevinylene), the star-shaped architectures can form various columnar, nematic, and smectic mesophases.129 In multi-arm oligoanilines, with an increase in the number of arms (with benzene core), the structural order increases from linear oligoaniline (i.e., NH2-(ANI)4-COOH and para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH) to nonlinear (i.e., meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH and Tri-(ANI)4-COOH).131 The star-shaped Tri-(ANI)4-COOH molecules self-assembled in well-designed rod-like orders (Fig. 18f) and resulted in the best performance i.e., shorter switching time and superior cycling stability.131 The morphology transferred from spherical micelles as solution to cylindrical structure (having star-shaped oligoaniline moieties in the core and coil PEG in the shell) as deposited film,136 which enhanced the switching and coloration efficiency. However, the smaller hydrophilic groups, i.e., COOH, have the best performance.131 The presence of the coiled polymer chains may hinder the ion mobility and reduce the diffusion rate in the cylindrical structure. The reduction in the planarity of the oligomer may adversely affect the packing behavior that can positively strengthen the fluorescence emission properties of the material. Introducing methoxyphenyl substitution in the electroactive nitrogen of the aniline in the linear oligoaniline-based polyamide led to a proper solubility in organic solvents and improved the film formation ability for electrochromic coating applications.125 TPA can act as an agent for hole-transporting and packing disruption.125
5.2. Electrochromism and switching function
The electrochromism of oligoanilines – visible color change by the stimuli – is important in optoelectrical applications, such as electrochromic displays, smart windows, and rear-view mirrors.175 The degree of anisotropy, the conjugation length and the topochemical reaction (which is triggered by UV, gamma, and X-ray radiation, by thermal annealing or even solvent) are three specific chemical aspects influencing the optical property.38 Owing to their specific structure – hydrophobic aromatic ring linked by the hydrophilic amine or the imine moiety – they can show reversible optoelectrical behavior by several stimuli, including pH, voltage, temperature, and redox agent.175 These changes in color associate with the energy band-gap of the oligomer and the dopant. The insertion/deinsertion of the dopant ions via doping/dedoping processes may lead to the electrochromic behavior. The combination of the order and the optoelectrical properties leads to the switching function, which can be exploited for biosensor applications – oligoaniline is biocompatible towards certain cell lines.139,141 The switching function can be measured by the optical contrast value, response times or coloration efficiency. The optical contrast value (%) – using Transmittance UV-vis-NIR spectroscopy – is calculated from the transmittance contrast difference between the colored (oxidized) states and the bleached (reduced) states. The optical contrast switching-time is the time required for reaching 95% of the maximum change in the transmittance at a characteristic wavelength (tb for bleached state, or tc, for colored state).124,125,177 The switching behavior is directly related to the ion diffusivity and the electrical conductivity; and a fast-switching time occurs when the ion diffusion is enhanced.
The responsive switching behavior through the optoelectrical reactions can be tuned: the substituent and capping groups, as well as the copolymerization and grafting to organic and inorganic compounds, can change the optoelectrical characteristics of a certain oligoaniline for a certain optical application. Table 3 compares optoelectrical properties of aniline-based compounds (copolymers, linear and multi-arm oligomers) and shows the effect of different functional groups on the electrochromic behaviors.
It was observed that by increasing the length of the aniline segments, from tetra to hexa, the optical contrast is increased.47 Studies suggest that the introduction of substituents to TANI has comparably more effects on the contrast enhancement (Table 3), probably due to the interchain electron-transfer between the polar groups and the secondary amines.135 Moreover, the star-shaped TANI structure often provides higher contrast value than its linear building block TANI (due to its well-ordered porous structures).135 In the star-shaped structures, the tb and tc values are quite close and comparable (at smaller voltage variation), whereas linear structures are tightly dense and show a significant difference.135 In fact, the star-shaped rod-like columnar structures yield the fastest switching times.136 However, the switching time of star-shaped oligoanilines display a dependence on analytical variables such as voltage range or applied wavelength47,135 (Table 3). The placement of the conductive moieties, either as a core or as an arm, can alter the electrochromic behavior of the final product through self-assembly and intermolecular π–π interactions. Although the star-shaped poly(L-lactides)-capped oligoaniline has displayed appropriate optochemical behaviour,139 the properties are not comparable with that of the star-shaped oligoaniline with PEG arm.135 The flexible core can result in ductile behavior, whereas the rigid core provides order and outstanding electrical properties.
Stimuli-responsive systems have been developed by the presence of diverse electroactive functional groups, such as oligoaniline and triphenylamine in poly amic acid,186–189 polyurea,154,185,190 poly aryl ether,191 polyamide124,125 and polysiloxane156,178–184 systems using frequently low-temperature polycondensation. They have shown reversible electroactivity and appropriate electrochromic properties with responses to an electrical potential, pH, as well as reductive and oxidative chemical stimuli (Table 3).186,192 For instance, polyurea-OA-triphenylamine systems have shown a quick response and at the same time almost the same bleaching and coloring time. The presence of hydrophilic groups, such as PEG and Congo red, can lead to quicker switching speeds and lower power requirement, possibly due to the more facile ionic diffusion.190 Carbon-based nanoparticles such as carbon dots and CNT make the bleaching and coloring so quick in polysiloxane networks without any attenuation up to fifty cycles due to their hydrophilic characteristic.156 The combination of cathodically (viologen) and anodically (phenothiazine) coloring moieties along with oligoaniline and siloxane network leads to molecular multichromism (Fig. 22). Mechanically strong polysiloxane provides cycling stability, while viologen, oligoaniline and phenothiazine display diverse color variation (purple–transparent, grey–light, green–blue) at the specific chemical potential, which is important for smart sensing applications.182
 Fig. 22  Transmittance spectra of (a) PST electrode in 0.1 M LiClO4 ACN solution (b) and (c) PSVT electrode in 1.0 M KCl HCl solution ([H+] = 0.01 M) as cathodic and anodic electrode, and (d) PSPT electrode in 0.1 M LiClO4 ACN solution at different potentials. The residence time is 300 s. Insets show the color change images of PST, PSVT, and PSPT. Transmittance changes (first 100 cycles) and switching times of PSPT film monitored at (e) 520 nm with repeated potentials at 0 V and 1.2 V, (f) 700 nm with repeated potentials at 0 V and 0.6 V, (g) CV curves of PSVT in 1.0 M KCl aqueous solution and 1.0 M KCl HCl solution ([H+] = 0.01 M) at a sweep speed of 50 mV s−1, (h) CV curves of PSPT, PST, and PSP in ACN with 0.1 M LiClO4 at a sweep speed of 100 mV s−1, (i) EIS of PSVT in 1.0 M KCl HCl solution ([H+] = 0.01 M) and PSPT in ACN with 0.1 M LiClO4. The inset shows the equivalent circuit model. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 

Fig. 22 illustrates the different electrochemical and cycling stabilities for the polysiloxane network with different functional groups. Alkoxy silane-capped groups comprising viologen, TANI and phenothiazine were used to prepare a poly(siloxane)-based electrode through cyclic voltammetry for sol–gel crosslinking reaction. The PSVT (poly(siloxane)-viologen-TANI) and PSPT (poly(siloxane)-phenothiazine-TANI) films represent porous interpenetrating morphology based on SEM images, while the size of the pores is larger for the PSPT sample containing bulky phenothiazine, and TANI groups. This porous structure facilitates the ions’ diffusion for better and quicker response to stimulation. In electrochromic investigations using UV-vis spectroscopy, the control sample PST (poly(siloxane)-TANI) film displays color alteration from transparent grey, light green, and finally wathet blue at 0.0–0.8 V and optical contrast of 34% at 700 nm (Fig. 22a). Herein, the unconjugated siloxane network may interfere with conjugated TANI and decrease the performance.182 A combination of TANI with viologen in polymer network – PVST film – displays both electrochromic behavior, in both negative and positive applied potentials. When voltages decrease from 0 to −0.8 V (Fig. 22b), the optical contrast of 20% at 550 nm was achieved, accompanied by color changes from transparent grey (at 0 V) to pink (at −0.6 V), and to purple (at −0.8 V). For positive voltages, we can see the color of the film changes from transparent grey (at 0 V) to light green (at 0.4 V), and finally to blue (at 0.8 V), while the optical contrast is 31% at 700 nm (Fig. 22c).182 The synergic effect of TANI and phenothiazine groups revealed outstanding multicolor electrochromic behavior in positive voltages (Fig. 22d): transparent grey (at 0 V) → light green (at 0.4 V) → grey-blue (at 0.6 V) → brown (at 1.0 V) → black-purple (at 1.2 V). This copolymerization can raise the optical contrast up to 53% (700 nm, 0–0.6 V) and 45% (at 520 nm, 0–1.0 V).
Besides, the switching times of films, for both PSVT and PSPT, are comparably short, 2.2/2.8 (tc/tb) and 3.7/4.6 at 700 nm, respectively.182 They have additionally kept their cycling stability and coloring/bleaching ability after 3000 s (over 100 cycle) (Fig. 22e and f). Coloring efficiencies (CE) of the films are as high as 101 cm2 C−1 (550 nm) and 288 cm2 C−1 (700 nm) for PSVT and 217 cm2 C−1 (520 nm) and 224 cm2 C−1 (700 nm) for PSPT.182 The challenging point in these multicomponent systems may be the electrolyte selection for better sensing and coloration performance of copolymer. Each of these groups has its own preferential electrolytes: viologen displays redox transition in a negative potential i.e., KCl electrolyte solution, whereas TANI derivatives respond electro-actively in positive potentials, i.e., LiClO4 organic electrolyte solution. The PSVT film is not electroactive enough in just KCl solution as electrolyte, while by addition of HCl solution four cyclic redox transitions can be observed at −0.53 V/−0.57 V, −0.47 V/−0.50 V, 0.22 V/0.19 V, and 0.34 V/0.30 V (Fig. 22g). The transitions in negative and positive voltages are assigned to viologen and TANI, respectively. The electroactivity of PSPT having TANI and phenothiazine displays some shifts in redox transition (0.89 V/0.32 V and 0.62 V/0.11 V) in comparison with their individual polysiloxane network PST (0.52 V/0.31 V, the absence of Emeraldine state) and PSP (0.87 V/0.61 V) due to the possible electron transfer and interaction between TANI and phenothiazine (Fig. 22h).182 The charge transfer resistance value (Rct) using EIS has also been calculated as about 950 Ω for PSVT and 1450 Ω for PSPT. The interpenetrated porous structure could be the reason for this high conductivity (Fig. 22i).182
The electrofluorochromic properties have recently gained attention in various fields, i.e., biological information storage, chemical sensors, and intelligent displays.188 Aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) and aggregation-induced emission (AIE) are good solutions for the fluorescence-quenching problem in the condensed states, like polymeric matrix.193 AIE molecules can be tailored in “core-side pattern” (i.e., tetraphenylethylene)185 or “chain-insertion pattern” (i.e., TPA).125,126 AIEgens such as fluorine and diphenyl enamine in combination with oligoaniline (see Table 2) can be engineered as side groups or in the polymer backbone.194–196 They do not have emission in the solution, but in aggregated state they can have emission due to the restricted intramolecular rotation.193 The higher number of substitution (fully substituted) and shorter change length (trimer or tetramer) for oligoaniline has enhanced the luminescence performance.126 The shorter chains of diphenyl enamine-substituted oligoanilines have revealed enhancement in emission above 60% of water (in a miscible solution of THF/water), in a way that at 90% water, the luminescence intensity increases up to six fold.126 In a recent study, Zhou et al. have prepared poly(urea-urethane)185 and poly (amic acid)-based189 composites – using parent TANI – as side groups of diamine group and tetraphenylethylene-based AIEgen. They have shown sensitivity towards H2O2185 (the product of many enzymatic reactions in biological systems) and glucose189 through interesting color/fluorescence responses.
Herein, test strips composed of electrospun nanofibers (possessing a large specific surface area for high-efficiency interactions) have been prepared to work as a colorimetric and fluorometric dual-response chemosensor to qualitatively and/or semi-quantitatively determine glucose through the redox reaction between oligoaniline and quantitatively generated hydrogen peroxide. In fact, by an increase in the hydrogen peroxide concentration, the oligoaniline moieties were oxidized, and the color changes from light grey to dark green. The UV-vis absorptions at 430 nm, 730 nm, and broadband in the range of 610–800 nm appear (the peak intensity at 340 nm declines), whereas the photoluminescence (PL) emission intensity at 486 nm decreases on account of a fluorescence quenching effect of quinoid rings in oligoaniline segments. This can be described as a dual-signal sensing strategy for higher precision. In case of glucose, it can be oxidized to gluconolactone and produces H2O2 in the presence of glucose oxidase.189 The polyamic acid system for sensing both glucose and hydrogen peroxide displays high-transmittance color-switching stability and reversibility at 730 nm – no changes after 100 cycles and just 10% drop after 1000 cycles (via spectronoamperometry and applying the alternating high and low potential of 0 V and 1.0 V with a retention time of 15 s). The optical contrast varyies from 74.8% (the bleaching state) to 29.2% (coloring state) with the coloration efficiency of 140 cm2 C−1 (the indication of a lower energy consumption), while the poly(urea-urethane) system for sensing just hydrogen peroxide also offers an incredibly high coloration efficiency of 503 cm2 C−1.185
Although most CPs exhibit the photoluminescence characteristics just in their fully-reduced states, aniline derivatives exhibit photoluminescence features in both fully reduced and half-oxidized states.154,194 The intrachain energy migration may result in the fluorescence switching feature.197,198 In the ‘off’ state, as soon as the oligoanilines were oxidized, the quinoid rings would act as excitation-traps and quench the fluorescence. By the addition of reductant – the ‘on’ state – the fluorescence recovered due to the elimination of the quinoid rings.186 As an example, in Fig. 23a the polyamic acid film (PEBA) exhibits bright blue-green photoluminescence emission at 486 nm, quenched by an increase in the applied potential from 0.0 V to 1.0 V. The tetraphenylethylene (TPE) moieties function as aggregation-induced emission (AIE) segment. This photoluminescence feature is maintained after 150 cycles, but at a low contrast ratio of 5.47 (Fig. 23b). It has a fluorescence switching behavior which has been evaluated by the on/off response time ∼5.3/5.5 s, determined at 90% modulation of the fluorescence emission (Fig. 24c). Fig. 23d represents the electrochromic and elctroflourochromic properties of the polyamic acid-based sensor in terms of oxidation and voltage alteration.
 Fig. 23  (a) Fluorescence emission of PEBA under diverse potentials from 0.0 to 1.0 V. (b) Electrofluorochromic stability of PEBA film monitored at 486 nm under the alternating potentials of 0.0 and 1.0 V. (c) Magnified electrofluorochromic switching cycles and switching times of PEBA/ITO electrode. (d) The optical images of electrochromic/electrofluorochromic dual-mode device. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
 Fig. 24  (a) Images of (a) 3D printed biodegradable conductive PCL scaffold with 5% TA content, (b) SEM images show strut surface and cross-section, (c) the 3D reconstructed image from micro CT shows well-defined interconnected macropores, (d) the representative SEM images showed the cell adhesion on the scaffold struts with 0%, 2.5% and 5% TA at day 28, (e) the representative brightfield-merged confocal fluorescent microscope images showed cross-sections of chondroprogenitor cell-seeded 3D printed PCL scaffolds. Reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
Different groups in the polymer structure can have synergic effects. The switching times of polysiloxane-OA-fluorene are 4.2 s/2.4 s (on/off) with good stability in electrofluorochromic properties after 50 cycles.184 This system also shows a 15% drop in the optical contrast value after 300 cycles.184 However, fluorene replacement by POSS and carbazole has extended the switching times to 10.5 s/9.2 s for its on/off state.183 Polyurea-OA-triphenylamine film revealed a switching time of 10.8/9.4 s (on/off) during the first ten cycles, whereas it is decreased to 14.0/6.2 s after 100 cycle.154 Controlled conformational changes of oligoaniline combined with the geometric changes of azobenzene (cis↔trans isomerization) within a polymer chain can also assist fluorene to enhance the fluorescence switching behavior.194 The nitro-195 and amino-capped196 tetraaniline substituted with diphenyl vinyl groups (Fig. 3g), with a high selectivity of up to Fe3+, can act as AIE fluorophores and be used for bioimaging of bacteria. Annealing of oligoaniline-based polyurethane has strengthened the fluorescence emission by an increase in the hard segment extent (having oligoaniline derivatives).199 TPA-containing electrochromic polyamide shows good electrochromic reversibility (either n-doping or p-doping), in the visible and NIR region, with a contrast value of ∼70%. The oligoaniline with linear structure has a notably less electrochromic performance in comparison with TPA nonlinear structures.124,125
Molecular hybrid methods, as interesting and convenient methods for the improvement of various properties, can be achieved by grafting nanoparticles (NPs) on the individual macromolecules or by attachment to the oligomers. The most used nanoparticles include Au,58,200,201 Ag,202,203 CdSe,58,200,204 silica,156,188,205–210 graphene oxide,157,211–215 carbon dots,156 carbon nanotube (CNT),180 Cu2O,216etc. Different concepts have been employed for the fabrication of 2D and 3D arrays of semiconductor NPs on surfaces. They include covalent binding, electrostatic interactions, molecular bridges (synthetic or biomolecules), supramolecular interactions, and electropolymerization.58 Doping of electroactive CNT by oligoaniline can induce switching properties in it for sensing applications. Oligoanilines firmly attached to the CNT, and during on and off states they are not displaced.217 In an oligoaniline-stabilized p-type Cu2O-semiconductor, the oligoaniline has protected Cu2O against photocorrosion during photoelectrochemical diagnostic experiments.216 Au and Ag can boost the electrical properties.200 AuNPs enhance sensitivities in the electrochemical sensors (i.e., dopamine dection)201,218 and facilitate electropolymerization on the template.200 Ag–OA, having been reduced by the oligoaniline and polyaniline, can also render high conductivity and antibacterial properties to the system.202 It also has catalytic effect for PANI interfacial polymerization.210 Au has also displayed high sensitivity to uric acid in sensors based on carbon paste electrode and polyimide-TANI-nanoparticle systems 1.53 μA μM−1 of uric acid in comparison with Pt and Ag. The interaction between nanoparticles and TANI has led to this good sensitivity.218
Silicone-based compounds can enhance durability, cyclic voltammetry stability, and responsiveness, when attached to the oligoanilines.156,178 They can enhance the density of trap states, which could impede the recombination of photogenerated carriers.156,181 For drug release applications, the grafted oligoaniline (onto the surface of hollow mesoporous silica) with different length operates as a gate by manipulating the “opening” or “closing” of mesopores via the doping procedure.209 The presence of polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) has also positively affected the switching behavior by a faster transition with a higher contrast value and enhanced flourochromic properties.183,188 For instance, in the polysiloxane-OA-carbozole-POSS system, POSS has shown higher electrical activity, an increase in CV current and a decrease in the charge transfer resistance (282 Ω compare with 779 Ω sample without POSS). The introduction of POSS groups would form an aggregation-caused quenching effect of fluorescence on account of the steric hindrance.183
5.3. Electrical behavior
The electrical conductivity (or DC conductivity (σRT)) mainly depends on the doping process, temperature and structural order.13,14 Any type of disorder in the structure and morphology can deteriorate the π-electron delocalization.219 Smaller dopants lead to a feasible doping/dedoping process and a higher order.101 However, macromolecular dopant remains in the structure and does not leach simply.113–115,165 Self-doped compounds can maintain their conductivity in a wide range of pHs.69 Moreover, the conductivity of doped conductive organic materials decreases with decreasing temperature, in contradiction to metals (σRT of conventional metal increases with decreasing temperature).13 Finally, the order and self-assembly can increase dominantly the electrical conductivity. The high crystallinity of the nanostructure directly influences its electrical transport behavior.163 The conductivity of linear oligoaniline increases by the dimension of the order: nanoribbon > nanoplate > nanowire.163
The conductivity of the linear oligomers (I2 dopant) varies between 1.3 × 10−2 and 9.6 × 10−1 S cm−1, and the homologic increment will not substantially change the electronic structure from the five-membered base upwards.71 The molecular design transition from linear to symmetrical multi-arm star-shaped oligoaniline decreases the resistance meaningfully47,131 (EIS analysis for charge transfer resistance of star-shaped: Rct = 2471 Ω and linear: Rct = 23450 Ω).47 An increase in the number of arms enhances the self-assembly of star-shaped oligoaniline and simplifies the diffusion of ions. The electrical conductivity of the star-shaped structure can be affected by the core conductivity: fullerene (C60) as the core molecule and conjugated oligoanilines as the arm create molecular donor–acceptors that are electro- and photoactive because of greater electron tunnelling efficiency and 3D intramolecular electron transfer.137,138 In contrast, hyperbranched PCLs-co-pentaaniline (σRT = 8.02 × 10−6–2.42 × 10−5 S cm−1) possess less conductivity compared to pentaaniline film (σRT = 10−2 S cm−1). However, the conductivities of the hyperbranched copolymers were, respectively, 4.8 and 1.6 fold higher than that of the linear copolymer, because of the further phase-dissociation in the linear copolymer.144 The conductivity is enhanced by the tunnel effect between two discontinuous conductive domains. However, overcrowded branches can adversely affect the conductivity.144
Other multi-arm macromolecules coupled with linear oligoanilines can greatly increase the applicability of this class of materials for neural or cardiovascular tissue engineering,144i.e., skeletal muscle regeneration.140 They can provide a two-phase system having hard and soft segments with a mechanically well-defined star-shaped structure and morphological order.146 They can develop electroactivity,139–141 hydrophilicity,141,144 biocompatibility,139–141,144 and tunable degradability,139–141 tough and ductile behavior,139,140 thermal stability,139,140 shape-memory properties (short recovery time (several seconds), high recovery ratio (over 94%), and high fixity ratio (almost 100%)),141 and also biomedical antibacterial and antioxidant behavior.63
Oligoanilines, as nanoparticles, are promising candidates for anticorrosive coating applications.106,206–208,220,221 Conductive hard segments of oligoanilines in various polymer structures (product of polycondensation), as a backbone of polyimide,222 and as a branch of polyurethane153,223 have shown anticorrosive behavior. The conductivity of oligoaniline-based polyurethane films, doped with para-toluene sulphonic acid, is in the order of 10−3 to 10−4 S cm−1.153 Silicone-capped trianiline can be used to prepare superhydrophobic coatings (contact angle ≃150°), with appropriate anticorrosive properties.207 However, the order of conductivity of the oligomer declined from 10−3 to 10−5 S cm−1 by ethoxy silane capping of trianiline.207 POSS-TANI has been grafted on graphene, which reduced the conductivity of the graphene from 0.18 to 0.026 S cm−1. However, its epoxy-based composite showed very good corrosion resistance.224 The composite of dextran-caffeic acid and TANI on Mg alloy prompts anticorrosive coating with the least cytotoxicity for clinical application.225 The charge-transfer resistance (Rct) was enhanced from 9.67 Ω cm2 for bare Mg alloy, to 120.6 Ω cm2 for composite-coated Mg alloy via EIS analysis. Based on a “Green Chemistry” perspective, anticorrosive epoxy-based coating has been prepared exploiting catechol chemistry. Nano α-Fe2O3 modified by attachment to (Boc-L-dopa)-capped TANI possesses good compatibility with waterborne epoxy matrix.226
Electroactive hydrogels for neural tissue application have exploited oligoaniline for electrical stimulus responses. Chitosan, as a well-known natural polymer used in biomedical applications, was modified by oligoaniline side-groups to induce conductivity in the hydrogel.122,227–230 It has shown suitable swelling capacity and good mechanical strength as well as acceptable electrochromic properties.122 Cell proliferation has been improved by oligoaniline introduction in an report of electro-responsivity and conductivity of hydrogel.122 An electroactive colloidal cryogel, based on agarose/alginate/chitosan, in the presence of self-doped aniline pentamer, has shown appropriate conductivity (10−3 S cm−1), biocompatibility, and suitable electro-responsiveness with great potential for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.231 Self-gelled hydrogel, using a blend of modified aniline dimer-chitosan and agarose, has also been employed for drug-release applications. The drug-release rate can be controlled by altering the aniline oligomer content and the applied electrical stimulation.227 The electrical stimulation can raise the drug release up to 40% comparing stimulated and unstimulated webs of conductive nanofibers.229 The functional supramolecular co-oligomer of oligoalanine–oligoaniline–oligoalanine has been designed for electrochemically enhanced drug delivery.232 The α-helix and β-sheet assembly and the doping with CSA showed a conductivity lower than that of mammalian cells, to enable the controlled delivery of a drug upon electrical stimuli. The sample with the higher conjugation length (containing hexaaniline) showed better cell proliferation and electrical-stimuli drug-release profile.232 Amine-capped trianiline, as a hard segment in conductive biodegradable L-lysine-based polyurethane, presents a synergic effect with lysine, and enhances the final electrochemical and thermomechanical properties of 3D porous polyurethane.112 Conductive polymer 3D-ink based on polycaprolactone and block copolymer of TANI-PCL-TANI has enhanced the surface hydrophilicity and fibronectin absorption for tissue engineering application – possibly cartilage repair. A fully interconnected conductive biodegradable PCL scaffold of macropores has been prepared via direct-ink writing in 3D printing. To form conductive PCL, the PCL macromolecules were capped by TANI, through ester-linkage, for hydrolytic degradation in the body. The blend of conductive TANI-PCL-TANI (CSA-doped) and high molecular weight PCL – dissolved in methanol/dichloromethane solvent as ink – was directly extruded through a small nozzle to create a 3D scaffold which subsequently solidifies by the volatile solvent evaporation (Fig. 24a). The printed scaffold has a well-designed, uniform and smooth strut surface (D ≃ 85 μm) and well-developed porosity (an average pore size of ca. 350 μm) which is an appropriate place for cell growth (Fig. 24b and c). After 28 days, the cross-sectional images of cell-seeded scaffolds with various contents of TA (0, 2.5% and 5%) display aggregations of cells (Fig. 24d). The type II collagen marker of hyaline cartilage can be observed by immunostaining (in green and blue color) and the sample with higher content of TANI has revealed more type II collagen, and the scaffold with 5% TANI has the greatest amount of differentiated cells, due to the promotion of adhesion and chondrogenesis (Fig. 24e). It was hypothesised that differences in the surface chemistry can affect the local charge distribution around strut surfaces and signal transduction pathways for chondrogenic differentiation of the chondroprogenitor cells. However, the influence of the external electrical stimuli has not been investigated in this study.233 In terms of mechanical properties, the increase in TANI content in the scaffold can increase the compression modulus: 35.1 MPa (5% TANI), 14.7 MPa (2.5% TANI) and 6.8 MPa (0% TANI), whereas it can slightly deteriorate the tensile properties, such as tensile modulus (153.4 MPa (5% TANI), 159.2 MPa (2.5% TANI) and 188.6 MPa (0% TANI)).233
Positive immunostaining staining of collagen type II was shown as green, and nuclei were shown as blue.233 The syntheses of vitrimers containing oligoanilines resulted in significant progress towards the fabrication of multi-stimuli-responsive materials.234–236 The neat vitrimer responds to heating, while the addition of the oligoaniline to the system as a monomer results in the formation of the multi-stimuli-responsive vitrimers. Apart from the multi-responsivity and multifunctionality, such as shape memory, healing, and welding, some of the final properties are emergent and have not been inherited from each component, for instance, photohealability, photoweldability, and pH-induced shape memory.234 Triple-responsive polyimine-trianiline vitrimers can show photohealing/welding under the irradiation of near-infrared (NIR) light.236 By an increase in the amine-capped trianiline (ACAT) monomer in the synthesis of poly imine vitrimer, the tensile modulus, strength and the elongation at breaks increases, and Tg of the polyimine-ACAT shifts from 100 °C to 107 °C. The ACAT-polyimine has revealed thermo- and photoinduced shape memory behavior (Fig. 25). In traditional thermo-induced shape memory, the temporary shape can be formed in two steps above and under Tg (i.e., 110 °C). The polymer strip can be programmed upon stress, into spiral form, above Tg, and then removing the stress with subsequent freezing of the sample shape at room temperature. The temporary spiral shape could be again relaxed to the original form at 110 °C in 80 s, whereas continued heating at 110 °C for 24 h reprograms. This cycle can be performed repeatedly. In addition, the presence of the oligoaniline gives excellent photothermal properties to the vitrimer, and results in the induction of photohealability and photoinduced shape memory behavior. Talking about photoinduced shape memory, after programing, the square sample to lotus shape, by conventional heating at 110 °C and room temperature, can return to its original square shape using a NIR laser. Again after 24 h at 110 °C the lotus shape can be recovered, which can be followed by reprograming and NIR irradiation in order to set different shapes. Dynamic thermomechanical analysis (DMA) has quantified this behavior (Fig. 25c). The strip is stretched under stress of 0.6 MPa, and then cooled down at the fixed strain. In a stress-free situation, the fixed strain (the shape) starts to decrease through heating up to 110 °C. Finally, the stress relaxation happens and the strain value returns to zero (i.e., original shape); the recovery rate is high enough, i.e., 86.97%. Furthermore, cracks can be healed using conventional heating, NIR irradiation, or employing solvents. Herein, the photohealing performed better than the conventional heating healing. The presence of amine solvent not only contributes to the imine-exchange reaction (which is facilitated by the primary amine), but also dissolves the polyimine-ACAT vitrimer. The balance between those delineates the optimum amount of solvent for the desired healing/welding processes.236
 Fig. 25  Shape memory properties: (A and B) photos of the shape recovery performance for ACAT-vitrimer by heat and by NIR irradiation; (C) quantitative shape-memory curves of ACAT-vitrimer obtained by DMA. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
The oligoanilines’ ability to absorb solar light and efficiently convert light into heat has been exploited to prepare well-performing organic self-floating evaporators for solar cells.237 Chen et al. engineered an efficient evaporator (80% efficiency at 0.5 sun) with high thermal stability (300 °C) and a hydrophobic surface (contact angle of 130°) (Fig. 26). The elasticity of oligoaniline-based foam was maintained after at least 500 loading/unloading cycles, with a compressive strain of 50%, while the maximum stress dropped only 15%, from 302 to 246 kPa. It showed properties comparable to the best graphene-based and inorganic evaporators, but prepared by a much simpler process owing to triazine crosslinked star-shaped oligoanilines. Paraformaldehyde condensation with oligoaniline-based diamine is a simple and intelligent approach to form a well-defined star-shaped crosslinked polymer.238
 Fig. 26  The synthesis and characterization of the evaporator. (a) The synthesis of the polymer, (b) SEM images of the foam evaporator, under low and high magnification, (c) photographs of a cylindrical evaporator (d ¼ 10 mm and h ¼ 10 mm) supporting a weight of 500 g (the weight of the cylinder is about 25 mg), (d) compressive stress–strain curves of the foam, (e) the optical image of the foam evaporator, self-floating at the air–water interface, (f) the water-wetting performance of the foam evaporator. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
Oligoaniline moieties can be tracked in dielectric materials to boost the dielectric permittivity with minimum loss. To develop dielectric polymers, there is a crucial need for high dielectric permittivity, while minimizing the dielectric loss.55 The combination of ferroelectric PVDF-based polymers (as electroactive polymers which change shape in response to electrical stimuli) and oligoaniline may boost the dielectric permittivity.239 Polystyrene has been capped by oligoanilines for applications in dielectric polymer film-based capacitors, using the copper-catalyzed click-reaction (CuAAC).55 It showed the frequency-independent behavior of relative permittivity via tuned phase-separation and the presence of oligoaniline-rich domains.55 Grafting TANI to a styrene–butadiene–styrene block copolymer raised the relative permittivity from 2.8 (without TANI) to 6.2 (25 mol% OA) and 9.2 (35 mol% OA), while they maintain their elasticity.240 The phase separation and π-stacking of TANI and styrene moieties are the main reasons for this enhancement. Acrylic elastomer resin was also modified to improve its permittivity properties by oligoaniline attachment as a side group.241
Modification by oligoaniline may impose better supercapacitive properties and more charge–discharge cycles to composite materials.151,213,214,242 Carbon-based supercapacitors suffer from relatively low energy density. This deficiency can be handled by modification of them with oligoaniline.211,242,243 The GO and oligoaniline have a synergic effect and enhance the specific capacitance of GO-grafted trianiline to values as high as 330243 and 640 F g−1.211 Moreover, they provide a great rate capability and good cycling stability (91% retention after 2000 cycles211). The increase in the conductivity of graphene oxide-g-TANI (41.7 S cm−1 (for GO–OA) vs. 5.8 S cm−1 (for GO)) was accompanied by remarkable improvements in energy storage (370 F g−1 (for GO–OA) vs. 114 F g−1 (for GO), and 129 F g−1 (for TANI)), and quite high charge–discharge cycling stability.213 High crystalline oligoaniline-modified carbon cloth-based supercapacitors have revealed high storage capacities: 2119.2 mF cm−2 and 1623.1 mF cm−2 for deposition- and solvent-prepared samples, in order.242 Oligoanilines can also act as nucleates to form supramolecular organized macroporous nanocomposites (specific capacitance = 965 and 825.5 F g−1),214,244 template for vertically oriented organic semiconducting single crystals (σRT = 12.3 S cm−1),151 and anticorrosive agent.245 The addition of oligoaniline into the doner–acceptor dyad systems can boost the charge generation ability with long lifetime.246 Herein, the conjugated oligomers act as a donor, and fullerene acts as acceptor.247 Results suggest that the covalently linked linear donor–acceptors have better performance compared to the physical blends,248 due to the large difference between the forward and backward charge transfers.246 Bilayer electrochromic supercapacitor (TANI-sulfanilic acid polysiloxane and Prussian blue) exhibits specific capacitances, as high as 273.4 F g−1 (representing a synergic effect), and charge-transfer resistance of 167.9 Ω (much less than each layer resistance value).181 The well-dispersed POSS-TANI giant molecules in epoxy resin have also shown specific capacitance of 280 F g−1 and anticorrosive properties.249 Oligoaniline possesses some other uncommon applications: the curing trend of epoxy resin has been enhanced meaningfully by the introduction of the oligoaniline-modified halloysite nanotubes. The estimated autocatalytic reaction order (based on the Arrhenius equation) represents a significant rise (from 0.11 to 0.28).121 The parent TANI (EB) has been used for the reversible anionic dye adsorber (236 mg g−1 for adsorption of Alizarin Red S).250 Oligoaniline derivatives are also employed for hair-dyeing applications, to reduce allergic contact dermatitis, instead of typical aromatic amines. By an increase in the length of the oligoaniline (up to a certain extent) and by the substitution of electron-donating moieties, a balance between skin sensitization potential and the desired hair nuance properties can be achieved.251
6. Limitations and future perspective
Linear oligoanilines were developed to give mono dispersity and better processability to aniline-based materials. They have experienced diverse applications and undergone many changes in their architecture in this regard. They were self-assembled and created nanostructure for better electrical properties. They were grafted onto nanoparticles, aiming at synergy in optoelectrical properties. Also, oligoanilines have coupled with inorganic elements to improve stability and durability. In another fashion, they have been copolymerized as precursors of backbone and branches to prepare multi-stimuli-responsive materials. These interesting materials contain designed nonlinear multi-arm star-shaped oligoanilines to enhance control over the order and ion diffusion, cyclic stability with further copolymerization, as well as adjusting donor–acceptor structure. However, there are some limitations that can be observed in the commercial applications of this class of materials.
There are numerous advantages provided by employing nonlinear structures in oligoanilines. For example, star-shaped architectures promote the film formation capability of the polymer, by adjusting the viscosity and formation of a polymer network, with the least possibility of defects.146 Moreover, the proper star-shaped architecture with desired arm lengths leads to the formation of a homogeneous network, and subsequently a uniform deformation under stress.55 However, too many star-points in the structure of the network can make the system rather brittle. The flexible multi-arm core macromolecule with rigid arms can donate ductility to the network, while a rigid core with flexible arms offers self-assembly order. Star-shaped structures also provide narrow MW dispersity and yield better thermal stability, in comparison with their linear counterparts.137,146 The employment of star-shaped architectures has also increased the electrical conductivity in some cases. The introduction of new building blocks in the structure of a polymer results in an adequate segregation, and induces the tunnel-effect, which consequently increases the conductivity.48,138,144 However, the linear oligoaniline precursors have been usually preferred for copolymerization, while employment of nonlinear TPA-based compounds has shown far better electrochemical performance. Maybe it is time to use more star-shaped oligoanilines to create well-designed and neatly crosslinked polyamide or polyurethane structures to engineer a tough, well-distributed network with uniform force distribution and high electrochemical properties.
It is well known that the higher conjugation length, the greater the conductivity in the system. However, the processing considerations determine the maximum length of the hard segments. The employment of the star-shaped architecture is an appropriate strategy to overcome this processing barrier. On top of that, star-shaped oligoanilines can be simply prepared, often via low energy-consuming approaches. On the other hand, the employment of the more complex architectures results in more limitations: first of all, the nature and the structure of the core molecule can predominantly influence the final product properties, and these effects could be multifaceted. For instance, the planar benzene-derivative cores form a discotic orientation and can increase the conductivity on account of the self-assembly and molecular packing,40,88 whereas employing a flexible core can decrease the crystallinity, which directly affects the conductivity.144 Secondly, employing star-shaped architectures often increases the synthesis complexity, and reduces the control over the preparation reaction by affecting the viscosity and the association of the intra- and inter-molecular interactions. It also imposes more complexity into the prepared network, which in turn results in poor predictions of the system properties.130 The other shortcoming stems from the methods for characterizing these systems. In fact, the employment of conventional characterization methods and well-established procedures for these complex systems is not possible. It should also be mentioned that in most cases, the symmetry (in the length and the sequence of arms) is favourable, because it adds simplicity to the system.
Despite all these great efforts being made in this field, a lack of “Green Chemistry” perspective in every single step of the synthesis and applications of aniline-based compounds imposes huge expense on the environment. Although organic semiconductors benefit considerably from better processability, more feasible synthesis procedures, and less harsh fabrication conditions in comparison with their traditional counterparts – inorganic – it does not mean that we neglect green chemistry elements through syntheses. Up to now, appreciable efforts have been made to prepare organic-based materials as good as inorganics, but the procedures need to be evaluated by life cycle assessment (LCA) and more should be learned about the impact of our selected approaches on the environment. Utilization of toxic catalysis and solvents needs to be evaluated for further awareness. Generally, there is no effort to choose and develop the more environmentally friendly approaches such as enzymatic oligomerizing and irradiation-induced reactions. Although enzymatic syntheses and polymerization occur regio- and stereoselectively under mild and environmentally friendly conditions, the cost has limited this methodology for large-scale applications. Microwave-induced synthesis is completely ignored, although it could provide quicker and less energy-consuming approaches. In the doping field, a few biobased protonic acids for the doping process have been used, but this needs more investigation. Looking forward, the synthesis of oligoaniline derivatives from biobased resources such as lignin sounds promising. Using safe solvents is another point to consider. Degradability of the oligomers and the degradation processes are also an important issue to investigate.
Conclusion
The creativity in device engineering associates with the innovation in the applied material to give specific desired features to the device. Herein, molecular design – based on demand – and desired properties play key roles. The molecular design process in oligoanilines can be conducted by various strategies: the alteration of the substitutional groups of the oligoaniline, capping oligoanilines with different functional moieties, copolymerization, grafting to nanoparticles, hard and soft templating, introducing a variety of dopants, employment of solvents and surfactants, and finally, the molecular architecture transforming from linear to non-linear multi-arm structures. The functional group and its position are decisive factors in designing the molecule. Regardless of the function it delivers, it can also have an invasive effect on the orientation pattern (self-assembly and liquid-crystalline behavior) of the oligomolecule, by introducing different kinds of interactions.
Oligoanilines possess a set of reversible opto and electrochemical properties, environmental stability, and simple synthesis and coupling procedures. Oligoanilines, apart from their architectures, display unique behaviors compared with other organic CPs: hydrogen bonding ability, doping (and self-doping) with biobased and non-toxic materials, biocompatibility, and much less cytotoxicity. These unique features, when combined with a special architecture, can impose rewarding properties into the conductive polymer. To date, a handful of molecular architectures have been employed to bestow the aniline-based polymers specific characteristics. The cooperation of oligoaniline and other functional moieties can not only synergically boost the optoelectrochemical properties, but also leads to the emergence of some new properties. They can develop electroactivity, hydrophilicity, biocompatibility, thermal stability, self-healing ability, photohealability, photoweldability, toughness and ductility, as well as shape-memory, anticorrosive, antibacterial, antioxidant, dielectric and supercapacitive properties.
Numerous advantages are associated with employing nonlinear structures in oligoanilines. The designed nonlinearity that maintains planarity maintenance can improve the structural order and self-assembly, which directly positively affect the deposited film morphology, electrical conductivity, switching function and responsiveness in addition to cyclic and thermal stability. Crucial factors in nonlinear molecular design comprised the choice of the core molecule, capped and grafted moieties to arms, and length and number of arms. Oligoanilines with functional groups that change the planarity, such as diphenyl enamine, contribute to fluorescence emission, and their copolymers afford photoluminescence to the systems used in bioimaging applications. Overall, excellent chemical, physical, electrical, mechanical, thermal, and optical properties support the use of star-shaped oligoanilines in various applications, including tissue engineering, electrochromic devices, polaronic ferromagnetic polymers, photoinduced conductive materials, and organic electronics and sensors.
Abbreviations

AIEAggregation-induced emission
ACQAggregation-caused quenching
ACATAmine-capped aniline trimer
APSAmmonium persolfate
ANIAniline
TANIAniline tetramer
ATAniline trimer
AFMAtomic force microscope
BPDA3,3′,4,4′-Biphenyltetracarboxylic diandydride

t
b
Bleaching times
CSACamphor sulfonic acid
CDCarbon dot
CNTCarbon nanotube
CCAPCarboxyl-capped aniline pentamer
CCATCarboxyl-capped aniline trimer

t
c
Coloring time
CEColoration efficiency
CPConductive polymer
CVCyclic voltammetry
DSDA3,3′,4,4′-Diphenylsulfonetetracarboxylic dianhydride
DMFDimethylformamide
ESMPElectroactive shape memory polymer
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EBEmeraldine base
ESEmeraldine-salt form
FETField effect transistors
C60Fullerene

T
g
Glass transition temperature
GOGraphene oxide
HHDAFHexa(hexadecaanilino)-[60]fullerene
HDIHexamethylenediisocyanate
HClHydrochloric acid
HPLAATHyperbranched copolymer of lactide and aniline tetramer
HPLAHyperbranched poly lactic acid
LEBLeucoemeraldine base
LEDsLight emitting diodes

T
m
Melting temperature

M
w
Molecular weight
NPNanoparticle

M
n
Number average molecular weight
ΔtOptical contrasts
OAOligoaniline
PNBPernigraniline base
PLLAsPoly(L-lactides)
PPVPoly(p-phenylene vinylene)
PPPPoly(p-phenylene)
PCLsPoly(ε-caprolactone)s
PAPolyacetylene
PANIPolyaniline
PDIPolydispersity index
PEGPolyethylene glycol
PFPolyfluorene
POSSPolyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane
PPyPolypyrrole
PThPolythiophene
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
SEMScanning electron microscope
SMPShape-memory polymer
Tri-(ANI)4-COOHStar-shaped tetraaniline
SASuccinic anhydride
H2SO4Sulfuric acid
BOC
tert-Butyl carbamate
TANITetraaniline
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TPATriphenylamine
XRDX-ray diffraction
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .
Y. K. K. Hiraoka, I. Ikezoe, H. Kajii, Y. Ohmori, K. Hiraoka, Y. Kusumoto, I. Ikezoe, H. Kajii and Y. Ohmori, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 554, 184–188 CrossRef .
O. L. Gribkova, O. D. Omelchenko, A. R. Tameev, D. A. Lypenko, A. A. Nekrasov, O. Y. Posudievskii, V. G. Koshechko and A. V. Vannikov, High Energy Chem., 2016, 50, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, R. Guo, T. Li, F. Li, Z. Liu, M. Zheng, B. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Luo and Y. Wan, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1591–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, D. Du, L. Guo, Y. Guo and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6525–6532 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Zhou, Y. Wang, Q. Pan, Q. Gong, Z. Xia and Y. Li, Carbon, 2019, 147, 519–531 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Soto-Oviedo, O. A. Araújo, R. Faez, M. C. Rezende and M.-A. De Paoli, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 1249–1255 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Elschner, S. Kirchmeyer, W. Lovenich, U. Merker and K. Reuter, PEDOT: principles and applications of an intrinsically conductive polymer, CRC press,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8475–8491 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Mishra, J. At., Mol., Condens. Matter Nano Phys., 2018, 5, 159–193 Search PubMed .

          A. A. Baleg, M. Masikini, S. V. John, A. R. Williams, N. Jahed, P. Baker and E. Iwuoha, in Functional Polymers, Springer, Switzerland,  2018, pp. 1–54 Search PubMed .
D. N. Nguyen and H. Yoon, Polymer, 2016, 8, 118 Search PubMed .
T.-H. H. Le, Y. Kim and H. Yoon, Polymer, 2017, 9, 150 Search PubMed .
R. Kumar, S. Singh and B. C. Yadav, Int. Adv. Res. J. Sci. Eng. Technol., 2015, 2, 110–124 Search PubMed .
Y. W. Park, C. Park, Y. S. Lee, C. O. Yoon, H. Shirakawa, Y. Suezaki and K. Akagi, Solid State Commun., 1988, 65, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .

          V. M. Kobryanskii, Developments in polyacetylene-nanopolyacetylene, Rapra Technology Ltd, Shawbury, Shrewsbury,  2000 Search PubMed .
S. Ramakrishnan, Resonance, 1997, 2, 48–58 CrossRef .
V. Raj, D. Madheswari and M. Mubarak Ali, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 116, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Macit, S. Sen and M. Saçak, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2005, 96, 894–898 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lévesque, P.-O. Bertrand, N. Blouin, M. Leclerc, S. Zecchin, G. Zotti, C. I. Ratcliffe, D. D. Klug, X. Gao, F. Gao and J. S. Tse, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2128–2138 CrossRef .
N. T. Kemp, A. B. Kaiser, C.-J. Liu, B. Chapman, O. Mercier, A. M. Carr, H. J. Trodahl, R. G. Buckley, A. C. Partridge, J. Y. Lee, C. Y. Kim, A. Bartl, L. Dunsch, W. T. Smith and J. S. Shapiro, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1999, 37, 953–960 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reung-U-Rai, A. Prom-Jun, W. Prissanaroon-Ouajai and S. Ouajai, J. Met., Mater. Miner., 2008, 18, 27–31 Search PubMed .
A. Pron and P. Rannou, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 135–190 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, H. Tang, Y. Qu, L. Li and X. Yang, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6579–6584 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Glaudell, J. E. Cochran, S. N. Patel and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401072 CrossRef .
G. Kaur, R. Adhikari, P. Cass, M. Bown and P. Gunatillake, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 37553–37567 RSC .
J. Gmeiner, S. Karg, M. Meier, W. Rieß, P. Strohriegl and M. Schwoerer, Acta Polym., 1993, 44, 201–205 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tanase, P. W. M. Blom, D. M. de Leeuw and E. J. Meijer, Phys. Status Solidi, 2004, 201, 1236–1245 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sato, K. Kaeriyama and K. Someno, Makromol. Chem., 1983, 184, 2241–2249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adhikari, R. Karpoormath, S. Radha, S. K. Singh, R. Mutthukannan, G. Bharate and M. Vijayan, High Perform. Polym., 2018, 30, 181–191 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Tanguy, M. Thompson and N. Yan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 1044–1064 CrossRef CAS .
E. Eskandari, M. Kosari, M. H. Davood Abadi Farahani, N. D. Khiavi, M. Saeedikhani, R. Katal and M. Zarinejad, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 231, 115901 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bhadra, A. Alkareem and N. Al-Thani, J. Polym. Res., 2020, 27, 122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beygisangchin, S. Abdul Rashid, S. Shafie, A. R. Sadrolhosseini and H. N. Lim, Polymer, 2021, 13, 2003 CAS .
F. Kazemi, S. M. Naghib, Y. Zare and K. Y. Rhee, Polym. Rev., 2021, 61, 553–597 CrossRef CAS .
N. Khalid, J. A. Razak, H. Hasib, M. Ismail, N. Mohamad, R. Junid and P. Puspitasari, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 957, 012028 CAS .
T. Jarosz, M. Lapkowski and P. Ledwon, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1006–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Namsheer and R. Chandra Sekhar, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 5659–5697 RSC .
G. Yang, W. Hou, X. Feng, X. Jiang and J. Guo, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2008, 108, 1155–1163 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Kanibolotsky, I. F. Perepichka and P. J. Skabara, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2695 RSC .
C. O. Baker, X. Huang, W. Nelson and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1510–1525 RSC .
H. Meier, U. Stalmach and H. Kolshorn, Acta Polym., 1997, 48, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rissler, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 395, 92–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. Unsworth, C. Conn, Z. Jin, A. Kaynak, R. Ediriweera, P. Innis and N. Booth, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 1994, 5, 595–604 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jahandideh, N. Esmaeili and K. Muthukumarappan, J. Polym. Environ., 2018, 26, 2072–2085 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. MacDiarmid and A. J. Epstein, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1989, 88, 317–332 RSC .
C. Gong, J. Yang, L. Cao and Y. Gao, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 521–532 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei and C. F. J. Faul, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 280–292 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Z. Chi, Y. Wei and J. Xu, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 840–841 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, F. Li, Y. Yan, X. Liu, C. Wang and D. Chao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 2321–2330 CrossRef CAS .
C. U. Udeh, N. Fey and C. F. J. Faul, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18137 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Jia, Y. Zhou and D. Chao, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2018, 12, 649–657 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Liu, X. Jia and D. Chao, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 111, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shao, Z. Yu, J. Hu, S. Chandrasekaran, D. M. Lindsay, Z. Wei and C. F. J. Faul, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16230 RSC .
C. G. Hardy, M. S. Islam, D. Gonzalez-Delozier, J. E. Morgan, B. Cash, B. C. Benicewicz, H. J. Ploehn and C. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 799–807 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S.-M. Jeong and J.-W. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5206–5209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Hardy, D. J. Mouser, N. Arroyo-Currás, S. Geissler, J. K. Chow, L. Nguy, J. M. Kim and C. E. Schmidt, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 6809–6822 RSC .
H. B. Yildiz, R. Tel-Vered and I. Willner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3497–3505 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Cui, X. Zhuang, Y. Wei and X. Chen, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 5074–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, R. Dong, J. Ge, B. Guo and P. X. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28273–28285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gharibi, H. Yeganeh, H. Gholami and Z. M. Hassan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 62046–62060 CAS .
A. C. da Silva and S. I. Córdoba de Torresi, Front. Mater., 2019, 6, 1–9 CrossRef .
P. Zarrintaj, B. Bakhshandeh, M. R. Saeb, F. Sefat, I. Rezaeian, M. R. Ganjali, S. Ramakrishna and M. Mozafari, Acta Biomater., 2018, 72, 16–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Willstätter and C. W. Moore, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1907, 40, 2665–2689 CrossRef .
W. J. Zhang, J. Feng, A. G. MacDiarmid and A. J. Epstein, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 119–120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, C. Yang, G. Wei and G. Feng, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 289–291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Q. Yang, B. Liu, L. Liu, M. Wang and C. Xiong, Synth. Met., 2016, 220, 428–432 CrossRef CAS .
K. Basavaiah, K. T. Rao and A. V. P. Rao, E-J. Chem., 2012, 9, 1342–1346 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, D. Chao, H. Liu, E. B. Berda, S. Wang, X. Jia, C. Wang and R. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 93, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, I. Różalska and M. Kuryłek, New J. Chem., 2004, 28, 669–675 RSC .

          J. Honzl and M. Tlusťáková, in Journal of Polymer Science Part C: Polymer Symposia, Wiley Online Library,  1968, vol. 22, pp. 451–462 Search PubMed .
W. Wang and A. G. MacDiarmid, Synth. Met., 2002, 129, 199–205 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rebourt, J. A. Joule and A. P. Monkman, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 65–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Sadighi, R. A. Singer and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 4960–4976 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Lu, F. Wudl, M. Nowak and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 8311–8313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ochi, H. Furusho and J. Tanaka, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1994, 67, 1749–1752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, K. Li, W. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Wu, Y. Ji, Y. Zhou, M. Shibata and R. Yosomiya, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1999, 20, 560–563 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stejskal, I. Sapurina, M. Trchová and E. N. Konyushenko, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3530–3536 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Surwade, V. Dua, N. Manohar, S. K. Manohar, E. Beck and J. P. Ferraris, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 445–455 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Venancio, P. Wang and A. G. MacDiarmid, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 357–369 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Ferreira, J. R. Pires and M. L. A. Temperini, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 1368–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto and D. Taneichi, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2000, 201, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Serrano-Luginbühl, R. Kissner, M. Milojević-Rakić, D. Bajuk-Bogdanović, G. Ćirić-Marjanović, Q. Wang and P. Walde, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 9153–9166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luginbühl, M. Milojević-Rakić, K. Junker, D. Bajuk-Bogdanović, I. Pašti, R. Kissner, G. Ćirić-Marjanović and P. Walde, Synth. Met., 2017, 226, 89–103 CrossRef .
R. A. Singer, J. P. Sadighi and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 213–214 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tour, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 537–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Struijk and R. A. J. Janssen, Synth. Met., 1999, 103, 2287–2290 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shao, P. Rannou, S. Sadki, N. Fey, D. M. Lindsay and C. F. J. Faul, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 12512–12521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. MacDiarmid and A. J. Epstein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2581–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. G. Kanatzidis, Conductive polymers, in Chemical and Engineering News,  1990, vol. 68, 49 Search PubMed.
R. Soc and G. Britain, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1985, 314, 3–15 CrossRef .
S.-A. Chen and H.-T. Lee, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 2858–2866 CrossRef CAS .
O. Melad and M. Jarur, Chem. Chem. Technol., 2016, 10, 41–44 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Jangid, Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Eng. Technol., 2019, 8, 3751–3772 Search PubMed .
G. Liao, Q. Li and Z. Xu, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 126, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. Canales, J. Torras, G. Fabregat, A. Meneguzzi and C. Alemán, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 11552–11562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Mills, Z. Shao, S. R. Flynn, P. Rannou, D. M. Lindsay, N. Fey and C. F. J. Faul, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2019, 4, 103–109 RSC .
J. N. Petrova, J. R. Romanova, G. K. Madjarova, A. N. Ivanova and A. V. Tadjer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 3765–3776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lin, R. L. Li, S. Robbennolt, M. T. Yeung, G. Akopov and R. B. Kaner, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 5892–5897 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brazovskii, N. Kirova, Z. G. Yu, A. R. Bishop and A. Saxena, Opt. Mater., 1998, 9, 502–506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. D. Tran, L. Liao, X. Duan and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10365–10373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Bell, G. Wu, J. S. Haataja, F. Brömmel, N. Fey, A. M. Seddon, R. L. Harniman, R. M. Richardson, O. Ikkala, X. Zhang and C. F. J. Faul, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14288–14294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Wei, L. Zhang and M. Wan, Acta Mater., 2005, 53, 1373–1379 CrossRef CAS .
K. Basavaiah and A. V. Prasada Rao, E-J. Chem., 2012, 9, 1175–1180 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, J. Feng, W. Yan and C. F. J. Faul, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4720–4725 RSC .
H. Zhao, T. Liu, C. Jiao and F. Yang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2021, 16, 1–13 Search PubMed .
S. Goel, N. A. Mazumdar and A. Gupta, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2010, 21, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, H. D. Tran, M. Mecklenburg, X. N. Guan, A. Z. Stieg, B. C. Regan, D. C. Martin and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9251–9262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, S. Pang, G. Xie, Z. Wang, H. Peng and Z. Zhang, Polymer, 2006, 47, 1456–1459 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Long, Z. Chen and M. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 693–698 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kashyap, K. Meghwal, C. Ameta, R. Ameta and P. B. Punjabi, Polym. Bull., 2019, 76, 2439–2451 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fang, F. Sun, J. Tang, Q. Zhao, J. Chen, X. Lei, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zuo, J. Li and Y. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2021, 42, 2100125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Yang, T.-L. Wang and Y.-T. Shieh, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 335–338 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoo, J. Cho, J. W. Lim, S. H. Park, J. Jang and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 164–167 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Yang, L.-R. Huang, Y.-K. Chih, W.-C. Lin, F.-J. Liu and T.-L. Wang, Polymer, 2007, 48, 3237–3247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Casanovas, M. Canales, C. A. Ferreira and C. Alemán, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 8795–8800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Vaschetto and B. A. Retamal, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 6945–6950 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cai, M. A. Cabassi, H. Yoon, O. M. Cabarcos, C. L. McGuiness, A. K. Flatt, D. L. Allara, J. M. Tour and T. S. Mayer, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2365–2372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Flatt and J. M. Tour, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 6699–6702 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, C. Nuckolls and S. Lindsay, Chem. Phys., 2006, 324, 236–243 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moghari, S. H. Jafari, M. K. Yazdi, M. Jouyandeh, A. Hejna, P. Zarrintaj and M. R. Saeb, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 3078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manouchehri, B. Bagheri, S. H. Rad, M. N. Nezhad, Y. C. Kim, O. O. Park, M. Farokhi, M. Jouyandeh, M. R. Ganjali, M. K. Yazdi, P. Zarrintaj and M. R. Saeb, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 131, 389–396 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lyu, M. Alotaibi, O. A. Bell, K. Watanabe, R. Harniman, B. M. Mills, A. M. Seddon, S. E. Rogers, S. M. King, W. Yan and C. F. J. Faul, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4392–4401 RSC .
L.-T. Huang, H.-J. Yen and G.-S. Liou, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9595–9610 CrossRef CAS .
L.-T. T. Huang, H.-J. J. Yen, J.-H. H. Wu and G.-S. S. Liou, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 840–849 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, K. Wang, B. Liu, M. Wang, M. Huang, Y. Zhang and J. Yang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 331–338 RSC .
C.-W. W. Lin, S. Aguilar, E. Rao, W. H. Mak, X. Huang, N. He, D. Chen, D. Jun, P. A. Curson, B. T. McVerry, E. M. V. Hoek, S. C. Huang and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4445–4457 RSC .
L. Y. Wang, C.-C. Chu and J. Shiea, Synth. Met., 2001, 119, 97–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lehmann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 3638–3651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jahandideh and K. Muthukumarappan, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 87, 360–379 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, J. Fan, H. Lu, M. Huang, X. Qiao and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 7844–7852 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 4492–4501 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thota, K. Boga, R. Narayan, S. Bojja and C. R. K. Rao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 11066–11078 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Mills, N. Fey, T. Marszalek, W. Pisula, P. Rannou and C. F. J. Faul, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 16950–16956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, C. Gong and J. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 422–430 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, C. Gong and J. Yang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 343–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Anantharaj, L. Y. Wang, T. Canteenwala and L. Y. Chiang, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1999, 3357–3366 RSC .
T. Canteenwala, V. Anantharaj, S. Patil, M. Halder and L. Chiang, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 39, 1069–1083 CrossRef .
B. Guo, A. Finne-Wistrand and A.-C. Albertsson, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 855–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, L. Wang, B. Guo, Z. Wang, Y. E. Chen and P. X. Ma, Biomaterials, 2015, 71, 158–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, L. Wang, J. Ge, B. Guo and P. X. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6772–6781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Han and C.-Y. Pan, Polymer, 2006, 47, 6956–6962 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Han, L.-P. Yang, X.-F. Zhang and C.-Y. Pan, Eur. Polym. J., 2007, 43, 3873–3881 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo, A. Finne-Wistrand and A.-C. Albertsson, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4472–4480 CrossRef CAS .
T. Canteenwala, S. V. Patil, M. Haldar, P. A. Padmawar, S. Verma and L. Y. Chiang, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2003, 40, 1263–1273 CrossRef .
L. Wang, C.-C. Chu, C.-F. Yeh, T.-I. Ho and S.-P. Rwei, Synth. Met., 2003, 135–136, 111–112 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, S. Cho, H. P. Sung, A. J. Heeger, C. W. Lee and S. H. Lee, Nature, 2006, 441, 65–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, J. Li, X. Li, S. Qiu, Y. Ye, F. Yang and H. Zhao, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 128, 137–147 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Melikova, A. P. Voronin, J. Panek, N. E. Frolov, A. V. Shishkina, A. A. Rykounov, P. Y. Tretyakov and M. V. Vener, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 27899–27910 RSC .
F. Paquin, J. Rivnay, A. Salleo, N. Stingelin and C. Silva, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10715–10722 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. A. Torres, A. Z. Stieg, S. Jiang, M. T. Yeung, Y. Rubin, S. Chaudhuri, X. Duan and R. B. Kaner, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9486–9496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, X. Du, L. Bai, L. Zhang and F. Meng, Liq. Cryst., 2017, 44, 1259–1268 CrossRef CAS .
R. Arukula, A. Thota, K. Boga, R. Narayan and C. R. K. Rao, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2018, 29, 1620–1631 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, N. Sun, X. Jia, X. Liu, C. Wang and D. Chao, Polymer, 2018, 134, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, T. Kim, J. Huh, M. Kang, J. E. Lee, H. Yoon and P. E. T. Al, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7624–7633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, E. B. Berda, Q. Ma, X. Liu, C. Wang and D. Chao, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5293–5300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, L. Yang, M. Cui, X. Wang, K. J. Chee, V. C. Nguyen, V. Kumar, A. Sumboja, M. Wang and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400781 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Long, J. L. Duvail, M. M. Li, C. Gu, Z. Liu and S. P. Ringer, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 237–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Vivekanandan, V. Ponnusamy, A. Mahudeswaran and P. S. Vijayanand, Arch. Appl. Sci. Res., 2011, 3, 147–153 CAS .
T. Thanpitcha, A. Sirivat, A. M. Jamieson and R. Rujiravanit, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 3423–3429 CrossRef CAS .
T. Siva, T. Bharathidasan and S. Sathiyanarayanan, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 23, 100812 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ciucci, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 13, 132–139 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. D. Tran, J. Liu, D. C. Martin and R. B. Kaner, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2011, 1402, 48–53 Search PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides, J. P. Mathias, C. T. Seto, G. M. Whrtesides, J. P. Mathias and C. T. Seto, Science, 1991, 254, 1312–1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhadra, D. Khastgir, N. K. Singha and J. H. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 783–810 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, T. Laitinen, B. Smarsly, O. Ikkala and C. F. J. Faul, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 761–766 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, Y. Ren, J. Han, X. Gong, Z. Wei, J. Xie and R. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9417–9425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bao, C. Mingxin, G. Liu, X. Jin and Q. Huang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2018, 93, 1147–1158 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, J. Dai, L. Liu, J. Wang, P. Wang, Y. Li, D. Zhou and Y. Han, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 16766–16773 RSC .
Q. Chen, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 2139–2142 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gospodinova, E. Tomšík and O. Omelchenko, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 8901–8904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, H. Wang and Y. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1886–1891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, E. Tomšík, J. Wang, Z. Morávková, A. Zhigunov, J. Stejskal and M. Trchová, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 129–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. F. S. dos Santos and M. L. A. Temperini, Eur. Polym. J., 2020, 122, 109345 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Townsend, M. Alotaibi, B. M. Mills, K. Watanabe, A. M. Seddon and C. F. J. Faul, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 741–752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Ohmura, T. Moriuchi and T. Hirao, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 7909–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Long, M.-M. Li, C. Gu, M. Wan, J.-L. Duvail, Z. Liu and Z. Fan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1415–1442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, E. B. Berda, X. Jia, Z. Lu, M. Zhu and D. Chao, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 3024–3033 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yimeng and C. Danming, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2020, 15, 9245–9255 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Zhou and D. Chao, Macromol. Res., 2020, 28, 721–726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Jia, M. Zhu, X. Liu and D. Chao, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 8138–8147 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Jia, E. B. Berda, J. Zhao, X. Liu and D. Chao, Eur. Polym. J., 2020, 138, 109979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Jia and D. Chao, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 106, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Jia and D. Chao, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 823, 672–677 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Xie, M. Zhou, E. B. Berda and D. Chao, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 194, 109594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, N. Sun, F. Li, X. Jia, C. Wang and D. Chao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6497–6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, S. Wang, R. Yang, E. B. Berda and C. Wang, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 291, 2631–2637 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, X. Jia, Y. Li, X. Liu, C. Wang and D. Chao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 3968–3972 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Jia, E. B. Berda, C. Wang and D. Chao, Mater. Today Chem., 2021, 21, 100497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Jia, X. Liu, C. Wang and D. Chao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2018, 56, 412–419 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, T. Zheng, H. Liu, R. Yang, X. Jia, S. Wang, E. B. Berda and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 60, 253–258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, E. B. Berda, X. Lu, X. Li, C. Wang and D. Chao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1648–1653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, J. Yang, C. Gong and H. Lu, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 196, 43–54 RSC .
D. Chao, Y. Yang, X. Jia and E. B. Berda, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 167, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, K. Wang, H. Lu, M. Huang and J. Yang, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 11816–11820 RSC .
B. Liu, W. He, H. Lu, K. Wang, M. Huang, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Gao, J. Yang and B. Tang, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, X. Jia, M. Feng, C. Wang and D. Chao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 1669–1673 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Shimano and A. G. MacDiarmid, Synth. Met., 2001, 123, 251–262 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, K. Wang, H. Lu, M. Huang, Z. Shen and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 41424–41429 RSC .
Y. Gu, J. Wang, H. Shi, M. Pan, B. Liu, G. Fang and S. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 128, 129–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Riskin, R. Tel-Vered, T. Bourenko, E. Granot and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9726–9733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Trchová and J. Stejskal, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1479–1486 CrossRef .
D. Chao, L. Cui, J. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Li, W. Zhang and C. Wang, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 537–540 CrossRef CAS .
C. Querner, P. Reiss, M. Zagorska, O. Renault, R. Payerne, F. Genoud, P. Rannou and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 554 RSC .
Y. Zhou, X. Liu, X. Jia and D. Chao, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 3829–3854 RSC .
Y. Ye, D. Zhang, Z. Liu, W. Liu, H. Zhao, L. Wang and X. Li, Synth. Met., 2018, 235, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, A. Mylonakis, Z. Zhang, P. I. Lelkes, K. Levon, S. Li, Q. Feng and Y. Wei, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 2721–2729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, Z. Liu, W. Liu, D. Zhang, H. Zhao, L. Wang and X. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 940–951 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, J. Zhao and C. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6467–6474 RSC .
S. M. Botsa, Y. P. Kumar and K. Basavaiah, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 22043–22053 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Yu, M. F. El-Kady, M. Anderson, M. D. Kowal, M. Li and R. B. Kaner, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 137–147 CrossRef .
L. Q. Xu, Y. L. Liu, K.-G. Neoh, E. Kang and G. D. Fu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 684–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Fan, J. Shen, K. Zhang, L. Yang and W. Zhang, Synth. Met., 2018, 243, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ghosh, U. Basak, P. Bairi, R. Ghosh, M. Pakhira, R. Ball, B. Biswas and D. P. Chatterjee, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1693–1705 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, B. Chao, Z. Zhao and D. Nan, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7, 125601 CrossRef CAS .
E. Szaniawska, I. A. Rutkowska, M. Frik, A. Wadas, E. Seta, A. Krogul-Sobczak, K. Rajeshwar and P. J. Kulesza, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 400–410 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hoque, T. Chowdhury and P. Kruse, Surf. Sci., 2018, 676, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bibi, S. C. Hsu, W. F. Ji, Y. C. Cho, K. S. Santiago and J. M. Yeh, Polymer, 2021, 13, 1–17 Search PubMed .
M. Massetti, F. Jiao, A. J. Ferguson, D. Zhao, K. Wijeratne, A. Würger, J. L. Blackburn, X. Crispin, S. Fabiano, A. Wu, L. Blackburn, X. Crispin, S. Fabiano, A. Würger, J. L. Blackburn, X. Crispin and S. Fabiano, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 12465–12547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, J. Liang, G. Liu, W. Ni and L. Shen, Coatings, 2019, 9, 399 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 6843–6857 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Malav, R. Rathod, S. Umare and D. Vidyasagar, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 095309 CrossRef .
G. P. Lokhande and R. N. Jagtap, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2018, 15, 1293–1309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, D. Yang, D. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Zhao, X. Li and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123160 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Shi, Y. Cui, K. Pan, W. Wei and X. Liu, Prog. Org. Coat., 2020, 149, 105928 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Ye, J. Li, F. Yang, H. Zhao and L. Wang, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 132, 455–467 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bagheri, P. Zarrintaj, S. S. Surwase, N. Baheiraei, M. R. Saeb, M. Mozafari, Y. C. Kim and O. O. Park, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 184, 110549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Matsumura, A. R. Hlil, C. Lepiller, J. Gaudet, D. Guay, Z. Shi, S. Holdcroft and A. S. Hay, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 7207–7224 CrossRef .
B. Bagheri, P. Zarrintaj, A. Samadi, R. Zarrintaj, M. R. Ganjali, M. R. Saeb, M. Mozafari, O. O. Park and Y. C. Kim, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 147, 160–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, J. Qu, X. Zhao and M. Zhang, Acta Biomater., 2019, 84, 180–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Alizadeh, P. Zarrintaj, S. K. Kamrava, Z. Bagher, M. Farhadi, F. Heidari, A. Komeili, T. J. Gutiérrez and M. R. Saeb, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 224, 115161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Hardy, M. N. Amend, S. Geissler, V. M. Lynch and C. E. Schmidt, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 5005–5009 RSC .
A. Prasopthum, Z. Deng, I. M. Khan, Z. Yin, B. Guo and J. Yang, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 4287–4298 RSC .
Q. Chen, X. Yu, Z. Pei, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 724–733 RSC .
Z. Feng, J. Hu, H. Zuo, N. Ning, L. Zhang, B. Yu and M. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 1469–1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, S. Wang, C. Lu, Y. Ren, Z. Liu, D. Ding, Z. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Chen and Q. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 21768–21778 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, Z. Pei, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 623–628 RSC .
J. M. García, G. O. Jones, K. Virwani, B. D. McCloskey, D. J. Boday, G. M. ter Huurne, H. W. Horn, D. J. Coady, A. M. Bintaleb, A. M. S. Alabdulrahman, F. Alsewailem, H. A. A. Almegren and J. L. Hedrick, Science, 2014, 344, 732–735 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liang, J. Claude, K. Xu and Q. Wang, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6265–6268 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ellingford, A. Pengchaicharoen, A. M. Wemyss and C. Wan, J. Compos. Sci., 2020, 4, 25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, J.-W. Wang, L. Wei, S.-Q. Wu, Y.-H. Yang and H. Ren, Composites, Part B, 2019, 176, 107216 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. Li, X. Li and P. Liu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2021, 424, 127626 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Q. Wang, D. Wang, X. Kang and J. Niu, Polymer, 2021, 215, 123350 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thota, Q. Wang, P. Liu and Z. Jian, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 368, 137587 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, S. Liu, H. Zhao and H. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17641–17648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Ramos, S. C. J. Meskers, P. A. van Hal, J. Knol, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, R. Marcos, M. Alicia, C. J. Stefan and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 9269–9283 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hirayama, K. Takimiya, Y. Aso, T. Otsubo, T. Hasobe, H. Yamada, H. Imahori, S. Fukuzumi and Y. Sakata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 532–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, H. Zhao, J. Li, D. Zhang, W. Zheng and L. Wang, Corros. Sci., 2020, 168, 108555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Zhu, W. Lyu, H. Xu, J. Feng and W. Yan, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2018, 296, 1777–1786 CrossRef CAS .
G. Venkatesan, Y. Dancik, A. Sinha, M. Bigliardi, R. Srinivas, T. Dawson, S. Valiyaveettil, P. Bigliardi and G. Pastorin, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 16188–16199 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Polyacetylene (PA) (C2H2)n	

	No commercial applications reported due to its unstable nature	High electrical conductivity (trans-PA > cis-PA), highly crystalline, poor solubility, environmental instability, high thermal stability	Undoped: 10−9–10−5; doped: 10–105; 23000–28000	
11 and 14–16
Poly(carbazole) (C12H9N)n	

	Electrochromic display devices, batteries, sensors electroluminescence devices	Electroluminescent	Doped 10−5; 10−3–10−4; 103	
17–20

Polypyrrole (PPy) (C4H2NH)n	

	Batteries, supercapacitors, electrochemical biosensors, conductive textiles and fabrics, mechanical actuators, drug delivery systems	Water-soluble, high electrical conductivity, convenient preparation, extremely reactive in their neutral state	Doped: 0.8–340	
11, 14, 17 and 21–23
Polythiophene (PTh) (C4H2S)n	

	Charge dissipation coatings in electron-beam lithography, transistors, solar cells, electrochromic devices	Good environmental and thermal stability, high electrical conductivity convenient preparation solvate-chrome	Undoped 10−4; doped: 2–466 102–105	
11, 14, 17 and 24–26
Poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) (C8H6)n	

	Electroluminescent devices: LEDs, photovoltaic devices	Low electrical conductivity, highly crystalline, environmental stable, mechanically strong electroluminescence	Undoped: 10−13–10−9; doped: 10−6	
11, 14, 17, 27 and 28
Poly(p-phenylene) (PPP) (C6H4)n	

	Electroactive cathode and anode materials in rechargeable batteries	Highly crystalline, high electrical conductivity, reversible electrochemical doping, ionic mobility, insoluble, structural integrity, and high voltage	Undoped 10−12; doped: 102	
11, 14 and 29
Polyaniline (PANI) (C6H4NH)n	

	Biosensors, antioxidants, drug delivery, bioactuators, food industry ammonia sensing, heavy metal removal, cardiovascular application	Controllable electrical conductivity, environmental stability, semi flexible, high electrical conductivity, thermal and radiation stability, reversible electrochemical doping	Undoped 10−10; doped: 101–102	
14, 17, 26 and 30–36

 	Fig. 1  The parent linear structures of oligoaniline (TANI): (a) phenyl/amine-capped, (b) amine-capped, and (c) phenyl-capped aniline tetramers, in the Leucoemeraldine base state.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of typical examples of different employed methodologies in parent linear oligoaniline syntheses.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of enzymatic synthesis in the vicinity of AOT vesicles (left) and proposed mechanism for enzymatic synthesis of oligoanilines in emeraldine salt form (right).	 

 	Fig. 4  The linear tetraaniline at various oxidation and doping states.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of (a) the functionalized Ph-capped tetramer, (b) substituted tetraaniline in meta (or ortho position of phenyl), (c) dithioacetate aniline dimer, (d) COOH/NHS-capped tetraaniline, (e) cationic amphiphilic aniline oligomer, and (f) 4-methoxy phenyl substituted oligoaniline on electron-active nitrogen, (g) diphenyl enamine (and nitro)-substituted oligoaniline, (h) perfluorophenylazid-capped tetraaniline in the LEB states.	 

 	Fig. 6  The syntheses of linear (I, III) and star-shaped (IV, V) meta–para oligoanilines.	 

 	Fig. 7  The synthesis of (a) three-arm star-shaped dianiline (n = 1) and tetraaniline (n = 3) oligomers, (b) star-shaped oligoaniline TDPB in its fully reduced state, using the Buchwald–Hartwig reaction.	 

 	Fig. 8  The syntheses of (a) linear carboxyl-capped tetraaniline (LEB (ANI)4-COOH), (b) linear amino/carboxyl-capped tetraaniline (LEB NH2-(ANI)4-COOH), (c) carboxyl-capped para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH, meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH and the star-shaped tetraaniline (Tri-(ANI)4-COOH) in the LEB state, and (d) synthesis of a star-shaped rod-coil block copolymer (Tri (ANI)4-b-PEG). N,N‘-Dimethyl acetamide (DMAc) 1-ethyl3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDCI).	 

 	Fig. 9  Syntheses of (a) linear tetra and hexamer aniline, (b) starburst oligoaniline-C60, using a thermal approach, (c) starburst oligoaniline-(ethylated-C60), using the irradiation approach (d) bis[penta (oligoanilino)]-C60 bis(2-aminopropyl)-poly(dimethylsiloxane).	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of (a) core–shell morphology, (b) palm-tree structure for fullerene derivative, and (c) starburst fullerene linked tetraaniline-terminated poly (urethane urea).	 

 	Fig. 11  The synthesis of the star-shaped polystyrene-b-tetraaniline.	 

 	Fig. 12  The syntheses of carboxyl-capped aniline trimer (CCAT), the star-shaped and hyperbranched poly(L-lactide)-based copolymers: PLA-AT, HPLA, HPLAAT, SMP, and ESMP.	 

 	Fig. 13  The syntheses of the linear and hyperbranched copolymers of PCLs and CCAP.	 

1	Copolymers of carboxyl-capped aniline pentamer and PCL	Tissue engineering	
σ
RT (S cm−1): 2.42 × 10−5–8.02 × 10−6; UV-vis: (330, 530–610 nm); CV: 0.26, 0.42, and 0.65 V	Hydrophilic nature (water contact angles for doped copolymers: 30°), good biodegradability, high thermal stability (I: 200–400, II: 450–800 °C)	
144

2	Copolymers of aniline tetramer and PLA	Tissue engineering	UV-vis: (320, 580 nm), (303, 436 nm) and 799 nm; CV: 0.37 and 0.6 V	Good ductility, high thermal stability (I: 250–320, II: 320–330 °C), high mechanical properties (strain: 158.9–42.7%, and modulus: 256.2–758.2 MPa), good degradability	
140

3	Copolymers of carboxyl-capped aniline trimer and PLA	Tissue engineering	UV-vis: undoped ACAT (340, 520 nm), CCAT (330, 590 nm); doped copolymer: (415, 638, and 818 nm); CV: ACAT (0.54, 0.7 V); copolymer (0.42, 0.60 V)	Thermal stability (I: 320–360, II: 360–600 °C), hydrophilicity (water contact angles for doped copolymers 54–63°), biodegradable	
139

4	Copolymers of amino-capped aniline trimer and six-armed PLA	Tissue engineering	CV: (0.37, 0.6 V)	Shape memory properties, mechanical properties (stress: 49.3 MPa, modulus: 2.0 GPa, strain: 3.6%), biocompatibility (water contact angles: 72°), tunable degradability	
141

5	Star-shaped tetraaniline (Tri-(Ani)4-COOH)	Electrochromic devices	UV-vis: (324, 580 nm); CV: (0.2–0.4, 0.76–0.87 V)	Electrochromic properties: optical contrast (Δt): 47.4–79.2%, switching-time 2.04, 1.9 s, coloration efficiency 133 cm2 C−1	
135

6	Self-doped Star-shaped tetraaniline (Tri-(Ani)4-COOH)	Electrochromic devices	UV-vis: (330, 430 nm); CV: (0.2–0.4, 0.76–0.87 V)	Optical contrast (Δtmax): 32.2% (linear oligomer 21.8%), switching time: 13.7, 5.8 s; coloration efficiency: 149.2 cm2 C−1 (linear oligomer 48.2 cm2 C−1), intrinsic resistance (RS 124.0, RCT: 2471, RP: 60.89 Ω)	
47

7	Tetraaniline-co-polyethyleneglycol (TANI-b-PEG)3	Electrochromic devices	UV-vis: 317 nm; CV: 0.480 and 0.574 V	Optical contrast (Δtmax): (73.3%); switching time: 2.11, 2.14 s; coloration efficiency: 318.5 cm2 C−1	
136

8	Hexa(hexadecaanilino)-[60]fullerenes	Photo-induced materials	UV-vis: (248, 289–317, 578–586 nm); fluorescence spectroscopy: (C60) 350 nm and (oligoaniline) 415 nm	Thermal stability: T50 > 500 °C	
137

9	Linear and branched meta–para aniline oligomers	Ferromagnetic polymers	UV-vis-NIR: (1.44, 3.02, 3.98 eV); CV: 0.42, 0.68, 1.15, and 1.31 V	EPR:3360 G with high-spin multiplicities, good chemical stability, intramolecular ferromagnetic spin–spin interaction; EPR	
132

10	1,3,5-Tris(4-dianilinophenyl)-benzene (TDPB)	Organic electronics-sensors	UV-vis-NIR: (330–340, 469 nm) undoped air oxidized-state (397, 778 nm) doped	EPR:3370 G (open shell) for doped, liquid-crystalline behavior for the doped star-shaped oligomer (0.36 nm π-stacking distance)	
134

11	Triblock-co-oligomers: bis[penta(oligoanilino)]-[60]fullerene-poly(dimethylsiloxane)	Not reported	—	Core–shell geometry	
145

12	Starburst fullerene-linked tetraaniline-terminated poly(urethane urea)	Not reported	—	Core–shell geometry	
146

13	Hexa(tetraanilino)-[60]fullerene and hexa(hexadecaanilino)-[60]fullerene	Not reported	UV-vis: (320, 581 nm) EB (320, 517 nm) fully oxidized	Multiple electron transfer capability	
138

14	PSt-b-tetraaniline	Not reported	CV: 0.42 and 0.64 V	Core–shell morphology (oligoaniline-coated spherical polystyrene)	
142

15	3-Armed star oligoanilines	Not reported	—	Monodisperse molecular weight	
128


 	Fig. 14  Crystallographic characteristics of the TANI (parent phenyl-capped) plates: (a) and (b) top-view and side-view (respectively) electron diffraction patterns of the vertical plates (with corresponding images shown in inset) transferred to a TEM grid, (c) powder XRD pattern of the crystal arrays, (d) molecular structure of TANI, (e) proposed packing arrangement for the TANI crystals obtained from SAED data (the back layer of molecules along the a-axis is represented in a different shade of color for clarity), and schematic illustration of the (f) face-on stacking and (g) edge-on stacking arrangements in relation to the nature of the infiltrating solvent and the final crystal orientation. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  2D and 3D height contrast AFM images of (a) and (b) NH2/COOH-capped TANI; (c) and (d) para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; (e) and (f) meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; and (g) and (h) star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-COOH films after CV cycles by EQCM. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 16  Doping states of TANI can be distinguished visually. (a) Photo showing emeraldine base TANI dispersed in different solvents in terms of increasing dielectric constant (left to right). (b) Photo of TANI in ethanol at doping levels of 0, 12.5, 25.0, 50.0, and 100%. The absorbance versus (c) wavelength and (d) energy from (b) indicating the formation of bipolarons (up arrows) upon doping. (e) The absorbances at both 434.5 and 1164.0 nm show a linear relationship with the doping level, confirming the presence of doubly doped and undoped TANI. (f) Energy level diagram for the bipolaron state showing the allowed optical transitions responsible for the two absorption peaks, ω1 and ω2. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  p-Doping: the anodically electrochromic behavior at applied potentials of (a) 0.00, (b) 0.70, (c) 1.05, (d) 1.40 (V vs. Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode), (e) 3D spectroelectrochemical behavior from 0.00 to 1.40 (V vs. Ag/AgCl) of TPA-DSDA-polyimide thin film (∼200 nm in thickness) on the ITO-coated glass substrate (coated area: 1.1 cm × 0.5 cm) in 0.1 M Tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP)/CH3CN. n-Doping: the cathodically electrochromic behavior (f) Optical spectra of TPA-DSDA based and (g) TPA-BPDA-based polyimide thin films (∼260 nm in thickness) on the ITO-coated glass substrate applied potentials versus Ag/AgCl. The insets show the p-doping and n-doping electrochromic photographic images of the films at indicated applied voltages. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 18  CV curves of (a) NH2/COOH-capped TANI-; (b) para-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; (c) meta-bi-(ANI)4-COOH; and (d) star-shaped Tri-(ANI)4-COOH films on FTO glass electrode in 1.0 mol L−1 HCl solution at the scan rate of 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, and 300 mV s−1, respectively. (e) Linear relationship between peak current density and the square root of the scan rate. Schematic illustration of (f) the self-assembly structure and (g) the ion transfer process of the star-shaped Tri-(ANI)4-COOH film. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 



Polysiloxane-OA-carbon dots	0.50/0.37	0.7	3.6	0–0.6	700	15	
	65.0	
156

Polysiloxane-OA cyanophenethylene	0.53/0.38, 0.18	—	—	0–0.8	700	15	52	90.0	
178

Polysiloxane-OA fluorescein	0.48/0.26	8.0	11.1	0–0.6	750	15	35	80.4	
179

Polysiloxane-OA-CNT	0.55/0.39	1.5	5.2	
	700	15	67	85.6	
180

Polysiloxane-OA-sulfanilic acid-Prussian blue	0.56/0.33, 0.39/0.09	6.6	3.2	0–0.6	700	15	50	92.7	
181

Polysiloxane-OA-viologen	−0.53/−0.57, −0.47/−0.50, 0.22/0.19, 0.34/0.30	2.2	2.8	−0.8–0	700	15	31	288	
182

10.4	12.1	550	16	101
Polysiloxane-OA-phenothiazine	0.89/0.32, 0.62/0.11	3.7	4.6	0–0.6	700	15	53	224	
182

1.7	8.8	520	25	217
Polysiloxane-OA-carbazole-POSS	0.65/0.25	7.8	10.2	0–0.8	700	15	49	80	
183

Polysiloxane-OA-fluorene	0.53/0.33	9.9	9.3	0–0.8	700	30	18	79	
184

Polyurea-OA-triphenylamine-	0.96/0.73, 1.36/1.11	2.8	2.2	0–1.0	1000	30	14	55.0	
154

Poly (urea-urethane)-OA-tetraphenylethylene	0.51/0.25	8.2	7.8	0–1.0	768	15	50.4	503	
185

9.6	9.8	489	34
Polyamic acid-OA-triphenylamine-fluorene	0.73/0.62, 1.08/0.82	6.0	1.8	0–0.8	420	30	70	20.0	
186

2.4	4.2	800	81.0
Polyamic acid-OA-fluorene	0.43/0.24, 0.57/0.45	4.8	4.5	−0.2–0.8	700	∼15	85	107.0	
187

Polyamic acid-OA-carbozole-POSS	0.61/0.33	4.1	2.9	0–0.8	800	30	
	82.9	
188

Polyamic acid-tetraphenylethylene-OA	0.51/0.33	1.9	11.6	0–1.0	730	15	—	140	
189

Poly urea-OA-o-toluidine	0.34/0.18, 0.52/0.43	8.1a	2.3a	−0.2–1.0	700	15	21	91.0	
190

11.7b	5.7b
Poly urea-OA-PEG	∼0.34/0.18, ∼0.52/0.43	7.1a	1.0a	−0.2–1.0	700	15	20	133.0	
190

10.2b	4.8b
Poly urea-OA-ethoxysilane	∼0.34/∼0.22c, ∼0.52/∼0.43	10.5a	2.7a	−0.2–1.0	700	15	25	67.0	
190

11.1b	4.5b
Poly urea-OA-Congo red	∼0.34/0.18, ∼0.52/0.43	5.5a	1.2a	−0.2–1.0	700	15	26	104.0	
190

13.5b	6.6b
Polyaryl ether-OA-azobenzene	0.50d/0.35	3.3	1.4	−0.2–0.8	700	30	25	107.4	
191

Polyimide-MPTAN (three methoxy phenyl groups)	0.6/0.42, 0.81/0.67, 1.31/0.93; cathodic: −0.98/0.92, −1.63/−1.23	5.09, 4.41	1.17, 1.27	0.0–0.70	1070, 1090	30	66	168.0, 171.0	
124

Polyamide-MPTAN (three methoxy phenyl groups)	0.45e, 0.71e, 1.04e	2.53f	4.07f	0–0.55	∼1070	60	83	167.0	
125

COOH-(ANI)4-COOH	∼0.8/0.1	17.0	—	−1.5–1.5	550	—	21.8	48.2	
47

COOH-(ANI)5-COOH	∼0.5/0, 0.9/0.5	7.9	4.7	−1.5–1.5	550	—	39.5	198.6	
47

COOH-(ANI)6-COOH	∼0.8/0.3	7.8	1.8	−1.5–1.5	550	—	46.7	190.7	
47

Star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-COOH	∼0.75/0.2	13.7	5.8	−1.5–1.5	550	—	32.2	149.2	
47

Ph-(ANI)4-NH2	0.86e	11.2	2.68	−0.2–0.8	750	15	47.4	30.5	
135

Ph-(ANI)4-COOH	0.86e	7.26	1.90	−0.2–0.8	750	15	79.2	97.8	
135

NH2-(ANI)4-COOH	0.87e	5.52	2.28	−0.2–0.8	750	15	65.1	73.0	
135

Star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-COOH	0.76e	2.04	1.90	−0.2–0.8	750	15	74.2	133.3	
135

Star-shaped tri-(ANI)4-PEG	0.57/0.48	2.11	2.14	−0.2–0.8	750	30	73	318.5	
136

NH2-(ANI)4-COOH	
	3.81	1.68	−0.2–0.6	750	10	58.2	81.1	
131


p-Bi-(ANI)4-COOH	
	3.08	2.48	−0.2–0.6	750	10	76.6	116.9	
131


m-Bi-(ANI)4-COOH	
	2.34	1.63	−0.2–0.6	750	10	77.8	168.3	
131

Tri-(ANI)4-COOH	
	1.82	1.45	−0.2–0.6	750	10	73.2	190.7	
131


 	Fig. 19  (a) Vapor-infiltration setup used for the experiments, (b) a graphene-coated SiO2/Si wafer before (top panel) and after (bottom panel) the crystallization of TANI, (c) polarized optical microscope image showing the SiO2/graphene interface where crystals only grow on the graphene-covered areas, (d) SEM image showing that the plate-shaped TANI crystals are oriented vertically on graphene, (e) DFTB modeling illustrates the electron density overlap between two TANI molecules and graphene leading to the preferred face-on orientation. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 20  Extensive control over the morphology of the tetraaniline crystals can be achieved by creating distinct self-assembly environments using different combinations of the doping acids, HCl, HNO3, HClO4, and H2SO4 (as indicated at the top) with eight different organic solvents (as indicated along the left side). The SEM images of the structures formed using these different dopants and organic solvents are shown here along with an aqueous control (a1–d1) shown at the top. Inset in d7 shows the cross-section of the porous sheet. Insets in a9, c9, and d9 are the corresponding TEM images illustrating the nanostructures’ hollow nature. Scale bars = 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a, b, f, g, h) FESEM and (I, j, k) TEM images of the twisted nanoribbons synthesized at 40% i-propanol of the mixed solvent. (c, d, e) Schematic diagrams show the torsional directions of twisted nanoribbons. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 22  Transmittance spectra of (a) PST electrode in 0.1 M LiClO4 ACN solution (b) and (c) PSVT electrode in 1.0 M KCl HCl solution ([H+] = 0.01 M) as cathodic and anodic electrode, and (d) PSPT electrode in 0.1 M LiClO4 ACN solution at different potentials. The residence time is 300 s. Insets show the color change images of PST, PSVT, and PSPT. Transmittance changes (first 100 cycles) and switching times of PSPT film monitored at (e) 520 nm with repeated potentials at 0 V and 1.2 V, (f) 700 nm with repeated potentials at 0 V and 0.6 V, (g) CV curves of PSVT in 1.0 M KCl aqueous solution and 1.0 M KCl HCl solution ([H+] = 0.01 M) at a sweep speed of 50 mV s−1, (h) CV curves of PSPT, PST, and PSP in ACN with 0.1 M LiClO4 at a sweep speed of 100 mV s−1, (i) EIS of PSVT in 1.0 M KCl HCl solution ([H+] = 0.01 M) and PSPT in ACN with 0.1 M LiClO4. The inset shows the equivalent circuit model. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Fluorescence emission of PEBA under diverse potentials from 0.0 to 1.0 V. (b) Electrofluorochromic stability of PEBA film monitored at 486 nm under the alternating potentials of 0.0 and 1.0 V. (c) Magnified electrofluorochromic switching cycles and switching times of PEBA/ITO electrode. (d) The optical images of electrochromic/electrofluorochromic dual-mode device. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Images of (a) 3D printed biodegradable conductive PCL scaffold with 5% TA content, (b) SEM images show strut surface and cross-section, (c) the 3D reconstructed image from micro CT shows well-defined interconnected macropores, (d) the representative SEM images showed the cell adhesion on the scaffold struts with 0%, 2.5% and 5% TA at day 28, (e) the representative brightfield-merged confocal fluorescent microscope images showed cross-sections of chondroprogenitor cell-seeded 3D printed PCL scaffolds. Reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 25  Shape memory properties: (A and B) photos of the shape recovery performance for ACAT-vitrimer by heat and by NIR irradiation; (C) quantitative shape-memory curves of ACAT-vitrimer obtained by DMA. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 26  The synthesis and characterization of the evaporator. (a) The synthesis of the polymer, (b) SEM images of the foam evaporator, under low and high magnification, (c) photographs of a cylindrical evaporator (d ¼ 10 mm and h ¼ 10 mm) supporting a weight of 500 g (the weight of the cylinder is about 25 mg), (d) compressive stress–strain curves of the foam, (e) the optical image of the foam evaporator, self-floating at the air–water interface, (f) the water-wetting performance of the foam evaporator. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 
AIE	Aggregation-induced emission
ACQ	Aggregation-caused quenching
ACAT	Amine-capped aniline trimer
APS	Ammonium persolfate
ANI	Aniline
TANI	Aniline tetramer
AT	Aniline trimer
AFM	Atomic force microscope
BPDA	3,3′,4,4′-Biphenyltetracarboxylic diandydride

t
b
	Bleaching times
CSA	Camphor sulfonic acid
CD	Carbon dot
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CCAP	Carboxyl-capped aniline pentamer
CCAT	Carboxyl-capped aniline trimer

t
c
	Coloring time
CE	Coloration efficiency
CP	Conductive polymer
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
DSDA	3,3′,4,4′-Diphenylsulfonetetracarboxylic dianhydride
DMF	Dimethylformamide
ESMP	Electroactive shape memory polymer
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EB	Emeraldine base
ES	Emeraldine-salt form
FET	Field effect transistors
C60	Fullerene

T
g
	Glass transition temperature
GO	Graphene oxide
HHDAF	Hexa(hexadecaanilino)-[60]fullerene
HDI	Hexamethylenediisocyanate
HCl	Hydrochloric acid
HPLAAT	Hyperbranched copolymer of lactide and aniline tetramer
HPLA	Hyperbranched poly lactic acid
LEB	Leucoemeraldine base
LEDs	Light emitting diodes

T
m
	Melting temperature

M
w
	Molecular weight
NP	Nanoparticle

M
n
	Number average molecular weight
Δt	Optical contrasts
OA	Oligoaniline
PNB	Pernigraniline base
PLLAs	Poly(L-lactides)
PPV	Poly(p-phenylene vinylene)
PPP	Poly(p-phenylene)
PCLs	Poly(ε-caprolactone)s
PA	Polyacetylene
PANI	Polyaniline
PDI	Polydispersity index
PEG	Polyethylene glycol
PF	Polyfluorene
POSS	Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane
PPy	Polypyrrole
PTh	Polythiophene
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
SMP	Shape-memory polymer
Tri-(ANI)4-COOH	Star-shaped tetraaniline
SA	Succinic anhydride
H2SO4	Sulfuric acid
BOC	
tert-Butyl carbamate
TANI	Tetraaniline
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TPA	Triphenylamine
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
