Toward all aerosol printing of high-efficiency organic solar cells using environmentally friendly solvents in ambient air   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02890A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02890A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17198-17210Toward all aerosol printing of high-efficiency organic solar cells using environmentally friendly solvents in ambient air†

        
          
            Ping 
            Yang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Tianqi 
            Zhai‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Boyang 
            Yu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Gengxin 
            Du
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Baoxiu 
            Mi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xinyan 
            Zhao
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Weiwei 
            Deng
          
        
      *b
aInstitute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Key Laboratory for Organic Electronics & Information Displays (KLOEID), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications (NUPT), Nanjing 210023, China. E-mail: iambxmi@njupt.edu.cn
bDepartment of Mechanics and Aerospace Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: dengww@sustech.edu.cn
cAcademy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: zhaoxy@sustech.edu.cn
Received 
      7th April 2021
    , Accepted 28th May 2021First published on 28th May 2021AbstractWith the surge of the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic solar cells (OSCs) in recent years, the commercialization of OSCs calls for scalable and environmentally friendly manufacturing techniques. Aerosol printing is a non-contact material deposition method that is compatible with flexible or curved substrates for scaled-up OSC fabrication. Here, by introducing vibrating mesh atomization (VMA) with specific engineering, we demonstrate the first attempt of fabricating OSCs by aerosol printing with the state-of-the-art OSC material of PTQ10:Y6-BO with an environmentally friendly solvent of o-xylene in ambient air. The inks of functional organic materials are converted by VMA into tiny aerosol droplets of ∼5 micrometers, which are passed through a slit printing nozzle to increase the droplet mass flux and suppress the coffee-ring effect. In doing so, favorable arrangement/crystallization of the organic molecules in photoactive layer are realized, leading to OSC devices with PCE up to 15.65%. The VMA is also suitable for printing the hole transport layer and electron transport layer. The all-aerosol-printed OSC devices achieved a PCE of 14.78%. Notably, VMA requires as little as 100 μL solution to prime the fluid lines, making the transition from laboratory experiments to continuous production more economical and practical. To illustrate this advantage, a mini automated production line was built to demonstrate the completion of five steps (printing of three functional layers, and thermal annealing of the hole transport layer and active layer) on a conveyer belt within 30 minutes, marking a concrete step towards manufacturing of high-performance OSCs.
Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) are a solution processable photovoltaic technology that offers the promise of low-cost roll-to-roll manufacturing of flexible substrates. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of spin-coated OSC devices at the lab scale (a few mm2) has been improved to beyond 18% over the last few years.1–3 One of the key remaining challenges toward commercialization of OSCs is to develop scalable manufacturing processes to overcome the limitations of spin coating, such as excessive material waste, difficulties for scale-up, and incompatibility with conformal deposition on curved surfaces.
There are two main types of scalable techniques for fabricating organic semiconductor thin films: (i) meniscus-based (continuous phase) methods including blade coating,4–6 slot-die coating,7–9 and brush painting;10,11 and (ii) droplet-based (dispersed phase) methods, such as inkjet printing,12,13 spray coating,14–23 and aerosol printing.24–27 Recently, meniscus-based methods have achieved remarkable PCEs. Sun et al. reported blade-coated PM6:Y6 OSCs with PCEs of 15.37% based on the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) architecture and 16.35% with a layer-by-layer structure.5 By using the hot slot-die coating process, Ma et al. fabricated OSC devices with PCEs of 13.20% based on the PM7:IT4F system8 and 15.60% based on the PM6:Y6 system.7 However, because the suspended liquid meniscus requires a precisely controlled gap between the coating head and the substrate, it imposes extra limitations and challenges on continuous roll-to-roll fabrication.
Alternatively, the droplet-based film-coating methods can achieve conformal printing/deposition and high tolerance to the substrate curvatures, roughness and defects because the deposition is non-contact and the film is formed by stacking individual droplets on the substrate. For example, Jung et al. demonstrated that the PCEs of the inkjet-printed OSC devices with a fullerene acceptor (PCDTBT:PC70BM) were up to 5% and 2% for those with active-layers or all functional layers inkjet-printed, respectively.12 Recently, Corzo et al. reported inkjet-printed OSCs (P3HT:OIDTBR) with nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs), achieving PCEs of 6.47% and 6% for the 0.1 and 2 cm2 devices, respectively.13 However, it is still a formidable challenge to formulate printable inks that meet the stringent requirements of solubility, viscosity and surface tension imposed by the inkjet printheads.
Spray methods, such as ultrasonic spray, pneumatic spray, and electrospray, have been reported for fabricating OSCs in many studies.14–23 Based on the spray-coated active layer of PBDB-T-2Cl:IT4F, a PCE of 12.29% was achieved.14 Although this value is the highest among droplet-based methods, it still lags behind those fabricated by meniscus-based methods. This efficiency gap may be attributed to three reasons. (i) A majority of high performance NFAs have best solubilities in the high-vapor-pressure solvent chloroform (CF), and the rapid evaporation of CF makes the droplets dry rapidly without completely merging with each other. (ii) The uneven evaporation of solvent in the sessile droplet causes the coffee ring effect: when a radial flow towards the contact line replenishes the evaporated liquid from the edge of the droplet, the convective flow moves solutes toward the periphery to form ring like stains termed coffee rings.28 The nonuniformity of the droplet-size and high solvent volatility exacerbate the coffee-ring effect and decreases the reproducibility of the thin-film morphology. (iii) The droplet size from most spray methods is too large for making OSCs. For example, for common ultrasonic or pneumatic spray methods, the typical droplet size range is 30–100 μm, which makes it very challenging to deposit uniform thin films with a thickness of ∼100 nm for a typical active layer or 10–40 nm for a typical hole transport layer (HTL) and electron transport layer (ETL) in OSCs. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop scalable droplet-based processing methods for high-quality functional thin-films of OSCs with good repeatability, low material waste, high throughput, and preferably with a more environmentally friendly solvent than the halogenated solvents.
Motivated by the need to develop a scalable droplet-based process for all functional organic-layers with non-halogen solvents, we investigate the fabrication of OSCs by aerosol printing based on vibrating mesh atomization (VMA). When liquid droplets are sufficiently small (usually less than 10 μm), they can be suspended in gas for an extended period of time and the mixture is termed aerosol. An aerosol can be generated by several different means, including ultrasonic,27 pneumatic,29 electrostatic,30 and vibrating mesh atomization.31,32 Compared to common pneumatic or ultrasonic sprays, an aerosol has a much smaller droplet size and much narrower size distribution, which are beneficial to create uniform mass flux upon the interaction of the droplets with the substrate as well as the neighboring droplets, facilitating high quality thin films.19 Especially, for ultra-thin film (thickness < 40 nm) fabrication, an aerosol possesses unique advantages compared to conventional droplet based methods, such as inkjet (with typical droplet sizes > 20 μm) and ultrasonic spray (droplet size of ∼40 μm). VMA atomizes liquids into a fine aerosol by forcing a mesh consisting of hundreds of micro-orifices to vibrate at a frequency of ∼100 kHz, which has several unique features that make it a good candidate for fabricating OSCs. First, VMA is compact, inexpensive, and highly reliable, which make it the technology of choice for portable humidifiers and aerosol drug delivery tools.33,34 Second, the droplet size of the aerosol can be tuned by the source frequency or the mesh size. Last but not least, the liquid volume required for VMA to operate could be as small as 100 μL. The emerging OSC materials are often priced at >$4000 per gram, and the ink “overhead” (the amount of liquid solution required to prime the system or fill the space in the tubing, connectors, and reservoir) for most printing methods is 1–10 mL and is often a prohibiting factor for academic laboratories to develop a continuous fabricating concept. In contrast, the low “overhead” consumption of VMA helps make the transition from the laboratory scale to industry scale more economical and practical.
In this work, we demonstrate high-performance OSC devices based on PTQ10:Y6-BO in ambient air employing an environmentally friendly solvent without any additive.35,36 The OSCs with the aerosol-printed active layer reaches a PCE up to 15.65%, which is higher than that of the spin-coated counterparts (15.36%). Large-area aerosol-printed devices (1 cm2) exhibit a PCE of 13.05%. To the best of our knowledge, these are the records for OSCs fabricated by scalable droplet-based methods. Furthermore, we realize high performance OSCs with all organic-layers fabricated by continuous VMA aerosol printing with environmentally friendly solvents in ambient air, i.e., a mini production line automatically completes five steps (printing of the HTL, annealing of the HTL, printing of the active layer, annealing of the active layer, and printing the ETL) in a conveyer belt within 30 minutes (Fig. 1a and the ESI†). The PCE of all aerosol printed OSCs is up to 14.78%, representing the best performance of OSCs with all organic-layers fabricated by scalable methods to date.
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the aerosol-printing production line: 3 vibrating mesh atomizers (VMAs) for printing the hole transport layer, photoactive layer, and electron transport layer, respectively; heating chambers for annealing the hole transport layer and active layer. (b) The schematic of the vibrating mesh atomizer. (c) The SEM image of the VMA showing hundreds of micro-orifices. (d) The size distribution of droplets produced by VMA. (e) Device configuration and the chemical structures of PTQ10 and Y6-BO. 
Results and discussion
Mechanism of aerosol printing based on the vibrating mesh atomizer
The aerosol printing apparatus consists of two major components: the vibrating mesh atomizer (VMA) and the slit printing nozzle. We shall first draw some comparison between the ultrasonic spray and the VMA. For an ultrasonic spray, the liquid solution is fed through a hollow rod and spread on a conical or flat atomization surface (Fig. S1 in the ESI†). The rod is driven by a high power (on the order of ∼100 Watt) piezoelectric transducer at a typical frequency of 40 kHz. The vibration of the rod induces Faraday waves on the liquid layer, and the wavelength is λ ∼100 μm for typical parameters. Ultrasonic spray is robust and the generated droplets are quite uniform. However, the droplet size is estimated from d0 ≈ 0.4λ ∼ 40 μm, which appears to be too large for making a uniform thin film of the photoactive layer (∼100 nm thick) and especially the hole/electron transport layers (10 to 40 nm thick) of OSCs, unless extremely dilute solution is used. Moreover, because the in-resonance frequency of the ultrasonic transducer is fixed, there is little room for the ultrasonic spray to adjust the droplet diameter. In contrast, the vibrating mesh atomizer works on a different principle. A piezoelectric ring actuator drives a thin perforated metal mesh with hundreds of laser-drilled or electro-etched micro-orifices at ∼100 kHz frequency (Fig. 1b). The orifices are tapered, with an entrance diameter of ∼10 μm and an exit diameter of ∼5 μm (Fig. 1c). The vibration leads to a fast upward and downward movement of the mesh, pushing out droplets to form fine mists. The droplet size is comparable to the diameter of the orifice opening. The droplet size distribution of the aerosol generated by VMA is characterized using a spray analyzer, and the produced droplet diameter is 3 to 8 μm with an average diameter of ∼5 μm and the relative standard deviation (RSD) of ∼30% (Fig. 1d). Note that the droplet diameter of VMA is at least 5 times smaller than that of a typical ultrasonic spray, and the volume of a single droplet is only ∼1/100 of the ultrasonic spray. All these features make VMA a suitable choice for depositing 10–100 nm thick thin films.
For a conventional unmounted VMA, the spray profile is conical and the deposition footprint is circular (Fig. 2a), and the inter-droplet distance is rather long, which will result in a long “standby time” for one deposited droplet to be merged with another. Thus, the individual coffee rings instead of completely connected films are likely formed. In addition, the aerosol from unmounted VMA loses momentum quickly and the deposition efficiency is rather low. To suppress the coffee-ring effect and increase the deposition efficiency, we designed an apparatus with the VMA mounted on an aerosol printing nozzle with a slit exit, which reshapes the spray profile from conical into sheet (Fig. 2c). Consequently, the droplet number density per unit area increases and the “standby time” decreases accordingly, which promotes sessile droplet merging and suppresses the coffee ring effect, and eventually helps produce a smooth and continuous thin film. The carrier gas (nitrogen) is introduced into the chamber to mix with the aerosol (Fig. 2b). Once the aerosol is generated, the carrier gas brings the aerosol onto the substrate. Certain portion of the droplets will be deposited on the substrate, while the remaining portion may be swept away by the carrier gas. The choice of the gas flow-rate (Qgas) directly affects the deposition efficiency, i.e., the ratio of the deposited materials to the materials supplied. The deposition efficiency can be considered as a classic impactor problem (ESI†).37 The key parameter that governs the deposition (or collection) efficiency is the Stokes number, which is defined as the ratio of the stopping distance of a droplet with velocity U to the aerosol jet half-width Dj/2: (1)
 Fig. 2  (a) Unmounted VMA in operation, showing fine mist. (b) The semi-transparent side view of the VMA with the gas chamber and slit nozzle. (c) The actual printing nozzle in operation, with the aerosol illuminated by a green laser beam. The solution flow rate is Ql = 100 μL min−1, and the carrier gas (N2) flow rate is Qgas = 2 L min−1. (d) The relationship between Stokes number Stk and the carrier gas flow rate Qgas. (e) The relationship of dry-film thickness with the solution flow rate Ql and printing speed V for the solution of PTQ10:Y6-BO in O-XY (8 mg mL−1). 
Here the slit (or a narrow rectangle) nozzle produces a two-dimensional aerosol jet of width Dj and length L. The stopping time of the droplet is: τ = m/(3πμgd) = ρdπd2/(18μg)(2)where m is the droplet mass, d is the droplet diameter, ρd is the mass density of the droplet, and μg is the gas viscosity. Therefore, eqn (1) becomes (3)
The velocity of the aerosol stream is U = Qgas/(DjL). The relationship between Stokes number and the carrier gas flow rate at different nozzle widths is illustrated in Fig. 2d. The impactor theory37 shows that to achieve >50% deposition, the minimum Stokes number should be Stk ≥ 0.59. This gives the design guideline for gaseous jet velocity U and the volume flow rate Qgas, which needs to be judiciously chosen. From the deposition efficiency point of view, higher flow rate is preferred. On the other hand, if the gas flow rate is too high, the excessive gas may promote rapid evaporation of the droplets. Once the vapor is saturated, evaporation will be halted. Therefore, the droplet residence time and the vapor pressure impose an upper limit to the carrier-gas flow rates. In this work, we use Qgas = 2 L min−1, which is equivalent to Stk = 0.8, corresponding to a deposition rate greater than 50%. We evaluated the exact deposition rate by measuring the film thickness and area, and then we compute the ratio of the solution volume injected by the syringe pump, and the measured deposition efficiency, which is up to 76%.
The liquid flow rate (Ql) and the velocity of the moving stage (V) jointly determine the deposited film thickness. The relationship of dry-film thickness with the solution flow rate Ql and printing speed V for the active solution is shown in Fig. 2e. For a liquid flow rate of Ql < 60 μL min−1, a continuous film could not be formed; while at a liquid flow rate of Ql > 120 μL min−1 the liquid film starts to overflow. Within the range of 60 μL min−1 < Ql < 120 μL min−1, the dry-film thickness could be adjusted by changing V. Collectively considering the requirement of the active layer, HTL and ETL, we choose V = 3 mm s−1 to prepare all three organic-layers.
Film formation and drying dynamics of the aerosol printing
During aerosol printing, the film is formed by piling up of individual wet droplets, semi-dried droplets, or dried particles landing on the substrate. The droplet evaporation time te and residence time tr (the time that the droplet travels from the nozzle to the substrate) describe the droplet status and film forming mechanism (see ref. 19 for more details). The evaporation time of the droplet is: te = d2/Ke(4)where d is the droplet diameter and Ke is the evaporation rate. For an evaporating spherical droplet, the evaporation rate Ke is approximately proportional to the solvent vapor pressure.
By first order approximation, tr is: tr = w/ut(5)where w is the gap between the atomizer and the substrate, and ut is the droplet terminal velocity. The degree of droplet evaporation could be quantified using the Damköhler number Da = tr/te.19,22 To form a continuous liquid film, droplets should remain fluidic to merge with each other upon landing on the substrate, corresponding to tr < te, i.e., Da < 1. The aerosol-printed film is especially susceptible to the evaporation properties of solvents, since the ratio of surface area to mass increases dramatically in the aerosol-form. Compared with the high-vapor-pressure solvent CF (23 kPa at 25 °C), o-xylene (O-XY) has lower vapor pressure (<1 kPa at 25 °C) that is more favorable to extend the evaporation time of the droplet and thus form a continuous wet film. In this work Da is kept less than 1, and we obtained wet droplets upon landing on the substrate. As the substrate passes through the slit aerosol printing nozzle, a wet film is formed. The surface of the immediately printed liquid film is wavy (Fig. 3a and c), which is due to the Kelvin–Helmholtz instability induced by the strong impinging carrier gas flow.38 After the film moves further away from the impinging gas flow, the film tends to level by the driving force of the Laplace pressure due to the liquid film surface curvature. The bulged-up region has positive curvature and the local liquid pressure is higher, while the trough region has negative curvature corresponding a lower pressure (Fig. 3a).39 Therefore, the liquid tends to move from the thicker area to the thinner region, levelling the overall film thickness. On the other hand, the restoring flow is retarded by the viscous effect. These two competing mechanisms lead to a certain amount of time for the wavy film to level. The levelling time τ of a liquid layer of thickness h, wave number q, surface tension σ and viscosity μ can be estimated from:39 (6)
 Fig. 3  The levelling of the liquid film. (a) Schematic of a wavy film with wavelength λ. (b) The relationship between the levelling time and wavelength of the liquid wavy film. (c) The wavelength observed right after the liquid film is printed (printing parameters: Ql = 100 μL min−1, Qgas = 2 L min−1, V = 3 mm s−1, T = 27 °C, U = 3.03 m s−1), Stk = 0.46. (d) Photograph of the dried films showing overall levelled uniform thickness (the ITO glass size is 15 mm × 20 mm). 

Fig. 3b shows the leveling time for different liquid-film thicknesses and wave number q = 2π/λ, where λ is the wavelength. Under our experimental conditions, the evaporation time of the film is ∼1 s, and the film thinner than 24 μm with wavelength λ < 2.6 mm will be leveled promptly before the film dries. As shown by the photograph of the dried films in Fig. 3d, the aerosol-printed films show overall leveled uniform thickness after drying.
For the HTL of PEDOT:PSS, the solvent used is a mixture of ethanol and deionized (DI) water. For the ETL of PDINO, the solvent is ethanol. The vapor pressures of these solvents are not as low as that of O-XY, but the solute concentration is much lower, such that the leveled wet films still can be achieved for both HTL and ETL films printed by aerosol. We noticed that aerosol jet printing (AJP) has been developed for functional nanomaterials in printed electronics, including flexible circuits, displays, electronics packaging, organic photodiodes and organic solar cells.24–26,40,41 We chose the customized VMA over AJP because of two reasons. First, in AJP the atomization takes places in a separate vessel and it requires several mL of inks. Second, AJP usually produces a much more focused flow-stream (typically less than 400 μm) by passing aerosol through a narrow, converging nozzle that results in aerodynamic focusing. Consequently, the large-area deposition is realized by the time-consuming line-by-line printing.42,43 Moreover, the line overlapping is prone to non-uniform wavy patterns or voids in the film, especially with volatile solvents, because the printed line may dry quickly before merging with subsequently printed lines. Here we employ VMA to fabricate thin films with a flat nozzle of 0.5 mm × 10 mm to achieve rapid and continuous wide-coverage printing without the overlap of narrow lines.
Morphological characteristics of the aerosol-printed films
The morphology of the aerosol-printed film is dominated by the self-assembly and crystallization of the molecules during solvent evaporation. Morphology characterization was performed to reveal details of the nanostructures in films fabricated by aerosol printing. Spin-coated films were fabricated as references for comparison. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to characterize surface morphology of aerosol-printed active layers. Rather smooth films were obtained by aerosol printing, showing a root mean square (RMS) roughness of ∼0.91 nm, which is similar to the spin-coated film with a RMS roughness of ∼0.90 nm (Fig. 4a). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 4b) and grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) (Fig. 4c) measurements were carried out to characterize the bulk morphology and phase separation of both aerosol-printed and spin-coated PTQ10:Y6-BO layers. The TEM images suggest that the phase separation for the aerosol-printed film is more pronounced with larger average domains compared with that of the spin-coated film. The domain size was quantified by fitting 1D GISAXS profiles and the fitting parameters are summarized in Table S1 in the ESI.† The average domain size of the acceptor phase could be calculated from the Guinier radius , D is the fractal dimension of acceptor domains and η is the average correlation lengths of the acceptor-rich phase.44 The acceptor domain size of the aerosol-printed film (34.73 nm) is larger than that of the spin-coated film (30.46 nm), which is in accordance with the more pronounced phase separation in the aerosol-printed film as presented in the TEM images (Fig. 4b). Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was performed to investigate the crystallinity and orientation of the molecules in PTQ10:Y6-BO films. Both aerosol-printed and spin-coated films demonstrate prominent (010) π–π stacking with a diffraction peak at ∼1.75 Å−1 in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction, and the (100) lamellar stacking peak at ∼0.28 Å−1 in the in-plane (IP) direction, indicating a preferential face-on orientation. The aerosol-printed film shows a more obvious face-on orientation than the spin-coated film, indicated by the higher (100) peak in the IP direction and a more indistinct (010) peak in the OOP direction. The mean size of the crystallites was acquired by calculating the crystal coherence length (CCL) using the Scherrer equation.45 The CCL value of the aerosol-printed film is 25.63 Å, which is similar to that of the spin-coated film (25.89 Å). However, the (010) peak in the OOP direction of the aerosol-printed film (qz = 1.78 Å−1, corresponding to d-spacing = 3.52 Å) exhibits a red shift compared to that of the spin-coated film (qz = 1.75 Å−1, corresponding to d-spacing = 3.59 Å), suggesting more compact molecular arrangement with decrease of the π–π stacking distance. For the (100) lamellar stacking, the aerosol-printed film demonstrates a longer lamellar coherent length (83.98 Å) compared with the spin-coated film (78.16 Å). Therefore, the aerosol-printed film exhibits higher crystallinity than the spin-coated film. The GIWAXS characteristics of neat PTQ10 and neat Y6-BO films (Fig. S3 and Table S2 in the ESI†) suggest that the decreased π–π stacking distance might be attributed to Y6-BO and the enlarged lamellar coherent length might be attributed to PTQ10 in the aerosol-printed film. In other words, the aerosol-printing process compacts the π–π stacking of the NFA and improves the lamellar packing of the polymer, accompanied by more pronounced face-on orientation. These observations are consistent with the UV-vis spectra shown in Fig. 4g. The aerosol-printed film shows notable enhancement of absorption of PTQ10 (500–600 nm) than that of the spin-coated film, indicating a higher degree of polymer aggregation. Compared with the spin-coated film, the absorption of Y6-BO in the aerosol-printed film exhibits a red shift (from 808 nm to 814 nm) and a more pronounced vibronic shoulder at 740 nm which could be attributed to the higher crystallinity of Y6-BO in the aerosol printed film. The superior crystallinity of the aerosol-printed film may also help explain the enhanced domain size shown in the TEM images.
 Fig. 4  Morphological characteristics of aerosol-printed and spin-coated (CF as solvent) PTQ10:Y6-BO films: (a) AFM surface topographic images (size: 5 × 5 μm2), (b) TEM images, (c) 2D GISAXS patterns, (d) 2D GIWAXS maps, (e) 1D GISAXS fitting profiles along the qxy axis, (f) GIWAXS line cuts of aerosol printed and spin coated PTQ10:Y6-BO films, and (g) the UV-vis absorption spectra of PTQ10:Y6-BO. 
The good morphology of the aerosol-printed active layer may be attributed to the drying and film-forming process of aerosol printing, which experiences three major stages: (i) the spreading and merging of the liquid droplets into a thin liquid film; (ii) the evaporation of the solvent; and (iii) the formation of a dry solid film left behind the sweeping of moving contact lines created by the slit nozzle. The aerosol printing produces a unidirectionally moving contact line following the direction of printing. The moving contact line is the final and critical stage for molecular alignment and packing. Therefore, the unidirectional (instead of random) contact line movement is expected to benefit the ordered polymer packing and crystallization. In contrast, for spin-coating, although the eventual film appears to be uniform, the film does not experience uniform evaporation and the liquid contact lines take intricate forms without unidirectional moving directions.
We also printed the HTL of PEDOT:PSS and ETL of PDINO. The good wetting properties of droplets on the substrate surface, i.e., the immediate droplets spreading on the substrate, are favorable for depositing smooth and uniform thin films by the disperse-phased printing methods. The contact angles of the PEDOT:PSS ethanol:DI water solution drop on the ITO surface and the PDINO ethanol solution drop on the PTQ10:Y6-BO surface are both close to 0° (Fig. S4†). The AFM measurements (Fig. S5†) show that the aerosol-printed PEDOT:PSS film has a similar surface roughness (RMS = 2.12 nm) to the spin-coated film (RMS = 1.86 nm). For films of the same thickness (∼40 nm), the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the aerosol-printed PEDOT:PSS film is virtually indistinguishable with that of the spin-coated counterpart (Fig. S6†). The sheet resistances (R□) of the PEDOT:PSS films are measured using a four-probe set up. The aerosol-printed PEDOT:PSS film exhibits R of 13.67 ± 0.50 Ω □−1 for a thickness of 40 nm, which is similar to that of the spin-coated film with R□ = 13.39 ± 0.25 Ω □−1 of the same thickness. The characteristic results suggest that in terms of surface morphology, transparency and conductivity, the aerosol printed and spin coated PEDOT:PSS films are comparable. Fig. S7† illustrates the AFM surface topographic images of the aerosol-printed and spin-coated PDINO films on the substrate of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTQ10:Y6-BO. The aerosol-printed PDINO film exhibits surface morphology with tufted patterns similar to the spin-coated PDINO film. The roughness of aerosol-printed PDINO film (RMS = 1.97 nm) is similar to that of the spin-coated film (RMS = 1.83 nm). The morphological behavior indicates that aerosol printing could deposit desirable thin films of PDINO on top of the active layer.
Photovoltaic performance
Devices of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTQ10:Y6-BO/PDINO/Ag were fabricated with the aerosol-printed active layer. For reference, the spin-coated devices were prepared using O-XY and CF as solvents, respectively. The photovoltaic parameters measured under the illumination of an AM 1.5G solar simulator at 100 mW cm−2 are presented in Fig. 5a. The average and best device characteristics of ten devices are summarized in Table 1. Spin-coated devices with O-XY as solvent exhibit PCEs up to 14.08%, and the highest PCE reaches 15.36% with CF as solvent. The increased PCEs could be attributed to higher solubility in CF than that in O-XY for both PTQ10 and Y6-BO. The devices with aerosol-printed photoactive layers using O-XY achieve the highest PCE of 15.65%, which is among the highest so far for printed OSCs by droplet-based methods (Fig. 6). The histogram of 30 aerosol-printed devices (Fig. S8†) shows modest variations of the device-to-device performance, suggesting that aerosol printing is a repeatable and effective method for fabricating OSCs. The aerosol-printed devices demonstrate higher PCE and especially notably higher FF than the spin-coated devices, which could be attributed to the synergized effects of improved crystallization and pronounced phase separation. Compared to the spin-coated OSCs with the same solvent O-XY, the significantly higher PCEs of the aerosol-printed OSCs could be partially attributed to the lower concentration of the solute in the aerosol ink. The process of droplet-stacking and the flux of droplet concentration enabled by the slit-nozzle VMA deposition lead to the formation of films with enough thickness even at lower concentration. Low concentration ink of the aerosol printing may facilitate the fabrication of efficient OSCs with green solvents which has inferior dissolvability for typical active materials than halogen-containing solvents. The current densities (Fig. 5b) integrated from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves (24.91 mA cm−2 for the aerosol-printed device and 24.85 mA cm−2 for the spin-coated device) agree well with the Jsc from the J–V scan (25.45 mA cm−2 for the aerosol-printed device and 25.34 mA cm−2 for the spin-coated device). Large-area devices (1 cm2) with aerosol-printed active layers achieved the highest PCE of 13.05%, with nearly unchanged Jsc (25.58 mA cm−2), slightly decreased Voc (0.852 V), and noticeable drop in FF (62.06%) compared with the small-area devices.
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves under the illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, (b) EQE curves, (c) carrier mobilities, (d) Jph–Veff curves, (e) Jsc–Plight curves, and (f) Voc–Plight curves of the aerosol-printed and reference OSCs. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic performances of aerosol-printed devices and the spin-coated reference devices




Process

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (PCEa) (%)





a Values in brackets are the average PCE obtained from 10 devices.
b The area of the device is 1 cm2.





Aerosol printing (active layer)
0.865
25.45
71.18
15.65 (15.40)


Aerosol printing (active layer)b
0.852
25.58
62.06
13.05 (12.51)


All aerosol printing
0.855
25.93
66.03
14.78 (14.32)


All spin coating (O-XY)
0.861
25.75
63.50
14.08 (13.88)


All spin coating (CF)
0.879
25.34
68.89
15.36 (15.21)




 Fig. 6  Chronological evolution of PCEs determined by J–V measurements of optimized devices with different droplet-based printing technologies.12–18,20–23,27,55–75 Empty symbols: printing the active layer; half-solid symbols: printing the active layer & HTL; solid symbols: printing the active layer & HTL & ETL. *An ultrathin pneumatic-sprayed active layer stacked on top of the thick ultrasonic-sprayed active layer. 
Charge transport of the aerosol-printed devices was investigated by measuring the hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) according to the space charge limited current (SCLC) method with hole-only and electron-only devices (Fig. 5c). The aerosol-printed device exhibits a hole mobility of 2.21 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of 2.85 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which are higher than those of the spin-coated device (hole mobility of 1.15 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of 1.98 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). The aerosol-printed devices also exhibited more balanced charge mobilities with μe/μh = 1.29 than the spin-coated devices with μe/μh = 1.72. The superior charge transport of the aerosol-printed devices may be related to the more pronounced face-on molecular orientation and higher crystallinity. The more balanced charge mobilities may be partially responsible for the higher FF of the aerosol-printed devices than the spin-coated devices.
The photocurrent density (Jph) versus the effective voltage (Veff) curves (Fig. 5d) are measured to gain insights into exciton dissociation and charge extraction. The photocurrent density Jph is defined as the difference between the current densities under standard illumination (Jlight) and those in the dark (Jdark). The effective voltage Veff is denoted as the deviation between the compensation voltage at zero Jph (V0) and the applied voltage bias (Vbias). Generally, Jph reaches saturation (Jsat) at large reverse bias Veff ≥ 2 V.46 The exciton dissociation probability (Pdiss) could be estimated from Pdiss = Jph/Jsat. The aerosol-printed device showed similar Pdiss (98.74%) to that of the spin-coated device (99.26%), indicating sufficient exciton dissociation and charge collection. The photocurrent Jsc and light intensity Plight are fitted according to the power-law Jsc ∝ (Plight)α. The deviation of the power factor α from α = 1 indicates the presence of bimolecular recombination (α = 0.5) and/or space charge effects caused by the difference in hole and electron mobility (α = 0.75).47–50 As shown in Fig. 5e, both the aerosol-printed and spin-coated devices have rather high α values (α = 0.99 and 0.98, respectively), indicating relatively low bimolecular recombination. The aerosol-printed devices exhibited more balanced charge mobilities than the spin-coated devices, and the slightly higher α value of the aerosol-printed device may be attributed to the weaker space charge effect. The trap-assisted recombination is revealed by the dependence of Voc on the light intensity (Plight). The semilogarithmic plot of Voc and Plight exhibits a linear relationship Voc ∝ (nkT/q)ln(Plight), where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elementary charge.51 The coefficient n of approximately 1 suggests that the trap-assisted recombination is negligible and the bimolecular recombination is dominant in the active layers. If the coefficient n is close to 2, the trap-assisted recombination in the band-gap dominates; if n < 1, the surface recombination, i.e., the recombination at an interface or the surface of the active layer, is the dominating mechanism.52–54Fig. 5f suggests that the slope of the aerosol-printed active layer device (n = 1.23) is similar to that of the spin-coated device (n = 1.24), revealing that bimolecular recombination is the dominant recombination mechanism in the active layer.
We further fabricated OSC devices with all three layers (active layer, HTL and ETL) by aerosol printing. We built a mini production line (Fig. 1a, see also the ESI†) to illustrate the concept of continuous aerosol printing. The production line consists of 3 VMAs for the hole transport layer, photoactive layer, and electron transport layer, respectively. A conveyer belt carries the ITO glass substrate to first pass the PEDOT:PSS printing stage at 3 mm s−1 to form a thin layer of the hole transport layer. Then the substrate is carried to the annealing station, which is a semi-enclosed chamber. Nitrogen is continuously supplied into the chamber to maintain an environment with low water vapor and oxygen concentration. An electric heater is mounted on the top of the chamber to keep the inside of the chamber above 100 °C. The HTL is annealed at 150 °C for 10 minutes, and then it is transferred by the conveyer belt to the photoactive layer printing station for printing of the ∼100 nm thick blend of PTQ10:Y6-BO. Then the conveyer belt carries the glass substrate with the printed active layer to the annealing chamber to undergo an annealing process at 100 °C for 10 minutes. After the annealing of the active layer, the ITO glass is carried by the conveyer belt to go through the final station of ETL, where the PDINO layer is printed. The entire process is fully programed and is completed within 30 minutes (ESI†). Only the Ag electrode is thermally evaporated.
The all-printed devices exhibit satisfactory PCEs of up to 14.78%, and the drop in PCE of the all-aerosol-printed devices is mainly caused by decreased FF. To investigate the reasons for the decreased FF, light dependent photocurrent characteristics of the all-printed device are measured (Fig. 5d–f). Compared with the device with the aerosol-printed active layer, the all-printed device exhibits significantly higher slope of the semilogarithmic plot of Voc and Plight(1.67kT/q), indicating that the trap-assisted recombination is dominant in the all-printed device. The increased trap-assisted recombination may explain the lower FF of the all-aerosol-printed devices. Because the morphologies of aerosol-printed charge transport layers and the conductivity of the aerosol-printed PEDOT:PSS are similar to those of the spin-coated films, we hypothesize that the higher trap recombination may be related to pin-hole and contact defects at the interfaces between the active layer and charge transport layers. Especially, since the PDINO layers are rather thin (∼10 nm), the substrate moving during the printing process may result in incomplete coverage. To clarify the potential existence of pin-holes, we calculated shunt and series resistance values from the dark J–V curves. The all-printed device has smaller shunt resistance (Rsh = 13069 Ω cm2) and larger series resistance (Rs = 13.7 Ω cm2) than the device with only the active layer printed by aerosol (Rsh = 16117 Ω cm2, Rs = 5.6 Ω cm2). The decreased Rsh and increased Rs could be attributed to the pin-holes and non-ideal contact between the active layer and HTL/ETL caused by the overlapping of individual droplets. On the other hand, the all-aerosol-printing experiments were not conducted in a clean room, and the particles in air may be another reason for defects in the ultrathin and large-area films.

Fig. 6 shows the chronological evolution of PCEs of OSC devices with different droplet-based printing technologies, and the details are summarized in Table S3.† This work sets record PCEs for both OSCS with the droplet-printed active layer and fully-printed OSC devices.
Conclusions
An aerosol printing approach based on VMA was introduced for fabricating OSCs. The aerosol printing nozzle exit is designed to be a slit to achieve continuous wide-coverage printing, which increases droplet mass flux, promotes sessile droplet merging, suppresses the coffee ring effect, and eventually produces smooth and continuous thin films. This ordered printing and drying process assists unidirectional flow of the liquid film that facilitates the arrangement and crystallization of the polymer and NFA molecules. Using a non-halogen solvent o-xylene in ambient air, the aerosol-printed active layers show improved crystallization, pronounced phase separation, and high and balanced carrier mobilities compared with the spin-coated counterparts. The highest PCE of devices with aerosol-printed active layer is 15.65%, which is higher than that of the spin-coated counterparts (15.36%) and is the highest to date for droplet-based printed OSCs. The hole transport layer (PEDOT:PSS) and electron transport layer (PDINO) are also printed with VMA aerosol and the PCE of all-aerosol-printed OSCs is up to 14.78%. This work makes a concrete step towards continuous manufacturing of high-performance OSCs with green solvents in ambient air.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Author contributions
PY fabricated the solar cell devices and performed the J–V, UV, AFM, and EQE measurements; TZ designed, built and debugged the aerosol-printing equipment; BY set up the mini production line and produced the video; GD performed TEM measurement and data characterization of GISAXS; BM, XZ, and WD conceived and designed the experiments. All authors contributed to the analysis and manuscript writing.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61975073, 11932009).
Notes and references
Q. S. Liu, Y. F. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Q. Qin, J. G. Xu, W. T. Li, J. Xiong, J. F. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. F. Yang, X. T. Zhang and L. M. Ding, 18% efficiency organic solar cells, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Single-junction organic photovoltaic cells with approaching 18% efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, R. Xia, Q. Huang, K. Zhang, Z. Hu, X. Liu, H.-L. Yip and F. Huang, Tandem, Tandem organic solar cells with 18.7% efficiency enabled by suppressing the charge recombination in front sub-cell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2103282 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Lin, B. Hu, X. Xu and W. Ma, Blade-Cast Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells in Air with Excellent Morphology, Efficiency, and Stability, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800343 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sun, Q. Wu, J. Guo, T. Wang, Y. Wu, B. Qiu, Z. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Hu, J. Guo, M. Shi, C. Yang, F. Huang, Y. Li and J. Min, A Layer-by-Layer Architecture for Printable Organic Solar Cells Overcoming the Scaling Lag of Module Efficiency, Joule, 2020, 4, 407 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Z. M. Chen, A. Armin, S. Dong, R. X. Xia, H. L. Yip, S. Shoaee, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Efficient Large Area Organic Solar Cells Processed by Blade-Coating With Single-Component Green Solvent, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700169 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, H. B. Naveed, B. Lin, X. Zhou, J. Yuan, K. Zhou, H. Wu, R. Guo, M. A. Scheel, A. Chumakov, S. V. Roth, Z. Tang, P. Muller-Buschbaum and W. Ma, Hot hydrocarbon-solvent slot-die coating enables high-efficiency organic solar cells with temperature-dependent aggregation behavior, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Lin, X. B. Zhou, H. Zhao, J. Yuan, K. Zhou, K. Chen, H. B. Wu, R. J. Guo, M. A. Scheel, A. Chumakov, S. V. Roth, Y. M. Mao, L. L. Wang, Z. Tang, P. Muller-Buschbaum and W. Ma, Balancing the pre-aggregation and crystallization kinetics enables high efficiency slot-die coated organic solar cells with reduced non-radiative recombination losses, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2467 RSC .
J. Y. Yang, Y. B. Lin, W. H. Zheng, A. L. Liu, W. Z. Cai, X. M. Yu, F. L. Zhang, Q. B. Liang, H. B. Wu, D. H. Qin and L. T. Hou, Roll-to-roll slot-die-printed polymer solar cells by self-assembly, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Lin, C. Guo, W. T. Chuang, C. L. Wang, Q. B. Wang, H. Liu, C. S. Hsu and L. Jiang, Directional Solution Coating by the Chinese Brush: A Facile Approach to Improving Molecular Alignment for High-Performance Polymer TFTs, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606987 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wang, W. Huang, N. D. Eastham, S. Fabiano, E. F. Manley, L. Zeng, B. H. Wang, X. A. Zhang, Z. H. Chen, R. Li, R. P. H. Chang, L. X. Chen, M. J. Bedzyk, F. S. Melkonyan, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Aggregation Control in Natural Brush-printed Conjugated Polymer Films and Implications for Enhancing Charge Transport, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10066 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jung, A. Sou, K. Banger, D. H. Ko, P. C. Y. Chow, C. R. McNeill and H. Sirringhaus, All-inkjet-printed, all-air-processed solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400432 CrossRef .
D. Corzo, K. Almasabi, E. Bihar, S. Macphee, D. Rosas-Villalva, N. Gasparini, S. Inal and D. Baran, Digital inkjet printing of high-efficiency large, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900040 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, S. H. Wang, Y. Tang, R. Hu, X. W. Yan, Z. Zhang, L. Li and Q. B. Pei, Intensification of Vertical Phase Separation for Efficient Polymer Solar Cell via Piecewise Spray Assisted by a Solvent Driving Force, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900458 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, W. Zheng, X. Yin, J. Yang, Y. Lin, W. Cai, X. Yu, Q. Liang, Z. He, H. Wu, Y. Li, F. Zhang and L. Hou, Manipulate Micrometer Surface and Nanometer Bulk Phase Separation Structures in the Active Layer of Organic Solar Cells via Synergy of Ultrasonic and High-Pressure Gas Spraying, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, R. Hu, X. Meng, Y. Li, X. Yan, X. Yang, X. Liao, L. Li, Q. Pei and K. B. Chong, Realization large-scale polymer solar cells using ultrasonic spray technique via solvent engineering, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800064 CrossRef .
C. Cai, Y. Zhang, R. Song, Z. Peng, L. Xia, M. Wu, K. Xiong, B. Wang, Y. Lin, X. Xu, Q. Liang, H. Wu, E. Wang and L. Hou, Polymer Solar Cells Spray Coated with Non-Halogenated Solvents, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhang, J. Griffin, N. W. Scarratt, T. Wang and D. G. Lidzey, High Efficiency Arrays of Polymer Solar Cells Fabricated by Spray-Coating in Air, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 275 CAS .
X. Y. Zhao and W. W. Deng, Printing photovoltaics by electrospray, Opto-Electron. Adv., 2020, 3, 190038 CAS .
K. Chang, Y. Li, G. Du, M. Zhong, P. Yang, Y. Zhu, F. He, B. Mi, X. Zhao and W. Deng, Efficient Non-Fullerene Organic Photovoltaics Printed by Electrospray via Solvent Engineering, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Zhao, Z. Tao, W. Yang, K. Xu, L. Wang, Y. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Z. Gao, B. Mi, M. Hong and W. Deng, Morphology and Electrical Characteristics of Polymer: Fullerene Films Deposited by Electrospray, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 183, 137 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhao, W. Yang, C. Li, X. Wang, S. L. Lim, D. Qi, R. Wang, Z.-Q. Gao, B.-X. Mi, Z.-K. Chen, W. Huang and W. Deng, Effects of Damkhöler Number of Evaporation on the Morphology of Active Layer and the Performance of Organic Heterojunction Solar Cells Fabricated by Electrospray Method, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 140 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhao, X. Wang, S. L. Lim, D. Qi, R. Wang, Z. Gao, B. Mi, Z.-K. Chen, W. Huang and W. Deng, Enhancement of the Performance of Organic Solar Cells by Electrospray Deposition with Optimal Solvent System, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 121, 119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, J. A. Cardenas, R. Worsley, N. X. Williams, J. B. Andrews, C. Casiraghi and A. D. Franklin, Flexible, print-in-place 1D-2D thin-film transistors using aerosol jet printing, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Xiao, W. Qian, K. Zhang, J. Yu, X. W. Xu, G. P. Wang, S. Z. Zheng and S. H. Yang, Preparation of active layers in polymer solar cells by aerosol jet printing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 33, 2005557 Search PubMed .
P. Kopola, B. Zimmermann, A. Filipovic, H. F. Schleiermacher, J. Greulich, S. Rousu, J. Hast, R. Myllyla and U. Wurfel, Aerosol jet printed grid for ITO-free inverted organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 252 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, E. Zhou, S. Miyanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, Self-Driven Perovskite Narrowband Photodetectors with Tunable Spectral Responses, Adv. Mater., 2011, 3, 4053 CAS .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Contact line deposits in an evaporating drop, Phys. Rev. E, 2000, 62, 756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Duan, F. J. Romay, C. Li, A. Naqwi, W. W. Deng and B. Y. H. Liu, Generation of Monodisperse Aerosols by Combining Aerodynamic Flow-Focusing and Mechanical Perturbation, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 17 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cloupeau and B. Prunetfoch, Electrostatic spraying of liquids in cone-jet mode, J. Electrost., 1989, 22, 135 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Waldrep and R. Dhand, Advanced nebulizer designs employing vibrating mesh/aperture plate technologies for aerosol generation, Curr. Drug Delivery, 2008, 5, 114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Vecellio, The mesh nebulizer: a recent technical innovation for aerosol delivery, Breathe, 2006, 2, 252 CrossRef .

          A. J. Hickey and S. R. P. d. Rocha, Pharmaceutical Inhalation Aerosol Technology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 3rd edn,  2018 Search PubMed .
J. S. Patton and P. R. Byron, Inhaling medicines: delivering drugs to the body through the lungs, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2007, 6, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, F. Pan, H. Bin, J. Zhang, L. Xue, B. Qiu, Z. Wei, Z. G. Zhang and Y. Li, A low cost and high performance polymer donor material for polymer solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 743 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hong, H. Yao, Z. Wu, Y. Cui, T. Zhang, Y. Xu, R. Yu, Q. Liao, B. Gao, K. Xian, H. Y. Woo, Z. Ge and J. Hou, Eco-compatible solvent-processed organic photovoltaic cells with over 16% efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903441 CrossRef PubMed .

          W. C. Hinds, Aerosol Technology: Properties, Behavior, and Measurement of Airborne Particles, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  1999 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, P. Tan and L. Xu, Kelvin–Helmholtz instability in an ultrathin air film causes drop splashing on smooth surfaces, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 3280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. G. De Gennes, F. Brochard-Wyart and D. Quéré, Capillarity and Wetting Phenomena: Drops, Bubbles, Pearls, Waves, Springer, New York,  2013 Search PubMed .
R. Eckstein, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and N. Mechau, Aerosol jet printed top grids for organic optoelectronic devices, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Chen, V. Nagarajan, D. W. Rosen, W. W. Yu and S. Y. Huang, Aerosol jet printing on paper substrate with conductive silver nano material, J. Manuf. Process., 2020, 58, 55 CrossRef .
N. J. Wilkinson, M. A. A. Smith, R. W. Kay and R. A. Harris, A review of aerosol jet printing – a non-traditional hybrid process for micro-manufacturing, Int. J. Adv. Des. Manuf. Technol., 2019, 105, 4599 CrossRef .
E. B. Secor, Principles of aerosol jet printing, Flexible Printed Electron., 2018, 3(3) DOI:10.1088/2058-8585/aace28 .
A. Mahmood and J. L. Wang, A Review of grazing incidence small-and wide-angle X-ray scattering techniques for exploring the film morphology of organic solar cells, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000337 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Smilgies, Scherrer grain-size analysis adapted to grazing-incidence scattering with area detectors, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2013, 46, 286 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, V. Gupta, W. L. Leong, L. Ke, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Intensity Dependence of Current–Voltage Characteristics and Recombination in High-Efficiency Solution-Processed Small-Molecule Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4569 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Recombination and Loss Analysis in Polythiophene Based Bulk Heterojunction Photodetectors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3885 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vollbrecht, J. Lee, S.-J. Ko, V. V. Brus, A. Karki, W. Le, M. Seifrid, M. J. Ford, K. Cho, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Design of narrow bandgap non-fullerene acceptors for photovoltaic applications and investigation of non-geminate recombination dynamics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 15175 RSC .
S. R. Cowan, N. Banerji, W. L. Leong and A. J. Heeger, Charge formation, recombination, and sweep-out dynamics in organic solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1116–1128 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie and P. W. M. Blom, Origin of the light intensity dependence of the short-circuit current of polymer/fullerene solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 203502 CrossRef .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Recombination in polymer-fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 82, 245207 CrossRef .
J. Vollbrecht, V. V. Brus, S.-J. Ko, J. Lee, A. Karki, D. X. Cao, K. Cho, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Quantifying the nongeminate recombination dynamics in nonfullerene bulk heterojunction organic solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901438 CrossRef .
J. Vollbrecht and V. V. Brus, On the recombination order of surface recombination under open circuit conditions, Org. Electron., 2020, 86, 105905 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Brus, Light dependent open-circuit voltage of organic bulk heterojunction solar cells in the presence of surface recombination, Org. Electron., 2016, 29, 1 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, M. O. Reese, B. L. Rupert, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Ultrasonic spray deposition for production of organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 447 CrossRef CAS .
G. Susanna, L. Salamandra, T. M. Brown, A. Di Carlo, F. Brunetti and A. Reale, Airbrush spray-coating of polymer bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1775 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Tait, B. P. Rand and P. Heremans, Concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating for donor:acceptor and thickness optimization of organic solar cells, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1002 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Z. Chen, D. Yang, F. Wu, X. Zhao and X. Yang, Fabricating high performance polymer photovoltaic modules by creating large-scale uniform films, Org. Electron., 2016, 32, 126 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, Z. Dai, B. Chen, R. Ji, X. Yang, R. Hu, J. Zhu and L. Li, Well-Dispersed Cu2ZnSnS4 Nanocrystals Synthesized from Alcohols and Their Applications for Polymer Photovoltaics, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 550 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cheng, Q. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Yang, R. Hu, J. Huang, J. Yu and L. Li, Low-temperature preparation of ZnO thin film by atmospheric mist chemistry vapor deposition for flexible organic solar cells, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 7004 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Scarratt, J. Griffin, T. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Yi, A. Iraqi and D. G. Lidzey, Polymer-based solar cells having an active area of 1.6 cm2 fabricated via spray coating, APL Mater., 2015, 24, 275 Search PubMed .
F. M. A. Almuntaser, S. Majumder, J. V. Sali and B. R. Sankapal, Inverted organic solar cell with ultrasonic spray deposited active layer, Optik, 2017, 131, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
R. Green, A. Morfa, A. J. Ferguson, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles and S. E. Shaheen, Performance of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices prepared by airbrush spray deposition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033301 CrossRef .
L. Reshma and K. Santhakumar, Non-fullerene organic solar cells with 7% efficiency and excellent air stability through morphological and interfacial engineering, Org. Electron., 2017, 47, 35 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Kang, Y.-J. Kang, S. Jung, M. Song, D.-G. Kim, C. Su Kim and S. H. Kim, Fully spray-coated inverted organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 103, 76 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Kim, W.-S. Chung, K. Kim, D. Y. Kim, K.-J. Paeng, S. M. Jo and S.-Y. Jang, Performance Optimization of Polymer Solar Cells Using Electrostatically Sprayed Photoactive Layers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3538 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, M. Abbas, S. K. Shah, R. Tuerhong, A. Generosi, B. Paci, L. Hirsch and R. Gunnella, Realization of solution processed multi-layer bulk heterojunction organic solar cells by electro-spray deposition, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2130 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahira, A. Toda, K. Suzuki and T. Fukuda, Highly efficient organic photovoltaic cells fabricated by electrospray deposition using a non-halogenated solution, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1600536 CrossRef .
T. Fukuda, A. Toda, K. Takahira, D. Kuzuhara and N. Yoshimoto, Improved performance of organic photovoltaic cells with PTB7-Th:PC71 BM by optimized solvent evaporation time in electrospray deposition, Org. Electron., 2017, 48, 96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, G. Kim, J. Lee and K. Lee, Morphology controlled bulk-heterojunction layers of fully electro-spray coated organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 272 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aernouts, T. Aleksandrov, C. Girotto, J. Genoe and J. Poortmans, Polymer based organic solar cells using ink-jet printed active layers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033306 CrossRef .
A. Teichler, R. Eckardt, S. Hoeppener, C. Friebe, J. Perelaer, A. Senes, M. Morana, C. J. Brabec and U. S. Schubert, Combinatorial Screening of Polymer:Fullerene Blends for Organic Solar Cells by Inkjet Printing, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 105 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hermerschmidt, P. Papagiorgis, A. Savva, C. Christodoulou, G. Itskos and S. A. Choulis, Inkjet printing processing conditions for bulk-heterojunction solar cells using two high-performing conjugated polymer donors, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 474 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eom, H. Park, S. H. Mujawar, S. C. Yoon, S.-S. Kim, S.-I. Na, S.-J. Kang, D. Khim, D.-Y. Kim and S.-H. Lee, High efficiency polymer solar cells via sequential inkjet-printing of PEDOT:PSS and P3HT:PCBM inks with additives, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1516 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Eggenhuisen, Y. Galagan, A. F. K. V. Biezemans, T. M. W. L. Slaats, W. P. Voorthuijzen, S. Kommeren, S. Shanmugam, J. P. Teunissen, A. Hadipour, W. J. H. Verhees, S. C. Veenstra, M. J. J. Coenen, J. Gilot, R. Andriessen and W. A. Groen, High efficiency, fully inkjet printed organic solar cells with freedom of design, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7255 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta02890a‡ These authors contributed equally: Ping Yang and Tianqi Zhai.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the aerosol-printing production line: 3 vibrating mesh atomizers (VMAs) for printing the hole transport layer, photoactive layer, and electron transport layer, respectively; heating chambers for annealing the hole transport layer and active layer. (b) The schematic of the vibrating mesh atomizer. (c) The SEM image of the VMA showing hundreds of micro-orifices. (d) The size distribution of droplets produced by VMA. (e) Device configuration and the chemical structures of PTQ10 and Y6-BO.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Unmounted VMA in operation, showing fine mist. (b) The semi-transparent side view of the VMA with the gas chamber and slit nozzle. (c) The actual printing nozzle in operation, with the aerosol illuminated by a green laser beam. The solution flow rate is Ql = 100 μL min−1, and the carrier gas (N2) flow rate is Qgas = 2 L min−1. (d) The relationship between Stokes number Stk and the carrier gas flow rate Qgas. (e) The relationship of dry-film thickness with the solution flow rate Ql and printing speed V for the solution of PTQ10:Y6-BO in O-XY (8 mg mL−1).	 
τ = m/(3πμgd) = ρdπd2/(18μg)	(2)
	(3)
te = d2/Ke	(4)
tr = w/ut	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 3  The levelling of the liquid film. (a) Schematic of a wavy film with wavelength λ. (b) The relationship between the levelling time and wavelength of the liquid wavy film. (c) The wavelength observed right after the liquid film is printed (printing parameters: Ql = 100 μL min−1, Qgas = 2 L min−1, V = 3 mm s−1, T = 27 °C, U = 3.03 m s−1), Stk = 0.46. (d) Photograph of the dried films showing overall levelled uniform thickness (the ITO glass size is 15 mm × 20 mm).	 

 	Fig. 4  Morphological characteristics of aerosol-printed and spin-coated (CF as solvent) PTQ10:Y6-BO films: (a) AFM surface topographic images (size: 5 × 5 μm2), (b) TEM images, (c) 2D GISAXS patterns, (d) 2D GIWAXS maps, (e) 1D GISAXS fitting profiles along the qxy axis, (f) GIWAXS line cuts of aerosol printed and spin coated PTQ10:Y6-BO films, and (g) the UV-vis absorption spectra of PTQ10:Y6-BO.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves under the illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, (b) EQE curves, (c) carrier mobilities, (d) Jph–Veff curves, (e) Jsc–Plight curves, and (f) Voc–Plight curves of the aerosol-printed and reference OSCs.	 


Aerosol printing (active layer)	0.865	25.45	71.18	15.65 (15.40)
Aerosol printing (active layer)b	0.852	25.58	62.06	13.05 (12.51)
All aerosol printing	0.855	25.93	66.03	14.78 (14.32)
All spin coating (O-XY)	0.861	25.75	63.50	14.08 (13.88)
All spin coating (CF)	0.879	25.34	68.89	15.36 (15.21)

 	Fig. 6  Chronological evolution of PCEs determined by J–V measurements of optimized devices with different droplet-based printing technologies.12–18,20–23,27,55–75 Empty symbols: printing the active layer; half-solid symbols: printing the active layer & HTL; solid symbols: printing the active layer & HTL & ETL. *An ultrathin pneumatic-sprayed active layer stacked on top of the thick ultrasonic-sprayed active layer.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta02890a
‡ These authors contributed equally: Ping Yang and Tianqi Zhai.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
