Light-driven micro/nanomotors: from fundamentals to applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00516D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00516D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6905-6926Light-driven micro/nanomotors: from fundamentals to applications

        
          
            Leilei 
            Xu†
, 
      
        
          
            Fangzhi 
            Mou†
, 
      
        
          
            Haotian 
            Gong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ming 
            Luo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jianguo 
            Guan
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, P. R. China. E-mail: guanjg@whut.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-27-87879468
Received 
      19th August 2017
    First published on 26th September 2017AbstractLight, as an external stimulus, is capable of driving the motion of micro/nanomotors (MNMs) with the advantages of reversible, wireless and remote manoeuvre on demand with excellent spatial and temporal resolution. This review focuses on the state-of-the-art light-driven MNMs, which are able to move in liquids or on a substrate surface by converting light energy into mechanical work. The general design strategies for constructing asymmetric fields around light-driven MNMs to propel themselves are introduced as well as the photoactive materials for light-driven MNMs, including photocatalytic materials, photothermal materials and photochromic materials. Then, the propulsion mechanisms and motion behaviors of the so far developed light-driven MNMs are illustrated in detail involving light-induced phoretic propulsion, bubble recoil and interfacial tension gradient, followed by recent progress in the light-driven movement of liquid crystalline elastomers based on light-induced deformation. An outlook is further presented on the future development of light-driven MNMs towards overcoming key challenges after summarizing the potential applications in biomedical, environmental and micro/nanoengineering fields.
Leilei Xu
Leilei Xu received her PhD in Physical Chemistry from Northeast Normal University in 2009 and worked as a Postdoc at Wuhan University of Technology (WUT) supervised by Prof. Jianguo Guan. In 2012, she joined WUT as an associate professor. At the beginning of 2016, she went to the University of California, Davis, as a visiting scholar. Her current research is focused on micro/nanofunctional materials for solar energy conversion involving photocatalysis and light-driven micro/nanomotors.
Fangzhi Mou
Fangzhi Mou received his PhD in materials science from the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing (SKLATMSP), Wuhan University of Technology in 2012. Between 2010 and 2011, he was a visiting PhD student at Washington University in St. Louis, USA. He then joined SKLATMSP at Wuhan University of Technology as an assistant professor and became an associate professor in 2013. His research interests include micro/nanomotors, responsive photonic crystals and their applications.
Jianguo Guan
Jianguo Guan is a Changjiang Scholar distinguished Professor of MOE, China, and Chief Professor of Wuhan University of Technology. He received his PhD in Electronic Materials and Devices from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 1995 and conducted his research at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2000–2001), and Washington University in St Louis, USA (2008–2009). He co-authored over 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals. His current research interest focuses on conducting/magnetic composite materials, micro/nanomotors, photonic crystals and metamaterials.
1. Introduction
Motors are devices that can convert other forms of energy into mechanical energy so as to produce motion. They play important roles in the development of human beings. Inspired by the movie “Fantastic Voyage” screened in 1966, the miniaturization of motors towards micro/nanoscale has attracted intensive interests of scientists for exploring the microscopic world.1–4 However, the construction of micro/nanomotors (MNMs) was once greatly challenging due to the inadaptability of macroscopic principles and the difficulties in the fabrication of micro/nanomaterials with sophisticated structures. Early studies of MNMs mostly concentrated on molecular motors5–7 and/or liquid motors.8,9 In the last decade, the advancement of synthesis technologies for micro/nanomaterials has brought about various solid MNMs based on polymers,10,11 metals or inorganic non-metals12–19 as well as their composites.20–23 These MNMs are often referred to as microswimmers, microwalkers, microrobots, etc. and are used to perform complex tasks in microscopic fields, such as environmental remediation,24–29 micro/nano assembly and fabrication,30 microcargo loading/unloading and transport31–35 as well as noninvasive microsurgery.36–45
For constructing MNMs, it is of significance to focus on some phenomena in nature: for example, natural biomotors, which can autonomously move by taking advantage of the spontaneous hydrolysis of biological energy units, such as ATP,46,47 and microorganisms, including some bacteria and sperm cells, which can swim by deforming their body in a screw-like or flexible oar-like way.48 These intriguing phenomena spark the imagination of scientists, who thus create MNMs propelled by chemical reactions,49–52 as well as external fields, such as temperature gradients,53,54 magnetic,55–59 electric,60 light61–63 and acoustic fields,64–70etc. Chemically powered MNMs can generate chemical gradients or bubbles to propel themselves by triggering in situ chemical reactions in a fluid as a reactant and/or a catalyst. For example, taking advantage of the Mg–water reaction, hemocompatible Mg-based Janus micromotors can be efficiently propelled by the in situ chemical reaction which continuously generates hydrogen bubbles.17,71 Due to the significant and fruitful advances in this field over the past few years, chemically powered MNMs have been reviewed from both fabrication and application viewpoints.26,72–74 Magnetically propelled MNMs was firstly discovered in 2005 and subsequetly made great progress. They, because of magnetic components, are responsive to an external magnetic field to induce motion and have been reviewed with respect to various aspects.55,57,75,76 In addition, ultrasound has also been frequently used as an external stimulus for driving MNMs in recent years, which was also reviewed by Cai and Wang in 2015.77
Light has been recognized as a handy stimulus for driving MNMs due to its wireless and remote propagation, as well as its precisely tuned energy input or reversible ON/OFF state of radiation.78 With these unique features of light, the elaborately designed light-driven MNMs may be controlled noninvasively with highly precise spatial and temporal resolution. The earliest example of light-driven MNMs is the azobenzene-based artificial molecular machine reported in the 1980s.79 Since then, light-driven MNMs have become one of the most intriguing topics in nanoscience and nanotechnolgy.80–84 It is worth noticing that light-driven MNMs involve various types of molecular motors,85–91 DNA walkers,92–95 liquid droplets,96–100 solid objects,101–104etc. Their motion can be implemented in liquid10 and/or air105 as well as on liquid/solid interfaces.96,101,106Table 1 briefly lists some typical examples of light-driven MNMs. The early studies of light-driven MNMs mainly concentrated on molecular machines based on the photoisomerization of azobenzene E ⇆ Z or CC bonds, of which chemical structures, driving principles and functions were successively reviewed in the 2000s.82,86–88,106 Subsequent works on light-driven MNMs focused on using light to dictate liquid motion, which impelled a new research field called optofluidics. The corresponding driving principles and design strategies have been specifically reviewed by Damien Baigl.98 Thus, these two types of light-driven MNMs are beyond the scope of this review. This review makes an attempt to streamline the thoughts of developing light-driven MNMs since in 2006 Sen and co-workers demonstrated a reversible pattern formation through photolysis of Ag in a H2O2 solution,107 with a focus on the state-of-the-art light-driven MNMs, especially those in a solid state, which have not been commented before.
Table 1 Some typical examples of light-driven MNMs




Motor class
Representative example
Light-induced physical effect or chemical reaction
Light response time/maximum speed
Motion direction
Driving principle




Molecular motor
Photochromic molecules, such as azobenzene and its derivatives, alkenes, dithienylethenes88,106

cis–trans photo-isomerization
—
Linear and rotary motion
Controlling conformational changes


Nanowalker (DNA molecule)92–95

cis–trans photoisomerization or light-induced cleavage of chemical bonds
—
Directional translation on a solid surface
Ratchet mechanism


Liquid motor
Oil droplets and liquid crystals8,9,99

cis–trans photo-isomerization
—/50 μm s−1
Linear motion toward lower contact angles
Wettability gradient


Water droplets96 or oil droplets108
Photothermal effect or cis–trans photoisomerization
—/3 mm s−1 or 300 μm s−1
Linear motion toward high interfacial tension
Surface tension gradient


Solid motor
Ag and Ag-based particles (e.g. AgCl102) or Janus particles (e.g. SiO2–Ag81)
Photolytic decomposition
≤1.2 s/100 μm s−1
Uncontrollable
Electrolyte gradient


Some semiconductor microspheres (e.g. TiO2 microspheres109) or Janus nanostructures (e.g. TiO2/Si nanotree110)
Photocatalytic reaction
≤0.1 s/∼10 μm s−1
Direction of motion away from light irradiation
Electrolyte/nonelectrolyte gradient


Janus structures or microtubes (e.g. TiO2 microtubes111)
Photocatalytic or photoelectrochemical reaction
≤0.2 s/325 μm s−1
Uncontrollable
Bubble recoil


Janus structures or microtubes partly coated with an Au layer (e.g. Au-mesoporous silica112)
Photothermal effect
≤0.1 s/47.5 μm s−1
Uncontrollable
Temperature gradient


Photoinert materials modified by photochromic molecules (e.g. azobenzene-coated PS nanoparticles10)

cis–trans photo-isometerization
≤0.1 s/15 μm s−1
Linear motion toward high interfacial tension
Surface tension gradient


Liquid crystalline elastomers113

cis–trans photo-isometerization
5 ms/37 μm s−1
Uncontrollable
Deformation




In this review, after briefly retrospecting the history of developed MNMs, we start by introducing the design strategies of light-driven MNMs as well as some photoactive materials (e.g. photocatalytic, photothermal or photochromic materials), which are the foundation of light-driven MNMs. The subsequent section expounds in detail the propulsion mechanisms and motion behaviors of so far developed light-driven MNMs with an emphasis on the driving principles, involving light-induced phoresis propulsion, bubble recoil and interfacial tension gradient as well as deformation propulsion. Afterwards, the preliminary and promising applications of light-driven MNMs in micro/nano assembly and engineering, biomedical and environmental fields, etc. are summarized according to the specific characteristics of light-driven MNMs before an outlook is provided on the future development and main challenges of light-driven MNMs. We expect that the systematic instruction presented here will interest and inspire the readers to further the construction, functionalization and practical application of light-driven MNMs in a broad horizon.
2. Design strategies and photoactive materials for light-driven MNMs
Light-driven MNMs are micro/nanodevices that can convert light energy into their kinetic energy. They are indispensably based on photoactive materials including photocatalytic materials, photothermal materials, photochromic materials, etc. These photoactive materials under light irradiation are capable of absorbing light energy, and then performing photochemical reactions, photothermal conversion, photoisomerization, and so on, respectively. During these processes, an asymmetric field (Y) of chemical products or energy is built across the MNM, thus powering the motion of photoactive materials.4,114 In this case, the motion velocity of MNMs (U) can be expressed in a general form as follows (eqn (1)): U = b∇Y(1)Here, b is the velocity coefficient, and ∇Y is the gradient of a potential function Y such as pressure, electric potential, solute concentration, or temperature.115 This equation clearly indicates that U is propotional to the gradient across the MNM. Increasing the gradient around MNMs is an effective strategy to accelerate their motion.
2.1. Design strategies for light-induced MNMs
Generally, there are two common strategies to construct light-driven MNMs using photoactive materials. One is to enable photoactive materials with elaborately designed asymmetric micro/nanostructures. The other is to create a nonuniform photo-exposure upon a photoactive material. As shown in Fig. 1, they both can make photoactive materials exhibit light-driven motion.
 Fig. 1  Structural configuration of light-driven MNMs. (A) The asymmetric micro/nanostructures adopted in the design of light-driven MNMs, including irregular and Janus micro/nanoparticles as well as tubular and biomimic micro/nanostructures. (B) The alternative design strategies of the light-driven MNMs with symmetric or isotropic micro/nanostructures by using an asymmetric external field. 

Fig. 1A shows the illustration of typical asymmetric structures used for fabricating light-driven MNMs. Irregular photoactive micro/nanoparticles with shape asymmetry and anisotropic surface properties, which could lead to nonuniformly distributed photochemical reaction products or light-induced energy fields around themselves, are possible options for the design of light-driven MNMs but with scarce successful cases due to the weak driving force and motion uncontrollability. Janus micro/nanostructures, which exhibit inherently anisotropic chemical and physical properties in a single particle, are the most common structures adopted in the design of light-driven MNMs by employing their asymmetric surface photochemical reactions and photophysical effects to establish an asymmetric field. The fabrication of Janus micro/nanostructures as light-driven MNMs is usually achieved by some physical approaches including physical vapor deposition,62,63 encapsulation,30 and so on. Tubular micro/nanostructures generally show distinct photoactivities of inner and outer surfaces or different mass diffusion behaviors in the confined inner void and outer infinite space. Thus, they are promising candidates for light-driven MNMs based on bubble recoil or phoretic propulsion. Such tubular micro/nanostructures are usually prepared by dry spinning111 or template-assisted layer-by-layer assembly.116 Besides these three typical structured light-driven MNMs, biomimic micro/nanostructures can also be employed for light-driven MNMs.113
Alternatively, an asymmetric field may form across symmetric or isotropic photoactive micro/nanoparticles when light asymmetrically illuminates them. In this case, the symmetric or isotropic photoactive micro/nanoparticles can directly become light-driven MNMs. As shown in Fig. 1B, oblique light irradiation may result in a non-uniform photo-exposure of an isotropic particle due to the limited penetration depth of light in the particle. Thus, asymmetrical surface chemical reactions are induced across the particle, and an asymmetric concentration (reactant or product) gradient field is then built to propel the motion of the particle.109 On the other hand, the non-uniform light irradiation (structured light irradiation) can also induce a non-uniform photo-exposure of MNMs. As a result, an asymmetric body deformation occurs on the light-induced deformation materials, eventually resulting in the directional propulsion of the MNMs.117
2.2. Photoactive materials for light-induced MNMs
Besides the unique asymmetric structural configuration or asymmetric external light field, the design of light-driven MNMs highly relies on the used photoactive materials, which are briefly introduced as follows.

2.2.1. Photocatalytic (or photolytic) materials. 
Among light-driven MNMs, photochemically powered MNMs are the most intensively investigated. They are usually constructed by at least one photocatalytic material, where a photocatalytic reaction occurs with the depletion of reactants and the generation of products. The asymmetric structure or the asymmetric light enrichment establishes a solute concentration gradient (electrolyte or non-electrolyte) and/or generates bubbles in a given direction around MNMs.62,63,111 For photocatalysts with low photo-stability, photolytic reactions may also occur during the photocatalytic process, causing electrolytes to form a concentration gradient. The generation of the solute concentration gradient from either photocatalytic or photolytic reactions can power the movement of MNMs because of phoretic flows.
The most common photocatalytic materials used for designing photochemically powered MNMs are semiconductors with definite band gaps (Eg) which determine their light response regions.118 Under irradiation of light with photonic energy (E = hν = hc/λ, where c is the speed of light, h is the Planck constant and λ is the wavelength) larger than Eg, photocatalysts are excited to generate electrons, which then transfer to the conduction bands (CBs), leaving holes in the valence bands (VBs). Then, photoexcited electrons and holes transport to the surface and participate in redox reactions. The positions of CBs and VBs determine the redox abilities of photogenerated electrons and holes. For example, orthorhombic Ta2O5, which has a more negative CB (about −0.40 eV) than anatase TiO2, possesses a much stronger reduction ability of photoexcited electrons being in favor of photocatalytic hydrogen production.119 Some reactions, such as the reduction of H+, O2 or CO2, normally rely on the more negative CB bottom than the reduction potentials. Similarly, the more positive VB top is a prerequisite for oxidation reactions, such as pollutant degradation and alcohol oxidation. Therefore, the desirable photocatalytic materials with an appropriate Eg and CB/VB position should be first taken into account for designing photochemically powered MNMs.
Basically, high photocatalytic efficiency leads to a large concentration gradient, favoring the movement of MNMs. The photocatalytic efficiency is usually described by an apparent quantum efficiency (QE%), which can be calculated according to eqn (2): (2)
As illustrated in Scheme 1, the entire photocatalytic process mainly consists of three steps of generation, transfer and separation as well as redox reactions of photoexcited charge carriers. Thus, utilizing photogenerated charge carriers effectively via accelerating charge transfer and restricting recombination of charge carriers is an applicable strategy to enhance the photocatalytic activity. This is because part of the absorbed energy can be released in the form of luminescence or heat during the recombination of photoexcited charge carriers in traps or surface states, largely deteriorating the performances of photocatalytic materials. Our previous works indicate that the photocatalytic activiy of a certain material not only depends on the inherent properties of photocatalysts, but is also closely related to their crystal structures and some special features including surface area, crystallinity, etc. as well as the interfacial features in the case of heterostructured photocatalysts. By taking tantalum oxides as an example, effective strategies for enhancing photocatalytic activities include (1) the modification of surface structures. The surface areas of In2O3/Ta2O5 and CdS/Ta2O5 photocatalytic materials have been distinctively increased by fabricating mesoporous structures,120,121 which endow them with active sites for H+ ion reduction, and thus improve the activities. (2) The improvement of crystallinity. By building up quasi-equilibrium conditions, hierarchical structures of Ta2O5 and tantalum oxyfluoride composed of single crystalline nanorods122,123 as well as single crystalline TaO2.18Cl0.64 and Ta2O5 microcubes124,125 have been obtained, which overcomes the difficulties in the preparation of single crystalline structures of tantalum oxides stemming from the rapid hydrolysis rates of most tantalum precursors and a high crystallization temperature. This significantly improves the crystallinities of tantalum oxide photocatalysts for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production. (3) The fabrication of well-defined heterostructured photocatalysts. Increased interfacial potential gradients, fewer interfacial defects and minimum interfacial resistances of the heterostructured photocatalysts can accelerate charge transfer and separation to enhance photocatalytic activities.126 The quantum-size effect has also been utilized to increase the interfacial potential gradients of heterostructured composites coupled with an enhanced driving force for charge transfer.120,127 Besides, many other strategies have also been reported to enhance photocatalytic activities, such as the surface doping of metallic or non-metallic elements and the construction of heterostructured composites with noble metals (Ag, Au or Pt, etc.). More information about them can be found in the reviews from Roland Marschall and Xiaobo Chens' groups.128,129
 Scheme 1  Basic process of a photocatalytic reaction upon light irradiation of a semiconductor particle; A: electron acceptor, D: electron donor. 
By means of photolytic and photocatalytic reactions, the so far reported light-driven MNMs mainly involve AgCl particles,107 highly crystalline heterostructured TiO2/Pt,62 amorphous TiO2/Au,130 and TiO2 tubular structures,111etc. Among the so far reported light-driven MNMs, an electrolyte concentration gradient is the main power used to propel their motion in pure water media. In this case, self-electrophoresis and/or self-diffusiophoresis are alternatives according to the light-produced ion species. For MNMs composed of symmetric particles or structures, the remarkable difference between the diffusion rate of negative ions and that of positive ions is steadily used to generate an electrolyte (ion product) concentration gradient, resulting in a net electric field to phoretically propel the motion of charged particles.102,107 The detailed propulsion mechnism will be discussed in section 3.1.1 “Light-induced electrolyte-gradient”. The usual ion-producing reactions are as follows (eqn (3) and (4)): (3) (4)Here, eqn (3) is the photolytic reaction of AgCl particles under UV light irradiation and eqn (4) is the photocatalytic redox reaction in the presence of highly efficient photocatalysts in pure water, such as TiO2 particles.
Photochemically powered Janus MNMs are able to implement asymmetric photocatalytic reactions producing the asymmetric distribution of electrolysis products. This is an alternative strategy to contribute to their motion.62,130 For example, TiO2/Pt(Au) microparticles accumulate more electrons (e−) on the side deposited with Pt or Au, while more holes (h+) remain on the other side of TiO2. As a consequence, the H+ concentration gradient field is formed in pure water media originating from the asymmetric generation and consumption of H+ ions around Janus structures according to eqn (5).62,63 4h+ + 2H2O → O2 + 4H+(5-1)or h+ + H2O → ˙OH + H+(5-2) 2e− + 2H+ → H2(5-3)
In addition to the electrolyte gradient, nonelectrolyte concentration gradients and asymmetric detachment of bubbles may also propel photochemically powered MNMs. They are generated by nonelectrolyte-producing photochemical reactions, which usually occur in H2O2 aqueous media following eqn (6):111,130 (6)When the generated O2 concentration is low, the motion of MNM is based on the O2 concentration gradient around the particles. In contrast, when the generated O2 concentration is high enough for the nucleation and growth of O2 bubbles, the detachment of bubbles from the surface of photocatalysts will thus push their motion. This suggests that the propulsion of MNMs with nonelectrolyte-producing reactions occurring may come from a nonelectrolyte concentration gradient or asymmetric detachment of bubbles depending on the generated gas concentration. The corresponding detailed propulsion mechanisms will be elucidated in sections 3.1.2 “Light-induced non-electrolyte gradient” and 3.2 “Light-induced bubble recoil”.


2.2.2. Photothermal materials. 
Photothermal materials are capable of producing photothermal effects under light irradiation, and thus can be utilized to develop light-driven MNMs.116,131,132 For photothermal effects, the light–heat energy transformation is based on a series of non-radiative processes. Taking gold (Au) nanocrystals for example, mobile carriers generated by photoexcitation gain energy to form hot electrons via electron–electron collisions. Subsequently, the hot electrons cool rapidly due to the established thermal equilibration between the electrons and lattice by electron–phonon interaction. In this way, the absorbed energy is released to the surrounding medium via phonon–phonon relaxation, resulting in an elevated temperature of the surrounding medium.
Photothermal materials commonly include organic photothermal materials,133,134 carbon materials135 and noble metals.136,137 Among them, noble metal nanocrystals may generate localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR), where the photothermal effect can be strongly enhanced.138 As illustrated in Scheme 2, the time-varying electric field associated with the incident light (E0) exerts a force on the gas of negatively charged electrons in the conduction band of the metal and drives them to oscillate colletively.139 At a certain excitation frequency (w), this oscillation will be in resonance with the incident light, resulting in a strong oscillation of the surface electrons. As it is a colletctive motion of a large number of electrons, the photothermal effect of noble metal nanocrystals can be strongly enhanced. The frequency of SPR absorption and scattering is dependent on the metal composition, nanoparticle size and shape, dielectric properties of the surrounding medium/substrate, and presence of inter-particle interactions.140–143
 Scheme 2  Schematic of the interaction of a metal nanosphere with light.139 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
Generally, the temperature distribution around optically stimulated photothermal particles can be described by the heat transfer equation (eqn (7)):144 (7)where r and t are the coordinate and time, T(r, t) is the local temperature, ρ(r), c(r) and k(r) are the mass density, spectial heat and thermal conductivity, respectively, Q(r, t) is the dissipation energy during light irradiation.
For a conical cylinder-like MNM, the heat diffusion equation can be adapted as eqn (8):116 (8)where hcAdT is the heat transfer through convection, A is the heat transfer area of the MNM surface, hc is the convective heat transfer coefficient of the process, dT is the temperature difference between the surface and the fluid.
For a single, spherical particle, the local temperature distribution is simply described by eqn (9):144 (9)in which V is the volume of photothermal particles, Q is the energy from light irradiation, k0 is the thermal conductivity of the surrounding medium, r is the distance from the center of photothermal particles. This equation includes the important dependence of temperature on the volume of particles (V) and the input energy (Q) from light.
As Link and El-Sayed reported, the generated hot electron temperature is easy to reach several thousand kelvins, and the lattice temperature can reach several tens of degrees with a low excitation power of 100 nJ.145 The high photothermal conversion efficiency of noble nanocrystals provides a great possibility of forming a temperature gradient in solution that can be applied in the propulsion of MNMs. In view of this, a large number of light-driven MNMs with asymmetric and/or confined structures have been developed, such as half Au-coated Janus particles112 and tubular rocket functionalized with Au nanoshells.116


2.2.3. Photochromic materials. 
Photochromic materials can undergo reversible transformation between two isomeric forms under light irradiation. The transformation mechanisms are generally based on some typically reversible reactions including cis–trans isomerization, pericyclic reactions, dissociation processes, intramolecular hydrogen transfers or group transfers, and electron transfers (oxidation–reduction).146 This results in the alteration of physical and chemical properties involving wettability, surface free energy and liquid crystal alignment.106 Taking advantage of this property of photochromic materials, light-driven MNMs can be designed.
A typical example is the most developed molecular switches and motors based on light-triggered trans–cis conversion of azobenzene and its derivatives' photoisomerization.89,96Eqn (10) indicates that upon irradiation of UV light, azobenzene units form cis isomers with a large dipole moment, while visble light irradiation can transform the cis isomers into the trans forms. (10)Compared to the trans isomers, the exposed surface of the cis forms has a high surface free energy. In this way, a surface energy gradient is generated via the light-driven trans–cis isomerization to propel the motion of MNMs on photo-responsive surfaces such as azobenzene-coated solid substrates or in aqueous solutions of azobenzene surfactants.104 Recently, azobenzene has also been employed as a photoactive molecule to modify polystryrene (PS) microspheres for their motion.10 (11)Eqn (11) shows the light-induced spiropyran pericyclic reaction.146 The transformation between the polar merocyanine form and the neutral spiro form accompanies a water affinity change, altering the interfacial tension with polar media. This can also be used to design light-driven MNMs. The detailed propulsion mechanism will be described in section 3.3 “Light-induced interfacial tension gradient”.
Liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs), as a representive soft deformation material, are composed of liquid crystal units (mesogens) and a polymer network. They possess both liquid crystal orientational order and elastic properties.147 Photoactive LCEs can produce light-induced deformation, and are widely used to design light-induced MNMs due to the fully reversible and large-amplitude shape-response to light stimuli. Photoactive LCEs are generally obtained by incorporating photochromic molecules into the LC networks. They can contract or expand under light stimuli, performing analogous worm-like movements. The light-induced deformation mechanism of photoactive LCEs is attributed to the photoisomerization of photochromic molecules causing order–disorder phase transitions or order–order alignment changes.145 For example, when photochromic molecules are incorporated into nematic LC alignments, the photoisomerization between the rod-like trans isomers and the bent cis isomers will break up the order of LC alignment and induce the contraction of LCEs due to the obvious change in molecular conformation under light stimulation. Modulating the irradiated light can endow the body shape of LCEs with reversible expansion and contraction, thus enabling mobility like the peristalsis of annelids. Taking into account this principle, light-driven MNMs can be grounded on liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs), which will be discussed in detail below.113,117

3. Propulsion mechanisms and motion behaviors of light-driven MNMs
When a locomotive object is scaled down to a low Reynolds number system, viscous forces and Brownian randomization have enormous influences on its motion. Thus a light-driven MNM has to overcome the viscous drag in the fluid and it constantly requires a driving force to impel itself to move. In the last decade, a number of models have been reported for guiding the design of such systems via establishing an asymmetric field across the photoactive micro/nanoparticles to break the symmetry of the pressure distribution, eventually resulting in the motion of MNMs. In terms of the nature of the light-induced driving force, the propulsion mechanisms for light-driven MNMs are summed up being classified into light-induced phoretic propulsion, bubble recoil, interfacial tension gradient propulsion and deformation propulsion.
3.1. Light-induced phoretic propulsion
Phoretic propulsion often refers to the motion of MNMs based on self-electrophoresis, self-diffusiophoresis and self-thermophoresis phenomena, etc. It is caused by asymmetric gradient fields including chemical or temperature gradient. Light-induced phoretic propulsion accounts for a large proportion of the reported light-driven MNMs. In terms of the gradient sources for propulsion, light-induced phoretic propulsion is in detail described as the following three subdivisions of light-induced electrolyte, nonelectrolyte and temperature gradients.

3.1.1. Light-induced electrolyte gradient. 
For the so far reported light-driven MNMs with electrolyte gradients across them, the electrolyte gradients intrinsically derive from ion-producing photochemical reactions, and their motions are on the basis of self-electrophoresis or self-diffusiophoresis, being related to the reaction products. Self-electrophoresis refers to the motion of a charged micro/nanoparticle in a self-generated electric field (E) resulting from the asymmetric distribution of ions across the particle, such as a H+ gradient stemming from H+-producing photocatalytic reactions. As the established electrolyte-gradient arises from the asymmetric generation/depletion of photogenerated H+ ions under light irradiation, a local E through the H+ gradient is generated, and thus the charged MNMs move in response to the self-generated E. Their motion can be depicted by self-electrophoresis with a direction being dependent on their surface charges.62,63,110
Another kind of light-induced electrolyte gradient propulsion system is based on self-diffusiophoresis. Early in 1947 B. V. Derjaguin and others theoretically predicted and experimentally established diffusiophoresis,115,148 which represents the spontaneous motion of dispersed particles in a fluid induced by a solute diffusion gradient. As a photochemical reaction of MNMs can generate cations and anions with a great difference between their diffusivities, their diffusion can give rise to an electrolyte gradient to propel the motion of MNMs. Basically, if one of these ions diffuses faster than the other, a diffusion-induced electric field (E) is established, which can drive both particle movement through electrophoresis and fluid flow along the charged substrate through electroosmosis. The electroosmotic flow can push the passive particles toward or away from the photoresponsive particles depending on the surface charge of the substrate. On the other hand, the overall electrolyte concentration is higher near the surface of the particle, which causes a chemophoretic flow in the direction of lower electrolyte concentration (Fig. 2). Therefore, the motion velocity (U) of the particle driven by the electrolyte gradient can be described as eqn (12):149 (12)Here, dln(C)/dx is the electrolyte gradient, Dc and Da are the diffusivities of the photo-induced cations and anions, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, e is the elementary charge, ε is the solution permittivity, η is the dynamic viscosity of the solution, ζp and ζs are the zeta potential of the particle and substrate, respectively.102 In this case, the co-effect of electrophoresis, electroosmosis and chemophoresis powers the movement of MNMs. In general, as the chemophoretic flow in electrolyte-gradient propelled systems is negligible, the motion of electrolyte gradient driven MNMs usually depends on the electrophoresis and electroosmosis. For the so far reported light-driven MNMs powered by an electrolyte gradient, the electrolyte gradient mainly relies on photochemically generated H+ or OH− ions, which undergo relatively fast diffusion. Now, we discuss them below in detail.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the electrolyte-gradient propulsion.149 Copyright 2013, Elsevier Ltd. 
In 2006 Sen et al. from the Pennsylvania State University discovered the first light-driven system, where Ag photolysis formed a reversible pattern. In this system, the photolytic decomposition of H2O2 at a Ag feature generates Ag+ and OOH− ions under UV light irradiation.107 They will diffuse away from the Ag feature with different diffusion coefficients. This leads to a diffusion-induced electric field, responsible for the observed diffusiophoretic motion. Inspired by this discovery, a number of Ag-based light-driven MNMs based on self-diffusiophoresis have attracted much attention due to their photolytic character. Ibele and co-workers in 2009 pioneered the first autonomous MNM propelled by a light-induced electrolyte gradient arising from the photolysis of AgCl particles (Fig. 3A).81,102 The asymmetric photodecomposition of AgCl particles due to heterogeneity or nonuniform photoexposure creates a localized electrolyte gradient deriving from the much faster diffusion of H+ than Cl−, which powers the autonomous motion in deionized water with a speed of 100 μm s−1. Influenced by the net electric field, the AgCl MNMs exhibit a schooling behavior and guide the motion of passive objects such as amidine-functionalized polystyrene microspheres and silica particles. This discovery opens up an opportunity for the coordinated movement of objects that are not directly attached to each other. Subsequently, Duan et al. analyzed the motion patterns of AgCl particles under UV light involving four distinct classes of AgCl particles (inert isolated, active isolated, active coupled, and active schooled) using three different diffusive behaviors (ballistic motion, enhanced diffusion and subdiffusion).61 A more recent work indicated that increasing the number of active sites by a microstar-shaped morphology can facilitate the motion of AgCl MNMs.150 However, AgCl MNMs exhibit normal diffusion at greater time intervals owing to the generation of an Ag byproduct, which covers the particle surfaces and thus impedes the ion-producing reactions. Upon adding H2O2 into the solution, an alternated oscillation between single-particle and collective behaviors of light-driven AgCl MNMs was subsequently discovered.14 Also in the same year, Sen and Velegol reported SiO2–Ag Janus particles as MNMs with a motion speed of ∼2 μm s−1 by means of the photochemical reaction of Ag and H2O2 solution upon UV light irradiation.81 In order to direct the MNMs, magnetic Dynabead microspheres were introduced to couple with silver to fabricate micrometer-sized colloidal heterodoublets by Darrell Velegol's group (Fig. 3B).59 Besides Ag and AgCl, photolysis was also found over some semiconductors, especially for those with narrower band gaps, under UV or visible light irradiation. Chen and coworkers reported some isotropic semiconductor MNMs (e.g. ZnO, CdS or Ag3PO4, etc.) that experience intensive photocorrosion and generate electrolytes such as Zn2+, Cd2+, Ag+ and H+, etc. in water under light illumination. Thus, they form an electrolyte gradient between the irradiated side and the shady side to propel their motion.109 The above examples clearly suggest that electrolyte gradients can form around MNMs via the asymmetric photolysis (or photocorrosion) of photoactive materials for self-propulsion. However, self-consumption will obviously limit the lifetime and thus the applications of these kinds of MNMs to some extent.
Different from the above light-driven MNMs that are self-consumed, those based on photocatalytic materials are stable while moving. Taking advantage of the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 particles, the Sen group reported MNMs that can move and perform reversible exclusion–contraction microfireworks under UV light irradiation.118 Their motion could be ascribed to the co-effect of the electrophoretic force and electroosmotic flow from the uneven distribution of some photogenerated chemical species, such as ˙O2−, ˙OH, H+, OH−, etc. upon UV light irradiation. The reversible exclusion–contraction microfireworks could be repeated by switching “ON/OFF” UV light and modified by adding radical scavengers or hole/electron scavengers. In contrast, Janus particles of TiO2/Pt62 (Fig. 3C) and TiO2/Au63 (Fig. 3D) MNMs can asymmetrically generate or consume H+ ions, resulting in H+ ion gradients under UV light irradiation. They are driven by self-electrophoresis. The H+ ion gradient across from TiO2 to Pt (or Au) results in a local E, propelling the micromotors with the TiO2 side forward. Furthermore, Gao et al. reported that the generated E can also attract charged colloidal particles in the vicinity to form dynamic colloidal molecules due to the electrostatic interactions between the MNM and the charged colloidal particles.151 In order to more efficiently utilize solar light, Jang et al. reported a multi-wavelength light-responsive Janus micromotor, Au/B-TiO2, consisting of a black TiO2 microsphere half coated with an Au layer. Due to the extended spectrum absorption of black TiO2 from 300 to 800 nm, the Janus MNMs can be driven by light over a broad range of wavelengths including UV, blue, cyan, green and red light.152 This result is expected to broaden the application range of the MNMs, especially in environmental remediation.
 Fig. 3  Light-induced electrolyte gradient propelled MNMs. (A) Schematic drawing of the formation of electrolyte gradient around a silver chloride microparticle in response to UV light.81 Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) SEM image of the silver-Dynabead heterodoublets and schematic of a system undergoing electrophoresis.59 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (C) Trajectories of light-driven TiO2/Pt MNMs in water without (a) and with (b) UV irradiation within a period of 1 s and schematic diagram of the propulsion mechanism.62 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic of a Au/B-TiO2 MNM powered by a multiwavelength light-induced H+ ion gradient.152 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (E) Schematic of a TiO2/Si nanotree MNM propulsion mechanism with side irradiation and migration under global illumination in 0.1% H2O2 or a mixture solution of 1,4-benzoquinone and hydroquinone (1 mM:10 mM).110 Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. (F) Structure characterization and schematic diagram of silicon nanowires (scale bar: 10 μm; upper right, scale bar: 500 nm).156 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, narrow bandgap semiconductor particles have also been applied for fabricating MNMs that can be propelled by visible light irradiation on the basis of light-induced electrolyte gradient. BiOI is an important visible light-reponsive photocatalytic material. Recently, Dong et al. developed a visible-light-driven BiOI-based Janus MNM half coated with light-inert layers, such as Au, Pt and Al2O3.153 The self-electrophoresis mechanism derived from light-induced H+ ion gradient contributes to its motion. Analogously, Cu2O/Au Janus MNMs were also discovered to be propelled by visible light irradiation in view of light-induced self-electrophoresis.154 In this study, electrochemical methods were firstly utilized for identifying the self-electrophoresis mechanism of MNMs. Esplandiu et al. reported a simple micropump composed of noble metals and doped silicon for guiding fluid motion under visible light irradiation.155
Photoelectrochemical reactions generating anions and cations respectively at the photocathode and photoanode are also utilized to build an asymmetrical electrolyte-gradient field for propelling MNMs by self-electrophoresis. Dai and coworkers recently reported a light-driven MNM of a Janus TiO2/Si nanotree, in which the TiO2 nanowire head and Si nanowire tail respectively acted as the photocathode and photoanode at opposite ends to induce a photoelectrochemical reaction under light irradiation. The shading effect of the large TiO2 nanowire head enabled an asymmetric distribution of photocatalytically generated H+ ions, and thus attained the precise steering of light-driven nanotrees (Fig. 3E).110 It is worth mentioning that this MNM self-aligns along the direction of light propagation and mimics the positive or negative phototaxis by altering the zeta potential of the photoanode. Its controllable motion is significant for more complicated micro/nanosystems. More recently, the same group further reported another visible/near-infrared light-driven MNM of a single-crystalline silicon nanowire based on a photoelectrochemical reaction.156 By thermal diffusion doping of phosphorous, the single-crystalline silicon nanowire is composed of n-Si photocathode and p-Si photoanode that drive the photoelectrochemical reaction upon light illumination. As a result, the unbalanced distribution of the generated H+ and OH− forms E propelling the motion of the single-crystalline silicon nanowire (Fig. 1F). Notably, being different from photocatalytic MNMs, the spectral response of silicon nanowire motors can be tuned by the nanowires' diameters due to optical resonance. These two studies demonstrate a new protocol for designing light-driven MNMs by means of solar cells which are capable of effectively harvesting light energy. This year Zhou et al. have also reported a tadpole-shaped Si–Au micromotor that can move in either deionized water or organic solvents without chemical fuels.157 It is powered by visible-light-induced self-electrophoresis on the basis of the photoelectochemical reaction and photoconductivity of amorphous Si.


3.1.2. Light-induced nonelectrolyte gradient. 
Being analogous to the formation of a light-induced electrolyte gradient across MNMs, photocatalytic reactions which generate neutral molecules over a photocatalyst can also be used to construct nonelectrolyte gradients using either asymmetric structures of photocatalysts like Janus particles or asymmetric photoexposure upon an isotropic photocatalyst, which both make the photocatalytic reactions occur asymmetrically. In this way, light-driven MNMs can be designed in principle. They are propelled by self-diffusiophoresis. For example, on the basis of the photodecomposition of H2O2 to generate O2 upon light irradiation in the presence of semiconducting photocatalysts, a number of light-driven MNMs have been developed including peanut Fe2O3 dockers,158,159 isotropic TiO2 microparticles109,160 and Janus Au–WO3@C microspheres.161 In the neutral molecule diffusiophoresis, the generated molecules interact with the surface of MNMs to create an asymmetric pressure gradient as an osmotic force to power the movements of MNMs. The U of light-induced noneletrolyte-gradient driven MNMs is described by eqn (13) according to the diffusiophoresis model:109 (13)where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the solution temperature, η is the viscosity of the fluid, and ∇C is the molecule concentration gradient, K and L are the Gibbs' absorption strength and the length of the MNM–solute interaction. As nonelectrolytes generally have a relatively low diffusivity, MNMs driven by a nonelectrolyte gradient often shows a velocity of a few micrometers per second, much slower than that of those driven by an electrolyte gradient. The locomotion direction of the MNM depends on whether the MNM–solute interaction is repulsive or attractive.
As an example, self-propelled colloidal Fe2O3 dockers with a “peanut” shape are driven by blue light irradiation and move in a basic solution (pH ∼8.5) containing 1 wt% H2O2.158 The motion of dockers could be attributed to the unbalanced osmotic pressure caused by the concentration gradients of H2O2 and O2 deriving from the photodecomposition of H2O2 using Fe2O3 as the photocatalyst. The parking of the dockers could be controlled by turning the light off due to the termination of the photocatalytic reaction and the disappearance of the chemical gradient (Fig. 4A). A similar example of light-driven MNMs following the same principle is Fe2O3 cubic motors.144 In an extension to the study of peanut Fe2O3 MNMs, Lin et al. recently discovered an interesting phenomenon that frequent collisions among peanut motors lead to the formation of one-dimensional, active colloidal ribbons along the dipole moment orientation under blue light irradiation.159 The dynamic self-organization comes from the competition of diffusio-osmotic propulsion, phoretic attraction, as well as magnetic dipole–dipole interaction. Simultaneously, due to the existence of light gradient inducing uneven H2O2 comsumption, the colloidal ribbons show a positive phototaxis due to the osmotic flow caused by the diffusion of H2O2 from the periphery to the center of the light spot. Besides the manipulation of motion ON/OFF and velocities, it is noteworthy that the motion direction control of MNMs driven by a nonelectrolyte gradient is also achieved without the assistance of other external fields. Chen et al. developed isotropic TiO2 microparticles driven by a noneletrolyte gradient as an intelligent photoresponsive MNM.109 The as-developed TiO2 MNMs take advantage of the limited penetration depth of light to establish asymmetric photocatalytic reactions over them and produce a directional net O2 concentration gradient independent of Brownian motion (Fig. 4B(a and b)). As a result, the TiO2 MNMs moved away from the light source displaying negative phototaxis. In view of this, the movement of the TiO2 particles can be finely manipulated along a predesigned path. This result significantly opens up new opportunities for the realization of novel functions.
 Fig. 4  Light-induced noneletrolyte-gradient propelled MNMs. (A) The hematite peanut MNMs. (a) SEM image of the MNMs and (b) schematic of docking triggered by blue light irradiation. Under light irradiation, the hematite peanut particle docks with a cargo which is unloaded when the light is turned off.158 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic of the phototaxis of an isotropic TiO2 MNM based on the limited penetration depth of light.109 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (C) Schematic of the propulsion mechanism of light-driven Au–WO3@C sphere Janus micromotors.161 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3. Light-induced temperature gradient. 
A light-induced temperature gradient is often used to propel the motion of MNMs by means of self-thermophoresis of photothermal materials. A net thermophoretic force generated by temperature difference can be quantitatively computed by eqn (14):162 F = −C∇T(r,t)(14)Here, the coefficient C = (9πdpη2ka)/(2ρTkp), where dp is the diameter of a particle, η is the fluid viscosity, ka is the fluid thermal conductivity, kp is the particle thermal conductivity, and ρ is the fluid density. Eqn (13) suggests that the thermophoretic force is proportional to the local temperature gradient and the particle diameter.
As the symmetric thermal diffusion causes an offset thermophoretic force, some symmetric photothermal particles usually exhibit Brownian motion under light irradiation. Thus, most temperature-gradient-driven MNMs are designed as Janus structures, which are partially coated with photothermal materials. This is capable of generating and maintaining a temperature gradient across particles under continuous light irradiation. In view of this, Jiang et al. proposed the difference in temperature (ΔT) across Janus particles described by eqn (15):54 (15)where ε is the absorption efficiency of the photothermal side, I is the light intensity, R is the particle radius, ka and kp are the thermal conductivitis of the fluid and the particle, respectively. The self-thermophoretic velocity (U) is described by the Soret coefficient (eqn (16)):54 (16)Here, ST of a Janus particle can be recognized as the average coefficients of two sides.
In view of the temperature-gradient propulsion principle formed by the construction of an asymmetric shape, Han et al. in 2010 created a miniaturized light mill with four blades made from a microporous polymer packed with Au nanoparticles.105 Each blade was composed of convex and concave sides with different amounts of heat generation under light irradiation, which resulted in a temperature gradient across the blade for driving the gas molecules around the MNMs for the rotation of the rotor. In the same year, Jiang and co-workers opened the exploration of light-driven MNMs based on the temperature gradient at a single particle level.54 A Janus particle half-coated with Au was irradiated with a defocused laser beam at 1064 nm. The absorption of the laser at the Au-coated side formed an asymmetric temperature distribution around the Janus particle and created a local temperature gradient of about 2 K across the particle due to the photothermal effect (Fig. 5A). Later, Qian and his colleagues presented a Langevin-type equation to describe the motion dynamics of an Au-coated polystyrene Janus microsphere irradiated with a laser, which produced a temperature gradient of 7 K. They also exploited the steering scheme of thermal fluctuations via numerical simulations and proof-of-principle experiments.163 Along this line, He and co-workers reported a near infrared laser-driven Janus chitosan/alginate multilayer capsule MNM prepared by a layer-by-layer (LBL) technology.130 The moving speed of the MNMs was up to 23.27 μm s−1 at a laser power of 9.6 J cm−2 without adding any fuel. Recently, they further developed fuel-free, NIR-driven Janus mesoporous silica nanoparticle motors (JMSNMs) with a 10 nm Au layer on one side of the MSNMs. Driven by a net thermophoretic force along the asymmetric structure caused by the strong SPR absorption of the Au nanoshells in the NIR region, the JMSNMs moved at an ultrafast speed of ca. 950 body length s−1 (47.5 μm s−1) under an NIR laser power of 70.3 W cm−2.112 A similar NIR-driven Janus microcapsule motor was also repored by Wu et al. with a maximum speed of 42 μm s−1 in water as shown in Fig. 5B.164
 Fig. 5  Light-induced temperature-gradient propelled MNMs. (A) Janus structured MNMs half-coated with Au. (a) Fluorescent tracers and (b) temperature distribution around a MNM under laser irradiation as well as (c) the motion of a MNM in water and in a Triton X-100 solution.54 Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics. (B) NIR-driven Janus polymer multilayer capsule MNMs. (a) Theoretical simulation of the photothermal effect; (b) schematic of the temperature-gradient propulsion principle as well as (c and d) time-lapse images of moving Janus capsule MNMs under defocused NIR irradiation.164 Copyright 2016, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag. (C) The polymeric tubular MNMs driven by NIR illumination: (a) schematic drawing of the driving principle. fi and f0 are the thermophoretic forces generated in the vicinity of the inner and outer surfaces from the photothermal effect of Au nanoshells, while fr represents the net resultant force; (b) schematic illustration of the motion of the polymeric tubular MNMs.116 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides the asymmetric structure of Janus particles, a confined space can also be used to build a temperature gradient. Wu and coworkers demonstrated a conically tubular rocket functionalized with Au nanoshells. The rocket was prepared by the LBL method of alternatively assembling negatively charged poly(styrenesulfonic acid) and positively charged poly(allylamine hydrochloride).116 As Au nanoparticles were selectively deposited on the inner surface of the tubes, a high temperature gradient was generated between the inner and outer surfaces under NIR illumination. Thus, the tubular MNMs showed a high moving speed of 160 μm s−1. The asymmetric structure of the MNMs enabled the tubular MNMs to move towards the direction of small-openings (Fig. 5C).
A nanoactuator is another kind of MNM. Ding and co-workers developed a light-induced nanoactuator by combining temperature-responsive amino-terminated polymer poly(N-isopropyl-acrylamide) (pNIPAM) with charged Au NPs.165 The local change of temperature caused by the plasmonic photothermal effect of the Au NPs resulted in the fast coil-to-globule transition of pNIPAM between the swollen and collapsed states. As the temperature was lower than the critical temperature (32 °C), the pNIPAM coating was inflated with water and the actuators repelled each other, whereas they approached close to the cluster via the strong van der Waals attraction due to the collapse of the pNIPAM coating. In this system, the pNIPAM coatings could perform reversible expansion and contraction millions of times faster than the corresponding bulk polymer due to the plasmonic absorption of Au NPs.
To sum up, the phoretic propulsion of light-triggered MNMs arises from the formation of an asymmetric gradient field caused by an asymmetric structure or nonuniform light-exposure. Therefore, this kind of MNM has its own advantages including easy trigger to move, fast photoresponse and so on. However, the so far developed light-induced MNMs propelled by electrolyte and nonelectrolyte gradients usually require environmentally unfriendly fuels such as H2O2 and do not move in a liquid with a high ionic strength. Besides, the driven power of the MNMs should be further enhanced by increasing the gradient to accelarate their motion, especially in viscous or flowing liquids like hydrogels or blood. Among the three phoretic propulsion mechnisms, the driving power formed by electrolyte gradients is the strongest because of the large diffusivity of ions, but their relatively low energy efficiencies restrict their practical applications to some extent. Light-induced temperature gradient-propelled MNMs have remarkable advantages in biomedical applications as they do not need chemical fuels and also do not generate waste products.

3.2. Light-induced bubble recoil
Unlike the above-discussed light-induced phoretic propulsion, the light-induced bubble propulsion originates from the recoil of bubbles. Nevertheless, in nature it can also be recognized as a gradient-like mechanism deriving from the asymmetric distribution of bubble concentration from photochemical reactions. In fact, there are substantial reported MNMs in which the motion stems from the recoil of bubbles. However, few earlier studies have reported light-induced bubble-propelled MNMs because the generated gases from photochemical reactions generally diffuse to the surrounding rather than form in situ massive bubbles. The so far reported bubble recoil propulsion of light-induced MNMs is mostly dependent on the photocatalytic decomposition of H2O2 according to eqn (6) using the MNMs (e.g. TiO2 or WO3) as photocatalysts. In a photocatalytic O2 generation system, a relatively high concentration of oxygen is generated on the surface of photoactive materials with a high activity.
Mou and colleagues described the formation free energy (ΔG) of a bubble embryo with a radius r on the surface of a TiO2 tubular MNM as follows (eqn (17)):111 ΔG = ΔGvVb + γb–fSb–f + (γt–b − γt–f)St–b(17)where the subscripts b, f and t represent the bubble embryo, the H2O2 aqueous solution and the tube surface, respectively. S and γ are the corresponding surface area and the surface free energy. Vb is the bubble embryo volume and ΔGv is the change in Gibbs free energy per unit volume. Here, ΔGv can be indicated by eqn (18): (18)where Cs is the concentration of the solute, Ceq is the equilibrium concentration or solubility, Ω is the volume per unit, and σ is the supersaturation defined by (Cs − Ceq)/Ceq. From this equation, it is clearly observed that ΔGv is dependent on the oxygen concentration. As σ attains the critical supersaturation of O2 in water, the concentrated oxygen coalesces to generate bubbles with a critical nucleation radius R0. Subsequently, the dissolved oxygen around a bubble coalesces into it causing it to grow until it reaches the detachment radius Rd.
As a result, a bubble propulsion model on the basis of the dynamics of bubble growth and detachment has been established by Gibbs and co-workers.166 As a bubble is released from the surface of MNMs, it results in a momentum change to induce a driving force Fdrive away from the surface of MNMs. The initial detachment velocity (ν0) of a bubble is nonzero and includes a vertical component balanced by the gravitational force and a horizontal component. By neglecting the vertical component, Fdrive is balanced by the viscous drag force Fdrag (for spheres, Fdrag = 6πμrv, where μ is the dynamic viscosity, r is the radius of the spherical MNM, v is the motion speed), when the MNM reaches a constant horizontal velocity (v). Consequently, the motion of MNMs based on the bubble recoil propulsion is directed away from the side of bubble generation. By assuming a constant pressure (P) and chaning volume (V) during the bubble growth, Gibbs and co-workers give an expression for MNM velocity (U) propelled by bubble recoil (eqn (19)): (19)where N is the number of bubbles, Rg is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature, ρ is the density of O2, γ is the interfacial tension of the liquid, c is the bulk concentration of H2O2 and α is the Langmuir adsorption constant. This clearly indicates that U is propotional to c and γ2, which determines the concentration of generated oxygen.
Thus, in order to effectively accumulate gases before diffusion to form bubbles, the MNMs with a confined space for inhibiting gas diffusion such as tubular structures or a high QE% are preferable. In 2013, Tang et al. demonstrated photochemically induced rolling actuation of WO3 coated galinstan liquid metal marbles at a millimeter level in a H2O2 solution beyond imagination.167 By defining a favorable place for hindered diffusion, the generation and growth of bubbles from photocatalytic decomposition of H2O2 eventually provided a rolling force to actuate the marble. Inspired by this study, Mou et al. demonstrated a light-induced bubble-propelled MNM using a TiO2 tubular structure with a maximum speed of 325 μm s−1.111 The O2 molecules generated from the photocatalytic H2O2 decomposition over TiO2 under UV irradiation would nucleate and grow into bubbles inside the TiO2 tubular microengines with an appropriate inner diameter and length due to the accumulative effect of the inner confined void, whereas the outside O2 molecules would diffuse away from the surface (Fig. 6A). It is observed that the confined effect of tubes greatly accelerates the nucleation and growth of bubbles to obtain a light-induced bubble-propelled MNM. Subsequently, following the same propulsion mechanism, light-driven TiO2 nanotube array MNMs are also developed based on microscale arrays of the smallest nanotubes with 50–120 nm inner diameter.168
 Fig. 6  Light-induced bubble-propelled MNMs. (A) The UV light-induced bubble propulsion mechanism of a TiO2 tubular microengine in H2O2 fuel.111 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) The light-induced bubble propulsion mechanism and motion in a fuel solution with 15 wt% H2O2 and 5 wt% Triton-X100 of the Am-TiO2/Au Janus MNM.130 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Improving the photocatalytic performance is an alternative to construct light-induced bubble-propelled MNMs. As reported, amorphous TiO2/Au (Am-TiO2/Au) Janus microparticles could also act as light-induced bubble-propelled MNMs (Fig. 6B) at a speed of 135 μm s−1. The photocatalytic performance of the amorphous TiO2 was dramatically enhanced by in situ H2O2 sensitization.130 In this case, masses of bubbles were generated from the naked Am-TiO2 surface of the Janus microspheres, and their subsequent ejection provided a driving power for the motion of the MNMs. The decomposition of H2O2 to generate microbubbles not only depends on the H2O2 concentration in solution, but also is closely related to the solution temperature. On the basis of this, Wu et al. reported a tube-like MNM triggered by NIR irradiation. It contains a multilayer of poly(allylamine hydrochloride)/poly(styrenesulfonic acid) modified by Pt nanoparticles and a thin Au shell. Adjusting the irradiated NIR intensity can control the motion speed of the MNM because it modulates the temperature of MNMs, which affects the kinetics of the decomposition of H2O2, and thus changes the release frequency of oxygen bubbles.169 Although light-induced bubble propelled MNMs have striking advantages of high power output and high motion speed (up to a few hundred microns per second), some unfavorable factors should also be taken into account including the requirement of toxic fuels and undesirable bubble generation as well as irregular motion trajectories, etc.
3.3. Light-induced interfacial tension gradient
Interfacial tension is an elastic tendency of a fluid interface. Since a fluid with a high tension possesses a larger pull power on the surrounding than that with a low tension, the interfacial tension gradient can naturally cause the fluid flow away from the low tension region to the high tension region. As a consequence, the interfacial tension gradient possibly acts as a driving force to propel MNMs. The motion velocity (U) can be described by eqn (20) according to Stokes law, which is proportional to the particle radius (R) or interfacial tension gradient (Δγ):170 (20)where η is the fluid viscosity.
Generally, the interfacial tension is determined by the constitution of the outermost surfaces, and thus photochromic reactions can be used to alter the interfacial features via manipulating chemical structures of the outermost monomolecular layers at a molecular level. For photochromic materials, such as azobenzenes and its derivatives, their trans and cis isomers exhibit reversible changes in specific physico-chemical properties like dipole moment and affinity to polar molecules under light irradiation. By taking advantage of this fact, we may control the interfacial properties including surface tension and wettability, and thus design light-driven MNMs based on a local interfacial tension gradient. The movements of this kind of MNMs are all towards where the gradient is diminished.
Kausar et al. demonstrated a translational motion of a polystryrene (PS) microsphere on the surface of a liquid-crystalline thin film doped with an azobenzene compound (Fig. 7A). Under UV light irradiation, the azobenzene compound was shown as the cis isomer, and the trans isomer was obtained by visible light irradiation. The motion of the PS microsphere was caused by a surface energy gradient via light-induced trans–cis photoisomerization of azobenzene with a speed of ∼88 μm min−1.104 Subsequently, Abid and co-workers developed azobenzene-coated polymer nanoparticles as light-driven MNMs. The photoisomerization of azobenzene molecules grafted on the surface of polymer nanoparticles supplied sufficient mechanical work to propel the particles in an aqueous medium (Fig. 7B).10 Recently, a hyperbranched polymer, Boltorn H40, has been functionalized by a photochromic molecule of spiropyran (SP), which could be translated to hydrophilic zwitterionic merocyanine (MC) upon UV irradiation.170 The asymmetric distribution of the hydrophilic MC molecules on the surface of polymers derived from asymmetric light irradiation induced an interfacial tension gradient to afford a net propulsive force on the particles. It is demonstrated that through modifying photoactive molecules on the surface of MNMs, the motion of photoinert materials can be achieved by light-induced interfacial tension gradient propulsion. Furthermore, the MNMs propelled by the light-induced interfacial tension gradient may exhibit a phototaxis towards the light source.
 Fig. 7  Light-induced surface tension gradient propelled MNMs. (A) Optical images of the translational motion of a solid particle (PS) on the surface of a liquid-crystalline film doped with DL-azoment.104 Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic of light-driven motion of azobenzene-coated polymer nanoparticles in aqueous media.10 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Light-induced deformation
Liquid crystalline elastomers (LCEs) are hybrid materials containing mesogens coupled with a polymer network structure and possess both the superior elastomeric properties of polymers and the order of nematic liquid crystals.147 Without external stimuli, such as heat and light irradiation, LCEs exhibit the order of nematic liquid crystals with a reversible expansion, whereas they become isotropic showing contraction along the alignment direction of mesogens when they are heated or irradiated by UV light. This reversible expansion and contraction can cause the mobility of LCEs. As LCE-based actuators and sensors using light as an energy source have been reviewed,171,172 we only introduce the latest developments of light-driven LCEs in this section.
Taking advantage of the deformation of LCEs induced by light irradiation, the Wiersma group adopted direct laser writing to fabricate a light-fueled microscopic walker, of which the limbs based on acrylic resin (IP-Dip) were used to separate the LCE from the substrate (Fig. 8A).113 The prepared LCE structure responded the fastest among all the reported LCE muscles. Moreover, the response to light was reversible and the contraction was up to around 20% along the alignment direction of the nematic liquid crystal elastomeric network. By utilizing the adhesion asymmetry of four tilted legs on a substrate, the LCE artificial walker with reversible expansion–contraction deformation is capable of moving on the substrate with a preferred direction due to the shear off anisotropy under a modulated laser beam. Its motion performance was expected to be improved by modulating the walker's geometry, the LCE shape, the leg tilt angle, etc. Sophisticated biomimetic motions can also be achieved by a LCE driven by structured monochromatic light. Due to the trans–cis photoisomerization of the azobenzene dye and the light-induced thermal effect, the LCE stimulated by structured dynamic light fields is like a swimmer and performs travelling-wave motion, stemmed from the sophisticated intrabody deformations in a periodic way (Fig. 8B).117 The photoresponse of the covalently bonded azobenzene dye drives the LCE to experience the nematic-to-isotropic phase transition. This confirms that LCEs are able to perform a bioinspired travelling-wave motion and other complex behaviors via conceiving the special structured light fields. Recently, E. Uchida and co-workers demonstrated an attractive directional and continuous translational motion of 3,3′-dimethylazobenzene (DMAB) crystals on a glass surface by the photoinduced trans–cis isomerization of azobenzenes.101 DMAB existed as the cis-isomer inducing liquefaction under UV light irradiation and as the trans-isomer leading to crystallization under visible light irradiation. The reversible transition between the two phases made the DMAB crystals move on the glass surface, even on a vertical surface, as shown in Fig. 8C.
 Fig. 8  Light-induced motion of liquid crystalline elastomers (LCEs). (A) Light-fueled microscopic walker based on the deformation of LCE.113 (a and b) The deformation of LCE along the long axis under 532 nm laser excitation; (c) slide view of the microscopic walker; and (d) the motion of the microscopic walker under 532 nm laser excitation. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) Light-induced microswimmer driven by biomimetic travelling waves.117 (a) Illustration of the system. The deformation of LCE was modulated by the dynamic light field; and (b) top-view images of the deformation of a cylindrical LCE under a periodic light pattern. Scale bar, 200 μm. Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (C) Photoinduced motion of DMAB crystals.101 (a) Schematic of the crystal motion and (b–g) laser microscope images of the translational motion of DMAB crystals after irradiation for 0 (b), 3 (c), 6 (d), 10 (e), 15 (f) and 20 min (g), respectively. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
3.5. Light-assisted control and propulsion
Besides as a direct stimulus for propelling photoactive materials, light can also act as an assisted energy source to turn on or off as well as modulate the motion of MNMs. Although these MNMs are beyond the scope of light-driven MNMs, they still represent an important aspect for light-controlled MNMs. For instance, Solovev and coworkers used light as a stimulus to start and stop the catalytically bubble-propelled MNMs.103 In this study, the motion of a roll-up Ti/Cr/Pt μ-engine on a Pt-patterned silicon substrate can be slowed by light irradiation, because the consumption of H2O2 on the substrate diminishes the concentration of fuel, which inhibits the generation of microbubbles, and thus slows down or stops the motion of the Ti/Cr/Pt μ-engine. The movement of the μ-engine would be reactivated by dimming the light source. It can be easily observed that light in this study is only a medium to switch off the propulsion of MNMs rather than a stimulus. This work suggests a novel strategy to achieve full wireless control over the propulsion of MNMs. Another strategy for light-assisted propulsion is that utilizing light irradiation to increase the local temperature, which has a positive effect on the motion of MNMs. Wu et al. have reported the near infrared-modulated propulsion of a bubble-driven Janus polymer MNM.173 The polymer multilayer capsule coated with the Pt shell not only acted as a catalyst for the generation of bubbles, but also as a photothermal agent to form a local temperature gradient from the Pt surface to the surrounding. The increased temperature induced the accelerated kinetics of the decomposition of H2O2 fuel, and thus increased the motion speed of the catalytically bubble-propelled MNMs. In an extension to this field, Moo and coworkers recently reported a light-assisted control system, where a simple molecular switch triggered by light irradiation in the medium can easily manipulate the movement of the bimetallic concentric Cu/Pt MNMs.174 The photoisomerization between spiropyrans and merocyanines under UV or visible light irradiation changes the surface tension of the medium, and thus drastically affects the locomotion of the MNMs. Above all, light-assisted control and propulsion represents a simple and attractive strategy to manipulate the motion of MNMs, especially for those MNMs which cannot be triggered by light. In this strategy, the environment in which MNMs move is required to undergo a change in the physical (temperature or surface tension) and chemical properties (concentration of fuels) under light irradiation.
4. Applications of light-driven MNMs
Light-driven MNMs have a noticeable advantage that the autonomous motion can be remotely controlled by an “ON/OFF” switch and intensity of the light irradiation. The phototaxis and rapid response time of light-driven MNMs endow them with the capabilities of intermixing, mapping the route, seeking targets on their own, as well as local heating, etc. which allow unique potential applications involving cargo transport and separation, micro/nano-assembly and processing, environmental remediation and drug delivery as well as photothermal therapy, etc.
4.1. Environmental remediation
Photocatalytic technology has been widely used in pollutant degradation for cleaning up aquatic environments. Light-driven MNMs that are mostly composed of highly efficient photoactive materials can autonomously move in a rapid response to external illumination (less than 0.1 s). Their mobility is expected to endow them with an enhanced efficiency for aquatic environmental remediation. A preliminary exploration on this aspect was carried out by developing water-fueled TiO2/Pt Janus MNMs for organic pollutant (RhB) decomposition in a 96-well plate.62 By means of pulsed light instead of the traditional UV light, the decrease in the motion speed and the reduction in the mass exchange caused by the aggregation of the MNMs were restricted. As a result, the decomposition efficiency was greatly enhanced by the “on-the-fly” photocatalytic reaction shown in Fig. 9. Notably, the water-fueled light-driven MNMs could be applied for environmental remediation, in clear contrast to chemically fuel-driven MNMs175 or mechanically dispersed photocatalytic materials. Ren et al. found that due to the photocatalytic degradation of DCIP and RhB by Au-WO3@C, the moving speed of Au–WO3@C Janus MNMs was accelerated in sodium-2,6-dichloroindophenol (DCIP) and Rhodamine B (RhB) aqueous solutions.161 The dye-induced acceleration behavior of the MNM indicates the feasibility of MNMs applied for envionmental dectection and remediation.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the aggregation and separation of the TiO2/Pt Janus submicromotors and (b) the photocatalytic degradation of RhB with or without the TiO2/Pt Janus submicromotors.62 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Such sensitivity towards light irradiation, as well as their capability to autonomously move in solution, equips light-driven MNMs with unique advantages for environmental remediation. The pairing of autonomous movement and photocatalytic performance has provided new opportunities in the space of dynamic nanoscale motion-based environmental remediation based on light-driven MNMs. Conceivably, their locomotion and motion-induced stirring can largely reduce the reaction time and efficiently distribute the active reactants in the entire solution mixture without the need for external mechanical stirrers, and thus present innovative solutions that could be exploited for photocatalysis technology applied in environmental remediation. Additionally, the small size, excellent dispersibility and the inherent features of MNMs also benefit their application in micro-environmental remediation, such as microchannels and microwells, etc. Nevertheless, the so far developed light-driven MNMs when used in envionmental remediation still evidently suffer from the disadvantages of low efficiencies and indispensable, but usually toxic fuels, which should be overcome via developing highly photoactive materials, structural design strategies and environmentally friendly fuel systems.
4.2. Cargo carriers
Light-driven MNMs that are capable of loading and transporting microcargoes is of great interest for a wide variety of applications, which can be possibly further exploited in micro/nanoengineering involving complex micro/nano-size factories, micro/nanoassembly, and so on. For example, Palacci and co-workers demonstrated a colloidal hematite MNM activated by light and steered by a magnetic field. The docker could load, transport and unload colloidal cargoes immediately operated by light ON/OFF.158 In the absence of magnetic field, the MNMs can also be driven along a predetermined pathway using physical alteration of the substrate. After the light is switched off, the cargo is released due to the the ceased phoretic attraction. This study shows that light-driven MNMs can act as a shepherd to pick up and gather spheres, which is a step forward in making a microscopic factory. Being different from the above light-driven MNMs directed by a magnetic field or inflexible micropatterns, Chen and coworkers recently demonstrated an intelligent phototactic phenomenon of light-driven MNMs composed of simple isotropic semiconductor particles (e.g. TiO2 microspheres with a diameter above 400 nm), which were able to perform linear positive or negative motion towards or back to the incident direction by taking advantage of the limited penetration depth of the incident light.109 On-demand transportation of cargoes (e.g. SiO2 particles) was achieved by the directional motion of MNMs and their capture and transportation caused by the phoretic attraction were easily manipulated by light ON/OFF (Fig. 10). This work opens a precedent for light-driven MNMs to achieve the directional loading, transporting and unloading of cargoes in solutions without the participation of other external fields. Besides the well-known phoretic attraction and the electrostatic force, the “sucking effect” is also responsible for the attachment of microcargos over tubular MNMs. For light-driven TiO2 nanotube array MNMs, the migration of the photogenerated O2 molecules inside nanotubes causes the fluid flow through the interior of nanotubes, attaching microcargoes. Interestingly, a part of nanotubes in the arrays attaches microcargoes, while the other part of nanotubes directs the motion of the MNMs. It is expected that the cargo release occurs when light is switched off.168 Recently, Paven discovered a noble light-driven towing engine for delivery and release of cargoes where cargoes can be encapsulated within liquid marbles and then released at a specific place and time triggered by a simple NIR or sunlight irradiation.176 Although the liquid marble is at a millimeter level, the locomotion of liquid marbles is similar to light-driven MNMs on the basis of light-induced surface tension gradient and can be recognized as the colony effect of MNMs.
 Fig. 10  Light-driven MNMs as carriers. (A) Loading, transportation and unloading of colloidal cargoes over a colloidal hematite MNM using an external magnetic field (a–i) or using physical alteration of the substrate (j–o).158 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (B) The capture, transportation and release of SiO2 particles by using light-driven TiO2 MNMs.109 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
4.3. Biomedicine
Near-infrared (NIR) light-driven MNMs are of special interest for application in the biomedical field due to the highest transmissivity of NIR light by body tissue. The reported NIR light-driven MNMs are usually based on the photothermal effect of nano Au, which can absorb the incident light and convert it to thermal energy by means of the surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). As a result, the generated heat induces a temperature gradient around the MNMs and thus propels their motion. Therefore, the NIR light-driven MNMs not only act as a transporter in the organism, but also are attractive as photothermal agents for disease imaging and therapy. A typical example of light-driven MNMs applied in biomedical field was demonstrated by He and his colleagues.169 They demonstrated photothermal triggering of the “on-demand” launch of Au shell-modified polymer multilayer MNMs, which were further functionalized with a tumor-targeted peptide and antifouling poly(ethylene glygol). The motion of the MNMs was triggered by a focused NIR laser beam with a power of 3 mW μm−2. When the MNMs selectively bonded to the target HeLa cell due to the highly specific cancer recognition, the power of the NIR laser was increased to 13 mW μm−2 for 5 s, which could induce the environmental temperature around the MNMs to increase by more than 10 °C to contribute to the apoptosis of HeLa cells (Fig. 11). Evidently, the MNMs driven by temperature gradients have advantages that they are fuel-free and do not generate waste products. However, the drawbacks such as lack of powerful propulsion and inferior navigation capabilities still seriously restrict their application in the biomedical field. The realization of in vivo biomedical applications requires further improvement of the power, efficiency, versatility, and biocompatibility of light-driven MNMs.
 Fig. 11  (a–c) The NIR light-driven gold shell-decorated MNM moves and binds to the target HeLa cell triggered by a low power NIR light; (d) the apoptosis of HeLa cells irradiated by high power NIR light; (e) theoretical simulation of the photothermal effect around the NIR light-driven gold shell-decorated MNM with a power of 3 mW μm−2 and dependence of NIR-induced temperature increase on the laser power.168 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
4.4. Micropumps
Micropumps show unique advantages for driving fluid flow in a microscale region and are of great interest for applications ranging from drug delivery to microfluidics due to their miniaturized overall size and improved dosing accuracy. A typical example is a flexible electromagnetic micropump using a magnetorheological elastomer, which is used to replace lymphatic vessels.177 Light-driven MNMs are capable of being powered by a light-induced concentration gradient in solution where the absorbed light energy is converted to mechanical energy. When immobilized to a surface, the propulsion force acting on the MNMs can be further transferred to the surrounding fluid to generate flows based on the principle of Galilean invariance. This provides a possibility for building micropumps that can precisely modulate the flow without any external power.118 Light mills derived from Crookes radiometers in the 19th century are rotating macroscopic motors driven by light-induced temperature gradients. Early in 2003, they were applied as devices for advanced cardiovascular imaging. When installed in a catheter, they could direct a NIR laser to scan and receive the information of the internal walls of coronary arteries.178 The first example of light-driven MNMs as micropumps was reported in 2006 based on Ag disks.107 A photolysis reaction of H2O2 and Ag in the presence of UV light irradiation generated Ag+ and OOH− ions in aqueous solutions. As the diffusion coefficient of Ag+ (1.6 × 10−9 m2 s−1) is larger than that of OOH− (0.3 × 10−9 m2 s−1), an electric field towards the silver disk was formed by the ion gradient, which in turn caused phoretic motion of tracer particles and osmotic fluid flows along the substrate, regardless of the negligible chemiphoretic flow. Subsequently, Sen and co-workers developed a TiO2 film pump on a glass surface in 2010 on the basis of the same principle.118 As shown in Fig. 12, the SiO2 tracers aggregated around the TiO2 film before the pump is turned on. After UV irradiation, the TiO2 film is capable of driving the fluid away from it. Obviously, the micropumps based on anchored light-driven MNMs can be easily turned ON/OFF reversibly by light irradiation. It is noteworthy that Li et al. reported a binary micropump with controllable pumping velocity and direction.179 The micropump consists of a perovskite with a photodecomposition feature and a photothermal material, poly[(2-methoxy-5-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEHPPV). The micropump can pump the fluid outwards based on the solute buoyancy mechanism induced by the photodecomposition of perovskite upon weak light irradiation (0.08 W cm−2), while it can make an inward fluid flow by the thermal buoyancy mechanism under strong light (1.2 W cm−2) deriving from the photothermal effect of MEHPPV. Because of the competition of the two mechanisms, the pumping direction and velocity can be easily manipulated by changing the light intensity. It is expected to achieve some unprecedented pumping behaviors such as heartbeat-like pumping.
 Fig. 12  Three types of light-triggered TiO2 micropumps.118 Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. 
5. Outlook and future perspectives
The exploratory studies of light-driven MNMs have witnessed their potential applications in biomedical, environmental and micro/nanoengineering fields. Due to their contactless regulation and tunable energy input as well as excellent spatial and temporal resolution, light-driven MNMs have performed some versatile tasks involving the transportation of cargoes in a precise and selective manner to specific locations, gathering and releasing objects as micropumps, as well as in environmental remediation, etc. This inspires us to explore the potentials of light-driven MNMs applied in multidisciplinary fields. However, despite the impressive progress made over the past decade, there are still huge hurdles in real applications of light-driven MNMs due to the inadequate understanding of the dependence on fuel and insensitive sensing, etc.
For future MNMs, the most critical factor is intelligentization. We expect MNMs to perform complex tasks by themselves including targeting, navigating and other specific functions such as adsorption, catalysis and drug release. Moreover, some specific requirements for MNMs will be proposed in specific environments. For example, for environmental remediation, the future light-driven MNMs should move autonomically combined with intelligent environment sensing and purification capacities. The motion modes of MNMs are to some extent like hives. When a motor finds a target area, it will be better to send information to others around it and thus attract more motors to purify the target area. For better efficiency, an intelligent MNM swarming is preferable. In view of this, the light-driven MNMs for environmental remediation should possess the ability of rapid movement to targets, sensitive sensing, excellent communication between each other, and enormous purification ability. For biomedical application, the accurate positioning of diseased cells, navigated movement and parking as well as efficient treatments are all vital for MNMs used for in vivo diagnosis and treatment. As a result, the fabricated MNMs should contain biological sensing components and be powered by a biocompatible fuel. Simultaneously, in view of specific requirements of bodies, the materials for fabricating MNMs should also be biocompatible and biodegradable. Compared to UV or visible light, the strong penetrating power and excellent biocompatibility of near infrared (NIR) light endows NIR light-driven MNMs with a promise for biomedical application. Although there are a few NIR light-driven MNMs that are based on the photothermal effect, those based on a NIR photocatalyst may be a more possible strategy for advancing MNMs applied in biomedicine. In a word, further development of light-driven MNMs should strive to gather efficiency, versatility, biocompatibility or greenness as well as functionalization. Research into the fabrication considering the integration of photo-response, autonomous communication and functionalization will represent a direction for the development of light-driven MNMs.
Fuel consumption is a huge hurdle for environmental remediation of light-driven MNMs. As reported, most light-driven MNMs are powered by the chemical fuel, H2O2, which is not environmentally friendly. Due to the ubiquity of water in nature, it has been recognized as an ideal fuel for driving light-driven MNMS. While a few water-fuel systems have been reported so far, their low efficiencies are still undesirable. Therefore, enhancing the motion efficiencies of light-driven MNMs and utilizing environmentally friendly fuel systems are required for advancing light-driven MNMs. As phoretic propulsion is the most commonly used mechanism for the motion of light-driven MNMs, the electrolyte concentration has an important effect on the velocities of MNMs. When the solution medium possesses a high ion concentration, the asymmetric distribution of partial chemical reaction products hardly induces the motion of MNMs. Thus, for the light-driven MNMs based on phoretic propulsion, another significant constraint is the sensitivity of motion velocities to ion concentrations. Actually, light-induced bubble release may exhibit unique advantages in the application for environmental remediation of light-driven MNMs. Thus, the development of photoactive materials with high activity is an alternative direction for those MNMs applied in environmental remediation. On the other hand, the functionalization of light-driven MNMs should be implemented to adapt to the application, for example, high porosity for adsorption, surface hydrophobicity for oil removal, identification of specific molecules for toxic metal ion removal, and so on.
Being different from the requirements for environmental remediation, the largest obstacle for light-driven MNMs applied in the biomedical field is their biocompatibility. Due to the specific environment of the body, the introduction of chemical fuels is absolutely inhibited and the biocompatible materials and reactions should be simultaneously executed. In view of this, a combination of cell derivatives with biocompatible IR light-responsive materials would be a possible strategy to improve the biocompatibility of light-driven MNMs for biomedical application. The recently reported light-driven MNMs based on the photothermal effect of nano-Au are promising for in vivo diagnosis and treatment. Besides biocompatibility, some key problems should also be addressed before scaling toward biomedical application, involving the tolerance of metal ion concentrations, the weak driving force and the light intensity as well as the effect of bubble accumulation. Imaginably, if the intelligentization of light-driven MNMs is achieved, it will become a powerful tool in the biomedical field. Through diverse functionalization, the light-driven MNMs are expected to perform targeted therapy, cleaning of clogged arteries and in situ imaging and diagnosis in vivo, especially in hard-to-reach places.
Ordered or disordered dynamic assembly on the nanoscale has already been demonstrated in previous studies of light-driven MNMs, which is ubiquitous in nature. The reversible photochemical reaction powers the flow of fluids around the MNMs as micropumps, which can be used for chemical sensing and microfluidics. Additionally, the ordered assembly derived from light-driven MNMs has potential for micro-imaging. In future, to perform complex tasks, light-driven MNMs will be developed towards building up autonomous cooperation with external equipment and efficient communication.
6. Conclusions
Light-driven MNMs based on photoactive solids are still young, even in the infancy stage regarding the research of self-propelled MNMs, but light as an external stimulus has unique advantages that it is easy to obtain, simple to wirelessly and remotely control with high spatial and temporal resolution, etc. when compared with chemically catalytic, magnetic and ultrasonic propulsions. For light-driven MNMs, their start and dock can be easily controlled through an ON/OFF switch of the radiation, and their direction and speed of motion also greatly depend on light input (wavelength, direction and power). Thus, the devices operated in this way might be proved valuable for future applications in cargo transportation and separation, nano-assembly and processing, environmental remediation and drug delivery as well as photothermal therapy, etc. Herein the recent advances of light-driven MNMs are reviewed, particularly focused on the propulsion principles involving ion, molecule and temperature gradients as well as light-induced bubble propulsions, which result from photocatalytic reactions and/or photothermal effects of photoactive materials. In addition, some extraordinary strategies including light-induced interfacial tension gradient and deformation have also been introduced for the construction of light-driven MNMs. Finally, some promising potential applications of light-driven MNMs have been discussed based on their inherent properties. For practical application of light-driven MNMs, there are still some challenges to be addressed. First, a sufficiently large motion speed is vital for MNMs. For environmental remediation, the motion of MNMs should get rid of dependence on ion gradients due to the complex reaction environment, which may be achieved via optimizing the structure of MNMs or enhancing the photocatalytic performances. When driven in vivo, MNMs are required to have an even higher speed to overcome the blood flow if needed. Second, the precise control of light-driven MNMs has been achieved in water by UV light irradiation of TiO2 microspheres. However, the present state is difficult to be extended to apply in some complicated environments, such as in vivo. Therefore, it is desirable to further develop light-driven MNMs that can autonomously move towards targets.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21474078 and 51521001), the Top Talents Lead Cultivation Project of Hubei Province, the Yellow Crane talent plan of Wuhan municipal government and the Innovation Group Project of Hubei Province, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT: 2017III028).
Notes and references
G. A. Ozin, I. Manners, S. Fournier-Bidoz and A. Arsenault, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 3011–3018 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Wang, Nanomachines: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. Wang and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8704–8735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Badjić, V. Balzani, A. Credi, S. Silvi and J. F. Stoddart, Science, 2004, 303, 1845–1849 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Golestanian, T. B. Liverpool and A. Ajdari, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 220801 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Spudich, Science, 2011, 331, 1143–1144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Oh, M. Nakagawa and K. Ichimura, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2262–2269 RSC .
F. Villafiorita Monteleone, G. Caputo, C. Canale, P. D. Cozzoli, R. Cingolani, D. Fragouli and A. Athanassiou, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18557–18563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Abid, M. Frigoli, R. Pansu, J. Szeftel, J. Zyss, C. Larpent and S. Brasselet, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7967–7971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, X. Lin, X. Zou, J. Sun and Q. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 7, 250–255 Search PubMed .
Y. Hong, N. M. K. Blackman, N. D. Kopp, A. Sen and D. Velegol, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 178103 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Lee, Y. Song, I. D. Hosein and C. M. Liddell, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 350–355 RSC .
M. E. Ibele, P. E. Lammert, V. H. Crespi and A. Sen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4845–4851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kagan, S. Balasubramanian and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 503–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Sattayasamitsathit, R. Dong, W. Gao, R. Tam, X. Feng, S. Ai and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9415–9420 RSC .
F. Mou, C. Chen, H. Ma, Y. Yin, Q. Wu and J. Guan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7208–7212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, A. Pei, R. Dong and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2276–2279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, O. E. Shklyaev, T. Li, W. Liu, H. Shum, I. Rozen, A. C. Balazs and J. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7077–7085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Dey, S. Bhandari, D. Bandyopadhyay, S. Basu and A. Chattopadhyay, Small, 2013, 9, 1916–1920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, A. Pei, X. Feng, C. Hennessy and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 998–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mou, C. Chen, Q. Zhong, Y. Yin, H. Ma and J. Guan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9897–9903 CAS .
W. Zhu, J. Li, Y. J. Leong, I. Rozen, X. Qu, R. Dong, Z. Wu, W. Gao, P. H. Chung, J. Wang and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4411–4417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Orozco, D. Vilela, G. Valdes-Ramirez, Y. Fedorak, A. Escarpa, R. Vazquez-Duhalt and J. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 2866–2871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jurado-Sanchez, S. Sattayasamitsathit, W. Gao, L. Santos, Y. Fedorak, V. V. Singh, J. Orozco, M. Galarnyk and J. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 499–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Moo and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 58–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3170–3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mou, D. Pan, C. Chen, Y. Gao, L. Xu and J. Guan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6173–6181 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Moo, H. Wang, G. Zhao and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4292–4296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. P. Steinberg, D. J. Pine and P. M. Chaikin, Science, 2013, 339, 936–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sundararajan, S. Sengupta, M. E. Ibele and A. Sen, Small, 2010, 6, 1479–1482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sattayasamitsathit, H. Kou, W. Gao, W. Thavarajah, K. Kaufmann, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Small, 2014, 10, 2830–2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, K. Hahn and S. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, Y. Tu, J. C. van Hest and D. A. Wilson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11662–11665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Orozco, B. Jurado-Sanchez, G. Wagner, W. Gao, R. Vazquez-Duhalt, S. Sattayasamitsathit, M. Galarnyk, A. Cortes, D. Saintillan and J. Wang, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5082–5087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Patra, S. Sengupta, W. Duan, H. Zhang, R. Pavlick and A. Sen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1273–1283 RSC .
K. E. Peyer, L. Zhang and B. J. Nelson, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1259–1272 RSC .
M. Guix, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez and A. Merkoci, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6285–6322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, Y. Li, J. Wu and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4501–4507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10486–10494 RSC .
Y. Wu, X. Lin, Z. Wu, H. Mohwald and Q. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10476–10481 CAS .
W. Gao, R. F. Dong, S. Thamphiwatana, J. Li, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 117–123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, T. Li, W. Gao, T. Xu, B. Jurado-Sánchez, J. Li, W. Gao, Q. He, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3881–3887 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Baylis, J. H. Yeon, M. H. Thomson, A. Kazerooni, X. Wang, A. E. S. John, E. B. Lim, D. Chien, A. Lee and J. Q. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500379 Search PubMed .
B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila, A. Martín, F. Soto, M. A. Lopez-Ramirez, S. Campuzano, G. M. Vásquez-Machado, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6756–6764 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Schliwa and G. Woehlke, Nature, 2003, 422, 759–765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Spudich, Science, 2011, 331, 1143–1144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Purcell, Am. J. Phys., 1977, 45, 3–11 CrossRef .
X. Ma, A. Jannasch, U.-R. Albrecht, K. Hahn, A. Miguel-López, E. Schäffer and S. Sánchez, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7043–7050 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Uygun, V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann, D. A. Uygun, S. D. de Oliveira and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Singh, F. Soto, K. Kaufmann and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 7000–7004 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, J. Li, B. E.-F. de Ávila, T. Li, W. Gao, Q. He, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 26, 7497–7501 CrossRef .
S. J. Wezenberg, K. Y. Chen and B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11457–11461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-R. Jiang, N. Yoshinaga and M. Sano, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 268302 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Rikken, R. J. Nolte, J. C. Maan, J. C. van Hest, D. A. Wilson and P. C. Christianen, Soft Mater., 2014, 10, 1295–1308 RSC .
J. Li, T. Li, T. Xu, M. Kiristi, W. Liu, Z. Wu and J. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4814–4821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Peyer, S. Tottori, F. Qiu, L. Zhang and B. J. Nelson, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 28–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fischer and A. Ghosh, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 557–563 RSC .
N. Chaturvedi, Y. Hong, A. Sen and D. Velegol, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6308–6313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Campuzano, D. Kagan, J. Orozco and J. Wang, Analyst, 2011, 136, 4621–4630 RSC .
W. Duan, M. Ibele, R. Liu and A. Sen, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2012, 35, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mou, L. Kong, C. Chen, Z. Chen, L. Xu and J. Guan, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4976–4983 RSC .
R. Dong, Q. Zhang, W. Gao, A. Pei and B. Ren, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 839–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, F. Soto, W. Gao, V. Garcia-Gradilla, J. Li, X. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8552–8555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Li, L. Mair, S. Ahmed, T. J. Huang and T. E. Mallouk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3201–3204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, F. Soto, W. Gao, R. Dong, V. Garcia-Gradilla, E. Magana, X. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2163–2166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Balk, L. O. Mair, P. P. Mathai, P. N. Patrone, W. Wang, S. Ahmed, T. E. Mallouk, J. A. Liddle and S. M. Stavis, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8300–8309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and W. Gao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5745–5751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmed, D. T. Gentekos, C. A. Fink and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11053–11060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Garcia-Gradilla, S. Sattayasamitsathit, F. Soto, F. Kuralay, C. Yardimci, D. Wiitala, M. Galarnyk and J. Wang, Small, 2014, 10, 4154–4159 CAS .
C. Chen, E. Karshalev, J. Li, F. Soto, R. Castillo, I. Campos, F. Mou, J. Guan and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10389–10396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit and J. Wang, Chem. Rec., 2012, 12, 224–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sanchez, L. Soler and J. Katuri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1414–1444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2109–2116 RSC .
R. Dreyfus, J. Baudry, M. L. Roper, M. Fermigier, H. A. Stone and J. Bibette, Nature, 2005, 437, 862–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, M. Hoop, F. Mushtaq, E. Siringil, C. Hu, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 37–48 CrossRef .
K. J. Rao, F. Li, L. Meng, H. Zheng, F. Cai and W. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 2836–2846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gorostiza and E. Y. Isacoff, Science, 2008, 322, 395–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Shinkai and O. Manabe, Host Guest Complex Chemistry III,  1984, vol. 121, pp. 67–104 Search PubMed .
M. K. ter Wiel, R. A. van Delden, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14208–14222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sen, M. Ibele, Y. Hong and D. Velegol, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 143, 15–27 RSC .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1542–1550 RSC .
M. Liu, T. Zentgraf, Y. Liu, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 570–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Masiero, S. Lena, S. Pieraccini and G. P. Spada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3184–3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Vicario, M. Walko, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5127–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Credi, Aust. J. Chem., 2006, 59, 157–169 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 77–92 RSC .
Y. B. Zheng, Q. Hao, Y.-W. Yang, B. Kiraly, I.-K. Chiang and T. J. Huang, J. Nanophotonics, 2010, 4, 042501 CrossRef .
A. A. Beharry and G. A. Woolley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4422–4437 RSC .
G. Ragazzon, M. Baroncini, S. Silvi, M. Venturi and A. Credi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 70–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Erbas-Cakmak, D. A. Leigh, C. T. McTernan and A. L. Nussbaumer, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10081–10206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, S. Sreelatha, R. Hou, A. Efremov, R. Liu, J. R. van der Maarel and Z. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 238104 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Y. Loh, J. Cheng, S. R. Tee, A. Efremov and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10293–10304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. A. Goetzfried, K. Hidaka, M. You, W. Tan, H. Sugiyama and M. Endo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6672–6676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, R. Hou, J. Cheng, I. Y. Loh, S. Sreelatha, J. N. Tey, J. Wei and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1792–1803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, M. Piech, N. S. Bell, D. Gust, S. Vail, A. A. Garcia, J. Schneider, C.-D. Park, M. A. Hayes and S. Picraux, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10864–10872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 14195–14199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Baigl, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 3637–3653 RSC .
K. Ichimura, S.-K. Oh and M. Nakagawa, Science, 2000, 288, 1624–1626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Berna, D. A. Leigh, M. Lubomska, S. M. Mendoza, E. M. Pérez, P. Rudolf, G. Teobaldi and F. Zerbetto, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 704–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Uchida, R. Azumi and Y. Norikane, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ibele, T. E. Mallouk and A. Sen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3308–3312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Solovev, E. J. Smith, C. C. Bof'Bufon, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10875–10878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kausar, H. Nagano, T. Ogata, T. Nonaka and S. Kurihara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2144–2147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-H. Han, S. Wu, J. C. Condit, N. J. Kemp, T. E. Milner, M. D. Feldman and S. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 213509 Search PubMed .
N. Katsonis, M. Lubomska, M. M. Pollard, B. L. Feringa and P. Rudolf, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2007, 82, 407–434 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kline and A. Sen, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7124–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Diguet, R. M. Guillermic, N. Magome, A. Saint-Jalmes, Y. Chen, K. Yoshikawa and D. Baigl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9281–9284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, F. Mou, L. Xu, S. Wang, J. Guan, Z. Feng, Q. Wang, L. Kong, W. Li, J. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603374 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Dai, J. Wang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhan, W. Dai, C.-C. Li, S.-P. Feng and J. Tang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1087–1092 CAS .
F. Mou, Y. Li, C. Chen, W. Li, Y. Yin, H. Ma and J. Guan, Small, 2015, 11, 2564–2570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xuan, Z. Wu, J. Shao, L. Dai, T. Si and Q. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6492–6497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, P. Wasylczyk, C. Parmeggiani, D. Martella, M. Burresi and D. S. Wiersma, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3883–3887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kong, F. Z. Mou, Y. Z. Jiang, X. F. Li and J. G. Guan, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 107–121 CrossRef .
J. L. Anderson, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 1989, 21, 61–99 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, T. Si, W. Gao, X. Lin, J. Wang and Q. He, Small, 2016, 12, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Palagi, A. G. Mark, S. Y. Reigh, K. Melde, T. Qiu, H. Zeng, C. Parmeggiani, D. Martella, A. Sanchez-Castillo, N. Kapernaum, F. Giesselmann, D. S. Wiersma, E. Lauga and P. Fischer, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 647–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, M. Diaz, U. M. Córdova-Figueroa and A. Sen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1568–1576 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 295, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Guan and W. Shi, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1353–1359 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Guan, W. Shi and L. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 160–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, W. Shi, L. Xu, G. Mou, Q. Xin and J. Guan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7301–7303 RSC .
L. Xu, H. Gong, L. Deng, F. Long, Y. Gu and J. Guan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9395–9404 CAS .
H. Tu, L. Xu, F. Mou and J. Guan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12455–12458 RSC .
H. Tu, L. Xu, F. Mou and J. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16562–16568 CAS .
L. Xu, X. Sun, H. Tu, Q. Jia, H. Gong and J. Guan, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 309–319 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Xu, W. Shi and J. Guan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 816–822 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2893–2939 RSC .
Y. Li, F. Mou, C. Chen, M. You, Y. Yin, L. Xu and J. Guan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 10697–10703 RSC .
M. Xuan, J. Shao, X. Lin, L. Dai and Q. He, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 482, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
H. Brenner, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2010, 82, 036325 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiao, K. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3975–3980 RSC .
K. Yang, H. Xu, L. Cheng, C. Sun, J. Wang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5586–5592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, L. Hu, X. Ma, S. Ye, L. Cheng, X. Shi, C. Li, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1868–1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Liu, J. Kim, Y. Lu and L. P. Lee, Nat. Mater., 2005, 5, 27–32 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Dong, Y. Li, D. Niu, Z. Ma, J. Gu, Y. Chen, W. Zhao, X. Liu, C. Liu and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5392–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Lasers Med. Sci., 2008, 23, 217–228 CrossRef PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Petryayeva and U. J. Krull, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 706, 8–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Underwood and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 3427–3430 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 136–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, S.-H. Kim, G.-R. Yi, D. Pine and P. Chaikin, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2014, 372, 20130372 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 409–453 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ercole, T. P. Davis and R. A. Evans, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 37–54 RSC .
H. Jiang, C. Li and X. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5225–5240 RSC .
B. V. Derjaguin, G. P. Sidorenko, E. A. Zubashenko and E. B. Kiseleva, Kolloidn. Zh., 1947, 9, 335–348 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Duan, S. Ahmed, T. E. Mallouk and A. Sen, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 531–554 CrossRef CAS .
J. Simmchen, A. Baeza, A. Miguel-Lopez, M. M. Stanton, M. Vallet-Regi, D. Ruiz-Molina and S. Sánchez, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, F. Mou, Y. Feng, S. Che, W. Li, L. Xu and J. Guan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22704–22712 CAS .
B. Jang, A. Hong, H. E. Kang, C. Alcantara, S. Charreyron, F. Mushtaq, E. Pellicer, R. Büchel, J. Sort, S. S. Lee, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6146–6154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, Y. Hu, Y. Wu, W. Gao, B. Ren, Q. Wang and Y. Cai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1722–1725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, Y. C. Li, P. Xu, N. S. McCool, L. Li, W. Wang and T. E. Mallouk, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 75–78 RSC .
M. J. Esplandiu, A. Afshar Farniya and A. Bachtold, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11234–11240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhan, B. Dai, J. Zheng, J. Liu and J. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201701451 .
D. Zhou, Y. C. Li, P. Xu, L. Ren, G. Zhang, T. E. Mallouk and L. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11434–11438 RSC .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. Vatchinsky, P. M. Chaikin and D. J. Pine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15978–15981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, T. Si, Z. Wu, C. Gao, X. Lin and Q. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017 DOI:10.1002/anie.201708155 .
D. P. Singh, U. Choudhury, P. Fischer and A. G. Mark, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201701328 .
Q. Zhang, R. Dong, Y. Wu, W. Gao, Z. He and B. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4674–4683 CAS .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30–38 CrossRef .
B. Qian, D. Montiel, A. Bregulla, F. Cichos and H. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1420–1429 RSC .
Y. Wu, T. Si, J. Shao, Z. Wu and Q. He, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3747–3756 CrossRef .
T. Ding, V. K. Valev, A. R. Salmon, C. J. Forman, S. K. Smoukov, O. A. Scherman, D. Frenkel and J. J. Baumberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 5503–5507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Gibbs and Y.
P. Zhao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 163104 CrossRef .
X. Tang, S.-Y. Tang, V. Sivan, W. Zhang, A. Mitchell, K. Kalantar-zadeh and K. Khoshmanesh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 174104 Search PubMed .
M. Enachi, M. Guix, V. Postolache, V. Ciobanu, V. M. Fomin, O. G. Schmidt and I. Tiginyanu, Small, 2016, 12, 5497–5505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, X. Lin, Y. Wu, T. Si, J. Sun and Q. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6097–6105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Wu, H. Qin, Z. Zhao and H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3164–3171 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikeda, J. Mamiya and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 506–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ohm, M. Brehmer and R. Zentel, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3366–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, T. Si, X. Lin and Q. He, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 511–514 RSC .
J. G. S. Moo, S. Presolski and M. Pumera, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3543–3552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, V. V. Singh, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco, K. Kaufmann, R. Dong, W. Gao, B. Jurado-Sanchez, Y. Fedorak and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11118–11125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Paven, H. Mayama, T. Sekido, H.-J. Butt, Y. Nakamura and S. Fujii, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3199–3206 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Behrooz and F. Gordaninejad, Proc. SPIE 9057, Active and Passive Smart Structures and Integrated Systems, 2014, 90572Q.
A. F. Fercher, W. Drexler, C. K. Hitzenberger and T. Lasser, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2003, 66, 239–303 CrossRef .
M. Li, Y. Su, H. Zhang and B. Dong, Nano Res., 2017 DOI:10.1007/s12274-017-1799-5 .

Footnote† L. Xu and F. Mou contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Leilei Xu
	Leilei Xu received her PhD in Physical Chemistry from Northeast Normal University in 2009 and worked as a Postdoc at Wuhan University of Technology (WUT) supervised by Prof. Jianguo Guan. In 2012, she joined WUT as an associate professor. At the beginning of 2016, she went to the University of California, Davis, as a visiting scholar. Her current research is focused on micro/nanofunctional materials for solar energy conversion involving photocatalysis and light-driven micro/nanomotors.

Fangzhi Mou
	Fangzhi Mou received his PhD in materials science from the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing (SKLATMSP), Wuhan University of Technology in 2012. Between 2010 and 2011, he was a visiting PhD student at Washington University in St. Louis, USA. He then joined SKLATMSP at Wuhan University of Technology as an assistant professor and became an associate professor in 2013. His research interests include micro/nanomotors, responsive photonic crystals and their applications.

Jianguo Guan
	Jianguo Guan is a Changjiang Scholar distinguished Professor of MOE, China, and Chief Professor of Wuhan University of Technology. He received his PhD in Electronic Materials and Devices from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 1995 and conducted his research at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2000–2001), and Washington University in St Louis, USA (2008–2009). He co-authored over 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals. His current research interest focuses on conducting/magnetic composite materials, micro/nanomotors, photonic crystals and metamaterials.

Molecular motor	Photochromic molecules, such as azobenzene and its derivatives, alkenes, dithienylethenes88,106	
cis–trans photo-isomerization	—	Linear and rotary motion	Controlling conformational changes
Nanowalker (DNA molecule)92–95	
cis–trans photoisomerization or light-induced cleavage of chemical bonds	—	Directional translation on a solid surface	Ratchet mechanism
Liquid motor	Oil droplets and liquid crystals8,9,99	
cis–trans photo-isomerization	—/50 μm s−1	Linear motion toward lower contact angles	Wettability gradient
Water droplets96 or oil droplets108	Photothermal effect or cis–trans photoisomerization	—/3 mm s−1 or 300 μm s−1	Linear motion toward high interfacial tension	Surface tension gradient
Solid motor	Ag and Ag-based particles (e.g. AgCl102) or Janus particles (e.g. SiO2–Ag81)	Photolytic decomposition	≤1.2 s/100 μm s−1	Uncontrollable	Electrolyte gradient
Some semiconductor microspheres (e.g. TiO2 microspheres109) or Janus nanostructures (e.g. TiO2/Si nanotree110)	Photocatalytic reaction	≤0.1 s/∼10 μm s−1	Direction of motion away from light irradiation	Electrolyte/nonelectrolyte gradient
Janus structures or microtubes (e.g. TiO2 microtubes111)	Photocatalytic or photoelectrochemical reaction	≤0.2 s/325 μm s−1	Uncontrollable	Bubble recoil
Janus structures or microtubes partly coated with an Au layer (e.g. Au-mesoporous silica112)	Photothermal effect	≤0.1 s/47.5 μm s−1	Uncontrollable	Temperature gradient
Photoinert materials modified by photochromic molecules (e.g. azobenzene-coated PS nanoparticles10)	
cis–trans photo-isometerization	≤0.1 s/15 μm s−1	Linear motion toward high interfacial tension	Surface tension gradient
Liquid crystalline elastomers113	
cis–trans photo-isometerization	5 ms/37 μm s−1	Uncontrollable	Deformation
U = b∇Y	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Structural configuration of light-driven MNMs. (A) The asymmetric micro/nanostructures adopted in the design of light-driven MNMs, including irregular and Janus micro/nanoparticles as well as tubular and biomimic micro/nanostructures. (B) The alternative design strategies of the light-driven MNMs with symmetric or isotropic micro/nanostructures by using an asymmetric external field.	 
	(2)

 	Scheme 1  Basic process of a photocatalytic reaction upon light irradiation of a semiconductor particle; A: electron acceptor, D: electron donor.	 
	(3)
	(4)
4h+ + 2H2O → O2 + 4H+	(5-1)
h+ + H2O → ˙OH + H+	(5-2)
2e− + 2H+ → H2	(5-3)
	(6)

 	Scheme 2  Schematic of the interaction of a metal nanosphere with light.139 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the electrolyte-gradient propulsion.149 Copyright 2013, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 3  Light-induced electrolyte gradient propelled MNMs. (A) Schematic drawing of the formation of electrolyte gradient around a silver chloride microparticle in response to UV light.81 Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) SEM image of the silver-Dynabead heterodoublets and schematic of a system undergoing electrophoresis.59 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (C) Trajectories of light-driven TiO2/Pt MNMs in water without (a) and with (b) UV irradiation within a period of 1 s and schematic diagram of the propulsion mechanism.62 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic of a Au/B-TiO2 MNM powered by a multiwavelength light-induced H+ ion gradient.152 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (E) Schematic of a TiO2/Si nanotree MNM propulsion mechanism with side irradiation and migration under global illumination in 0.1% H2O2 or a mixture solution of 1,4-benzoquinone and hydroquinone (1 mM:10 mM).110 Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. (F) Structure characterization and schematic diagram of silicon nanowires (scale bar: 10 μm; upper right, scale bar: 500 nm).156 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 
	(13)

 	Fig. 4  Light-induced noneletrolyte-gradient propelled MNMs. (A) The hematite peanut MNMs. (a) SEM image of the MNMs and (b) schematic of docking triggered by blue light irradiation. Under light irradiation, the hematite peanut particle docks with a cargo which is unloaded when the light is turned off.158 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic of the phototaxis of an isotropic TiO2 MNM based on the limited penetration depth of light.109 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (C) Schematic of the propulsion mechanism of light-driven Au–WO3@C sphere Janus micromotors.161 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
F = −C∇T(r,t)	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 5  Light-induced temperature-gradient propelled MNMs. (A) Janus structured MNMs half-coated with Au. (a) Fluorescent tracers and (b) temperature distribution around a MNM under laser irradiation as well as (c) the motion of a MNM in water and in a Triton X-100 solution.54 Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics. (B) NIR-driven Janus polymer multilayer capsule MNMs. (a) Theoretical simulation of the photothermal effect; (b) schematic of the temperature-gradient propulsion principle as well as (c and d) time-lapse images of moving Janus capsule MNMs under defocused NIR irradiation.164 Copyright 2016, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag. (C) The polymeric tubular MNMs driven by NIR illumination: (a) schematic drawing of the driving principle. fi and f0 are the thermophoretic forces generated in the vicinity of the inner and outer surfaces from the photothermal effect of Au nanoshells, while fr represents the net resultant force; (b) schematic illustration of the motion of the polymeric tubular MNMs.116 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 
ΔG = ΔGvVb + γb–fSb–f + (γt–b − γt–f)St–b	(17)
	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 6  Light-induced bubble-propelled MNMs. (A) The UV light-induced bubble propulsion mechanism of a TiO2 tubular microengine in H2O2 fuel.111 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) The light-induced bubble propulsion mechanism and motion in a fuel solution with 15 wt% H2O2 and 5 wt% Triton-X100 of the Am-TiO2/Au Janus MNM.130 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(20)

 	Fig. 7  Light-induced surface tension gradient propelled MNMs. (A) Optical images of the translational motion of a solid particle (PS) on the surface of a liquid-crystalline film doped with DL-azoment.104 Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic of light-driven motion of azobenzene-coated polymer nanoparticles in aqueous media.10 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Light-induced motion of liquid crystalline elastomers (LCEs). (A) Light-fueled microscopic walker based on the deformation of LCE.113 (a and b) The deformation of LCE along the long axis under 532 nm laser excitation; (c) slide view of the microscopic walker; and (d) the motion of the microscopic walker under 532 nm laser excitation. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) Light-induced microswimmer driven by biomimetic travelling waves.117 (a) Illustration of the system. The deformation of LCE was modulated by the dynamic light field; and (b) top-view images of the deformation of a cylindrical LCE under a periodic light pattern. Scale bar, 200 μm. Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (C) Photoinduced motion of DMAB crystals.101 (a) Schematic of the crystal motion and (b–g) laser microscope images of the translational motion of DMAB crystals after irradiation for 0 (b), 3 (c), 6 (d), 10 (e), 15 (f) and 20 min (g), respectively. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the aggregation and separation of the TiO2/Pt Janus submicromotors and (b) the photocatalytic degradation of RhB with or without the TiO2/Pt Janus submicromotors.62 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Light-driven MNMs as carriers. (A) Loading, transportation and unloading of colloidal cargoes over a colloidal hematite MNM using an external magnetic field (a–i) or using physical alteration of the substrate (j–o).158 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (B) The capture, transportation and release of SiO2 particles by using light-driven TiO2 MNMs.109 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–c) The NIR light-driven gold shell-decorated MNM moves and binds to the target HeLa cell triggered by a low power NIR light; (d) the apoptosis of HeLa cells irradiated by high power NIR light; (e) theoretical simulation of the photothermal effect around the NIR light-driven gold shell-decorated MNM with a power of 3 mW μm−2 and dependence of NIR-induced temperature increase on the laser power.168 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Three types of light-triggered TiO2 micropumps.118 Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH.	 
Footnote
† L. Xu and F. Mou contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
