Nanoengineering and interfacial engineering of photovoltaics by atomic layer deposition  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1NR10349K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1NR10349K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3482-3508Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanoengineering and interfacial engineering of photovoltaics by atomic layer deposition

        
          
            Jonathan R. 
            Bakke
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Katie L. 
            Pickrahn
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thomas P. 
            Brennan
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Stacey F. 
            Bent
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA. E-mail: sbent@stanford.edu;  Fax: (+650) 723-9780;   Tel: (+650) 723-0385
Received 
      4th April 2011
    , Accepted 12th June 2011First published on 28th July 2011AbstractInvestment into photovoltaic (PV) research has accelerated over the past decade as concerns over energy security and carbon emissions have increased. The types of PV technology in which the research community is actively engaged are expanding as well. This review focuses on the burgeoning field of atomic layer deposition (ALD) for photovoltaics. ALD is a self-limiting thin film deposition technique that has demonstrated usefulness in virtually every sector of PV technology including silicon, thin film, tandem, organic, dye-sensitized, and next generation solar cells. Further, the specific applications are not limited. ALD films have been deposited on planar and nanostructured substrates and on inorganic and organic devices, and vary in thickness from a couple of angstroms to over 100 nm. The uses encompass absorber materials, buffer layers, passivating films, anti-recombination shells, and electrode modifiers. Within the last few years, the interest in ALD as a PV manufacturing technique has increased and the functions of ALD have expanded. ALD applications have yielded fundamental understanding of how devices operate and have led to increased efficiencies or to unique architectures for some technologies. This review also highlights new developments in high throughput ALD, which is necessary for commercialization. As the demands placed on materials for the next generation of PV become increasingly stringent, ALD will evolve into an even more important method for research and fabrication of solar cell devices.Jonathan R. BakkeJonathan R. Bakke hails from Baton Rouge, Louisiana. He received a B.S. in Chemical Engineering and Mathematics with a business minor from Tulane University in 2006, and he was awarded the Barry M. Goldwater scholarship in 2005. Jonathan is currently a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering at Stanford University and is supported by NDSEG and NSF graduate fellowships. His research has focused on both fundamental understanding of ALD processes and the application of ALD to thin film, quantum dot, organic, and dye-sensitized solar cells.Katie L. PickrahnKatie L. Pickrahn was raised in Murrieta, California. She received a B.S. in Chemical Engineering with a minor in Materials Science from the University of California, Irvine in 2009 where she was a Regents' Scholar. Currently, Katie is a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering at Stanford University, and is supported by an NSF graduate Fellowship. Her research interests include the application of ALD to nanostructured devices for energy conversion.Thomas P. BrennanThomas P. Brennan grew up in Yardley, Pennsylvania. He received a B.S.E. in Chemical Engineering with certificates in Biology and Computer Science from Princeton University in 2007. Thomas is currently a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering and is supported by an Albion Walter Hewlett Graduate Fellowship. His research interests include interface engineering and characterization in dye-sensitized solar cells.Stacey F. BentStacey F. Bent is Professor of Chemical Engineering and Professor, by courtesy, of Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering, at Stanford University. She earned her B.S. degree in Chemical Engineering from U.C. Berkeley and her PhD degree in Chemistry in 1992 from Stanford University. Following postdoctoral work at AT&T Bell Laboratories, she joined the faculty at New York University before moving to Stanford University in 1998. Her research interests are in understanding surface and interfacial chemistry and materials processing, including atomic layer deposition, and applying this knowledge to problems in sustainable energy and nanoelectronics.
I. Introduction
The current global energy landscape sees the majority of energy produced from non-renewable, carbon-based sources including natural gas, oil, and coal. Emissions of CO2 – a greenhouse gas implicated in global climate change – from the combustion of fossil fuels have been the primary cause of the rise of atmospheric CO2 concentrations to over 380 ppm today from the 210–300 ppm range during the 650,000 years prior to the Industrial Revolution.1 With the rapidly increasing world population and rising standards of living for developing countries, worldwide energy consumption is projected to increase from 16.2 TW in 2007 (or 245 million barrels per day of oil-equivalent energy2) to over 30 TW by 2050 even with improvements in energy efficiency.3 For example, China currently produces 90% of their electricity from coal and China's per capita standard of living (and concomitantly, energy consumption) is rapidly increasing.2,3 Even with growth rates in the double digits for some renewable sources, the total amount of energy produced by these sources is still small compared to carbon-based energy as illustrated by the plot in Fig. 1. Moreover, the plot highlights that a natural shift (i.e. based on technology, economics and infrastructure) in energy sources can take decades to occur. While energy sources like wind, nuclear, hydroelectricity, and biomass are crucial for the transition to cleaner energy, they do not have the ability to supplant fossil fuel sources.1,3 On the other hand, the earth receives nearly 120 petawatts of energy flux in the form of solar radiation, which means one hour's worth of energy from sunlight is equal to the world's energy consumption, and solar is the one source with the ability to be a primary provider of energy. Hence, to have a world powered by sustainable and carbon-free energy, increased research into solar cells – or photovoltaics (PV) – should be considered for economic, climatic, and political reasons.
 Fig. 1  Sources of world energy from 1850–2008. Solar, wind, and geothermal data were obtained from the BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2010.4 Other energy sources data were obtained from Vaclav Smil.5 

        PV technology has advanced rapidly over the last several decades as both the materials used and the device architectures have changed. The number of materials used has increased as technologies have developed; for example, the materials used for solar devices has expanded from primarily single crystal silicon (c–Si) to thin films including CuInxGa1-xSySe2-y (CIGS), CdTe, and Cu2ZnSnSxSe4-x (CZTS) and to organic materials. Architectures have developed from stacked layers of various materials (Fig. 8) to nanostructures (such as for dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) in Fig. 18 and for core-shell devices in Fig. 21), which take advantage of nanoscale electronic properties and/or quantum effects. The commercialization of various technologies has led to a total market installation of 13.8 GW in 2010, up from 5.6 GW of new installation in 2005.6 Nevertheless, as shown in Fig. 2, the cost of installed solar in $/W must still come down – especially in the largest markets – for solar technology to be an economically viable choice. Thus, there is an important need for increases in efficiencies and new methods of production to obtain lower costs, motivating an active research effort in PV today.
 Fig. 2  Required grid prices of solar in various countries to reach parity with current production methods.6 (Reprinted with permission of Morgan Stanley Research). 
In newer generations of PV technology, devices are increasingly dominated by effects which occur at interfaces and on the nanoscale, both of which can be addressed by nano-engineering materials with atomic layer deposition (ALD). ALD is a nanoscale deposition method because of its ability to deposit materials at a controllable sub-nanometer (usually sub-angstrom) rate and to coat structures that are highly porous and/or tortuous and have aspect ratios approaching 5000.7–10 Interfacial engineering by ALD has led to significant understanding of passivation for c–Si (Section IV), pn junctions for thin film devices like CIGS and CdTe (Section V.D), the importance of electrode work function for organic devices (Section VIII.B), and the encapsulation of devices from the atmosphere (Sections V.E and VIII.C). ALD is also used to conduct searches for new absorber materials for nanostructured devices (Sections V.C and IX), to prevent recombination in DSSCs (Section VII), to create and encapsulate QDs and nanoparticles (Section IX), and to understand nanowire based devices. Moreover, the transparent conducting oxide (TCO) is a crucial part of most solar cells (Section X), and ALD has shown promise as a technique for depositing TCOs on future nanostructured devices. Manufacturing considerations are also being considered, and high-throughput ALD is an active area of research and commercialization (Section XI). This paper will review the scientific and engineering insights that ALD studies have provided toward improved PV technologies.
II. 
        Atomic layer deposition


Atomic layer deposition (ALD) was first developed in the 1970s by T. Suntola and co-workers for the deposition of ZnS for display devices.11 Since then, ALD has been used to deposit a wide range of materials, including oxides, sulfides, selenides, tellurides, nitrides and metals.12,13 A key requirement is that suitable molecular precursors must undergo self-limiting reactions, since the primary distinction between ALD and other vapor deposition methods is that a self-saturating surface monolayer is formed after every precursor exposure. A thorough description of recent developments in ALD chemistry can be found in many review articles.12,14–16ALD has been implemented in a diverse number of fields including microelectronics,10 catalysis,17 and sensors.18 In this review, we will focus on recent developments in the use of ALD for photovoltaics.19

ALD is a deposition technique consisting of a series of self-limiting, surface-saturated reactions to form thin conformal films at a controllable rate. In implementation, it is similar to chemical vapor deposition (CVD), except that the precursors are not introduced into the reactor at the same time as one another but are typically separated in time by inert gas purges. Consequently, the reaction is limited to the monolayer of reactant that has been adsorbed to the substrate. Through this modification, uniform, conformal films may be produced with precise control over the thickness of the film.
A schematic for one cycle of an idealized binary ALD reaction is shown in Fig. 3. First, a reactant is dosed into the chamber (step 1). The reactant either chemisorbs or physisorbs to the substrate but does not react with other molecules of the same reactant. Once a monolayer of the reactant has been formed, the excess reactant is purged from the chamber with an inert gas such as nitrogen or argon (step 2). The counter reactant is then pulsed into the chamber, where it reacts with the layer of original reactant on the substrate (step 3), and once the surface has become saturated with the counter-reactant, the excess counter-reactant is pulsed from the chamber (step 4). The surface is now primed for a new layer of reactant. This process is repeated until the desired thickness is achieved (step 5). In most cases, a complete monolayer is not deposited even when the surface is completely saturated with precursor due to various reasons such as steric hindrance from the precursor's ligands.20,21 Regardless, conformal films are seen because of the self-limiting nature of the reactions. Greater detail on the surface chemistry of different ALD reactions can be found in a review by George et al.16 More detailed information on strategies for using ALD for nanofabrication is available through other resources.10,22
 Fig. 3  Schematic of one cycle for a binary material in an atomic layer deposition reaction. 

ALD is usually performed at an elevated temperature to promote or initiate the reaction and to reduce the amount of condensed, unreacted precursor on the substrate; however, the temperature range is bounded by excess condensation or thermal activation at low temperatures and precursor degradation or desorption at high temperatures.23 The temperature range where ALD can occur, the so-called “ALD window”, varies between systems. Not all combinations of precursors have ALD windows, hence, the precursors must be carefully chosen. In some cases, thermal energy alone is not enough to activate the reactions, and the ALD process may be assisted through the use of UV light24 or plasma.15 Plasma enhanced ALD (PE-ALD) may widen the number of precursors that can be used, increase the growth rates, and improve the film's properties; however, it may also limit the ability to form conformal coatings over nanostructures with high aspect ratios.25
The innate self-limiting nature of ALD endows it with the ability to produce conformal thin films, even on materials with high aspect ratios. ALD has been used to coat colloidal crystals to form inverted opal photonic crystals,26 and infiltrate nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) templates to form nanotubes.7,27 The self-limiting nature of ALD also allows for excellent composition control, and nanolaminates, mixtures, and alloys have been formed by exploiting this characteristic.28 In addition, ALD reactions often have low growth temperatures, in some cases below 50 °C, making the technique highly attractive for deposition on organic substrates.7ALD has also been used to create films that are denser and have more uniform grain sizes than available through other methods.29 These advantages put ALD in a unique position to address many challenges in photovoltaics.
III. Photovoltaic solar technologies and device operation
The last few decades have seen dramatic improvements in and the invention of a wide variety of solar cells. ALD has shown promise as a tool for use in virtually every segment of photovoltaics and has shed light onto the functioning of solar cells and paths to improving both production methods and efficiencies. Areas of application19 include first generation (crystalline silicon), second generation (thin films, CIGS, a-Si, organic, dye-sensitized), tandem, and third generation (tandem, quantum dots, nanowires, etc) photovoltaics. Moreover, the function of ALD films in photovoltaic systems varies greatly and includes absorbers, buffer layers, passivation layers, and anti-recombination coatings, among other uses. Research into transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) has also been carried out with application to nearly any type of photovoltaic technology. The intention of this review is not to provide an exhaustive investigation of photovoltaics since there are already many valuable resources, including reviews for crystalline silicon cells,30 inorganic and thin films devices,31–34 CIGS,35,36buffer layers,37,38 DSSCs,39–41 organic PV,42–51 tandem cells,52,53 nanostructured cells,54–56quantum dots,57 processing,58–60 and economic analysis.3,61,62 Further, efficiency tables summarizing record efficiencies for each type of cell and advancements of each technology are available.63,64 Rather, this article details how ALD has been used in devices and how materials and techniques developed by ALD may be applied in the future to PV.

Fig. 4 shows the band diagram of an inorganic pn junction solar cell (Section VIII describes DSSC operation) and a generic current–voltage (I–V) plot of a photovoltaic device in operation.65 A p-type material acts as the absorber of incident light, and when an n-type semiconductor is placed in contact with it, a built-in voltage potential gradient is created that is called the space-charge region (or depletion region). This gradient serves as a bias that assists in electrons flowing from the p-type material to the n-type material. Depending on the band gap and the position of the conduction band and valence band for the two materials, a conduction band offset (CBO or ΔECB) and a valence band offset (VBO or ΔEVB) may arise, which can have implications for the travel of electrons and holes, respectively. When a photon generates an electron-hole pair in the absorber, the electron travels along the conduction band through the space-charge region and through the n-type semiconductor to a front contact while the hole travels through the neutral region of the p-type material to the back contact.
 Fig. 4  Generic sketches of a) the band diagram for a pn heterojunction in an inorganic solar cell and b) I–V curves showing the VOC and JSC and where shunt and series resistances affect device performance. 
The open circuit voltage (VOC) is the built-in voltage that occurs in a junction when light is incident and no charge is collected; it can also be described as the point of load at which dark current and photogenerated current equal each other. Dark current is the current that flows opposite to the desired direction of current collection. When a circuit is complete, the flow of electrons at zero-bias is defined as the short circuit current density (JSC). When a load is applied between 0 and VOC, charge is collected and power is produced. At some point as shown in Fig. 4b, maximum power (MP) is produced and the fill factor (FF) defines the amount of power that a cell collects compared to the theoretical maximum: (Equation 1)The efficiency of a solar cell is defined as the percentage of the incident solar power that is converted into useful power. The efficiency (η) is related to the previous values by the following: (Equation 2)The quantum efficiency, which is the probability that a given photon will produce a useable electron, provides information about both the optical and electrical losses in a device as a function of wavelength. External quantum efficiency (EQE) refers to the percentage of charge carriers collected which are generated by incidentphotons while internal quantum efficiency (IQE) accounts for the percentage of carriers collected which are generated by absorbedphotons. Thus, EQE never exceeds IQE in a device. (Equation 3)Two main types of resistances affect the performance of a cell. Series resistance (Rs) is due to resistance to current flow through a cell, such as at contacts, and the ideal value is zero. Shunt resistance (Rsh) – also called parallel resistance – is due to current leakage around the edges of a cell or through undesired point contacts in a cell, which are non-work producing pathways, and the ideal value is infinity.
There are many factors that can influence device parameters. For example, JSC decreases from shadow losses, parasitic absorption, recombination, long paths of travel for electrons, and reflection of incident light. VOC may be reduced due to conduction band offsets, low carrier concentration, high temperatures which increase dark current, and defects and trap states (i.e. recombination). Resistance losses and recombination severely diminish the FF. ALD has been utilized both to understand these inefficiencies and to engineer solutions in devices, as will be reviewed in this paper.
IV. First generation: crystalline silicon
A. Traditional architectures including PERC and PERL
Single crystal silicon solar cells are the most efficient and well-studied single junction devices due to their close ties to the microelectronics industry. The passivated emitter rear locally diffused cell (PERL, Fig. 5b) holds the world record efficiency of ∼25%;66 however, the passivated emitter and rear cell (PERC, Fig. 5a) – although providing lower efficiencies – is an important design for commercialization of silicon cells because of its simpler design and processing requirements.30 The applications of ALD to silicon photovoltaics are limited since the junction is formed by doped regions of silicon, and the absorber region must be on the order of 200 μm thick owing to the indirect bandgap of silicon. Due to the processing requirements of ALD, it will likely be limited to deposition of materials under 1 μm in thickness for commercial applications. Nevertheless, the best designs require several points of contact and passivating layers, and ALD has successfully been used in these architectures as shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  a) PERC device architecture with Al2O3 ALD or Al2O3 ALD followed by PECVD SiOx rear passivation67 (Reprinted from ref. [67] with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Ltd) and b) PERL68 devices with Al2O3 passivation of the front p+ emitter (Reprinted from ref. [68] with permission from the American Institute of Physics). 
The passivation of c–Si with an oxide at points of contact is very important for efficient operation of solar cells. Traditionally, a thermal oxide was grown for the world-record efficiency devices; however, other oxides and methods are appealing because they can decrease the temperature required for anneals (> 950 °C) and reduce the complexity of the process. Thus, Al2O3 by thermal and PE-ALD was initially studied as a passivating layer due to its low deposition temperature (< 300 °C) and its unique ability among oxides to form a fixed negative charge at the c–Si interface.69 Agostinelli et al. originally studied the passivation of 2 Ω-cm p-type CZ–Si using thermal Al2O3 ALD at 300 °C. The surface recombination velocity was as low as 10 cm/s at an injection level of 1015 cm−3, and the fixed negative charge at the interface remained relatively stable with time and increased temperature.69
Improvements were made upon this technique by using PE-ALD at 200 °C on both 2 Ω-cm p-type Si and 1.9 Ω cm n-type Si followed by an anneal under inert atmosphere at 425 °C. Similar effective lifetimes and surface recombination velocities were seen on p-type Si; however, the values were improved on n-type Si to 6.6 ms and < 2 cm/s, respectively, where a 26 nm thick Al2O3 layer was optimal.70 Further studies by Hoex et al. demonstrated that passivation of p-type c–Si can be effective as well.71 A later, more in-depth study by Hoex et al. showed improvements in preventing recombination on p-type Si to match the values of n-type Si and relates these results to intrinsic Si.72 They compared thermal ALD to PE-ALD to show that PE-ALD had the advantage of a higher built in electric charge at the interface as shown in Fig. 6.72 These optimized depositions were claimed to be as effective as passivation by high-temperature thermal anneals of SiO2. A derivative work using PECVD shows that passivating layers almost as good as those deposited by ALD can be grown at a rate of 1.67 nm/s.73 Finally, as will be discussed further in Section XII, recent advances in spatial (thermal) ALD have shown that Al2O3 can be deposited at 1.2 nm/s while still yielding lifetimes of 5 ms and recombination velocities of < 2 cm/s.74
 Fig. 6  Effective surface recombination as a function of the B-density at the surface of c-Si wafers passivated by different methods demonstrates the superior ability of ALD to passivate surfaces. The a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H films were deposited by PECVD, SiO2 films were grown by thermal oxidation, and the Al2O3 films were synthesized by plasma-assisted ALD (Reprinted from ref. [72] with permission from the American Institute of Physics).72 

ALD was first demonstrated in a working device by Schmidt et al.67 They studied the use of ALD (Fig. 5a) as a replacement in p-type c–Si PERC device of the high-temperature SiO2 rear surface passivation layer, which is used to reduce recombination at the c–Si interface before the contacts. Schmidt et al. optimized two device architectures: a 130 nm thick Al2O3 ALD passivation layer and a 30 nm thick Al2O3 ALD layer followed by 200 nm of PECVD-SiOx. The Al2O3 layer showed equivalent Voc and Jsc to the typical “annealed” architecture; however, the FF suffered slightly, leading to a best efficiency of 20.0% compared to 20.5% for the standard. The ALD Al2O3/PECVD-SiOx stack showed slight increases in Voc and Jsc, and only a minor decrease in FF which led to a best efficiency of 20.6%. Both device architectures using ALD showed reproducibility for several 2 cm × 2 cm cells. Measurements of the recombination velocity revealed that Al2O3 by itself yields values similar to the standard, and the stack architecture decreases recombination velocities from 90 ± 20 to 70 ± 20 cm/s, which leads to a slightly higher internal quantum efficiency (IQE) for the cell. The internal reflectance of these PERC cells was unaffected by the new passivation layers. Overall, through the utilization of ALD on PERC cells, it may be possible to simplify the process parameters while producing cells of equivalent quality.
The next advancement was the application of Al2O3 to 4 cm2 n-type c–Si PERL devices as a passivation of the front p+ emitter as shown in Fig. 5b.68 Due to the differences in designs between PERC and PERL cells, Al2O3 was used to passivate the random pyramid front contact. Benick et al.68 were able to consistently reproduce PERL cells with efficiencies of over 22% with the best cell having an efficiency of 23.2%. Moreover, the IQE was ∼100% in the 300–600 nm range. They compared their devices to the best reported p-type emitter on n-type c–Si of 22.7%, establishing the ability of ALD to make thin passivation layers for first generation solar cells under less restrictive processing conditions.
More recently, Bock et al. have studied the surface passivation of aluminum doped p-type silicon emitters (ALU+) architectures where the p-type emitter on an n-type cell is formed by screen printing aluminum and firing at 900 °C.75 Surface passivation of the Al-p+ emitter was done by PECVD a-Si, ALD Al2O3, and ALD Al2O3/PECVD-SiNx stacks. The ALD and stacks showed remarkable passivation abilities for this solar cell architecture; however, the performance of full devices (η = 20%) with ALD passivation layers were not reported in this publication.
Overall, the application of ALD to silicon PV has shown much promise because lower processing temperatures can be used while still producing cells of equivalent quality, possibly greatly reducing the energy requirements. Nevertheless, several challenges exist for the commercialization of this application, and a full economic analysis would need to be performed. For example, high speed ALD is a necessity to prevent increased costs associated with lower throughput. The total processing costs including precursors and added equipment must be considered as well. Finally, c-Si wafer manufacturing is an established technology far along the learning curve, which may mean the barrier to deployment is high for changes in device fabrication.
B. 
          Nanowire based architecture
Nanostructured architectures provide unique opportunities for solar cells and especially for applications of ALD to solar energy devices, and a few instances of nanowire based PV will be discussed throughout this review. In a recent application of silicon PV, Gunawan et al. fabricated core-shell radial pn junction silicon nanowires (Fig. 7) to allow for more optimized charge collection and enhanced light trapping.76 During the processing and characterization, they found that the high surface area structures led to significant increases in surface recombination; thus, they passivated the surface with 10 nm of Al2O3 ALD deposited at 300 °C which led to an almost two-fold improvement in efficiency from 1.0% to 1.8% as delineated in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  a) Device structure of core-shell radial pn junction silicon nanowires and b) J–V curve of cells before and after passivation by Al2O3, which limits surface recombination (Reprinted from ref. [76] by permission of Elsevier).76 
V. Second generation: thin films
A. Overview
The past decade has seen considerable interest from scientists and entrepreneurs in thin film solar cells as suitable alternatives to c-Si solar cells due to the high raw material costs and energy intensive processing of c-Si. Thin film PV encompasses absorbers such as a-Si, CdTe, CIGS, and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTS), among others. A distinct advantage of thin film solar cells is a reduction in the amount of material used which may correlate into a decrease in costs. Only 1– 3 μm of absorber material is needed because of the direct bandgap; in contrast, c-Si needs greater than 100 μm of material due to its indirect bandgap. The device architectures for the three main types of thin film cells (a-Si, CdTe, and CIGS) are shown in Fig. 8. For the compound semiconductor absorber cells, the pn junction is typically a heterojunction between two different materials, unlike c-Si and a-Si devices, which are homojunction devices.
 Fig. 8  Cross-sectional view of typical architectures for a) a-Si b) CdTe and c) CIGS solar cells.31 
The applications of ALD to the various thin film technologies differ because of the distinct material properties and operating mechanism for each type. For example, applications to a-Si have been limited to the deposition of the ZnO front contact by ALD. Efficient CdTe solar cells have been produced when the absorber and window layer are deposited by closed space sublimation, evaporation, chemical bath deposition (CBD), and spray pyrolysis so there has not been a necessity to switch to ALD methods; however, opportunities exist to study the buffer layer with CdS ALD and the TCO with Cd2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4, especially if nanostructuring of CdTe is explored. CIGS based devices have spawned more interest in the ALD community thus far because the materials and composition of the buffer layer and absorber layer can be varied greatly and still produce efficient devices. Nanostructured CIS absorber layers have been deposited by ALD for working devices, demonstrating the ability of ALD to make complicated materials and to coat tortuous substrates; nevertheless, the attempts to deposit absorber layers is limited because the thickness of > 1 μm required on planar substrates is difficult to achieve by ALD. The 2005 model by Kayes et al. showing the potential of nanostructured solar cells accelerated efforts to create working devices,77 and as this field (discussed in more detail in Section X) expands, more opportunities to study CIGS, CZTS, CuxS, FeS2, SnS, and other direct bandgap thin films deposited by ALD onto nanostructured devices will expand. The champion application of ALD to thin films thus far has been the deposition of buffer layers (CdS, ZnO, ZnSe, etc) to planar CIGS cells. The thickness requirement of the film (< 100 nm and often much less) is easily achieved by ALD, and ALD offers the ability to grade and dope these n-type materials.
B. 
          a-Si: ALD B-ZnO front contacts
B-doped ZnO deposited by ALD and MOCVD was studied as a front contact for a-Si p–i–n junction solar cells.78,79Diethylzinc (DEZn) and H2O were used as the precursors with intermittent pulses of B2H6 every 6 cycles. ALD B-ZnO films were found to have lower resistivity and higher carrier concentrations and mobilities compared to films grown by MOCVD; however, B-ZnO MOCVD films have natural texturing useful for a front contact. By depositing a 1900 nm MOCVD and 100 nm ALD bilayer as the front contact, the benefits of both methods were realized, and an 8.2% efficient stabilized cell was deposited, which compared favorably with the 8.7% optimized cell with the standard FTO contact. Moreover, it was found that MOCVD contacts were unstable after operation in air for 6 months, whereas the bilayer structure prevented this degradation. This phenomenon will be discussed in more detail in Section X, which summarizes TCO deposition by ALD.
C. Thin film absorbers

1. CuxS. 
The deposition of CuxS has been studied with multiple Cu precursors. Although challenges are present depending on the precursor choice, photovoltaic behavior with Cu1.8S has been demonstrated. The precursor Cu(II) bis(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate) – or Cu(thd)2 – has been shown to yield CuS films below 175 °C80 and Cu1.8S films above 175 °C81,82 when H2S was the counter-reactant. Only the Cu1.8S films were active as PV absorbers with a bandgap of 1.75 eV; however, to obtain this stoichiometry required slight decomposition of Cu(thd)2 which slowed the growth rate and signified that a “pure” ALD process was not occurring. A 35 nm thick film on flat TiO2 displayed a JSC of 30 μA/cm2 and a VOC of 200 mV under irradiation of 2.8 kW/m2. The IQE values were only 6–7%.
Recent studies by Martinson et al. using bis(N,N-di-sec-butylacetamidinato)dicopper(I) and H2S as ALD precursors showed the ability to produce Cu2S films with an indirect bandgap of 1.2 eV and direct bandgaps of 1.3 and 1.8 eV that show self-limiting deposition on high aspect ratio films.83 However, they did not demonstrate a working PV device in this work, and further research is needed to determine its suitability and stability for working cells.


2. 
            CIS absorbers, In2S3 buffers, and Al2O3 barriers. 

            Cu(In1-xGax)(Se2-ySy) thin film solar cells have commanded the most research attention and investment money of the thin film category of solar cells because of the potential for high efficiencies under mass production conditions (world record efficiency is 20% for lab scale devices66) and the ability to tune the bandgap from 1.1–1.8 eV depending on the stoichiometry. In recent years, a series of studies by Nanu et al. was performed analyzing the properties of CuInS2 ALD films and the characteristics of devices with CuInS2/TiO2 heterojunctions.84–90ALD was used to deposit the absorber material, buffer layer, and anti-recombination layer in these devices.
In the work by Nanu et al.,84–87,89 precursors of CuCl, InCl3, and H2S were utilized to produce CIS films with a bandgap of ∼1.45 eV. By controlling the length of the precursor pulses, the phases present in the films were finely tuned to be copper rich or copper poor as shown in Fig. 9a. Further, by increasing the deposition temperature from 380 to 410 °C, the disorder in the film was significantly decreased.85 Optimized CIS ALD for solar cells was applied to a device architecture based on TiO2 nanoparticles. The structure is given in Fig. 9b where an In2S3 ALD buffer was used to extract charge from the CIS and a thin Al2O3 ALD layer blocked back recombination from the TiO2 nanoparticles. An efficiency of 4% was achieved under AM1.5 irradiation with a VOC of 0.49 eV, a FF of 0.44, and a JSC of 18 mA/cm2.86,87,90
 Fig. 9  a) XRD patterns of CIS ALD films. By decreasing the length of the CuCl pulse, the CIS films range from CIS + CuxS (excess CuCl) to pure CIS to CIS + CuIn5S8 (excess InCl3).85 b) Band structure of the best performing cells87 (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [85,87] with permission). 


3. SnS. 
SnS has been a material of interest to the PV community for a long time due to its direct bandgap of ∼1.3 eV, the abundance of tin and sulfur, and the benign environmental effects of its components; however, successes making working devices have been limited. Recently, the first published article of SnS ALD was presented using Sn(acac)2 and H2S as precursors in the temperature range 125–225 °C on Si and Al2O3 substrates.91 A bandgap of ∼1.9 eV was determined for a slightly oxidized film (from exposure to air).

D. 
          Buffer layers

1. Overview and function. 
The pn junction in thin film solar cells is crucial to making high efficiency devices because of its effect on the electrical, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties. While all thin film solar cells have a pn junction, CIGS devices have been studied in most detail for applications of ALD due to the wider range of processing and deposition conditions compared to CdTe devices. The buffer layer is typically an n-type material with a wider bandgap than the absorber material, and the optimized thickness is normally between 50 and 80 nm. Electrically, the buffer layer optimizes the band alignment of devices at the pn junction and at the n-TCO junction and increases the depletion layer, leading to an increased Voc. Further, a buffer layer protects the absorber from damage during deposition of the oxide window and the TCO, and it helps passivate large area devices in the production scale.32,35,92
To date, the champion buffer layer for CIGS devices is CdS deposited by chemical bath deposition (CBD). Nevertheless, there has been a strong push to develop a vacuum method for the buffer deposition to optimize processing conditions since most CIGS manufacturing techniques are vacuum based. Other issues with CdS CBD is that it may contain contaminants from the precursors, including O, C, and N, and the chemicals required for CBD react with the surface of the CIGS. Finally, the PV community is interested in finding an alternative to CdS because of the environmental effects associated with Cd and because of the parasitic absorption by the buffer since its bandgap is 2.4 eV. Thus, vapor techniques including ALD are promising for deposition of buffer layers and for exploring alternative buffers.
Many different techniques have been utilized to deposit a wide range of films as alternative buffers including, but not limited to, ZnS, ZnO, Zn(O,S), ZnxMg1-xO, In2S3, ZnInxSey and ZnSe.37,38ALD has been used to deposit most of these alternative materials on various absorbers including CIS, CGS, and CIGS, and the ALD studies have led to an increased understanding of the effect of these different materials on device performance. ALD especially is useful because of the ability to control the thickness and composition of the ALD buffers and to alter the composition as a function of thickness. This section details the use of ALD to manipulate composition on a fine scale to study the effects of recombination, resistivity, and band alignment; to study the effects of temperature on interdiffusion and surface passivation; to confirm thickness effects of the buffer on device performance; and to determine how various absorbers form junctions with varying n-type materials. A summary of the best reported cells with ALD buffer layers is shown in Table 1. The following sections on buffer layers are all for films deposited on CIGS except for the one report of Zn(O,S) on CdTe absorbers.
Table 1 
Buffer layers deposited by ALD, including parameters of deposition, and best reported efficiencies. The efficiencies of devices from different references cannot be directly compared due to controls being dissimilar from differences in absorber, TCOs, treatments, testing conditions, etc.





ALD Method
Thickness (nm or cycles)
Temperature (°C)
Efficiency
Substrate
Ref.





                      ZnSe
                    
10 nm
250
11.6%
CIGS

93




                      ZnO
                    
70 nm
165
13.9%
CuInxGa1-xSe2

94




                      ZnO
                    
100 nm
120
10.8%

                      CuInSe2

95




                      ZnO
                    
100 nm
120
8.0%
CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2

95



ZnO0.7S0.3
500 cycles
120
16.4%
CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2

96



ZnO0.48S0.52
84 nm
250
8.0%

                      CdTe
                    

97



ZnS
100 cycles
120
11.3%
CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2

96



ZnxMg1-xO
1000 cycles (1Mg:6Zn)
120
14.1%, 16.2%
CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2

98,99



Zn–Sn–O
3 Zn: 8 Sn
120
13.8%
CuIn0.5Ga0.5Se2

100




                      In2S3
30–50 nm
210–220
12.1–16.4%
CIGS

101–105




                      Al2O3
1 nm
160
9%
CIGS

106




                      TiO2
50 nm
160
0.7%
CIGS

106




                      Ta2O5
1 nm
160
5%
CIGS

106







2. 
            Zinc containing buffer layers. 
a) 
              ZnSe
            . 
The first publication surrounding the use of ALD for buffer layers was on ZnSe. The work was performed by Ohtake et al. in 1995, and they demonstrated reasonable CIGS cells of 11.6% efficiency with a 10 nm (30 cycle) film deposited at 250 °C with elemental Zn and Se precursors.93 Due to the slightly higher bandgap of 2.67 eV compared to 2.42 eV for CdS, there was a small gain in QE below 500 nm. Interestingly, there were recombination centers at the buffer/CIGS interface that when filled – either from applying a bias or from prolonged irradiation – led to an efficiency increase from 5% to over 11%.
No other studies of ALDZnSe buffer layers for CIGS cells have been reported since the original work by Ohtake et al.93 Clearly, there are still improvements that can be made on ZnSe buffer layers, but there are three disadvantages that have likely discouraged the pursuit of it: 1) the bandgap of ZnSe is lower than ZnS, 2) selenium has a higher level of toxicity than most elements, and 3) the cost of selenium is high due to its relative scarcity.
b) 
              ZnO
            . 
Chaisitsak and Konagai et al. first deposited ZnO with DEZn and water as a buffer layer on CIGS.94,107,108 They found that the resistivity of films deposited at 165 °C greatly affected performance, and the best performing cells had highly-resistive 70 nm thick ZnO and greatly improved VOC and FF (though the JSC slightly decreased).107 The temperature of pre-treatments and deposition was important because excess In and S diffusing into the buffer layer degraded performance and improper interface formation led to cells requiring an hour long light soaking to reach optimum performance of 13.9% (VOC = 0.51 V, JSC = 36.9 mA/cm2, FF = 73.6).94
Stolt and Platzer-Bjorkman et al. published a series of articles studying the interfacial properties, band alignment, and recombination pathways in CIGS cells with ZnO buffer layers.95,109,110 Initially, they discovered that CuInSe2/ZnO cells almost matched the CuInSe2/CdS controls while the CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2/ZnO cells suffered in performance due to a drop in VOC and FF. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) analysis of the band alignments suggested that a positive CBO of ∼0.1 eV and a negative CBO of ∼ −0.2 eV for CIS/ZnO and CIGS/ZnO, respectively, may have caused the difference because of increased recombination at the negative CBO.95 Electrical studies suggested that differences in the net doping of the absorber at the interface may also lead to charge buildup and increased recombination, contributing to the lower efficiency of the CIGS/ZnO cells.109 Using temperature dependent current–voltage measurements, they estimated the location of the main source of recombination in ALD-ZnO cells. By determining the activation energy for saturation current, they found that CIS/ZnO(ALD), CIS/CdS(CBD), and CIGS/CdS(CBD) were dominated by bulk recombination (i.e. the activation energy matched the band gap of absorber) in the absorber whereas recombination in CIGS/ZnO(ALD) appeared to occur at interfaces (i.e. the activation energy equaled the interface barrier for holes, which is Φb in Fig. 10), likely due to the negative CBO.110
 Fig. 10  Band diagram for a CIGS or CIS/ZnO device where A is recombination in the bulk absorber, B is recombination in the space charge region, and C is recombination at the interface (Reproduced from ref. [110] by permission of Elsevier).110 
c) ZnS and ZnOxS1-x. 
The first example of utilizing the ability of ALD to tune the stoichiometry of mixed films for buffer layers was the deposition of ZnOxS1-x106 ranging in composition from ZnO to ZnS. Stolt and Edoff et al.96,111–115 completed a series of studies into the various parameters that affect the performance of ZnOxS1-x as the n-type material for CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2buffer layers. Their findings suggested that a strong correlation between cell efficiency, composition, and thickness exists in that the composition for the optimal cell efficiency varied with the number of cycles at 120 °C. For example, thicker films with low concentrations of sulfur (∼ZnO0.7S0.3) performed similarly to thin layers with high sulfur content (∼ZnO0.2S0.8).96 The 500 cycle ZnO0.7S0.3 film performed the best with an efficiency of 16.4% (VOC = 0.642 V, JSC = 34.3 mA/cm2, FF = 74.4). The exact cause for the high efficiency was unclear, but may be related to surface passivation with sulfur or appropriate conduction band offsets. Pure ZnS showed the best performance (11.4%) with very thin (100 cycle) films. EDX elemental mapping of the composition of ZnOxS1-x buffer layers with depth (Fig. 11) confirmed that ZnO ALD has a longer incubation time on CIGS, which led to a natural gradient in buffer layer where the oxygen content increases as the deposition proceeds. Varying both the In:Ga ratio and the O:S ratio of the films demonstrated that the optimum composition of the ZnOxS1-x buffer layer was similar for all compositions of CIGS.111,112
 Fig. 11  
EDX elemental depth profile showing the high content of sulfur at the interface of CIGS compared to the bulk of the buffer layer (Reprinted from ref. [96] with permission from the American Institute of Physics).96 
In the only work looking at buffer layers by ALD for CdTe solar cells, Perrenoud et al. studied the effect that the TCO, VBO, CBO, composition, and intermixing at the ZnOxS1-x/CdTe interface had on device performance.97 Overall, device performance was lower for the devices with ALD buffer layers compared to devices with traditional CdS buffer layers. Since the motivation to remove Cd from the buffer layer for CdTe solar cells is not present, either enhancements in device performance or production cost decreases are necessary for ALD to be considered as a technique in the manufacturing of CdTe solar cells; nevertheless, the understanding gained from this study is useful.
d) ZnxMg1-xO. 
Edoff et al. have furthered their work by establishing that ZnxMg1-xO (the Mg source is bis-cyclopentadienyl magnesium) grown by ALD is an effective buffer layer for CIGS based cells.98,99,112,115–117 The mixture was polycrystalline, and the bandgap increased as Mg content increased due to the 7.7 eV bandgap of MgO, which led to gains in the JSC because of the lower absorption in the buffer layer. The QE measurements shown in Fig. 12 verified that the larger band gap of ZnxMg1-xO led to an increase in charge collection above 2.3 eV. At low concentrations of Mg, the film had a ZnO-like crystal structure. At high Mg content a two phase material was formed, and the efficiency of cells decreased at this point because there was a major decrease in FF.98 Optimization of the process parameters revealed that the best devices were deposited in the 105–135 °C range with the composition of x = 0.8–0.9, yielding a band gap of 3.5–3.7 eV. Interestingly, device performance was fairly insensitive to thicknesses of 80–600 nm, and the best device had an efficiency of 16.2% (VOC = 0.64 V, JSC = 33.7 mA/cm2, FF = 75.1) as seen in Table 1.99 Further studies found that at higher temperatures, changes occurred at the pn junction interface and the resistivity decreased, leading to significant decreases in the VOC and FF.117 Since their control of composition with ALD was so fine, Edoff et al. used light soaking measurements to determine that samples with low concentrations of Mg (x >.95) were dominated by recombination at the interface while samples with higher concentrations (0.8 < x < 0.9) were dominated by recombination in the space charge region.116
 Fig. 12  
                QE measurement of the best ZnxMg1-xO buffer layer CIGS cell showing an increase in efficiency in the blue region due to the higher bandgap and a similar efficiency to CdS controls in the rest of the spectrum (Reproduced from ref. [99] by permission of Elsevier).99 
e) Zn–Sn–O. 
A Zn–Sn–O semiconductor deposited at 120 °C using DEZn and Sn(OtBu)4 was shown to work as a buffer material on CuIn0.5Ga0.5Se2.100 The device performance was strongly correlated to the composition, and the mixed films performed better than either of the binary materials. The best devices were produced by alternating 3 cycles of DEZn between every 8 cycles of Sn(OtBu)4 to yield a 13.8% efficient cell (VOC = 0.691 V, JSC = 27.9 mA/cm, and FF = 71.6%). The cells with this buffer displayed more degradation over time than either ZnO or SnOx, however.


3. 
            In2S3. 
In a series of papers in the early 2000s, Lincot and coworkers detailed the use of In2S3 ALD films as buffer layers for CIGS while varying deposition temperature, buffer thickness, and module size.101–104,106,118 Deposition was performed with In(acac)3 and H2S precursors, and the authors saw a gradual improvement in the quality of their cells as demonstrated by the entry in Table 1. Experiments in which the thickness was varied from 15 to 90 nm revealed that the JSC gradually decreased with thickness due to parasitic absorption; the VOC, which peaked at ∼45nm, was never as good as for CdS. EQE data exhibited greater efficiencies between 380 and 600 nm compared to CdS (Fig. 13a) due to the higher bandgap. Optical measurements revealed band gap values of 2.6–2.85 eV, depending on deposition temperature.118 These values were higher than the expected energy gap of ∼ 2 eV; however, the difference may be caused by Na or O diffusion into the film. Further, stability tests at 85% humidity and 85 °C for 1000 h showed only a slight decrease in efficiency of the devices over time.
 Fig. 13  a) The EQE was strongly affected by the In2S3 ALD buffer layer properties103 and (b) the deposition temperature of In2S3 ALD buffer layers strongly affected device parameters (Reprinted from ref. [103] with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Ltd). 
The deposition temperature of In2S3 also played a strong role in device performance (Fig. 13b), and 200 °C proved to be the optimum temperature. Nevertheless, annealing samples in air which were deposited at lower temperatures led to increase of up to 30% in efficiency. Finally, Lincot and coworkers discovered that copper, sodium, and selenium diffused into the buffer layers, and the rate of diffusion was strongly correlated to the temperature. The best cell with an In2S3 buffer layer was 0.1 cm2 and displayed an efficiency of 16.4%, VOC of 665 mV, JSC of 31.5 mA/cm2, and FF of 78%.103 Module cells with areas of 714 cm2 had efficiencies as high as 12.9%.104 Unfortunately, it is difficult to directly compare their In2S3 ALD buffer layers to other methods since results of CdS CBD controls and the composition of the CIGS absorber layers were not given.
In further studies, lifetime testing performed on large scale cells over a 16 month period119 demonstrated the ability of ALD to produce high quality films. Abou-Ras et al. completed a detailed analysis of the surface morphology of In2S3 and of the interfacial quality of In2S3/CIGS with SEM and TEM, respectively, and they studied the effect of Na migration into and its effects on In2S3 ALD.120 Subsequent electrical measurements by Lincot and coworkers suggested that the n-type doping level is 1016–1017 cm−3.118 Sterner et al. also performed a detailed optical analysis of the In2S3 buffer layers deposited by ALD at 160 °C.105 They found that a bandgap of ∼2.1 eV for In2S3 on CIGS with a bandgap of ∼1.15 eV led to a VBO of −1.2 eV and a CBO of −0.25 eV. The negative CBO increased interfacial recombination for low deposition temperature In2S3 ALD films.
In another study, Lincot et al. completed cells with the device structure of CIGS/In2S3 (ALD)/Al:ZnO (ALD).121 In one of the earliest attempts to use AZO as a TCO, they achieved 13.5% efficient cells. Since then, significant advancements in AZO by ALD have been made (vide infra) and may be useful in future studies.


4. Other buffer materials. 
During their screening studies for buffer materials, Lincot and coworkers tested TiO2, Ta2O5, and Al2O3.106 Although it is a semiconductor, TiO2 failed as a buffer layer as the devices had the lowest VOC, JSC, and FF of the buffer materials tested, and the cells had a maximum efficiency of 0.7%. However, considering that Al2O3 is an insulating material, it delivered a surprisingly high efficiency of 9% with a 1 nm film on CIGS, which was better than the 6% control film without a buffer due to an increase in the VOC. 1 nm thick Ta2O5 buffers produced cells that were 5% efficient. Values are shown in Table 1.


5. Outlook for buffer layers by ALD. 
Opportunities still exist to explore the properties of materials deposited by ALD as buffers and to understand interfacial properties at the pn junction using the advantages of ALD. Moreover, several buffer materials such as In2Se337 ZnInSex,37 and SnO2/SnS237 have been deposited by other methods for working devices, while others including CdS122 and CdxZn1-xS123,124 have been deposited by ALD but not applied to solar cells. ALD will find more applications in thin film solar devices as the technology progresses. New absorbers such as CZTS are candidates for studies of buffer layers by ALD, and as nanostructured PV becomes more advanced, ALD may be the only technique that can appropriately coat buffer layers onto the absorber layers.

E. Encapsulation with Al2O3
Recently, the encapsulation of completed CIGS devices with Al2O3 was studied as a protective barrier against moisture degradation (See Section VIII.C below for similar studies with organic devices), and the structure is shown in Fig. 14a.125 The major finding was that the VOC and FF did not decrease under 1 sun accelerated test conditions of 85 °C and 85% relative humidity for 1000 h (Fig. 14b) compared to a glass encapsulated device which showed degradation of these properties. The JSC decreased for the ALD encapsulated device; however, it was attributed to yellowing of the epoxy film. A later study by the same group studied Al2O3 as an encapsulant in which the Al2O3 was deposited directly on a flexible polyethylene terephthalate sheet and then bonded to the CIGS substrate.126 These cells did not show significant device degradation after 50 day UV exposure nor after 10 cycles of freeze-thaw (−40 °C to 85 °C and 85% relative humidity).
 Fig. 14  a) Structure of the CIGS cell with a protective Al2O3 ALD film and b) device characteristics under accelerated conditions where the filled circles represent the Al2O3 ALD device and the open squares signify the glass covered device (Reproduced from ref. [125] by permission of Elsevier).125 
F. 
          Nanowire templates
Oja Acik et al.127 utilized thin layers of TiO2 ALD to protect ZnO nanostructures during the processing of their cells for a device structure of ITO/ZnOstructured/ZnO:In/TiO2/In2S3/CIS. While ALD of TiO2 did not appear to benefit their devices, the structured devices showed an efficiency of 2.0% compared to 1.6% for planar devices.127 In the most recent study of nanowires, Sarkar et al. created semiconductor-sensitized solar cells (SSSCs) by utilizing the ability of ALD to coat high aspect ratio substrates.128 In this structure, the ALD film served as the “sensitizer.” They deposited In2S3 ALD to uniformly coat arrays of TiO2 nanowires as shown in the SEM image in Fig. 15. Using a cobalt based electrolyte (as opposed to the typical iodine electrolyte discussed in Section VIII for sensitized cells, which degraded the In2S3 film), a sensitized cell with an efficiency of 0.36% was constructed. The low EQE of ∼10% may be caused from recombination and poor electron injection from the In2S3 to the TiO2.
 Fig. 15  
            SEM images of TiO2 a) as prepared from Ti foils and b) after 175 cycles (5.2 nm) of In2S3 at 150 °C (Reprinted from ref. [128] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2010.).128 
VI. Tandem devices
A. 
          III-V Multijunction concentrator devices
In what may have been the earliest application of ALD to solar cells, a series of papers in the early 1990s outlined the deposition of AlGaAs, AlAs, and GaAs as absorbers by ALD for tandem III–V solar cells where Si and C were used as the n-type and p-type dopants, respectively.129–132 The reactor in these studies was a dual mode ALD and MOCVD chamber with trimethygallium, trimethylaluminum, and arsine as the reactant gases applied at deposition temperatures of 550–650 °C. With a two junction device structure, efficiencies of almost 16% were achieved under concentrated light as shown in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  In the first application of ALD to photovoltaics, 15.7% efficient cells under concentrated light were achieved with Al0.3Ga0.7As/GaAs solar cells (Reproduced from ref. [132] by permission of Elsevier).132 
B. Tandem a-Si/μc-Si with photonic crystal intermediate reflector
In tandem a-Si/μc-Si, it is possible to increase the efficiency by enhancing the current (i.e. absorption) in the a-Si film. Fig. 17 illustrates the purpose and method for achieving this goal using an intermediate reflective layer (IRL) between the two films.133Fig. 17a shows a prototype of the proposed architecture where an inverse opal created by deposition of ZnO ALD on a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) template reflects light at a wavelength defined by the properties of the opal. Fig. 17b shows that photons around 650 nm are effectively reflected back into the a-Si, which is desired because a-Si and μc-Si absorption spectra overlap in that range. Although a working solar cell was not constructed in this report, significant strides were made in showing the possibility and usefulness of ALD to the proposed structure.
 Fig. 17  a) A single junction sample of a device with layers consisting of (1) glass, (2) p-type and intrinsic a-Si, (3) n-type a-Si, (4) 3D photonic intermediate reflective layer (IRL) of ZnO from ALD and (5) Si backside. b) Transmittance of the device with and without the opal shows the reflective quality of the IRL. (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [133] with permission).133 
VII. Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs)
A. Types of DSSCs
DSSCs, described in great detail elsewhere,39,40,41 are an attractive area of research and commercialization because they can be built with abundant, inexpensive materials and, unlike many other PV technologies, are relatively resilient to impurities, reducing processing costs. Refinements to the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) pioneered by O'Regan and Graetzel in 1991134 have pushed efficiencies to 11.5%.135 As shown in Fig. 18, in the archetypal (and still most efficient) design, a high-porosity photoanode of sintered anatase TiO2 nanoparticles is coated with a monolayer of chemisorbed organic or organometallic dye molecules. Photons are absorbed by the dye molecules, which typically have a ruthenium atom at the center, exciting an electron to the dye's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (or to higher energy unoccupied orbitals) which is then injected into the TiO2 conduction band in the sub-picosecond time regime. Electron transport through the TiO2 proceeds via a slow diffusive process until reaching the fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) transparent conducting substrate. The oxidized dye molecule is regenerated via an iodide/triiodide redox couple in an organic solvent (typically acetonitrile-based). Reduction of the triiodide occurs at a platinum back electrode.
 Fig. 18  Schematic of a DSSC with a nanoporous TiO2 substrate. Two common hole conductors are the iodide/triiodide redox couple in solution and the solid-state spiro-OMeTAD molecule. 
Despite the impressive device performances, engineering challenges remain to make DSSCs more efficient, more practical, and more economical. The slow electron diffusion through the TiO2 nanoparticles limits device thicknesses and surface trap states increase the probability of electron-hole recombination. The liquid nature of the hole conductor necessitates proper device sealing. This iodide/triiodide solution is also corrosive to the platinum electrode, reducing device lifetime.136 There are therefore many degrees of freedom in altering the DSSC architecture.
One such design entails replacing the TiO2 nanoparticle photoanode with nanowires137,138 or nanotubes.139–141 The increase in crystal grain size speeds electron transport to the FTO electrode, especially if a high mobility material such as ZnO is used. Fast transport also enables thicker devices and hence increased dye loading and light absorption. There are various candidates to replace the liquid electrolyte including low vapor pressure ionic liquids142 and solid-state organic hole conductors such as Spiro-OMeTAD.143 These solid-state devices, however, suffer from a higher recombination rate between electrons in the TiO2 and holes in the Spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 19, Pathway 4), increasing the need for faster electron transport and/or passivation of the photoanode surface.
 Fig. 19  Important electron pathways in a DSSC. Pathway 1 is the desired injection of an electron into TiO2 which occurs very rapidly. Pathway 2 is the relaxation of the excited dye back to its ground state. Pathway 3 is the recombination of an electron in TiO2 with the oxidized dye molecule. Pathway 4 is recombination of an electron in TiO2 with the hole conductor (H.C.). Pathway 4 is typically much faster than Pathway 3, particularly when alternatives to the iodide/triiodide hole conductor are employed. Pathway 5 is the recombination of an electron in the transparent conducting oxide with a hole in the hole conductor. The back electrode (typically silver, gold, or platinum) where the hole conductor is reduced is not shown. 
B. 
          ALD to build core-shell photoanodes
The most prevalent use of ALD for DSSCs in the literature is to coat the photoanode in order to reduce recombination via Pathways 3 and 4. This tactic has been motivated by analogous work performed via various solution methods wherein conformal coatings (the “shell”) of SiO2,144ZrO2,144Al2O3,144,145Nb2O5,145SrTiO3,145SnO2,145ZnO,145,146CaCO3,147,148 and BaTiO3149 on TiO2 (the “core”) have been achieved as well as coatings of MgO, ZnO, and Al2O3 on a SnO2 photoanode.150 Of these coatings, all except ZrO2 and SnO2 increased the efficiency compared to uncoated liquid DSSCs. Despite the success of these solution methods, ALD is an attractive alternative because ALD allows for angstrom-level resolution versus the nanometer-level resolution of solution processes. Furthermore, the ALD precursors more readily penetrate the tortuous nanopores in DSSCs, improving uniformity of the coating layers.
There are multiple ways a “core-shell” design can reduce recombination: by passivation of surface defect sites that act as recombination centers, as a tunneling barrier to electron-hole recombination, and via dielectric screening of the Coulombic attraction between electrons and holes. A decrease in dark current follows the drop in recombination and device Voc potentially improves as a result, as described by the Shockley diode equation.151 Furthermore, core-shell designs also enable alteration of the core conduction band energy via band-bending caused by the shell conduction band or via a dipole induced by the shell oxide; a favorable change in the core conduction band energy can improve Voc.145 Finally, coating the surface with oxides that possess a high isoelectric point has the ancillary benefit of increasing dye adsorption, which in turn raises device Jsc.152

1. Core-shells in nanoparticle-based devices. 
The presence of a shell, however, can also diminish device performance if electron injection into the TiO2 (or ZnO or SnO2) is blocked. The rapid speed of electron injection (Pathway 1) versus relaxation (Pathway 2) enables some slowdown of injection without reducing device Jsc. Where this cutoff occurs is a matter of debate. In typical cells with sintered TiO2 nanoparticles, reports of the optimal coating thickness for Al2O3 range from 1 cycle (∼0.1–0.2 nm)153,154 to 20 cycles (∼2 nm).152,155 Interestingly this disagreement is also seen with other deposition methods where reported optimal thicknesses range from < 1 nm144 up to ∼12 nm.156 Performance enhancements achieved by Lin et al.153 and a TEM of their Al2O3-coated TiO2 nanoparticles are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 20 respectively.
Table 2 Data from Lin et al. of the effect of Al2O3 barrier-layer thickness in a DSSC. Note that optimal device performance is after only one cycle of ALD (∼0.1 nm thick shell)153




Shell Thickness (nm)

Voc (mV)

Jsc (mA/cm2)

FF (%)
Efficiency (%)




0
737 ± 9
11.57 ± 0.43
66.9 ± 0.7
5.75 ± 0.22


0.1 (1 cycle)
765 ± 9
12.46 ± 0.38
68.7 ± 0.8
6.50 ± 0.15


0.2 (2 cycles)
744 ± 38
9.77 ± 0.21
68.6 ± 5.8
5.00 ± 0.16


0.5 (5 cycles)
796 ± 4
0.86 ± 0.11
67.9 ± 8.8
0.46 ± 0.12


1.0 (10 cycles)
764 ± 104
0.18 ± 0.01
37.2 ± 3.4
0.05 ± 0.01




 Fig. 20  
Transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of a TiO2 nanoparticle coated by 20 cycles (∼2 nm) of Al2O3 by Lin et al. (Reproduced from ref. [153] by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry).153 
The improvements attained with relatively thick layers of a large bandgap, insulating material like Al2O3 are surprising even accounting for the femtosecond timescale of electron injection in a normal cell. For electron tunneling, described by the relation I α exp(β*d), where I is current, d is the thickness of the medium, and β is the tunneling attenuation factor, β values ∼1 Å−1 have been reported for Al2O3 shells.157,158 This implies a slowdown in electron injection by a factor of ∼5*108 for a 2 nm thick Al2O3 shell; this β value is corroborated by significant reductions in electron injection in as few as 5 ALD cycles observed elsewhere.159 Less work has been reported on other oxides but 5 cycles of HfO2 have been shown to improve JSC and efficiency dramatically155 and 5 cycles of SiO2 yielded similar improvements.160 When a small number of ALD cycles are involved, the degree of surface coverage is difficult to determine. Tien et al. have developed a model that uses X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data to calculate surface coverage and demonstrated it with Al2O3 shells.154 Their analysis suggests that complete surface coverage does not occur until approximately 15 ALD cycles, which is many more than the number of cycles often employed in devices. Understanding ALD growth behavior at low cycle numbers is therefore very important in assessing results of core-shell devices. While there are discrepancies in the optimal shell thicknesses reported in the literature, multiple ALD-deposited coatings have proven successful in increasing device efficiencies.
Other work has utilized the recombination-blocking ability of barrier layers in order to explore different hole conductors. 2 cycles (∼0.2 nm) of ZrO2 were used to improve the performance of a ss-DSSC with Spiro-OMeTAD.161 Hamann et al. coated TiO2 with Al2O3 and then replaced the iodide couple with a ferrocene couple which would otherwise suffer from a high recombination rate at the TiO2 interface.157 The same group has also examined Al2O3 as a way to passivate a SnO2 rather than TiO2 photoanode.158SnO2 is desirable for its high mobility but suffers from a high recombination rate, which was reduced with one ALD cycle of Al2O3. It is worth noting that in all of the applications in TiO2-based devices described above, ALD was used in lieu of, not in addition to, the standard TiCl4 post-treatment of sintered TiO2 nanoparticles. This solution process has a strong effect on device performance, particularly JSC, and improves efficiency.162


2. Core-shells in nanowire templates and other alternative devices. 
In addition to the more standard nanoparticle-based devices, nanowire DSSCs are drawing attention due to the greater electron mobilities that can be attained in structures with large crystal grains, particularly single-crystal nanowires. Recently, Tétreault et al. constructed a network of single-crystalline TiO2 nanowires in a solid-state DSSC.163 Treating the nanowire array with the standard TiCl4 solution method increased device efficiency from 1.5% to 3.9%, but treating the array with ALD of TiO2 resulted in an even more dramatic improvement, boosting device efficiency to 4.9% (the majority of the improvement for both treatments was due to an increase in JSC). This is the first reported instance of ALD outperforming the TiCl4 method. Law et al. coated ZnO nanowires with both Al2O3 and TiO2 and tested their performance in DSSCs.151 While Al2O3 did increase the VOC it also reduced JSC and did not improve overall device performance. TiO2 on the other hand, improved both VOC and efficiency. The boost in VOC is attributed, in addition to passivation of surface sites, to the buildup of a surface field due to differences in doping between the ZnO core and the TiO2 shell which reduces exposure of injected electrons to the surface. As TiO2 does not act as a tunneling barrier to electron injection, even relatively thick layers up to 35 nm improve device performance. The same phenomenon has also been observed with very thin TiO2 layers (< 1 nm) in ZnO nanocrystallite devices.164,165TiO2 shells deposited viaALD have also been shown to improve the performance of SnO2 nanowire DSSCs.166 Finally, ALD of TiO2 atop indium tin oxide (ITO) (also deposited viaALD) in nanotubes also shows promise.167 This design, shown in Fig. 21, has a continuous network of transparent conducting material for extremely rapid charge collection. The TiO2 shell is necessary to prevent rapid recombination at the ITO surface (i.e. Pathway 5).
 Fig. 21  Schematic of TiO2/ITO core-shell device on an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane template.167TCO indicates transparent conducting oxide and Pt-FTO indicates platinized-fluorine doped tin oxide (Reprinted from ref. [167] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008). 

C. Other uses of ALD in DSSCs

ALD has also been used to build the photoanode in a DSSC. Unlike in the core-shell models described above where ALD is used to construct a recombination barrier on top of a conductive shell, in other instances ALD has been used to construct a conductive photoanode on an otherwise insulating substrate. Hamann et al. have used ALD to deposit ZnO168 and TiO2169 on a SiO2 aerogel network. The advantage of an aerogel network is that charge transport is essentially one-dimensional, reducing the average distance electrons travel to reach the electrodevia diffusion. Han et al. have reported ALD of TiO2 on a three-dimensional “nanoribbon” peptide network of diphenylalanine.170 The peptides are removed viacalcinations leaving a network of hollow TiO2 nanoribbons. Martinson et al. have examined using anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membranes with nanopores as a template to build ZnO171,172 and TiO2/ITO devices,167 as shown in Fig. 21. The resultant nanotube devices have reached efficiencies of 1.6%171 (the record for a ZnO device is 5.6%173). While the 200 nm pores and thick, 60 μm membranes are a promising template, roughness factors need to be raised in order to increase dye loading and raise JSC.
Work by Standridge et al. has demonstrated the ability of ALD to coat silver nanoparticles in DSSCs, which enhance light absorptionvia plasmonic effects.174,175 By coating the nanoparticles with thin (< 10 nm) layers of TiO2, dye molecules can be adsorbed and the metallic core is protected from the corrosive redox couple. ALD of a few cycles of Al2O3 prior to TiO2 was also shown to improve the compactness of the oxide layer as Al2O3 is more easily grown on silver than is TiO2. One final application area for ALD is in depositing a thin buffer layer on top of the transparent conducting oxide electrode in order to prevent recombination via Pathway 5 in Fig. 19. This buffer layer, typically on the order of 50–100 nm, is used to cover areas of the electrode that are not otherwise coated by nanoparticles or nanowiresetc. While this route has proven successful at reducing recombination,151,157,158 it has not outperformed the standard spray pyrolysis technique.143,176
VIII. Organic photovoltaics
A. Function and design
In principle, organic photovoltaics (OPVs) operate similarly to inorganic cells (discussed in Section III); however, there are a few important differences outlined below and described in more detail in review papers.46,47 The typical configuration is a bilayer cell as shown in Fig. 22a. The active components are the organic donor (analogous to the p semiconductor) and the organic acceptor (analogous to the n semiconductor), and these molecules can be either polymers or small molecules. The buffer layers can be organic or inorganic and are conductive compounds that mitigate recombination and modify the electrodes to enhance electron/hole collection and transport. During operation the donor material absorbs light to create an electron-hole pair called an exciton. Unlike during operation of inorganic cells, the absorption of light does not create free carriers in organic devices; instead, the exciton must travel through the donor phase to a donor–acceptor interface at which point it can be dissociated into free carriers.
 Fig. 22  Standard a) Bilayer and b) Bulk heterojunction OPV architectures. 
One of the challenges for OPV arises from the fact that excitons typically decay within 20 nm, which strictly limits the active region that can be used to create power. To help overcome this, one of the major design variations for OPVs is the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) design, which intermixes the two active organic components to create paths of travel on the order of the decay length or less as shown in Fig. 22b (similar to DSSC designs discussed in VII.A and nanowire designs discussed throughout the review).44–46 Inverted devices – in which the position of the donor and acceptor molecules are switched in bilayers – are another design modification in organic solar cells. The operation is similar except that the opposite bias is applied compared to standard devices, and this orientation also requires modification of the electrodes so that the holes and electrons are now collected on opposite ends. There are several advantages to the inverted design including decreased degradation and easier incorporation into tandem cells.44 So far, ALD has been useful for OPVs in modifying the work function of electrodes in both standard and inverted devices to create optimum band alignment and to deposit an oxygen and water-resistant barrier to increase the lifetime of devices.
B. Modification of OPV electrodes and TCOs with ALD
Several studies have looked into the modification of the electrodes in OPVs with varying device structures. Using a standard bilayer device, Park et al. found that when replacing ITO with AZO on glass and depositing a 100 nm thick P3HT/PCBM heterojunction, shunting occurred from the metal electrode to the AZO, leading to decreased performance.177 Depositing a 130 nm thick i-ZnO layer between the AZO and active layer led to decreased shunting and enhanced performance. Unfortunately, the efficiency of their cells was low and only increased from 0.07% to 0.2%. In another application, it was shown that cells with the structure AZO ALD/P3HT/PTCDI (3,4,9,10 perylene-tetracarboxylic diimide)/Alq3 (tris(8-hydroxyquinoline))/Au exhibited photovoltaic behavior.178
Schmidt et al. have studied the use of 25 nm thick TiO2 ALD films deposited with tetrakis(dimethylamino)titanium(IV) as electron selective layers (to modify the electrode work function) in inverted P3HT/PCBM BHJ devices; on the other electrode, MoO3 served as the hole extraction layer.179 Using the semitransparent (i.e. a TCO as both contacts) device architecture shown in Fig. 23, 1.9% efficient cells were achieved. The “opaque” design by replacing the top electrode with Al yielded a 2.1% efficient cell.179 Later studies illuminated the fact that exposure to air (oxygen) creates defect states at the TiO2/organic interface that can be eliminated with exposure to 370 nm UV light. The authors concluded that negatively charged oxygen states form at the interface preventing electron extraction and that the UV light leads to desorption of the interfacial oxygen.180Fig. 23b and c shows the increase in FF and JSC after UV illumination, and the degradation of performance that occurs over time due to exposure to oxygen.
 Fig. 23  a) Device architecture for semi-transparent cells.179 b) Increased performance of devices with TiO2 electron selective layers after UV exposure (IV curve performed under 535 nm light). c) Performance loss over time from exposure to oxygen species (Reproduced from ref. [179,180] by permission of The American Institute of Physics).180 
In a similar application, Wang et al. studied the replacement of Cs2CO3 with ZnO ALD (DEZn and H2O precursors) as the electron selective layer for flexible inverted OPVs with a poly(ethylene naphthalate) substrate.181 Using the structure illustrated by the band diagram in Fig. 24a, they achieved an efficiency of 4.18% with a 4 mm2 device when the ZnO deposited at 80 °C was 36 nm thick, which they claimed was the highest reported efficiency of flexible organic cells. Thicknesses above 36 nm caused an increase in series resistance leading to sharp decreases in FF (though VOC was unaffected). ZnO deposited at 45 °C showed similar results; however, efficiencies at 80 °C were slightly higher due to a lower resistance and a more hydrophobic surface which helps with polymer wetting.
 Fig. 24  a) Band diagram of OPV with ZnO electron selective layer. b) I–V curves at 80 °C deposition of ZnO. C) Comparison of 45 °C and 80 °C ZnO films shows a decrease in series resistance by increasing temperature (Reproduced from ref. [181] by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry).181 
Cheun et al. used a similar inverted device structure as Wang et al. (except they replaced the MoO3 with PEDOT:PSS) to study ZnO ALD altered ITO (deposition at 200 °C using DEZn and H2O) on performance.182 They found that even one cycle of ZnO ALD shifted the work function of the ITO substrate from 4.7 eV to ∼4.3 eV, and the work function was not a function of thickness. Further, as seen in previous studies, a kink appeared in the I–V curve until a critical thickness – in this case 10 nm – at which point the device performance drastically increased as fill factor and VOC improved. However, as noted by Schmidt et al. (vide supra), exposure to UV light removed oxygen defect states in the ZnO film, leading to an increase in efficiency for sub 10 nm films. Upon increasing the active layer thickness from 80 to 200 nm, the overall device performance increased from 2.02% to 3.06% when using a 20 nm thick ZnO ALD layer.
In an effort to design semi-transparent cells (Fig. 25a) that do not require ITO or the use of an evaporation step for the grid, Zhou et al. studied using PEDOT:PSS as both electrodes where ZnO ALD (40 nm at 80 °C) was deposited on the bottom electrode to behave as an electron selective layer.183 The EQE of this device neared that of the reference device (Fig. 25b), which had the advantage of a reflective Al top contact, yielding a cell that was 1.8% efficient. Later optimization by Zhou et al. led to device efficiencies of 2.4%.184
 Fig. 25  a) Device architecture for semi-transparent cell. B) EQE comparison to reference cell (Reproduced from ref. [183] by permission of The American Institute of Physics).183 
C. Encapsulation of OPVs by Al2O3 and Al2O3/HfO2 nanolaminates
A major challenge of organic solar cells is that some of the molecules used to make cells are very sensitive to water and oxygen and degrade rapidly when exposed to ambient conditions. Gas diffusion barrier layers are used to mitigate this degradation, and ALD is an attractive method for encapsulation because uniform coatings are achievable with highly controllable thicknesses and material properties. Potscavage et al. analyzed the effect of a 200 nm thick Al2O3 thermal ALD layer deposited at 100 °C over a pentacene/C60 heterojunction cell.185 They found that the ALD not only increased the FF and VOC of the devices but also dramatically increased the lifetime of the cells. After 10 h, the efficiency of unencapsulated cells decreased by 80%, yet encapsulated cells lost less than 6% of their original operating power conversion efficiencies after over 6000 h (Fig. 26). Further studies by Chang et al. showed that Al2O3/HfO2 nanolaminates improved the encapsulation of OPVs by preventing hydrolysis-induced aging of Al2O3.186 More recently, Sarkar et al. found that for PEDOT/P3HT/PCBM bulk heterojunction cells, Al2O3 deposited with ozone as the counter-reactant as compared to water further increased the effectiveness of OPV encapsulation by ALD.187
 Fig. 26  Normalized lifetime efficiency of encapsulated pentacene/C60 OPV cell with Al2O3 and a UV-epoxy (Reproduced from ref. [185] by permission of The American Institute of Physics).185 
D. Organic-nanorod template
The only demonstrated polymer based nanorod solar cell utilizing ALD was developed by Greene and Yang et al. using P3HT coated TiO2 ALD on ZnO nanowires.188 The best device performance of 0.29% occurred with 4–10 nm thick coatings of TiO2 on ZnO nanorods (150–225 nm long and 15–25 nm thick) while cells lacking the TiO2 were barely functional. The cause was either due to better exciton dissociation with TiO2 or reduced recombination at the interface, and the minimum thickness of 4 nm for the TiO2 was attributed to the fact that it transitioned from amorphous to anatase at this thickness. The VOC and FF reached their optimum values at ∼4 nm thick TiO2, and then the values saturated. However, JSC reached a peak value at ∼4 nm and then monotonically decreased with thickness. Finally, to achieve the optimum device performance, the core-shell devices were exposed to air, with the best device increasing from 0.03% to 0.29% over a one month period. An explanation for this phenomenon was that the TiO2 lost surface oxygen when under vacuum making it an electron donor, and exposure to ambient replaced this lost oxygen. Using the same ZnO nanowire arrays as in the Greeneet al. paper, Yuhas and Yang built all oxide nanowire cells using TiO2 ALD blocking layers between the p-type Cu2O nanoparticle absorber and the n-type ZnO nanowires.189 The advantages of their structure included long term stability of oxide materials, non-toxicity, and elemental abundance. Without a TiO2 blocking layer, no photovoltaic response was recorded because of very low shunt resistance between the Cu2O and the ITO. While the design is a useful step forward for solar technology, the best cell from this design was only 0.05%, which leads to many opportunities for analysis and improvement.
IX. Next generation (quantum confinement)
The ability to engineer the bandgap of a semiconductor has been known for quite some time, and this is traditionally accomplished by confining at least one of the dimensions of a material such that size quantization effects take over. Over the past few years, much interest has been placed in using multiple exciton generation (MEG) in quantum dots (QDs) for applications to photovoltaics in hopes of surpassing the Shockley-Queisser limit.55ALD is a promising tool to achieve confinement due to the fine control over growth rates. Dasgupta et al. first demonstrated quantum confinement with ALD for stoichiometric, polycrystalline PbS films using Pb(tmhd)2 and H2S at 160 C.190,191 Below 10 nm, the films displayed confinement effects, and the bandgap varied from the bulk value of 0.4 eV to 2.7 eV (Fig. 27a). A subsequent study by Dasgupta et al. demonstrated the ability to deposit QDs that varied in size with cycle number on silicon nanowires, and an example of as grown PbS QDs after 20 cycles of ALD is shown in Fig. 27b. This study showed positive progress towards using QDs as sensitizers (absorbers) in PV devices.192
 Fig. 27  a) Bandgap versus film thickness for PbS ALD films. Measurements exhibit a trend similar to values estimated from an effective mass model. b) As deposited PbS QDs after 20 cycles of ALD (Reprinted from ref. [190,192] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2009 and 2011.).190,192 
More recently, Brennan et al.193 have deposited CdS QDs below 6 nm in diameter within nanoporous TiO2 by utilizing the fact that the CdS nucleates in the first few cycles before it becomes a continuous film.122 Similarly to the PbS confined films, these QDs showed confinement from the bulk bandgap value of 2.4 eV up to 3 eV. By utilizing the architecture for a ss-DSSC (vide supra) and replacing the dye with CdS QDs, they were able to make ss-QDSSCs using ALD grown QDs. Nevertheless, the maximum efficiency achieved was only 0.25%, leaving room for improvement.
X. TCOs and anti-reflective coatings
A. Overview of TCOs
Transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) are integral to the optimized operation of solar cells. As materials with both high conductivity and high transparency, they perform important roles in thin film and organic solar cells, serving as contacts, chemical barriers, and antireflection coatings. Typically, TCOs have a resistivity on the order of 10−4 Ω cm and a carrier concentration on the order of 1022 cm−3.194 For optimal performance, a TCO material must satisfy numerous criteria beyond optical transparency and electrical conductivity; the material's degree of crystallinity, work function, stability, toxicity, hardness, cost and deposition temperature are also important design considerations.195 Many materials have been explored for use as TCOs, including doped ZnO, ITO, In2O3, and doped SnO2, and these materials have been deposited through a variety of methods including chemical vapor deposition, sol–gel methods, spray pyrolysis, electron-beam plasma-deposition, and sputtering, as documented in many reviews available on TCOs.195–197 The properties of these films vary with composition and deposition method as seen in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison of TCO's resistivities made through different deposition techniques. The different techniques compared in this table are atomic layer deposition (ALD), metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), magnetron sputtering (MSP), and spray pyrolysis. MSP is the conventional method to deposit TCOs




Material
Deposition Method
Resistivity (10−4 Ω cm)





                    ZnO
                    198
Photo-ALD
6.9



                    ZnO
                    29

ALD

67



                    ZnO
                    29

MOCVD

2440



                    ZnO (B doped)29

ALD

5



                    ZnO (B doped)29

MOCVD

71



                    AZO
                    194

PLD

0.85



                    AZO
                    194
rf MSP
1.9



                    AZO
                    194
dc MSP
2.7



                    AZO
                    199

ALD

1.35


ITO200

ALD

2.4


ITO194

PLD

0.72


ITO194

Spray Pyrolysis

0.95


ITO194

PLD

0.845


ITO194

MSP

∼1



                    SnO2201

Spray Pyrolysis

∼10



                    SnO2202

ALD

19



                    SnO2 (F doped, FTO)201

Spray Pyrolysis, CVD
∼2.2





ALD holds much promise in future development of TCOs. As discussed previously, three-dimensional designs to enhance function and performance are attracting increasing interest for solar cells, necessitating a way to deposit thin conformal films uniformly on surfaces with high aspect ratios. In addition, the ability to carefully control and study resistivity as a function of composition requires a technique with fine deposition control. Increasing interest in organic solar cells also motivates TCOs with low processing temperatures. In many cases, ALD can uniquely satisfy these criteria. Below, recent research on the ALD of TCOs is discussed.
B. 
          SnO2
With its high transparency, conductivity, stability, and low cost, tin oxide is one of the traditional commercial TCOs. In particular, fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) has become increasingly important as production of thin film CdTe PV has increased.203ALD is a promising technique to produce thin, highly uniform SnO2 films that are difficult to achieve through CVD, spray pyrolysis, thermal evaporation, or sputtering.204 Early ALD experiments used SnCl4 or SnI4 and an oxygen source as the precursors,205–207 but the high processing temperatures required and the corrosive conditions due to byproducts made the use of these precursors less than optimal. Elam et al. detailed an alternative method by using tetrakis(dimethylamino) tin and hydrogen peroxide, with uniform film growth between 50–300 °C, but the films deposited below 150 °C had significant carbon contamination, likely from incomplete reaction between precursors.202 The resistivity of ∼2.8 × 10−1 Ω cm for films deposited at 150 °C was much higher than the value of 1.9 × 10−3 Ω cm for films deposited at 200 °C.202 In a recent paper, Heo et al. developed a method to deposit conformal SnOx films at temperatures as low as 50 °C using a newly synthesized Sn2+ precursor (N2,N3-di-tert-butyl-butane-2,3-diamido-tin(II) (C12H26N2Sn)) and hydrogen peroxide.208 The lowest obtained resistivity using this method was 1.33 × 10−2 Ω cm. The potential for oxidation of the underlying absorber using this SnOx process was investigated on polymer solar cell materials, but the authors did not see any oxidation problems. The properties of SnOx films may be further tailored through doping the film.
C. ITO

          Indium
          tin oxide (ITO) is the most widely used TCO for optoelectronic devices, having both high optical transmission and low sheet resistance; however, ITO deposition by ALD has presented unique challenges. Precursors must be found for In and Sn that have self-limiting reactions in the same temperature range. Asikainen et al. used InCl3, SnCl4, and either water or hydrogen peroxide to form ITO films.200,209,210 These films had resistances of 2.4 × 10−4 Ω cm and greater than 90% transmission, comparable with films grown by other techniques. Unfortunately, high deposition temperatures of ∼300–500 °C, corrosive byproducts, and low growth rates of only 0.25–0.40 Å/cycle hinder the adoption of this procedure. Ritala et al. attempted to use other precursors such as In(acac)3, In(hfacac)3, In(thd)3, and In(CH3)3, but were unsuccessful.211 More recently, Elamet al. deposited ITO films using cyclopentadienyl indium and ozone to create In2O3 and tetrakis(dimethylamino)tin and hydrogen peroxide for the SnO2.212 Films with 5% SnO2 cycles were found to have the lowest resistivity of 3 × 10−4 Ω cm and the highest transparency of 92% of the films studied. It was also shown that the SnO2 cycles inhibited In2O3 growth. The ALD ITO window was found to be between ∼200–320 °C, with most of their work being completed at 275 °C. The amount of tin was tuned for optimal properties in the films as shown in Fig. 28, producing films with properties comparable to those fabricated through other methods, as seen in Table 3. However, while ITO is in many cases the standard TCO material, the limited supply of indium encourages the development of alternative TCO materials.
 Fig. 28  Effect of amount of tin doping on the resistivity, mobility and carrier concentration in ITO films (Reprinted from ref. [212] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008.).212 
D. 
          ZnO
        

Zinc oxide (ZnO) has attracted much attention as a TCO because of its low resistivity, high resistance to hydrogen plasma, low growth temperature, and low cost compared to ITO. Numerous studies have been completed on the ALD of ZnO. Commonly, to create the films, DEZn and deionized water are used as the reactants.213 In 1996, Saito et al. grew ZnO through ALD over the temperature range of 105–235 °C.214 The resistivity of the films was on the order of 10−3 Ω cm. It was later shown that by using photo-ALD, where the growing film is exposed to UV light, the minimum resistivity was decreased by an order of magnitude to 6.9 × 10−4 Ω cm, and the electron concentration was increased to 5 × 1020 cm−3 in undoped ZnO.198,213 It is believed that the UV light irradiation leads to an excess of Zn, which causes point defects such as interstitial Zn or O vacancies.198,215 The electrical properties of the film may be further improved through boron doping.29,78,215
Interestingly, ZnO films grown through ALD showed improved characteristics compared to those created through MOCVD with the same precursors. Besides increased uniformity, deposition through ALD lowered the resistivity of the films by more than an order of magnitude for both B-doped and undoped ZnO films, and there was greater electron concentration and electron mobility for ALD films.78 In addition, the high quality ZnO films produced through ALD have greater stability, having almost no degradation of their electrical properties over a time span of 18–23 months.215Degradation of electrical properties is usually caused by the adsorption of oxygen at the grain boundaries. It is hypothesized that through ALD, the number of dangling bonds and unstable bonds is decreased relative to CVD, which in turns reduces oxygen adsorption at the grain boundary.215ALD films have been used as a protective coating of MOCVD films to prevent oxygen adsorption, and textured ZnO films with good stability and ability to trap light have been grown through a two-step MOCVD of ZnO followed by ALD of ZnO.29 A comparison of the stability of films produced by photo-MOCVD versus a bilayer system consisting of films grown by photo-MOCVD films with an ALD ZnO protective layer is seen in Fig. 29. The open symbols denote as-deposited properties while the dark symbols are for the samples after exposure to air for 6 months. The films with an ALD coating show little deterioration in electron mobility, compared to the photo-MOCVD films. Clearly, ALD of ZnO holds much promise in the development of improved TCOs for solar cells.
 Fig. 29  Electron mobility and carrier concentration properties of photo-MOCVD ZnO films and bilayer films consisting of a CVD deposited layer coated with an ALD layer. The open circles denote as-deposited properties, while the closed circles denote the electrical properties of films exposed to air (Reproduced from ref. [78] by permission of The Japanese Society of Applied Physics).78 
E. 
          AZO
        
To further improve the conductivity of ZnO TCOs, the films may be doped with Al. Both the creation of ZnO and Al2O3 films using ALD are well established, as discussed previously. Interestingly, these films have very different physical properties. ZnO films are conducting, crystalline, and rough with a refractive index of 2.0 and a density of 5.62 g/cm3 while Al2O3 films are insulating, amorphous, and smooth with an index of refraction on 1.64 and density of 2.91 g/cm3.216 Elam et al. have shown that the refractive index, surface roughness, crystallinity, resistivity, and density of the AZO films can be tuned by controlling the composition of the films.216 For example, the resistivity can be controlled by over 18 orders of magnitude, from 10−2 to 1016 Ω cm. These properties do not follow the rule of mixing based on pulse exposures, with the Zn content being lower than expected. Detailed analysis of the system growth using a quartz crystal microbalance has shown that when trimethyl aluminum is used, the Al precursor etches the zinc oxide surface.217Al incorporation and activation has also been studied using an in situ conductance probe.218 By optimizing the amount of Al doping, films with a resistivity less than 10−3 Ω cm can be obtained.219,220AZO films have an optical transmittance of greater than 80%221 and conformal coatings over high aspect ratio Si microrods have already been achieved.222 Combined with the relative abundance of its constituents, the properties of AZO makes it a more attractive alternative to the more common ITO. Examples of its use as the TCO for solar cells exist, such as the work on CIGS cells by Yousfi et al.106
F. Future TCOs
There are many other TCO materials beyond what is discussed here, many of which have not been explored using ALD, and there is currently an active search for the next generation of TCOs.195,223 One goal in TCOs is to increase the conductivity without reducing the transmission. This may be done by increasing the mobility through the removal of scattering mechanisms or using materials with improved mobility. Improvements in materials have already been achieved. For example, Zn2SnO4 has been shown to have the best transparency of TCOs and CdO has the best mobility. Much of the future work involves evaluating the phase space between CdO, ZnO, In2O3, SnO2, and Ga2O3.195 Previously, ALD has not been implemented for the development of these new TCOs, but it has much potential in the exploration of films with fine control over their composition. It is also important to establish methods for producing these films using ALD if these materials are to be used for nano-PV since their importance will increase as third generation PV matures and requires a high degree of conformality.
G. Anti-reflective (AR) coatings
AR coatings reduce the optical reflection at materials' interfaces, improving a cell's efficiency by increasing light coupling into the active region of the PV. Strategies to reduce the optical reflection include texturing the interface224 or applying a thin layer of a material with a higher refractive index (n) than the substrate.225 The optimal index of refraction of an AR coating is related to the index of refraction of the substrate.226 The ability to tailor optical properties such as the refractive index over a large range by adjusting the number of subcycles of two materials with different optical properties makes ALD particularly well-suited for fabricating AR coatings.
For example, Lim et al. explored TixSi1-xOy (TSO) as an AR coating using PE-ALD.227 The TSO coating dramatically decreased the reflectivity compared to a bare Si wafer, suggesting that TSO may be a good candidate material for thin film solar cells. In another work, AlXTi1−XO (ATO) films deposited through PE-ALD also show dramatic reductions in reflectivity,226 and these films can be deposited using ALD at temperatures low enough for the processing of flexible thin film PV, highlighting another benefit of using this deposition technique. Other materials that can be used for AR coatings have also been deposited by ALD, including tantalum oxide,228 lanthanide oxides,229 and rare earth oxides,230 although these materials may be limited in their applicability to commercial solar cells. Through adequate optimization, ALD may be used to deposit AR coatings to improve the efficiency of PV devices.
XI. Integration of ALD into commercial applications: rapid deposition and design parameters
The design and customization of ALD reactors has been performed in the research setting for decades.231–234 Nevertheless, the major drawback in the commercialization of many ALD processes is the technique's low growth rate. Often, the purging or pumping time needed to ensure a true ALD process by the removal of excess reactants from the reactor is the limiting factor, restricting the growth rate to approximately 0.04 nm/s or less,235 which is unsuitable for the PV industry. For ALD to become commercially viable in the photovoltaic industry, higher-throughput methods are needed. Currently, two strategies are being pursued to achieve higher throughput: optimization of multiwafer batch processing with temporal pulsing and the creation of a deposition scheme called spatial-ALD.
Multiwafer batch reactors increase throughput by allowing for many wafers to be coated simultaneously. ALD batch processing is particularly attractive when depositing large numbers of thick films, and batch reactors are generally more reliable than single wafer designs, allowing for lower cost-of-ownership.236,237 The total processing time for ALD includes not only the deposition reaction but also the time needed for substrate(s) loading, heating, processing, cooling and un-loading.238 Proper manufacturing design can help to minimize these times by carrying out steps simultaneously, such as heating the substrate while loading. Tuning the flow to allow quick purging times and high gas flow while still attaining uniform growth also assists in decreasing the processing time. Through proper optimization and design, new ALD systems claim to meet the PV industry's high quality and throughput demands.238
Another approach is to design reactors that spatially separate the locations of the reactions. Termed spatial-ALD, this process has the potential to perform ALD at high-speeds.74,235,236,239–241 In spatial-ALD, isolated half reactions are occurring simultaneously at different locations on the substrate, in contrast to traditional ALD where reactants are sequentially (temporally) cycled through the chamber one reactant at a time. One possible design to achieve spatial ALD involves the sweeping of a deposition head consisting of channels filled with different precursors across the substrate as shown in Fig. 30. The precursor gas stream channels are surrounded by exhaust lines and inert gas streams to isolate the precursors. The gap between the deposition head and the substrate is minimized for faster purging. In this design, only the deposition head, which can be smaller than the substrate, needs to be under vacuum. Various designs of reactors can be found in literature.74,235,241
 Fig. 30  Schematic drawing illustrating the underlying design behind spatial ALD. Two channels are shown where the precursors enter the chamber, in this case, the precursors for Al2O3. Exhaust lines remove the excess reactant and an inert gas further isolates the two precursors from one another. The substrate is moved over the gas flow for deposition (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [74] with permission).74 
Spatial-ALD has already achieved many promising results. Growth rates per cycle are similar to those achieved through traditional ALD processes for both ZnO and Al2O3 systems.239,240 As discussed earlier, Al2O3 formed through ALD can be used to passivate c-Si surfaces. Because the cycle times are faster, growth rates up to 1.2 nm/s were achieved using this method and c-Si passivated with the spatial ALD had very low surface recombination velocities −6.5 cm/s on p-type and 8.1 cm/s for n-type235 – comparing favorably with other techniques.73 A substrate throughput of 3 m/min has been attained using spatial-ALD,240 and such a design may be modified for high throughput deposition on very large substrates, or even roll-to-roll printing on flexible substrates. The ability of spatial-ALD to passivate Si solar cells has been investigated by Vermang et al. in a recent paper.242 They showed that 10–30 nm of Al2O3 deposited by spatial-ALD produced on p-type Czochralski-grown Si provided the same level of passivation as temporally deposited Al2O3. While Al2O3 deposited by spatial-ALD on n-type FZ Si wafers did not provide the same level, by thermally processing 30 nm of Al2O3 after deposition, adequate surface passivation was achieved. Promising results such as these for spatial-ALD and the continued optimization of batch reactors are two ways of bringing the PV industry's high throughput requirements within reach.
XII. 
        ALD inspired processes
One of the challenges of integrating ALD into some applications is the need for expensive and energy-intensive equipment to create the vacuum operating conditions, especially if the rest of the process is not vacuum based. Using a liquid-phase procedure to perform the atomic layer deposition would circumvent the use of these vacuum conditions. Recent work by Foong et al. produced dense, well-aligned TiO2 nanotubes using liquid atomic layer deposition, and tested the viability of these materials as a component in a model hybrid poly(3-hexylthiophene)(P3HT):TiO2 solar cell.243 The nanotubes were formed by using a nanoporous anodic alumina (AAO) template. The templates were dipped into a solution containing the titanium precursor, sonicated to remove excess reactant, dipped in a hydrolyzing solution, and dried at 90 °C. This process was repeated until the desired thickness was achieved, and then the template was etched away. Arrays ranging from 150 nm to 400 nm tall and 60–70 nm in diameter with 5–20 nm thick walls were successfully created as seen in Fig. 31. The growth rates were comparable to those typically produced by TiO2 ALD. When used in a P3HT:TiO2 solar cell, the highest efficiency achieved was 0.3%, which is a twofold improvement over the benchmark bilayer devices without nanotubes. Although the liquid ALD process still needs further study, this work serves as an important proof of concept for the viability of liquid atomic layer deposition as an alternative to the traditional vapor-phase ALD.
 Fig. 31  
          Micrographs of TiO2 nanotubes formed through liquid ALD under optimized conditions. The nanotubes are about 150 nm tall, 60–70 nm in diameter with wall thicknesses of approximately 5 nm. The nanotubes produced are dense and well-aligned (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [243] with permission).243 
Research is also ongoing in the development of an electrochemical equivalent of ALD, called electrochemical atomic layer deposition (EC-ALD). In EC-ALD, self-limited reactions are achieved by depositing at a potential lower than favorable for the same reactants to react with oneself, but still favorable for the reaction between dissimilar reactants to occur on the surface.244 Many materials relevant to photovoltaics have been formed using this method, including CdTe,245,246CdSe,247 and PbSe.248 This method in some cases has been shown to promote epitaxy and improved film quality,245 although these advantages will have to outweigh the additional costs associated with this method to make it a reasonable choice for photovoltaics.
Molecular layer deposition (MLD) is a burgeoning field based on ALD where the precursors are substituted with organic molecules to deposit ultrathin organic films249,250 or organic-inorganic hybrid films.251–254 The applications for which MLD has been studied are limited due to its recent entrance into the research community; nevertheless, opportunities may exist in the future for applications to organic or hybrid devices.
XIII. Conclusions, outlooks, and opportunities
The pace at which ALD has found applications in the photovoltaic community has accelerated rapidly in the last few years, and the opportunities to fully utilize the abilities of ALD have not yet been fully explored. The flexibility of ALD has been demonstrated by its application to virtually every segment of the photovoltaic industry and by the great variation in the function of the ALD films. The insights gained from ALD as a tool will be important to the PV community as a whole. Whether or not ALD is integrated into commercial systems for all the applications we have covered in this review, the lessons and fundamental understanding may be integrated into the methodology and processes of other deposition techniques. Further, the needs of the end user are important, and ALD has already inspired researchers in other communities to adapt the theory of ALD into their technologies which include solution processing, electrochemical deposition, and vapor deposition of organics.
First generation solar technology has been well-studied, the efficiency has been increased to the point where there is limited room for improvement, and costs of the module have been driven down such that the balance of systems is a significant percentage of the total cost. Therefore, the number of opportunities to apply ALD to first generation PV will likely remain limited despite the exciting work showing the ability to passivate silicon interfaces. Nevertheless, entrepreneurs are working on integrating high speed ALD into c-Si manufacturing. Second generation devices still have room for improvement in many areas. The insight gained from buffer layers deposited by ALD onto CIGS (and eventually CZTS and other absorbers) are important because of the capability to study parameters such as composition and thickness and effects such as passivation, recombination, and band gap alignment. The search for new materials is also aided by ALD, especially for absorber materials. The PV community is engaged in the search for cheap, abundant absorbers to meet the demand placed on solar as a major energy source. Since many absorbers such as SnS, Cu2O, CuxS, FeS2, and PbS may be applied in nanostructured devices, ALD will be integral to the application of these p-type semiconductors. Thus, the integration of ALD into thin film PV research and production may become more significant as nanostructured devices will potentially require the abilities of ALD for the absorber, buffer, TCO, and AR layers. Overall, ALD is important and will increase in importance in understanding nanostructured solar cells in the future.
The application of ALD to 3rd generation technology (and beyond) is one of the more exciting areas for fundamental research. The constraints placed on processing for the technologies are severe, and the implementation of ALD will be important in meeting these demands. ALD will provide the opportunity to understand fundamental device operation as third generation and nano-PV improve and as interfacial formation and quantum issues become more important.
Organic devices are very sensitive to the alignment of the HOMO and LUMO, and the electrodes are absolutely critical to device performance. ALD has proven valuable both as a way to create the right alignment and to match low temperature processing conditions for TCOs and selective layers. Also, ALD as an encapsulant has been demonstrated since exposure to the ambient is a significant issue for organic PV, but the films must be thin and non-destructive to the bulk device. Moreover, the many available architectures and materials used in DSSCs offer numerous avenues for implementation of ALD. The ability of ALD to conformally passivate various interfaces in DSSCs has already proven successful in reducing recombination. However, the variability in reported results with respect to electron injection demands further study. Furthermore, ALD's ability to construct a photoanode on non-conducting templates presents a method to build novel device designs. While ALD offers much promise for DSSCs, it has yet to contribute to record-breaking devices. As promising new cell designs are developed, however, there will undoubtedly be areas where ALD may be of assistance.
TCOs are crucial to the performance of many different types of solar cells and ALD has been used to synthesize numerous types of TCOs, comparable to films created using other methods. From a fundamental research standpoint, ALD may be useful in exploring new films with varying stoichiometry because of the ability to finely tune the composition of the films. In some cases, it has been found that ALD-TCOs have improved properties over films deposited through other methods. However, for ALD to be of use in industry, the advantages of ALD must outweigh the greater complexities associated with it. The push toward nanostructured PV may necessitate its use to achieve thin, conformal coatings. In addition, ALD is one of the few methods that can achieve conformal thin films at the low temperatures needed for deposition on organic PVs. On the other hand, for ALD to be successful for these applications, high throughput will be needed. Methods such as spatial-ALD and multiwafer batch reactors hold promise to meet the high-throughput demands of the PV industry as cost-effective production techniques.
Nevertheless, challenges still remain for the ALD-PV research community and for the incorporation of ALD into manufacturing. For ALD to succeed as a deposition technique in the photovoltaic industry, it must help reach the goal of solar power matching the cost of current grid power. Thus, understanding device performance and increasing efficiency are crucial considerations. Decreasing the cost of ALD in manufacturing is another. ALD requires significant energy input for heating and vacuum; thus, increasing the throughput is a necessary step for ALD as is its integration with existing manufacturing methods. Precursors can also be expensive, so reactors must be tuned to optimize use of the precursors at a large scale. Further, research into new ALD precursors is another important aspect of its application because each type of solar cell has stringent manufacturing conditions that must be met. For example, many organic and hybrid solar cells require processing temperatures well below 200 °C. Temperature is also an issue for thin film devices because it has been seen at elevated temperatures that thermal diffusion at the pn junction can be detrimental to device performance. Also, because of the issues surrounding charge recombination, ALD deposited materials must be pure (i.e. without contaminants such as carbon) so that trap states are not created in the film. Finally, photovoltaic designs should be environmentally friendly and minimize the use of toxic elements like Cd, Pb, or Se and rare elements like In, Ga, and Te. Thus, studying earth abundant and non-toxic materials will continue to be a major effort. These challenges present many opportunities, and we expect that researchers will continue to tackle these problems with the goal that solar technologies will one day be the major supplier for global energy consumption.
XIV. Acknowledgements
This review was carried out as part of the Center on Nanostructuring for Efficient Energy Conversion, an EFRC funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001060. Varian Semiconductor Equipment Associates is gratefully acknowledged for initial funding of research on ALD buffer layers. J.R.B. acknowledges funding from the Department of Defense (DoD) through the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship (NDSEG) and from the National Science Foundation (NSF) Graduate Fellowship. K.L.P. is supported by an NSF Graduate Fellowship. T.P.B. acknowledges the support of the Albion Walter Hewlett Graduate Fellowship.
XV. References
N. Lewis and D. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .

          ExxonMobil, The Outlook for Energy: A View to 2030,  December 2008 Search PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS .

          BP, Statistical Review of World Energy 2010 Search PubMed .

          V. Smil, Energy Transitions: History, Requirements, Prospects, Praeger,  2010 Search PubMed .

          S. Gupta and S. Lu, Morgan Stanley, Solar:Positioning for Oversupply & ASP Declines,  November 15, 2010 Search PubMed .
M. Knez, K. Nielsch and L. Niinistö, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3425–3438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ducso, N. Q. Khanh, Z. Horvath, I. Barsony, M. Utriainen, S. Lehto, M. Nieminen and L. Niinisto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 683–687 CrossRef .
J. W. Elam, D. Routkevitch, P. P. Mardilovich and S. M. George, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3507–3517 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, H.-B.-R. Lee and W. J. Maeng, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2563–2580 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suntola, Mater. Sci. Rep., 1989, 4, 261–312 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Puurunen, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 121301–121352 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2003, 21, 2231–2261 CAS .
M. Leskelä and M. Ritala, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5548–5554 CrossRef .
M. Leskelä and M. Ritala, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 409, 138–146 CrossRef .
S. M. George, A. W. Ott and J. W. Klaus, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13121–13131 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, H. Huang, F. B. Prinz and S. F. Bent, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3897–3905 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du and S. M. George, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 135, 152–160 CrossRef .

          W. M. M. Kessels, B. Hoex and M. C. M. van de Sanden, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2008. PVSC '08. 33rd IEEE,  2008, 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. T. Tanskanen, J. R. Bakke, S. F. Bent and T. A. Pakkanen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11899–11906 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Tanskanen, J. R. Bakke, S. F. Bent and T. A. Pakkanen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16618–16624 CAS .

          M. Knez and N. Pinna, Atomic Layer Deposition of Nanostructured Materials, Wiley-VCH, (in press) Search PubMed.
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Jones and M. Hitchman, Chemical Vapour Deposition: Precursors, Processes and Applications, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2009 Search PubMed .
H. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2011 DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2011.01.404 .
J. S. King, D. Heineman, E. Graugnard and C. J. Summers, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 244, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bae, H. Yoo, S. Kim, K. Lee, J. Kim, M. M. Sung and H. Shin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 756–767 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Costescu, D. G. Cahill, F. H. Fabreguette, Z. A. Sechrist and S. M. George, Science, 2004, 303, 989–990 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Sang, A. Yamada and M. Konagai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 37, L1125–L1128 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Green, Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells in Clean Electricity from Photovoltaics, Imperial College Press, London,  2001 Search PubMed .
R. W. Miles, G. Zoppi and I. Forbes, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Green, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2007, 18, 15–19 CrossRef .
K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson and V. Dutta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 69–92 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kemell, M. Ritala and M. Leskela, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mat. Sci., 2005, 30, 1–31 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Dhere, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2181–2190 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hariskos, S. Spiering and M. Powalla, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 99–109 CrossRef CAS   (and references therein).
S. Siebentritt, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 767–775 CrossRef CAS   (and references therein).
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .

          M. D. Archer and A. J. Nozik, ed., Nanostructured and Photoelectrochemical Systems for Solar Photon Conversion, Imperial College Press, London,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef .
N. S. S. Harald Hoppe, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CrossRef .
L. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434–1449 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. Scharber and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .

          G. N. Patrick and A. C. Fernando, Nanotechnology, 21, p. 492001 Search PubMed.
C. Winder and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1077–1086 RSC .
E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954–985 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Segura, N. Martin and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 31–47 RSC .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
J. Roncali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 483–495 RSC .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 CAS .
A. D. Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839 CrossRef .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
A. Luque, A. Martí and A. J. Nozik, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, D. Ruebusch, A. Rathore, R. Kapadia, O. Ergen, P. Leu and A. Javey, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 829–843 CrossRef .
L. Yin and C. Ye, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2011, 3, 41–58 CAS .
F. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .
F. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Wolden, J. Kurtin, J. B. Baxter, I. Repins, S. E. Shaheen, J. T. Torvik, A. A. Rockett, V. M. Fthenakis and E. S. Aydil, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2011, 29, 030801–030816 Search PubMed .
C. Wadia, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072–2077 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nielsen, C. Cruickshank, S. Foged, J. Thorsen and F. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1553–1571 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 84–92 CAS   (and references therein).

          L. Kazmerski, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  September 21, 2010 Search PubMed .

          S. M. Sze, ed. J.W. Sons, Second Edition edn,  1981 .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 144–150 CrossRef CAS   (and references therein).
J. Schmidt, A. Merkle, R. Brendel, B. Hoex, M. C. M.v. de Sanden and W. M. M. Kessels, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 461–466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Benick, B. Hoex, M. C. M. van de Sanden, W. M. M. Kessels, O. Schultz and S. W. Glunz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253504–253503 CrossRef .
G. Agostinelli, A. Delabie, P. Vitanov, Z. Alexieva, H. F. W. Dekkers, S. De Wolf and G. Beaucarne, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3438–3443 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hoex, S. B. S. Heil, E. Langereis, M. C. M. van de Sanden and W. M. M. Kessels, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 042112–042113 CrossRef .
B. Hoex, J. Schmidt, R. Bock, P. P. Altermatt, M. C. M. van de Sanden and W. M. M. Kessels, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 112107–112103 CrossRef .
B. Hoex, J. Schmidt, P. Pohl, M. C. M. van de Sanden and W. M. M. Kessels, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 044903–044912 CrossRef .
P. Saint-Cast, D. Kania, M. Hofmann, J. Benick, J. Rentsch and R. Preu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 151502–151503 CrossRef .
P. Poodt, A. Lankhorst, F. Roozeboom, K. Spee, D. Maas and A. Vermeer, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3564–3567 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bock, J. Schmidt, S. Mau, B. Hoex and R. Brendel, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 1966–1971 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gunawan and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1388–1393 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Kayes, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302–114311 CrossRef .
B. S. Sang, K. Dairiki, A. Yamada and M. Konagai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, 4983–4988 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Sang, A. Yamada and M. Konagai, J. Jpn. Appl. Phys., 37, p. L206 Search PubMed.
J. Johansson, J. Kostamo, M. Karppinen and L. Niinisto, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1022–1026 RSC .
L. Reijnen, B. Meester, A. Goossens and J. Schoonman, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2002, 19, 311–314 CrossRef .
L. Reijnen, B. Meester, A. Goossens and J. Schoonman, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2003, 9, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 123107–123103 CrossRef .
M. Nanu, F. Boulch, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 242103–242103 CrossRef .
M. Nanu, L. Reijnen, B. Meester, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2004, 10, 45–49 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nanu, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 453–456 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nanu, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Grasso, M. Nanu, A. Goossens and M. Burgelman, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nanu, L. Reijnen, B. Meester, A. Goossens and J. Schoonman, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 492–496 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lenzmann, M. Nanu, O. Kijatkina and A. Belaidi, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 639–643 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim and S. M. George, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17597–17603 CAS .

          U. P. Singh and S. P. Patra.
Y. Ohtake, K. Kushiya, M. Ichikawa, A. Yamada and M. Konagai, J. Jap. Appl. Phys. 1, 1995, 34, 5949–5955 CAS .
S. Chaisitsak, A. Yamada, M. Konagai and K. Saito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 39, 1660–1664 CrossRef CAS .
C. Platzer-Bjorkman, J. Lu, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 321–325 CrossRef CAS .
C. Platzer-Bjorkman, T. Torndahl, D. Abou-Ras, J. Malmstrom, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044506 CrossRef .
J. Perrenoud, S. Buecheler, L. Kranz, C. Fella, J. Skarp and A. N. Tiwari, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2010 35th IEEE, 2010, 000995–001000 CrossRef .
T. Torndahl, C. Platzer-Bjorkman, J. Kessler and M. Edoff, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 225–235 CrossRef .
C. Platzer-Bjorkman, I. Torndahl, A. Hultqvist, J. Kessler and M. Edoff, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 6024–6027 CrossRef .

          A. Hultqvist, M. Edoff and T. Törndahl, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, n/a–n/a Search PubMed.
J. F. Guillemoles, B. Canava, E. B. Yousfi, P. Cowache, A. Galtayries, T. Asikainen, M. Powalla, D. Hariskos, H. W. Schock and D. Lincot, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, 6065–6068 CrossRef CAS .
S. Spiering, D. Hariskos, M. Powalla, N. Naghavi and D. Lincot, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 359–363 CrossRef CAS .
N. Naghavi, S. Spiering, M. Powalla, B. Cavana and D. Lincot, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2003, 11, 437–443 CrossRef CAS .
S. Spiering, A. Eicke, D. Hariskos, M. Powalla, N. Naghavi and D. Lincot, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 562–566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sterner, J. Malmstrom and L. Stolt, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2005, 13, 179–193 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Yousfi, T. Asikainen, V. Pietu, P. Cowache, M. Powalla and D. Lincot, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 361–362, 183–186 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaisitsak, T. Sugiyama, A. Yamada and M. Konagai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, 4989–4992 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shimizu, S. Chaisitsak, T. Sugiyama, A. Yamada and M. Konagai, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 361–362, 193–197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Igalson and C. Platzer-Björkman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 93–103 CrossRef CAS .
U. Malm, J. Malmstrom, C. Platzer-Bjorkman and L. Stolt, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 208–212 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hultqvist, C. Platzer-Björkman, E. Coronel and M. Edoff, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 497–503 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hultqvist, C. Platzer-Björkman, J. Pettersson, T. Törndahl and M. Edoff, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2305–2308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Platzer-Bjorkman, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, P. Est. Acad. Sci., 2003, 52, 299–307 CAS .
C. Platzer-Bjorkman, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, P. Third World Conf. Photovoltaic Energy Conv., 2003, 461–464 Search PubMed .
C. Platzer-Björkman, P. Zabierowski, J. Pettersson, T. Törndahl and M. Edoff, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 249–256 Search PubMed .
J. Pettersson, C. Platzer-Björkman and M. Edoff, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 460–469 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torndahl, E. Coronel, A. Hultqvist, C. Platzer-Bjorkman, K. Leifer and M. Edoff, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 115–125 CrossRef .
N. Naghavi, R. Henriquez, V. Laptev and D. Lincot, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 222, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Spiering, D. Hariskos, S. Schroder and M. Powalla, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 195–198 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abou-Ras, D. Rudmann, G. Kostorz, S. Spiering, M. Powalla and A. N. Tiwari, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 084908–084908 CrossRef .
E. B. Yousfi, B. Weinberger, F. Donsanti, P. Cowache and D. Lincot, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 29–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bakke, H. J. Jung, J. T. Tanskanen, R. Sinclair and S. F. Bent, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4669–4678 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bakke and S. F. Bent, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bakke, J. T. Tanskanen, H. J. Jung, R. Sinclair and S. F. Bent, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 743–751 RSC .
P. F. Carcia, R. S. McLean and S. Hegedus, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2375–2378 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Hegedus, P. F. Carcia, R. S. McLean and B. Culver, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2010 35th IEEE,  2010, 001178–001183 Search PubMed .
I. Oja Acik, A. Katerski, A. Mere, J. Aarik, A. Aidla, T. Dedova and M. Krunks, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2443–2447 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sarkar, J. Y. Kim, D. N. Goldstein, N. R. Neale, K. Zhu, C. M. Elliott, A. J. Frank and S. M. George, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8032–8039 CAS .
S. A. Hussien, P. Colter, A. Dip, J. R. Gong, M. U. Erdogan and S. M. Bedair, Sol. Cells, 1991, 30, 305–311 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bedair and N. A. El-Masry, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1994, 82–83, 7–13 CrossRef .
N. Hayafuji, G. M. Eldallal, A. Dip, P. C. Colter, N. A. El-Masry and S. M. Bedair, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1994, 82–83, 18–22 CrossRef .
G. M. Eldallal, M. S. Abou-Elwafa, M. A. Elgammal and S. M. Bedair, Renewable Energy, 1995, 6, 713–718 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bielawny, J. Üpping, P. T. Miclea, R. B. Wehrspohn, C. Rockstuhl, F. Lederer, M. Peters, L. Steidl, R. Zentel, S. M. Lee, M. Knez, A. Lambertz and R. Carius, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2008, 205, 2796–2810 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chen, M. Wang, J.-Y. Li, N. Pootrakulchote, L. Alibabaei, C.-h. Ngoc-le, J.-D. Decoppet, J.-H. Tsai, C. Graetzel, C.-G. Wu, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3103–3109 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, J. Takao, J. Jiu, M. Sakamoto and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14943–14949 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, I. Okada and S. Yoshikawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, G488–G493 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215–218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
N. Papageorgiou, Y. Athanassov, M. Armand, P. Bonhote, H. Pettersson, A. Azam and M. Gratzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3099–3108 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
E. Palomares, J. N. Clifford, S. A. Haque, T. Lutz and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 475–482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diamant, S. Chappel, S. G. Chen, O. Melamed and A. Zaban, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1271–1276 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Roh, R. S. Mane, S.-K. Min, W.-J. Lee, C. D. Lokhande and S.-H. Han, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 253512–253513 CrossRef .
S. Lee, J. Young Kim, K. Sun Hong, H. Suk Jung, J.-K. Lee and H. Shin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2405–2412 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wang, M. Yanagida, K. Sayama and H. Sugihara, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2912–2916 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Shi, S. Peng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 197, 260–265 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. P. Bandaranayake, M. K. Indika Senevirathna, P. M. G. M. Prasad Weligamuwa and K. Tennakone, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1277–1281 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall, J. Liphardt and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652–22663 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ganapathy, B. Karunagaran and S.-W. Rhee, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5138–5143 CrossRef CAS .
F.-Y. T. Ching Lin, Min-Hsueh Lee, Chia-Hua Lee, Ta-Chang Tien, Lih-Ping Wang and Song-Yeu Tsai, J. Mater. Chem., 2009 Search PubMed .
T.-C. Tien, F.-M. Pan, L.-P. Wang, F.-Y. Tsai and C. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10048–10053 CAS .
M. Shanmugam, M. F. Baroughi and D. Galipeau, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 2678–2682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, H. Han, Q. Tai, J. Zhang, S. Xu, C. Zhou, Y. Yang, H. Hu, B. Chen and X.-z. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 119–123 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19756–19764 CAS .
C. Prasittichai and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Antila, M. J. Heikkilä, V. Aumanen, M. Kemell, P. Myllyperkiö, M. Leskelä and J. E. I. Korppi-Tommola, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 536–539 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shanmugam, B. Bills and M. F. Baroughi, Mater. Res. Soc. Sym. P., 2010, 1260 Search PubMed .
T. C. Li, M. S. Goes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, P. R. Bueno, C. Prasittichai, J. T. Hupp and T. J. Marks, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18385–18390 CAS .
P. M. Sommeling, B. C. O'Regan, R. R. Haswell, H. J. P. Smit, N. J. Bakker, J. J. T. Smits, J. M. Kroon and J. A. M. van Roosmalen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19191–19197 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tetreault, E. Horvath, T. Moehl, J. Brillet, R. Smajda, S. Bungener, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Forro, A. Magrez and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7644–7650 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, Q. Zhang, B. B. Garcia, X. Zhou, Y. H. Jeong and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2329–2332 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, Q. Zhang, B. B. Garcia and G. Cao, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2011, null–null Search PubMed .
S. Gubbala, V. Chakrapani, V. Kumar and M. K. Sunkara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2411–2418 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. Liu, M. J. Pellin, T. J. Marks and J. T. Hupp, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2862–2866 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1560–1564 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10303–10307 CAS .
H. Tae Hee, 
            et al.
          , Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 185601 CrossRef .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183–2187 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, Marcio S. Goes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 4015–4021 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshida, J. Zhang, D. Komatsu, S. Sawatani, H. Minoura, T. Pauporté, D. Lincot, T. Oekermann, D. Schlettwein, H. Tada, D. Wöhrle, K. Funabiki, M. Matsui, H. Miura and H. Yanagi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 17–43 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2596–2600 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407–8409 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan and M. Grätzel, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 643–652 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, S. J. Tark, J. S. Lee, H. Lim and D. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1020–1023 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Saarenpää, T. Niemi, A. Tukiainen, H. Lemmetyinen and N. Tkachenko, Sol. Energ. Mat. Sol. C., 94, pp. 1379–1383 Search PubMed.
H. Schmidt, H. Flugge, T. Winkler, T. Bulow, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 243302–243303 CrossRef .
H. Schmidt, K. Zilberberg, S. Schmale, H. Flugge, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243305–243303 CrossRef .
J.-C. Wang, W.-T. Weng, M.-Y. Tsai, M.-K. Lee, S.-F. Horng, T.-P. Perng, C.-C. Kei, C.-C. Yu and H.-F. Meng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 862–866 RSC .
H. Cheun, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, Y. Zhou, W. J. Potscavage, S.-J. Kim, J. Shim, A. Dindar and B. Kippelen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 20713–20718 CAS .
Y. Zhou, H. Cheun, S. Choi, J. W. J. Potscavage, C. Fuentes-Hernandez and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 153304–153303 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, H. Cheun, S. Choi, C. Fuentes-Hernandez and B. Kippelen, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 827–831 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Potscavage, S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 253511–253511 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chang, C.-T. Chou, Y.-J. Lee, M.-J. Chen and F.-Y. Tsai, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1300–1306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, J. H. Culp, J. T. Whyland, M. Garvan and V. Misra, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1896–1900 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451–18456 CAS .
B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3756–3761 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Dasgupta, W. Lee and F. B. Prinz, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS .

          N. P. Dasgupta, L. Wonyoung, T. P. Holme and F. B. Prinz, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2009 34th IEEE,  2009, 000356–000360 Search PubMed .
N. P. Dasgupta, H. J. Jung, O. Trejo, M. T. McDowell, A. Hryciw, M. Brongersma, R. Sinclair and F. B. Prinz, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 934–940 CrossRef CAS .

          T. P. Brennan, P. Ardalan, H. B. R. Lee, J. R. Bakke, I. K. Ding, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, Unpublished data.
T. Minami, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, S35 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Ginley, T. Coutts, J. Perkins, D. Young, X. Li, P. Parilla, R. Stauber, D. Readey and C. Duncan, Next-Generation Transparent Conducting Oxides for Photovoltaic Cells: An Overview,  2001 Search PubMed .
T. Minami, MRS Bull., 2000, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Lewis and D. Paine, MRS Bull., 2000, 22–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saito, Y. Watanabe, K. Takahashi, T. Matsuzawa, B. Sang and M. Konagai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. An, W. Cho, B. K. Lee, S. S. Lee and C. G. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 4856–4859 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ritala, T. Asikainen and M. Leskela, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 1, 156–157 CrossRef .

          D. S. Ginley, R. Kykyneshi, J. Zeng and D. P. Cann, in Handbook of Transparent Conductors, SpringerUS, pp. 171–191 Search PubMed.
J. W. Elam, D. A. Baker, A. J. Hryn, A. B. F. Martinson, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2008, 26, 244–252 CAS .

          C. A. Wolden, J. Kurtin, J. B. Baxter, I. Repins, S. E. Shaheen, J. T. Torvik, A. A. Rockett, V. M. Fthenakis and E. S. Aydil, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films, 29, p. 030801 Search PubMed.
G. Choi, L. Satyanarayana and J. Park, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252, 7878–7883 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J. Sundqvist, M. Ottosson, A. Tarre, A. Rosental, J. Aarik and A. Hårsta, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 260, 191–200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Viirola and L. Niinistö, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 249, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tarre, A. Rosental, A. Aidla, J. Aarik, J. Sundqvist and A. Hårsta, Vacuum, 2002, 67, 571–575 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heo, A. S. Hock and R. G. Gordon, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4964–4973 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asikainen, M. Ritala and M. Leskela, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 3210–3213 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asikainen, M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, T. Prohaska, G. Friedbacher and M. Grasserbauer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1996, 99, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ritala, T. Asikainen, M. Leskela and J. Sharp, MRS Online Proc. LIbr., 1996, 426, 513 CAS .
J. W. Elam, D. A. Baker, A. B. F. Martinson, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1938–1945 CAS .
A. Yamada, B. Sang and M. Konagai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1997, 112, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sang and M. Konagai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 35, L602–L605 CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, K. Saito, K. Takahashi and M. Konagai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 65, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Elam, D. Routkevitch and S. M. George, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, G339–G347 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Elam and S. M. George, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1020–1028 CrossRef CAS .

          J. S. Na, G. Scarel and G. N. Parsons, J. Phys. Chem. C, 114, pp. 383–388 Search PubMed.
D.-J. Lee, J.-Y. Kwon, S.-H. Kim, H.-M. Kim and K.-B. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, D277–D281 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Luka, T. Krajewski, B. Witkowski, G. Wisz, I. Virt, E. Guziewicz and M. Godlewski, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, pp. 1–6 Search PubMed.

          P. Banerjee, W.-J. Lee, K.-R. Bae, S. B. Lee and G. W. Rubloff, J. Appl. Phys., 108, pp. 043504–043507 Search PubMed.

          B. H. Kong, M. K. Choi, H. K. Cho, J. H. Kim, S. Baek and J.-H. Lee, Electrochem. Solid St., 13, pp. K12–K14 Search PubMed.

          C. A. Hoel, T. O. Mason, J.-F. o. Gaillard and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Chemistry of Materials, 22, pp. 3569–3579 Search PubMed.
P. Campbell and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 62, 243–249 CrossRef .
T. Fujibayashi, T. Matsui and M. Kondo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183508 CrossRef .
J. W. Lim, S. J. Yun and S. H. Lee, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2010, 56, 96–99 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lim, S. J. Yun and J. H. Kim, ETRI J., 2009, 31, 675–679 CrossRef .
K. Kukli, J. Aarik, A. Aidla, O. Kohan, T. Uustare and V. Sammelselg, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 260, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Päiväsaari, M. Putkonen and L. Niinistö, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 472, 275–281 CrossRef .
L. Niinistö, M. Nieminen, J. Päiväsaari, J. Niinistö and M. Putkonen, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1443–1452 CrossRef .
N. P. Dasgupta, J. F. Mack, M. C. Langston, A. Bousetta and F. B. Prinz, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81, 044102–044106 CrossRef .
J. Elam, M. Groner and S. George, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2002, 73, 2981 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yuan and S. Yangping, 2010 IEEE Int. Sym. on Sus. Sys. and Tech. (ISSST), 2010, 1–6 CrossRef .
J. R. Bakke, J. S. King, H. J. Jung, R. Sinclair and S. F. Bent, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5400–5408 CrossRef CAS .
F. Werner, B. Veith, V. Tiba, P. Poodt, F. Roozeboom, R. Brendel and J. Schmidt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 162103 CrossRef .
G. M. Sundaram, A. Bertuch, R. Bhatia, R. Coutu, M. J. Dalberth, E. Deguns, G. Liu, M. J. Sowa and J. S. Becker, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 429–440 CrossRef CAS .
E. Granneman, P. Fischer, D. Pierreux, H. Terhorst and P. Zagwijn, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 201, 8899–8907 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Skarp, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 447–452 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Levy, S. F. Nelson and D. Freeman, J. Disp. Technol., 2009, 5, 484–494 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Levy, D. Freeman, S. F. Nelson, P. J. Cowdery-Corvan and L. M. Irving, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 3 CrossRef .

          V. Kuznetsov, E. Granneman, P. Vermont and K. Vanormelingen, ECS Trans., 33, pp. 441–446 Search PubMed.
B. Vermang, A. Rothschild, A. Racz, J. John, J. Poortmans, R. Mertens, P. Poodt, V. Tiba and F. Roozeboom, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2011 Search PubMed .
T. R. B. Foong, Y. Shen, X. Hu and A. Sellinger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1390–1396 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Gregory and J. L. Stickney, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 300, 543–561 CrossRef CAS .
V. Venkatasamy, N. Jayaraju, S. M. Cox, C. Thambidurai, U. Happek and J. L. Stickney, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 1223–1229 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Gregory, D. W. Suggs and J. L. Stickney, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1279–1284 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Lister and J. L. Stickney, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1996, 107, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vaidyanathan, S. M. Cox, U. Happek, D. Banga, M. K. Mathe and J. L. Stickney, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 10590–10595 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Loscutoff, H.-B.-R. Lee and S. F. Bent, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5563–5569 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Loscutoff, H. Zhou, S. B. Clendenning and S. F. Bent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 331–341 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dameron, D. Seghete, B. B. Burton, S. D. Davidson, A. S. Cavanagh, J. A. Bertrand and S. M. George, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3315–3326 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, B. Gong, R. M. VanGundy and G. N. Parsons, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 820–830 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yoon, J. L. O'Patchen, D. Seghete, A. S. Cavanagh and S. M. George, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2009, 15, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yoon, D. Seghete, A. S. Cavanagh and S. M. George, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5365–5374 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Jonathan R. Bakke	Jonathan R. Bakke hails from Baton Rouge, Louisiana. He received a B.S. in Chemical Engineering and Mathematics with a business minor from Tulane University in 2006, and he was awarded the Barry M. Goldwater scholarship in 2005. Jonathan is currently a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering at Stanford University and is supported by NDSEG and NSF graduate fellowships. His research has focused on both fundamental understanding of ALD processes and the application of ALD to thin film, quantum dot, organic, and dye-sensitized solar cells.
Katie L. Pickrahn	Katie L. Pickrahn was raised in Murrieta, California. She received a B.S. in Chemical Engineering with a minor in Materials Science from the University of California, Irvine in 2009 where she was a Regents' Scholar. Currently, Katie is a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering at Stanford University, and is supported by an NSF graduate Fellowship. Her research interests include the application of ALD to nanostructured devices for energy conversion.
Thomas P. Brennan	Thomas P. Brennan grew up in Yardley, Pennsylvania. He received a B.S.E. in Chemical Engineering with certificates in Biology and Computer Science from Princeton University in 2007. Thomas is currently a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering and is supported by an Albion Walter Hewlett Graduate Fellowship. His research interests include interface engineering and characterization in dye-sensitized solar cells.
Stacey F. Bent	Stacey F. Bent is Professor of Chemical Engineering and Professor, by courtesy, of Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering, at Stanford University. She earned her B.S. degree in Chemical Engineering from U.C. Berkeley and her PhD degree in Chemistry in 1992 from Stanford University. Following postdoctoral work at AT&T Bell Laboratories, she joined the faculty at New York University before moving to Stanford University in 1998. Her research interests are in understanding surface and interfacial chemistry and materials processing, including atomic layer deposition, and applying this knowledge to problems in sustainable energy and nanoelectronics.

 	Fig. 1  Sources of world energy from 1850–2008. Solar, wind, and geothermal data were obtained from the BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2010.4 Other energy sources data were obtained from Vaclav Smil.5	 

 	Fig. 2  Required grid prices of solar in various countries to reach parity with current production methods.6 (Reprinted with permission of Morgan Stanley Research).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of one cycle for a binary material in an atomic layer deposition reaction.	 

 	Fig. 4  Generic sketches of a) the band diagram for a pn heterojunction in an inorganic solar cell and b) I–V curves showing the VOC and JSC and where shunt and series resistances affect device performance.	 
	(Equation 1)
	(Equation 2)
	(Equation 3)

 	Fig. 5  a) PERC device architecture with Al2O3 ALD or Al2O3 ALD followed by PECVD SiOx rear passivation67 (Reprinted from ref. [67] with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Ltd) and b) PERL68 devices with Al2O3 passivation of the front p+ emitter (Reprinted from ref. [68] with permission from the American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 6  Effective surface recombination as a function of the B-density at the surface of c-Si wafers passivated by different methods demonstrates the superior ability of ALD to passivate surfaces. The a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H films were deposited by PECVD, SiO2 films were grown by thermal oxidation, and the Al2O3 films were synthesized by plasma-assisted ALD (Reprinted from ref. [72] with permission from the American Institute of Physics).72	 

 	Fig. 7  a) Device structure of core-shell radial pn junction silicon nanowires and b) J–V curve of cells before and after passivation by Al2O3, which limits surface recombination (Reprinted from ref. [76] by permission of Elsevier).76	 

 	Fig. 8  Cross-sectional view of typical architectures for a) a-Si b) CdTe and c) CIGS solar cells.31	 

 	Fig. 9  a) XRD patterns of CIS ALD films. By decreasing the length of the CuCl pulse, the CIS films range from CIS + CuxS (excess CuCl) to pure CIS to CIS + CuIn5S8 (excess InCl3).85 b) Band structure of the best performing cells87 (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [85,87] with permission).	 


                      ZnSe
                    	10 nm	250	11.6%	CIGS	
93


                      ZnO
                    	70 nm	165	13.9%	CuInxGa1-xSe2	
94


                      ZnO
                    	100 nm	120	10.8%	
                      CuInSe2	
95


                      ZnO
                    	100 nm	120	8.0%	CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2	
95

ZnO0.7S0.3	500 cycles	120	16.4%	CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2	
96

ZnO0.48S0.52	84 nm	250	8.0%	
                      CdTe
                    	
97

ZnS	100 cycles	120	11.3%	CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2	
96

ZnxMg1-xO	1000 cycles (1Mg:6Zn)	120	14.1%, 16.2%	CuIn0.7Ga0.3Se2	
98,99

Zn–Sn–O	3 Zn: 8 Sn	120	13.8%	CuIn0.5Ga0.5Se2	
100


                      In2S3	30–50 nm	210–220	12.1–16.4%	CIGS	
101–105


                      Al2O3	1 nm	160	9%	CIGS	
106


                      TiO2	50 nm	160	0.7%	CIGS	
106


                      Ta2O5	1 nm	160	5%	CIGS	
106


 	Fig. 10  Band diagram for a CIGS or CIS/ZnO device where A is recombination in the bulk absorber, B is recombination in the space charge region, and C is recombination at the interface (Reproduced from ref. [110] by permission of Elsevier).110	 

 	Fig. 11  
EDX elemental depth profile showing the high content of sulfur at the interface of CIGS compared to the bulk of the buffer layer (Reprinted from ref. [96] with permission from the American Institute of Physics).96	 

 	Fig. 12  
                QE measurement of the best ZnxMg1-xO buffer layer CIGS cell showing an increase in efficiency in the blue region due to the higher bandgap and a similar efficiency to CdS controls in the rest of the spectrum (Reproduced from ref. [99] by permission of Elsevier).99	 

 	Fig. 13  a) The EQE was strongly affected by the In2S3 ALD buffer layer properties103 and (b) the deposition temperature of In2S3 ALD buffer layers strongly affected device parameters (Reprinted from ref. [103] with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 14  a) Structure of the CIGS cell with a protective Al2O3 ALD film and b) device characteristics under accelerated conditions where the filled circles represent the Al2O3 ALD device and the open squares signify the glass covered device (Reproduced from ref. [125] by permission of Elsevier).125	 

 	Fig. 15  
            SEM images of TiO2 a) as prepared from Ti foils and b) after 175 cycles (5.2 nm) of In2S3 at 150 °C (Reprinted from ref. [128] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2010.).128	 

 	Fig. 16  In the first application of ALD to photovoltaics, 15.7% efficient cells under concentrated light were achieved with Al0.3Ga0.7As/GaAs solar cells (Reproduced from ref. [132] by permission of Elsevier).132	 

 	Fig. 17  a) A single junction sample of a device with layers consisting of (1) glass, (2) p-type and intrinsic a-Si, (3) n-type a-Si, (4) 3D photonic intermediate reflective layer (IRL) of ZnO from ALD and (5) Si backside. b) Transmittance of the device with and without the opal shows the reflective quality of the IRL. (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [133] with permission).133	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of a DSSC with a nanoporous TiO2 substrate. Two common hole conductors are the iodide/triiodide redox couple in solution and the solid-state spiro-OMeTAD molecule.	 

 	Fig. 19  Important electron pathways in a DSSC. Pathway 1 is the desired injection of an electron into TiO2 which occurs very rapidly. Pathway 2 is the relaxation of the excited dye back to its ground state. Pathway 3 is the recombination of an electron in TiO2 with the oxidized dye molecule. Pathway 4 is recombination of an electron in TiO2 with the hole conductor (H.C.). Pathway 4 is typically much faster than Pathway 3, particularly when alternatives to the iodide/triiodide hole conductor are employed. Pathway 5 is the recombination of an electron in the transparent conducting oxide with a hole in the hole conductor. The back electrode (typically silver, gold, or platinum) where the hole conductor is reduced is not shown.	 

0	737 ± 9	11.57 ± 0.43	66.9 ± 0.7	5.75 ± 0.22
0.1 (1 cycle)	765 ± 9	12.46 ± 0.38	68.7 ± 0.8	6.50 ± 0.15
0.2 (2 cycles)	744 ± 38	9.77 ± 0.21	68.6 ± 5.8	5.00 ± 0.16
0.5 (5 cycles)	796 ± 4	0.86 ± 0.11	67.9 ± 8.8	0.46 ± 0.12
1.0 (10 cycles)	764 ± 104	0.18 ± 0.01	37.2 ± 3.4	0.05 ± 0.01

 	Fig. 20  
Transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of a TiO2 nanoparticle coated by 20 cycles (∼2 nm) of Al2O3 by Lin et al. (Reproduced from ref. [153] by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry).153	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic of TiO2/ITO core-shell device on an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane template.167TCO indicates transparent conducting oxide and Pt-FTO indicates platinized-fluorine doped tin oxide (Reprinted from ref. [167] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008).	 

 	Fig. 22  Standard a) Bilayer and b) Bulk heterojunction OPV architectures.	 

 	Fig. 23  a) Device architecture for semi-transparent cells.179 b) Increased performance of devices with TiO2 electron selective layers after UV exposure (IV curve performed under 535 nm light). c) Performance loss over time from exposure to oxygen species (Reproduced from ref. [179,180] by permission of The American Institute of Physics).180	 

 	Fig. 24  a) Band diagram of OPV with ZnO electron selective layer. b) I–V curves at 80 °C deposition of ZnO. C) Comparison of 45 °C and 80 °C ZnO films shows a decrease in series resistance by increasing temperature (Reproduced from ref. [181] by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry).181	 

 	Fig. 25  a) Device architecture for semi-transparent cell. B) EQE comparison to reference cell (Reproduced from ref. [183] by permission of The American Institute of Physics).183	 

 	Fig. 26  Normalized lifetime efficiency of encapsulated pentacene/C60 OPV cell with Al2O3 and a UV-epoxy (Reproduced from ref. [185] by permission of The American Institute of Physics).185	 

 	Fig. 27  a) Bandgap versus film thickness for PbS ALD films. Measurements exhibit a trend similar to values estimated from an effective mass model. b) As deposited PbS QDs after 20 cycles of ALD (Reprinted from ref. [190,192] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2009 and 2011.).190,192	 


                    ZnO
                    198	Photo-ALD	6.9

                    ZnO
                    29	
ALD
	67

                    ZnO
                    29	
MOCVD
	2440

                    ZnO (B doped)29	
ALD
	5

                    ZnO (B doped)29	
MOCVD
	71

                    AZO
                    194	
PLD
	0.85

                    AZO
                    194	rf MSP	1.9

                    AZO
                    194	dc MSP	2.7

                    AZO
                    199	
ALD
	1.35
ITO200	
ALD
	2.4
ITO194	
PLD
	0.72
ITO194	
Spray Pyrolysis
	0.95
ITO194	
PLD
	0.845
ITO194	
MSP
	∼1

                    SnO2201	
Spray Pyrolysis
	∼10

                    SnO2202	
ALD
	19

                    SnO2 (F doped, FTO)201	
Spray Pyrolysis, CVD	∼2.2

 	Fig. 28  Effect of amount of tin doping on the resistivity, mobility and carrier concentration in ITO films (Reprinted from ref. [212] with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008.).212	 

 	Fig. 29  Electron mobility and carrier concentration properties of photo-MOCVD ZnO films and bilayer films consisting of a CVD deposited layer coated with an ALD layer. The open circles denote as-deposited properties, while the closed circles denote the electrical properties of films exposed to air (Reproduced from ref. [78] by permission of The Japanese Society of Applied Physics).78	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic drawing illustrating the underlying design behind spatial ALD. Two channels are shown where the precursors enter the chamber, in this case, the precursors for Al2O3. Exhaust lines remove the excess reactant and an inert gas further isolates the two precursors from one another. The substrate is moved over the gas flow for deposition (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [74] with permission).74	 

 	Fig. 31  
          Micrographs of TiO2 nanotubes formed through liquid ALD under optimized conditions. The nanotubes are about 150 nm tall, 60–70 nm in diameter with wall thicknesses of approximately 5 nm. The nanotubes produced are dense and well-aligned (Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced from ref. [243] with permission).243	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
