Recent progress of dual-site catalysts in emerging electrocatalysis: a review  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CY00456B View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3CY00456B
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, Advance Article Recent progress of dual-site catalysts in emerging electrocatalysis: a review
Min Zhou

*a, 
Weijie Kong

a, 
Mengyun Xuea, 
Hangfei Lia, 
Muhammad Afsar Khan

a, 
Bitao Liu

*b, 
Fei Lu

*a and 
Xianghua Zengac
aCollege of Physical Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225000, China. E-mail: minzhou@yzu.edu.cn; feilu@yzu.edu.cn
bResearch Institute for New Materials Technology, Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, Chongqing, 402160, China. E-mail: liubitao007@163.com
cCollege of Electrical, Energy and Power Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225000, China
Received 
3rd April 2023
, Accepted 29th June 2023First published on 1st July 2023AbstractDeveloping sustainable and clean electrochemical energy conversion technologies is a promising route to address energy scarcity and environmental pollution challenges, where electrocatalysts with high efficiency are of significance. To date, it is a huge challenge to prepare catalysts that facilitate multi-step reactions due to the difficulty in balancing the adsorption strength of multiple intermediates on a single catalytic site. Recently, owing to their multiple active centers and structural diversity, dual-site catalysts (DSCs), including catalysts containing heterointerfaces and heteroatoms, have attracted extensive interest to encourage multi-step reactions. Remarkable progress has been achieved by DSCs in the fields of electrocatalysis, such as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), and CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). In this review, we provide a systematic summary of the development of DSCs in the past years, as well as their applications in typical catalytic reactions. We categorized the DSCs into heterostructure catalysts, elemental doping catalysts, and diatomic-site catalysts, focusing on the catalytic mechanism of different types of DSCs catalysts. This review is aiming to shed light on the physical and chemical properties of the emergent DSCs and gain insights into the synergistic effect within the dual site in close proximity, thus offering guidelines to the catalyst design for multiple reactions in the future.Min ZhouMin Zhou received his B.S. (2007) and Ph.D. (2012) degrees from Lanzhou University, China. Next, he worked at the College of Physical Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, China. From 2015 to 2016, he worked in Prof. Bando Yoshio's group in National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. His research mainly focuses on the synthesis of low-dimensional nanomaterials and their applications in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.Weijie KongWeijie Kong received her B.S. degree in 2021 from Yangzhou University, China. Currently she is a master's student of Associate Professor Min Zhou in the School of Physical Science and Technology, Yangzhou University. Her current research interests are focused on non-precious metal-based nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.Muhammad Afsar KhanMuhammad Afsar Khan received his master's degree in 2022 from Yangzhou University, China. Currently he is a Ph.D. Research student under supervision of Professor Min Zhou. His research direction mainly focuses on the design and synthesis of non-precious nano materials for energy storage and conversion devices.Bitao LiuBitao Liu received his B.S. (2007) and Ph.D. (2012) degrees from Lanzhou University, China. Since then he worked at Research Institute for New Materials Technology, Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, China. His research mainly focuses on the synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in energy storage and sensor.Fei LuFei Lu received his Ph.D. (2021) degrees from Beijing Jiaotong University, China. Since then he worked at College of Physical Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, China. His research includes the precise synthesis of low-dimensional materials and exploring the applications in heterogeneous catalysis and electrochemical energy storage.
1. Introduction
The ever-increasing demand for energy has led to massive worldwide consumption of fossil fuels, accompanied by concerns about their limited reserves and severe environmental problems.1–3 Searching for sustainable and renewable environment-friendly energy sources, such as solar and wind energy, is becoming one of the top priorities for the coming decades. However, the utilization of this clean energy is limited by its uneven spatial and temporal distribution, requiring efficient energy storage and conversion technologies. In this context, electrochemical technologies such as fuel cells, supercapacitors, and H2O or CO2 electrolysis systems are considered to be the most practical options to satisfy this energy storage and conversion requirements.4–7
Electrocatalysts are critical components in electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology, which can accelerate the slow reaction kinetics and reaction rates in catalytic processes.8–10 Therefore, rational design of electrocatalysts with high efficiency is of great significance, where a deep understanding of the active sites is required. In 1925, Taylor first proposed the active center theory and pointed out that the atoms located at the edges and top corners with unsaturated coordination are the potential active centers. However, for some catalytic reactions, it is still ambiguous about the active sites. The establishment of the active site has always occupied a crucial position, not only to improve the catalytic theory but also to provide guidance for the design of high-efficiency catalysts.11,12 Catalytic reactions, such as oxygen evolution reaction (OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in alkaline solutions, and CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), generally go through multiple reaction steps with multiple intermediates involved.13–15 Nevertheless, balancing the adsorption/desorption ability toward these intermediates on one site is extremely difficult due to the scaling relationship between the binding energy of these intermediates on a specific site.16–18 Therefore, to diversify catalytic reactions, the key is to control the various intermediates separately, one of the most intriguing strategies is to create dual-site catalysts (DSCs) that feature distinct functions individually. For example, constructing different kinds of heterostructures, designing more complex diatomic systems based on single-atom catalysts, introducing heteroatoms, or forming alloys in which designed synergies can be used to improve catalytic activity and alter selectivity.
To date, tremendous progress has been reported on DSCs. Specifically, the development of single-atom catalysts has enriched the scope and connotations of DSCs substantially.19–21 Up to now, some reviews have been published regarding the developments of DSCs.22,23 Nevertheless, most of the DSCs-related reviews pay dominative attention to the single atom catalysts, where the two single atoms are loaded nearby to form the catalytic sites. However, the progress in other DSCs, including the new active sites provided by hetero-interfaces in heterostructures and hetero-domains in alloying catalysts, has been neglected.24–26 Indeed, the latter two have been the common types of DSCs for a long time. Therefore, a review that contains the emergence and variety of the DSCs is desired but not yet available.
Accordingly, in this review, we summarized the emergent progress of the DSCs with different types, aiming to provide an overview of the DSCs applied in energy-related electrocatalysis. Considering that there are multiple roles involved in the catalytic mechanisms of the DSCs, such as the electronic effects, stress effects, and spacing effects. This review focuses on the DSCs that provide new active sites for some intermediates in the reactions. We categorize the DSCs into the following three types (Fig. 1): 1) heterostructures, in which the heterointerfaces, containing dual components, are indeed the active sites for different reaction steps; 2) doping and alloying heteroatoms, which can provide synergetic effect between the support and the introduced dopants; 3) diatomic systems, the paired atoms in the close proximity form a dual-site catalytic domain. Then, the practical applications of the DSCs in electrocatalysis, such as HER, OER, ORR, and CO2RR, are discussed. Much emphasis was placed on the electronic structural modulation and the synergistic effects of the DSCs in various reactions. This review also highlighted the opportunities and challenges of DSCs in future research.
 Fig. 1  Overview of the categories of DSCs. Left: Heterointerfaces within heterostructures; middle: doping or alloying heteroatoms; right: dual catalytic site in close proximity. 
2. Types of DSCs
2.1 Heterostructure catalysts
The concept of heterostructure was first raised in the field of semiconductor physics. Generally, a heterostructure is a composite structure consisting of interfaces formed by different materials, including conductors, semiconductors, and insulators.27–29 Accordingly, heterostructure catalysts consisted of several materials that are usually chemically bonded together via an interface.30–32 In recent years, heterostructure materials, especially those with interfaces at the nanoscale, have shown great potential in the fields of energy storage and conversion.33–35 Typically, the heterostructure can lead to energy band bending, thus allowing the modification in the electronic structure of the interface, such as type-II heterojunctions.36–38 With respect to the electrocatalytic reactions, heterostructure catalysts exhibit the following advantages, including 1) heterostructure could provide dual types of active sites within the interface to facilitate multiple reaction steps, and 2) each building block in heterostructure catalysts is tunable, allowing for a various combination to engineering, thus encouraging the precise electronic-structure manipulation for the specific catalytic sites.39–41 The electron delocalization usually modulates the electronic structure or the energy band structure of the components, thus providing more possibilities to tune the catalytic performance of the catalyst.42–44
The most prominent feature of the heterostructure catalysts is providing additional adsorption sites for multiple intermediates during the reaction.45–47 For example, Zhao et al. reported the modulation of the atomic-level interface of Pt/NiO heterostructure via an annealing treatment.48 Fig. 2a and b shows the high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of the Pt/NiO heterostructure. As shown in Fig. 2b, the d-spacing of 0.24 nm for the lattice stripes of the substrate corresponds well to the (111) plane of NiO. The Pt nanoparticle (Pt NP) shows a set of interplanar spacing of 0.24 nm and a crossover angle of 60°, corresponding to the 1/3(422) crystallographic group of Pt. Interestingly, the lattice match of (111)NiO and 1/3(422)Pt indicates that the Pt NPs are epitaxially grown on NiO, which led to the formation of the Pt–NiO interface (Fig. 2c). Astonishingly, the heterostructure delivered by far the highest specific exchange current density of 8.1 mA cmPt−2 for hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR). The excellent performance is attributed to the optimized binding behaviors of hydrogen and hydroxyl species at the engineered Pt–NiO interface, thus the synergy between Pt and NiO dual-sites that greatly enhances the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 2  (a) HRTEM image of Pt/NiO. (b) Magnified HRTEM image of the square region in (a). (c) Structure models of Pt/NiO. (d) The HRTEM images of FeOOH/Ni3N hybrid catalysts. The SAED pattern (e and f) was taken from FeOOH/Ni3N hybrid catalysts. (g) Calculation model of FeOOH/Ni3N. Color codes: Fe, brown; O red; Ni, green; N, blue.48 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
In past studies, precious-metal-based materials, such as platinum, palladium, ruthenium, and iridium, were widely employed as advanced catalysts.49–51 However, the scarcity and high cost of these noble metal materials are significant barriers to large-scale commercialization. Therefore, great efforts are devoted to developing highly active and durable non-noble metal catalysts to achieve high catalytic activity. Recently, Guan et al. reported a direct growth of FeOOH on Ni3N nanotube arrays supported on conductive carbon cloth as a bifunctional catalyst.52 The HRTEM image of FeOOH/Ni3N hybrid catalysts (Fig. 2d) clearly demonstrate the heterointerface of FeOOH and Ni3N. Furthermore, the heterointerface is also identified from the bright diffused halo of the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns (Fig. 2e and f). Specifically, the positively charged FeOOH can easily adsorb the OH− or H2O, whilst the negatively charged Ni3N adsorbs the H+ from H2O or OH− in alkaline media (Fig. 2g). Thus, the electron-delocalized interface accelerates the dissociation of H2O and the following hydrogen production. The synergistic effect in a hybrid system with a high density of heterointerface could sustainably trigger the improvement of HER/OER catalytic performance.
2.2 Elemental doping and alloying
For electrocatalysts, the electronic structure is the critical factor that determining their intrinsic adsorption capacity to various intermediates.53–55 Accordingly, tuning the electronic structure of catalysts is an effective approach to regulating the catalytic performance.56–58 Doping has been proven to be a common strategy to alter the electronic structure of catalysts.59–61 The introduced heteroatoms may serve as the new active centers, especially integrating the atoms in close proximity as dual active sites to enhance the catalytic performance.62–64 Zhou et al. employed the nickel dopants within Ni–MoS2 nanosheets to improve the inferior HER kinetics of MoS2.65 The introduced Ni sites could effectively reduce the kinetic potential of the initial water dissociation step and promote the desorption of the formed OH−, leading to an excellent electrochemical HER activity in 1 M KOH aqueous solution. Moreover, the doping strategy could not only introduce the additional active sites but also manipulate the electronic structure of the adjacent atoms. For example, Dou et al. fully exploited the catalytic potential of atomically thin CoSe2 nanoribbons for OER by incorporating Fe doping and Co/Se vacancies.66 Fig. 3a shows the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image of the CoSe2–DFe–VCo nanobelts. The Se and Co vacancies could be easily identified by the high-angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM) images (Fig. 3b and c). The theoretical calculations further demonstrated that the synergistic effect of Fe doping and Co vacancies resulted in a significant decrease in the binding energy of OH* and achieved high catalytic activity.
 Fig. 3  (a) STEM image of CoSe2–DFe–VCo nanobelts with selected area electron diffraction pattern (left inset) indicating the mixed cubic and orthorhombic phases and cross-sectional view (right inset) showing the atomic thickness. Scale bar, 200 nm, 5 1/nm (left inset), and 2 nm (right inset). (b and c) HAADF-STEM images of different catalysts and the intensity profiles along the selected rectangular regions suggest the missed surface Se and Co atoms in CoSe2–DFe–VSe and CoSe2–DFe–VCo, respectively. Scale bar, 0.5 nm. (d) HAADF-STEM image and e) high magnification image of V–NiPt. The blue and green circles represent {111} and {200} facets, respectively. (f) Schematic illustration of V–NiPt structure, Ni, and Pt atoms are marked in blue and red.66 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlage. 
Alloying is another strategy to fabricate DSCs, which is achieved by incorporating metals into clusters or nanoparticles to form a domain.67–70 Compared with the undecorated one, the foreign metal could dramatically modify the alloyed domain, in electronic, strain, and catalytic properties.71–73 For example, Zhou et al. reported a NiPt alloy with plenty of atomically dispersed Pt at the edges to facilitate hydrogen evolution in alkaline solutions.74 As shown in Fig. 3d and e, HAADF-STEM images revealed the nickel nanotwin structures along {111} axis within the V–NiPt catalyst, in which the brighter spots observed in the topmost layer corresponded to the Pt distribution in the material, indicating the formation of Pt-rich domain, especially semi-atomic-dispersion Pt–Ni atomic pair, on the NiPt alloy. The schematic diagram in Fig. 3e shows the atomic illustration of the material, in which the Pt–Ni atomic pair is located at the edge of the particle. The formed Ni–Pt atomic pairs could accelerate the delicate adsorption/desorption equilibrium between various intermediates (OH* and H*) during the hydrogen evolution reaction to achieve a record 6 mV ultralow overpotential at the current density of 10 mA cm−2.
2.3 Diatomic-site catalysts
In 2011, the research group led by Tao Zhang achieved pioneering success in the preparation of a Pt-based single-atom site catalyst (Pt1/FeOx).75 Since then, single-atom catalysts (SACs) have become a frontier area in catalysis.76–78 Although SACs are expected to achieve 100% atomic utilization, they encounter great challenges in catalytic reactions involving multiple reactants, intermediates, and products. It is attributed to the involved exclusive active site, which makes it difficult to break the linear proportionality between the adsorption energies of the reaction intermediates, resulting in a fundamental limitation of catalytic efficiency.79–81 Also, in order to avoid the formation of metal nanocrystals due to the large surface energy of individual metal atoms, most of the reported synthesized catalysts have relatively low loadings, usually below 1.5 wt%, resulting in low overall activity. Naturally, researchers come up with the idea of constructing more fascinating catalytic sites that contain multiple metal atoms as active centers (to integrate their functions and even exploit potential synergistic interactions). Thus, diatomic-site catalysts (DACs) have recently emerged as a further extension of the SACs family to further pursue high-efficiency catalysis.82–84
The research work related to DACs reported so far can be categorized into homonuclear DACs and heteronuclear DACs.85 The homonuclear DACs consist of two identical and adjacent metal atoms immobilized on a substrate, where the interaction between the two active sites facilitates the optimization of the catalytic kinetics.86–88 For example, Zhang et al. synthesized a planar-like Fe2N6 structure by thermally migrating coupled isolated FeN4 sites on a carbon substrate (Fig. 4a and b).89 The planar-like Fe2N6 structure, with the synergistic advantage of an optimized oxygen intermediate adsorption state and multiple accessible active sites, exhibits a strong driving force for O–O bond breaking, thereby enhancing ORR kinetics as well as inhibiting side reactions.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis for the planar-like Fe2N6 structure on carbon support. (b) HAADF-STEM image of high-density planar-like Fe2N6 structure. Inset: deductive oxygenated intermediates adsorption state on the planar-like Fe2N6 structure.89 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of Pt–Ru dimers on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs). (d) The intensity profile was obtained on one individual Pt–Ru dimer.93 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Integrating two different metal atoms into the diatomic sites can further enrich the catalyst library. The various interaction with the heteronuclear DACs, specifically electron accumulation or depletion between the diatomic active sites, are more interesting for electronic structural modulation and further catalytic performance.90–92 For example, Zhang et al. successfully prepared Pt–Ru dimers anchored on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes by two-step ALD processes (Fig. 4c).93 As shown in Fig. 4d, the two atoms show different contrast in the dimer, which indicates the dimer-like structure is composed of Pt and Ru atoms. First-principles calculations revealed that Pt–Ru dimers produced a synergistic effect by modulating the electronic structure, thus enhancing the hydrogen evolution activity.
3. Catalytic application of DSCs
3.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction
Hydrogen, owing to its zero-carbon properties and highest weight energy density, is considered the ideal energy carrier to change the global energy structure in the future.94–96 So far, a promising hydrogen production pathway is to electrolyze water, which involves hydrogen evolution reactions (HER) on the cathode and oxygen evolution reactions (OER) on the anode in the electrolytic cell. The efficiency of hydrolysis depends on the catalytic activity of the electrocatalysts used on both electrodes.97–99 For HER, it is a multi-electron process, containing a multi-step reaction involving many reaction intermediates such as H*, and OH* (* represents an adsorption site).100–102 In alkaline media, HER proceeds via the Volmer–Tafel or Volmer–Heyrovsky pathways, as shown in the following equation: 
Volmer step: H2O + e− → H* + OH−
(1) 
Heyrovsky step: H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−
(2) 
Tafel step: H* + H* → H2
(3)
Both pathways involve the adsorption of H2O molecules, i.e., the reduction of H2O molecules to H* and OH−, the adsorption/desorption of OH− and the formation of H* intermediates as shown in Fig. 5a.103,104 Specifically, during the Volmer step, H* is adsorbed on the active sites of the electrocatalyst. In the next step, the adsorbed H* either combines with H2O (Heyrovsky step) or another adsorbed H* (Tafel step) to produce H2.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic pathways for hydrogen evolution reaction under alkaline conditions.104 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic representation of water dissociation step of C3N4@MoN. (c) LSV curves of the different catalysts measured in Ar-saturated 1 M KOH. (d) The relative energy diagram along the reaction coordinate, including the first (left panel) and second (right panel) water dissociation process on the basal plane of MoS2 and C-MoS2, respectively. R reactant, RC reactant complex, TS transition state, IM intermediate. (e) LSV curves of CC, Mo2C, C-MoS2, MoS2, and Pt/C with IR correction.35 Copyright 2018, Elsevier BV. 
Since HER is a multi-step reaction in alkaline environments, balancing the adsorption/desorption ability for H* and OH* at one active site is extremely difficult.105–107 The most common strategy is to create dual active sites, in which each performs its functions.108–110 Therefore, a desired DSC catalyst for alkaline HER should be coupled with good H-adsorption and water-dissociation ability. For example, Markovic et al. designed a composite material by depositing ultrathin Ni(OH)2 clusters on Pt electrodes, in which Ni(OH)2 kinetically dissociated water and Pt promoted the subsequent adsorption of atomic hydrogen and desorption of the formed H2.111 In addition, the introduction of Li+ further enhanced the production of hydrogen intermediates due to the destabilizing effect of Li+ on the HO–H bond.112,113 Similar to Pt, the electronic structure of the 2D graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) can be easily tuned to an appropriate level for Had.114,115 Qiao's group constructed a heterostructure consisting of 2D MoN and 2D g-C3N4 (C3N4@MoN).35 The specific Mo–N–C interface could dramatically promote the reaction kinetics of the alkaline HER (Fig. 5b). Theoretical calculations show that the high activity originates from the synergy between the favorable OH adsorption on MoN and the optimized H adsorption on g-C3N4. Therefore, an overpotential of 110 mV is required to drive the catalytic current of 10 mA cm−2, which is much better than the pristine g-C3N4 or MoN (Fig. 5c). MoS2 also has favorable adsorption-free energy for H adsorption. However, its unfavorable water adsorption and dissociation properties limit the practical application to an extent. Therefore, Zang et al. successfully conferred excellent alkaline hydrogen evolution ability to MoS2 by carbon doping, especially the induced orbital modulation.116 Theoretical calculations showed that carbon doping allows HER catalysis to proceed on a much lower potential energy surface (Fig. 5d). From the water adsorption/dissociation conformation on C-MoS2 (Fig. 5d), H2O is adsorbed on the C site, while the nearby S sites assist in water dissociation by attracting H from water molecules. Accordingly, carbon doping can endow MoS2 with an exceptional Pt-like alkaline HER performance by adjusting the orbital orientation on the basal plane (Fig. 5e).
It is highly desirable to create DSCs in a single-atom system to maximize the synergistic effect. Chen et al. fabricated metastable nanostructured RuAu single-atom alloys (SAAs) with novel properties through a laser ablation technique in liquid (LAL).117 As shown in Fig. 6a, Au atoms are atomically dispersed in the Ru host, and the magnified HAADF-STEM image clearly reveals that Au atoms occupy the positions within the Ru lattice, which is further proved by the profile of integrated pixel intensity along with the white solid line in Fig. 6b. DFT shows that Ru has the best driving force for the Volmer reaction, while RuAu has the optimal driving force for the Heyrovsky reaction (Fig. 6c). Thus, RuAu SAAs accelerate HER in alkaline medium by tandem catalysis, namely, Ru atoms capturing and splitting water molecules, and Au atoms adsorbing protons and promoting hydrogen formation to achieve high HER activity. A single-atom criterion combined with dual-site interface engineering should be an effective way to create DSCs. Lu et al. reported a cation-deficient electrostatic anchorage route to fabricate an atomically dispersed Pt–O realm, particularly including the dual-site Pt and Opt components, in monolayer Ti1−xO2 nanosheets (Pt1O1/Ti1−xO2).118 As shown in Fig. 6d, the titanium vacancies (Tivac) are clearly distinguished. In addition, the atomically dispersed Tivac could be utilized for the electrostatic trapping of platinum ions. Furthermore, the obtained Pt1O1/Ti1−xO2 nanosheets have a thickness of about 1.1 nm (Fig. 6e). The bright spot at the titanium lattice row, emphasized by the profile of the integrated pixel intensity, further confirmed the exclusive anchorage of Pt through dangling oxygen bonds at the site-specific Tivac (Fig. 6f). Theoretical calculations show that the dual Pt–Opt sites synergistically optimized the H adsorption at both sites. Moreover, the paired Hads, with optimal ΔGH* and spatial distance could be ideally recombined via the Tafel pathway. Therefore, the synergy of dual Pt–Opt sites substantially triggers the high-efficiency HER catalysis.
 Fig. 6  (a) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of RuAu-0.2. Scale bar: 1 nm. (b) Magnified image in the red dotted rectangle of (a), Au atoms are marked with red circles. The inset is the atomic model of the material. (c) Gibbs free energy profile of HER on Pt (111), Ru (001), and RuAu (001) surfaces. ΔGT represents the energy barrier for the Heyrovsky reaction. ΔGB represents the activation energy of water dissociation.117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the cation-deficient Ti1−xO2. (e) AFM image and the corresponding thickness profile of Pt1O1/Ti1−xO2. (f) HAADF-STEM image of Pt1O1/Ti1−xO2. (g) Charge distribution of the Pt–Hads and OPt–Hads within the Pt–O realm (at the isosurface level of 0.01 e Bohr−3). (h) the proposed reaction pathway during HER with free energy variation. Pt cyan, Ti blue, O red, and H white.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 
3.2 Oxygen evolution reaction
The construction of efficient oxygen evolution electrocatalysts is essential for various energy-related processes, such as electrochemical hydrolysis and metal–air batteries.119–121 The OER process involves four electron–proton coupling reactions followed by the production of oxygen on the catalyst surface (Fig. 7a).122–124 In alkaline conditions the OER reaction equation is as follows: 
4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
(4)It contains several basic steps generally following the pathway below: 
OH− → OH* + e−
(5) 
OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−
(6) 
2O* → O2
(7)or 
O* + OH− → OOH* + e−
(8) 
OOH* + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−
(9)
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic pathways for oxygen evolution reaction under alkaline conditions.123 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (b) Illustration of the proposed OER mechanism.131 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (c) Structures of different surface phases and OER intermediates; adsorbates of surface phases are highlighted by blue circles on the sides views, and OER intermediates are differentiated by colors (yellow instead of white for hydrogen and rose instead of red for oxygen, respectively). A dashed rose circle indicates the formation of a surface O vacancy. The reaction centers are highlighted by large white circles. The magnetic moments of Ni and Fe during the OER are also given on the top views.58 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
It should be noted that the production of O2 through O* can also involve two approaches: one is combining two O* (eqn (7)) to produce O2, and the other pathway is to first form OOH* (eqn (8)) and followed with O2 production.125,126
Since OER undergoes O–H breaking and O–O bond formation, high potential energy is required to overcome the kinetically hindered process. In contrast, DSCs can effectively increase the number of active sites and superior reaction kinetics, thus reducing the energy barrier of the reaction.127–129 In general, different components have specific activity for different fundamental steps of the electrochemical reactions. Meanwhile, the adjacent components could employ synergistic effects to promote the overall reaction kinetics. For example, Zhao and coworkers designed an Ir/Ni(OH)2 heterostructure with ultrafine IrOx nanoparticles anchored on Ni(OH)2 nanosheets.129 Moreover, the abundant interface between IrOx and NiOOH during OER not only ensures the exposure of the active sites but also adequately plays the role of breaking the scaling limitation. The intermediate OH* and O* species involved in the OER reaction could be adsorbed on Ni(OH)2/NiOOH and IrOx, respectively, during which a transfer of the intermediates within the interface is preferred. Thus, the engineered heterointerfaces could further accelerate the formation of OOH*, then, substantially improving the kinetics of oxygen production (Fig. 7b).130,131 Transition metal oxides (TMO) are excellent candidates for OER catalysts due to their multivalent oxidation states (e.g., M2+/3+/4+).132–134 Moreover, the catalytic performance of the Mδ+ center could be further enhanced by introducing the additional redox-flexible dopants. Dionigi et al. elucidated the reaction centers and OER mechanism of NiFe and CoFe (MFe) layered double hydroxides (LDHs) by electrochemical measurements, operando X-ray scattering and absorption spectroscopy, and DFT calculations.58 The results revealed that OER proceeds through the Mars van Krevelen mechanism (Fig. 7c). The Fe sites and the newly formed O-bridged Fe–M (M = Ni or Co) centers, in light of the modified flexible electronic structure, stabilize the unfavorable OER intermediates. Therefore, the corresponding OER performance is dramatically enhanced by several orders of magnitude.
With respect to breaking the related scaling relationship, the precise control of the adsorption of OH* and OOH* at specific sites should be a fascinating strategy for enhancing the catalytic kinetics.135,136 For example, Huang and co-workers reported the synthesis of single-atom transition metals (Fe, Co, and Ni) embedded in N-doped graphene (M–NHGFs) for the OER.127 Although M–NHGFs have an identical M–N4C4 moiety, their catalytic performances are different due to the tuned ligand field effect. In MN4C4 moieties, both M and C centers could serve as the adsorption sites for the OER intermediates. Moreover, the adsorption energy of the C site for the OER intermediates depends strongly on the number of d electrons of the metal. In contrast to the single-site catalytic route in Fe– or Co–N4C4, the OER processes over the Ni–N4C4 moieties through a dual-site pathway (Fig. 8a–c). Specifically, the intermediates including O* and OH* prefer to adsorb on the C site, while OOH* is favorably adsorbed on the Ni site, leading to the circumvention of their scaling relationship. As a result, the Ni–N4C4 samples exhibited superior catalytic activity than Fe–N4C4 and Co–N4C4 counterparts. Notably, the support material is one of the key parameters for the stabilization of the diatomic metal, then the synergistic interaction and the further promoted catalysis. Li et al. employed the transition metal carbides as support materials to stabilize metal atoms (e.g., Fe, Ni) to yield highly efficient single-atom OER catalysts.137 As shown in Fig. 8d, the atomically dispersed Fe/Ni sites at the edge of the thin amorphous WCx surface could be observed. The variation in atomic column intensity also verifies the presence with a random distribution of Fe/Ni atoms on the WCx surface (Fig. 8e). Theoretical calculations show that the atomically dispersed Fe/Ni atoms exist in metal–metal interactions with the WCx surface. During the OER process, the O-bridged Fe–Ni moieties were formed, in which the synergistic effect of Fe and Ni resulted in the lowest overpotential of 160 mV, as shown in Fig. 8f.
 Fig. 8  (a) HRTEM image of Ni-NHGF. Scale bar, 0.5 nm. (b) Dual-site mechanisms towards OER. (c) Free energy diagram at 1.23V for OER.127 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) HAADF-STEM image of WCx–FeNi. (e) The corresponding intensity profiles along the (2) plane over the dimmer atomic columns (marked by the arrows 1–5 in d). (f) The reaction paths on WCx–FeNi and the corresponding free energies.137 Copyright 2021, Springer ature. 
3.3 Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)
ORR holds an essential part in energy conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells, and metal–air cells.138 According to the typical model of multi-electron ORR proposed by Wroblowa et al. O2 may undergo direct reduction to H2O by the 4e− pathway (eqn (10)), or reduction to H2O2 by the 2e− pathway (eqn (11)). The generated H2O2 can be further reduced to H2O involving a 2-electron process at another site (eqn (12)), which is considered to be a sequential pathway (Fig. 9a).139–141 
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O
(10) 
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2
(11) 
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O
(12)
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic pathways for the oxygen reduction reaction.139 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Gibbs free energy change diagram for SMOx–SMO and SMOx–MO.147 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 
The ORR process consists of multiple steps of adsorption of oxygenated intermediates (OOH*, O*, OH*) on the active sites of the electrocatalyst. Accordingly, the ORR activity of the electrocatalyst depends largely on the strength of the adsorption energy between the active sites and the oxygen-related intermediates. The DSCs can effectively degrade the free energy of the reaction process through the synergistic effect of different active sites in close proximity, thus delivering higher catalytic performance.142–144 The heterostructured catalysts could promote localized charge transfer and trigger the synergetic effect, owing to the varied interfacial properties.145,146 Then, the enhanced electrocatalytic activity and stability for the heterostructured catalysts could be delivered. Chen et al. constructed SrMn3O6−x–SrMnO3 (SMOx–SMO), a perovskite-containing hybrid material with strong interfacial interactions, by the epitaxial growth method.147 As a result, SMOx–SMO exhibited excellent ORR performance in alkaline media, achieving a half-wave potential of 0.74 V and an ultimate current density of −5.46 mA cm−2. Theoretical calculations showed that Mn3+ with partially filled eg orbitals and Mn4+ with unfilled eg orbitals formed a dual-active-site catalytic realm, in which the Mn3+ site served as the dominant site and Mn4+ site worked as the supplementary one. The high-valent oxidation state of Mn optimizes the adsorption of reaction intermediates (Fig. 9b), improves their reaction kinetics, and enhances the ORR catalysis.
Generally, single-atom catalysts are difficult to break the linear proportionality between the adsorption energies of the reaction intermediates.142,148 In contrast, the construction of a diatomic system by introducing foreign components could effectively solve this problem. For instance, Liu's group reported on synergistic catalysis between Pt–Co alloy nanoparticles and atomically dispersed Co–Nx–Cy sites, which improved the ORR catalytic performance (Fig. 10a–d).149 The strained Pt–Co core–shell nanoparticles (NPs) and the Co–Nx–Cy sites directly underwent ORR catalysis. Meanwhile, the H2O2 generated from the nearby Co–Nx–Cy sites was further reduced to H2O by the Pt–Co nanoparticles. DFT calculations further elucidated that the crossover pathway during the oxygen reduction between the Co–Nx–Cy site and the strained PtCo NPs (as shown by the green arrow in Fig. 10e). Therefore, the synergistic effect of the engineered DSC system delivered the outstanding ORR activity and selectivity.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the LP@PF catalysts. (b) HRTEM image. (c) AC-HAADF-STEM image of Pt–Co NPs in LP@PF-1. (d) Support containing atomically dispersed Co (circled in red) and trace Pt (circled in blue). (e) Free energy diagram of the ORR pathways. The proposed associative reaction coordinates represent the following states: (I) *or# + O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, (II) OOH* or OOH# + 3H+ + 3e−, (III) O* or O# + H2O + 2H+ + 2e−, (IV) * + H2O2+ 2H+ + 2e−, (V) 2OH# + 2H+ + 2e−, (VI) OH* or OH# + H2O + H+ + e−, and (VII) *or# + 2H2O, where the asterisk (blue) denotes the binding site on Co–N4 embedded in graphene and the hash mark (gray) denotes the binding site on a strained Pt (111) facet. Inset: schematics of H2O2 generated over Co–N4 migrating to the strained Pt (111) surface (green arrows), followed by dissociation to OH# and water formation.149 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) The ORR volcano plot of the binuclear site. (g) Proposed ORR mechanism on the FeCoN5–OH site.153 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The rational design of the bimetallic center is capable of exhibiting extraordinary ORR electrocatalytic activities.150–152 Wang et al. constructed the Fe–Co dual sites embedded in N-doped carbon nanotubes ((Fe,Co)/CNT) by a double solvent method.23 The activation of the OO bond could be initiated through the Fe–Co dual sites, thereby benefiting the sequential oxygen reduction. Finally, (Fe,Co)/CNT exhibited an excellent ORR activity with admirable onset potential (Eonset, 1.15 V) and half-wave potentials (E1/2, 0.954 V), superior to commercial Pt/C (1.05 and 0.842 V, respectively). Liu's group highlighted the key role of spontaneously formed OH* in promoting the catalytic process of Fe–Co binuclear sites.153 During the whole catalytic process, the exothermic formation of OH* on FeCoN5 makes it a stable modifier ligand throughout the ORR process. Therefore, the activity of the synthesized FeCoN5–OH binuclear site exhibited an activity more than 20 times higher than that of the single-atom FeN4 (Fig. 10f). DFT verified the electrochemical stability of the OH ligand at the binuclear site over the entire ORR potential range, which could weaken the binding strength of Fe–O. As a result, the FeCoN5–OH catalyst exhibited extremely superior onset and half-wave potentials of 1.02 and 0.86 V, respectively, in acidic media.
3.4 CO2 reduction reaction
Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction is a complex process involving multi-proton coupling and electron transfer, leading to a diverse range of reduction products (Fig. 11a).154–156 However, CO2 reduction always occurs at a relatively negative potential. In terms of thermodynamics, CO2 is a stable molecule with a very strong CO bond (750 kJ mol−1), which is much larger than the C–H (411 kJ mol−1), C–O (327 kJ mol−1) and C–C bonds (336 kJ mol−1). Therefore, a large energy barrier must be overcome to induce the conversion of CO2. Electrocatalysts possess the potential to facilitate electron transfer for the catalytic conversion of CO2 under mild conditions.157–159 Nevertheless, the hydrogen protons in the aqueous solution are prone to form H2, which becomes the main side reaction of CO2RR and greatly limits the Faradic efficiency (FE).160 Consequently, designing catalysts with excellent performance to reduce the overpotential and improve the selectivity and stability has become the focus of CO2RR research. In this regard, DSCs can effectively enhance the binding energy of the involved intermediates (e.g., COOH*, CO*, OCHO*, etc.) in CO2RR due to the synergistic effect of the multiple active sites, thus improving their tandem reaction efficiency.161–163
 Fig. 11  (a) Possible pathways for CO2 reduction.154 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) CO current densities under different potentials. (c) Cu atom pair anchored on Pd10Te3 nanowires. Free energy profiles for CO2 activation mode165 copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Synergistic catalysis of homologous paired metal diatoms can effectively enhance CO2-related activation reactions.164 For example, Jiao et al. reported on a Cu10–Cu1x+ paired diatom anchored on one-dimensional Pd10Te3 alloy nanowires for CO2RR.165 Notably, the sample with an optimized Cu loading of 0.10 wt% showed a high- efficiency and selectivity of CO2 reduction to CO (FECO of 92%). Moreover, the FEH2 during the CO2RR reaction is limited to ∼3%, implying a completely suppressed activity for the competing HER (Fig. 11b). DFT calculations (Fig. 11c) revealed that the Cu10–Cu1x+ binuclear site has the most favorable kinetic and thermodynamic characteristics. In detail, Cu10 adsorbs a CO2 molecule and the neighboring Cu1x+ adsorbs an H2O molecule, realizing an ideal configuration for stabilizing chemisorbed CO2. Thus, the Cu10–Cu1x+ atomic pair work synergistically to promote the key bimolecular step of CO2RR. In brief, the synergetic activation of the adsorbed bimolecular on diatoms demonstrates the unique advantages of DSCs in complex catalytic reactions.
In addition, heteronuclear diatomic catalysts can provide various synergies based on different molecules and their interfaces. Ren et al. reported on an isolated diatomic Ni–Fe site immobilized on nitrogenous carbon (Ni/Fe–N–C) as an effective electrocatalyst for CO2RR.166 Ni/Fe–N–C exhibits an extremely high selectivity with CO Faraday efficiency of 98% at −0.7 V vs. RHE. Theoretical calculations show that the Ni–Fe centers undergo a structural change upon CO2 uptake and CO adsorption, which reduces the energy barrier for intermediate COOH* formation and CO desorption, leading to a superior CO2RR activity (Fig. 12a). Fu et al. reported a Cr2O3–Ag heterostructure catalyst (Cr2O3@Ag) for electrocatalytic CO2RR with a superb FECO of 99.6% at −0.8 V vs. RHE with a high JCO of 19.0 mA cm−2. Operando Raman spectroscopy studies revealed that the markedly enhanced performance is attributable to the Cr2O3–Ag heterostructure that induces the stabilization of CO2˙−/*COOH intermediates (Fig. 12b–d). DFT calculations unveiled that the metallic Ag-catalyzed CO2 reduction to CO requires a 1.45 eV energy input to proceed, which is 0.93 eV higher than that of the metal/metal oxides-structured Cr2O3@Ag (Fig. 12e).
 Fig. 12  (a) The catalytic mechanism on diatomic metal–nitrogen site.166 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b–d) The operando Raman spectroscopy of Cr2O3@Ag, Cr2O3, and Ag NPs. (e) Free energy diagrams for CO production on Cr2O9H4/Ag (111) and Ag (111).167 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
4. Conclusions and perspectives
Over the past few years, new paradigms using DSCs have been applied to various electrochemical reactions and exhibited tremendous advantages. In this review, we categorized the reported DSCs into three types: the heterostructured catalysts, the doped and alloyed catalysts, and the diatomic catalysts. The emergent progress of the DSCs in the fields of HER, OER, ORR, and CO2RR was summarized, in which the catalytic mechanisms were emphasized by comparing them with the single-site catalysts. It is illustrated that, by using the DSCs, the catalytic efficiency of the multi-step reactions could be optimized remarkably. Meanwhile, the electronic structure of the active sites can be optimized due to the charge transfer between different sites, based on which the binding energy to the intermediates can be tuned. Moreover, the diversity and operability of the DSCs allow for enormous possibilities for catalysis. Up to now, the DSCs have been one of the most active research topics in energy-related electrocatalysts.
Although some progress has been made for DSCs, challenges still remain in this field. For example, the precise identification of the active sites is still a problem that needs further investigation. In addition, the insight into the structure–function relationship between the identified active sites and catalytic performance should be further clarified. The prospects of DSCs in electrochemical applications may lie in the following aspects: 1) developing reliable synthesizing methods for catalyst engineering, such as sub-nanometer heterojunctions and high-yield diatomic catalysts; 2) employing the refined characterization techniques, such as spherical differential electron microscopy and in situ spectroscopy, to clarifying the reaction mechanism and structure–function relationships of DSCs; 3) expending the application of the DSCs to other multiple-step reactions, such as nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), two-electron water oxidation reaction to generate hydrogen peroxide (2e− WOR), and ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR), and facilitating the tandem catalysis by using the specific synergistic effect. With the diversity of active sites in DSCs, research on non-precious metal DSCs can make a significant contribution to energy conservation and environmental protection. DSCs, as a frontier in electrochemical catalysis, to open up an avenue for high-efficiency electrocatalysis.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
AcknowledgementsThis work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.52202310), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20191443), the Qinglan Project, Youth Hundred Talents Program and the Top-talent Program of Yangzhou University, and the Innovation Technology Platform Project (YZ2020268) jointly built by Yangzhou City and Yangzhou University.
ReferencesE. S. Davydova, S. Mukerjee, F. Jaouen and D. R. Dekel, Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction in Alkaline Electrolytes, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6665–6690 CrossRef CAS .S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Progress and Perspectives of Electrochemical CO2 Reduction on Copper in Aqueous Electrolyte, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Zheng, L. Yu, W. Liu, X. Dai, X. Niu, W. Fu, W. Shi, F. Wu and X. Cao, Structural advantages and enhancement strategies of heterostructure water-splitting electrocatalysts, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100443 CrossRef CAS .R. Li, K. Xiang, Z. Peng, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Recent Advances on Electrolysis for Simultaneous Generation of Valuable Chemicals at both Anode and Cathode, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102292 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, Y. Gao, H. Kong, J. Kim, S. Choi, F. Ciucci, Y. Hao, S. Yang, Z. Shao and J. Lim, Non-precious-metal catalysts for alkaline water electrolysis: operando characterizations, theoretical calculations, and recent advances, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 9154–9196 RSC .P. Yu, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, X. Zhan, X. Lou, F. Xia and J. He, Earth abundant materials beyond transition metal dichalcogenides: A focus on electrocatalyzing hydrogen evolution reaction, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 244–276 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhao, K. Rui, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Heterostructures for Electrochemical Hydrogen Evolution Reaction: A Review, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803291 CrossRef .H. Ding, H. Liu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Structural Transformation of Heterogeneous Materials for Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13174–13212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. J. Xu, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Strategies for design of electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution under alkaline conditions, Mater. Today, 2020, 36, 125–138 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, D. Wang and S. Wang, High-Entropy Alloys for Electrocatalysis: Design, Characterization, and Applications, Small, 2022, 18, e2104339 CrossRef PubMed .H. S. Taylor, A theory of the catalytic surface, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1925, 108, 105–111 CAS .S. Zhao, Y. Yang and Z. Tang, Insight into Structural Evolution, Active Sites, and Stability of Heterogeneous Electrocatalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202110186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, S. Dou, X. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Strategies to Break the Scaling Relation toward Enhanced Oxygen Electrocatalysis, Matter, 2019, 1, 1494–1518 CrossRef .M. B. Ross, P. De Luna, Y. Li, C.-T. Dinh, D. Kim, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Designing materials for electrochemical carbon dioxide recycling, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 648–658 CrossRef CAS .J. Yang, Q. Shao, B. Huang, M. Sun and X. Huang, pH-Universal Water Splitting Catalyst: Ru-Ni Nanosheet Assemblies, iScience, 2019, 11, 492–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Xie, Z. Niu, D. Kim, M. Li and P. Yang, Surface and Interface Control in Nanoparticle Catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 1184–1249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .U. B. Kim, D. J. Jung, H. J. Jeon, K. Rathwell and S. G. Lee, Synergistic Dual Transition Metal Catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 13382–13433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Atom-level interfacial synergy of single-atom site catalysts for electrocatalysis, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 65, 103–115 CrossRef CAS .R. T. Hannagan, G. Giannakakis, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Single-Atom Alloy Catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12044–12088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Cheng, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Single-Atom Catalysts: From Design to Application, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 539–573 CrossRef .Y. Pan, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Li, Structural Regulation with Atomic-Level Precision: From Single-Atomic Site to Diatomic and Atomic Interface Catalysis, Matter, 2020, 2, 78–110 CrossRef .D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Atomic site electrocatalysts for water splitting, oxygen reduction and selective oxidation, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215–2264 RSC .J. Wang, W. Liu, G. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Q. Xu, X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, Z. Yang, T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Synergistic effect of well-defined dual sites boosting the oxygen reduction reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .Q. Xu, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Hu, H. Jiang and C. Li, Atomic heterointerface engineering overcomes the activity limitation of electrocatalysts and promises highly-efficient alkaline water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5228–5259 RSC .H. Zhang, A. W. Maijenburg, X. Li, S. L. Schweizer and R. B. Wehrspohn, Bifunctional Heterostructured Transition Metal Phosphides for Efficient Electrochemical Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003261 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Y. Liu and J. He, Heterostructures Based on 2D Materials: A Versatile Platform for Efficient Catalysis, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804828 CrossRef PubMed .G. Zhao, Y. Jiang, S.-X. Dou, W. Sun and H. Pan, Interface engineering of heterostructured electrocatalysts towards efficient alkaline hydrogen electrocatalysis, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 85–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Zhao, K. Rui, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Boosting electrochemical water oxidation: the merits of heterostructured electrocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6393–6405 RSC .A. Govind Rajan, J. M. P. Martirez and E. A. Carter, Why Do We Use the Materials and Operating Conditions We Use for Heterogeneous (Photo) Electrochemical Water Splitting?, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11177–11234 CrossRef CAS .T. Billo, F. Y. Fu, P. Raghunath, I. Shown, W. F. Chen, H. T. Lien, T. H. Shen, J. F. Lee, T. S. Chan, K. Y. Huang, C. I. Wu, M. C. Lin, J. S. Hwang, C. H. Lee, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Ni-Nanocluster Modified Black TiO2 with Dual Active Sites for Selective Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Small, 2018, 14, 1702928 CrossRef PubMed .J. Diao, Y. Qiu, S. Liu, W. Wang, K. Chen, H. Li, W. Yuan, Y. Qu and X. Guo, Interfacial Engineering of W2N/WC Heterostructures Derived from Solid-State Synthesis: A Highly Efficient Trifunctional Electrocatalyst for ORR, OER, and HER, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1905679 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Zeng, K.-C. Chang, J. Kubal, N. M. Markovic and J. Greeley, Stabilization of ultrathin (hydroxy)oxide films on transition metal substrates for electrochemical energy conversion, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17070 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, J. Tang, H. Qian, Z. Wang and Y. Yamauchi, One-Pot Synthesis of Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework 67-Derived Hollow Co3S4@MoS2 Heterostructures as Efficient Bifunctional Catalysts, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5566–5573 CrossRef CAS .J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. An, D. Zhou, M. K. H. Leung and S. Yang, Nanohybridization of MoS2 with Layered Double Hydroxides Efficiently Synergizes the Hydrogen Evolution in Alkaline Media, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .H. Jin, X. Liu, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Constructing tunable dual active sites on two-dimensional C3N4@MoN hybrid for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 690–697 CrossRef CAS .M. Kim, M. A. R. Anjum, M. Choi, H. Y. Jeong, S. H. Choi, N. Park and J. S. Lee, Covalent 0D–2D Heterostructuring of Co9S8–MoS2 for Enhanced Hydrogen Evolution in All pH Electrolytes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002536 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Geng, B. Zhang, J. He, J. Xue, T. Frauenheim and M. Li, Ni/Mo Bimetallic-Oxide-Derived Heterointerface-Rich Sulfide Nanosheets with Co-Doping for Efficient Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution by Boosting Volmer Reaction, Small, 2021, 17, e2006730 CrossRef PubMed .J. Hu, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang, Q. Qi, M. Sun, F. Zi, M. K. H. Leung and B. Huang, Interface Modulation of MoS2/Metal Oxide Heterostructures for Efficient Hydrogen Evolution Electrocatalysis, Small, 2020, 16, e2002212 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Ma, J. Li, X. Liao, W. Luo, W. Huang, J. Meng, Q. Chen, S. Xi, R. Yu, Y. Zhao, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Heterostructure Design in Bimetallic Phthalocyanine Boosts Oxygen Reduction Reaction Activity and Durability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005000 CrossRef CAS .Y.-Y. Ma, Z.-L. Lang, L.-K. Yan, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, K. Feng, Y.-J. Xia, J. Zhong, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Highly efficient hydrogen evolution triggered by a multi-interfacial Ni/WC hybrid electrocatalyst, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2114–2123 RSC .H. Yu, E. S. Davydova, U. Ash, H. A. Miller, L. Bonville, D. R. Dekel and R. Maric, Palladium-ceria nanocatalyst for hydrogen oxidation in alkaline media: Optimization of the Pd–CeO2 interface, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 820–826 CrossRef CAS .S. Niu, Y. Fang, J. Zhou, J. Cai, Y. Zang, Y. Wu, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, X. Zheng, W. Qu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Manipulating the water dissociation kinetics of Ni3N nanosheets via in situ interfacial engineering, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10924–10929 RSC .G. Yang, Y. Jiao, H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, X. Dong, D. Guo, C. Tian and H. Fu, Interfacial Engineering of MoO2-FeP Heterojunction for Highly Efficient Hydrogen Evolution Coupled with Biomass Electrooxidation, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2000455 CrossRef PubMed .J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Interface Engineering of MoS2/Ni3S2 Heterostructures for Highly Enhanced Electrochemical Overall-Water-Splitting Activity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wang, M. Zhang, G. Yang, W. Song, W. Zhong, X. Wang, M. Wang, T. Sun and Y. Tang, Heterogeneous Bimetallic Mo-NiPx/NiSy as a Highly Efficient Electrocatalyst for Robust Overall Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101532 CrossRef CAS .C. Wang, H. Lu, Z. Mao, C. Yan, G. Shen and X. Wang, Bimetal Schottky Heterojunction Boosting Energy-Saving Hydrogen Production from Alkaline Water via Urea Electrocatalysis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000556 CrossRef CAS .X. Zheng, X. Han, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, D. Nordlund, J. Wang, S. Chou, H. Liu, L. Li, C. Zhong, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Identifying Dense NiSe2/CoSe2 Heterointerfaces Coupled with Surface High-Valence Bimetallic Sites for Synergistically Enhanced Oxygen Electrocatalysis, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2000607 CrossRef PubMed .G. Zhao, L. Xia, P. Cui, Y. Qian, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhao, H. Pan, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Atomic-Level Modulation of the Interface Chemistry of Platinum-Nickel Oxide toward Enhanced Hydrogen Electrocatalysis Kinetics, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 4845–4852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhao, H. Liu, W. Gao, W. Xue, Z. Liu, J. Huang, X. Pan and Y. Huang, Surface-Engineered PtNi-O Nanostructure with Record-High Performance for Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9046–9050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Wang, K. Jiang, G. Wang, J. Yao and X. Huang, Phase and Interface Engineering of Platinum-Nickel Nanowires for Efficient Electrochemical Hydrogen Evolution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12859–12863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhu, X. Qin, F. Xiao, S. Yang, Y. Xu, Z. Tan, J. Li, J. Yan, Q. Chen, M. Chen and M. Shao, The role of ruthenium in improving the kinetics of hydrogen oxidation and evolution reactions of platinum, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 711–718 CrossRef CAS .J. Guan, C. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Yang, W. Zhou, Y. Wang and G.-R. Li, FeOOH-enhanced bifunctionality in Ni3N nanotube arrays for water splitting, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118600 CrossRef CAS .M. Bat-Erdene, M. Batmunkh, B. Sainbileg, M. Hayashi, A. S. R. Bati, J. Qin, H. Zhao, Y. L. Zhong and J. G. Shapter, Highly Dispersed Ru Nanoparticles on Boron-Doped Ti3C2Tx(MXene) Nanosheets for Synergistic Enhancement of Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Small, 2021, 17, e2102218 CrossRef PubMed .M. Liu, K. A. Min, B. Han and L. Y. S. Lee, Interfacing or Doping? Role of Ce in Highly Promoted Water Oxidation of NiFe-Layered Double Hydroxide, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101281 CrossRef CAS .H. Su, L. Chen, Y. Chen, R. Si, Y. Wu, X. Wu, Z. Geng, W. Zhang and J. Zeng, Single Atoms of Iron on MoS2 Nanosheets for N2 Electroreduction into Ammonia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20411–20416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Cao, Z. Chen, K. Zang, J. Xu, J. Zhong, J. Luo, X. Xu and G. Zheng, Doping strain induced bi-Ti3+ pairs for efficient N2 activation and electrocatalytic fixation, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2877 CrossRef PubMed .L. Deng, F. Hu, M. Ma, S. C. Huang, Y. Xiong, H. Y. Chen, L. Li and S. Peng, Electronic Modulation Caused by Interfacial Ni-O-M (M=Ru, Ir, Pd) Bonding for Accelerating Hydrogen Evolution Kinetics, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 22276–22282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Dionigi, Z. Zeng, I. Sinev, T. Merzdorf, S. Deshpande, M. B. Lopez, S. Kunze, I. Zegkinoglou, H. Sarodnik, D. Fan, A. Bergmann, J. Drnec, J. F. Araujo, M. Gliech, D. Teschner, J. Zhu, W. X. Li, J. Greeley, B. R. Cuenya and P. Strasser, In-situ structure and catalytic mechanism of NiFe and CoFe layered double hydroxides during oxygen evolution, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Abbasi, M. Asadi, C. Liu, S. Sharifi-Asl, B. Sayahpour, A. Behranginia, P. Zapol, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Tailoring the Edge Structure of Molybdenum Disulfide toward Electrocatalytic Reduction of Carbon Dioxide, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 453–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Triggering the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of the inert two-dimensional MoS2 surface via single-atom metal doping, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .M. Kuang, Y. Wang, W. Fang, H. Tan, M. Chen, J. Yao, C. Liu, J. Xu, K. Zhou and Q. Yan, Efficient Nitrate Synthesis via Ambient Nitrogen Oxidation with Ru-Doped TiO2/RuO2 Electrocatalysts, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002189 CrossRef PubMed .D. Liang, Y. W. Zhang, P. Lu and Z. G. Yu, Strain and defect engineered monolayer Ni-MoS2 for pH-universal hydrogen evolution catalysis, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18329–18337 RSC .S. Dresp, T. Ngo Thanh, M. Klingenhof, S. Brückner, P. Hauken and P. Strasser, Efficient direct seawater electrolysers using selective alkaline NiFe-LDH as OER catalyst in asymmetric electrolyte feeds, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1725–1729 RSC .M. Gorlin, J. Ferreira de Araujo, H. Schmies, D. Bernsmeier, S. Dresp, M. Gliech, Z. Jusys, P. Chernev, R. Kraehnert, H. Dau and P. Strasser, Tracking Catalyst Redox States and Reaction Dynamics in Ni-Fe Oxyhydroxide Oxygen Evolution Reaction Electrocatalysts: The Role of Catalyst Support and Electrolyte pH, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2070–2082 CrossRef PubMed .H. Li, F. Yu, X. Ling, H. Wan, M. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Wei, F. Lu, X. Zhang, X. Zeng and M. Zhou, Dual-cation-doped MoS2 nanosheets accelerating tandem alkaline hydrogen evolution reaction, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 445703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Dou, C. T. He, L. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Al-Mamun, J. Ma and H. Zhao, Approaching the activity limit of CoSe2 for oxygen evolution via Fe doping and Co vacancy, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Kang, Y. Li, M. Zhu and R. Jin, Atomically precise alloy nanoclusters: syntheses, structures, and properties, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6443–6514 RSC .H. Li, X. Shu, P. Tong, J. Zhang, P. An, Z. Lv, H. Tian, J. Zhang and H. Xia, Fe-Ni Alloy Nanoclusters Anchored on Carbon Aerogels as High-Efficiency Oxygen Electrocatalysts in Rechargeable Zn-Air Batteries, Small, 2021, 17, e2102002 CrossRef PubMed .S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, M. Heima, R. Luo, R. T. Haasch, J. I. Gold, M. Yamauchi and P. J. Kenis, Electroreduction of Carbon Dioxide to Hydrocarbons Using Bimetallic Cu-Pd Catalysts with Different Mixing Patterns, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 47–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Saleem, Z. Zhang, B. Xu, X. Xu, P. He and X. Wang, Ultrathin Pt-Cu nanosheets and nanocones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18304–18307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Kim, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, A. M. Asiri and P. Yang, Synergistic geometric and electronic effects for electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide using gold-copper bimetallic nanoparticles, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Liu, Q. Liu and J.-L. Luo, Highly Stable and Efficient Catalyst with In Situ Exsolved Fe–Ni Alloy Nanospheres Socketed on an Oxygen Deficient Perovskite for Direct CO2 Electrolysis, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6219–6228 CrossRef CAS .M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang, Y. Qin, J. Y. Ma, F. Lin, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Guo, PdMo bimetallene for oxygen reduction catalysis, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Zhou, H. Li, A. Long, B. Zhou, F. Lu, F. Zhang, F. Zhan, Z. Zhang, W. Xie, X. Zeng, D. Yi and X. Wang, Modulating 3d Orbitals of Ni Atoms on Ni-Pt Edge Sites Enables Highly-Efficient Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101789 CrossRef CAS .B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Single-atom catalysis of CO oxidation using Pt1/FeOx, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Hu, X. Li, S. Zhang, Q. Li, J. Fan, X. Qu and K. Lv, Fe1/TiO2 Hollow Microspheres: Fe and Ti Dual Active Sites Boosting the Photocatalytic Oxidation of NO, Small, 2020, 16, e2004583 CrossRef PubMed .X. Ao, W. Zhang, Z. Li, J. G. Li, L. Soule, X. Huang, W. H. Chiang, H. M. Chen, C. Wang, M. Liu and X. C. Zeng, Markedly Enhanced Oxygen Reduction Activity of Single-Atom Fe Catalysts via Integration with Fe Nanoclusters, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11853–11862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Hu, E. Song, M. Wang, W. Chen, F. Huang, Z. Feng, J. Liu and J. Wang, Partial-Single-Atom, Partial-Nanoparticle Composites Enhance Water Dissociation for Hydrogen Evolution, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2001881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Wurster, D. Grumelli, D. Hotger, R. Gutzler and K. Kern, Driving the Oxygen Evolution Reaction by Nonlinear Cooperativity in Bimetallic Coordination Catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3623–3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhang, Q.-A. Huang, J. Wang, J. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Supported dual-atom catalysts: Preparation, characterization, and potential applications, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 783–798 CrossRef CAS .N. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Kang, C. Ye, R. Jin, H. Yan, R. Lin, J. Yang, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, L. Liu, W. Song, J. Liu, D. Wang and Y. Li, A Supported Pd2 Dual-Atom Site Catalyst for Efficient Electrochemical CO2 Reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13388–13393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y.-X. Zhang and Z. Niu, Dual-atom catalysts: controllable synthesis and electrocatalytic applications, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 1908–1922 CrossRef CAS .C. Wu, X. Zhang, Z. Xia, M. Shu, H. Li, X. Xu, R. Si, A. I. Rykov, J. Wang, S. Yu, S. Wang and G. Sun, Insight into the role of Ni–Fe dual sites in the oxygen evolution reaction based on atomically metal-doped polymeric carbon nitride, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14001–14010 RSC .P. Zhou, X. Hou, Y. Chao, W. Yang, W. Zhang, Z. Mu, J. Lai, F. Lv, K. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Ma, J. Luo and S. Guo, Synergetic interaction between neighboring platinum and ruthenium monomers boosts CO oxidation, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 5898–5905 RSC .H. Liu, H. Rong and J. Zhang, Synergetic Dual-Atom Catalysts: The Next Boom of Atomic Catalysts, ChemSusChem, 2022, 15, e202200498 CAS .D. Cao, J. Wang, H. Xu and D. Cheng, Construction of Dual-Site Atomically Dispersed Electrocatalysts with Ru-C5 Single Atoms and Ru-O4 Nanoclusters for Accelerated Alkali Hydrogen Evolution, Small, 2021, 17, e2101163 CrossRef PubMed .M. Xiao, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, L. Gao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, Identification of binuclear Co2N5 active sites for oxygen reduction reaction with more than one magnitude higher activity than single atom CoN4 site, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 396–403 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xiong, S. Wang, W. Chen, J. Zhang, Q. Li, H. S. Hu, L. Zheng, W. Yan, L. Gu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Construction of Dual-Active-Site Copper Catalyst Containing both CuN3 and CuN4 Sites, Small, 2021, 17, e2006834 CrossRef PubMed .N. Zhang, T. Zhou, J. Ge, Y. Lin, Z. Du, C. A. Zhong, W. Wang, Q. Jiao, R. Yuan, Y. Tian, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, High-Density Planar-like Fe2N6 Structure Catalyzes Efficient Oxygen Reduction, Matter, 2020, 3, 509–521 CrossRef .T. Chao, X. Luo, W. Chen, B. Jiang, J. Ge, Y. Lin, G. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Atomically Dispersed Copper-Platinum Dual Sites Alloyed with Palladium Nanorings Catalyze the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16047–16051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Chen, H. Li, C. Fan, Q. Meng, Y. Tang, X. Qiu, G. Fu and T. Ma, Dual Single-Atomic Ni-N4 and Fe-N4 Sites Constructing Janus Hollow Graphene for Selective Oxygen Electrocatalysis, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2003134 CrossRef PubMed .V. Kashyap, A. Anand, R. Soni and K. Sreekumar, Medium Modulated Oxygen Reduction Activity of Fe/Co Active Centre-engrafted Electrocatalysts, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2956–2964 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T. K. Sham, M. Gu, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Atomic layer deposited Pt-Ru dual-metal dimers and identifying their active sites for hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef PubMed .W. Gao, Y. Zhou, X. Wu, Q. Shen, J. Ye and Z. Zou, State-of-the-Art Progress in Diverse Black Phosphorus-Based Structures: Basic Properties, Synthesis, Stability, Photo- and Electrocatalysis-Driven Energy Conversion, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2005197 CrossRef .L. Li, P. Wang, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Metallic nanostructures with low dimensionality for electrochemical water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3072–3106 RSC .X. Li, L. Zhao, J. Yu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Water Splitting: From Electrode to Green Energy System, Nanomicro Lett., 2020, 12, 131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. D. Butson, A. Sharma, H. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Lee, P. Varadhan, M. N. Tsampas, C. Zhao, A. Tricoli, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish and S. Karuturi, Surface-Structured Cocatalyst Foils Unraveling a Pathway to High-Performance Solar Water Splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2102752 CrossRef .Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Tang, H. Luo, S. Niu, Z. H. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, Self-Templated Fabrication of MoNi4/MoO3-x Nanorod Arrays with Dual Active Components for Highly Efficient Hydrogen Evolution, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703311 CrossRef PubMed .J. Ding, Y. Ji, Y. Li and G. Hong, Monoatomic Platinum-Embedded Hexagonal Close-Packed Nickel Anisotropic Superstructures as Highly Efficient Hydrogen Evolution Catalyst, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 9381–9387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Du, Y. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Unveiling the In Situ Dissolution and Polymerization of Mo in Ni4 Mo Alloy for Promoting the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7051–7055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Feng, Z. Zhao, R. Tang, Y. Zhao and T. Meng, Interfacial Structural and Electronic Regulation of MoS2 for Promoting Its Kinetics and Activity of Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 53262–53270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Fu, Y. Li, N. Yao, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, IrMo Nanocatalysts for Efficient Alkaline Hydrogen Electrocatalysis, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7322–7327 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Single-Atom Engineering to Ignite 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Based Catalysis: Fundamentals, Progress, and Beyond, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 1273–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Yang, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Self-Supported Electrocatalysts for Practical Water Electrolysis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102074 CrossRef CAS .J. Huang, J. Han, T. Wu, K. Feng, T. Yao, X. Wang, S. Liu, J. Zhong, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang and B. Song, Boosting Hydrogen Transfer during Volmer Reaction at Oxides/Metal Nanocomposites for Efficient Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 3002–3010 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, K. Ni, C. Niu, R. Guo, W. Xi, Z. Wang, J. Meng, J. Li, Y. Zhu, P. Wu, Q. Li, J. Luo, X. Wu and L. Mai, Upraising the O 2p Orbital by Integrating Ni with MoO2 for Accelerating Hydrogen Evolution Kinetics, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2275–2285 CrossRef CAS .J.-Y. Zhang, T. He, M. Wang, R. Qi, Y. Yan, Z. Dong, H. Liu, H. Wang and B. Y. Xia, Energy-saving hydrogen production coupling urea oxidation over a bifunctional nickel-molybdenum nanotube array, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 894–902 CrossRef CAS .W. Li, J. Liu, P. Guo, H. Li, B. Fei, Y. Guo, H. Pan, D. Sun, F. Fang and R. Wu, Co/CoP Heterojunction on Hierarchically Ordered Porous Carbon as a Highly Efficient Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen and Oxygen Evolution, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102134 CrossRef CAS .A. Nairan, P. Zou, C. Liang, J. Liu, D. Wu, P. Liu and C. Yang, NiMo Solid Solution Nanowire Array Electrodes for Highly Efficient Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903747 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhang, P. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Chang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Superaerophobic Ultrathin Ni-Mo Alloy Nanosheet Array from In Situ Topotactic Reduction for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Small, 2017, 13, 1701648 CrossRef PubMed .R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Enhancing Hydrogen Evolution Activity in Water Splitting by Tailoring Li+-Ni(OH)-Pt Interfaces, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Sun, X. Li, T. Zhang, K. Xu, Y. Yang, G. Chen, C. Li and Y. Xie, Nitrogen-Doped Cobalt Diselenide with Cubic Phase Maintained for Enhanced Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21575–21582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. L. Zhou, Z. Wang, C. B. Han, X. Ke, C. Wang, Y. Jin, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, Platinum single-atom catalyst coupled with transition metal/metal oxide heterostructure for accelerating alkaline hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Chai, Z. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Efficient Photocatalytic Overall Water Splitting Induced by the Giant Internal Electric Field of a g-C3N4/rGO/PDIP Z-Scheme Heterojunction, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2007479 CrossRef PubMed .K. Chu, Y. P. Liu, Y. B. Li, Y. L. Guo and Y. Tian, Two-dimensional (2D)/2D Interface Engineering of a MoS2/C3N4 Heterostructure for Promoted Electrocatalytic Nitrogen Fixation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7081–7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Cai, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Tuning orbital orientation endows molybdenum disulfide with exceptional alkaline hydrogen evolution capability, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1217 CrossRef PubMed .C. H. Chen, D. Wu, Z. Li, R. Zhang, C. G. Kuai, X. R. Zhao, C. K. Dong, S. Z. Qiao, H. Liu and X. W. Du, Ruthenium-Based Single-Atom Alloy with High Electrocatalytic Activity for Hydrogen Evolution, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803913 CrossRef .F. Lu, D. Yi, S. Liu, F. Zhan, B. Zhou, L. Gu, D. Golberg, X. Wang and J. Yao, Engineering Platinum-Oxygen Dual Catalytic Sites via Charge Transfer towards Highly Efficient Hydrogen Evolution, Angew. Chem. Int., Ed., 2020, 59, 17712–17718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Tian, X. Zhai, X. Wang, J. Li and Z. Li, Advances in manganese-based oxides for oxygen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14400–14414 RSC .H. F. Wang, L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu, MOF-derived electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1414–1448 RSC .J. Zhao, J. J. Zhang, Z. Y. Li and X. H. Bu, Recent Progress on NiFe-Based Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Small, 2020, 16, e2003916 CrossRef PubMed .X. Li, Z. Cheng and X. Wang, Understanding the Mechanism of the Oxygen Evolution Reaction with Consideration of Spin, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 4, 136–145 CrossRef .T. Reier, H. N. Nong, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl and P. Strasser, Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution Reaction in Acidic Environments - Reaction Mechanisms and Catalysts, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601275 CrossRef .M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J.-J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction for energy conversion and storage: A comprehensive review, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 136–157 CrossRef CAS .D. Liu, P. Zhou, H. Bai, H. Ai, X. Du, M. Chen, D. Liu, W. F. Ip, K. H. Lo, C. T. Kwok, S. Chen, S. Wang, G. Xing, X. Wang and H. Pan, Development of Perovskite Oxide-Based Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Small, 2021, 17, e2101605 CrossRef PubMed .J. Song, C. Wei, Z. F. Huang, C. Liu, L. Zeng, X. Wang and Z. J. Xu, A review on fundamentals for designing oxygen evolution electrocatalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2196–2214 RSC .H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, General synthesis and definitive structural identification of MN4C4 single-atom catalysts with tunable electrocatalytic activities, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .F. Pan, T. Jin, W. Yang, H. Li, Y. Cao, J. Hu, X. Zhou, H. Liu and X. Duan, Theory-guided design of atomic Fe–Ni dual sites in N,P-co-doped C for boosting oxygen evolution reaction, Chem. Catal., 2021, 1, 734–745 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhao, P. Li, N. Cheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, An Ir/Ni(OH)2 Heterostructured Electrocatalyst for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction: Breaking the Scaling Relation, Stabilizing Iridium(V), and Beyond, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2000872 CrossRef PubMed .H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, Z. Cai, L. Wang, C. Tian, X. Zhang and H. Fu, Anion-Modulated HER and OER Activities of 3D Ni-V-Based Interstitial Compound Heterojunctions for High-Efficiency and Stable Overall Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901174 CrossRef PubMed .P. Zhou, L. Tao, S. Tao, Y. Li, D. Wang, X. Dong, T. Frauenheim, X. Fu, X. Lv and S. Wang, Construction of Nickel-Based Dual Heterointerfaces towards Accelerated Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution via Boosting Multi-Step Elementary Reaction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1601275 Search PubMed .C. Wang, H. Shang, H. Xu and Y. Du, Nanoboxes endow non-noble-metal-based electrocatalysts with high efficiency for overall water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 857–874 RSC .A. Zhang, Y. Liang, H. Zhang, Z. Geng and J. Zeng, Doping regulation in transition metal compounds for electrocatalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 9817–9844 RSC .R. Gao, M. Deng, Q. Yan, Z. Fang, L. Li, H. Shen and Z. Chen, Structural Variations of Metal Oxide-Based Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Small Methods, 2021, 5, e2100834 CrossRef PubMed .H. Liu, X. Xu, H. Xu, S. Wang, Z. Niu, Q. Jia, L. Yang, R. Cao, L. Zheng and D. Cao, Dual active site tandem catalysis of metal hydroxyl oxides and single atoms for boosting oxygen evolution reaction, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120451 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Poerwoprajitno, L. Gloag, T. M. Benedetti, S. Cheong, J. Watt, D. L. Huber, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, Formation of Branched Ruthenium Nanoparticles for Improved Electrocatalysis of Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Small, 2019, 15, e1804577 CrossRef PubMed .S. Li, B. Chen, Y. Wang, M. Y. Ye, P. A. van Aken, C. Cheng and A. Thomas, Oxygen-evolving catalytic atoms on metal carbides, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1240–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Luo, Y. Chu, J. Liu, Z. Shi, S. Zhu, L. Gong, J. Ge, C. H. Choi, C. Liu and W. Xing, Pyrolyzed M–Nx catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction: progress and prospects, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2158–2185 RSC .A. Kulkarni, S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Norskov, Understanding Catalytic Activity Trends in the Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2302–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Sun, C. Deng, S. Tian and Q. Tang, Oxygen Electrocatalysis by [Au25(SR)18]: Charge, Doping, and Ligand Removal Effect, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7957–7969 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Zagal and M. T. Koper, Reactivity Descriptors for the Activity of Molecular MN4 Catalysts for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510–14521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Design of N-Coordinated Dual-Metal Sites: A Stable and Active Pt-Free Catalyst for Acidic Oxygen Reduction Reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, An Isolated Zinc-Cobalt Atomic Pair for Highly Active and Durable Oxygen Reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2622–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Wei, Z. Fu, D. Legut, T. C. Germann, S. Du, H. Zhang, J. S. Francisco and R. Zhang, Rational Design of Highly Stable and Active MXene-Based Bifunctional ORR/OER Double-Atom Catalysts, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2102595 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Wang, B. Xiao, Z. Lin, Y. Xu, Y. Lin, F. Meng, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, B. Fang, S. Guo and W. Zhong, PtSe2/Pt Heterointerface with Reduced Coordination for Boosted Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 23388–23393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Guo, P. Yuan, J. Zhang, H. Xia, F. Cheng, M. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Qiao, S. Mu and Q. Xu, Co2P-CoN Double Active Centers Confined in N-Doped Carbon Nanotube: Heterostructural Engineering for Trifunctional Catalysis toward HER, ORR, OER, and Zn-Air Batteries Driven Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805641 CrossRef .C. Chen, X. T. Wang, J. H. Zhong, J. Liu, G. I. N. Waterhouse and Z. Q. Liu, Epitaxially Grown Heterostructured SrMn3O6-x-SrMnO3 with High-Valence Mn3+/4+ for Improved Oxygen Reduction Catalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 22043–22050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Lu, L. An, X. Li, D. Xia, Z. Zhang and J. Li, Nano-intermetallic AuCu3 catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction: performance and mechanism, Small, 2014, 10, 2662–2669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Chong, J. Wen, J. Kubal, F. G. Sen, J. Zou, J. Greeley, M. Chan, H. Barkholtz, W. Ding and D.-J. Liu, Ultralow-loading platinum-cobalt fuel cell catalysts derived from imidazolate frameworks, Science, 2018, 362, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Yu, Y. Ma, F. Hu, C. C. Lin, L. Li, H. Y. Chen, X. Han and S. Peng, Dual-Sites Coordination Engineering of Single Atom Catalysts for Flexible Metal–Air Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101242 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, Z. Lyu, Z. Chen, S. Zhu, Y. Shi, R. Chen, M. Xie, Y. Yao, M. Chi, M. Shao and Y. Xia, Maximizing the Catalytic Performance of Pd@AuxPd1-x Nanocubes in H2O2 Production by Reducing Shell Thickness to Increase Compositional Stability, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19643–19647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhu, H. Zhou, C. Zhang, J. Zhang and S. Mu, Dual active nitrogen doped hierarchical porous hollow carbon nanospheres as an oxygen reduction electrocatalyst for zinc-air batteries, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13257–13263 RSC .M. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Gao, X. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, Climbing the Apex of the ORR Volcano Plot via Binuclear Site Construction: Electronic and Geometric Engineering, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17763–17770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Jiang, X. Nie, X. Guo, C. Song and J. G. Chen, Recent Advances in Carbon Dioxide Hydrogenation to Methanol via Heterogeneous Catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7984–8034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Tan, C. Yu, Y. Ren, S. Cui, W. Li and J. Qiu, Recent advances in innovative strategies for the CO2 electroreduction reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 765–780 RSC .K. Zhao and X. Quan, Carbon-Based Materials for Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to C2+ Oxygenates: Recent Progress and Remaining Challenges, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 2076–2097 CrossRef CAS .Y. Peng, L. Wang, Q. Luo, Y. Cao, Y. Dai, Z. Li, H. Li, X. Zheng, W. Yan, J. Yang and J. Zeng, Molecular-Level Insight into How Hydroxyl Groups Boost Catalytic Activity in CO2 Hydrogenation into Methanol, Chem, 2018, 4, 613–625 CAS .P. Prslja and N. López, Stability and Redispersion of Ni Nanoparticles Supported on N-Doped Carbons for the CO2 Electrochemical Reduction, ACS Catal., 2020, 11, 88–94 CrossRef .M. Rafiq, X. Hu, Z. Ye, A. Qayum, H. Xia, L. Hu, F. Lu and P. K. Chu, Recent advances in structural engineering of 2D hexagonal boron nitride electrocatalysts, Nano Energy, 2022, 91, 106661 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, B. Wei, M. Zhu, J. Chen, Q. Jiang, B. Yang, Y. Hou, L. Lei, Z. Li, R. Zhang and Y. Lu, Synergistic Effect of Atomically Dispersed Ni-Zn Pair Sites for Enhanced CO2 Electroreduction, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2102212 CrossRef PubMed .X. Nie, X. Jiang, H. Wang, W. Luo, M. J. Janik, Y. Chen, X. Guo and C. Song, Mechanistic Understanding of Alloy Effect and Water Promotion for Pd-Cu Bimetallic Catalysts in CO2 Hydrogenation to Methanol, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4873–4892 CrossRef CAS .F. Qi, K. Liu, D.-K. Ma, F. Cai, M. Liu, Q. Xu, W. Chen, C. Qi, D. Yang and S. Huang, Dual active sites fabricated through atomic layer deposition of TiO2 on MoS2 nanosheet arrays for highly efficient electroreduction of CO2 to ethanol, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6790–6796 RSC .Y. Xia, S. Kashtanov, P. Yu, L.-Y. Chang, K. Feng, J. Zhong, J. Guo and X. Sun, Identification of dual-active sites in cobalt phthalocyanine for electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104163 CrossRef CAS .T. Ding, X. Liu, Z. Tao, T. Liu, T. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Shen, D. Liu, S. Wang, B. Pang, D. Wu, L. Cao, L. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Li, H. Sheng, M. Zhu and T. Yao, Atomically Precise Dinuclear Site Active toward Electrocatalytic CO2 Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 11317–11324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Jiao, R. Lin, S. Liu, W. C. Cheong, C. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Pan, J. Tang, K. Wu, S. F. Hung, H. M. Chen, L. Zheng, Q. Lu, X. Yang, B. Xu, H. Xiao, J. Li, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Copper atom-pair catalyst anchored on alloy nanowires for selective and efficient electrochemical reduction of CO2, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 222–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Ren, X. Tan, W. Yang, C. Jia, S. Xu, K. Wang, S. C. Smith and C. Zhao, Isolated Diatomic Ni-Fe Metal-Nitrogen Sites for Synergistic Electroreduction of CO2, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6972–6976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Q. Fu, J. Liu, N. M. Bedford, Y. Wang, J. W. Sun, Y. Zou, M. Dong, J. Wright, H. Diao, P. Liu, H. G. Yang and H. Zhao, Synergistic Cr2O3 @Ag heterostructure enhanced electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2202854 CrossRef PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Min Zhou	Min Zhou received his B.S. (2007) and Ph.D. (2012) degrees from Lanzhou University, China. Next, he worked at the College of Physical Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, China. From 2015 to 2016, he worked in Prof. Bando Yoshio's group in National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. His research mainly focuses on the synthesis of low-dimensional nanomaterials and their applications in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Weijie Kong	Weijie Kong received her B.S. degree in 2021 from Yangzhou University, China. Currently she is a master's student of Associate Professor Min Zhou in the School of Physical Science and Technology, Yangzhou University. Her current research interests are focused on non-precious metal-based nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.
Muhammad Afsar Khan	Muhammad Afsar Khan received his master's degree in 2022 from Yangzhou University, China. Currently he is a Ph.D. Research student under supervision of Professor Min Zhou. His research direction mainly focuses on the design and synthesis of non-precious nano materials for energy storage and conversion devices.
Bitao Liu	Bitao Liu received his B.S. (2007) and Ph.D. (2012) degrees from Lanzhou University, China. Since then he worked at Research Institute for New Materials Technology, Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, China. His research mainly focuses on the synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in energy storage and sensor.
Fei Lu	Fei Lu received his Ph.D. (2021) degrees from Beijing Jiaotong University, China. Since then he worked at College of Physical Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, China. His research includes the precise synthesis of low-dimensional materials and exploring the applications in heterogeneous catalysis and electrochemical energy storage.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the categories of DSCs. Left: Heterointerfaces within heterostructures; middle: doping or alloying heteroatoms; right: dual catalytic site in close proximity.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) HRTEM image of Pt/NiO. (b) Magnified HRTEM image of the square region in (a). (c) Structure models of Pt/NiO. (d) The HRTEM images of FeOOH/Ni3N hybrid catalysts. The SAED pattern (e and f) was taken from FeOOH/Ni3N hybrid catalysts. (g) Calculation model of FeOOH/Ni3N. Color codes: Fe, brown; O red; Ni, green; N, blue.48 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) STEM image of CoSe2–DFe–VCo nanobelts with selected area electron diffraction pattern (left inset) indicating the mixed cubic and orthorhombic phases and cross-sectional view (right inset) showing the atomic thickness. Scale bar, 200 nm, 5 1/nm (left inset), and 2 nm (right inset). (b and c) HAADF-STEM images of different catalysts and the intensity profiles along the selected rectangular regions suggest the missed surface Se and Co atoms in CoSe2–DFe–VSe and CoSe2–DFe–VCo, respectively. Scale bar, 0.5 nm. (d) HAADF-STEM image and e) high magnification image of V–NiPt. The blue and green circles represent {111} and {200} facets, respectively. (f) Schematic illustration of V–NiPt structure, Ni, and Pt atoms are marked in blue and red.66 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlage.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis for the planar-like Fe2N6 structure on carbon support. (b) HAADF-STEM image of high-density planar-like Fe2N6 structure. Inset: deductive oxygenated intermediates adsorption state on the planar-like Fe2N6 structure.89 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of Pt–Ru dimers on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs). (d) The intensity profile was obtained on one individual Pt–Ru dimer.93 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

Volmer step: H2O + e− → H* + OH−
	(1)

Heyrovsky step: H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−
	(2)

Tafel step: H* + H* → H2
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic pathways for hydrogen evolution reaction under alkaline conditions.104 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic representation of water dissociation step of C3N4@MoN. (c) LSV curves of the different catalysts measured in Ar-saturated 1 M KOH. (d) The relative energy diagram along the reaction coordinate, including the first (left panel) and second (right panel) water dissociation process on the basal plane of MoS2 and C-MoS2, respectively. R reactant, RC reactant complex, TS transition state, IM intermediate. (e) LSV curves of CC, Mo2C, C-MoS2, MoS2, and Pt/C with IR correction.35 Copyright 2018, Elsevier BV.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of RuAu-0.2. Scale bar: 1 nm. (b) Magnified image in the red dotted rectangle of (a), Au atoms are marked with red circles. The inset is the atomic model of the material. (c) Gibbs free energy profile of HER on Pt (111), Ru (001), and RuAu (001) surfaces. ΔGT represents the energy barrier for the Heyrovsky reaction. ΔGB represents the activation energy of water dissociation.117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (d) HAADF-STEM image of the cation-deficient Ti1−xO2. (e) AFM image and the corresponding thickness profile of Pt1O1/Ti1−xO2. (f) HAADF-STEM image of Pt1O1/Ti1−xO2. (g) Charge distribution of the Pt–Hads and OPt–Hads within the Pt–O realm (at the isosurface level of 0.01 e Bohr−3). (h) the proposed reaction pathway during HER with free energy variation. Pt cyan, Ti blue, O red, and H white.118 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.	 

4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
	(4)

OH− → OH* + e−
	(5)

OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−
	(6)

2O* → O2
	(7)

O* + OH− → OOH* + e−
	(8)

OOH* + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−
	(9)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic pathways for oxygen evolution reaction under alkaline conditions.123 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (b) Illustration of the proposed OER mechanism.131 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (c) Structures of different surface phases and OER intermediates; adsorbates of surface phases are highlighted by blue circles on the sides views, and OER intermediates are differentiated by colors (yellow instead of white for hydrogen and rose instead of red for oxygen, respectively). A dashed rose circle indicates the formation of a surface O vacancy. The reaction centers are highlighted by large white circles. The magnetic moments of Ni and Fe during the OER are also given on the top views.58 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) HRTEM image of Ni-NHGF. Scale bar, 0.5 nm. (b) Dual-site mechanisms towards OER. (c) Free energy diagram at 1.23V for OER.127 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) HAADF-STEM image of WCx–FeNi. (e) The corresponding intensity profiles along the (2) plane over the dimmer atomic columns (marked by the arrows 1–5 in d). (f) The reaction paths on WCx–FeNi and the corresponding free energies.137 Copyright 2021, Springer ature.	 

O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O
	(10)

O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2
	(11)

H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O
	(12)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic pathways for the oxygen reduction reaction.139 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Gibbs free energy change diagram for SMOx–SMO and SMOx–MO.147 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the LP@PF catalysts. (b) HRTEM image. (c) AC-HAADF-STEM image of Pt–Co NPs in LP@PF-1. (d) Support containing atomically dispersed Co (circled in red) and trace Pt (circled in blue). (e) Free energy diagram of the ORR pathways. The proposed associative reaction coordinates represent the following states: (I) *or# + O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, (II) OOH* or OOH# + 3H+ + 3e−, (III) O* or O# + H2O + 2H+ + 2e−, (IV) * + H2O2+ 2H+ + 2e−, (V) 2OH# + 2H+ + 2e−, (VI) OH* or OH# + H2O + H+ + e−, and (VII) *or# + 2H2O, where the asterisk (blue) denotes the binding site on Co–N4 embedded in graphene and the hash mark (gray) denotes the binding site on a strained Pt (111) facet. Inset: schematics of H2O2 generated over Co–N4 migrating to the strained Pt (111) surface (green arrows), followed by dissociation to OH# and water formation.149 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) The ORR volcano plot of the binuclear site. (g) Proposed ORR mechanism on the FeCoN5–OH site.153 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Possible pathways for CO2 reduction.154 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) CO current densities under different potentials. (c) Cu atom pair anchored on Pd10Te3 nanowires. Free energy profiles for CO2 activation mode165 copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The catalytic mechanism on diatomic metal–nitrogen site.166 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b–d) The operando Raman spectroscopy of Cr2O3@Ag, Cr2O3, and Ag NPs. (e) Free energy diagrams for CO production on Cr2O9H4/Ag (111) and Ag (111).167 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
