Multi-wavelength light emission from InGaN nanowires on pyramid-textured Si(100) substrate grown by stationary plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy  ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR00071J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR00071J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8836-8846Multi-wavelength light emission from InGaN nanowires on pyramid-textured Si(100) substrate grown by stationary plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy†

        
          
            Peng 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hedong 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xingyu 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongjie 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lujia 
            Rao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guofu 
            Zhou
          
        
      *acd and 

        
          
            Richard 
            Nötzel
          
        
      *ac
aGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Information Materials and Technology, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, People's Republic of China. E-mail: guofu.zhou@m.scnu.edu.cn; richard.noetzel@scnu.edu.cn
bResearch Institute for Soft Matter and Biomimetics, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory for Soft Functional Materials Research, Department of Physics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China
cNational Center for International Research on Green Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, People's Republic of China
dAcademy of Shenzhen Guohua Optoelectronics, Shenzhen 518110, People's Republic of China
Received 
      4th January 2020
    , Accepted 12th March 2020First published on 12th March 2020AbstractWe demonstrate multi-wavelength light emission from InGaN nanowires (NWs) monolithically grown on pyramid-textured Si(100) substrates by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) under stationary conditions. Taking advantage of the highly unidirectional source material beam fluxes, the In content of the NWs is tuned on the different pyramid facets due to varied incidence angle. This is confirmed by distinct NW morphologies observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and by energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) element mapping. Photoluminescence and cathodoluminescence (CL) reveal multiple lines originating from InGaN NWs on the different pyramid facets. The anomalous temperature dependence of the emission wavelength results from carrier redistribution between localized or confined states, spontaneously formed within the NWs due to composition fluctuations, verified by high-resolution EDX elemental analysis. First-principles calculations show that the pyramid facet edges act as a barrier for atom migration and enhance atom incorporation. This leads to uniform composition within the facets for not too high a growth temperature, consistent with the SEM, EDX and CL results. At elevated temperature, InGaN decomposition and In desorption are enhanced on facets with low growth rate, accompanied by Ga inter-facet migration, leading to non-uniform composition over the Ga migration length which is deduced to be around 580 nm. Our study presents a method for the fabrication of multi-wavelength light sources by highly unidirectional MBE on textured Si substrates towards color temperature-tunable solid-state lighting and RGB light-emitting diode displays.
Introduction
III-Nitride semiconductors are intensively investigated for their superior physical properties and wide-ranging application areas including optoelectronic, microelectronic and electrochemical devices.1–3 Their bandgap energy can be continuously tuned from 3.4 eV (GaN) down to 0.69 eV (InN) by increasing the In content,4,5 covering the whole visible spectrum.6 Beyond that, nanowire (NW) structures further boost performance and integration compatibility due to high surface-to-volume ratio and strain accommodation in hetero-epitaxial growth and growth on mismatched substrates.7–14 InGaN/GaN quantum well (QW) blue and green light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are commercialized and widely used for lighting and display applications. Currently, white-light LEDs and RGB LED displays are realized by down-conversion using fluorescent phosphors or by the integration of InGaAsP LEDs for red emission. A phosphor-free, monolithic, all III-nitride white or multi-color LED is clearly needed to avoid the energy loss of down-conversion and to reduce fabrication complexity. Several approaches have been proposed to realize white or multi-color emission, including stacked multiple InGaN/GaN QWs or disks in NWs with different In content and non-planar nanostructure growth exploiting the In incorporation efficiency on different crystal facets.15–19 It is, however, difficult to achieve uniform carrier injection, particularly of holes, into stacked QWs or disks with different In content, and large-scale device processing is hampered by irregular nanostructured surfaces. A method, laterally tuning the In composition beyond nanoscale areas, which can be electrically addressed individually, will be a solution.
Different from other material growth methods, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) provides highly unidirectional source material beam fluxes, which inspired us to develop a novel approach to laterally tune the incorporation of the source materials. It starts with texturing a Si(100) wafer into pyramids bound by four {111} facets, which is an established technology for enhancing the absorption of Si solar cells. Beyond ordinary growth of uniform III-nitride NWs or GaAs and InAs NW ensembles on such textured Si wafers,20–23 we apply the unidirectional source material beam fluxes and associated different incident angles in stationary MBE to create distinct variations of the In content of InGaN NWs on the different {111} pyramid facets. This is directly confirmed by the NW morphologies observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) element mapping and by photoluminescence (PL) and cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements. PL and CL exhibit emission consisting of multiple lines from the NWs on the different pyramid facets. Carrier localization or confinement within the NWs is reflected in anomalous temperature dependence of the emission wavelength. The measurement results are underlined by first-principles calculations showing that the pyramid facet edges act as a barrier for atom migration and enhance atom incorporation. This leads to uniform InGaN NW composition on the individual facets for not too high a growth temperature, observed by SEM and by EDX and CL mapping. At elevated temperature, InGaN decomposition and In desorption set in on pyramid facets with low growth rate, accompanied by Ga atom migration from neighboring facets, allowing the deduction of the Ga atom migration length of around 580 nm from fitting the Ga atom EDX intensity profile. Unlike structures relying on the growth selectivity among different facets limited to sub-μm length scales, our work provides a method to individually tune the composition and emission wavelength of InGaN NWs on all the exposed facets over length scales given by the processed facet size, compatible with large-scale, parallel device fabrication.
Processing and growth
Pyramid texturing of the Si substrate was carried out by wet chemical etching for 50 min in NaOH aqueous solution. 5 vol% isopropyl alcohol was added as surfactant. Residual NaOH electrolyte and surface oxide were then removed by dipping the etched substrates in 20% HCl and 10% HF aqueous solutions, before rinsing in deionized water for 2 min. Growth was performed by plasma-assisted MBE with active N species and atomic In and Ga atom beams provided by a radio frequency (RF) plasma source and Knudsen metal effusion cells, respectively. The processed substrates, together with planar Si(111) substrates for reference, were mounted with In on 3-inch Si wafers and degassed at 300 °C for one hour in the MBE buffer chamber. Before growth, the substrates were annealed at 900 °C for 10 min in the MBE growth chamber and exposed to active N flux for 2 min to form a thin SiNx layer.24 InGaN NW growth was performed at 600–700 °C for different samples under N-rich conditions with In and Ga beam equivalent pressure of 2.7 × 10−8 and 4.7 × 10−8 Torr, respectively. The active N RF plasma source forward power was set at 350 W and the molecular N2 flux rate was 1.0 sccm (standard cubic centimeters per minute). The manipulator sample stage was kept stationary during growth to maintain constant Ga and In atom beam flux incidence angles on the four pyramid facets.
Characterization
The In content of the InGaN NWs on the planar Si(111) substrates was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer. The morphology of the InGaN NWs was analyzed using a Zeiss Gemini 500 SEM in top and cross-sectional views. The In, Ga and N element distributions were analyzed by EDX spectroscopy and mapping in the SEM. The optical properties were assessed by temperature-dependent PL (TDPL) spectroscopy between 10 K and room temperature (RT) in a closed-cycle cryostat using the 405 nm line of a laser diode with power density of 2.1 W cm−2 and spot diameter of 300 μm as excitation source. The PL was dispersed by a single monochromator and detected by a Si CCD. Spatially resolved CL measurements were performed with an FEI Quanta 400 FEG SEM equipped with a Mono CL3+ spectrometer. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and EDX mapping were carried out with a JEM-1400 PLUS TEM microscope equipped with an Aztec X-Max 80 energy dispersive spectrometer.
Simulation
First-principles calculations were performed within the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation25 and projected augmented wave method as implemented in VASP codes.26 The plane wave cut-off energy, vacuum region and total energy convergence criterion were 500 eV, 1.5 nm and 1 meV per atom, respectively. A 4 × 2 unit cell and 7 atomic layers with a vacuum region of 20 Å were evaluated. The bottom of the slab was stabilized with pseudo-hydrogen atoms. Within this framework, the migration of a Ga atom crossing the edge of a Si pyramid facet was quantified.
Results and discussion
To understand the directional In and Ga atom deposition on the pyramid facets, we first specify the alignment of the source material effusion cells in the MBE growth chamber. The In and Ga effusion cells point towards the center of the sample stage, i.e., the substrate with a 75° angle in between. The N plasma source is mounted between the Ga and In effusion cells. SEM top-view and cross-sectional images of the as-processed Si(100) substrate and InGaN NWs overgrown at 660 °C are shown in Fig. 1(a–c) and (d–f), respectively. In (c) and (f) the magnification is increased as indicated by the green rectangles in (b) and (e). The angle of 53 ± 2° of the pyramid facets with the (100) substrate plane confirms their near 〈111〉 orientations. The observed size variation of the pyramids is due to the random starting points and onset of etching. The pyramid heights are around 5–10 μm. The facets are very smooth because of our optimized process. After InGaN growth, the pyramids are fully covered with NWs. The diameter and density of the NWs vary from facet to facet, seen in the top-view SEM images, which is a consequence of the different impinging In and Ga atom beam fluxes. This is confirmed by the cross-sectional SEM images, revealing additionally different lengths of the NWs on the different facets and different angles of their axes with respect to the 〈111〉 facet orientations which also follow from the different atom beam fluxes and angles of incidence.
 Fig. 1  (a–c) Top-view SEM images and (d–f) cross-sectional SEM images of the (a and d) pyramid-textured Si substrate, (b and e) overgrown with InGaN NWs. In (c and f) the magnification is increased. 
In Fig. 2(a) the SEM top view of a selected Si pyramid overgrown with InGaN NWs is shown together with the mappings of the (b) integrated EDX intensity and (c) In, (d) Ga, (e) N and (f) Si EDX intensities. Clear variations of the EDX intensities and, consequently, InGaN NW compositions are observed among the different facets for all elements owing to the different impinging atom beam fluxes. The EDX intensities change rather steeply at the facet edges, suggesting that the facet edges act as energy barriers for the surface atom migration, leading, for not too high growth temperatures, to largely uniform In content of the NWs on each facet. The variation of the Si EDX intensity, being reversed compared to the N EDX intensity, is therefore attributed to the NW density and length, in accordance with the SEM image, with a larger NW density and length enhancing the N EDX signal and suppressing the Si EDX signal better, giving a smaller relative ratio of the Si EDX intensities. To be quantitatively precise, the detector viewing angle needs to be taken into account. Therefore, experiments were done with samples rotated by 90°. The measured EDX intensity ratios or compositions for the different facets, though altered, still dominate, as shown in ESI Fig. S1.† Therefore, EDX for the present pyramid structure can only give a qualitative result of the intensity ratios or compositions for the different facets.
 Fig. 2  (a) Top-view SEM image of a selected Si pyramid overgrown with InGaN NWs and corresponding element mappings of (b) the total EDX intensity and (c), (d), (e) and (f) the In, Ga, N and Si EDX intensities, respectively. 

Fig. 3 shows the EDX spectra for the four facets labeled I, II, III and IV of the Si pyramid overgrown with InGaN NWs, depicted in the top-view SEM image in the inset. The directions of the impinging In and Ga atom beam fluxes are indicated, which determine the nanowire inclinations.27 A cross-sectional SEM image of a pyramid of similar size is presented in ESI Fig. S2.† The deduced quantitative atomic ratio of In and Ga directly relates to the NW composition, taking into account the element specific X-ray efficiencies, which, however, bears some ambiguity.
 Fig. 3  EDX spectra taken from the facets labeled I–IV of the Si pyramid overgrown with InGaN NWs shown in the top-view SEM image in the inset. 
Facet IV facing the In and Ga effusion cells receives the largest flux of both In and Ga atoms. It exhibits the longest NWs with the highest density seen in SEM images and the lowest Si EDX intensity relative ratio. The situation is reversed for facet II, facing away from the In and Ga effusion cells. Also the uniformity of the NW alignment is poorer on facet I which receives the fewest In and Ga atoms. The error of the EDX quantitative analysis has been examined with XRD for NWs grown on planar Si substrates and found to be within 1%. The In contents determined from EDX vary between 12.40% for facet III and 16.2% for facet II. The variation of the In contents for facets I, II and IV is within the experimental error. With increasing In content, the top diameter of the NWs decreases, which is consistent with the larger In atom migration length compared to that of Ga atoms. Thus, In atoms have a smaller incorporation rate at the NW sidewalls and lateral growth is reduced when the In atom beam flux is increased relative to the Ga atom beam flux. Altogether, the EDX spectra confirm the indicated variation of the In and Ga atom beam fluxes and related In contents of the NWs on the different facets.
The structural properties of the InGaN NWs on the different Si pyramid facets translate well to the optical properties. Fig. 4(a) shows the large-area PL spectra obtained at RT (top) of the InGaN NWs on the Si pyramids and (bottom) of the InGaN NWs on the planar Si(111) substrate for reference. Given the laser spot diameter of 300 μm, a large number of pyramids are excited. Both samples reveal a strong emission in the green. The emission of the NWs on the pyramids is broader and stronger compared to that of the NWs on the planar substrate, which is attributed to the increased surface area of the pyramids, resulting in larger NW geometrical area density, and the emission peak is shifted to lower energy, longer wavelength. Gaussian fitting of the PL spectrum of the NWs on the pyramids reveals two emission lines labeled 1 and 2 with peaks at 552 and 578 nm at the lower- and higher-wavelength side of the emission spectrum of the NWs on the planar substrate with a peak at 559 nm. Given that the In content of the NWs on the planar substrate is 12.47%, determined from EDX quantitative analysis and in agreement with XRD, emission line 2 is assigned to the NWs on the pyramid facet III whose In content is 12.4%. Line 1 is then attributed to a superposition of the emission from the NWs on the other pyramid facets I, II and IV with close In content, which also accounts for the asymmetric bi-Gaussian line shape. The In contents determined from the PL peak positions agree with those deduced from EDX, taking a bowing parameter of about 4.5. Though this large value is within the range of reported bowing parameters,28 it is likely governed by fluctuations of the In content with the PL preferably originating from In-rich regions with locally lower bandgap energy. Also, the In content determined from EDX might be too low.
 Fig. 4  (a) Large-area PL spectra obtained at RT from the InGaN NWs on the (top) Si pyramids and (bottom) planar Si(111) substrate. Gaussian fits are indicated. (b) Corresponding TDPL spectra. (c) Peak energy as a function of temperature of the fitted PL lines 1 and 2 in (a). 
Further insight into the optical properties is provided by the TDPL measurements of the NWs on the pyramids, shown in Fig. 4(b). Each PL spectrum is fitted by two lines, labeled 1 and 2, with Gaussian shape. The peak energies of both lines are plotted in Fig. 4(c) as a function of the temperature. The temperature dependence of the peak energy of line 2 exhibits an S-shape which is characteristic for carrier localization caused here by In composition fluctuations within the NWs,29 verified by the TEM result shown in Fig. 5. At low temperature, the photo-generated carriers statistically occupy the localization sites with a preference for lower-energy, In-rich sites. With an increase of the temperature, the carriers are thermally activated to redistribute into low-energy, In-rich localization sites and the PL peak energy strongly shifts to low energy in the temperature range of 10–140 K. With further increase of the temperature, the carriers are also thermally activated out of the low-energy localization sites to finally uniformly occupy all localization sites, resulting in a reduction of the low-energy shift of the PL peak energy until it follows the temperature dependence of the energy bandgap above 240 K, given by the semi-empirical Varshni law. The difference of the PL peak energy measured at low temperature and the extrapolated PL energy at low temperature deduced from the Varshni law provides an indication of the localization energy. It amounts to 13 meV, correlating with the turning point of the S-shaped temperature dependence at 160 K, i.e., 13.7 meV thermal energy. The temperature dependence of the peak energy of line 1 closely follows the semi-empirical Varshni law in the whole temperature range without a pronounced S-shape, most probably due to the emission originating from several facets. The overall temperature dependence of the peak energy of line 1 is weaker than that of the peak energy of line 2 in accordance with the lower absolute energy and, thus, higher In content of the NWs.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of a selected InGaN NW and corresponding high-resolution mappings of the (b) In, (c) Ga and (d) N EDX intensities. 
The TEM image of a single, selected InGaN NW is shown in Fig. 5(a) together with high-resolution mappings of the (b) In, (c) Ga and (d) N EDX intensities. The NW has a flat top and diameter of 52 nm. In the EDX mappings, the Ga and N atoms are distributed over the entire NW while the In distribution reveals a smaller diameter of 42 nm. This is attributed to the lower incorporation rate of In atoms at the NW sidewall compared to that of Ga atoms due to the larger In atom migration length. Clear In intensity fluctuations are observed along the NW axis due to phase separation during In incorporation on the c-plane NW top.30,31 The result is a core–shell structure with In composition fluctuations in the inner core, confirming the conclusions from the PL measurements. This may also lead to too low an In content deduced from the EDX measurements taken in the SEM.
From CL spectroscopy at RT, spatially resolved emission is obtained to ultimately distinguish the optical properties of the InGaN NWs on the different pyramid facets. Fig. 6(a) depicts a top-view SEM image of the InGaN NWs on the investigated Si pyramid which has a larger size, which is found to increase the difference of the In contents of the NWs on the different facets and, therefore, the shifts of the emission wavelengths. Fig. 6(b) shows a CL intensity map determined at 543 nm as an example and in (c) the CL spectra taken from the InGaN NWs on the pyramid facets labeled I–IV are depicted, as indicated in the corresponding top-view SEM images next to the CL spectra. The indicated In contents for the different facets are calculated from the CL peak positions taking the bowing parameter of 4.5, following the evaluation from PL. The CL intensity map is determined at the CL peak wavelength of facet I, indicated by the red dashed lines in (a) and (b).
 Fig. 6  (a) Top-view SEM image of InGaN NWs grown on a selected Si pyramid. (b) Corresponding CL intensity map obtained at RT at 543 nm. (c) RT CL spectra taken from the four facets labeled I–IV, as indicated in the SEM images on the right. The respective In contents calculated from the CL peak positions are also listed. 
The In contents determined from EDX are 12.56, 19.88, 11.0 and 9.04% for facets I, II, III and IV, respectively. Some discrepancy needs to be addressed here. The EDX measured In contents of the InGaN NWs on facets III and IV are lower than that of the NWs on facet I but their emission is at longer wavelengths. This can be explained by the existence of pure GaN on facets III and IV with clearly distinguished GaN emission peaked at 365 nm, shown in ESI Fig. S3.† Therefore, the measured In content, which is an average when deduced from the EDX intensities of the Ga and In atoms due to resolution limits, appears lower than the actual In content of the InGaN NWs, from which the CL is measured. The formation of pure GaN was also reported by Goodman et al.32 and attributed to self-shadowing of the impinging In atom beam flux. Such shadowing is expected to be enhanced due to the present pyramid texture. The EDX measurements confirm that the In source cell is facing facet II and, to a lesser extent, facet I, such that shadowing follows for facets III and IV. Moreover, once pure GaN nuclei are formed due to shadowing at the initial growth stage, the later incorporation of In is hindered due to lattice pulling for the large lattice mismatch.33,34 Pure GaN phase formation of facets I and II is negligible, which does not influence the correlation between the InGaN emission center wavelength and the In composition of the pyramid facets.
The analysis of the structural and optical properties is underlined by a first-principles theoretical study of the Ga atom migration behavior across a pyramid facet edge. The study refers to InGaN NWs grown on the Si pyramids at the lower temperature of 600 °C. The top-view SEM image is shown in Fig. 7(a). The corresponding In and Ga atom EDX intensity line scans and In and Ga atom EDX intensity mappings are shown in Fig. 7(b) and (c), respectively. For ease of comparison, the SEM image of the InGaN NWs grown on a Si pyramid at 660 °C is shown again in Fig. 7(d), together with the corresponding In and Ga atom EDX intensity line scans and mappings in (e) and (f), respectively.
 Fig. 7  (a) Top-view SEM image of InGaN NWs grown on a selected Si pyramid at the reduced temperature of 600 °C. (b) In and Ga atom EDX intensity line scans as indicated by the yellow line in (a). (c) In and Ga atom EDX intensity mappings. (d–f) The same as (a–c), respectively, for InGaN NWs grown at 660 °C for easy comparison. (g) Atomistic ball-and-stick model of a Si pyramid facet edge with a Ga atom migrating across and system energy calculated for the successive Ga atom locations, as indicated. 
For the lower growth temperature, the NWs become more uniform on the individual facets and the inter-facet element distinction gets more abrupt. There is a sharp change of the Ga atom EDX intensity at the facet edges while the In atom intensity only changes weakly over longer distances. This points towards an energy barrier for atom migration at the facet edges which is more difficult to be overcome for the Ga atoms at the lower growth temperature. The different behaviors for the In and Ga atoms are well in accordance with the larger migration length of In atoms compared to that of Ga atoms. Moreover, pronounced accumulation of Ga atoms occurs at the facet edges at the lower growth temperature, clearly seen in the EDX intensity line scans and mappings inside the dashed yellow rectangle in Fig. 7(c). This indicates that at the facet edges, Ga incorporation is significantly enhanced for the reduced growth temperature. All these experimental observations are reproduced by the first-principles calculations of the total system energy with the Ga atoms at locations 0 to 10 as indicated in the atomistic ball-and-stick schematic drawings in Fig. 7(g). Without going into great detail, the system energy as a function of the Ga atom location, also plotted in Fig. 7(g), goes through a pronounced absolute maximum at position 2 when the Ga atom is passing the facet edge, revealing the energy barrier to Ga atom migration. Moreover, as shown in the atomistic drawings, the Si lattice responds to the subsequent Ga atom locations, leading not only to the absolute maximum of the system energy at position 2 but also to a local minimum at position 7 explaining the enhanced incorporation of the Ga atoms, complementing the experimental observations.
Finally, we present the morphology of the InGaN NWs grown on a Si pyramid at the increased temperature of 700 °C. The SEM top view, also indicating the EDX measurement points with deduced local In contents, is shown in Fig. 8(a). EDX intensity mappings for In and Ga within the green square are shown in Fig. 8(b) and SEM images with increased magnification taken at positions II and IV are shown in Fig. 8(c and d). The very low In content at position II indicates InGaN decomposition and In desorption at the high growth temperature. This is particularly favored due to the lowest growth rate on facet II, facing away from the Ga and In effusion cells. The resulting high Ga content favors compact layer growth, as indicated in Fig. 8(c), compared to the still columnar structures observed in Fig. 8(d), though at the high growth temperature the columns become more irregularly shaped with increased lateral size, indicating already enhanced lateral growth and coalescence towards compact layers. The low growth rate on facet II, together with the high growth temperature, results in preferential migration of Ga atoms over the energy barrier at the facet edges from facets I and III into facet II. Consequently, enhanced In desorption takes place in areas of facets I and III close to the facet edges where the Ga atoms migrate away and the growth rate is reduced, as confirmed by the more compact morphology in these areas. More SEM images with greater magnification, in particular from the border of the areas and facet edges are shown in ESI Fig. S4.† The migration of Ga atoms into facet II is confirmed by the Ga atom EDX intensity line scan depicted in Fig. 8(e), taken along the dashed arrow in Fig. 8(a). From an exponential fit of the Ga atom EDX intensity profile, a Ga atom migration length of γ = 580 nm is deduced, which is consistent with previous reports.35 As regards applications, careful optimization of the growth temperature is needed to guarantee a uniform In content over the entire individual facets with abrupt facet-to-facet composition change at the facet edges. This is achieved at not too high a growth temperature, taking advantage of the energy barrier for atom migration and the enhanced atom incorporation at the facet edges while avoiding degradation of the crystal quality when the growth temperature is too low. Moreover, inter-facet atom migration is most relevant for smaller pyramids. Using lithographic patterns before etching can eliminate these small pyramids towards ordered arrays of pyramids with uniform, larger size and experimentally evidenced similar In content for the facets of pyramids with similar size. This also paves the way for the fabrication of tunable white light or RGB LEDs, allowing metallizing and ultimately electrically addressing the facets individually.
 Fig. 8  (a) Top-view SEM image of InGaN NWs grown on a selected Si pyramid at the increased temperature of 700 °C. The facets are labeled I–IV with the respective In contents of the NWs determined from EDX indicated. (b) EDX intensity mappings for In and Ga from the green square in (a). (c and d) SEM images with increased magnification taken in the center of facets II and IV. (e) Ga atom EDX intensity line scan indicated by the dashed yellow arrow in (a). 
Conclusion
In conclusion, we have grown InGaN NWs on pyramid-textured Si(100) substrates by plasma-assisted MBE under stationary conditions. The In content of the NWs on the different pyramid facets was distinctly tuned due to the highly unidirectional source material beam fluxes with varied incidence angles. Surface morphology imaged by SEM, and EDX, PL and CL measurements confirmed the variation of the In content, being uniform on the individual facets for not too high a growth temperature. This was attributed to an energy barrier for Ga and In atom migration at the facet edges with, additionally, larger incorporation rate. Carrier localization/confinement due to In composition fluctuations was evidenced by an anomalous temperature dependence of the PL emission wavelength. The In composition fluctuations were directly seen by high-resolution EDX element mapping with TEM. First-principles calculations confirmed the energy barrier for Ga atom migration and enhanced incorporation at the facet edges. At high growth temperature, InGaN decomposition and In desorption were observed on facets with low growth rate facing away from the Ga and In effusion cells, accompanied by inter-facet Ga atom migration, which led to non-uniform In composition. Therefore, for optimized growth conditions, uniform, multicolor emission is obtained from the different facets, which are large enough to be electrically addressed individually, towards monolithic, color temperature-tunable white light emitters and RGB LED displays.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51561135014, U1501244), Program for Chang Jiang Scholars and Innovative Research Teams in Universities (no. IRT_17R40), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (no. 2019050001), the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Information Materials and Technology (grant no. 2017B030301007), MOE International Laboratory for Optical Information Technologies, the 111 Project, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51907171).
References
K. Okamoto, I. Niki, A. Shvartser, Y. Narukawa, T. Mukai and A. Scherer, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aryal, B. N. Pantha, J. Li, J. Lin and H. X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 052110 CrossRef .
M. Qi, G. Li, S. Ganguly, P. Zhao, X. Yan, J. Verma, B. Song, M. Zhu, K. Nomoto, H. Xing and D. Jena, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 063501 CrossRef .
J. S. Thakur, Y. V. Danylyuk, D. Haddad, V. M. Naik, R. Naik and G. W. Auner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 035309 CrossRef .
S. A. Kazazis, E. Papadomanolaki, M. Androulidaki, M. Kayambaki and E. Iliopoulos, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 125101 CrossRef .
S. C. Jain, M. Willander, J. Narayan and R. V. Overstraeten, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 965–1006 CrossRef CAS .
Ž. Gačevic, G. D. Sánchez and E. Calleja, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1117–1121 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Aiello, A. H. Hoque, M. Z. Baten and P. Bhattacharya, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1289–1294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fernández-Garrido, M. Ramsteiner, G. Gao, L. A. Galves, B. Sharma, P. Corfdir, G. Calabrese, Z. S. Schiaber, C. Pfüller, A. Trampert, J. M. J. Lopes, O. Brandt and L. Geelhaar, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5213–5221 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, T. K. Ng, N. Wei, A. Prabaswara, M. S. Alias, B. Janjua, C. Shen and B. S. Ooi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1056–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. May, A. G. Sarwar and R. C. Myers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 141103 CrossRef .
V. Kumaresan, L. Largeau, A. Madouri, F. Glas, H. Zhang, F. Oehler, A. Cavanna, A. Babichev, L. Travers, N. Gogneau and M. Tchernycheva, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4895–4902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schuster, M. Hetzl, S. Weiszer, J. A. Garrido, M. De La Mata, C. Magen, J. Arbiol and M. Stutzmann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1773–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Brubaker, S. M. Duff, T. E. Harvey, P. T. Blanchard, A. Roshko, A. W. Sanders, N. A. Sanford and K. A. Bertness, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 16, 596–604 CrossRef .
S. M. Sadaf, Y. H. Ra, H. P. T. Nguyen, M. Djavid and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6696–6701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Lee, Y. H. Yeh, S. J. Tu, P. C. Chen, W. C. Lai and J. K. Sheu, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A401–A412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, A. Banerjee, P. Bhattacharya and B. S. Ooi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 193102 CrossRef .
M. Funato, K. Hayashi, M. Ueda, Y. Kawakami, Y. Narukawa and T. Mukai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 021126 CrossRef .
I. Ozden, E. Makarona, A. V. Nurmikko, T. Takeuchi and M. Krames, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2532–2534 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rieger, D. Rosenbach, G. Mussler, T. Schäpers, D. Grützmacher and M. I. Lepsa, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1979–1986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tsai, C. Y. Lin, C. L. Wang, J. W. Chen, C. H. Chen and C. L. Wu, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 260–267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Vanka, J. Gim, Y. Wu, R. Fan, Y. Zhang, J. Shi, M. Shen, R. Hovden and Z. Mi, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 405–413 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wu, K. Sun and Z. Mi, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1454–1462 RSC .
P. Aseev, P. E. D. Soto Rodriguez, V. J. Gomez, N. H. Alvi, J. M. Manuel, F. M. Morales, J. J. Jimenez, R. Garcia, A. Senichev, C. Lienau, E. Calleja and R. Nötezl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 072102 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Ku, J. H. Huang, C. H. Wang, H. C. Fang and C. P. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Adachi, Properties of Semiconductor Alloys: Group-IV, III-V and II-VI Semiconductors, John Wiley & Sons, Wiltshire,  2009 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Cho, G. H. Gainer, A. J. Fischer, J. J. Song, S. Keller, U. K. Mishra and S. P. DenBaars, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1370–1372 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tourbot, C. Bougerol, A. Grenier, M. D. Hertog, D. Sam-Giao, D. Cooper, P. Gilet, B. Gayral and B. Daudin, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 075601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Limbach, T. Gotschke, T. Stoica, R. Calarco, E. Sutter, J. Ciston, R. Cusco, L. Artus, S. Kremling, S. Höfling and L. Worschech, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 014309 CrossRef .
K. D. Goodman, V. V. Protasenko, J. Verma, T. H. Kosel, H. G. Xing and D. Jena, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 084336 CrossRef .
G. Tourbot, C. Bougerol, F. Glas, L. F. Zagonel, Z. Mahfoud, S. Meuret, P. Gilet, M. Kociak, B. Gayral and B. Daudin, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 135703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kong, S. Albert, A. Bengoechea-Encabo, M. A. Sanchez-Garcia, E. Calleja and A. Trampert, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 485701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gotschke, T. Schumann, F. Limbach, T. Stoica and R. Calarco, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 103102 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: EDX element mapping results for 90° rotation. Cross-sectional SEM image of InGaN NWs grown at 660 °C and top-view SEM images with enlarged scale of InGaN NWs grown at 700 °C on Si pyramids. Extended-range CL and PL spectra, including the emission from pure GaN. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr00071jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–c) Top-view SEM images and (d–f) cross-sectional SEM images of the (a and d) pyramid-textured Si substrate, (b and e) overgrown with InGaN NWs. In (c and f) the magnification is increased.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Top-view SEM image of a selected Si pyramid overgrown with InGaN NWs and corresponding element mappings of (b) the total EDX intensity and (c), (d), (e) and (f) the In, Ga, N and Si EDX intensities, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  EDX spectra taken from the facets labeled I–IV of the Si pyramid overgrown with InGaN NWs shown in the top-view SEM image in the inset.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Large-area PL spectra obtained at RT from the InGaN NWs on the (top) Si pyramids and (bottom) planar Si(111) substrate. Gaussian fits are indicated. (b) Corresponding TDPL spectra. (c) Peak energy as a function of temperature of the fitted PL lines 1 and 2 in (a).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of a selected InGaN NW and corresponding high-resolution mappings of the (b) In, (c) Ga and (d) N EDX intensities.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Top-view SEM image of InGaN NWs grown on a selected Si pyramid. (b) Corresponding CL intensity map obtained at RT at 543 nm. (c) RT CL spectra taken from the four facets labeled I–IV, as indicated in the SEM images on the right. The respective In contents calculated from the CL peak positions are also listed.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Top-view SEM image of InGaN NWs grown on a selected Si pyramid at the reduced temperature of 600 °C. (b) In and Ga atom EDX intensity line scans as indicated by the yellow line in (a). (c) In and Ga atom EDX intensity mappings. (d–f) The same as (a–c), respectively, for InGaN NWs grown at 660 °C for easy comparison. (g) Atomistic ball-and-stick model of a Si pyramid facet edge with a Ga atom migrating across and system energy calculated for the successive Ga atom locations, as indicated.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Top-view SEM image of InGaN NWs grown on a selected Si pyramid at the increased temperature of 700 °C. The facets are labeled I–IV with the respective In contents of the NWs determined from EDX indicated. (b) EDX intensity mappings for In and Ga from the green square in (a). (c and d) SEM images with increased magnification taken in the center of facets II and IV. (e) Ga atom EDX intensity line scan indicated by the dashed yellow arrow in (a).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: EDX element mapping results for 90° rotation. Cross-sectional SEM image of InGaN NWs grown at 660 °C and top-view SEM images with enlarged scale of InGaN NWs grown at 700 °C on Si pyramids. Extended-range CL and PL spectra, including the emission from pure GaN. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr00071j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
