Toward functional nanocomposites: taking the best of nanoparticles, polymers, and small molecules   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35375J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35375J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2654-2678Toward functional nanocomposites: taking the best of nanoparticles, polymers, and small molecules†Joseph Kaoa, Kari Thorkelssona, Peter Baia, Benjamin J. Rancatoreb and Ting Xu*abcaDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, USA. E-mail: tingxu@berkeley.edubDepartment of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, USAcMaterials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, USAReceived 10th September 2012First published on 28th November 2012AbstractNanocomposites, composed of organic and inorganic building blocks, can combine the properties from the parent constituents and generate new properties to meet current and future demands in functional materials. Recent developments in nanoparticle synthesis provide a plethora of inorganic building blocks, building the foundation for constructing hybrid nanocomposites with unlimited possibilities. The properties of nanocomposite materials depend not only on those of individual building blocks but also on their spatial organization at different length scales. Block copolymers, which microphase separate into various nanostructures, have shown their potential for organizing inorganic nanoparticles in bulk/thin films. Block copolymer-based supramolecules further provide more versatile routes to control spatial arrangement of the nanoparticles over multiple length scales. This review provides an overview of recent efforts to control the hierarchical assemblies in block copolymer-based hybrid nanocomposites.Joseph KaoJoseph Kao received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2009. He then joined the MSE graduate program at the University of California, Berkeley, where he received his MS in 2010 and continued to pursue a PhD degree. His doctoral research focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of hierarchical assembly of multidimensional nanoparticle in thin films of supramolecular nanocomposites towards hierarchically-structured functional hybrid materials.Kari ThorkelssonKari Thorkelsson received his BS degrees in Materials Science and Engineering and Chemical Engineering in 2009; MS degrees in Materials Science and Engineering in 2011 from the University of California, Berkeley. His is currently pursuing a PhD degree. His research interests are functional nanocomposites based on anisotropic nanoparticles.Peter BaiPeter Bai received his BS degree in 2010 from Cornell University. He received his MS degree on size-dependent nanoparticle assembly in supramolecular thin films from the University of California, Berkeley. Currently he is a PhD student in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, investigating liquid crystalline block copolymer supramolecules.Benjamin J. RancatoreBenjamin Rancatore received his BS in Chemistry from the University of California, Santa Barbara, in 2008. He is currently a PhD student. His doctoral research focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of the self-assembly, stimuli-responsiveness, and electronic properties of organic semiconductor-based supramolecules and their blends with semiconducting nanoparticles.Ting XuTing Xu received an MS degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science in 1999 and a PhD from the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 2004. She was a joint postdoctoral fellow between the University of Pennsylvania and the Cold Neutrons for Biology and Technology Partnership Program at NIST. She is now an Associate Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering and the Department of Chemistry at UC Berkeley, and a Faculty Scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Her research efforts focus on fundamentally understanding the hierarchical self-assembly of complex systems toward functional hybrid materials.1. IntroductionNanoparticles, a few to tens of nanometers in size, have been used for centuries due to their unique structural and optical properties without fully understanding the underlying causes.1 More recently, it was discovered that some of these unique physical properties are due to quantum confinement effects and have found wide usage in a variety of fields such as life science, energy, electronics, and environmental science.2,3 Quantum dots, often called artificial atoms, display size-dependent optical and electrical properties and have been widely applied in bioimaging and photovoltaics. Metallic nanoparticles demonstrate localized surface plasmon resonance that is promising for next-generation optical and sensing applications. With developments in nanoparticle synthesis, nanoparticles of controlled size, shape, chemical composition and surface ligands can be prepared.4–8In situ studies on the nanoparticle growth process have further provided critical insights to achieve fine control over nanoparticle synthesis.9–11 It is reasonable to believe that they will be used as artificial atoms to build functional materials in a similar manner to traditional elements in the periodic table.Just as a hydrogen molecule has properties distinct from two uncoupled hydrogen atoms, ensembles of nanoscopic building blocks may exhibit properties different from those of the individual building blocks due to coupling and exchange phenomena.2,12–22 Collective properties of nanostructured arrays of nanoparticles can be accessed by tailoring the spatial arrangement of the nanoparticles over multiple length scales, especially when the nanoscopic building blocks are in close proximity, say less than 10 nm apart.23 Nanocomposites, i.e. composite materials with one or more nanostructured components, containing hierarchically-structured nanoparticles with single particle precision may pave the path for next-generation nanodevices to meet the demands of future technologies. To obtain targeted functional nanocomposites, it is requisite not only to select the right nanoparticles as building blocks, but also to develop approaches to assemble these artificial atoms over multiple length scales and, moreover, to be able to apply these approaches for nanoparticles with different chemical compositions, sizes, and shapes.The spatial organization of nanoparticles on the scale of a few hundred nanometers can be obtained using “top-down” techniques, which have been progressively developed toward greater integration densities and smaller feature sizes.24,25 At the tens of nanometers scale, however, conventional lithographic processes are approaching their practical and theoretical limits and make it challenging to arrange nanoparticles with single particle precision and manipulate the inter-particle distance to be less than 10 nm. On the other hand, “bottom-up” self-assembly approaches provide opportunities to overcome these limitations, especially to control the inter-particle ordering precisely to tailor the coupling phenomena in nanoparticle clusters. Development of “bottom-up” fabrication platforms to generate 1-D, 2-D, and 3-D ordered arrays of nanoparticles with single particle precision over macroscopic distances will not only enable a basic understanding of the physical properties of this new family of materials and develop structure–property correlations, but also the fabrication of a plethora of next-generation nanoparticle-based devices including, but not limited to, plasmonic waveguides, photonic crystals, optical lenses, memory storage devices, nanoelectronic circuits, photovoltaics, and batteries.In addition to structural control of nanoparticle assemblies, “bottom-up” approaches will also open opportunities to incorporate other functional building blocks into nanocomposites to introduce properties complementary to those of nanoparticles. A rich family of functional building blocks such as liquid crystals, organic small molecules, and polymers with defined architectures have been synthesized and investigated. Each of them offers unique physical and chemical properties and can be readily incorporated in conjunction with nanoparticles. Organic small molecules, especially those with optical, electrical, and magnetic properties, possess numerous advantages to provide tunable functionalities for nanomaterials. For example, liquid crystals (LCs), a state of matter that has properties between that of a conventional liquid and that of a solid crystal, have unique phase behaviors and unconventional properties that are dependent on the ordering of liquid crystalline phases. Blue phase LCs, for example, are of interest for fast light modulation and tunable photonic crystals due to their several hundred nanometer lattice periods and corresponding Bragg reflections in the visible light range. Another interesting class of organic building blocks is organic semiconducting small molecules. Organic semiconductors usually contain π-bonds, which have holes and electrons that can act as current carriers. With π-conjugate systems, electrons can move via π-electron cloud overlaps, especially by hopping, tunneling and related mechanisms in the constituent molecules. In the past decades, organic semiconducting small molecules have been commonly used in electronic devices such as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic thin film transistors (OTFTs), and organic photovoltaics (OPVs). It is non-trivial to obtain macroscopic assemblies of either small molecules or nanoparticles at low cost using existing fabrication infrastructure. In contrast, polymers can be readily synthesized with controlled molecular weight and architecture and are amenable to various processing techniques. Developments in polymer science, especially in the area of block copolymers (BCPs), provide useful guidance to manipulate the assemblies of nanoscopic building blocks over macroscopic distances. However, engineering functionalities seen in inorganic materials using polymers alone is non-trivial. Assembling selected building blocks in BCP structural frameworks shows tremendous potential to construct technologically important functional nanocomposites in bulk and in thin films to expand the horizon of nanoscience (Fig. 1). Fig. 1  Hierarchical co-assemblies of nanocrystals, polymers, and small molecules toward functional nanocomposites. In this Review, we discuss nanocomposites containing inorganic spherical and anisotropic nanoparticles, with a focus on the guided assemblies of nanoparticles in BCPs toward functional hybrid materials. For the assemblies of spherical nanoparticles, we focus on BCP-based nanocomposites where nanoparticles are either synthesized in situ within BCP microdomains or pre-synthesized ex situ. Anisotropic nanoparticles often exhibit different optical and electrical properties from those of spherical nanoparticles.26 Unlike spherical nanoparticles, anisotropic nanoparticles tend to have complex behaviors and their assemblies involve more energetic considerations.26 Here, to provide the readers with a comprehensive view of recent developments in anisotropic nanoparticle assemblies, we begin the discussion with a brief background on the self-assembly of nanorods using solvent evaporation, surface modification, and external fields, followed by the assemblies formed upon blending with polymers. The supramolecular approach combines polymers and small molecules and adds versatility to direct nanoparticle assemblies in comparison to polymers alone. The combination of polymers and small molecules allows one to gain better control over the spatial organization of spherical and anisotropic nanoparticles over multiple length scales. To establish the foundation for understanding supramolecular nanocomposites, we discuss the phase behaviors of BCP-based supramolecules containing simple alkyl small molecules. The discussion is followed by functional supramolecules based on liquid crystalline and organic semiconducting small molecules. These functional small molecules can incorporate built-in functionalities into BCP to construct supramolecules that are optically, electronically, or magnetically active. With the aid of the BCPs and functional supramolecules, nanoparticles may form a broader range of structures in the nanoscopically confined geometry. These multicomponent nanocomposites containing functional organic and inorganic building blocks may potentially demonstrate unique optical, electrical, and magnetic properties. Further manipulation of the spatial organization of each building block in the hybrid system may build the foundation for one to tune the coupling effects between each functional nanomaterial and access the interesting collective properties that may be useful for next-generation nanoparticle-based devices.2. Block copolymer-based nanocompositesNanoparticles exhibit interesting optical, electrical, and magnetic properties, and the controlled spatial organization of these building blocks into multidimensional arrays with precise inter-particle ordering will build a structural foundation for many applications.23,27–29 BCPs microphase separate into a rich library of well-defined and well-ordered arrays of microdomains, tens of nanometers in dimension, comparable to the size of nanoparticles, that can be used to direct the assemblies of nanoparticles.30–37 In thin films, BCP microdomains can be macroscopically aligned by balancing interfacial interactions or by applying external fields.38–42 Thus, BCPs are commonly employed as structure-directing templates for nanoparticle assemblies. Two major strategies have been explored to generate nanoparticle arrays within BCP microdomains: in situ synthesis of nanoparticles and assemblies of preformed nanoparticles in selected BCP microdomains.43,442.1 In situ synthesis of nanoparticles in BCP microdomainsFor in situ nanoparticle synthesis, a range of nanoparticles can be incorporated into BCP nanostructures via a reduction of nanoparticle precursors selectively incorporated into one of the BCP microdomains.43,44 The options range from chemical reduction to thermal decomposition, vapor deposition methods, and sputtering.45 Cohen’s group employed chemical reduction to generate metal or semiconductor nanoclusters in microphase-separated BCP microdomains.46–51 They conducted extensive studies on the syntheses of semiconductor nanoclusters within microphase-separated BCPs prepared by ring-opening metathesis polymerization.46,47,51 Chan et al. reported the syntheses of metal nanoclusters (Au, Ag, and Pd) by decomposing metal complexes attached selectively to one BCP block (Fig. 2).48–50 These approaches led to nanoclusters of different species and particle sizes in confined geometry. The in situ nanoparticle synthesis approach is limited to certain families of BCPs where polymers favorably interact with cations. Hashimoto et al. employed the one-step “dispersion route”, in which the solutions of the metal precursor (PdII) and the protective polyisoprene-b-poly(2-vinylpyridine) (PI-b-P2VP) were combined, and the reduction is subsequently performed in solution at elevated temperature, resulting in nanocomposite films containing Pd nanoparticles exclusively localized around the center of the P2VP microdomains.52 Fig. 2  Electron micrographs of the (a) lamellar and (b) cylindrical nanocomposites containing (NORPHOS)-b-(MTD) diblock copolymers and in situ synthesized Au nanoclusters after thermal treatments. The Au nanoclusters were preferentially contained in the NORPHOS blocks. Scale bars = 100 nm in (a) and 50 nm in (b). Adapted with permission from Y. N. C. Chan, R. R. Schrock and R. E. Cohen, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 24–27. Copyright 1992 American Chemical Society. Wiesner’s group developed a sol–gel “dispersion route” to generate inorganic materials in the poly(ethylene oxide) blocks of a poly(isoprene-b-ethylene oxide) (PI-b-PEO) BCP (Fig. 3).53–56 The metal alkoxide precursors, which contain a polymerizable organic moiety and preferentially swell the hydrophilic PEO block as a result of hydrogen bonding, underwent a sol–gel process in the PEO microdomains (Fig. 3a). After high-temperature oxidation of the polymer matrix, a mesoporous ceramic material with unprecedented morphology control on the nanoscale was generated (Fig. 3b and c). A similar approach has been used to generate SiO2 and TiO2 nanostructures with reverse morphology and mesoporous TiO2 thin films using nanostructured BCP films as templates.57–59 Russell’s group showed that alkali halide or metal salts complexed with the poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) blocks in thin films of PS-b-PEO, on the order of a few ions per chain.60 They demonstrated large flexibility in the choice of salt used, including gold or cobalt salts such that well-organized patterns of nanoparticles can be generated inside the PEO microdomains upon exposure to the electron beam. Fig. 3  (a) Schematic drawing of Wiesner’s group’s approach for synthesizing silica mesostructures in PI-b-PEO using hydrolysis reaction. (b) The electron microscopy results showing that the hydrophilic PEO block acts as an anchor for the metal alkoxide condensation products. The nanocomposite contained 0.57 g of metal oxides in 0.5 g of PI-b-PEO. (c) Qualitative silicon distribution of the same site as in (b) recorded by elemental mapping using the Si-L 2, 3 absorption edge. From H. Arora, P. Du, K. W. Tan, et al., Science, 2010, 330, 214–219 Reprinted with permission from AAAS. Besides the “dispersion routes”, another in situ nanoparticle synthesis method is the “immersion route” where the solid polymeric film is placed into a solution containing the metal precursor such that the metal precursor can diffuse into the swollen BCP microdomains. Dipping the film containing metal salts into the reducing agent solution results in the formation of nanoparticles in the microdomains. For instance, Sohn et al. reported reducing the Au3+ ions of HAuCl4, which is coordinated to the pyridine moieties in the P4VP block in a polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP) thin film, using a solution of sodium borohydride to generate Au nanoparticles exclusively in the P4VP blocks which resulted in alternating layers of polymers and Au nanoparticles.61 Kim et al. used the immersion method to grow silicon dioxide (SiO2) in BCP thin films.62 In their work, the PEO domains were first swollen with water by immersing the BCP film in water. The films were then exposed to SiCl4, whereupon the SiCl4 was hydrolyzed by the water trapped in the PEO domains and SiO2 was generated on top of the PEO cylinders. Recently, Lee et al. achieved hybrid plasmonic nano-necklace arrays consisting of Ag and Au surrounded with polymer matrices by immersing the films in two metal precursor solutions in a sequential order, followed by reduction of the precursors.63 In addition, they recently demonstrated that the composition of the pre-defined 2-D plasmonic nanoparticle arrays prepared from the in situ synthesis method could be precisely modified by galvanic displacement reactions.64The in situ methods have become very popular because they are easy to implement. The major advantages of the in situ methods are that they usually yield a homogeneous distribution of nanoparticles in the polymer matrix and the volume fraction of the in -situ synthesized nanoparticles in the BCP microdomains can be increased significantly by simply repeating the precursor loading and reduction steps. Recently, many groups have demonstrated that in situ synthesis methods can be used to generate nanostructured organic–inorganic nanocomposites for various applications. Wiesner’s group has presented a simple BCP-based one-pot self-assembly approach to superparamagnetic mesoporous materials with magnetic iron oxide particles within the matrix.65 The nanostructured materials open a new avenue to novel biopolymer separation technologies combining size-exclusion principles with separation of magnetically labeled materials, which should enable potential catalytic applications at elevated temperatures. Joo et al. fabricated highly crystalline and ordered mesoporous titanium oxide (TiO2) through the use of the BCP PI-b-PEO with higher photocatalytic activity than conventional TiO2 films fabricated from nanoparticles or via a sol–gel reaction.66 Using the same method, Snaith’s group successfully fabricated dye-sensitized solar cells based on the in situ synthesized mesoporous TiO2 films with precise control over their performances.67,68 Arora et al. also showed that the in situ synthesis method can be used to generate etching masks for growing epitaxial single-crystal nanostructured thin films for a wide variety of applications, including energy conversion and storage.53 One of the major limitations using in situ synthesis methods is that the size of the nanoparticle and the inter-particle ordering inside the domains cannot be precisely controlled. Mirkin’s group has provided advances in nanoparticle size distribution, demonstrating that monodisperse sub-5 nm single crystalline Au nanoparticles could be produced by reducing the metal ions associated with the P2VP chains in PEO-b-P2VP micelles patterned by dip pen nanolithography.69 However, it remains a challenge to control nanoparticle size and inter-particle ordering in general in a scalable manner using existing in situ synthesis methods, which poses limitations on the fabrication of nanocomposites with tunable functionalities.2.2 Nanocomposites based on preformed nanoparticles in bulkIn the past decades, there have been great successes in controlled nanoparticle synthesis. People have been developing new methods to synthesize a rich library of monodisperse nanoparticles with tunable shapes, and sizes.3 Ion exchange reactions allow for the variation of the chemical composition of nanoparticles without significantly affecting the size or morphology of the particle.3,70 In addition, new surface chemistry has been explored to exchange the ligands on the surface of the nanoparticles for uniform dispersion in different solvents.3 Scientists have also strived to modify the existing nanoparticle syntheses for scalable nanomanufacturing. With the state-of-the-art nanoparticle synthesis methods, people began to seek for alternative methods by using “bottom-up” approaches to achieve multidimensional nanostructured arrays of preformed nanoparticles with controlled inter-particle ordering toward functional nanocomposites.21,23 To this end, directed self-assemblies of nanoparticles using DNA linkers, carbon nanotubes or macromolecular templates, have been extensively studied to achieve multidimensional assemblies of nanoparticles with nanoscale resolution.21 Among template-assisted approaches, DNA-mediated self-assemblies of nanoparticles have shown great promise to generate not only 1-D and 2-D, but also 3-D nanostructures of nanoparticles with precisely controlled inter-particle distance.21 However, one of the most prominent obstacles using DNA to direct the assemblies of nanoparticles is the current high cost of synthetic DNA and its low yields, which make the approach not suitable for large-scale device fabrication. As a result, there is an interest in the development of complementary template-assisted strategies that are economically feasible to enable scalable fabrication. Over the past decade, BCPs, which have a rich library of nanostructures, the cost effectiveness, and the solution-processability for scale-up manufacturing, have been extensively utilized as templates for directed assemblies of nanoparticles.21,43,44,71,72 Many nanoparticle-based devices such as plasmonic waveguides, plasmonic photonic crystals, photovoltaics, and sensors require precise control over the inter-particle ordering (coupling effects). Using BCPs to control the spatial arrangement of nanoparticles of different sizes, shapes, and compositions may enable one to generate nanocomposites for next-generation nanodevices that may not be fabricated using in situ synthesis methods.The co-assembly of nanoparticles with BCPs relies on a delicate balance of the interactions between the ligands attached to the nanoparticles and the segments of the BCPs, and the influence of the size of the nanoparticles on the chain configuration of the BCPs.31,34,35,37,72–74 For example, surface modified nanoparticles can interact favorably with specific blocks of a BCP such that the nanoparticles can be preferentially sequestered in the domains.43,44 Upon incorporation of solid nanoparticles into BCPs, the polymer chains must stretch around these obstacles, causing a loss in conformational entropy that increases with particle radius.71 In bulk BCP nanocomposites, the change in free energy upon incorporation of nanoparticles can be written qualitatively as: ΔG = (ΔHligand–polymer) − T(ΔScon + ΔStrans)(1)where ΔHligand–polymer describes the enthalpic contribution from ligand–polymer interactions; ΔScon refers to the change in conformational entropy of the polymer chains; and ΔStrans accounts for the entropic contribution due to the number of physical arrangements of the nanoparticles in the nanocomposites. Understanding the thermodynamics of the co-assemblies of nanoparticles and BCPs allows one to precisely control the 3-D spatial organization of nanoparticles and inter-particle distance, leading to hierarchically structured nanocomposites.Lauter-Pasyuk et al. incorporated unmodified γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles into the PS microdomains in thin films of lamellar polystyrene(deuterated)-b-polybutyl methacrylate (d-PS-b-PBMA) and studied the spatial organization of the nanoparticles by neutron scattering.75,76 They determined that the ∼4 nm nanoparticles concentrated close to d-PS-b-PBMA interfaces while larger nanoparticles (∼6 nm) localized in the center of PS domains. The results successfully demonstrated that the particle distribution inside the host domains could be controlled in BCP-based composite materials. Bockstaller et al. achieved co-assemblies of unmodified Au and SiO2 nanoparticles in a bulk system consisting of a symmetric poly(styrene-b-ethylene propylene) (PS-b-PEP) BCP and focused on the entropic effects on the co-assemblies of nanoparticles and BCPs.31 In both studies, the nanoparticles are covered by alkyl ligands that have favorable interactions with one BCP block. Experimentally, the enthalpic contribution from polymer–ligand interactions can be tailored by modifying the surface chemistry on the nanoparticles.77 One of the most well established approaches is to modify the surface of the nanoparticles by polymers to tailor ΔHligand–polymervia van der Waals interactions to prevent macrophase separation between polymer and nanoparticles and obtain dispersion of nanoparticles in polymer matrices.43,44,78,79 To this end, Lin et al. incorporated poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-tagged ferritin bio-nanoparticles into lamella-forming P2VP-b-PEO thin films.34 The BCPs were found to form perpendicular and parallel lamellae in thin films with and without ferritin-PEG, respectively. The results suggested that only the bio-nanoparticles modified by PEG could be incorporated into PEO microdomains, mediating interfacial interactions and reorient the microdomains to be normal to the surface. Extensive studies have been performed on the assemblies of polymeric ligand coated Au nanoparticles in PS-b-P2VP in bulk.33,35,80,81 Au nanoparticles can be selectively localized within the PS and P2VP microdomains by modifying the surface of the nanoparticles with PS and P2VP homopolymers, respectively (Fig. 4).35,81,82 To localize particles at the interfaces between the blocks, particles are coated with a mixture of PS and P2VP homopolymers35,81,82 (Fig. 4) or PS-b-P2VP random copolymers.81 Additionally, the surface coverage of the polymer ligands on the nanoparticle is a critical parameter that determines the spatial organization of nanoparticles in BCPs.80 PS-coated gold nanoparticles with PS chain areal density higher than a critical value were found to be well dispersed in PS domains of PS-b-P2VP while the nanoparticles were segregated along the interface between PS and P2VP domains of PS-b-P2VP when the areal density of the polymer ligand was small.80 Fig. 4  Kramer et al. have shown that the spatial organization of Au nanoparticles coated by a mixture of low molecular weight thiol end-functional PS/P2VP can be controlled in PS-b-P2VP. Varying the PS and P2VP surface compositions (FPS) on the Au nanoparticles allows one to place the nanoparticles into PS or P2VP microdomains or at the interface. Adapted with permission from B. J. Kim, J. Bang, C. J. Hawker, et al., Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12693–12703. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. Simulation and computational studies have also been reported to explore the spatial organization of polymer modified nanoparticles in polymer matrices. Sides et al. presented a fluid model for investigating the equilibrium structure of mesostructured polymeric fluids with embedded nanoparticles.83 The simulation results were consistent with the experimental ones conducted on PS-functionalized Au nanoparticles in a PS-b-P2VP melt. The method can be used for polymers of arbitrary chemical and architectural complexity, along with particles of all shapes, sizes, and surface treatments. Akcora et al. demonstrated theory and simulations on self-assemblies of spherical nanoparticles uniformly grafted with macromolecules into a variety of anisotropic superstructures in homopolymer matrices.84 The computational results suggested the balance between the energy gain when particle cores approach and the entropy of distorting the grafted polymers in the nanoparticle self-assembly. Recently, Jayaraman et al. have shown simulation studies that the inter-particle attraction/repulsion in a polymer matrix can be tuned by controlling the grafting density of polymer ligands on the nanoparticles, which may provide opportunities for one to generate nanoparticle clusters with controlled inter-particle distance in polymer domains.85–87 Some other works illustrate how copolymer functionalization and the sequence of the grafted copolymer ligands could be a new route experimentalists can take to tailor self-assembly of nanoparticles into nanoclusters with tunable shape and size in the polymer matrix.86,87 The theoretical results may potentially help the experimentalists gain further control over the nanoparticle assemblies in BCPs.For all the cases discussed above, the enthalpic contributions are relatively small since they rely on weak van der Waals interactions between nanoparticle ligands and BCP blocks. To achieve better solubility of nanoparticles selectively in one BCP block, nanoparticle incorporation should be driven by stronger enthalpic interactions between the block and the nanoparticle ligands through ionic interactions, dipole–dipole interactions, and hydrogen bonding. Wiesner’s group pioneered in the approach by introducing dipole–dipole interactions and hydrogen bonding between the ligands on the nanoparticles and the PEO blocks in PS-b-PEO (Fig. 5).88 They showed that Pt nanoparticles modified with ionic liquid ligands, N,N-di-2-propoxyethyl-N-3-mercaptopropyl-N-methylammonium chloride, could be preferentially driven into one of the domains in poly(isoprene-b-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PI-b-PDMAEMA) via ionic interactions.88 Using this approach, the Pt nanoparticles had high solubility in the PDMAEMA blocks and the nanoparticle loading could reach as high as 74 wt% in the nanocomposites. After pyrolysis of the film, a nanostructure containing 97 wt% of Pt was generated. In addition to ionic interactions, hydrogen bonding between nanoparticle ligands and one block of the BCP can be formed to enhance the enthalpic contributions, which allows one to tailor the spatial organization of nanoparticles in BCPs. Recently, Jang et al. reported a synthetic strategy to synthesize amphiphilic Au nanoparticles functionalized with an inner hydroxylated polyisoprene (PIOH) layer and an outer PS shell (Fig. 6).89 When the number of the PIOH groups increased, the P2VP chains had more access to the hydroxyl groups in the inner shell. The energy gain due to the hydrogen bonding between the PIOH groups and the P2VP chains offset that from the adsorption of P2VP chains on Au-core surfaces and the energy penalty of mixing PS brushes into P2VP domains. This results in selective segregation of nanoparticles in the P2VP domains. Small molecule additives that can hydrogen bond with the hydroxyl groups within the PIOH shell of the nanoparticle were used to compete with the P2VP chains to further tailor nanoparticle–polymer interactions. Interestingly, as the volume fraction of the small molecule reached a critical value, no nanoparticles were found at the interface with the majority of nanoparticles being present in pea-pod-like nanoaggregates within the PS domains. Similar approaches have been used to achieve the assemblies of the Au nanoparticles modified by hydroxylated ligands, in PS-b-P2VP.90,91 Due to the formation of hydrogen bonds between the hydroxyl groups in the ligands and the polymer chains, the Au nanoparticles were strongly localized in P2VP domains with a very high volume fraction of nanoparticles around 0.53.90 Using stronger interactions such as ionic interactions and hydrogen bonding between the nanoparticle ligands and the polymer chains can strengthen the enthalpic contributions from ΔHligand–polymer. This gives one not only a useful tool to manipulate the spatial organization of nanoparticles in BCPs, but also a strategy to achieve high nanoparticle loading in BCP microdomains to generate a rich library of inorganic nanostructures. Fig. 5  Warren et al. showed that Pt nanoparticles modified with ionic liquid ligands, N,N-di-2-propoxyethyl-N-3-mercaptopropyl-N-methylammonium chloride, could be preferentially driven into one of the domains in poly(isoprene-b-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate), PI-b-PDMAEMA via ionic interactions. (a) Examination of the nanocomposite at higher magnification resolved individual Pt nanoparticles, seen as dark spots in the bright-field image of TEM. (Inset) A typical convergent-beam electron diffraction pattern (seen with an ultra-high-vacuum scanning transmission electron microscope) from a single Pt nanoparticles, demonstrating its crystallinity. (b) An annealed lamellar hybrid. (c) Pyrolysis of an annealed inverse hexagonal hybrid yields a mesoporous Pt–C composite. (Inset) Selected area electron diffraction, showing Pt expected face-centered cubic scattering profile. From S. C. Warren, L. C. Messina, L. S. Slaughter, M. Kamperman, Q. Zhou, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Science, 2008, 320, 1748–1752. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.  Fig. 6  Jang et al. reported a facile strategy to synthesize amphiphilic Au nanoparticles functionalized with an inner hydroxylated polyisoprene (PIOH) layer and an outer PS shell. The spatial organization of the Au nanoparticles can be precisely controlled by varying the number of the PIOH groups in the ligand. To prove this conclusion, they added small molecule additives that can hydrogen bond with the hydroxyl groups within the PIOH shell of the nanoparticle and compete with the P2VP chains. Interestingly, as the volume fraction of the small molecule reaches a critical value, no nanoparticles were found at the interface with the majority of nanoparticles being present in pea-pod-like nanoaggregates within the PS domains. Adapted with permission from S. G. Jang, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 133, 16986–16996. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Besides the enthalpic contributions, the entropic contributions in eqn (1) also play important roles in the co-assemblies of nanoparticles and BCPs in bulk. Upon incorporation of nanoparticles in polymers, the polymer chains must stretch around these obstacles, causing a loss in conformational entropy ΔScon. This entropic contribution may sometimes become a dominant driving force especially when ΔHligand–polymer relies on weak enthalpic interactions and the particle radius is relatively large compared with the radius of gyration of the polymer. The entropic effects on the nanoparticle assemblies have been extensively studied theoretically.71,74,92 The pioneering work by Balazs’ group has combined density functional theory and self-consistent field theory to simulate the behavior of nanoparticles of diameter d in BCP domains of period L.71,73,93,94 They showed that the interfacial segregation of nanoparticles with neutral ligands (i.e., χ = 0) occurs for small particles (d/L < 0.2).71 However, when d/L > 0.3, the nanoparticles become more localized toward the center of the appropriate domains to minimize the conformational entropic penalty as chain stretching becomes significant to accommodate the nanoparticles.71 In this case, the entropic cost of stretching the polymer chains in order to accommodate the particles is greater than that offset by the translational entropy of the particles, which is maximized by distributing particles homogenously throughout the domain. To systematically study the entropic effects, experimentalists have investigated the effect of d/L ratio on the assemblies of nanoparticles in BCPs by varying the nanoparticle size, ligand size, and the molecular weight of the BCP.43,44 Bockstaller et al. investigated the effect of entropy on the spatial distribution of Au and SiO2 nanoparticles of different sizes (Fig. 7).31 They observed that the larger SiO2 nanoparticles (d/L = 0.26) resided in the center of the domain while the smaller Au nanoparticles (d/L = 0.06) located along the inter-material dividing surface. The experimental results agreed with the simulation, suggesting that the self-assembly process was predominantly determined by entropic contributions. For large particles, the decrease in conformational entropy of the respective polymer chains upon particle sequestration is dominant, whereas for smaller particles, the decrease in entropy is offset by the particle’s translational entropy. Similar results were observed in a system containing triblock copolymers and Au nanoparticles of different sizes.95 These studies not only elucidated the entropic effects on the co-assemblies of nanoparticles and BCPs, but also showed the potential of using BCPs to achieve hierarchical nanostructures of different kinds of nanoparticles in a ternary nanocomposite. Another strategy to investigate the effect of the d/L ratio on the self-assemblies of nanoparticles in BCPs is to vary the molecular weight of the BCP, thereby varying L while keeping the particle size d unchanged. Chiu et al. observed that the nanoparticles localized near the center of the microdomains when the d/L ratio was changed to be from 0.13 to 0.44 by varying the molecular weight of the BCP, which is consistent with the simulation.82 As the d/L ratio decreased to be smaller than 0.1, the conformational entropic penalty became less significant and the particles were more dispersed in the microdomain as the molecular weight of the BCP increased. However, as the volume fraction of the nanoparticle increased, the increase in stretching penalty could no longer be offset by translational entropy, resulting in a more localized spatial organization of the nanoparticles in the middle of the domains. Fig. 7  Bright field TEM micrograph of a ternary blend of PS-b-PEP, ∼3.5 nm Au nanoparticles, and ∼21.5 nm SiO2 nanoparticles with the volume fraction of the nanoparticles around inorganic filling fraction φ = 0.02. In the TEM image, the Au nanoparticles appear as dark spots along the intermaterial dividing surface and the silica nanocrystals reside in the center of the PEP domains. Inset: schematic of the particle distribution (size proportions are changed for clarity). Adapted with permission from M. R. Bockstaller, Y. Lapetnikov, S. Margel and E. L. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5276–5277. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. One can also control the spatial organization of nanoparticles in bulk by taking advantage of the presence of defects in BCPs. Listak and Bockstaller showed that polymer-coated nanoparticles tended to segregate at high-energy tilt and twist grain boundary structures in amorphous lamellar BCP–nanoparticle blends (Fig. 8).96 In particular, at small tilt angles (chevron grain boundary), the nanoparticle distribution was equal to the that near the center of the specific domains in the BCP (Fig. 8a). In contrast, at larger tilt angles such as omega (Fig. 8b) or T-junction (Fig. 8c) grain boundary structures, the nanoparticles were found to selectively swell the high elastic energy regions along the grain boundary, thereby stabilizing the energetically unfavorable grain boundary structures through the relaxation of chains in the grain boundary region to maximize the conformational entropy of the polymer chains near those defects. The report facilitates the understanding of the consequences of material characteristics and processing conditions on grain boundary morphologies in BCP–nanoparticle blends, which may pave the way for the development of applications that capitalize on the particular microstructure of the nanocomposites. Fig. 8  (a) Electron micrograph of the unstained composite containing PS-b-PEP and PS capped Au nanoparticles depicting a chevron grain boundary structure (θ ≈ 30°). Particles were distributed uniformly in the PS microdomains. (b) Electron micrograph of the stained PS-b-PEP/Au depicting an omega-type grain boundary (Ω). The Au nanoparticles particle segregated to the high-energy regions across the boundary, resulting in the periodic array of nanoparticles aggregates. (c) Electron micrograph of the stained PS-b-PEP/Au depicting a T-junction grain boundary. The periodic array of aggregates reveals that particle accumulation occurred within the high-energy T-junctions across the boundary. Insets of panels a–c illustrate the particle distribution within the boundary region. Adapted with permission from J. Listak and M. R. Bockstaller, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5820–5825. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 2.3 Nanocomposites based on pre-formed nanoparticles in thin filmsMultidimensional nanoparticle arrays can be readily generated in bulk BCPs by balancing the entropic and enthalpic contributions. For many practical applications, the nanostructured arrays of nanoparticles need to be in thin film configurations. Controlling the 3-D spatial organization of nanoparticles, especially in a thin film form of BCPs, opens up the routes toward the fabrication of functional materials with unique optical, mechanical, and electrical properties.In thin films of BCPs, however, the thermodynamics that governs the nanoparticle assemblies becomes more complex because the surface to volume ratio is large and the interfacial interactions at the air–film and the film–substrate interfaces begin to come into play.74,92 Similar to that in bulk, the assembly of nanoparticles upon blending with BCP in thin films is determined by a combination of enthalpic and entropic contributions.43,44,72,93 In thin BCP films, the change in free energy upon incorporation of nanoparticles can be written as: ΔG = (ΔHligand–polymer + ΔHligand–air + ΔHligand–substrate) − T(ΔScon + ΔStrans)(2)where ΔHligand–air accounts for the change in enthalpy due to ligand–air interactions and ΔHligand–substrate accounts for the energetic change due to the interfacial interactions between the ligands on the nanoparticles and the substrate.BCP thin films have been used as templates to guide the 1-D/2-D assemblies of nanoparticles at the air–polymer interface.30,97 Lopes and Jaeger showed that the deposited Au atoms preferentially wet the top of the PS microdomains through hydrophobic interactions in an ultra-thin film containing PS-b-PMMA BCPs.30 The BCP film formed a regular scaffold of highly anisotropic, stripe-like domains. Differential wetting guided diffusing metal atoms to aggregate selectively along the scaffold, producing highly organized 1-D and 2-D metal nanostructures on the surface of the film. In another approach, Binder et al. reported binding Au nanoparticles onto the surface of one of the blocks in microphase-separated BCPs in thin films.98 In their approach, the Au nanoparticles were coated with ligands consisting of barbituric acid moieties, which could form hydrogen bonds with the Hamilton receptors on the polymer chains to form 1-D/2-D nanostructured arrays of Au nanoparticles on the surface of the film. BCP nanotemplates can also be fabricated to generate different assemblies of nanostructured arrays of nanoparticles. Nanoporous thin films can be produced using thin films of cylindrical PS-b-PMMA, producing an ideal nanotemplate wherein nanoparticles could be sequestered.42,99,100 Hexagonally ordered cylindrical pores were used to host nanoparticles with appropriate sizes and surface ligands.100 In addition, external fields can be used to deposit nanoparticles in BCP nanoporous films. Zhang et al. showed the controlled placement of CdSe nanoparticles in PS-b-PMMA based nanoporous film using electrophoretic deposition.101 Nearly complete deposition of CdSe nanoparticles covered with α, ω-thiocarboxylic acid ligands into the nanopores was observed after electrodeposition treatment for 5 min. Varying the deposition time, the nanoparticle concentration, and the strength of the applied electric field allowed them to easily tune the degree of deposition.To precisely control the 3-D spatial organization of nanoparticles in BCP thin films, many reports have successfully tailored ΔHligand–polymer by modifying the surface chemistry on the nanoparticles. Li et al. demonstrated that Au nanoparticles could be functionalized with a mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic ligands by ligand exchange (Fig. 9).102 The variation of nanoparticle ligands and processing methods allowed them to disperse the Au nanoparticles either within one of the microdomains, or at the interface between the microdomains, in PS-b-P2VP BCP thin films. Moreover, thermal annealing caused coarsening of the nanoparticles in the P2VP microdomain and further heating led to an expulsion of the particles from the interior of the film. Similarly, Kang et al. showed that tetradecyl phosphonic acid (TDPA)-capped CdSe nanoparticles (CdSe-TDPA) preferentially segregated near the center in the PS microdomains in PS-b-PMMA BCP thin films.103 In this case, due to the strong repulsion between the PMMA chains and the TDPA ligands on the nanoparticles, the energy penalty of mixing CdSe-TDPA into PMMA blocks was too high. As a result, CdSe-TDPA nanoparticles were sequestered in PS microdomains. Park et al. showed that PEO modified Au nanoparticles were preferentially sequestered in PMMA cylinders in poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate) (PSt-b-PMMA) thin films.104 During the solvent annealing process, the PEO capped Au nanoparticles interacted with the water vapor, thereby a significant number of the nanoparticles were segregated to the top surface of the film, where water vapor was condensed. As the solvent was removed rapidly from the film, the PMMA cylinders containing the Au nanoparticles began to grow vertically and induce the perpendicular orientation of the microdomains. This work shows that surface modification on the nanoparticles can tailor ligand–polymer and ligand–surface interactions, allowing one to control the orientation and spatial organization of the nanoparticle arrays simultaneously in thin films. Li et al. utilized the approach of tailoring ligand–polymer interactions to create responsive polymer–nanoparticle nanocomposites by modifying Au nanoparticle with P4VP homopolymer ligands and assembling the nanoparticles into a PS-b-P4VP thin film.105 The nanocomposite demonstrated variable localized surface plasmon resonance bands and morphologies during solvent annealing due to the spatial reorganization of the nanoparticles. Fig. 9  (a) and (b) show the TEM images of PS-b-P2VP/Au nanoparticles A (1:1) and nanoparticle B (3:1) mixtures, respectively. Nanoparticles with ratios of dodecanethiol to 11-mercapto-1-undecanol ligand of 1:1 and 3:1 were used in this study, referred as nanoparticle A (1:1) and B (3:1), respectively. The samples were prepared on silicon wafers and solvent annealed, followed by thermal annealing on a hot stage under vacuum at 170 °C for 30 min and then quenched to room temperature in the nitrogen flow. Adapted with permission from Q. Li, J. He, E. Glogowski, X. Li, J. Wang, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1462–1466. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH. In addition to the enthalpic contributions originating from ΔHligand–polymer, ΔHligand–air and ΔHligand–substrate in eqn (2) also significantly influence the nanoparticle assemblies in BCP thin films. In thin films, the component that has relatively lower surface energy wets the air–polymer interface to minimize surface tension of the film. For example, Lin et al. showed that tri-n-octylphosphine oxide-(TOPO)-covered CdSe nanoparticles covered the top of the P2VP microdomains and segregated at P2VP–substrate interface in thin films of PS-b-P2VP–CdSe nanocomposites (Fig. 10).34 Usually, the preferential interaction of P2VP with the substrate and the lower surface energy of PS forced an orientation of the cylindrical microdomains parallel to the substrate. However, the segregation of the nanoparticles at the interfaces mediated the interfacial interactions, resulting in the perpendicular orientation of the microdomains regardless of the nature of the substrate or the film thickness. The favorable interactions between the substrate and the ligands on the nanoparticles also determined the spatial arrangement of the nanoparticle in BCP thin films. For instance, Meli et al. reported that the majority of the PS capped Au nanoparticles in a thin film consisting of polystyrene-b-poly(1,1′,2,2′-tetrahydroperflurooctyl methacrylate) (PS-b-PFOMA) micellar BCPs segregated at film–substrate interface.106 Furthermore, near the substrate (silicon nitride), the PS capped Au nanoparticles that had an average size comparable to the radius of gyration of the polymer chain located at the interface between the two blocks. This result indicates that the enthalpic interactions between the substrate and the ligands may overcome that between the favorable ligand–polymer enthalpic interactions and the conformational entropy of the host chains, which provides one a useful tool to control the spatial organization of nanoparticles in thin films of BCPs. Fig. 10  (a) and (b) show the cross-sectional TEM and secondary electron SEM images of the nanocomposite thin film containing PS-b-P2VP BCP and TOPO capped CdSe nanoparticles, respectively. The CdSe nanoparticles were found to cover the P2VP cylinders at the air–polymer and polymer–substrate interfaces. The sample was thermally annealed at 170 °C for 2 days. (c) Schematic representation of the assembly of CdSe nanoparticles on top of the P2VP cylinders. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature. Y. Lin, A. Boker, J. B. He, K. Sill, H. Q. Xiang, et al., Nature, 2005, 434, 55–59, copyright 2005. As in bulk, besides the enthalpic contributions, the entropic ones in eqn (2) also affect the co-assemblies of nanoparticles and BCPs in thin films significantly. In homopolymer–nanoparticle systems, Green’s group has done extensive studies on the spatial organization of the nanoparticles in polymer matrices as a function of nanoparticle size.107–109 In a nanoparticle–PMMA nanocomposite, Gupta et al. found that the larger PEO-modified CdSe nanoparticles that had average diameter comparable to the radius gyration of the PMMA matrix were driven to the exposed crack area, whereas the smaller CdSe nanoparticles tended to be homogeneously distributed in the film.110 Expelling the larger nanoparticles to the free surface resulted in an entropic gain as the PMMA chains must extend and stretch around the nanoparticles to achieve a uniform dispersion. The result indicates that the entropic penalty imposed on the PMMA chains owing to the presence of the particles can be a dominant factor affecting the spatial organization of the nanoparticles in polymer films.There are also reports that focus on the entropic effects on the nanoparticle assemblies in BCP thin films. Lauter-Pasyuk et al. used neutron reflection to determine the spatial distributions of Fe2O3 nanoparticles (4 and 6 nm in diameter) in the films containing d-PS-b-PBMA BCPs.75,76 They observed that the small nanoparticles (4 nm) concentrated close to d-PS-b-PBMA interfaces while the larger nanoparticles (6 nm) localized in the center of PS domains, which is consistent with that observed in bulk. Kim et al. studied the spatial organization of PS-modified Au nanoparticles in thin films of PS-b-PnBMA (Fig. 11).111 Large Au nanoparticles preferentially segregated to the core of edge dislocations in the parallel lamellar structure to minimize the loss in conformational entropy in the matrix and relax the chain stretching from the polymer chains surrounding the core of the dislocations (Fig. 11a and b). However, when the nanoparticles were small, they located throughout the PS domains because the gain in translational entropy of the nanoparticles offsets the cost in conformational entropy (Fig. 11c). The work emphasizes the dominant role of dislocations in determining the spatial organization of sufficiently large nanoparticles and the entropic contributions to the nanoparticle assemblies in BCP thin films. Fig. 11  STEM images of the lateral distribution of nanoparticles in BCP (PS-b-PnBMA) thin films containing 3 wt% nanoparticles. (a) The image of a film containing PS capped Au nanoparticles of average diameter 5.1 nm is shown and the nanoparticles are found to be localized at the core of the edge dislocation. (b) A magnified image of (a). (c) The edge of a hole in a film containing Au nanoparticles of average diameter 1.8 nm. It is clear that the smaller Au nanoparticles were more homogeneously distributed in the film. Adapted with permission from J. Kim and P. F. Green, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10452–10456. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. Recently, Yoo et al. showed that neutral Au nanoparticles mainly located near the substrate with some near the top surfaces in a thin film of perpendicular lamellae of PS-b-PMMA.112 Their self-consistent field theory simulations show that neutral Au nanoparticles at the PS–PMMA interface moved to the film–substrate interface to reduce the entropic penalty of the polymer chains. The results, again, suggest that the location of the nanoparticle within BCP templates in thin films can be greatly influenced by the entropic contributions.It has been demonstrated that the 3-D spatial organization of a single kind of nanoparticle can be precisely controlled by tailoring the surface chemistry and the size of the nanoparticles. Moreover, by modifying the surface chemistry of the nanoparticles, stimuli-responsive nanocomposites may be generated. For example, Li et al. showed that Au nanoparticles decorated with P4VP and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM)/poly(methoxy-oligo(ethylene glycol) methacrylate) (PMBAA) mixture ligands could be used to construct pH113,114 and temperature115,116 sensitive nanocomposites, respectively. For next-generation nanoparticle-based devices, however, the nanocomposite thin films may need to demonstrate multiple and tunable functionalities that originate from the coupling effects between the nanoparticle arrays of different species. To this end, people have been seeking the possibility of creating hybrid arrays of nanoparticles in thin film configurations. For example, monodisperse metal, semiconductor, and magnetic nanoparticles of different sizes can self-assemble into 2-D binary nanoparticle superlattices via controlled solvent evaporation, yielding multifunctional hybrid nanocomposites.117,118 To self-assemble two different types of nanoparticles using a BCP template, Sohn et al. incorporated Au nanoparticles physically around hexagonally ordered micelles composed of PS-b-P4VP (P4VP in the core) in a monolayer film (Fig. 12).119 Hydrophobic Au nanoparticles were preferentially sequestered in the intermicelle nonpolar PS corona regions energetically favorable with the minimum entropic packing penalty. Iron oxide nanoparticles were then in situ synthesized in the core area of the ordered micelles (P4VP), resulting in iron oxide nanoparticles surrounded by gold nanoparticles. A similar approach has been used by Kim’s group to fabricate hybrid nanoparticle arrays in which the preformed Au and in situ synthesized Ag nanoparticles were in the core and corona regions of the micelles in the 2-D arrays, respectively.120 This led to a controlled inter-particle distance between different plasmonic nanoparticles in a uniform and homogeneous thin film with tunable surface plasmon resonance band. Using the same method, Acharya et al. fabricated hybrid 2-D arrays of anisotropic TiO2 nanocrystals and Ag nanoparticles in thin films of inverse PS-b-P4VP micelles using the same technique.121 The Ag nanoparticle-decorated TiO2 2-D networks demonstrated enhanced photocatalytic activity by approximately 27 and 44% over that of Ag-free TiO2 networks and randomly deposited TiO2 nanoparticles, respectively. Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of an array of iron oxide nanoparticles surrounded by gold nanoparticles; (b) EDX spectra on gold and iron nanoparticles marked by circles and a cross in the enlarged TEM image, respectively. Adapted with permission from B. H. Sohn et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6368–6369. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. To control the 3-D spatial organization of hybrid arrays of nanoparticles, one of the recent efforts done by Haridas et al. showed the potential of using BCPs to guide the assemblies of binary mixtures of nanoparticles in thin films.122,123 In their work, thin films of hybrid arrays of pyridine modified CdSe quantum dots and PS grafted Au nanoparticles were successfully prepared using PS-b-P4VP templates. Specifically, the preferential interactions between pyridine and P4VP localized the CdSe quantum dots exclusively into the P4VP cylinders while the PS capped Au nanoparticles resided inside the PS matrix. Controlling the dispersion and location of the respective nanoparticles allowed them to tune the exciton–plasmon interaction in the hybrid arrays and hence control the optical properties of the nanocomposite thin film.2.4 Nanocomposites based on anisotropic nanoparticlesSimilar to isotropic nanoparticles, anisotropic particles display many unique electrical, mechanical, and optical properties valuable for a variety of applications, such as photovoltaics,124,125 plasmonic devices,126,127 magnetic storage,43,128 and sensors.23,43 Anisotropic nanoparticles also exhibit interesting properties that are sometimes more desirable than conventional spherical ones.26 For example, nanoparticles having irregular shapes possess plasmonic “hot spots” at high-curvature corners, which may demonstrate stronger plasmonic coupling between the particles than spherical ones and may be more suitable for sensing applications. From a directed assembly point of view, anisotropic nanomaterials face an additional challenge beyond the ones inherent in assembling isotropic particles. Their anisotropy in shape and possibly chemical composition, which gives rise to many of their unique properties, must be taken into account when assembling the particles. For many applications (e.g. plasmonics), it is important to control the orientation of the nanoparticles relative to their neighbors, while in others (e.g. mechanically strengthened composites) it is vital to ensure that the particles form an interconnected network with specific 3-D spatial organization of the particles. In addition, the inter-particle distance of the nanoparticle arrays must be precisely controlled in the assemblies such that the coupling effects between the nanoparticles can be tailored to demonstrate unique collective properties for functional devices.Over the past decade, many approaches have been developed to assemble anisotropic nanoparticles to allow access to their unique properties. Some groups have investigated the natural tendency of colloidal particles to aggregate in solution, manipulating the depletion interaction, dipole moments, or other properties to aggregate particles into controlled assemblies. Other groups have turned their focus on the ligands that coat most solution-processed nanoparticles, modifying them to enable controlled assembly into desired structures. There are also many experiments that have applied external forces to induce assembly, using external fields, BCPs, patterned substrates, or a combination of these to force the particles into desired arrangements and alignments. To provide a comprehensive overview of the field, we present a brief highlight on the assembly of solution-suspended anisotropic nanomaterials before discussing BCP-based nanocomposites containing anisotropic nanoparticles.2.4.1 Assemblies of anisotropic nanoparticles. Through computation,129 and later through experiment,130–132 it was shown that nanorods display a liquid-crystalline behavior at certain concentrations. This behavior has been used to assemble nanorods through controlled solvent evaporation to form nanorod assemblies both parallel and perpendicular to a substrate (Fig. 13).20,133–135 Other asymmetric nanoparticles have also been explored and appeared to share similar assembly behaviors.136–139 The energetic driving forces to assemble nanoparticles in solution can also be tuned through various other driving forces, such as ferromagnetism,140 solvent quality,141 the depletion attraction142,143 and ligand chemistry among others.144–163 These techniques afford some control over the structures. To achieve diverse nanostructures of anisotropic nanoparticles, precise control of concentrations or surface modification is usually required. In addition, anisotropic nanoparticle assemblies can be obtained via the application of external forces, ranging from an electric or magnetic field,127,164–166 a shear field,167,168 to a surface field provided by a chemically169,170 or physically171,172 patterned substrate, among others.173 These methods, while requiring the addition of material or forces external to the nanoparticles, can often achieve unique assembly morphologies and high levels of alignment over large area (Fig. 14). Finally, well-aligned layers of nanorods can be assembled at the air–water interface using a Langmuir–Blodgett deposition,174 on the surface of organic solvent droplets suspended in water,175 or at the surface of multi-walled carbon nanotubes.176 Highly-ordered alignment over macroscopic distances can be achieved with this method as well, though it is severely restricted in the morphologies it can achieve. Fig. 13  Nanorod alignment on a device scale from controlled drying. Top row are SEM images at progressively higher magnification, and the bottom row are TEM images at progressively higher magnification. Adapted with permission from J. L. Baker et al. Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 195–201. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.  Fig. 14  TEM images of “self-corralling” of alkane-covered CdSe nanorods in PMMA: (a) after solvent evaporation under an applied electric field; (b) after solvent evaporation without an applied electric field. The scale bar is 100 nm. Adapted with permission from S. Gupta, et al. Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2066–2069. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 2.4.2 Assemblies of anisotropic nanoparticles in BCPs. Another way to externally manipulate the spatial arrangement of anisotropic nanoparticles is the use of BCP templates. When a single BCP block interacts preferentially with the nanoparticles, the BCP morphology can be used to guide the nanoparticle assembly. A number of simulations have been performed on the assemblies of nanorods in BCPs. Chen et al. performed simulations on the formation of ordered structures of nanoscale rods driven by assembly of symmetric diblock copolymers. They observed that the nanorods could be ordered into nanowires within the BCP domains.177 Shou et al. performed a computational study on nanorods in diblock copolymers, finding that the morphology formed depended not only on the relative sizes of the polymer blocks, but also the d/L ratio of the nanorods.178 Later, simulation results from Tang et al. demonstrated the phase diagram of a diblock copolymer–nanorod mixture as a function of block fraction and particle fraction.179 He et al. focused their simulations on a cylinder-forming BCP with nanorods with an emphasis on the enthalpic and entropic interactions in the BCP/nanorod system.180 They later expanded these simulations to other morphologies.181 Yan et al. conducted simulations on a mixture of Janus particles and a diblock copolymer. They determined that the location and orientation of the Janus particles could be tuned through their surface morphology.182 Experimental investigation of anisotropic nanoparticles in BCPs is more recent, starting with the research of Deshmukh et al., where they used a BCP matrix to align gold nanorods parallel to a substrate (Fig. 15).183 The lamellae formed by the BCP confined the nanorods to two dimensions, restricting 71% of the nanorods to within 5 degrees of the lamellar plane. Fig. 15  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of a solvent-annealed PS-b-PMMA film containing PEG modified Au nanorods. The PS domains were selectively stained. (b) Higher magnification TEM image of the nanocomposite film showing the orientation of Au nanorods within PMMA lamellae. (c) Top-down view of the nanocomposite film shown in (a). (d) Schematic of Au nanorods within the lamellar PMMA domains of a PS-b-PMMA film. Adapted with permission from R. D. Deshmukh, Y. Liu and R. J. Composto, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3662–3668. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 3. Directed-assemblies of nanoparticles in BCP-based supramoleculesIn the previous section, the efforts made to generate multidimensional nanostructured arrays of nanoparticles in conventional coil–coil BCPs in bulk/thin films have been discussed. Manipulating the balance between the enthalpic and entropic contributions provides one the opportunities to precisely control the spatial distribution of nanoparticles in BCPs. However, it still remains challenging to achieve precise control over the inter-particle ordering in nanoparticle assemblies using BCPs that have coil–coil chain configurations. Supramolecules can be readily constructed by attaching small molecules to polymer backbones via secondary interactions such as hydrogen bonding and ionic interactions. Attaching small molecules that favorably interact with the nanoparticle ligands to the polymer side chains can effectively tailor nanoparticle–polymer interactions. This eliminates the need to conduct nanoparticle surface chemistry. In addition, the unique architecture of BCP-based supramolecules allows one to tailor the balance between ΔScon and ΔStrans, which depends on not only the d/L ratio, as discussed previously, but also the entropic spring constant k of the polymer chain. The k of the comb-like segments in coil–comb supramolecules deviates from the expression (k = 3kT/(Nb2)) for conventional Gaussian polymer chains, which makes the system more sensitive to the change in conformational entropy upon nanoparticle incorporation and enhance the entropic contributions in the co-assembly process. This provides a unique handle to direct nanoparticle assembly at a single polymer chain level. The small molecules in the comb blocks can order on the molecular level within the BCP microdomains, resulting in hierarchical assemblies that can further guide the spatial distribution of the nanoparticles with a precision akin to that seen when using DNA.To make coil–comb BCPs, one can either synthesize BCPs with a block containing rigid moieties covalently bonded to the back bones or attach rigid small molecules to the blocks through secondary interactions to form BCP-based supramolecules. Using secondary interactions eliminates the need to modify polymer chains and the strength of the non-covalent linkage between the small molecules and BCP can be varied by external stimuli. Therefore, the architecture of the supramolecules and the spatial distribution of the nanoparticles can be tailored using external fields. In addition, using a supramolecular approach allows one to incorporate functional small molecules into the supramolecules to tune the physical properties of the nanocomposites. The supramolecular approach allows one to precisely control the spatial organization of nanoparticles at multiple length scales to generate functional/stimuli responsive nanocomposites. In this section, we will focus on the constructions and the phase behaviors of the BCP-based supramolecules containing various kinds of small molecules and the directed assemblies of spherical/anisotropic nanoparticles in supramolecular templates in bulk or in thin films.3.1 Phase behaviors of BCP-based supramolecules in bulk and in thin filmsThe phase behavior of BCP-based supramolecules in bulk has been extensively studied by ten Brinke and Ikkala, which provide useful information to guide initial studies in co-assemblies of nanoparticles and BCP-based supramolecules in bulk.184–191 They demonstrated a simple supramolecular way of constructing self-organizing comb–coil BCPs with two length scales by combining BCPs with hydrogen-bonding amphiphiles.184,185 The most extensively studied supramolecular system contains PS-b-P4VP with 3-pentadecylphenol (PDP) small molecules attached to the 4VP groups through hydrogen bonding, leading to self-assembly at two different length scales.184,185,192,193 The larger length scale corresponds to the microphase separation of BCP in tens to a few hundred nanometers, and the shorter length scale, typically only a few nanometers, is determined by the length of the repulsive side chains within the comb block. The concept allows a rich variety of morphologies and phase transitions by modifying the block lengths, the amount of the amphiphiles, their alkyl chain lengths, and the strength of the hydrogen bonding.193 The side chains, typically low molecular weight amphiphilic compounds, can also be attached to the P4VP backbones through ionic interactions. For instance, Ikkala and ten Brinke et al. showed that the 4VP groups could be protonated with methanesulfonic acid (MSA) such that the MSA small molecules were strongly attached to the P4VP blocks through ionic interactions and the comb-like blocks became charged.191,193In addition to the phase behavior of the supramolecules, Ikkala, ten Brinke et al. also investigated the stimuli responsiveness of the BCP-based supramolecules.188,189,194 They first reported the influence of large amplitude oscillatory shear on the macroscopic orientation of the PS-b-P4VP(PDP)r supramolecules and the pathways toward macroscopic orientations.194 In one case, they found that oscillatory shear orientation of hierarchically-ordered PS-b-P4VP(PDP)r of a cylinder-within-lamellar morphology resulted in parallel alignment of the PS cylinders with the (10) plane parallel to the shear plane and transverse alignment of the matrix layers.189 Their results suggested that PS-b-P4VP nanorods of up to 10 μm length can easily be prepared using the shear flow procedures.To prepare the supramolecular approach for nanofabrication and nanotemplating, it is necessary to study the phase behavior of the BCP-based supramolecules in thin films. In thin films of BCPs, the interfacial interactions at air–polymer and polymer–substrate interfaces have strong impacts on the morphology of the BCPs.195 Van Zoelen et al. first reported that the P4VP(PDP) blocks wet the surface and the silicon oxide layer on the substrate due to the low surface energy of the PDP small molecules and the favorable interactions between the P4VP blocks and the silicon oxide on the substrate.196 As opposed to pure PS-b-P4VP BCPs, which exhibit asymmetric wetting conditions (PS wets the surface and P4VP the substrate), the PS-b-P4VP(PDP) supramolecules have symmetric boundary conditions in thin films. Tung et al. showed that the interfacial interactions could be modified by the PDP small molecules.197 They found that increasing the weight fraction of the P4VP(PDP) blocks not only affected the morphology of the supramolecules, but also resulted in the perpendicular orientation of the microdomains in thin films. The PDP in the P4VP(PDP) microdomains and a trace amount of PDP in the PS domains were found to mediate the interfacial interactions between the polymer chains and the underlying substrate. Kao et al. further continued the study by modifying the polarity of the underlying substrate by using a PS coated substrate.198 With the weight fraction of the comb block >0.5, the macroscopic orientation of the supramolecules was still perpendicular to the surface. The main reason was that the PDP small molecules near the polymer–substrate interface changed their orientation to mediate the unfavorable interfacial interactions between P4VP and the PS modified substrate. Thus, the macroscopic orientation of the supramolecules could be preserved on non-polar substrate.In addition to PDP, the solvent used during solvent annealing also mediates the interfacial interactions, affecting the morphology and the macroscopic orientation of the supramolecules in thin films. Because of the selectivity of chloroform toward PS, the morphology of the supramolecules could be changed by annealing at different vapor pressures, which, for a specific strongly segregated system that was on the boundary between lamellar and cylindrical, resulted in terraces of metastable perpendicular lamellae.199 During annealing, the P4VP(PDP) comb blocks underwent an order-to-disorder transition and PS and P4VP microphase separated in the normal parallel structures. After solvent evaporation, the combs crystallized and formed parallel layers within the terraces of the parallel microdomains. Recently, Stamm et al. found that the orientation of cylindrical microdomains of P4VP(HABA) in thin films of PS-b-P4VP(HABA) depended on the selectivity of the solvent as well as on the degree of swelling.200 In a nonselective solvent like chloroform, the cylinders were found to lie parallel to the substrate as long as the swelling ratio allowed the system to be in the cylindrical region of the phase diagram. At high swelling ratios, the cylinders transform into spherical domains, and drying of the solvent resulted in perpendicular orientation due to the coalescence of the spherical microdomains. In a selective solvent like 1, 4-dioxane, the cylinders were found to be always oriented perpendicular to the substrate. The solvent preferentially swelled the PS domains and the system easily went into spherical morphology which ultimately resulted in perpendicular cylinders.3.2 Nanoparticle assemblies in BCP-based supramolecules in bulkUsing supramolecular templates (PS-b-P4VP(PDP)r), Zhao et al. directed the assemblies of nanoparticles to generate stimuli-responsive hierarchically structured nanocomposites in bulk (Fig. 16).201 Compared with the BCPs with random coil configuration, BCP-based supramolecules have small molecules that effectively tailor the interactions between BCP and nanoparticles, direct inter-particle ordering and generate responsive nanoparticle assemblies. In blends of PS(40 kDa)-b-P4VP(5.6 kDa)(PDP)1 and various kinds of nanoparticles of different sizes, the native alkyl ligands capped nanoparticles were selectively incorporated into the lamellar P4VP(PDP)1 microdomains due to the favorable PDP–alkyl ligand interactions (Fig. 16a). In cylindrical supramolecules where PS cylinders were embedded in a P4VP(PDP)3 matrix, 7 vol% of ∼5.4 nm PbS nanoparticles were arranged in a hexagonal grid (Fig. 16b and c). Because of the unique architecture of the supramolecule, the increase in entropic penalty arising from the polymer chain deformation on the incorporation of the nanoparticles is greater than that in coil–coil BCPs. To minimize the loss in conformational entropy due to chain deformation, the nanoparticles formed a single layer, only one particle diameter in thickness, in the center of the P4VP(PDP)1 blocks (Fig. 16a). In cylindrical nanocomposites, the PbS nanoparticles were preferentially sequestered in the corners of the hexagons when the nanoparticle loading was decreased (Fig. 16c). This, again, suggested that the conformational entropy may be the dominant driving force that directed the nanoparticle assemblies in the supramolecular system. The nanocomposites were also found to be heat and light responsive. Zhao et al. found that the nanoparticles were assembled in the center of P4VP(PDP)r lamellae from 50 to 100 °C, at the interfaces between the polystyrene-rich and P4VP(PDP)r lamellae at 110 °C and randomly distributed in the P4VP(PDP)r lamellae at 150 °C as the population of the hydrogen bonding between PDP and 4VP decreased (Fig. 16d–f). They also attached OPAP small molecules to the supramolecules and the X-ray scattering results suggested that the trans–cis isomerization of OPAP induced a 12% change in the periodicity of the nanoparticle assemblies in lamellar morphology. Overall, the supramolecular method enables precise control over the spatial distribution of the nanoparticles over multiple length scales due to the coil–comb architecture of the supramolecules, and the hierarchically structured nanocomposites are responsive to heat and light. Thorkelsson et al. successfully generated PS-b-P4VP supramolecules based on organic semiconductors and high dielectric small molecules, in addition to PDP and OPAP, and used the functional supramolecules to effectively direct the assembly of a variety of nanoparticles.202 This versatile approach is applicable to a wide range of small molecules and nanoparticles, opening new routes for device fabrication based on nanoparticle composite materials. Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of a blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)2 and ∼4 nm CdSe (2 vol%) nanoparticles. The nanoparticles were well confined in the middle of the P4VP(PDP)2 blocks and formed nanoparticle sheets in the lamellae. (b) TEM image of a blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)3 and ∼5.4 nm PbS nanoparticles, showing the PbS nanoparticles arranged in a hexagonal grid. (c) Schematic diagram showing that the PbS nanoparticles were preferentially sequestered in the corners of the hexagons as shown in (b). (d–f) TEM images and schematic drawings of the blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)2 and ∼4 nm CdSe (2 vol%) nanoparticles quenched from (d) 50 °C, (e) 110 °C, and (f) 150 °C, during the heating and cooling cycles. The blend was heated from 50 to 160 °C and cooled down to 50 °C at a heating/cooling rate of 10 °C min−1. The nanoparticles were assembled in the center of P4VP(PDP)2 lamellae from 50 to 100 °C, at the interfaces between the polystyrene-rich and P4VP(PDP)2 lamellae at 110 °C and randomly distributed in the P4VP(PDP)2 lamellae at 150 °C once the population of the hydrogen bonding between PDP and 4VP decreased. Adapted from Y. Zhao et al. Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 979–985. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group. 3.3 Nanoparticle assemblies in BCP-based supramolecules in thin filmsFor practical applications, the fabrication process should produce 3-D nanoparticle assemblies in thin film configurations that are suitable for device fabrication over macroscopic distances using existing fabrication infrastructure. However, various studies have shown that the thermodynamics and the assembly kinetics governing the phase behavior of BCP-based nanocomposites in thin films can be quite different from that in bulk.Recently, Kao et al. investigated the co-assemblies of spherical nanoparticles and BCP-based supramolecules forming parallel lamellar and cylindrical morphologies in thin films (100–200 nm) (Fig. 17).203 They demonstrated that the 3-D assemblies of nanoparticles observed in bulk can be readily translated into thin films. For lamellar nanocomposites, the Au nanoparticles formed 2-D sheets stacked parallel to the surface (Fig. 17a). Within the 2-D nanoparticle sheet, the nanoparticles formed hexagonally packed ordered arrays (Fig. 17a). Kinetically, the solvent annealing condition was optimized such that lamellae are oriented parallel to the surface before the nanoparticles migrate to the surface. Energetically, significant cost in conformational entropy prevented the nanoparticles from traveling through the rigid comb blocks to migrate to the surface. 2-D hexagonally-packed metal nanoparticle arrays demonstrate strong collective surface plasmon resonance that provides surface-enhanced Raman scattering.204–206 Alternating sheets of Au nanoparticles and polymer matrix may act as hyperbolic metamaterials for light manipulation. They also studied thin films of nanoparticles/cylindrical supramolecule blends where BCP cylinders were oriented parallel to the surface and the hexagonal lattice of parallel cylindrical microdomains was distorted upon solvent removal (Fig. 17b). Different from that observed previously in thin films of coil–coil BCPs, the entropic contributions from polymer chain conformation upon nanoparticle incorporation were found to favor the incorporation of nanoparticles in the interior of thin films. In this case, the nanoparticles acted as filler, localizing in the interstitial regions between cylindrical microdomains to effectively release the comb block deformation (Fig. 17b). Energetically, the entropy gain overcomes the differences in the surface tension between nanoparticle and supramolecule and stabilizes 3-D nanoparticle assemblies within the film. This observation is similar to the simulations and experimental results in systems containing cylindrical BCPs and homopolymers. The study demonstrates a simple and robust approach to direct nanoparticle assemblies in thin films with exceptional precision and builds a foundation for more accurate manipulation of these assemblies to meet demands in nanoparticle-based device fabrication and optimize macroscopic properties of BCP-based nanocomposites. Fig. 17  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of a blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)1 and ∼6 nm Au (6 vol%) nanoparticles. In the middle of each P4VP(PDP)1 blocks, the nanoparticles formed 2-D hexagonally-packed nanoparticle sheets. (b) Perspective image of the thin film’s cross section showing the Y–Z plane. The film contains a blend of PS(19)-b-P4VP(5.2)(PDP)1.7 and 6 vol% of ∼5 nm Au nanoparticles. The nanoparticles preferentially located at the interstitial sites of a distorted hexagonal lattice of in-plane PS, forming 3-D lattice of nanoparticle chains cylinders parallel to the surface. Adapted with permission from J. Kao et al. Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2610–2618. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 3.4 Assemblies of anisotropic nanoparticles in BCP-based supramoleculesThe supramolecular method has also become a promising approach that enables one to precisely control the 3-D spatial organization of anisotropic nanoparticles in nancomposites. Recently, Thorkelsson et al. successfully used BCP-based supramolecules to confine nanorods between rigid comb-like blocks, assembling nanorods into a plane or hexagonal array within the hierarchically-structured composite (Fig. 18).207 The comb-like blocks resist deformation more than the coil blocks typically formed by a BCP, allowing for more precise assembly of nanorods much thinner than previously assembled through BCPs. Particle–particle separation and alignment could be tailored by controlling the supramolecular morphology – nanorods in a lamellar morphology were shown to assemble into raft-like structures in the plane of the lamellae, and nanorods preferentially located in the interstitial sites between cylinders along the cylinder axis in the cylindrical supramolecule (Fig. 18). The work demonstrates that the supramolecular approach provides an alternative opportunity for one to precisely control the 3-D spatial organization of nanorods to potentially generate nanorod-based nanocomposites with tunable functionalities. Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of a BCP-based supramolecule composite forming hexagonal arrays of nanorods. (b) Schematic drawing of polymer chain conformation. (c) TEM tomography reconstruction of composite shown in (a) with views from three orthogonal angles. Adapted with permission from K. Thorkelsson et al. Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 498–504. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 3.5 BCP-based supramolecules containing liquid crystals and organic semiconducting small molecules for functional/stimuli-responsive nanocompositesMost of the existing studies on supramolecular systems focus on alkyl-based small molecules. The supramolecular approach makes it synthetically trivial to incorporate functional small molecules without synthesizing new polymers. Considering the diversity of small molecules available in terms of molecular packing and built-in functionalities, there are tremendous technological potentials for these supramolecules alone or their blends with nanoparticles. Here, we will briefly survey two families of small molecules, (i) liquid crystalline and (ii) organic semiconducting small molecules for their obvious optical and electronic properties. We foresee that incorporation of liquid crystalline small molecules into nanocomposites should expand the optical properties beyond those offered by nanoparticle alone. Surface modification of nanoparticles with conductive ligands is requisite to modulate and achieve electronic properties of nanocomposites. Systems described in the previous sections that are based on insulating polymers and small molecules need to be substituted by electronically active materials such as organic semiconductors. In this section, we focus on the discussion on incorporating liquid crystalline small molecules and organic semiconductors into polymers for the generation of stimuli-responsive/functional hybrid nanocomposites.3.5.1 Liquid crystalline BCPs. Ever since the discovery of LCs by Friedrich Reinitzer in 1888, liquid crystalline small molecules have led a surge of research interest and resulted in numerous technological applications such as optical displays and information storage devices.208–210 Liquid crystal small molecules possess several unique properties, such as thermotropic and lyotropic phase transitions, and responsiveness to electric, magnetic and optical fields, that make them well suited for introducing stimuli-driven functionalities to other materials.211 By combining the rich morphology of BCPs with the unique phase behavior and field responsiveness of liquid crystals, a new class of materials known as liquid crystalline BCPs (LCBCPs) is helping to expand the versatility of the BCP system.The first attempts of introducing liquid crystallinity into BCPs via side chain incorporation were largely unsuccessful until 1978, when Finkelmann et al. discovered that mesogenic behavior in the side chain liquid crystalline moieties can only be preserved if the mesogen is separated from the polymer backbone by an alkyl spacer.212,213 The discovery led to an explosion of research progress in the synthesis and development of new side chain LCBCPs possessing both BCP microphase separation and liquid crystalline mesophases.214–220Side chain LCBCPs are structurally unique compared to coil–coil BCPs due to their ability to simultaneously self-assemble on multiple length scales. Smectic A and C* phases have been observed in the LC microdomains, forming lamellae-within-lamellae morphologies.221,222 Cholesteric phases have been demonstrated in homopolymers containing LC side groups,223 but to date there have not been any reports of cholesteric phases that can be stabilized in a side chain LCBCP. The LC moieties can also be used to introduce additional functionalities in BCPs. LC side groups possessing strong electric224 or magnetic223–225 dipoles have been incorporated into side chain LCBCPs to induce responsiveness to external electric and magnetic fields (Fig. 19). Fig. 19  Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) intensity plot of a poly(ethylene oxide-b-methacrylate/cyanobiphenyl) LCBCP at (a) zero magnetic field and (b) 6T magnetic field. (c) Wide Angle X-ray Scattering (WAXS) plot of the LCBCP under 6T magnetic field. (d) full width half maximum and peak intensities of BCP microdomain scattering (triangles) and LC scattering (circles) as a function of magnetic field strength illustrating the degree of LCBCP alignment under applied magnetic field. Adapted with permission from P. W. Majewski, M. Gopinadhan and C. O. Osuji, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 2–8. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. LC moieties containing an azobenzene group align under polarized light due to Weigert’s effect.226 When the LC block is in the minority microdomain, the LC moieties align under the applied external field without influencing the overall BCP morphology. In contrast, when the LC block is in the majority microdomain, the alignment of the LC moieties will also induce alignment of the overall BCP morphology via a phenomenon known as molecular cooperative motion. This mechanism has been exploited extensively to produce long range ordering and orientation switching in side chain LCBCPs.227–231Although side chain LCBCPs have demonstrated considerable potential in producing novel structural and functional materials, their versatility is limited due to the complexity involved during synthesis. One approach to circumvent this issue is to attach the LC moieties to the polymer backbone via non-covalent bonds, such as hydrogen bonds,191 ionic bonds,232 metal coordination,233 π–π stacking,234 or combinations of multiple bonding types.235 This approach significantly simplifies polymer synthesis and enables a larger variety of LC small molecules to be incorporated into the BCP. Hydrogen bonding is a particularly attractive strategy because it occurs in many biological and natural systems. This section will focus on supramolecular LC systems via hydrogen bonding to highlight important historical and recent developments in this field.The first successful supramolecular side chain LC polymer via hydrogen bonding was created in 1989 by Kato et al., in which a polyacrylate homopolymer containing a side chain terminating in a 4-oxybenzoic acid unit was mixed with a low molecular weight LC compound containing a pyridine ring.236 The mixture exhibited a nematic phase between 168 and 216 °C, and showed a single Tg value higher than the Tg of individual components due to the formation of the hydrogen bond. It was also postulated that the geometry of the polymer and LC components is important in that the hydrogen bonding should only occur along the long molecular axis of the polymer side chain to maximize the conformational freedom of the attached LC species. Since this pioneering work, others have continued to research the hydrogen bonding complexion of LC moieties to homopolymers, creating homopolymer-based supramolecular systems demonstrating LC phase behavior,185,192 and orientational switching of the microstructure under applied electric,237 and magnetic fields.238 It is important to emphasize that the hydrogen bonding strength relative to the polymer backbone-LC moiety repulsion force is a critical parameter in determining the morphology of the supramolecule. Microphase-separated, mesomorphous morphologies can only be achieved if the hydrogen bonding force is significantly stronger than the repulsive force.239Extending this molecular design concept to diblock copolymers, Ruokolainen et al. demonstrated a supramolecular side chain LCBCP created by hydrogen bonding 3-pentadecylphenol (PDP), a mesogenic side group, to the 4VP units of a PS-b-P4VP diblock copolymer.184 The resulting supramolecule self-assembles into rich morphologies characterized by hierarchical ordering, in which the BCP assembles into microdomains with a periodicity of tens of nm, while the mesogenic species assembles into a smectic phase with a periodicity of several nm within the P4VP microdomain. The hierarchical assembly results in a lamellar-within-lamellar morphology that closely resembles results obtained in covalently bonded systems, thereby proving the viability of hydrogen bonding to create side chain LCBCPs. This concept has been extended to other diblock copolymer systems to create other hierarchically ordered morphologies, such as lamellar-within-spherical, lamellar-within-cylindrical, lamellar-within-perforated lamellar, spherical-within-lamellar, cylindrical-within-lamellar, and gyroid-within-lamellar.184,185Besides using pyridine units as the host for hydrogen bonding, a variety of other monomer units have been explored, such as poly(vinyl phenol) (PVP), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) blocks.237,240,241 Ober et al. have used several poly(styrene-b-acrylic acid) BCPs with a wide range of molecular weights and imidazole-terminated mesogenic side groups to form hydrogen bonded complexes. It was found that there exists a critical blend ratio below which LC mesophase formation does not occur.242 Chen et al. constructed supramolecular LCBCPs by hydrogen bonding a dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (DBSA) moiety to poly(1,4-butadiene-b-ethylene oxide) (PB-b-PEO) to create PB-b-PEO(DBSA) coil–comb complexes.240Recently, much research effort have been directed at incorporating more exotic and functional LC moieties into supramolecular LCBCPs. Cholesterol derived molecules have been attached to BCPs via hydrogen bonding in an attempt to create induced chirality in the BCP morphology. Ikkala et al. hydrogen bonded cholesteryl hemisuccinate to PS-b-P4VP, which formed microphase smectic A structures within the BCP lamellae.243 ten Brinke et al. have incorporated several para-substituted alkyl and alkoxyl phenylazophenol small molecules into PS-b-P4VP. These small molecules contain photo-responsive azobenzene groups which can potentially introduce photophysical properties to supramolecular LCBCPs. The resulting complexes have shown structural and thermal properties similar to the previously studied PS-b-P4VP(PDP) system.244 Osuji et al. have investigated the incorporation of LC small molecules that align with externally applied electric and magnetic fields into supramolecular LCBCPs.237,238,242 In one study, a supramolecule comprised of PS-b-PAA and an imidazole-terminated hydrogen bonding mesogenic group demonstrated alignment under applied AC electric fields of 1–2 V μm−1 in minutes, while cooling from a temperature above the order–disorder transition temperature of the supramolecule.237 It was also possible to orient the BCP below the order–disorder transition temperature but above the glass transition temperature of both blocks. It was suggested that the low temperature alignment phenomenon is due to unbounded mesogens with higher mobilities that accelerate the alignment of bound mesogens.237 In another study, the same supramolecular LCBCP was aligned using a 5T external magnetic field, again relying on the mobility of unbounded mesogens by loading beyond the saturation capacity of the polymer backbone (Fig. 20).242 The mesogens adopted a homeotropic configuration at intermediate stoichiometry that transitioned to homogeneous at higher stoichiometry (Fig. 20). Fig. 20  Magnetic field alignment of a supramolecular LCBCP. (a) molecular architecture and (b) hydrogen bonding configuration of the supramolecule. (c) SAXS, (d) schematic and (e) TEM image of the supramolecular LCBCP after magnetic field alignment. Adapted with permission from C. O. Osuji, C. Y. Chao, C. K. Ober and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 3114–3117. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 3.5.2 Organic semiconductors in supramolecules and nanocomposites. Organic–inorganic hybrid devices can potentially take advantage of the strengths of both classes of materials. For example, given the high extinction coefficients and tunable absorbance spectrums of nanoparticles, when they are used as the acceptor in place of fullerenes in bulk heterojunctions (BHJs), they can increase the overall light absorbance and broaden the overall absorbance spectrum of the active layer.245 However, they have historically exhibited lower power conversion efficiency (PCE) than either purely organic or purely inorganic solar cells. Early work by Alivisatos et al. investigating P3HT–CdSe blends demonstrated the feasibility of this system and achieved PCEs of 1.7%. They also showed that the PCE can be enhanced by the use of anisotropic nanorods instead of spherical nanoparticles.245 This is due to the increased distance that charges can travel within a single particle before needing to “hop” to another. Since the nanorods tend to aggregate and prefer to lie parallel to the substrate in this particular system, they are not ideal for transporting charge vertically to the electrode. With this in mind, conjugated polymers blended with tetrapods246 and hyperbranched nanocrystals247 have been investigated and achieved PCEs of up to 2.2%. Blends of low band-gap conjugated polymers and semiconducting nanoparticles have achieved efficiencies above 3%.248Semiconducting nanoparticles are not the only class of nanoparticles that have been blended with small molecule organic semiconductors or conjugated polymers to improve electronic and optical properties. Recently, the addition of metallic (plasmonic) nanoparticles has been shown to enhance photo conversion efficiency.249–252 This improvement is attributed to an enhancement of the light absorption, a reduction in the radiative decay, and a reduction in non-radiative loss mechanisms.253Improvements in devices require optimization of morphology of the blend, band gaps and electronic coupling between nanoparticles and organic building blocks. Nanostructured blends of conductive organic building blocks and inorganic nanoparticles are promising for the fabrication of low-cost and flexible electronic devices. However, the current bottleneck is to increase the charge mobility of nanoparticles that require the exchange of large, insulating ligands for shorter, conductive ones.254 For nanocomposites, conducting ligands were used to lower the barrier to charge transport between particles and to improve the electronic coupling at the organic–inorganic interface.255 The use of organic semiconducting ligands has also been applied to nanowires.256 There have been limited studies on structural control over the assemblies of nanoparticles covered with conductive ligands in nanocomposites. Energetically, favorable ligand–polymer interactions need to be engineered to solubilized conductive-ligand covered nanoparticles within polymeric matrices.Small molecule organic semiconductors have many advantages over their polymer analogs, including their high purity and well-defined electronic properties.257–260 They provide unique opportunities to fabricate low cost, high performance organoelectronic devices such as organic photovoltaics (OPVs) or organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).257,261–264 However, it remains a challenge to solution process them into uniform films, due to dewetting and their strong tendency to crystallize.258,265 Organic semiconductor-containing supramolecules can potentially overcome these limitations and open up new routes to tailor electronic properties of nanocomposites in addition to structural control discussed earlier in this contribution.The supramolecular approach provides a new avenue to solution process organic semiconductors as well as to assemble them into nanoscopic structures in thin films to fabricate organic electronics.266–268 It circumvents some of the synthetic challenges inherent to the preparation of conjugated BCPs, and enables the tailoring of electronic properties without the need to synthesize new polymers. Kinetically, the non-covalent linking of an organic semiconductor to a BCP block preserves the chain mobility of the polymer necessary for ordered self-assembly during annealing, while constraining crystallization of the small molecule to within the microdomains. Blends of inert polymers and organic semiconductors can be used to improve the solution processability of the semiconductor.269 Nanostructured thin films were recently obtained in blends of regioregular P3HT-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) rod-coil block copolymers with PCBM (Fig. 21).267 Favorable interactions between PCBM and P4VP sequestered PCBM within the P4VP microdomains and led to electron donor/electron acceptor networks with high thermal stability (Fig. 21a–c). Oligothiophene-containing supramolecules can overcome the solution processability limitation of organic semiconductors and can be spin-casted into uniform films with low surface roughness without compromising charge mobility (Fig. 22).268 Fig. 21  (a) P3HT-b-P4VP(PCBM) supramolecules used for the polymer bulk heterojunction active layer. (b) Top-view TEM image (iodine-stained) and (c) the cross-sectional view of the active layer of a standard device. The active layer exhibits the same percolating structure in lateral and perpendicular projections. (d–e) Current–voltage curves of a solar cell with the supramolecular active layer. Measurements were done under dark and under AM1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination using either (d) the standard or (e) the inverted device structure. The measurements were done before and after annealing at 150 °C for 12 h. Adapted with permission from N. Sary et al. Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 763–768. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.  Fig. 22  (a) Chemical structure of a PS-b-P4VP(4T) supramolecule. (b) TEM image of a PS-b-P4VP(4T) supramolecule annealed below the melting point of 4T. (c) I–V curves of OFET devices with 4T and P4VP(4T) active layers. Adapted with permission from B. J. Rancatore et al. ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2721–2729. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. However, there are only limited studies on the phase behavior of organic-semiconductor-containing supramolecules and in general, supramolecules containing small molecules that possess strong intermolecular interactions.243,268,270 Small molecules may crystallize and macrophase separate from the BCP matrix.243,271 This reduces the stoichiometry between the small molecule and the polymer repeat unit, which changes the polymer chain conformation, the chain rigidity, the interaction parameters between the two blocks and the volume fraction of the comb block. Kinetically, the chain architecture and mobility strongly depend on the molecular packing of the attached small molecules and the hierarchical assemblies may also have pathway dependence. It is likely that multiple kinetically trapped states can be long-lived to capture non-equilibrium nanostructures.197,198,272 The effect of the small molecule on the chain architecture and mobility can potentially amplify the entropic effect on the phase behavior of supramolecular nanocomposites.4. Conclusion and perspectivesNanocomposites have opened up processing pathways to readily incorporate some properties offered by traditional hard materials without the commonly required high temperature, high vacuum processing conditions. This Review has highlighted some of the more recent progress in the field of BCPs and BCP-based supramolecules as templates for nanostructured polymer–inorganic hybrid nanocomposites. It is evident from the research over the last fifteen years that powerful design criteria are emerging for the generation of BCP-based nanocomposites with exquisite control over nanoparticle spatial organization. In situ synthesis methods have been extensively investigated to generate organic–inorganic hybrid materials with a rich variety of morphologies and compositions. These nanocomposites have high volume fractions of the inorganic component and have demonstrated their potential to be used for photocatalysis, dye-sensitized solar cells, and the fabrication of metamaterials.For the research based on nanocomposites containing preformed nanoparticles, particular emphasis has been devoted to modifying nanoparticle surface chemistry, size, and shape to tailor the thermodynamic driving forces in the assembly process. Fundamental understanding of the thermodynamics, i.e., the enthalpic and entropic contributions that take place during the self-assembly processes, has laid down a solid foundation for the fabrication of multidimensional nanoparticle arrays in BCP-based nanocomposites. In addition, recent developments in nanoparticle synthesis allow the generation of nanoparticles with a wide range of compositions and geometries for various applications. For example, 1-D chains and 2-D lattices of nanoparticles can be routinely assembled in BCP-based nanocomposite thin films that can be used for plasmonic waveguides,273 memory storage,274 and surface enhanced Raman scattering.204 Using the supramolecular approach discussed in Section 3, 3-D nanostructured arrays of nanoparticles without surface segregation can be achieved in thin films. These nanocomposite thin films containing 3-D arrays or networks of nanoparticles may demonstrate unique mechanical178 and optical275 properties. To generate electronically-active BCP–nanoparticle hybrid nanocomposites for electronics and energy harvesting devices, appropriate 3-D nanostructures of nanoparticles are required in the film. Additionally, the insulating ligand shell of the nanoparticles needs to be modified by electroactive small molecule/polymeric ligands to enhance the electronic coupling between individual particles to provide efficient 3-D percolation pathways as demanded by these devices. To expand the possibility of these nanocomposites for certain devices, the kinetics of the co-assemblies need to be further investigated to optimize processing parameters to gain access and control over morphologies in not only equilibrium but also kinetically-trapped states. Computational studies will continue to increase in importance in providing guidance not only on static structure, but also on the dynamics and non-equilibrium states of these systems. As small molecule synthesis and polymer synthetic methodology advance and become more mainstream, exciting new opportunities will emerge for the fabrication of next-generation smart nanocomposites that have multiple functionalities, stimuli-responsiveness, and tunable physical properties.We are only in the initial stages of these studies and there is a lot of potential waiting to be harnessed in the years to come. While the results are encouraging, a lot remains to be done in order to provide materials solutions that can facilitate the necessary advances in nanocomposite-based devices to become performance and cost competitive with existing technologies. As we approach these milestones, and as the system becomes more complex and the number of controllable variables escalate, experimentalists will face even greater challenges in manipulating these multiple component systems. Computational design and simulation to provide insights into the assembly process will be more important than ever. It is our hope that the readers take this Review as an inspiration to further advance this rising field and implement it in the fabrication of advanced functional materials.ReferencesW. D. Kingery and P. Vandiver, Ceramic Masterpieces. Art, Structure, Technology, Free Press, New York,  1986 Search PubMed .C. L. Choi and A. P. Alivisatos, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2010, 61, 369–389 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS .X. Peng, J. Wickham and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 5343–5344 CrossRef CAS .L. Manna, D. J. Milliron, A. Meisel, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 382–385 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2951–2959 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16851–16857 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .H. Zheng, R. K. Smith, Y.-W. Jun, C. Kisielowski, U. Dahmen and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2009, 324, 1309–1312 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Yuk, J. Park, P. Ercius, K. Kim, D. J. Hellebusch, M. F. Crommie, J. Y. Lee, A. Zettl and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2012, 336, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .H.-G. Liao, L. Cui, S. Whitelam and H. Zheng, Science, 2012, 336, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Alivisatos, K. P. Johnsson, X. G. Peng, T. E. Wilson, C. J. Loweth, M. P. Bruchez and P. G. Schultz, Nature, 1996, 382, 609–611 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic and J. J. Storhoff, Nature, 1996, 382, 607–609 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .K. Elteto, X. M. Lin and H. M. Jaeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 205412 CrossRef .G. Schmid and U. Simon, Chem. Commun., 2005, 697–710 RSC .T. P. Bigioni, X. M. Lin, T. T. Nguyen, E. I. Corwin, T. A. Witten and H. M. Jaeger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .K. E. Mueggenburg, X.-M. Lin, R. H. Goldsmith and H. M. Jaeger, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 656–660 CrossRef CAS .D. Nykypanchuk, M. M. Maye, D. van der Lelie and O. Gang, Nature, 2008, 451, 549–552 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Baker, A. Widmer-Cooper, M. F. Toney, P. L. Geissler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .M. Grzelczak, J. Vermant, E. M. Furst and L. M. Liz-Marzan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3591–3605 CrossRef CAS .Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Small, 2011, 7, 2133–2146 CrossRef CAS .Z. Nie, A. Petukhova and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 15–25 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Cheng, C. A. Ross, V. Z. H. Chan, E. L. Thomas, R. G. H. Lammertink and G. J. Vancso, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1174–1178 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Ling, I. Y. Phang, W. Maijenburg, H. Schonherr, D. N. Reinhoudt, G. J. Vancso and J. Huskens, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 983–985 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Glotzer and M. J. Solomon, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 557–562 CrossRef .A. N. Shipway, E. Katz and I. Willner, ChemPhysChem, 2000, 1, 18–52 CrossRef CAS .Y. N. Xia, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 693–713 CrossRef CAS .V. V. Zhirnov and D. J. C. Herr, Computer, 2001, 34, 34–43 CrossRef .W. A. Lopes and H. M. Jaeger, Nature, 2001, 414, 735–738 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Bockstaller, Y. Lapetnikov, S. Margel and E. L. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5276–5277 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Hawker and T. P. Russell, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 952–966 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Kim, J. J. Chiu, G. R. Yi, D. J. Pine and E. J. Kramer, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2618–2622 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lin, A. Boker, J. B. He, K. Sill, H. Q. Xiang, C. Abetz, X. F. Li, J. Wang, T. Emrick, S. Long, Q. Wang, A. Balazs and T. P. Russell, Nature, 2005, 434, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Chiu, B. J. Kim, E. J. Kramer and D. J. Pine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5036–5037 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Warren, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Warren, L. C. Messina, L. S. Slaughter, M. Kamperman, Q. Zhou, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Science, 2008, 320, 1748–1752 CrossRef CAS .E. Huang, L. Rockford, T. P. Russell and C. J. Hawker, Nature, 1998, 395, 757 CrossRef CAS .T. Xu, H. C. Kim, J. DeRouchey, C. Seney, C. Levesque, P. Martin, C. M. Stafford and T. P. Russell, Polymer, 2001, 42, 9091–9095 CrossRef CAS .T. Thurn-Albrecht, J. DeRouchey, T. P. Russell and H. M. Jaeger, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3250–3253 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Kim, M. J. Misner, T. Xu, M. Kimura and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 226–231 CrossRef CAS .T. Thurn-Albrecht, J. Schotter, C. A. Kastle, N. Emley, T. Shibauchi, L. Krusin-Elbaum, K. Guarini, C. T. Black, M. T. Tuominen and T. P. Russell, Science, 2000, 290, 2126–2129 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Bockstaller, R. A. Mickiewicz and E. L. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1331–1349 CrossRef CAS .A. Haryono and W. H. Binder, Small, 2006, 2, 600–611 CrossRef CAS .A. B. R. Mayer, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2001, 12, 96–106 CrossRef CAS .V. Sankaran, C. C. Cummins, R. R. Schrock, R. E. Cohen and R. J. Silbey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 6858–6859 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Cummins, M. D. Beachy, R. R. Schrock, M. G. Vale, V. Sankaran and R. E. Cohen, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 1153–1163 CrossRef CAS .Y. N. C. Chan, G. S. W. Craig, R. R. Schrock and R. E. Cohen, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 885–894 CrossRef CAS .Y. N. C. Chan, R. R. Schrock and R. E. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 7295–7296 CrossRef .Y. N. C. Chan, R. R. Schrock and R. E. Cohen, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 24–27 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Cummins, R. R. Schrock and R. E. Cohen, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .T. Hashimoto, M. Harada and N. Sakamoto, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 6867–6870 CrossRef CAS .H. Arora, P. Du, K. W. Tan, J. K. Hyun, J. Grazul, H. L. Xin, D. A. Muller, M. O. Thompson and U. Wiesner, Science, 2010, 330, 214–219 CrossRef CAS .P. Du, M. Q. Li, K. Douki, X. F. Li, C. R. W. Garcia, A. Jain, D. M. Smilgies, L. J. Fetters, S. M. Gruner, U. Wiesner and C. K. Ober, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 953–957 CrossRef CAS .P. F. W. Simon, R. Ulrich, H. W. Spiess and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3464–3486 CrossRef CAS .M. Templin, A. Franck, A. DuChesne, H. Leist, Y. M. Zhang, R. Ulrich, V. Schadler and U. Wiesner, Science, 1997, 278, 1795–1798 CrossRef CAS .H. C. Kim, X. Jia, C. M. Stafford, D. H. Kim, T. J. McCarthy, M. Tuominen, C. J. Hawker and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 795–797 CrossRef CAS .M.-A. Cha, C. Shin, D. Kannaiyan, Y. H. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu, D. Y. Ryu and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7245–7250 RSC .J. Peng, C. Mao, J. Kim and D. H. Kim, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1857–1861 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Kim, M. J. Misner, L. Yang, O. Gang, B. M. Ocko and T. P. Russell, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8473–8479 CrossRef CAS .B. H. Sohn and B. H. Seo, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1752–1757 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Kim, X. Q. Jia, Z. Q. Lin, K. W. Guarini and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 702–706 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Lee, J. Lee, Y. J. Jang, J. Lee, Y. H. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu, S. S. Lee and D. H. Kim, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 57–60 RSC .J. Y. Lee, J. Lee, Y. J. Jang, J. Lee, Y. H. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu, C. Park and D. H. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1782–1784 RSC .C. Garcia, Y. M. Zhang, F. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1526–1530 CrossRef CAS .J. Joo, J. Shim, H. Seo, N. Jug, U. Wiesner, J. Lee and S. Jeon, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 3032–3037 CrossRef CAS .M. Nedelcu, J. Lee, E. J. W. Crossland, S. C. Warren, M. C. Orilall, S. Guldin, S. Huettner, C. Ducati, D. Eder, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 134–139 RSC .P. Docampo, S. Guldin, M. Stefik, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, S. Huettner, H. Sai, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS .J. Chai, F. Huo, Z. Zheng, L. R. Giam, W. Shim and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 20202–20206 CrossRef CAS .M. Oh and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5492–5494 CrossRef CAS .R. B. Thompson, V. V. Ginzburg, M. W. Matsen and A. C. Balazs, Science, 2001, 292, 2469–2472 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Balazs, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Science, 2006, 314, 1107–1110 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Lee, R. B. Thompson, D. Jasnow and A. C. Balazs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 155503 CrossRef .J. Y. Lee, Z. Y. Shou and A. C. Balazs, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7730–7739 CrossRef CAS .V. Lauter-Pasyuk, H. J. Lauter, D. Ausserre, Y. Gallot, V. Cabuil, E. I. Kornilov and B. Hamdoun, Physica B, 1997, 241, 1092–1094 CrossRef .V. Lauter-Pasyuk, H. J. Lauter, D. Ausserre, Y. Gallot, V. Cabuil, B. Hamdoun and E. I. Kornilov, Physica B, 1998, 248, 243–245 CrossRef CAS .R. Shenhar, T. B. Norsten and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 657–669 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Fogg, L. H. Radzilowski, R. Blanski, R. R. Schrock and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 417–426 CrossRef CAS .C. Xu, K. Ohno, V. Ladmiral and R. J. Composto, Polymer, 2008, 49, 3568–3577 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Kim, J. Bang, C. J. Hawker and E. J. Kramer, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4108–4114 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Kim, J. Bang, C. J. Hawker, J. J. Chiu, D. J. Pine, S. G. Jang, S.-M. Yang and E. J. Kramer, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12693–12703 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Chiu, B. J. Kim, G.-R. Yi, J. Bang, E. J. Kramer and D. J. Pine, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3361–3365 CrossRef CAS .S. W. Sides, B. J. Kim, E. J. Kramer and G. H. Fredrickson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 250601 CrossRef .P. Akcora, H. Liu, S. K. Kumar, J. Moll, Y. Li, B. C. Benicewicz, L. S. Schadler, D. Acehan, A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, V. Pryamitsyn, V. Ganesan, J. Ilavsky, P. Thiyagarajan, R. H. Colby and J. F. Douglas, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 354–359 CrossRef CAS .A. Jayaraman and K. S. Schweizer, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8423–8434 CrossRef CAS .N. Nair and A. Jayaraman, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8251–8263 CrossRef CAS .T. B. Martin, A. Seifpour and A. Jayaraman, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5952–5964 RSC .S. C. Warren, L. C. Messina, L. S. Slaughter, M. Kamperman, Q. Zhou, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Science, 2008, 320, 1748–1752 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Jang, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 133, 16986–16996 CrossRef .Y. Lin, V. K. Daga, E. R. Anderson, S. P. Gido and J. J. Watkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6513–6516 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Jang, A. Khan, C. J. Hawker and E. J. Kramer, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1553–1561 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Lee, Z. Shou and A. C. Balazs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 136103 CrossRef .J. Huh, V. V. Ginzburg and A. C. Balazs, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 8085–8096 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Lee, R. B. Thompson, D. Jasnow and A. C. Balazs, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 4855–4858 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Spontak, R. Shankar, M. K. Bowman, A. S. Krishnan, M. W. Hamersky, J. Samseth, M. R. Bockstaller and K. Rasmussen, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS .J. Listak and M. R. Bockstaller, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5820–5825 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Zehner, W. A. Lopes, T. L. Morkved, H. Jaeger and L. R. Sita, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 241–244 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Binder, C. Kluger, C. J. Straif and G. Friedbacher, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 9405–9410 CrossRef CAS .T. Thurn-Albrecht, R. Steiner, J. DeRouchey, C. M. Stafford, E. Huang, M. Bal, M. Tuominen, C. J. Hawker and T. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 787–791 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Misner, H. Skaff, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 221–224 CrossRef CAS .Q. L. Zhang, T. Xu, D. Butterfield, M. J. Misner, D. Y. Ryu, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 357–361 CrossRef CAS .Q. Li, J. He, E. Glogowski, X. Li, J. Wang, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1462–1466 CrossRef CAS .H. Kang, F. A. Detcheverry, A. N. Mangham, M. P. Stoykovich, K. C. Daoulas, R. J. Hamers, M. Mueller, J. J. de Pablo and P. F. Nealey, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 148303 CrossRef .S. C. Park, B. J. Kim, C. J. Hawker, E. J. Kramer, J. Bang and J. S. Ha, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8119–8124 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, J. Y. Lee and D. H. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 585–591 CrossRef CAS .L. Meli, Y. Li, K. T. Lim, K. P. Johnston and P. F. Green, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6713–6720 CrossRef CAS .A. Arceo, L. Meli and P. F. Green, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2271–2276 CrossRef CAS .L. Meli, A. Arceo and P. F. Green, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 533–537 RSC .P. F. Green, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7914–7926 RSC .S. Gupta, Q. L. Zhang, T. Emrick, A. C. Balazs and T. P. Russell, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 229–233 CrossRef CAS .J. Kim and P. F. Green, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10452–10456 CrossRef CAS .M. Yoo, S. Kim, S. G. Jang, S.-H. Choi, H. Yang, E. J. Kramer, W. B. Lee, B. J. Kim and J. Bang, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9356–9365 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, Q. He, Y. Cui and J. Li, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 412–417 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, Q. He, Y. Yang, H. Mohwald and J. Li, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7254–7256 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, Y. Cui, K. Wang, Q. He, X. Yan and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3134–3140 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, Q. He, Y. Cui, K. Wang, X. Zhang and J. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 2224–2229 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2006, 439, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Shevchenko, M. Ringler, A. Schwemer, D. V. Talapin, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3274–3275 CrossRef CAS .B. H. Sohn, J. M. Choi, S. I. Yoo, S. H. Yun, W. C. Zin, J. C. Jung, M. Kanehara, T. Hirata and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6368–6369 CrossRef CAS .H. Acharya, J. Sung, B.-H. Sohn, D. H. Kim, K. Tamada and C. Park, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4248–4255 CrossRef CAS .H. Acharya, J. Sung, I. Bae, T. Kim, D. H. Kim and C. Park, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14695–14701 CrossRef CAS .M. Haridas and J. K. Basu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 415202 CrossRef CAS .M. Haridas, L. N. Tripathi and J. K. Basu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 063305 CrossRef .J. Y. Chun and J. W. Lee, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 4251–4263 CrossRef CAS .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .M. J. A. Hore and R. J. Composto, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6941–6949 CrossRef CAS .Q. Liu, Y. Cui, D. Gardner, X. Li, S. He and I. I. Smalyukh, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1347–1353 CrossRef CAS .C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .P. G. Bolhuis, A. Stroobants, D. Frenkel and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, J. Chem. Phys, 1997, 107, 1551 CrossRef CAS .L.-S. Li, J. Walda, L. Manna and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 557–560 CrossRef CAS .N. R. Jana, L. A. Gearheart, S. O. Obare, C. J. Johnson, K. J. Edler, S. Mann and C. J. Murphy, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2909–2912 RSC .C.-C. Kang, C.-W. Lai, H.-C. Peng, J.-J. Shyue and P.-T. Chou, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 750–756 CrossRef CAS .B. Nikoobakht, Z. L. Wang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8635–8640 CrossRef CAS .L.-S. Li and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 408–411 CrossRef CAS .A. Ghezelbash, B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1832–1836 CrossRef CAS .R. Blaak, B. M. Mulder and D. Frenkel, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 5486–5492 CrossRef CAS .B. S. John, A. Stroock and F. a. Escobedo, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 9383–9389 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2006, 439, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .T. Ming, X. Kou, H. Chen, T. Wang, H.-L. Tam, K.-W. Cheah, J.-Y. Chen and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9685–9690 CrossRef CAS .F. Dumestre, B. Chaudret, C. Amiens, M. Respaud, P. Fejes, P. Renaud and P. Zurcher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5213–5216 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B. Murray, A. Kornowski, S. Förster and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12984–12988 CrossRef CAS .D. Baranov, A. Fiore, M. van Huis, C. Giannini, A. Falqui, U. Lafont, H. Zandbergen, M. Zanella, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 743–749 CrossRef CAS .M. Zanella, G. Bertoni, I. R. Franchini, R. Brescia, D. Baranov and L. Manna, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 203–205 RSC .D. Li, Y. J. Jang, J. Lee, J.-E. Lee, S. T. Kochuveedu and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16453–16460 RSC .E. Dujardin, S. Mann, L.-B. Hsin and C. R. C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1264–1265 RSC .M. R. Jones, R. J. Macfarlane, B. Lee, J. Zhang, K. L. Young, A. J. Senesi and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 913–917 CrossRef CAS .K. G. Thomas, S. Barazzouk, B. I. Ipe, S. T. S. Joseph and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13066–13068 CrossRef CAS .D. Fava, Z. Nie, M. A. Winnik and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4318–4322 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Zareie, X. Xu and M. B. Cortie, Small, 2007, 3, 139–145 CrossRef CAS .P. R. Selvakannan, E. Dumas, F. Dumur, C. Péchoux, P. Beaunier, A. Etcheberry, F. Sécheresse, H. Remita and C. R. Mayer, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 349, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Walker and V. K. Gupta, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 435603 CrossRef .D. Fava, M. A. Winnik and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2571–2573 RSC .T. S. Sreeprasad, A. K. Samal and T. Pradeep, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4589–4599 CrossRef CAS .H.-S. Park, A. Agarwal, N. A. Kotov and O. D. Lavrentovich, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 13833–13837 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Orendorff, T. M. Alam, D. Y. Sasaki, B. C. Bunker and J. A. Voigt, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 971–983 CrossRef CAS .M. Rycenga, J. M. McLellan and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2416–2420 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Horsch, M. H. Lamm and S. C. Glotzer, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1341–1346 CrossRef .M. A. Horsch, Z. Zhang and S. C. Glotzer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 056105 CrossRef .T. D. Nguyen and S. C. Glotzer, Small, 2009, 5, 2092–2098 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Horsch, Z. Zhang and S. C. Glotzer, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 945 RSC .T. D. Nguyen and S. C. Glotzer, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2585–2594 CrossRef CAS .L. He, L. Zhang, Y. Ye and H. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 7189–7200 CrossRef CAS .A. Figuerola, I. R. Franchini, A. Fiore, R. Mastria, A. Falqui, G. Bertoni, S. Bals, G. Van Tendeloo, S. Kudera, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 550–554 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Ryan, A. Mastroianni, K. A. Stancil, H. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1479–1482 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Titov and P. Král, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3605–3612 CrossRef CAS .E. Rossitto, O. Lecarme, L. Latu-Romain, K. Berton, T. Pinedo-Rivera, T. Jiu, P. Reiss and D. Peyrade, Microelectron. Eng., 2009, 86, 828–831 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Murphy and C. J. Orendorff, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2173–2177 CrossRef CAS .P. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Xia, L. Tong, X. Xu and Y. Ying, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3145–3150 CrossRef CAS .E. Ploshnik, A. Salant, U. Banin and R. Shenhar, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2774–2779 CrossRef CAS .D. Nepal, M. S. Onses, K. Park, M. Jespersen, C. J. Thode, P. F. Nealey and R. A. Vaia, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5693–5701 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cui, M. T. Björk, J. A. Liddle, C. Sönnichsen, B. Boussert and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1093–1098 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Teich-McGoldrick, M. Bellanger, M. Caussanel, L. Tsetseris, S. T. Pantelides, S. C. Glotzer and R. D. Schrimpf, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3683–3688 CrossRef CAS .S. Gupta, Q. Zhang, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2066–2069 CrossRef CAS .F. Kim, S. Kwan, J. Akana and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4360–4361 CrossRef CAS .J. He, Q. Zhang, S. Gupta, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and P. Thiyagarajan, Small, 2007, 3, 1214–1217 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Correa-Duarte, J. Pérez-Juste, A. Sánchez-Iglesias, M. Giersig and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4375–4378 CrossRef CAS .K. Chen and Y.-Q. Ma, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 7783 CrossRef CAS .Z. Shou, G. A. Buxton and A. C. Balazs, Compos. Interfaces, 2003, 10, 343–368 CrossRef CAS .Q.-Y. Tang and Y.-Q. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 10117–10120 CrossRef CAS .L. He, L. Zhang, H. Chen and H. Liang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3403–3410 CrossRef CAS .L. He, L. Zhang and H. Liang, Polymer, 2010, 51, 3303–3314 CrossRef CAS .L.-T. Yan, N. Popp, S.-K. Ghosh and A. Böker, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 913–920 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Deshmukh, Y. Liu and R. J. Composto, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3662–3668 CrossRef CAS .J. Ruokolainen, M. Saariaho, O. Ikkala, G. ten Brinke, E. L. Thomas, M. Torkkeli and R. Serimaa, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 1152–1158 CrossRef CAS .J. Ruokolainen, G. ten Brinke and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 777–780 CrossRef CAS .H. Kosonen, S. Valkama, J. Hartikainen, H. Eerikainen, M. Torkkeli, K. Jokela, R. Serimaa, F. Sundholm, G. ten Brinke and O. Ikkala, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 10149–10154 CrossRef CAS .H. Kosonen, S. Valkama, J. Ruokolainen, M. Torkkeli, R. Serimaa, G. ten Brinke and O. Ikkala, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2003, 10, 69–75 CrossRef CAS .E. Polushkin, G. A. van Ekenstein, I. Dolbnya, W. Bras, O. Ikkala and G. ten Brinke, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 1421–1423 CrossRef CAS .G. A. van Ekenstein, E. Polushkin, H. Nijland, O. Ikkala and G. ten Brinke, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 3684–3688 CrossRef CAS .S. Valkama, T. Ruotsalainen, A. Nykanen, A. Laiho, H. Kosonen, G. ten Brinke, O. Ikkala and J. Ruokolainen, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 9327–9336 CrossRef CAS .G. ten Brinke, J. Ruokolainen and O. Ikkala, in Hydrogen Bonded Polymers, ed. W. Binder, Editon edn,  2007, vol. 207, pp. 113–177 Search PubMed .O. Ikkala, M. Knaapila, J. Ruokolainen, M. Torkkeli, R. Serimaa, K. Jokela, L. Horsburgh, A. Monkman and G. ten Brinke, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1206–1210 CrossRef CAS .O. Ikkala and G. ten Brinke, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2131–2137 RSC .K. de Moel, R. Maki-Ontto, M. Stamm, O. Ikkala and G. ten Brinke, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 2892–2900 CrossRef CAS .W. van Zoelen and G. ten Brinke, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1568–1582 RSC .W. van Zoelen, T. Asumaa, J. Ruokolainen, O. Ikkala and G. ten Brinke, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3199–3208 CrossRef CAS .S.-H. Tung, N. C. Kalarickal, J. W. Mays and T. Xu, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6453–6462 CrossRef CAS .J. Kao, J. Tingsanchali and T. Xu, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4392–4400 CrossRef CAS .W. van Zoelen, E. Polushkin and G. ten Brinke, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8807–8814 CrossRef CAS .B. Nandan, M. K. Vyas, M. Boehme and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2463–2473 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, K. Thorkelsson, A. J. Mastroianni, T. Schilling, J. M. Luther, B. J. Rancatore, K. Matsunaga, H. Jinnai, Y. Wu, D. Poulsen, J. M. J. Fréchet, A. Paul Alivisatos and T. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 979–985 CrossRef CAS .K. Thorkelsson, B. J. Rancatore, C. E. Mauldin, J. M. Luther, D. Poulsen, J. M. J. Freacutechet, A. P. Alivisatos and X. Ting, Proceedings 2010 10th IEEE International Conference on Nanotechnology and Joint Symposium with Nano Korea 2010 KINTEX (IEEE-NANO 2010), 2010, 51–55.J. Kao, P. Bai, V. P. Chuang, Z. Jiang, P. Ercius and T. Xu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2610–2618 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, C. S. Levin and N. J. Halas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14992–14993 CrossRef CAS .C.-F. Chen, S.-D. Tzeng, H.-Y. Chen, K.-J. Lin and S. Gwo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 824–826 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Tan, M. J. Campolongo, D. Luo and W. Cheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .K. Thorkelsson, A. J. Mastroianni, P. Ercius and T. Xu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 498–504 CrossRef CAS .F. Reinitzer, Chem. Monthly, 1888, 9, 20 CrossRef .N. Tamaoki, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1135–1147 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Sheraw, L. Zhou, J. R. Huang, D. J. Gundlach, T. N. Jackson, M. G. Kane, I. G. Hill, M. S. Hammond, J. Campi, B. K. Greening, J. Francl and J. West, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1088 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Woltman, G. D. Jay and G. P. Crawford, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 929–938 CrossRef CAS .H. Finkelmann, M. Happ, M. Portugal and H. Ringsdorf, Makromol. Chem. Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1978, 179, 2541–2544 CAS .H. Finkelmann, H. Ringsdorf, W. Siol and J. H. Wendorff, Makromol. Chem. Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1978, 179, 829–832 CAS .B. Gallot, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1996, 21, 1035–1088 CrossRef CAS .B. Gallot, M. Fafiotte, A. Fissi and O. Pieroni, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1996, 17, 493–501 CrossRef CAS .B. Gallot and F. Monnet, Eur. Polym. J., 1996, 32, 147–151 CrossRef CAS .G. P. Mao, J. G. Wang, S. R. Clingman, C. K. Ober, J. T. Chen and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2556–2567 CrossRef CAS .M. Yamada, T. Iguchi, A. Hirao, S. Nakahama and J. Watanabe, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .O. Francescangeli, D. Rinaldi, M. Laus, G. Galli and B. Gallot, J. Phys. II, 1996, 6, 77–89 CrossRef CAS .M. Walther and H. Finkelmann, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1996, 21, 951–979 CrossRef CAS .M. Anthamatten and P. T. Hammond, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 8066–8076 CrossRef CAS .M. Anthamatten and P. T. Hammond, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2001, 39, 2671–2691 CrossRef CAS .I. W. Hamley, V. Castelletto, P. Parras, Z. B. Lu, C. T. Imrie and T. Itoh, Soft Matter, 2005, 1, 355–363 RSC .G. P. Mao, J. G. Wang, C. K. Ober, M. Brehmer, M. J. O'Rourke and E. L. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 1538–1545 CrossRef CAS .P. W. Majewski, M. Gopinadhan and C. O. Osuji, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 2–8 CrossRef CAS .F. Weigert, Verh. Dtsch. Phys. Ges., 1919, 21, 479–491 CAS .Y. Morikawa, S. Nagano, K. Watanabe, K. Kamata, T. Iyoda and T. Seki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 883–886 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, S. Asaoka, A. Shishido, T. Iyoda and T. Ikeda, Small, 2007, 3, 768–771 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu and T. Ikeda, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2149–2180 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, T. Kobayashi and G.-H. Hu, Polymer, 2011, 52, 1554–1561 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, A. Shishido, T. Iyoda and T. Ikeda, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 927–931 CrossRef CAS .A. F. Thunemann, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 1473–1572 CrossRef CAS .U. S. Schubert and C. Eschbaumer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2893–2926 Search PubMed .F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Pollino and M. Weck, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 193–207 RSC .T. Kato and J. M. J. Frechét, Macromolecules, 1989, 22, 3818–3819 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Chao, X. F. Li, C. K. Ober, C. Osuji and E. L. Thomas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .M. Gopinadhan, P. W. Majewski, E. S. Beach and C. O. Osuji, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 184–189 CrossRef CAS .J. Ruokolainen, M. Torkkeli, R. Serimaa, S. Vahvaselka, M. Saariaho, G. tenBrinke and O. Ikkala, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 6621–6628 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Chen, C. C. Ko and T. L. Lin, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 5619–5623 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Chao, X. F. Li and C. K. Ober, Pure Appl. Chem., 2004, 76, 1337–1343 CrossRef CAS .C. O. Osuji, C. Y. Chao, C. K. Ober and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 3114–3117 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Korhonen, T. Verho, P. Rannou and O. Ikkala, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1507–1514 CrossRef CAS .J. de Wit, G. A. van Ekenstein, E. Polushkin, K. Kvashnina, W. Bras, O. Ikkala and G. ten Brinke, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 4200–4204 CrossRef CAS .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .B. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961–963 CrossRef CAS .I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C.-P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 239–242 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Morfa, K. L. Rowlen, T. H. Reilly, M. J. Romero and J. van de Lagemaat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013504 CrossRef .G. D. Spyropoulos, M. Stylianakis, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Photonics Nanostruct. Fundam. Appl., 2011, 9, 184–189 CrossRef .A. P. Kulkarni, K. M. Noone, K. Munechika, S. R. Guyer and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .M. Stavytska-Barba, M. Salvador, A. Kulkarni, D. S. Ginger and A. M. Kelley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20788–20794 CAS .K. Munechika, Y. Chen, A. F. Tillack, A. P. Kulkarni, I. J.-L. Plante, A. M. Munro and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2598–2603 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, J. Puthussery, S. Gaik, R. Ihly, H. W. Hillhouse and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1960–1969 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Milliron, A. P. Alivisatos, C. Pitois, C. Edder and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 58–61 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Briseno, T. W. Holcombe, A. I. Boukai, E. C. Garnett, S. W. Shelton, J. M. J. Fréchet and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3693 CrossRef CAS .H. E. Katz, Z. Bao and S. L. Gilat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 359–369 CrossRef CAS .B. P. Rand, J. Xue, F. Yang and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233508 CrossRef .P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .Y. Matsuo, Y. Sato, T. Niinomi, I. Soga, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16048–16050 CrossRef CAS .J. Roncali, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1719–1730 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Tamayo, X.-D. Dang, B. Walker, J. Seo, T. Kent and T.-Q. Nguyen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 103301 CrossRef .M. Riede, T. Mueller, W. Tress, R. Schueppel and K. Leo, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424001 CrossRef CAS .B. Ma, C. H. Woo, Y. Miyamoto and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1413–1417 CrossRef CAS .F. Würthner, Z. Chen, F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Osswald, C.-C. You, P. Jonkheijm, J. V. Herrikhuyzen, A. P. H. J. Schenning, P. P. A. M. van der Schoot, E. W. Meijer, E. H. A. Beckers, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10611–10618 CrossRef .N. Sary, F. Richard, C. Brochon, N. Leclerc, P. Lévêque, J.-N. Audinot, S. Berson, T. Heiser, G. Hadziioannou and R. Mezzenga, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 763–768 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Rancatore, C. E. Mauldin, S.-H. Tung, C. Wang, A. Hexemer, J. Strzalka, J. M. J. Fréchet and T. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2721–2729 CrossRef CAS .J. Kang, N. Shin, D. Y. Jang, V. M. Prabhu and D. Y. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12273–12275 CrossRef CAS .J.-F. Gohy, S. Antoun, R. Sobry, G. Van den Bossche and R. Jérôme, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2000, 201, 31–41 CrossRef CAS .G. ten Brinke, J. Ruokolainen and O. Ikkala, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2007, 207, 113–177 CrossRef CAS .S.-H. Tung and T. Xu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5761–5765 CrossRef CAS .J. Chai, D. Wang, X. Fan and J. M. Buriak, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 500–506 CrossRef .A. J. Hong, C.-C. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Kim, F. Xiu, S. Ji, J. Zou, P. F. Nealey and K. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 224–229 CrossRef .C.-P. Huang, X.-G. Yin, Q.-J. Wang, H. Huang and Y.-Y. Zhu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 016402 CrossRef .Footnote† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Joseph Kao	Joseph Kao received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2009. He then joined the MSE graduate program at the University of California, Berkeley, where he received his MS in 2010 and continued to pursue a PhD degree. His doctoral research focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of hierarchical assembly of multidimensional nanoparticle in thin films of supramolecular nanocomposites towards hierarchically-structured functional hybrid materials.
Kari Thorkelsson	Kari Thorkelsson received his BS degrees in Materials Science and Engineering and Chemical Engineering in 2009; MS degrees in Materials Science and Engineering in 2011 from the University of California, Berkeley. His is currently pursuing a PhD degree. His research interests are functional nanocomposites based on anisotropic nanoparticles.
Peter Bai	Peter Bai received his BS degree in 2010 from Cornell University. He received his MS degree on size-dependent nanoparticle assembly in supramolecular thin films from the University of California, Berkeley. Currently he is a PhD student in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, investigating liquid crystalline block copolymer supramolecules.
Benjamin J. Rancatore	Benjamin Rancatore received his BS in Chemistry from the University of California, Santa Barbara, in 2008. He is currently a PhD student. His doctoral research focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of the self-assembly, stimuli-responsiveness, and electronic properties of organic semiconductor-based supramolecules and their blends with semiconducting nanoparticles.
Ting Xu	Ting Xu received an MS degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science in 1999 and a PhD from the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 2004. She was a joint postdoctoral fellow between the University of Pennsylvania and the Cold Neutrons for Biology and Technology Partnership Program at NIST. She is now an Associate Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering and the Department of Chemistry at UC Berkeley, and a Faculty Scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Her research efforts focus on fundamentally understanding the hierarchical self-assembly of complex systems toward functional hybrid materials.

 	Fig. 1  Hierarchical co-assemblies of nanocrystals, polymers, and small molecules toward functional nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electron micrographs of the (a) lamellar and (b) cylindrical nanocomposites containing (NORPHOS)-b-(MTD) diblock copolymers and in situ synthesized Au nanoclusters after thermal treatments. The Au nanoclusters were preferentially contained in the NORPHOS blocks. Scale bars = 100 nm in (a) and 50 nm in (b). Adapted with permission from Y. N. C. Chan, R. R. Schrock and R. E. Cohen, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 24–27. Copyright 1992 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic drawing of Wiesner’s group’s approach for synthesizing silica mesostructures in PI-b-PEO using hydrolysis reaction. (b) The electron microscopy results showing that the hydrophilic PEO block acts as an anchor for the metal alkoxide condensation products. The nanocomposite contained 0.57 g of metal oxides in 0.5 g of PI-b-PEO. (c) Qualitative silicon distribution of the same site as in (b) recorded by elemental mapping using the Si-L 2, 3 absorption edge. From H. Arora, P. Du, K. W. Tan, et al., Science, 2010, 330, 214–219 Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 
ΔG = (ΔHligand–polymer) − T(ΔScon + ΔStrans)	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Kramer et al. have shown that the spatial organization of Au nanoparticles coated by a mixture of low molecular weight thiol end-functional PS/P2VP can be controlled in PS-b-P2VP. Varying the PS and P2VP surface compositions (FPS) on the Au nanoparticles allows one to place the nanoparticles into PS or P2VP microdomains or at the interface. Adapted with permission from B. J. Kim, J. Bang, C. J. Hawker, et al., Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12693–12703. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Warren et al. showed that Pt nanoparticles modified with ionic liquid ligands, N,N-di-2-propoxyethyl-N-3-mercaptopropyl-N-methylammonium chloride, could be preferentially driven into one of the domains in poly(isoprene-b-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate), PI-b-PDMAEMA via ionic interactions. (a) Examination of the nanocomposite at higher magnification resolved individual Pt nanoparticles, seen as dark spots in the bright-field image of TEM. (Inset) A typical convergent-beam electron diffraction pattern (seen with an ultra-high-vacuum scanning transmission electron microscope) from a single Pt nanoparticles, demonstrating its crystallinity. (b) An annealed lamellar hybrid. (c) Pyrolysis of an annealed inverse hexagonal hybrid yields a mesoporous Pt–C composite. (Inset) Selected area electron diffraction, showing Pt expected face-centered cubic scattering profile. From S. C. Warren, L. C. Messina, L. S. Slaughter, M. Kamperman, Q. Zhou, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Science, 2008, 320, 1748–1752. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 6  Jang et al. reported a facile strategy to synthesize amphiphilic Au nanoparticles functionalized with an inner hydroxylated polyisoprene (PIOH) layer and an outer PS shell. The spatial organization of the Au nanoparticles can be precisely controlled by varying the number of the PIOH groups in the ligand. To prove this conclusion, they added small molecule additives that can hydrogen bond with the hydroxyl groups within the PIOH shell of the nanoparticle and compete with the P2VP chains. Interestingly, as the volume fraction of the small molecule reaches a critical value, no nanoparticles were found at the interface with the majority of nanoparticles being present in pea-pod-like nanoaggregates within the PS domains. Adapted with permission from S. G. Jang, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 133, 16986–16996. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Bright field TEM micrograph of a ternary blend of PS-b-PEP, ∼3.5 nm Au nanoparticles, and ∼21.5 nm SiO2 nanoparticles with the volume fraction of the nanoparticles around inorganic filling fraction φ = 0.02. In the TEM image, the Au nanoparticles appear as dark spots along the intermaterial dividing surface and the silica nanocrystals reside in the center of the PEP domains. Inset: schematic of the particle distribution (size proportions are changed for clarity). Adapted with permission from M. R. Bockstaller, Y. Lapetnikov, S. Margel and E. L. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5276–5277. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Electron micrograph of the unstained composite containing PS-b-PEP and PS capped Au nanoparticles depicting a chevron grain boundary structure (θ ≈ 30°). Particles were distributed uniformly in the PS microdomains. (b) Electron micrograph of the stained PS-b-PEP/Au depicting an omega-type grain boundary (Ω). The Au nanoparticles particle segregated to the high-energy regions across the boundary, resulting in the periodic array of nanoparticles aggregates. (c) Electron micrograph of the stained PS-b-PEP/Au depicting a T-junction grain boundary. The periodic array of aggregates reveals that particle accumulation occurred within the high-energy T-junctions across the boundary. Insets of panels a–c illustrate the particle distribution within the boundary region. Adapted with permission from J. Listak and M. R. Bockstaller, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5820–5825. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 
ΔG = (ΔHligand–polymer + ΔHligand–air + ΔHligand–substrate) − T(ΔScon + ΔStrans)	(2)

 	Fig. 9  (a) and (b) show the TEM images of PS-b-P2VP/Au nanoparticles A (1:1) and nanoparticle B (3:1) mixtures, respectively. Nanoparticles with ratios of dodecanethiol to 11-mercapto-1-undecanol ligand of 1:1 and 3:1 were used in this study, referred as nanoparticle A (1:1) and B (3:1), respectively. The samples were prepared on silicon wafers and solvent annealed, followed by thermal annealing on a hot stage under vacuum at 170 °C for 30 min and then quenched to room temperature in the nitrogen flow. Adapted with permission from Q. Li, J. He, E. Glogowski, X. Li, J. Wang, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1462–1466. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) and (b) show the cross-sectional TEM and secondary electron SEM images of the nanocomposite thin film containing PS-b-P2VP BCP and TOPO capped CdSe nanoparticles, respectively. The CdSe nanoparticles were found to cover the P2VP cylinders at the air–polymer and polymer–substrate interfaces. The sample was thermally annealed at 170 °C for 2 days. (c) Schematic representation of the assembly of CdSe nanoparticles on top of the P2VP cylinders. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature. Y. Lin, A. Boker, J. B. He, K. Sill, H. Q. Xiang, et al., Nature, 2005, 434, 55–59, copyright 2005.	 

 	Fig. 11  STEM images of the lateral distribution of nanoparticles in BCP (PS-b-PnBMA) thin films containing 3 wt% nanoparticles. (a) The image of a film containing PS capped Au nanoparticles of average diameter 5.1 nm is shown and the nanoparticles are found to be localized at the core of the edge dislocation. (b) A magnified image of (a). (c) The edge of a hole in a film containing Au nanoparticles of average diameter 1.8 nm. It is clear that the smaller Au nanoparticles were more homogeneously distributed in the film. Adapted with permission from J. Kim and P. F. Green, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10452–10456. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of an array of iron oxide nanoparticles surrounded by gold nanoparticles; (b) EDX spectra on gold and iron nanoparticles marked by circles and a cross in the enlarged TEM image, respectively. Adapted with permission from B. H. Sohn et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6368–6369. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Nanorod alignment on a device scale from controlled drying. Top row are SEM images at progressively higher magnification, and the bottom row are TEM images at progressively higher magnification. Adapted with permission from J. L. Baker et al. Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 195–201. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM images of “self-corralling” of alkane-covered CdSe nanorods in PMMA: (a) after solvent evaporation under an applied electric field; (b) after solvent evaporation without an applied electric field. The scale bar is 100 nm. Adapted with permission from S. Gupta, et al. Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2066–2069. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of a solvent-annealed PS-b-PMMA film containing PEG modified Au nanorods. The PS domains were selectively stained. (b) Higher magnification TEM image of the nanocomposite film showing the orientation of Au nanorods within PMMA lamellae. (c) Top-down view of the nanocomposite film shown in (a). (d) Schematic of Au nanorods within the lamellar PMMA domains of a PS-b-PMMA film. Adapted with permission from R. D. Deshmukh, Y. Liu and R. J. Composto, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3662–3668. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of a blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)2 and ∼4 nm CdSe (2 vol%) nanoparticles. The nanoparticles were well confined in the middle of the P4VP(PDP)2 blocks and formed nanoparticle sheets in the lamellae. (b) TEM image of a blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)3 and ∼5.4 nm PbS nanoparticles, showing the PbS nanoparticles arranged in a hexagonal grid. (c) Schematic diagram showing that the PbS nanoparticles were preferentially sequestered in the corners of the hexagons as shown in (b). (d–f) TEM images and schematic drawings of the blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)2 and ∼4 nm CdSe (2 vol%) nanoparticles quenched from (d) 50 °C, (e) 110 °C, and (f) 150 °C, during the heating and cooling cycles. The blend was heated from 50 to 160 °C and cooled down to 50 °C at a heating/cooling rate of 10 °C min−1. The nanoparticles were assembled in the center of P4VP(PDP)2 lamellae from 50 to 100 °C, at the interfaces between the polystyrene-rich and P4VP(PDP)2 lamellae at 110 °C and randomly distributed in the P4VP(PDP)2 lamellae at 150 °C once the population of the hydrogen bonding between PDP and 4VP decreased. Adapted from Y. Zhao et al. Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 979–985. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of a blend of PS(40)-b-P4VP(5.6)(PDP)1 and ∼6 nm Au (6 vol%) nanoparticles. In the middle of each P4VP(PDP)1 blocks, the nanoparticles formed 2-D hexagonally-packed nanoparticle sheets. (b) Perspective image of the thin film’s cross section showing the Y–Z plane. The film contains a blend of PS(19)-b-P4VP(5.2)(PDP)1.7 and 6 vol% of ∼5 nm Au nanoparticles. The nanoparticles preferentially located at the interstitial sites of a distorted hexagonal lattice of in-plane PS, forming 3-D lattice of nanoparticle chains cylinders parallel to the surface. Adapted with permission from J. Kao et al. Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2610–2618. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of a BCP-based supramolecule composite forming hexagonal arrays of nanorods. (b) Schematic drawing of polymer chain conformation. (c) TEM tomography reconstruction of composite shown in (a) with views from three orthogonal angles. Adapted with permission from K. Thorkelsson et al. Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 498–504. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) intensity plot of a poly(ethylene oxide-b-methacrylate/cyanobiphenyl) LCBCP at (a) zero magnetic field and (b) 6T magnetic field. (c) Wide Angle X-ray Scattering (WAXS) plot of the LCBCP under 6T magnetic field. (d) full width half maximum and peak intensities of BCP microdomain scattering (triangles) and LC scattering (circles) as a function of magnetic field strength illustrating the degree of LCBCP alignment under applied magnetic field. Adapted with permission from P. W. Majewski, M. Gopinadhan and C. O. Osuji, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 2–8. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  Magnetic field alignment of a supramolecular LCBCP. (a) molecular architecture and (b) hydrogen bonding configuration of the supramolecule. (c) SAXS, (d) schematic and (e) TEM image of the supramolecular LCBCP after magnetic field alignment. Adapted with permission from C. O. Osuji, C. Y. Chao, C. K. Ober and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 3114–3117. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) P3HT-b-P4VP(PCBM) supramolecules used for the polymer bulk heterojunction active layer. (b) Top-view TEM image (iodine-stained) and (c) the cross-sectional view of the active layer of a standard device. The active layer exhibits the same percolating structure in lateral and perpendicular projections. (d–e) Current–voltage curves of a solar cell with the supramolecular active layer. Measurements were done under dark and under AM1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination using either (d) the standard or (e) the inverted device structure. The measurements were done before and after annealing at 150 °C for 12 h. Adapted with permission from N. Sary et al. Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 763–768. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Chemical structure of a PS-b-P4VP(4T) supramolecule. (b) TEM image of a PS-b-P4VP(4T) supramolecule annealed below the melting point of 4T. (c) I–V curves of OFET devices with 4T and P4VP(4T) active layers. Adapted with permission from B. J. Rancatore et al. ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2721–2729. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
